Eukaryotic Protein Disulfide Isomerase Complements
Escherichia coli dsbA Mutants and Increases the Yield of
a Heterologous Secreted Protein with Disulfide Bonds*
(Received for publication,September 1, 1995, and in revised form, February 21, 1996)
Marc Ostermeier, Kristine De Sutter‡, and George Georgiou§
From the Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712 and
the‡Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gent University, K. L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000Gent,Belgium
Eukaryotic protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a 55-
kDa enzyme with cysteine oxidoreductase, chaperone,andantichaperoneactivitiesthatcatalyzedisulfidefor-mation and rearrangement in the eukaryotic endoplas-micreticulum.InGram-negativebacteria,theformationofdisulfidebondsintheperiplasmismediatedbyDsbA,a strong cysteine oxidase but an inefficient catalyst ofdisulfide bond isomerization with no known chaperoneactivity. We show that rat PDI (rPDI) secreted in the
periplasmic space of Escherichia coli can catalyze the
formationofdisulfidebondsandcomplementseveralofthe phenotypes of dsbAmutants. The function of rPDI
was dependent on the dsbBgene, suggesting that the
reoxidation of this eukaryotic enzyme involves directinteractions with bacterial redox proteins. Co-expres-sion of rPDI increased the yield of bovine pancreatictrypsin inhibitor (BPTI) severalfold, an effect that wasenhanced when reduced glutathione was added to thegrowth medium. Whereas PDI is thought to functionprimarily as an isomerase in the eukaryotic endoplas-micreticulum,rPDIfailedtodecreasetheaccumulationof two-disulfide folding intermediates of BPTI and thusdidnotappeartoappreciablycatalyzetherate-limitingstep in the oxidative folding pathway of BPTI. Theseresults demonstrate that expression of eukaryotic fol-dases in E. colican be exploited to better understand
their function in vivoand also to increase the yield of
biotechnologically valuable proteins.
Most exported proteins contain disulfide bonds that confer
increased thermodynamic stability to the folded polypeptidechain. The sequence of events involved in cysteine oxidationand correct pairing to form native disulfide bonds is a criticalstep in protein folding. Due to constraints related to the reac-tivity or structural accessibility of cysteine thiols in proteins,disulfide bonds often form very slowly. A complex cellular ma-chinery, whose components and mode of action are only nowbeginningtobeunderstood,hasevolvedtocatalyzetheseproc-essesin vivo. In Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia
coli, the cytoplasm is highly reducing, and therefore disulfide
formation normally occurs after a polypeptide chain has beentranslocated across the inner membrane (1, 2). Genetic analy-sis has identified at least six genes coding for cell envelopeproteins that play a role in disulfide bond formation.
1Four of
these proteins have been characterized in some detail (2, 3).DsbA is a 21.5-kDa enzyme having a thioredoxin-like subdo-mainwithanextremelyreactiveandhighlyoxidizingdisulfidebondbutpoordisulfideisomerizationactivity(4–8).DsbBisacytoplasmic membrane protein that is required for the reoxi-dation of DsbA (9–12). DsbC is another soluble cysteine oxi-doreductase and has much higher disulfide isomerase activitythan DsbA (2, 13). Finally, the recently discovered DsbD is aninnermembraneproteinthathasbeenproposedtofunctionasa reducing source in the periplasm and to be required formaintaining proper redox conditions (3).
Bacterial proteins become oxidized and fold rapidly soon
after export from the cytoplasm. However, the formation ofnative disulfide bonds in heterologous proteins with multiplecysteines is often very inefficient (7, 14). Partially folded mol-ecules are highly susceptible to degradation, thus resulting invery low yields (1). The shortcomings of the disulfide bondformation machinery of E. coliwith respect to eukaryotic pro-
teins have been illuminated by analyzing the folding pathwayofthebovinepancreatictrypsininhibitor(BPTI)
2expressedin
theperiplasmicspace(15).BPTIisa6.5-kDaproteaseinhibitorwith three disulfide bonds. In E. coli, just as in vitro, the
rate-limiting step in folding is the isomerization of two-disul-fide intermediates. The bacterial periplasmic space is thoughttobestronglyoxidizing(7,16,17)andappearstolacksufficientdisulfide isomerase activity required for the folding of heterol-ogousmultidisulfideproteins.Insharpcontrasttothebacterialperiplasm,disulfidebondformationineukaryotesoccursintheendoplasmic reticulum, a compartment that is maintained atmore reducing conditions than the periplasm (18). Disulfidebond formation and isomerization in the endoplasmic reticu-lum is catalyzed by protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), a veryabundant 55-kDa enzyme that, apart from its thioredoxin-likeactive sites, shares little homology with prokaryotic proteins.PDI contains two active sites that are not functionally equiva-lent, has been shown to both promote and inhibit protein ag-gregation, and can exist in different oligomerization states(19–22).
Here we show that rat PDI (rPDI) expressed in the E. coli
periplasmic space can substitute for DsbA to catalyze the for-mation of disulfide bonds in bacterial proteins and to comple-mentseveralofthephenotypesof dsbAmutants.Interestingly,
rPDIfunctionisnearlyabolishedin dsbBmutants,suggesting
that this eukaryotic protein becomes reoxidized via disulfide
*ThisworkwassupportedbyNIGMS,NationalInstitutesofHealth,
Grant GM47520–01. The costs of publication of this article were de-frayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article musttherefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18
U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
§To whom correspondence should be addressed. Fax: 512-471-7963;
E-mail: gg@che.utexas.edu.1S. Rainas and D. Missiakas, personal communication.
2The abbreviations used are: BPTI, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhib-
itor; IPTG, isopropyl- b-D-thiogalactopyranoside; PDI, protein disulfide
isomerase; rPDI, rat PDI; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay.THEJOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY Vol. 271, No. 18, Issue of May 3, pp. 10616–10622, 1996
© 1996 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Printed in U.S.A.
10616exchange with a component of the prokaryotic oxidoreductase
machinery.WealsodemonstratethatexpressionofrPDIintheE. coliperiplasmic space is beneficial for the expression of the
recombinant multidisulfide trypsin inhibitor BPTI.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
BacterialStrainsandPlasmids— TheE.coliK12strainsusedinthis
study were JCB570[MC1000 phoRzih12::Tn10], JCB571[JCB570
dsbA::kan1], JCB789[JCB570 dsbB::kan], JCB758[JCB570 dsbA::kan
dsbB::kan], JCB502[( lD69),lacZ::Tn10 (tetsby fusa-ric acid)], and
JCB572 [JCB502 dsbA::kan1] (4, 10). The last two strains contained
F9[proAB,lacIq,lacZ DM15,Tn10].PlasmidpTI103containstheOmpA
leader-BPTI gene fusion and has been described previously (23). Plas-mid pLPPsOmpArPDI contains the gene for the mature rat PDI, fusedtotheOmpAsignalsequence,underthecontrolofthe lpp-lacpromoter
(24).pACYCBPTIcontainstheOmpAleader-BPTIgenefusionandtheorigin of replication of pACYC184.
General Methods— Unless otherwise specified, cells were grown at
37°CinM9minimalsaltsmedia,adjustedtopH7.0,andsupplementedwith 0.2% glucose and 0.2% casein hydrolysate. For labeling experi-ments, cultures were supplemented with 50
mg/mlL-amino acids (ex-
cept cysteine and methionine) instead of casein. Ampicillin (50 mg/ml)
and/orchloramphenicol(40 mg/ml)wasaddedasrequired.IntheBPTI
production experiments, 100 mg/ml ampicillin and 170 mg/ml chloram-
phenicol were used to maintain the co-transformants.
Fractionation by osmotic shock was carried out essentially as de-
scribedbyNeuandHeppel(25).Sensitivitytofilamentousphageswastested by diluting overnight cultures, grown without IPTG, to anA
600nm 50.005, followed by infection with phage JB4 (a Cmr, M13
derivative).SubsequentlythecellswereplatedonLBwith0.2%glucoseand 20
mg/ml chloramphenicol. Conjugation experiments using SF103
(F2DlacX74 glaE galK thi rpsL (strA)DphoA(PvuII)ptr-32::FCmr)a s
therecipientstrainwereconductedasdescribed(26).Rabbitpolyclonalantisera against native BPTI (Boehringer-Mannheim) and rPDI wereprepared using standard protocols (27).
Pulse-Chase Experiments, Immunoprecipitation, and Electrophore-
sis—For monitoring the oxidative state of alkaline phosphatase and
OmpA, mid-exponential phase cells were labeled with 100
mCi/ml
Trans35SLabel(ICNBiomedicalsInc.)for45sandchasedwith20m M
methionine and 3 m Mcysteine. Samples (1 ml) were withdrawn at
varioustimesandaddedtotrichloroaceticacidoniceatafinalconcen-trationof10%.Theproteinpelletsobtainedbycentrifugationat12,0003gfor10minwereresuspendedin0.5mlof100m
MTris-HCl(pH9.0),
1.5% SDS, 5 m MEDTA, and 35 m Miodoacetamide. Samples were then
diluted 4-fold in immunoprecipitation buffer (10 m MTris-HCl, pH 8.0,
0.1% Triton X-100, 0.14 MNaCl, and 0.025% NaN3) and immunopre-
cipitated with antisera to alkaline phosphatase (from 5 Prime 33
Prime, Boulder, CO) and OmpA as described previously (15). OxidizedandreducedproteinswereresolvedbySDS-polyacrylamidegelelectro-phoresisin20-cmnonreducinggelsessentiallyasdescribed(28).Pulse-chase experiments for following the kinetics of folding of BPTI werecarriedoutasdescribedpreviously(15)exceptthatthechasecontained3m
Mcysteine.
Detection of BPTI by ELISA— Cells were induced with 0.1 m MIPTG
atA600nm 50.3–0.35, and for some samples GSH and/or GSSG was
added 20 min later at the concentrations indicated in the text. Fivehoursafterinduction,sampleswerefrozenat 270°Candthenthawed
to 4°C, lysed by French press (20,000 p.s.i.a.), and fractionated intoinsoluble and soluble fractions by centrifugation at 12,000 3gfor 10
min.Theproteinconcentrationofthesolublefractionwasmeasuredbythe Bio-Rad Protein Assay. Next, 100
ml of soluble protein diluted to a
concentration of 2.5 mg protein/ml in ELISA coating buffer (32 m M
Na2CO3,68mMNaHCO3)wasaddedto96-wellplates.Afterincubation
overnight at 4°C, the wells were washed three times with washingbuffer (0.5% Tween 20 in phosphate-buffered saline) and three timeswith double distilled H
2O, blocked with 200 ml of 2% bovine serum
albumin(BoehringerMannheim)inphosphate-bufferedsalinefo r1hat
37°C and then washed again. Subsequently, 100 ml/well of BPTI anti-
sera(diluted1:1000inphosphate-bufferedsalinewith0.05%Tween20and0.25%bovineserumalbumin)wasaddedtotheplateandincubatedfor1hat37°C.The platewasthenwashedagainasbefore,and100
ml
of goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase conjugate (diluted 1:1000 inphosphate-buffered saline with 0.05% Tween 20 and 0.25% bovineserum albumin) was added to each well. After 30 min at 37°C and afinal wash, 100
ml of peroxidase substrate ABTS (Bio-Rad) was added.
Developing was stopped with 100 ml of 2% oxalic acid after 5 min, and
theA410nmwas measured on a MR300 MicroElisa Reader (DynatechLaboratories Inc., Chantilly, VA). The soluble fraction of cells without
plasmid was spiked with known amounts of BPTI and used as astandard.
Affinity Precipitation of BPTI with Trypsin-Agarose— Soluble frac-
tions from 1.5 ml of culture volume were mixed with 1.5 ml of 50 m
M
Tris-HCl(pH8.0)bufferand12.5 mloftrypsin-agarosebeads(Sigma,20
units/ml)andincubatedonarotatorat4°Covernight.Thebeadswerepelleted by centrifugation, and the pellet was washed twice for 30 minin 50 m
MTris-HCl (pH 8.0) and then for another 30 min at 10 m M
Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) on a rotator at 4°C. Subsequently, the beads wereresuspended in SDS loading buffer, boiled for 5 min, and centrifuged,and the soluble fractions were loaded onto 16% Tricine SDS-polyacryl-amidegelelectrophoresis(Novex,SanDiego).Electrophoresiswascar-riedoutunderreducingconditions.Theproteinswerethentransferredtoapolyvinylidenedifluoridemembranefor45minat2.5mA/cm
2using
the MilliBlot-Graphite Electroblotter System (Millipore, Corp., Bed-ford, MA) and immunologically detected with the anti-BPTI primaryantibody (1:1000 dilution) followed by horseradish peroxidase-conju-gated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:3000 dilution) (Bio-Rad) (27).
RESULTS
The gene encoding the complete sequence of mature rat
protein disulfide isomerase has been fused to the bacterialOmpA leader peptide and expressed from the strong lac-lpp
promoter (24). Even in the absence of the inducer IPTG, a55-kDa band corresponding to the mature rPDI was readilyvisible in SDS-polyacrylamide gels of the osmotic shock frac-tion ofEscherichia coli (Fig. 1) and was detected by Western
blotanalysisusingrPDI-specificsera.Uponinductionwith0.5m
MIPTG,rPDIwasoverexpressedandbecamethemostprom-
inentproteinintheperiplasmicspace.InadditiontotheintactrPDI monomer, a lower molecular weight product, designatedrPDIf, was evident in induced but not in uninduced cultures(Fig. 1). De Sutter et al.(24) have shown that rPDIf corre-
sponds to a polypeptide synthesized from an internal transla-tioninitiationcodonintherPDIgene.AlthoughrPDIfisfoundpredominantlyinthespheroplastfraction,aportionisreleasedbyosmoticshock,asisevidentfromFig.1.Westernblottingofsamples from induced cultures also revealed several minorlowermolecularweightspecies,presumablydegradationprod-ucts. The level of expression was identical in both the dsbA
FIG.1.Expression of rPDI in a dsbAmutant.Bacterial cultures
JCB570(dsbA1)andJCB571( dsbA2),withorwithouttherPDIexpres-
sion plasmid pLPPsOmpArPDI, were grown overnight at 37°C anddiluted 100-fold into fresh media. After 30 min, the cultures weredivided in two equal parts, one of which received IPTG at a finalconcentration of 0.5 m
M. Cells were harvested at A600nm 50.4 and
fractionated by osmotic shock. Electrophoresis on the osmotic shocksupernatant was carried out on 12.5% acrylamide gels under reducingconditions. The rPDIf fragment, which represents a C-terminal frag-mentofrPDIincludingthesecondactivesite,arisesduetoaninternaltranslation initiation within rpdi(24).Eukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10617mutant strain JCB571 and in the isogenic control strain
JCB570. Furthermore, Western blots demonstrated that rPDIproductionwasnotsubstantiallyaffectedbythe dsbA,dsbB ,or
dsbAdsbB mutations under either induced or uninduced con-
ditions (data not shown). This is in contrast to other disulfidebond-containing secreted proteins such as alkaline phospha-tase,
b-lactamase, urokinase and BPTI (2, 15). The production
of these proteins is substantially reduced in dsbAanddsbB
mutants,presumablybecauseinefficientformationofdisulfidebonds results in increased susceptibility to proteolyticdegradation.
WhiledsbAis not essential for cell viability, null mutants
exhibit pleiotropic phenotypes including resistance to filamen-tousphages,impairedmotilityandconjugation,poorgrowthinminimal media, and formation of mucoid colonies when grownwithsublethalconcentrationsofantibiotics(2,4).AsshowninFig. 2, transformation with pLPPsOmpArPDI resulted incomplementationofseveral dsbAphenotypes.Basalexpression
ofrPDIincellsgrownwithoutinducerwassufficienttorestoreconjugationcompetenceandsensitivitytof1phagetoabout20and 35% of the level in the parental strain, respectively. Ex-pressionofrPDIalsorestoredthegrowthrateof dsbA
2cellsin
minimal media to that of dsbA1cells (Fig. 2 B). Complementa-
tionofthe dsbAphenotypesisnotmerelyduetotheexpression
of a heterologous secreted protein since it was not observed incells producing preOmpA-BPTI, which is also exported in the
E.coliperiplasmicspaceviatheOmpAleaderpeptideand,like
rPDI, contains six cysteines. It should be noted that in theseexperiments,cellswerenotinducedwithIPTGbecause(i)rPDIwas already expressed at significant levels without inductionand (ii) the overproduction of rPDI in induced cultures wasfound to negatively affect the efficiency of conjugation in wildtype cells.
In some genetic backgrounds a null dsbAallele confers sen-
sitivity to dithiothreitol (11). However, the growth of JCB570andJCB571weresimilarlyaffectedbythepresenceofreduceddithiothreitolorGSHinbothrichandminimalmedia(datanotshown). Thus, in the JCB570 genetic background, it was notpossible to determine whether the expression of rPDI affectsthe sensitivity of dsbA
2cells to reducing agents.
The ability of rPDI to complement the phenotypes of dsbA
null mutants suggested that it must be able to catalyze theformation of disulfide bonds in the periplasmic space. Directevidence for the function of rPDI in vivowas obtained by
examining the kinetics of oxidation of two bacterial exportedproteins, alkaline phosphatase and OmpA. Cultures were ra-diolabeled with 100
mCi/ml Trans35S Label for 45 s, and then
samples were added to iodoacetamide at different times tocarboxymethylate free cysteine residues. Subsequently, re-duced and oxidized alkaline phosphatase were resolved elec-trophoreticallyin20-cmpolyacrylamidegels.Theformationofdisulfide bonds in dsbA
1cells was very rapid and was largely
completed within 1 min, whereas in dsbA2cells, no oxidized
alkaline phosphatase was detectable even after 10 min (Fig.3A). However, in cells expressing basal levels of rPDI, the
formation of disulfide bonds was restored, and oxidized alka-line phosphatase was the only species detectable after 10 minof chase. Transformation with a control plasmid (pTI103) didnothaveanyeffectontheoxidationstateofalkalinephospha-tase. Similar results were observed with the oxidation of theouter membrane protein OmpA, which contains a single disul-fide bond (data not shown).
For PDI to be functional as a direct oxidase, its active site
must be regenerated through disulfide exchange with an ap-
FIG.2.rPDI rescues phenotypes of dsbAmutants. A, F-pilus
assembly. Uninduced cells were either infected with the filamentousphageJB4(Cm
rM13)orusedasthedonorforconjugationwithSF103
astherecipient.Strainsareasfollows: w.t.,JCB502F 9;dsbA2,JCB572
F9. Plasmids are as follows: rPDI, pLPPsOmpArPDI; control, pTI103.
Data represent the average from three independent experiments. B,
growth in M9 minimal media. Solid symbols , JCB570 ( dsbA1);open
symbols, JCB571 ( dsbA 2);●andE, no plasmid; and, pLPPsOm-
pArPDI; fandM, pTI103 (control plasmid).
FIG.3.Oxidation of alkaline phosphatase in dsbA2anddsbB2
cells with or without rPDI. Bacterial cultures JCB570 ( dsbA1
dsbB1), JCB571 ( dsbA2dsbB1) JCB789 ( dsbA1dsbB2), and JCB758
(dsbA2dsbB2) were labeled with Tran35S-label for 45 s. followed by a
10-min chase with excess methionine and cysteine. Proteins were pre-cipitatedwith10%trichloroaceticacid,treatedwithiodoacetamide,andimmunoprecipitated with antisera against alkaline phosphatase. Im-munecomplexeswereresolvedbyelectrophoresisundernonreducingorreducingconditionsandvisualizedbyautoradiography.Thepositionsofreduced (red-AP), oxidized ( ox-AP), and precursor ( pre-AP) are indi-
cated.A, rPDI rescue of disulfide formation in dsbA
2cells.B, effect of
rPDI on disulfide formation in dsbB2cells.Eukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10618propriate donor/acceptor. Whereas in the endoplasmic reticu-
lumtheredoxstateofPDIisdeterminedbytheratioofreducedto oxidized glutathione, there is no evidence for an analogouslowmolecularweightredoxbufferintheperiplasmicspace.InE. coli, the reoxidation of DsbA is thought to be mediated by
DsbB, a cytoplasmic membrane protein that contains at leastfour, and possibly five, cysteines within two periplasmic ex-posedloops(9–12,29). dsbBmutantsexhibitadefectindisul-
fide bond formation, although not as severe as that of dsbA
mutants.TodeterminewhethertheactivestateofrPDImightalso be dependent on DsbB, we monitored the oxidation ofalkaline phosphatase in dsbBmutants transformed with
pLPPsOmpArPDI.In dsbBmutantslessthan30%ofthealka-
line phosphatase was found in the oxidized form even after 10minpostchase(Fig.3 B).ExpressionofrPDIwaslargelyunable
to rescue the formation of oxidized alkaline phosphatase, asonly 50% of the alkaline phosphatase was oxidized after 10min. Furthermore, no oxidized protein was detected indsbAdsbB double mutants with or without pLPPsOmpArPDI.
Further evidence of rPDI’s dependence on DsbB came fromstudying the production of the heterologous protein BPTI. Asdiscussed in greater detail below, although rPDI could rescuetheformationofBPTIin dsbAmutants,rPDIcouldnotrescue
the formation of BPTI in dsbBmutants. Thus, the catalysis of
disulfide formation by rPDI in E. coliis dependent on a func-
tionaldsbBgene.
IndsbBmutants, but not in dsbAmutants or in wild type
cells, the expression of rPDI appeared to mildly interfere withthe processing of the leader peptide as evidenced by the pres-ence of a band corresponding to the alkaline phosphatase pre-cursor 1 min after the chase (data not shown). A faint bandcorresponding to the precursor was also evident even after 10min (Fig. 3 B). The reason for precursor accumulation in dsbB
mutants bearing pLPPsOmpArPDI is not understood.
Under physiological conditions, the periplasmic space of E.
coliis rather poor in disulfide isomerase activity, a function
that is thought to be mediated primarily by DsbC (2). Since amajor role of PDI in the endoplasmic reticulum appears to bethe catalysis of disulfide bond isomerization (30, 31), we rea-soned that the presence of rPDI in the E. coliperiplasm may
facilitatetheexpressionofheterologousproteinswhosefoldingrequires the rearrangement of disulfide bonds. The rate-limit-ing step in the in vitrofolding of bovine pancreatic trypsin
inhibitor (BPTI), a protein containing three disulfides, is theisomerization of two-disulfide intermediates (32–34). In vitro,
thepresenceofPDImodestlyincreasestherateofformationoftwo-disulfide intermediates but greatly increases their rate ofintramolecular rearrangement (35, 36). Expression of secretedBPTI inE. coliresults in low levels of native protein and is
accompanied by the accumulation of two-disulfide intermedi-ates in the periplasmic space (15). To measure the effect ofrPDI on BPTI expression, cells were co-transformed withpLPPsOmpArPDIandpACYCBPTI,acompatibleplasmidcar-rying the BPTI gene. The cells were grown in minimal mediasupplemented with chloramphenicol and ampicillin to main-tain both plasmids. Because the standard assay for BPTI,which is based on trypsin inhibition, is not very sensitive andsuffers in part from interference from endogenous proteasesandtrypsininhibitors,
3BPTIwasquantifiedbyELISAusinga
primary polyclonal antibody raised against native BPTI.
Coexpression of rPDI in wild type cells resulted in a 6-fold
increase in BPTI in the absence of glutathione and a 15-foldincreaseinitspresence(Fig.4).TheincreasedyieldwithrPDIcoexpressionwasnotduetoahigherrateofBPTIsynthesis.Ifanything,co-expressionofrPDIresultedinaslightlylowerrate
ofBPTIsynthesisasdeterminedbyradiolabelingexperiments.This slight reduction in the rate of protein synthesis cannotaccount for the increased efficiency of native BPTI formation,sinceintheabsenceofrPDI,BPTIproductionwasnotfoundtoimprove in cells where the synthesis of BPTI was reduced bylowering the amount of inducer, IPTG.
To confirm that the increased level of BPTI detected by
ELISA was due to the production of native protein, BPTI wasaffinity-precipitated with trypsin immobilized on agarosebeads and detected by Western blotting. The interaction be-tween trypsin and native BPTI is exceedingly strong (dissoci-ationconstant6 310
214M),andthecomplexisstableforweeks
at4°C(37).Reduced,carboxymethylatedBPTIdoesnotbindtotrypsin. Coomassie staining of trypsin-precipitated samplesfromwildtypecellsnotbearinganyplasmiddetectedabandatapproximately 16 kDa, the molecular weight of the E. coli
trypsininhibitorecotin,whichhasnohomologywithBPTI(38).Several other faint bands were also visible, but none of thesebandscross-reactedwithanti-BPTIseraonWesternblots(Fig.5A,lane 2). When such E. coliextracts were spiked with high
levels of purified BPTI and trypsin affinity-precipitated, morethan one band was detected by Western blotting (Fig. 5). Atlowerproteinloadings,however,onlyasinglebandwasvisible.
Western blots showing the level of BPTI in wild type, dsbA,
anddsbBcultureswithorwithoutco-expressionofrPDIandin
the presence of various amounts of reduced or oxidized gluta-thione are shown in Fig. 5. These experiments confirmed thatcoexpressionofrPDIincreasesthelevelofnativeBPTIproduc-tionseveralfoldandthatproductioncouldbefurtherenhancedbysupplementingthegrowthmediawithmoderateamountsofGSH. In the absence of rPDI co-expression, glutathione alonedidnotincreasetheproductionofBPTI.Amodestincreasewasobserved for some cultures supplemented with 5 m
MGSH, 6.2
mMGSSG,butthiseffectwassomewhatvariable.Thepresence
of high concentrations of GSH (25 m M) was found to adversely
affect the production of BPTI both with and without rPDIco-expression.
Cells lacking a functional DsbA or DsbB were found to be
completely impaired in BPTI production, a deficiency thatcould not be alleviated by the addition of reduced or oxidizedglutathioneoramixturethereof(Fig.5 B).Althoughexogenous
oxidized glutathione can partially oxidize DsbA and thus com-plement some of the phenotypes of dsbBmutants, in this case
itwasnotsufficienttorescueBPTIproduction.Coexpressionof
3M. Ostermeier and D. Sharp, unpublished data.
FIG.4.Coexpression of rPDI improves the yield of BPTI as
detected by ELISA. Bacterial cultures JCB570 containing pACY-
CBPTI (open bars) or pLPPsOmpArPDI and pACYCBPTI ( solid bars )
were induced with 0.1 m MIPTG atA600nm 50.3–0.35. GSH and/or
GSSG as indicated was added 20 min after induction. Five hours afterinductionthecellswereharvested,andtheconcentrationofBPTIinthesoluble fraction was detected by ELISA. The data reported here repre-sent the average of three independent experiments; for each sample,ELISAs were performed at least in triplicate.Eukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10619rPDIwasabletorestoreBPTIproductionin dsbAmutantsbut
notdsbBmutants,furtherillustratingthatrPDIcomplements
thedsbAmutation and that rPDI’s oxidase activity is depend-
ent on a functional DsbB protein. In dsbBmutants, BPTI was
detected only in cells coexpressing rPDI and supplementedwith10m
Moxidizedglutathione.Theadditionof10m Mcysta-
mine to cultures expressing rPDI could also complement thedsbBmutation(datanotshown).SincePDIhasbeenshownto
haveaspecificityforglutathioneinformingthemixeddisulfidein dithiol-mediated oxidation (39), these results suggest thatthe likely role of the added dithiols is to oxidize the active siteof rPDI, which then carries out direct oxidation of the proteinsubstrate.Finally,itshouldbementionedthat10m
Moxidized
dithiothreitol, which is a much weaker oxidizer that GSSG orcystamine, could not rescue BPTI dsbBmutants coexpressing
rPDI.
Inmutantcells,particularly dsbBmutants,theinductionof
rPDI resulted in the accumulation of two higher molecularweight species, one of which migrated with an electrophoreticmobilityidenticaltotheBPTIprecursor.Thesespeciesarenotlikelytorepresentcross-reacting E.coliproteins,asbothwere
recognized by an antiserum against BPTI obtained from adifferent laboratory and were not detected in cells lacking theBPTI expression plasmid. As was discussed above, the expres-sion of rPDI in dsbBmutants results in some retardation of
precursor processing. Therefore, it is possible that the highermolecular weight species detected in the dsbBmutants where
rPDI was overproduced correspond to preOmpA-BPTI species.SuchpreOmpA-BPTIspeciesmustcontainatleastsomeofthenative disulfides, since otherwise they could not have beenbound by the immobilized trypsin.
To elucidate the role of PDI in the folding of BPTI, the
kinetics of folding were monitored in pulse-chase experimentswhere folding intermediates were trapped by blocking freecysteines with iodoacetamide and separated by nonreducinggelelectrophoresis.Intheelectrophoreticsystemusedhere,alltwo-disulfideintermediates(designatedas*)arewellresolved
from the native protein and from other folding species (15).Without coexpressing rPDI, these two-disulfide intermediatesaccumulate during folding, and the rate-limiting step in theformation of native protein is their isomerization. In cells ex-pressing rPDI, two-disulfide intermediates were still observedtoaccumulate(Fig.6).Furthermore,whenreducedglutathioneis added to the cells, two-disulfide intermediates accumulatedtoanevengreaterextent.Inthiscaseover50%oftheBPTIisfound as two-disulfide intermediate species after 20 min ofchase.ItappearsthatundertheseconditionsrPDIinthe E.coli
periplasm does not have a noticeable effect on the rearrange-ment and/or direct oxidation of kinetically trapped two-disul-fide intermediates. This does not preclude the possibility ofrPDI having isomerase activity in the periplasm, as rPDI’sisomerase activity could conceivably be masked by an existingisomerase activity in the periplasm ( e.g.that of DsbC). How-
ever, rPDI’s isomerase activity can not be the cause for theimproved yield of BPTI. The exact fate of the * band is notknown at present, but it must be degraded and/or eventuallyfold to native protein. When lysates of wild type cells or dsbA
mutants expressing rPDI (which had been labeled with
14C-L-
amino acids fo r 5 h and free cysteines blocked with 100 m M
iodoacetamide)wereimmunoprecipitatedandresolvedonnon-
reducing Reisfeld urea gels, only native BPTI with three di-sulfides was found to be present (data not shown).
In cells co-expressing rPDI the half-life for the formation of
thenativeproteinwasapproximately6–7min,independentofwhether GSH/GSSG had been added. This is experimentallyindistinguishable from the rate of BPTI folding without rPDI(15)andconsistentwithrPDInothavingasignificanteffectontherate-limitingstep,disulfideisomerization.Forcomparison,thefoldingofBPTIineukaryoticmicrosomes,whicharerichin PDI, can occur with a half-life of less than 1 min at 30°Cand is accompanied by relatively little accumulation of two-disulfide intermediates, depending on the redox conditionsemployed (40).
DISCUSSION
Ratproteindisulfideisomeraseisexpressedatahighlevelin
theE. coliperiplasm even in dsbAmutants. Besides restoring
normal growth in minimal media, expression of rPDI restoresconjugationcompetenceandsensitivitytofilamentousphages.These phenotypes are dependent on the presence of correctlyassembled F pili, a process which is impaired when disulfidebond formation is compromised in dsbAmutants. Ostensibly,
rPDI restores pili assembly by facilitating disulfide bond for-mation. Indeed, rPDI could catalyze the oxidation of native E.
coliproteins such as alkaline phosphatase and OmpA in cells
lacking DsbA, albeit at a rate somewhat slower than DsbA’s.
AlthoughourresultsstronglysuggestthatrPDIfunctionsas
FIG.5.Western blot showing expression of BPTI with and
without coexpression of rPDI. Bacterial cultures JCB570 (wild
type), JCB571 ( dsbA2), and JCB789 ( dsbB2) carrying pACYCBPTI
were induced (except those marked with a U) with 0.1 m MIPTG at
A600nm 50.3–0.35.GSHandGSSGattheindicatedm Mconcentrations
wereadded20minafterinduction.Fivehoursafterinductionthecellswere harvested, and the soluble fraction was affinity-precipitated withtrypsin-agarose beads, electrophoresed through 16% SDS-polyacryl-amide Tricine gels, and detected by Western blot (see “ExperimentalProcedures”). A, wild type cells. Lanes 1and2, soluble fraction of
non-plasmid-containing wild type cells with ( X) and without ( Y)a n
addition of 2
mg of BPTI. B, Dsb mutant cells. U, uninduced cells; pre,
preOmpABPTI; #, degradation product of preOmpArPDI; rPDI, carry-
ing plasmid pLPPsOmpArPDI.
FIG.6.Accumulationoftwo-disulfidefoldingintermediatesof
BPTIinE.colicoexpressingrPDIasmonitoredbynonreducing
electrophoresis. Proteins immunoprecipitated from cultures labeled
withL-[35S]cysteinefor1minandquenchedwith100m Miodoacetamide
wereresolvedonnonreducinggelscontaining8 Murea.Timesindicated
are minutes after the chase. Lanes 1–4 , no addition of glutathione.
Lanes 5–8 ,2mMGSH added 30 min before pulse. The positions of
preOmpA-BPTI ( Pre), reduced carboxymethylated BPTI ( R), native
BPTI (N), and two-disulfide intermediates (*) are indicated.Eukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10620a cysteine oxidase in the periplasmic space of Gram-negative
bacteria, another explanation is that rPDI does not functioncatalytically but instead somehow induces the synthesis ofotherE. coliproteins that are responsible for disulfide bond
formation. For example, Missiakas et al.(13) have shown that
overexpression of DsbC can complement dsbAmutations, and
it may be possible that the phenomena we observed aroseindirectlyduetotheinductionofDsbC.Webelievethatthisisnot the case for the following reasons. (i) The oxidation ofalkaline phosphatase in dsbAmutants expressing rPDI is de-
pendentonDsbB.However,highlevelsofDsbCinfactcomple-mentdsbBmutations (13). Thus, the function of rPDI cannot
merelybeduetotheinductionofDsbC,sincethenitwouldnotbe expected to be dsbB-dependent. (ii) As shown in Fig. 5 and
discussedfurtherbelow,theexpressionofrPDIisessentialforthe formation of native BPTI in dsbAmutants. In the absence
of rPDI, no BPTI is formed in dsbAmutants even when the
cells are grown with a wide range of concentrations of exoge-nousthiolsanddisulfides.ThusitcannotbearguedthatrPDIsimply changes the redox state of the periplasm; rather, itsenzymatic activity per secatalyzes the formation of disulfide
bonds in BPTI.
Given the presence of millimolar concentrations of glutathi-
oneintheendoplasmicreticulum(18)andPDI’sspecificityforglutathione (39) it appears that in eukaryotes the active stateofPDIismaintainedbyglutathione.Sincethereisnoevidencefor the presence of glutathione or other low molecular weightthiols in the bacterial periplasmic space (1), it is reasonable toassumethatforrPDItobefunctionalintheperiplasm,itmustbeabletointeractdirectlywithacomponentoftheprokaryoticdisulfide-forming machinery. Indeed, the rPDI-mediated for-mation of disulfide bonds in alkaline phosphatase and BPTIwas found to be partially dependent on DsbB. This is interest-ing given that rPDI, apart from its thioredoxin active site,showslittlehomologytoDsbAortootherbacterialproteins.Itmay be that the active site of rPDI, whose three-dimensionalstructure has not yet been solved, conforms to the thioredoxinfold as is the case with DsbA. If the active sites of the twoproteinsarestructurallysimilar,thenitisreasonabletoexpectthat a protein such as DsbB, which normally interacts withDsbA, may also be able to interact with rPDI. Alternatively,rPDI’s dependence on DsbB may be an indirect effect.
In catalytic amounts and in the presence of glutathione or
otherlowmolecularweightthiols,PDIprimarilycatalyzestheformation of mixed disulfides with model peptide substrates(39). However, the lack of a periplasmic low molecular weightredoxcoupleinbacteriaandrPDI’sdependenceonDsbBimplythatrPDIcatalyzesdisulfidebondformationbydirecttransferof its own disulfide bonds to protein substrates. Direct forma-tion of disulfide bonds from PDI to reduced proteins has beenobservedin vitrowith stoichiometric quantities of the enzyme
andintheabsenceofotheroxidants(39,41).ItshouldbenotedthatDsbAalsonormallytransfersitsdisulfidebonddirectlytoreduced protein substrates (42), but unlike with PDI, this re-action is not enhanced by the addition of glutathione redoxbuffers (8).
Gram-negative bacterial proteins fold faster under very oxi-
dizing conditions. For example, the optimal rate for folding ofalkaline phosphatase in vitrooccurs in 6 m
MGSSG and pro-
ceeds at 50% the maximal rate in 30 m MGSSG (16). Accord-
ingly, there is evidence that the periplasmic space is indeed ahighly oxidizing environment. Most, if not all, of the DsbAmolecules have been shown to be in the oxidized form in theperiplasm of wild type cells (17). The highly oxidized state ofthe periplasm can in part explain why eukaryotic proteinscontaining multiple disulfides are often poorly expressed. Inthe endoplasmic reticulum, these proteins normally fold in a
relativelyreducedenvironment,whichaffordstheopportunityfor reduction of incorrect disulfides and disulfide rearrange-ment, processes catalyzed by PDI (19, 31). Disulfide bondisomerizationislikelytoberelativelyunimportantto E.coli,as
periplasmicandoutermembraneproteinswithmorethantwodisulfides are rare (8).
ForrPDItobeefficientintheoxidationofalkalinephospha-
tase indsbAmutants, it must provide a redox environment
comparablewiththataffordedbyDsbA,anequivalent[GSH]
2/
[GSSG] equilibrium constant of around 20 mM(16). The redox
potential of PDI at near physiological pH is equivalent to[GSH]
2/[GSSG] of around 40–80 mM. Thus, a significant frac-
tion,ifnotthemajority,oftherPDImoleculesintheperiplasmmust be present in the oxidized form in order to effectivelyfacilitate disulfide formation. This is quite different from theendoplasmicreticulum,wheretheredoxstateisbelievedtobe[GSH]
2/[GSSG] 50.5–3.3m MandPDIwouldbepresentalmost
exclusively in reduced form (18).
To examine whether rPDI can catalyze disulfide bond
isomerizationintheperiplasm,wechosetomonitortheoxida-tive folding of BPTI. BPTI is a three-disulfide protease inhibi-tor that is very poorly expressed in E. coliand whose in vitro
foldingpathwayinvolvesdisulfiderearrangementasdescribedin Scheme I (34).
In Scheme I, R is the fully reduced protein, I represents the
various one-disulfide species, II represents the native-like in-termediate N 9(30–51, 14–38) as well as two-disulfide species
withonenon-nativeandonenativedisulfide,N*representsthekinetic trap (5–55, 14–38), N
SH,SHis the native-like species
(30–51,5–55),andNisthenativeproteinwiththreedisulfides.The rate-limiting step in folding is the conversion of II toN
SH,SH,whichisthenrapidlyoxidizedtothenativeprotein.In
the two native-like disulfide intermediates N 9and N*, the
unpairedcysteinesareburiedwithintheinterioroftheprotein.N* and to a lesser extent N 9have a native-like conformation,
and therefore the activation energy for the conformationalchange required to position the two disulfides in close proxim-ity is high, and thus the rate of rearrangement to N
SH,SHis
slow. Thus, two-disulfide intermediates accumulate as hasbeen observed in vitrowith small molecular weight thiols (43)
andwithDsbA(42),and invivointheperiplasmof E.coli(15).
PDI has been shown to catalyze virtually all of the steps in
theinvitrofoldingpathwayofBPTI(35,36).Inthepresenceof
catalyticamountsofproteindisulfideisomeraseandasuitableredox buffer, the rate of formation of N 9and N* from reduced
protein is increased by about 3-fold, whereas the subsequentfolding of these two kinetically trapped intermediates to N isaccelerated by more than 3,000-fold (35), resulting in a dra-matic decrease in the amount of two-disulfide intermediatesobservedduringfolding.Catalysisalsoappearstooccur invivo
as evidenced by the fact that relatively small amounts of two-disulfide intermediates were detected during the folding ofBPTI in microsomes (40).
Co-expression of rPDI in wild type E. coliincreased the
steady-state level of BPTI by 15-fold in the presence of gluta-thione and 6-fold in its absence. However, pulse-chase experi-mentsrevealedthatthepresenceofrPDIdoesnotdecreasetheaccumulation of two-disulfide intermediates. In fact, in the
SCHEMEIEukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10621presence of glutathione, two-disulfide intermediates accumu-
lated to a greater extent. Thus, in wild type E. coli, rPDI does
notfacilitatetheisomerizationofN 9andN*toNSH,SHanymore
than the formation of N 9and N*.
Theaboveresultssuggestthefollowing.(i)Inwildtypecells,
rPDI does not function as an appreciable isomerase to rear-range the two-disulfide intermediates in order to form nativeBPTI. This is supported further by experiments in our lab inwhichmutantsofrPDIdevoidofdirectoxidaseactivity,butnotdisulfide isomerase activity, were unable to improve the yieldof BPTI or rescue its production in dsbAmutants, even with
addedglutathione.
4rPDI’slackofappreciableisomeraseactiv-
ity in the periplasm is not surprising, since evidence suggeststhat the active sites of rPDI in the periplasm are predomi-nantlyoxidizedandthereforecanonlycatalyzedirectoxidationand not disulfide rearrangement. Attempts to improve BPTIproduction invivobymakingtheperiplasmmorereducing( i.e.
byaddingreducingagentsorbyusing dsbmutants)inorderto
elicitrPDIisomeraseactivitywereunsuccessfulbutshouldnotbe construed as evidence of an inherent inability of rPDI toexhibitisomeraseactivityintheperiplasm.Inamorereducingperiplasm, the rates of formation of the first and second disul-fidesinBPTIshoulddecrease,andthusthecompetingprocessof proteolysis is likely to limit the yield of correctly foldedprotein. It may be that the conditions for eliciting sufficientrPDIisomeraseactivitytoappreciablyincreasetheconversionof two-disulfide intermediates to native protein leave theperiplasm too reducing for any BPTI molecules to form disul-fidesefficientlyinordertoavoidproteolysis.(ii)Theincreaseintwo-disulfide intermediates with added glutathione indicatesthatrPDIisfunctioningasanoxidasethatsupplementsDsbAin forming the two-disulfide intermediates. In vitro, PDI’s oxi-
dase activity has been found to be enhanced by the addition ofa redox buffer of glutathione (39). (iii) Increased steady statelevelsofBPTIappeartobetheresultofthefasterformationoftwo-disulfide intermediates from reduced protein, thus avoid-ing proteolysis. It is also conceivable that the chaperone-likeactivity of PDI may play a role in the increased levels of BPTI(21, 44). It should be also noted that we have found thatco-expressionofrPDIcanenhancethecorrectfoldingofatleastone other eukaryotic protein, tissue plasminogen activator
5
and thus may be a general tool for improving proteinexpression.
Acknowledgments— We thank J. C. A. Bardwell and J. Beckwith for
providing the strains used in this work, D. P. Goldenberg for plasmidpTI103,U.HenningforthegiftofOmpAantisera,andD.MissiakasandS.Rainaforcommunicatingresultspriortopublication.Wearepartic-ularlygratefultoH.F.GilbertforthegiftofrPDIusedtoraiseantiseraand for advice on GSH/GSSG. We thank K. D. Wittrup for the gift ofpolyclonal antisera against reduced BPTI and for many useful sugges-tions and stimulating discussions. Finally, we are grateful to E. Re-maut, H. F. Gilbert, and K. D. Wittrup for reading earlier versions of
this manuscript.
Addendum— While this paper was under review, Peter Lund and
co-workers(45)showedthattheexpressionofhumanPDIexpressedtotheE. coliperiplasm improved the yield of PelC, a pectate lyase from
Erwinia carotovora that contains two disulfides. In dsbAmutants,
hPDI restored wild type alkaline phosphatase activity but requiredGSSG to restore wild type levels of PelC.
REFERENCES
1. Wu¨lfing, C., and Plu ¨ckthun, A. (1994) Mol. Microbiol. 12,685–692
2. Bardwell, J. C. A. (1994) Mol. Microbiol. 14,199–205
3. Missiakas, D., Schwager, F., and Raina, S. (1995) EMBO14,3415–3424
4. Bardwell, J. C. A., McGovern, K., and Beckwith, J. (1991) Cell67,581–589
5. Kamitani, S., Akiyama, Y., and Ito, K. (1992) EMBO J. 11,57–62
6. Zapun, A., Bardwell, J. C. A., and Creighton, T. E. (1993) Biochemistry 32,
5083–5092
7. Wunderlich, M., and Glockshuber, R. (1993) Protein Sci. 2,717–726
8. Joly, J. C., and Swartz, J. R. (1994) Biochemistry 33,4231–4236
9. Guilhot, C., Jander, G., Martin, N. L., and Beckwith, J. (1995) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92,9895–9899
10. Bardwell, J. C. A., Lee, J., Jander, G., Martin, N., Belin, D., and Beckwith, J.
(1993)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90,1038–1042
11. Missiakas, D., Georgopoulus, C., and Raina, S. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.90,7084–7088
12. Dailey, F. E., and Berg, H. C. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90,
1043–1047
13. Missiakas,D.,Georgopoulus,C.,andRaina,S.(1994) EMBOJ. 13,2013–2020
14. De Sutter, K., Remaut, E., and Fiers, W. (1992) Mol. Micro. 6,2201–2208
15. Ostermeier, M., and Georgiou, G. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,21072–21077
16. Walker, K. W., and Gilbert, H. F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,28487–28493
17. Kishigami, S., Akiyama, Y., and Ito, K. (1995) FEBS Lett. 364,55–58
18. Hwang, C., Sinskey, A. J., and Lodish, H. (1992) Science257,1496–1502
19. Freedman,R.B.,Hirst,T.R.,andTuite,M.F.(1994) TrendsBiochem.Sci. 19,
331–336
20. Lyles, M. M., and Gilbert, H. F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,30946–30952
21. Puig, A., and Gilbert, H. F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,7764–7771
22. Puig, A., Lyles, M. M., Noia, R., and Gilbert, H. F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,
19128–19135
23. Goldenberg, D. P. (1988) Biochemistry 27,2481–2489
24. DeSutter,K.,Hostens,K.,Vandekerckhove,J.,andFiers,W.(1994) Gene141,
163–170
25. Neu, H. C., and Heppel, L. A. (1965) J. Biol. Chem. 240,3685–3692
26. Silhavy, T. J., Berman, M. L., and Enquist, L. W. (1983) Experiments with
Gene Fusions , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor,
New York
27. Ausubel,F.M.,Brent,R.,Kingston,R.E.,Moore,D.D.,Seidman,J.G.,Smith,
J. A., and Struhl, K. (eds) (1989) Current Protocols in Molecular Biology ,
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York
28. Pollitt, S., and Zalkin, H. (1983) J. Bacteriol. 153,27–32
29. Jander, G., Martin, N. L., and Beckwith, J. (1994) EMBO J. 13,5121–5127
30. Bardwell, J. C. A., and Beckwith, J. (1993) Cell74,769–771
31. Wittrup, K. D. (1995) Curr. Opin. Biotech. , in press
32. Creighton, T. E. (1992) BioEssays 14,195–199
33. Weissman, J. S., and Kim, P. S. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89,
9900–9904
34. Goldenberg, D. P. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci. 17,257–261
35. Weissman, J. S., and Kim, P. S. (1993) Nature365,185–188
36. Creighton,T.E.,Hillson,D.A.,andFreedman,R.B.(1980) J.Mol.Biol. 142,
43–62
37. Vincent, J. P., and Lazdunski, M. (1972) Biochemistry 11,2967–2977
38. McGrath,M.E.,Hines,W.M.,Sakanari,J.A.,Fletterick,R.J.,andCraik,C.
S. (1991)J. Biol. Chem. 266,6620–6625
39. Darby, N. J., Freedman, R. B., and Creighton, T. E. (1994) Biochemistry 33,
7937–7947
40. Creighton, T. E., Bagley, C. J., Cooper, L., Darby, N. J., Freedman, R. B.,
Kemmink, J., and Sheikh, A. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. 232,1176–1196
41. Lyles, M. M., and Gilbert, H. F. (1991) Biochemistry 30,619–625
42. Zapun, A., and Creighton, T. E. (1994) Biochemistry 33,5202–5211
43. Creighton, T. E., and Goldenberg, D. P. (1984) J. Mol. Biol. 179,497–526
44. Cai,H.,Wang,C.C.,andTsou,C.L.(1994) J.Biol.Chem. 269,24550–24552
45. Humphreys, D. P., Weir, N., Mountain, A., and Lund, P. A. (1995) J. Biol.
Chem.270,28210–282154P. Bessette, M. Ostermeier, H. F. Gilbert, and G. Georgiou, manu-
script in preparation.
5J. Qiu, J. R. Swartz, and G. Georgiou, unpublished data.Eukaryotic PDI Complements E. coli dsbA Mutation 10622