 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Aug 29, 2024
Genomic and phenotypic analyses of chitin degradation and secondary metabolite
production in Pseudoalteromonas
Paulsen, Sara Skøtt
Publication date:
2020
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Paulsen, S. S. (2020). Genomic and phenotypic analyses of chitin degradation and secondary metabolite
production in Pseudoalteromonas. DTU Bioengineering. 
 
 
Genomic and phenotypic analyses of chitin degradation 
and secondary metabolite production in 
Pseudoalteromonas  
 
 
Sara Skøtt Paulsen  
PhD Thesis  
March 2020  
 
 i Preface  
This present PhD study  serves as a partial fulfillment of the requirements to obtain a PhD degree 
from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work has  has been  carried out at the 
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (DTU Bioengineering)  from October 2016 to March 
2020 under the supervision of Professor Lone Gram  and Senior Researcher Eva Sonnenschein . 
The PhD was supported by the Villum Foundation (Annua l Award to Lone Gram) and a PhD 
stipend from DTU Bioengineering . 
The work resulted in three research articles which are included in this thesis. 
Sara Skøtt Paulsen  
Kgs. Lyngby, March 2020 ii 
 Acknowledgements  
First I would like to thank my supervisor Lone Gram , with whom I was first acquainted with in 2011 
during my BSc education.  Thank you so much for taking care of me all these years  – both 
scientifically and non -scientifically – and for trusting me with this PhD project.  
 
I would also like to thank my co -supervisor Eva Sonnenschein . Thanks for your support and 
encouragement. You  inspire me on so many levels, and I am proud to call you my friend. Thank 
you! 
 
Special thanks go to past and present members of the GramLab. You have always made room for 
scientific discussions, moral support and fun (with and without C 2H6O). Karen , Nicole  and 
Bastian , thanks for  being my partners -in-crime from the start to the (semi) end.  
 
Also thanks to Thomas  & Thomas , Xiyan  and Shengda  for the good collaborations  and Mikael  
for your endless help  with bioinformatics . HUGE  thanks to Jette  who always helped me in the lab 
and also just for you r kind and loving person.  
 
Special thanks go  to my family  who has  always supported me (although they probably still have no 
clue what I have been doing for the past 3 years ). My friends Sarah , Pernille , Katrine , Tina, 
Christian , Kristian  and Gustav  – thanks for soci alizing with me once in a while. Finally, thanks to 
Udo Fischer . Danke.  
  iii Abstract  
The continuous emergence and spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria is a huge threat to modern 
society. We need to find and develop novel antimicrobial compounds to enable treatment of 
infectious diseases in the future . Bacteria have for decades provided antimicrobial compounds, 
and along with the genomic sequencing era it has become evident that only a minority of the 
potential antibiotic compounds encoded in the genomes of bacteria are yet discovered. In the past 
decades, the marine environment has gaine d attention because of its rich biodiversity being 
unexplored from a pharma - and biotech point of view. M arine bacteria are a prolific resource of 
novel antimicrobials , and in particular those of the genus Pseudoalteromonas. The purpose of this 
PhD project  was to investigate the genus Pseudoalteromonas for its potential to produce novel 
antimicrobial compounds using in silico and in vitro methods.  
A global  in silico  analysis of 157 strains from the genus Pseudoalteromonas confirmed that 
pigmented species o f the genus are potent producers of antimicrobial compounds, dedicating as 
much as 15% of their genomic content for this purpose. The global analysis also revealed many 
taxonomic discrepancies within the genus, and led us to pursue the description of a nov el species 
Pseudoalteromonas galatheae . This subsequently co ntributed to the expansion of phylogeny within 
the genus  and highlighted the importance of incorporating genomic information when describing 
novel species.  
Many antimicrobial compounds are encoded in so -called cryptic or silent (or orphan) biosynthetic 
gene clusters within the genomes, meaning that the chemistry of the compounds produced is not 
known. Previous studies have shown that using carbon sources mimic king the natural environment 
of bacteria can induce production of antimicrobial compounds in marine vibrios. In silico  analysis of 
carbohydrate -active enzymes in genomes of Pseudoalteromonas  showed that chitin was likely a 
preferred substrate for the bioactive pigmented species and we th us hypothesized that chitin 
degradation and production of antimicrobial compounds could be interconnected within the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas. Using a metabolomics approach  as well as constructing chitinas e gene 
deletion mutants it was found that the marine  carbon sources did alter the metabolome of two 
strains, but that chitin was not convincingly inducing production of antimicrobial compounds.  
Concluding , this work has contributed to the understanding of the genus Pseudoalteromonas, 
highlighting their imm ense genetic capacity to produce novel antimicrobial compounds , which is 
similar to that of our most famous antibiotic producers , the Actinomycetes . This knowledge can be 
used to target the discovery of novel drugs towards culturable bacteria with a huge u nknown 
bioactivity potential.  iv 
 Resumé  
Den kontinuerlige  fremkomst og spredning af antibiotikaresistente bakterier er en stor trussel mod 
det moderne samfund.  Det er nødvendigt at finde og udvikle nye antimikrobielle stoffer for at kunne 
bekæmpe smitsomme infektioner  i fremtiden. Bakterier har i årtier været producent af  
antimikrobielle stoffer, og i forbindelse med genomsekventerings -æraen er det blevet klart , at kun 
en brøkdel af de potente antimikrobielle stoffer, som bakteriernes genom koder for, er ble vet 
opdaget. I de sidste årtier har det marine miljø opnået stor opmærksomhed på grund af dets rige 
samt uudforskede biodiversitet fra et pharma - og biotekrelateret synspunkt. Marine bakterier udgør 
en rig kilde til nye antimikrobielle stoffer, især bakter ier af slægten Pseudoalteromonas. Formålet 
med dette PhD projekt har været at undersøge  slægten Pseudoalteromonas for dens evne til at 
producere nye antimikrobielle stoffer ved brug af in silico og in vitro metoder.  
En global in silico analyse af 157 stam mer fra slægten Pseudoalteromonas bekræftede at 
pigmenterede arter i slægten er potente producenter af antimikrobielle stoffer, og dedikerer op til 
15 % af deres genetiske materiale til dette formål. Den globale analyse afslørede også flere 
taksonomiske uo verensstemmelser i slægten, hvilket ledte os til at forfølge beskrivelsen af den nye 
art Pseudoalteromonas galatheae. Dette har bidraget til udvidelse n af fylogenien samt fremhæver 
vigtigheden af at inkorporere genomisk information i beskrivelsen af nye ar ter.  
Mange antimikrobielle stoffer er kodet for af såkaldte kryptiske eller tavse (eller ’orphan’ ) 
biosyntetiske genklynger i genomerne, hvilket betyder at kemien af stofferne ikke er kendt. 
Tidligere studier har vist at brugen af karbonkilder, som efterligner bakteriernes naturlige miljø, kan 
inducere produktionen af antimikrobielle stoffer i marine vibrio. En in silico analyse af kulhydrat -
aktive enzymer i Pseudoalteromonas genomerne viste , at kitin var et muligt foretrukken substrat for 
de bioaktive pigmenterede arter og derfor hypotes erede vi, at kitinnedbrydning og  produktion af 
antimikrobielle st offer kunne være koblet sammen i slægten Pseudoalteromonas. Ved brug af 
metabolomics samt konstruktion af kitinase gen -deletion mutanter fandt vi , at marine karbonkilder 
kan påvirke metabolomet af two stammer, men at kitin ikke overbevisende inducerede 
produktionen af antimikrobielle stoffer.  
Afslutningsvis har dette værk bidraget til forståelsen af slægten Pseudoalteromonas , og 
understreger slægtens enorme genetiske kapacitet for at producere nye antimikrobielle stoffer, 
som er lignende den af vores mest kende antibiotika -producenter, Actinomyceter. Denne viden kan 
bruges til at målrette opdagelsen af nye stoffer mod kultiverbare bakterier med et stort ukendt 
bioaktivt potentiale.    v 
 Publications  
 
Paulsen, S. S .; Strube, M. L.; Bech, P. K.; Gram, L. & Sonnenschein, E. C. Marine chitinolytic 
Pseudoalteromonas represents an untapped reservoir of bioactive potential. mSystems  4, (2019).  
 
Paulsen, S. S .; Isbrandt, T.; Kirkegaard, M; Buijs, Y; Strube, M. L.; Sonnensc hein, E. C.; 
Ostenfeld, T. & Gram, L. Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the 
Pseudomonas quinolone system precursor, HHQ, by a novel marine species Pseudoalteromonas 
galatheae sp. nov. (Submitted to Scientific Reports) . 
 
Wang, X.; Paulsen, S. S .; Isbrandt, T.; Ostenfeld, T.; Strube, M. L.; Gram, L. & Zhang, S. A 
conjugation -based gene knock -out strategy for bioactive molecule producer Pseudoalteromonas 
rubra  S4059 . (Submitted to Microbial Biotechnology ). Table of contents  
Preface  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  i 
Acknowledgements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  ii 
Abstract  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  iii 
Resumé  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  iv 
Publications  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  v 
1. Introduction and th esis outline  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  1 
2. The marine environment as a source of novel drugs  ................................ ................................ ..... 3 
2. 1 Galathea 3 collection  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  5 
3. Genus Pseudoalteromonas : Taxonomy and biotechnology potential  ................................ ...... 6 
3.1 Taxonomy, species delineation and the accompanying issues  ................................ ............  7 
3.2 Occurrence and importance of genus  Pseudoalteromonas ................................ .................  11 
4. Bacterial chitin degradation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  14 
4.1 Structural composition of chitin.  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 14 
4.2 Enzymes involved in chitin degradation  ................................ ................................ ...................  15 
4.2.1 Bacterial chitinases  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  17 
4.2.2 Chitin active lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases  ................................ .............................  19 
4.2.3 Hexosaminidases  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  22 
4.3 Chitin d egradation in Pseudoalteromonas  ................................ ................................ ...............  22 
5. Bacterial secondary metabolites  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  25 
5.1 Biosynthesis of bacterial secondary metabolites  ................................ ................................ ... 25 
5.2 Bioactive bacterial volatiles  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  28 
5.3 Genome mining as a tool to discover secondary metabolites  ................................ ............  29 
5.4 Cultivation -based strategies for unlocking the bioactive potential of bacteria  ..............  32 
5.6 Secondary metabolites from Pseudoalteromonas  ................................ ................................ .. 35 
5.6.1 Secondary metabolites produced by the novel species Pseudoalteromonas galatheae  38 
6. Conclusion and future perspectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 44 
7. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  46 
8. Research articles  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 58 1 1.Introduction and thesis outline
The discovery of penicillin and subsequently other antibiotics  has without a doubt revolutionized 
medicine and is considered a turning point for modern medical history. Unfortunately, the most 
serious consequence of the use (and misuse) of antibiotics is the associated antibiotic resistance. 
New drugs, especially antimicrobial compounds, are urgently needed to counter and reverse the 
spread of antibiotic resista nt bacteria.  
The isolation of several hundred  bioactive marine bacteria by our laboratory during the global 
research expedition Galathea 3 in 2006/2007 is the foundation of this PhD, as it has been for 
several other  studies  before me. This PhD thesis is based on work carried out by former members 
of the GramLab group, and the notion that the biosynthetic potential of marine bacteria can be 
induced w hen applying ‘natural settings’ , such as chitinous growth media, compared to standard 
laboratory settings1–3. In the marine family Vibrionaceae, addition of chitin to the growth medium  
positively affect ed the biosynthetic capacity of several strains . Some species of the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas produce many bioactive compounds and are also potent chitin degraders. 
Based on previous knowledge of the Vibrionaceae , we speculated that chitin or other carbo n 
sources  could induce the biosynthetic potential of strains from  the genus Pseudoalteromonas .  
The work of this PhD project was focused around the 98 Pseudoalteromonas strains isolated 
during the Galathea 3 expedition4,5. All the strains were genome sequenced and mined for th eir 
genomic capacity to produc e bioactive secondary metabolites as well as investigating which 
carbohydrates they were likely to prefer. We combined this knowledge with laboratory -based 
experiments to gain access to the wealth of secondary metabolites prod uced by this group of 
bacteria.  
All the bacteria isolated on the Galathea 3 expedition originate from the marine environment, and 
the marine environment as source for novel drugs is the focus of chapter 2 . Here I provide a 
general overview as to why the marine environment confers an interesting habitat to search for 
novel drugs. In chapter 3, I zoom in on the main actors of this PhD  project , namely the members 
of the genus Pseudoalteromonas.  Whole -genome sequencing of the many Pseudoalteromonas 
isolates revealed several discrepancies in the taxonomy within the genus, thus in this chapter , I 
describe the discrepancies within species delineation in the genus and why it is important to ‘clea n 
up the mess’. The second part focus es on the occurrence of the gen us and why it represent s an 
interesting candidate  for biotechnology.   2 Based on a global analysis of  genes encoding carbohydrate -active enzymes , we hypothesized that 
chitin was likely  a preferred substrate for the species that produce the majority of the secondary 
metabolites  in the genus . Thus, in chapter 4  I describe how chitin is degraded by bacteria,  the last 
part with focus on Pseudoalteromonas.  In chapter 5, the main focus is on the bioactive secondary 
metabolites produced by bacteria, in particular those of marine origin. The second part of the 
chapter deals with the secondary metabolites produced by Pseudoalteromonas , and where 
possible , a reflection on the ecological role of the secondary metabolites is given.  
The above chapters provide a backgro und to the three manuscripts included in this thesis.  
Chapter 6 is a concluding chapter consisting of the main conclusions and future remarks. The full 
length research ar ticles included in this thesis are  comprised in chapter 7.   3 2.The marine environment  as a source of novel drugs
Almost  70% of the ear th surface is covered by oceans and th e marine environment contains a 
great  biodiversity, with about one half of the global primary production occurring  in the oceans6,7. 
The marine m icro- and macro organisms inhabit many different niches with varying temperatures, 
salinity and pressure (shallow and deep waters, deep -sea hydrothermal vents, coral reefs and 
polar regions ). Microorganisms  often colonize the surface s of macroorgani sms, many times 
exhibiting beneficial effects for the host . While the terrestrial environment has been a prolific 
source of microbial -derived drugs for many years,  the marine environment still remains relatively 
underexploited . Marine microorganisms repres ent a rich resource for discovery of novel drugs 
because they are often exposed to unique conditions compared to terrestrial conditions,  causing  
the microorganisms to develop unique and unusual chemistry  that are different to that of their 
terrestrial neighbors8.  
New s econdary metabolite s (SMs)  have continuously been discovered from marine organisms , 
providing a solid ground for drug discovery and development . Fungi, sponges, bacteria and 
cnidarians are the four largest groups , from which marine SMs have been derive d (Figure 1)9. 
Two-hundred -and-forty new compounds were reported from marine bacteria  in 2018 . 
Actinomycetes , in particular Streptomycetes,  have since the onset of the antibiotic era in the 1940s 
represented an unmatched capacity for SM production . Not surprisingly,  in the marine environment  
the genus is also the dominant source of new compounds comprising  167 of the 240  new drug 
candidates  described9.  
Figure 1. The trends of marine natural product discovery from 2014 -2018. Figure from  9. 
4 The marine environment is now generally acknowledged as a potential source of novel 
pharmaceutical ly relevant  compounds. Several marine -derived compounds have been approved 
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or reached clinical trials (Table 1). Interestingly , the 
main dis ease area of interest is cancer, probably caused by the lack of industrial investment  for 
novel antimicrobial compounds .  
Table 1. Marine -derived compounds which have been FDA -approved or is in phase III of clinical trials as of 
November 2019.  ADC: Antibody drug conjugate. The table has been modified from 
https://ww w.midwestern.edu/departments/marinepharmacology.xml  
Compound 
Name  Trademark and 
year of approval  Marine 
Organism  Chemical 
Class  Disease 
Area  
FDA approved  
Enfortumab Vedotin -
ejfv PADCEVTM (2019)  Mollusk/  
cyanobacterium  ADC Cancer  
Polatuzumab vedotin 
(DCDS -4501A)  Polivy TM (2019)  Mollusk/  
cyanobacterium  ADC Cancer  
Plitidepsin  Aplidin®  (NA) Tunicate  Depsipeptide  Cancer  
Trabectedin 
(ET-743) Yondelis® 
(2015) Tunicate Alkaloid  Cancer  
Brentuximab vedotin 
(SGN -35)  Adcetris® 
(2011) Mollusk/  
cyanobacterium  ADC  Cancer  
Eribulin Mesylate 
(E7389)  Halaven® 
(2010) Sponge  Macrolide  Cancer  
Omega -3-acid ethyl 
estersLovaza® 
(2004) Fish Omega -3 
fatty acids  Hypertrigly -
ceridemia  
Ziconotide Prialt® 
(2004) Cone snail  Pepti de Pain 
Vidarabine 
(Ara-A) Vira-A® 
(1976)  Sponge  Nucleoside  Antiviral  
Cytarabine 
(Ara-C) Cytosar -U® 
(1969) Sponge  Nucleoside Cancer  
Phase III  
Plinabulin 
(NPI-2358) NA Fungus  Diketopipe -
razine  Cancer  
Tetrodotoxin  Halneuron TM Pufferfish  Guanidinium 
alkaloid  Pain 
Lurbinectedin 
(PM01183)  Zepsyre®  Tunicate  Alkaloid  Cancer  
Marizomib 
(Salinosporamide A; 
NPI-0052)  NA Bacterium  Beta-lactone -
gamma 
lactam  Cancer  5 The marine organisms listed in Table 1 as producers of the compounds are mostly eukaryot es, but 
this is probably not the complete truth, as many compounds likely are produced by a microbial 
symbiont. The most famous case of this is bryostatin, a compound initially thought to be produced 
by the marine bryozoan Bugula neritina , however it was later found that the actual producer of the 
compound was the uncultivated symbiont Candidatus Endobugula sertula10.  
2. 1 Galathea  3 collection
During  the global research expedition Galathea 3,  one of the research goals was to isolate marine 
culturable bacteria with antimicrobial activities with potential for biotechnological use5. Samples 
were collected throughout the marine waters of the world  (Figure 2) and bacteria were isolated  
because of their ability to inhibit the fish pathogen Vibrio anguillarum. Five-hundred -and-nineteen 
isolates were identified and 16 S rRNA gene sequence homology placed the isolates in three major 
proteobacterial groups: Vibrionaceae, Pseudoalteromonas spp. and the Roseobacter group. Of 
these, the most pronounced antibacterial strains were the pigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains, 
which  were predom inantly isolated from surface swabs from warmer waters. This genus is the 
focus of this PhD study and will be described in more detail in the next chapter . 
Figure 2. 39.000 nautical miles were completed during the nine month long  Galathea 3 expedition (figure 
from www.galathea3.dk)  
6 
 3. Genus Pseudoalteromona s: Taxonomy and biotechnology 
potential  
Species of the genus Pseudoalteromonas are Gram -negative, flagellated bacteria that belong to 
the γ-Proteobacteria. They are strictly marine bacteria that are found ubiquitously in the oceans , 
and are highly salt -tolerant, some tolerating a salt concentration of 15%11. Species within th e 
genus are divided into two clades: pigmented and non -pigmented species obviously based on the 
appearance of color  when cultivated  (Figure 3). The pigmented group displays a much larger 
degree of variability than the more shallow phylogeny of the non -pigm ented group12.  
 
Figure 3. Phylogenetic tree based on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of 157 strains of the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas. Fifty strains belong to the Galathea  3 collection, whereas the remaining genomes were 
downloaded from the NCBI database. The colored boxe s indica te the pigmentation of the strains. Vibrio 
anguillarum 90-11-286 was used as root. Figure adapted from paper 113. 
7 
 Strains in the genus Pseudoalteromonas have an open pangenome12. The pangenome is the 
group of genes possessed by all the strains within bacteria of the same taxon. The pangenome is 
divided into three categories i) core ii) accessory and iii) unique. An open pangenome refers to the 
observation that new genes are added to the pangenome whenever ne w genomes are added to 
the analysis, meaning that predicting the size of the full pangenome is not possible14. Based on 38 
Pseudoalteromonas genomes, of which 10 are pigmented, only seven percent of the pangenome 
genes belong to the core genome ( Figure 4). The core genomes of non -pigmented and pigmented 
species consist of 13% and 17% of the genes, respectively. The major part of the core genes have 
functions related to housekeeping pr ocesses as well as transcription, translation and replication12. 
The open pangenome seems somewhat  contradicting to the observed shallowness within the non -
pigmented group.   
 
Figure 4. The Pseudoalteromonas pangenome. Figure adapted from 12. 
 
Because of the open pangenome of Pseudoalteromonas , horizontal gene transfer (HGT) has been 
suggested to play a role in the evolution of the genus. Indeed it was found that the mobile genetic 
elements (MGEs) identified throughout the 38 genomes accounted for 14% of the genes in the 
pangenome. Further investigating the MGEs clearly separated the non -pigmented and pig mented 
strains, where pigmented species contained more MGEs, suggesting that HGT has played a role in 
speciation and follows the phylogeny12. 
 
3.1 Taxonomy, species delineation and the accompanying issues   
The taxonomic history of the genus dates back to 1995, where the advent of 16 S rRNA gene 
sequencing resulted in the revision of the genus Alteromon as and the subsequent creation of the 
genus Pseudoalteromonas by Gauthier et al.15. The genus consisted of twelve species in 1 995, 
whereas today the genus is expanded to include 53 species (including subspecies) with validly 
8 
 published names16. Classification of prokaryotes has since the 1960s relied on genomic 
comparisons when DNA -DNA hybridization (DDH) was introduced, and has since become the gold 
standard for describing novel species. A DDH similarity of ≥70% is considered a criterion for 
assig ning two strains to the same species, but when based on wet -lab work, the method is 
tedious17,18. Modern prokaryotic taxonomy is stron gly influenced by the development in genom e 
sequencing, and the DDH measurement is now easily calculated in silico , e.g.  using freely 
available software tools such as the Genome -to-Genome -Distance calculator (GGDC)19. Another 
measure widely used for assessing species boundaries – and many times suggested as the best 
option for genome -based species identification - is Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI)20. ANI  can be 
calculated in different ways, but is overall based on a  pairwise measurement of  similarity between 
two or more genome sequences. It is generally accepted that an ANI value of 95 -96% is equivalent 
to the 70% DDH boundary for species delineation21,22. ANI has been used in paper 1  for assigning 
species to newly sequenced strains13, and in paper  2 for clarifying the novelty of a new species, 
Pseudoalteromonas galatheae23.  
 
Taxonomy is the organizing principle of biology and is a method for understanding and organizing  
bacterial diversity. Correct taxonomic classification  is important as it aids in making p redictions and 
framing hypothese s for further resear ch based on current knowledge  (i.e. when choosing which 
strains to include in an analysis  based on relatedness or novelty to known species ). For the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas, difficulties in assigning the correct taxonomic affiliation to a strain is 
highlig hted by the fact that of 32 3 genome assemblies in the NCBI database  by beginning of 2020, 
165 represent assemblies of unclassified species and 158 strains have been assigned to a 
species24. Regarding the number of strains deposited in the NCBI data base , the distribution of 
represented species in the NCBI database is  also highly uneven (Figure 5). Although pigmented 
Pseudoalteromonas  species are by far the most common species in the NCBI database, the broad 
scientific interest in the whole genus is reflected by the distribution of many unique species being 
sequenced, and that 44 of the 53 known species are represented by their genome.   
 9 
  
Figure 5. The number of strains represented by a species in the NCBI database by start 2020. Grey bars 
represen t non -pigmented species and colored bars represent pigmented species, where the color indicates 
the reported pigmentation of the species.  
 
There can be several reasons for the lack of affiliation to a species within the genus. There is a 
chance that an assembly represents a novel species. Another issue is  if the assembly is assigned 
to more than one species,  then it becomes  difficult to determine which species the isolate belongs 
to. Furthermore, it may not be  important for a  given study to assign  species to the ir strain, 
especially if species assignment i s not straightforward, and then the assembled genome ends up in 
the unclassified group of genomes. That an assembly assigns to more than one species has been 
a recurring issue throughout this PhD work  (Figure 6). Some species of Pseudoalteromonas 
display u p to 99.9% sequence identity between the 16S rRNA genes11, and the high sequence 
identity of the 16S rRNA gene between different species was also an issue in paper 2 where  we 
described  the new species P. galatheae23. Thus, the 16S rRNA gene is a poor ph ylogenetic marker 
for the genus. MALDI -TOF has a better species -resolution for known species  than that of the 16S 
rRNA gene25. MALDI -TOF can however  not properly characterize unknown environmental isolates  
and th e authors note that “ an important reason is the extent of biodiversity that is still uncharted 
even within this culturable genus, so that the isolates tested probably represent undescribed 
species ”. This is an important observation to keep i n mind. That many isolates  are undescribed, 
but have highly similar 16S rRNA gene sequences , can  probably be a reason  for a wrong  species  
assignment. N ovel species may also be  assigned to  already e xisting species, which can make 
science communication difficult at times.  
10 
  
 
  
Figure 6. Zoom in on the phylogentic tree from Figure 3. Red boxes mark the inconsistencies in taxonomic 
affiliation in two selected cases. In both A and B, two highly identical strains are described as two different 
species (A = ANI similarity 99.3%, B = ANI similarity 99.8%). In the case of B, the isolate S172 7 belong to 
the Galathea isolates and is likely the same species as the two isolates  with which it clusters . We have left 
S1727 unclassified due to the species inconsistency in this case.  
 
Another  example where  taxonomy becomes messy is that of Pseudoalte romonas sp. TB41, which  
clusters with P. issachenkonii/P. tetradonis  in the ANI analysis in paper  113, but in a relatively 
recent study is described as a closely related bacterium to Pseudoalteromonas  halotolerans 
TAC12526. In fact, based on the species definition using ANI, the  two strains  are not closely 
related, as they share 84.2% ANI similarity with each other. The authors concluded the taxonomic 
relatedness from a previous study, in which they also used ANI, as well as other in silico methods, 
to determine that Pseudoalteromoas sp. TB41 falls into the group of ‘P. haloplanktis -like’ bacteria.  
Becaus e the genomes of the strains used for comparison were likely wrongly or doubtfully 
assigned , the authors based their conclusions on dubious assigned genomes . Based on the 
phylogeny in paper 113, strains assigned  as P. haloplanktis  occur  scattered around the tree, and 
thus represent a phylogenetic pitfall that conc ern the remainder of the phylogenetic tree. This 
above issue  strongly highlight s the need for a re -evaluation of strains/species in the genus.  
 
Other scientists have also reported inconsistencies in species delineation in the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas , as well as the potential for many  additional  novel species27,28. This does not 
only ha ppen within the genus Pseudoalteromoas but also on a global scale of prokaryotic 
taxonomy. Researchers have become more attentive to species delineation, and the following 
important message was quoted by Figueras et al29.: “The mistakes in the species names of 
deposited genomes are relevant because they may lead to incorrect conclusions in comparative 
genomics studies. Therefore, these data should motivate researchers to implement measures to 
prevent introducing taxonomical errors in public genome databases” . In 2018, NCBI introduced ANI 
analyses for all newly upload ed bacterial genomes to ensure that they are correctly assigned to a 
species, and to notify the submitter if there is a misidentification30. They also provide the service of 
assigning species to strains deposited without a taxonomic affiliation, if their analyses propose that 
A
Z
Z B 11 
 there is an affiliat ed specie s. Whenever a new type -strain is submitted to NCBI and confirmed, 
NCBI curators will repeat the complete process of evaluating the strains of the affected genus, and 
potentially reassign some strains to the newl y confirmed species of the type -strain.  
 
At the early stage of the sequencing era, it was  discussed h ow the whole -genome sequence would 
become  the standard to determine the taxonomy17. Using genomic data to describe novel species 
seems to move rapidly forward, as in 2018, the International Journal of Systematic and 
Evolutionary Microbiology (IJSEM)  published a set of guidelines for how to use genomic data to 
infer taxonomy31. ANI and in silico DDH are incr easingly used in species descriptions, and 
nowadays it is rather the exception to exclude these data in a species description. Several 
approaches for making these analyses available for the ‘ wet-lab scientist without great 
bioinformatics skills’ is being d eveloped, such as the Type (Strain) Genome Server (TYGS), which 
is a user -friendly web server for genome -based prokaryote taxonomy32. As bioinformatics becomes 
more accessible for  wet-lab scientist s, these approaches are important means for the rapidly 
expanding genomic taxonomy and description of new genera and species. These guidelines from 
IJSEM  were used in paper 223 to describe the novel species P. galatheae . Here we used genomic 
and metabolomics comparisons of  the new species , and compared  to the four closest related type 
strains . Apart from identifying P. galatheae as a novel species, the  results indicated that two of the 
so-called different species, should  in fact be one species . This again stresses  the importance for 
incorporating the complete genome when describing novel species, as well as underlining a need 
for confirmation of the  existing species  within the genus.   
 
3.2 Occurrence and importance of genus Pseudoalteromonas   
Pseudoalteromonads are omnipresent in marine waters. The total abundance of 
Pseudoalteromonas in surface seawaters during the Galathea3 expedition was 2 -3%, and was 
measured using cultivation independent measures with CARD -FISH33. During the Tara Oceans 
Project, Pseudoalteromonas was found to contribute 0 .4% of the total ocean bacteria  using a 
metagenomic approach34. Members of the genus have been isolated from many marine habitats 
such as open and coastal waters, deep -sea waters and sediments5. They are often found in 
healthy association with higher eukaryotic organisms35, but have also been described as 
(opportunistic) pathogen s in organisms such as fish36, sponges37, scallops38 and algae39. 
Pigmented spe cies have generally larger genomes (5.2 ± 0.6 Mb) compared to non -pigmented 
species (4.4 ± 0.4 Mb)13. Considering the closed genomes available in the NCBI database 12 
 suggests that the genome of a Pseudoalteromonas strain consists of one l arge and one smaller 
chromosome.  
Pigmented species are known for their broad variety of SMs whereas the non -pigmented species 
are believed to have a great enzymatic capacity and a higher environmental tolerance35,40. This 
underst anding was partially supported by the analysis of glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) in paper 113. 
GHs are, as the name entails, hydrolytic enzymes acting on carbohydrates. We found that non -
pigmented species have a higher diversity of GHs compa red to pigmented species (Figure 7) 
although the number of GHs on a gene count basis was not different between pigmented and non -
pigmented strains.  
 
 
Figure 7. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) of pigmented (red) and non -pigmented (grey)  strains  based on 
glycosyl hydrolases (GHs). GHs with loadings of more than ±0.5 are shown , as they contribute significantly 
to the diversification of GH profiles between the pigmen ted and non -pigmented strains. The high diversity of 
GHs within the non -pigmented species is shown by the scattering dots, compared to pigmented strains that 
are more concentrated around the center. Figure from 13. 
 
Non-pigmented species of the genus are of interest due to their production of extracellular 
enzymes with biotechnological relevance, such as proteases41, collagenas es42, agarases43 and 
chitinases44. The GH analysis from paper 113 suggest that non -pigmented species are particular 
driven towards the degradation of algal carbohydrates, which are present in the ocean in several 
13 
 different forms, which explains the high diversity of GHs within the group  as seen in Figure 7 . One 
of the most studied non -pigmented strains is  Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125 , which  was 
the first Antarctic bacterium to be fully genome sequenced and annotated45. It is  psychrophilic and 
mesotolerant , and shows  fast growth in a wide range of temperatures (from -2.5 to 25 °C)46. Non -
pigmented strains from deep -sea environments such as P. haloplanktis TAC125 and 
Pseudoalteromonas sp. SM991347 have attracted attention , because of their presence in extreme 
environments, such as Antarctica. Cold -adapted enzymes are of particular industrial interest 
because they function at low temperatures, thus offering economic and environmental benefits.  
The first carrageenase describe d originated from the non -pigmented Pseudoalteromonas 
carrageenovora 9T 48. The locus containing the carrageenan -degrading genes are located o n a 
plasmid and not on either of the two chromosomes49, again supporting the hypothesis that HGT 
has played (and is playing) a role in the speciation within the genus . 
 
Secondary metabolites are  probably the most known  characteristic  of the  pigmented species , and 
they likely benefit the bacteria during nutrient acquisition and colonization  of biotic and abiotic 
surfaces35. It is not only the bacteria itself that benefit from their production of SMs, but also t heir 
eukaryotic host can profit from its colonizers. For example, Pseudoalteromonas inhabit the 
hemolymph of healt hy marine invertebrates and represent potential probiotics to control infectious 
diseases in aquaculture. Pseudoalteromonas strains isolated from the hemolymph of oysters and 
mussels were  antimicrobial against pathogenic Vibrio harveyi  that causes mortality in marine 
snails50. The snails showed higher survival when pre -treate d with Pseudoalteromonas prior to V. 
harveyi expose, compared to those that had not been pre -treated. The potential use of pigmented 
Pseudoalteromonas  as probiotics  has previously been reported in penaeid hatcheries51 and 
mollusc farms52, and it is likely that the SMs produced by Pseudoalter omonas are responsible for 
the protective activities. The SMs produced by pigmented Pseudoalteromonas will be described in 
more detail in chapter 5.  
 
SMs are often produced when environmental cues turn on the transcription of the gene clusters 
encoding the SMs. One such cue can be the carbon source, which has been a focus of this PhD 
project. From the GH analysis in Figure 7 we found that genes encoding  chitinolytic enzymes  
(GH18, GH19 and GH20)  where among the biggest driver s of the diversification from the non -
pigmented species, which lead us to question if chitin degradation and production of SMs could be 
connected.   14 
 4. Bacterial chitin degradation  
Chitin is the most abundant polymer in the marine environment, and the second most abundant on 
Earth next to cellulose. It is an important structural element in the exoskeleton of crustaceans and 
insects, in cell walls of fungi and in pens of squid s. Chiti n does not accumulate on the ocean  floor, 
suggesting that it is efficiently degraded and turned over53. Bacteria are the most important 
degraders of chitin in the ocean and c hitin provides a rich source of carbon and nitrogen. These 
nutrients  are often limited in the marine envi ronment, and therefore , the chitin surface is a hotspot 
for bacteria and their interactions54. Bacteria respond to chitin in the surroundings with chemotaxis 
and chemotrophism, meaning that the bacteria either migrate or grow towards the source of 
nutrients. Once in close proximity or attached to chitin, bacteria will start secreting extracellular 
chitinases, which degrade the polymer into smaller oligomers  that can be imported into the 
bacteri al cell  and utilized55–57. Chitinases  are found in both terrestrial and  marine bacteria , and are 
found in many phyla, such as Actinobacteria, P roteobacteria, Acidobacteria and Firmicutes58. 
Using a metagenomics approach it has been estimated that between 0.2% and 5.8% of all 
bacterial cells are chitinolytic59, whereas the chitinolytic fraction of culturable bacteria from the 
Chesapeake Bay was an average of 21%60. In paper 1  we describe that within the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas, 100% of the pigmented species are chitinolytic , whereas only 45% of the non -
pigmented species are13.  
4.1 Structur al composition of chitin.  
Structurally, chitin is a polymer of 1,4 -β linked N-acetyl -D-glucosamine (GlcNAc) , in which the 
GlcNAc units are rotated 180o to each other ( Figure 8). The polymerization of the linked GlcNAc 
units exhibit three different crystalline conformations: α, β and γ, which are different in the 
orientation of the microfibril chains61. The α -conformation is by far the most common type of chitin, 
where the chains are arranged in an anti -parallel fashion. This type is found in the fungal cell wall, 
and in most protistan and invertebrate exoskeletons. A less common conformation is β -chitin, in 
which the chains are arranged in a parallel fashion. The least common conformation is γ -chitin, in 
which  the chains are arranged by two parallel chains followed by one anti -parallel chain.  β-chitin 
and γ -chitin have only been reported in squid. All t hree forms of chitin are found in the squid, and 
the physical form of chitin has importance for its location:  α-chitin in the hard beak, β -chitin in the 
rigid pens and γ -chitin in the flexible stomach lining54. 
 15 
  
Figure 8. Structural composition of chitin , a polymer composed of 1,4 -β-linked units of N -acetylglucosamine. 
Chitin can be found in three different conformations: α (anti -parallel  chains ), β (parallel  chains ) and γ ( mixture 
of two parallel  chains  and one anti-parallel  chain ). Figure from 62. 
 
4.2 Enzymes involved in chitin degradation  
Bacterial degradation of chitin occurs in three main steps : i) breaking down the crystalline chitin  
into oligomers , ii) hydrolyzing the oligomers into dimers and iii) splitting  the dimers into monomers  
(exemplified by the model of chitin degradation in V. harveyi in Figure 9). The enzymes involved in 
the extracellular  steps are chitinases  and lytic poly saccharide monooxygenases  (LPMOs). The 
breakdown products are imported into to the periplasm or cytoplasm via uptake systems, such as 
the phosphoenolpyruvate -dependent phosphotr ansferase system63 and/or ABC transporters64. In 
the periplasm or cytoplasm , hexosa minidases  split the dimers into monomers; although 
spontaneous release of monomers can also occur during  hydrolysis by chitinases65. The metabolic 
importance of GlcNAc catabolism is evident from the degradation products: (a)  NH 3, the preferred 
nitrogen source for bacteria, (b) fructose -6-phosphate, which en ters directly into glycolysis and (c) 
acetate, which can be converted into acetyl -CoA, and is a precursor for a wide range of biological 
processes66. In the following sub -chapters the different genes involved in bacterial chitin 
degradation will be described in detail.  
  
16 
  
Figure 9. Model of chitin degradation in Vibrio harveyi . Chitin is degraded in the extracellular space via 
chitinases and lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases ( the latter is not depicted in this figure). Once partially 
degraded, chitin oligomers are transported through the outer membrane via size -dependent pori ns. In the 
periplasm , the further degradation takes place via GlcNAcases/chitodextrinases (in this thesis referred to as 
hexosaminidases), and the products of this are either GlcNAc 2 or GlcNAc. The hybrid two -component 
sensor, ChiS , will sense GlcNAc 2 and release a chitin -binding protein (CBP)  and render ChiS ‘active’. T he 
‘active’ state of ChiS  subsequently regulates the transcription of  genes in the chitin catabolic operon. In the 
periplasm , GlcNAc 2 is transported to the cytoplasm via an ABC -transporter, and GlcNAc is transported via a 
PTS transporter. The chitin breakdown products are then phosphorylated and converted to fructose -6-
phosphate, NH 3 and acetate . Figure from 67.   
 
In the marine environment, chitin degradation is mostly studied in  Vibrio species  (particularly, 
Vibrio cholerae ); potentially, due to the role of  chitin as a vector for the spread of this human 
pathogen  as well as of Vibrio vulnificus and Vibrio parahaemolyticus68. Chitin can also induce 
natural transformation in vibrios . This allows exogenous DNA to be taken up by horizontal gene 
transfer, which in the worst scenario can lead to a more pathogenic strain57,69. Chitin degradation in 
V. cholerae  is subject to carbon c atabolite repression by glucose70.  Vibrios  do not necessarily  
require salt for growth , as opposed to Pseudoalteromonas , making them good organisms for 
studying the genes involved in chitin degradation via molecular methods. One such example is the 
study by Hayes et al. , in which all seven chitinases have been knocked out and re -introduced into 
a V. cholerae strain71 This enabled the systematic genetic dissection of all the chitin degrading 
genes in V. cholerae,  showing that not all chitinases are equally important for chitin degradation.  
17 
 4.2.1 Bacterial chitinases  
Chitinases hydrolyze the β -1,4 glycosidic bonds in the polymeric chitin chains  and can act as endo - 
as well as exo -enzymes, meaning that they either cleave randomly in the polymer or from the 
reducing ends, respectively72. Chitinases contain a catalytic domain as well as additional chitin -
binding domains , such as  chitin -binding modules (CBMs) or fibronectin III (FnIII) domains , that  
increase  the affinity  and efficacy  of the enzyme65. The vast majority of bacterial chitinases belong 
to GH family 18, and a few belong to GH family 1972. GH19 chitinases are rather known from 
plants. GH18 and GH19 chitinases do not share sequence similarity and also have different 
catalytic mechanisms73. It is hypothesized that GH18 and GH19 chitinases have evolved 
separately65. The first bacterial GH19 chitinase was discovered in a Streptomyces griseus strain in 
1996 by Ohno et al74 and since then , genome seq uencing has  revealed  more genes encoding 
bacterial GH19 chitinases . Plant GH19 chitinases mainly act as protection against pathogenic 
fungi75,76, but the function of GH19 chitinases in bacteria is unknown . Bacterial GH19 chitinases 
have been reported to both degrade chitin and to be antifungal, however , the antifungal ac tivity 
does not seem to be restricted to GH19 chitinase s, as GH18 chitinases also show  antifungal 
activity77–81. In paper 1 , we found that GH19 chitinases were present in all  the genomes of 
pigmented Pseudoalteromonas and in few non -pigmented species , suggesting that the GH19 
chitinase has a role for pigmented species of the genus13. 
 
Bacterial genomes can harbor s everal different genes encoding for chitinases . As an example, the 
average chitin degrading Actinobacteria  was found to encode 6.45 chitinases in its genome58. In 
the genus Pseudoalteromonas we found that p igmented strains encoded on average 5.2 GH18 
chitinases,  whereas the non -pigmented chitinolytic strains encoded an average of 2.1 GH18 
chitinases13.It is an open  question if all the chitinases are  essential and /or expressed. The  genome 
of the  potent chitin -degrading bacterium Cellvibrio japonicus encodes  four genes of  GH18 
chitinases and one gene of a  GH19 chitinase. Secretome analysis showed that all four GH18 
chitinases and to a much lower extent the GH19 chitinase were abundant during growth on chitin82. 
Building on that study, the physiological role of the four GH18 chitinases was investigated, and it 
was predicted that three of the chitinases were secreted and one was membrane -bound83. 
Transcriptome analysis demonstrated that the genes were highly upregulated and knock -out of the 
chitinase  gene s showed that only one gene, chi18D , is essential for chitin degradation, although 
synergistic effects were observed with two other chitinases.  
 
The genome of V. cholerae encode s seven putative extracellular chitinases and three putative 
periplasmic chitinases  belonging to the GH18 and GH19 families . Transcriptome analysis 18 
 demonstrated  that all seven extracellular chitinases ( including  a GH19 chiti nase) were  expressed 
during growth on chitin, but one GH18 chitinase, ChiA2, was the most highly expressed gene71. 
Likewise, a study on two members of the Vibrionaceae family show ed that all  encoded chitinases, 
including  GH19 chitinases, were expr essed and upregulated during growth on chitin, some to a 
higher extent than others84. The conserved presence of GH19 chitinases in pigmented 
Pseudoalteromonas as well as its enigmatic nature, led us to pursue the role or function of the 
GH19 chitinase in Pseudoalteromonas  rubra S4059  in paper 385. We thus created a gene deletion 
knock -out mutant of the GH19 chitinase  and the results  showed that the wild -type and GH19 
mutant grew alike in chitin media  (Figure  10)85.This indicated that under our experimental setup the 
GH19 chitinas e was not important.  This somewhat fits with the above studies describing that the 
GH19 chitinase is not essential for growth on chitin. In the above mentioned  studies , the GH19 
genes are active and expressed, meaning that they must serve a function. In paper 3, we do not 
know if the GH19 chitinase is expressed under the tested circumstances, thus we are now 
investigating the gene expression of the chitinases in P. rubra S4059  to support the results .  
 
Figure 10. No difference in growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 wildtype (black) and GH19 
deletion mutant (red) in colloidal chitin. The points are average of two biological replicates with standard 
deviations. Similar experiment was performed in crysta lline chitin showing  the same trend. Figure simplified 
from 85. 
 
Naming of GH18 chitinases can be somewhat confusing, as many res earchers give the identified 
chitinases names in alphabetical order. This can be confusing because the domains within the 
chitinases have been named according to previously described chitinases, e.g. ChiA and ChiD 
(Figure 1 1). The crystal structure of the ChiD -type chitinase was originally described in Bacillus 
circulans (named ChiD in the study) , and the domain architecture consists of af GH18 catalytic 0123456789
0 24 48 72Log(CFU/mL)
Time (h)19 
 domain, a chitin -binding domain and a FnIII domain, where the FnIII and chitin -binding domain is 
located  either C -terminal or N -terminal to the catalytic domain86. Likewise, the crystal structure of 
the ChiA -type chitinase was described as ChiA in Serratia marcescens, and thus named 
accordingly. The ChiA -type chitinase domain architecture consists of a FnIII domain separated by 
a hinge -region from the catalytic dom ain87. Thus, researchers might name a chitinase ChiA, but it 
can have the ChiD -type domain architecture.  
 
 
Figure 11. Screenshot from NCBI of the domain structure of two GH18 chitinases from Pseudoalteromonas 
rubra S4059  (from paper 3). Top: the chitinase resembles the ChiD -type chitinase, bottom: the chitinase 
resembles the ChiA -type chitinase.  
 
4.2.2 Chitin active  lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases  
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are relat ively newly discovered enzymes being 
discovered in 201088. LPMOs are oxidative enzymes that cleave glycosidic bond s in crystalline 
surfaces. LPMOS are categorized in auxiliary  activity (AA) families AA9, AA10 , AA11  and AA 13, 
but were originally classified as carbohydrate -binding modules (CBM)  before 201089. The first 
LPMO enzyme was discovered in Serratia marcescenc acting on chitin, but generally, LPMOs act 
on crystalline polymeric surfaces , including cellulose and starch72,90. LPMOs  belonging to AA9 are 
active on cellulose and are primarily of fungal origin. AA10 LPMOs are predominantly of  bacterial 
origin and acts on chitin  and cellulose. Chitin -active LPMOs of fungal origin belong to the AA11 
family , and AA13 family LPMOs are of fungal origin with activity on starch90. Hence, whenever 
bacterial chitin -active LPMOs are mentioned  in this thesis , they belong to the AA10 family. On 
chitin, LPMOs create nicks in the crystalline chitin chains to provide  access for chitinases  thus 
enhancing  the efficiency  of chitinases.   
 
The the oxidative mechanism of LPMOs cleaves 1,4 -β bonds in chitin  (and cellulose, starch)  while 
oxidizing the C188 (Figure 12). The oxygen introduced at the C1 position, originates from molecular 
oxygen, and the reac tion is  dependent on an electron donor . Ascorbic acid is a commonly used 
20 
 reductant for the activity of LPMOs88. It has recently been described that LPMOs can also use 
H2O2 as co -substrate91. LPMOs are copper -dependent enzymes, and Cu2+ binds the LPMO with 
nanomolar affinity and is essential for catalysis92. LPMOs have gained much attention due to their 
industrial relevance , i.e. for biofuel production, and on chitin they improve the accessibility for 
chitinases in the most recalcitrant parts t hat otherwise would have been degraded much slower90.   
 
Figure 12. Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase reaction  on chitin . LPMOs catalyze the oxidation within a 
crystalline polysaccharide lea ding to cleav age of the 1,4 β linked units of  N-acetylglucosamine. Oxidation 
occurs at C1 and results in the formation of a lactone, which is hydrated to become a reducing end aldonic 
acid. C4 -oxidation leads to ketoaldose formation at the non -reducing end. Copper is essential for catalysis  
Figure fr om 90. 
 
Gene e xpression data of a study of C. japonicus  grow ing on chitin showed that of the genes 
involved in chitin degradation, the LPMO was the most upregulated gene83. The authors then 
cloned and  expressed  the LPMO gene and  four GH18 chitinase genes and performed synergy 
experiments in chitin media . This  surprisingly demonstrated  that there was no synergistic effect 
when adding the LPMO to the chitinases. The authors speculate that this might be an effect o f the 
substrate used, as it might not have been ‘crystalline enough’.  In paper 3, we do not see a 
difference between the wildtype and the two LPMO gene deletion kn ock-outs in growth kinetics in 
chitin media  or biofilm formation of P. rubra S4059, either suggesting that we have not found a 
suitable assay for testing the role of the genes, or that the genes do not have a function  in this 
setup85. Most studi es conducted on chitin degradation  are carried out using non -natural substrates, 
meaning substrates that have been pre -processed, such as colloidal chitin (acid hydrolyzed) or 
21 
 crystalline chitin powder from Sigma Aaldrich (washed and milled). In real life, the structure is 
much more complex, as chitin is also in a complex of minerals and proteins, and laboratory chitin is 
usually deproteiniz ed and demineralized.  We addressed this issue in paper 3 by using 
unprocessed shrimp shells from Vannamei shrimps to assess the chitin degradation of the WT, 
GH19 and LPMO mutants of P. rubra S4059, but no difference in chitin degradation between wild 
type and mutants was  seen  (Figure  13)85.  
 
Figure 13. Growth and attachment of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 wildtype and mutants on non -
processed Vannamei shrimp shells  estimated in sea salt water before and after sonication of shrimp shells.  
Open circle: wildtype, open square diamond: GH19 mutant, open triangle: double LPMO mutant.  Solid grey 
lines are samples from the sea salt water before sonication , and solid black lines are samples from sea water 
after sonication.  Dotted lines represent 3% sea salt without shrimp shells as control . 
 
Another factor most often not considered in a laboratory setup is that the lifestyle of the majority of 
bacteria is most likely in a (mixed community) biofilm, and that the genes may be more important 
for attached growth  and in an interaction with other bacteria . Inducing cues could  be missing in 
traditional  laboratory  experiments, simply because the bacteria do not grow the  way they would in 
natural settings. Another possibility could be that LPMOs (or GH19 chitinases) are only critical for 
certain steps of the degradation, and is not detected whe n using heavily pre -treated substrates and 
therefore not visible. All of these things need to be considered when  evaluating  the importance  or 
role of the GH19 and LPMO genes in Paper 3 and it is important not to write off the role of the 
GH19 and LMPO gene s, although the applied  settings do not seem important for chitin degradation 
or biofilm formation.   0123456789
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Log(CFU/mL)
Time (days )22 
 4.2.3 Hexosaminidases  
Intracellular  GlcNAc 2 is cleaved by hexosaminidase s (also known as chitobiase s) from the non -
reducing end into GlcNAc and utilized. Hexosaminidase s belong to GH family 20. Some 
hexosaminidases are also capable of removing the GlcNAc residue from longer chitin chains. This 
process usually takes place in the periplasmic or cytoplasmic space61. In Pseudoalteromonas, 
hexosaminidases are present in all chitin degrading strains  (up to three gene copies) , and in few 
non-chitin d egraders  (only one gene copy), suggesting that a small sub -set of non -chitin degraders 
can utilize the GlcNAc 2 degradation product produced by chitinolytic bacteria13. This commensal or 
cheating strategy is also known in Bacillus , where strains not producing chitinases do produce 
hexosaminidases93.  
  
4.3 Chitin degradation in Pseudoalteromonas  
Chitin degradation is a known phenomenon in Pseudoalteromonas, but the  details about  chitin 
degradation is not as well studied  as for vibrios . Thus, this section aims to collect the knowledge 
about the influence and degradation of chitin in Pseudoalteromonas . 
In paper 1, we conduct ed global genomic comparison s of chitin -degradation in 157 
Pseudoalteromonas genomes13. The analyses were performed on 95 non -pigmented and 62 
pigmented strains, and found  that all pigmented genomes and 40 non -pigmented genomes contain 
chitin degrading genes of the GH18 family. Chitinases of the GH19 family were omnipresent in the 
pigmen ted strains, but only present in ten of the 40 non -pigmented chitinolytic genomes , as 
mentioned previosuly . We describe a three -gene chitin degradation cluster, which seems to be a 
conserved trait in all chitin -degrading Pseudoalteromonas regardless of pigmentation (Figure 14). 
The cluster was first identified in Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 in 1999  by Techkarnjanaruk and 
Goodman94. It consists of two GH18 chitinases  of the ChiA and ChiC types  flanking a n LPMO. 
Production of the ChiA -type chitinase was controlled by expression of a ChiC -type chitinase, as a 
transposon insertion in the chiC gene resulted in loss of chitinase activity of the strain. Later 
analyses found that the cluster was transcribed as an operon, but that the genes could also be 
transcribed separately from individual promoters95. GlcNAc was found to induce expression of the 
operon 10 -fold and colloidal chitin induced the expression  3-fold, by measuring the lacZ gene 
product of β -galactosidase96. Early starvation and increased CO 2 levels were also found to induce 
expression of the operon, and  it was not repressed by glucose, suggesting that it is not catabolite 
repressed. However, e xpression of the operon was repressed by rich chitin medium (0.1% chitin). 
By the time of discovery of the gene cluster, the role of the LPMO was not known  and it w as 
therefore assigned as a chitin -binding protein without catalytic activity. To my knowledge, no LPMO 23 
 from a Pseudoalteromonas strain has  yet been characterized, although they are omnipresent in the 
genomes of chitin -degrading Pseudoalteromonas13.  
 
Figure 14.The chitin degradation cluster is conserved in all chitin degrading Pseudoalteromonas . The cluster 
consists of two GH18 chitinases of the ChiC -type and ChiA -type, flanking a lytic polysaccharide 
monooxygenase (LMPO ) belonging to  Auxillary Activity family 10 . Figure from13.  
 
Further investigation of the cluster demonstrated  that concentration and source of nitrogen 
regulated the promoter activity of the ChiC -type chitinase97. The gene was induced when no or little 
ammonium was present and repressed when it was present in excess , correlating to the previously 
mentioned study by Techkarnjanaruk et al.94. This suggests a tight regulation of the chitin -
degrading genes in Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 . Different sub -populations have been described 
for Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 when grown on chitin: a chitinase active and a non -chitinase active 
population98. It was  hypothesized th at the chitinase active sub -population released chitin 
degradation products into the aqueous environment  that the non -chitinase active population could 
utilize. This ‘division of labor’ -phenomenon is also known from e.g. Bacillus subtilis where different 
clonal sub -populations perform complementary tasks during biofilm formation99 or the case where 
one sup -population produces acetate, and the other sup -population converts acetate to acetoin, 
which is non -toxic to the cells100. It is believed that bacteria can divide up to 20% faster, if they 
share cellular building blocks or metabolic tasks101, and the occurrence of two sup -populat ions of 
Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 when grown on chitin could very well fit into this theory. Furthermore , 
chitin -degrading bacteria hydrolyze more chitin than they utilize themselves102. This is the case for 
Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 when grown in a dual species biofilm on squid pen with Vibrio  sp. 
S141103. Vibrio sp. S141 produces chitinases, however it grows poorly on squid pen, but grows on 
GlcNAc. Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 was capable of supporting the growth of Vibrio sp. S141 in 
the biofilm on squid pen. When they were grown in a biofilm on a glass surface and supplied with a 
soluble carbon source only used by Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S91, the biofilm did not provide a ny 
growth support of Vibrio sp. S141. The relationship between Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91 and 
Vibrio sp. S141 seemed to be commensal, since Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S91 did not display 
reduced fitness from the nutrient -scavenging Vibrio sp. S141 in squid pen.  
24 
 The genes involved in chitin degradation have been  studied extensively  in Pseudoalteromonas  
piscicida O-7. In presence of chitin, the strain produces four chitinases (referred to as ChiA, B, C 
and D), three hexosaminidases  (GlcNAcase A, B and C) , a transglycosylative enzyme (Hex99) and 
a chitin -binding protein (Cpb1, now recognized as LPMO)104–110. Interestingly, the mature form of 
GlcNAcase A is likely exposed on the c ell surface, and the authors suggest that this gives an 
advantage to the host, because the enzyme is not secreted into the milieu, leading to  a more 
efficient hydrolysis and uptake of the substrate104. Regulation of the genes involved in chitin 
degradation in P. piscicida O-7 is controlled by the two -component system (CdsS/CdsR)111. CdsR 
is the response regulator that is phosphorylated by the sensor kinase CdsS, and CdsR was bound 
near the promotor regions of the four chit inases and the LPMO. Phosphorylation was promoted by 
the degradation products of chitin, and overall, the results suggest that CdsR is a common 
regulator of chitin degradation in the strain. The CdsS/CdsR two -component systems was 
identified in the genomes  of all  102 chitin -degrading Pseudoalteromonas strains analyzed in Paper 
113, indicating that this two -component system is conserved in Pseudoalteromonas  (data not 
included in the publication) . Similar to Pseudoalteromonas sp. S91, glucose did not repress any 
chitin -degrading genes in P. piscicida O-7, further supporting that these pathways are not 
connected109.  
As mentioned, natural transformation is chitin -induced in Vibrio species, but no studies have 
described a similar observation for Pseudoalteromonas . The sensor Chi S also play s a fundamental 
role in chitin degradation in vibrios , but is cognate regulator has still not been identified112. This 
could be due to the hybrid nature of the sensor, and/or the fact that several  regulators are present. 
In Pseudoalteromonas, the sensor/regulator pair CdsS/CdsR is of the conventional two -component 
regulatory system, and have to the best of my knowledge not been linked to other cellular 
processes than those  around chitin degradation . Carbon catabolite repression has been observed 
for Vibrios , but as mentioned not for Pseudoalteromonas. In fact, unpublished experiments during 
this PhD study indicated that several strains of Pseudoalteromonas grew faster and/or better on 
GlcNAc than gl ucose, indicating  that these strains are highly adapted to the GlcNAc -rich 
substrates.  Niche -adaptations, such as growth on chitin, may come with induced responses of SM 
production. B ecause pigmented Pseudoalteromonas  have such a conserved and elaborate 
chitinolytic machinery we asked in paper 223 and paper 385 if chitin was linked to the production of 
SMs in two pigmented stra ins, as SM production is also a dominant feature of pigmented 
Pseudoalteromonas .   25 
 5. Bacterial secondary metabolites  
Bacterial metabolites are divided into primary and secondary metabolites  depending on the 
functional properties  and biosynthesis. The primary metabolites are directly involved in the 
maintenance and reproduction of the cell, and thus support the essential processes of the cell . 
SMs are compounds that participate in various physiological function s, but are not necess ary to 
maintain the cell. They are e.g. involved in survival strategies of the bacteria by mediation of intra- 
and extracellular  signaling o r acquisition of metals . SMs are in newer literature often  referred to as 
‘specialized metabolites’, as it has becom e clear that these molecules are not of secondary 
importance, but can have very vital functions for the producer113. 
 
5.1 Biosynthesis of bacterial seco ndary metabolites  
SMs belong to different chemical classes such as polyketides  (PKs) , non-ribosomal peptides  
(NRPs) , terpenoids and alkaloids . They are normally produced by enzymes encoded by co -
localized genes on a single locus, and forms the so -called biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) . The 
documented a ntimicrobial compounds from Pseudoalteromonas species belong to alkaloids, PKs 
and NRPs114. Enzymes encoding for production of NRPs are most frequently identified in the 
genomes of Pseudoalteromonas , followed by PKs  (data not published).  PKs and NRPs are 
commonly  encountered in bacteria  and their biosynthesis follows an assembly -line strategy . They 
are synthesized by large modular enzymes: polyketide synthases (PKS) and non -riboso mal 
peptide synthetases (NRPS).  
 
Many NRP s are assembled according to the co -linearity rule that basically consists of an initiation 
module, a various number of elongation modules followed by a termination module ( Figure 15 + 
Figure 16). Each module contains at least a condensation (C) domain, an adenylation (AD) domain 
and a peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) domain. The A D domain  is responsible for selecting the amino 
acid (aa) substrate and activating it by  subsequently attach ing it via a thioester link to the PCP 
domain. Then , the PCP domain transports the aa to the C domain that catalyzes an amide bond 
formation between the aa and the peptide attached to the PCP domain of the preceding module to 
hereby elongate the peptide with a single aa residue. A thioesterase (TE) domain will terminate 
and release the product115,116.  
 26 
  
Figure 15. NRPS biosynthesis.  The initiation  module consisting of the adenylation (A) domain and a peptidyl 
carrier protein (PCP) will select an amino acid (Aa) to start synthesizing the peptide backbone. The 
elongation module, consisting of a condensation (C) domain, A  domain and PCP domain is repe ated several 
times, after which the peptide is released by a thioesterase (TE) in the termination module.  Figure from 116. 
 
PKSs  are classified into type I, II and II according to the organization of their f unctional domains . 
The starter unit for biosynthesis of PKs  is acyl coenzyme A (coA), and the principle of a PKS is the 
structural modularity , where the substrate for initiation and elongation is selected and activated by 
the acyl transferase (AT) domain and transferred to the acyl carrier protein (ACP) domain  (Figure 
16). Then  a ketosynthase  (KS) domain catalyse s the condensation between the s ubstrate and the 
growing polyketide chain. The AT, ACP and KS domains are the ‘basic requirements’ of function, 
but other tailoring domains can also be present, such as ketoreductase (KR), dehydrogenase (DH) 
and enolreductase (ER) domains117. Type I PKSs consist of one large enzyme comprising several 
domains that catalyze different reactions, and they are found in both bacteria and fungi. Type II 
PKSs are mostly found in bacteria and consists of several dissociable enzymes that ea ch serve a 
function while synthesizing the polyketide. Type III PKSs use the acyl -coA thioesters directly 
instead of  using extender units tethered to an ACP. Type III PKSs are less frequently found in 
bacteria117. Hybrid BGCs are  also often encountered, such as the PKS-NRPS hybrid encoding 
biosynthesis of chondramide as shown in Figure 16. 
 
27 
  
Figure 16. PKS-NRPS hybrid biosynthesis of chondramide produced by the marine Myxobacterium 
Chondromyces crocatus . Belonging to the polyketide synthase: ACP: acyl carrier protein, KS: ketosynthase, 
AT: acyl transferase, DH: β -hydroxy dehydratase, KR: β -ketoacyl reductase, ER: enoyl reductase. Belonging 
to the non -ribosomal peptide synthetase: C: condensation domain, A:  adenylation domain, PCP: peptidyl 
carrier protein , MT: methyl transferase domain, E: epimerization domain, TE: thioesterase domain, PEP: 
phosphoenolpyruvate domain . Figure from 116.  
 
Terpenoid/isoprenoid compounds are among one of the largest classes of bioactive SMs, and 
plants, fungi and bacteria produce them118. Terpenoids are assembled from linked isoprene units  
and the enzymes catalyzing this process are called terpene synthases.  They can undergo a variety 
of cyclizations, catalyzed by terpene cyclases, and a subsequent tailoring of the molecule is often 
followed. Terpenes are generally considered to be of plant or fungal origin, although some bacterial 
terpenes are known119. Geosmin, produced by Streptomyces spp., is probably one of the best 
known bacterially derive d terpenoids, as this is the volatile earthy compound one can smell when 
talking a walk in the woods  (Figure 17, compound 1) .   
 
Alkaloids are low molecular weight compounds that contain nitrogen. The nitrogen atoms in 
alkaloids are amino acid derived and the main amino acids involved in alkaloid biosynthesis are 
ornithine, lysine, nicotinic acid, tyrosine, tryptophan, anthranillic acid and histidine. Tambjamines 
are examples of alkaloids. They are yellow pigments that have been isolated from  a 
Pseudoalteromonas  species 120,121 and have  also been chemically synthe sized122. Tambjamines 
have a bipyrrole core , similar to that of prodiginies, which contain the red pigment prodigiosin 
produced by P. rubra  (Figure 17, compound 2 and 3 ). 
28 
  
Figure 17. Structure s of the terpenoid G eosmin and the alkaloid compounds Tambjamine and Prodiginine.  
 
 
5.2 Bioactive b acterial volatiles  
Although volatiles are mostly of hydrophobic nature, they are produced in the marine environment, 
and have only recently been recognized as potential drug candidates123. The main focus o n 
volatiles ha s been on the possible ecological role in intra - and inter -kingdom interactions, and 
volatiles are known to modulate growth, motility, virulence and biofilm f ormation123. In soil, v olatiles 
can diffuse a distance of >12 cm during a time course of 20 minutes, which is a very large distance 
for microbes124. That bacteria use volatile s (infochemicals)  to communicate on a ‘long -distance 
relationship ’ basis  is therefore not unimaginable.  Members of the marine genus Salinispora and the 
Roseobacter group produce nitrogen -containing volatiles, but the function of the volatiles has not 
been investigated23. Pseudoalteromonas marina and Vibrio atlanticus produce the volatile 
compounds dimethyl disulphide, benzaldehyde, dimeth yl trisulphide and  tert-butylamine that have 
been used to control plant parasitic nematodes125. In some cases, volatiles are released from 
antibiotic -producing bacteria that likely o riginate from shunt metabolites of antibiotic biosynthesis. 
The volatile compound streptopyridin produced by Streptomyces sp. FORM5 is tightly connected to 
the production of the antibiotic streptazoline126, and the marine actinomycete  Salini spora tropica  
produce many different volatile compounds, some of which are by -products of the potent antibiotic 
and anticancer drug salinosporamide A biosynthetic pa thway127. In paper 2  we identified the 
volatile compound 2 -aminoacetophenone produced by the novel species P. galatheae , which is a 
shunt m etabolite from the biosynthetic pathway of pseudanes23, and will be described more in 
detail  later in this chapter .  
29 
 5.3 Genome mining as a tool to discover secondary metabolites  
Although the structural complexity of SMs is huge, the core biosynthetic enzymes are often 
strikingly conserved, which makes the ir prediction possible using bioinformati cs tools. Genome 
mining is the concept of searching for genes encoding conserved biosynthetic enzymes. One of 
the most comprehensive program s for this purpose is the ‘antibiotics and secondary metabolite 
analysis shell’  antiSMASH128. It is a web -based tool that allows for rapid genome -wide analysis of 
BGCs in bacterial  genomes  (and fungal  and plant  genomes , fungiSMASH  and plantiSMASH, 
respectively ). AntiSMASH integrates a number of previously published in silico tools for  detection 
of SMs. AntiSMASH currently runs as version 5 and is used by thousands of scientists worldwide , 
and can be very u seful for discovering novel SMs . As an example, g enome m ining has led to the 
discovery of the two halogenated peptides  curacomycin and dechlorocuracomycin  which w ere 
subsequently confirmed using mass spectrometry and NMR . Using antiSMASH,  Kaweewan et al. 
discovered a try ptophan -halogenase -encoding gene  within a  NRP  gene cluster and based on 
genomic data , the biosynthetic pathway of the two compounds was proposed129.  
In 2002, the full genome sequence of Streptomyces coelicolor was published and the hidden 
treasures of SM gene clusters became apparent130. The genome of S. coelico lor encodes 29 
BGCs, of which only two of the products were known  in 2002 . The genome mining revolution has 
come a long way since then, and nowadays, the products of the majority of the BGCs in S. 
coelicolor are either known or shar e high similarity to other known compounds (Figure 18).  30 
  
Figure 18. Biosynthetic gene  clusters detected by antiSMASH ver . 5 in the Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) 
genome. Twenty -nine BGCs are present in the genome, the majority of which represent known compounds 
or have high similarity to other known compounds.   
 
Streptomycetes  have been ch emically exploited for decades although there still are areas of the 
chemistry of S. coelicolor that can be investigated . Streptomyces are also prolific SM producers in 
the marine environment where in particular the genus Salinispora has been studied extensively131. 
For Proteobacteria, members of the genus Pseudoalte romonas  represents qualified candidates for 
novel chemistry. An example is the genome of the red pigmented P. rubra S4059, which ha s 16 
predicted BGC s encoded  in the genome and only three of those show relatively low similarity to 
known compounds  (Figure 19).  
 
31 
  
Figure 19. Biosynthetic gene clusters detected by antiSMASH  ver. 5  in Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 . 
Sixteen BGCs are detected, of which 11 are located on chromosome I, and five on chromosome II. Only 
three of the 16 BGCs display low similarity to other known compounds . 
 
A majority of the in silico -detected BGCs are orphan , silent or cryptic. Orphan refers to that the 
BGC has been detected, but so far, no product has been linked to the cluster.  Silent or cryptic 
means that the BGC s are not expressed under laboratory conditions, or that they are produced in 
such small amount s that are below analytical detection. These unknown BGCs hold a huge 
potential for drug discovery, but the discovery is not straightforward. Analyzing and  characterizing 
each BGC  in a genome is not very feasible, which BGC to analyze is a recurring questi on, and how 
to prioritize can be  a challenge. The high rediscovery rate of compounds is also an issue. 
Nonetheless, the development of bioinformatics tools has  been – and still is – an effective tool for 
guiding laboratory experiments towards detecting the  new drugs of tomorrow.  An important 
question for drug discovery is how to gain access to all these compounds . This PhD project has 
focused on cultivation -based strategies to potentially activate or induce novel antimicrobial 
compounds .  
32 
 5.4 Cultivation -based  strategies  for unlocking  the bioactive potential of 
bacteria  
Many  microorganisms have a far greater potential for production of SM s than the actual numbers 
of chemically detected compounds. Production of SMs is costly for the bacterial cell, as energy and 
resources are required for production of the biosynthetic enzymes, molecular precursors as well as 
tailoring of the product. The synthesis of SMs is therefore a tightly regulated process and is likely 
activated by specific cues from the environm ent132. Genetic engineering is one approach to either 
homologously or heterologously express the BGCs, but many marine organisms, particular those 
of the genus  Pseudoalteromonas,  are not easy to manipulate genetically133. Identifying the correct 
cues  by changing the culture conditions  to trigger the expression of silent/cryptic/orphan  BGCs is 
another method to identify  novel drug candidates , and was originally conceptualized into the “One 
Strain Many Compounds” (OSMAC) approach134. A plethora of different  culture conditions have 
proven  successful  for induction of SMs, such as nutrients, pH, temperature, addition of chemical 
elicitors and co -cultivation132. The OSMAC approach can be challenging and  time-consuming, as 
many cultivation changes will without a doubt affect the organism. If not just shooting blankly at the 
microorganism with a huge variety of cultivation changes, how does one then decide on which 
parameters to use, in the hope of discovering a new drug candidate?  
Considering the ecological niches  of the microorganism, the carbon source available in the 
microorganism’s natural environment is a logical starting point when changing culture conditions. 
When operating in the marine environment, chitin is, as mentioned, the most abundant polymer.  
Previo us PhD students from this group have demonstrated that changing the carbon source from 
glucose  or mannose to chitin  affected  the production of antibacterial compounds in strains from the 
Vibrionaceae family:  Wietz et al. described that growing on chitin  stimulated  the production of the 
antibiotic andrimid  in Vibrio corallilyticus S20523, and Giubergia et al. described how chitin  
increase d the number of antibacterial strains2. On glucose medium, six of 295 Vibrio  strains 
showed antibacterial activity against the target strain Vibrio anguillarum, whereas 49 and 91 of the 
strains showed antibacterial activity when grown on mannose and chitin , respectively2. 
Furthermore, trans criptome profiles of V. corallilyticus S2052 and Photobacterium galatheae 
S2753 showed that genes involved in secondary metabolism were significantly affected by chitin, 
compared to glucose. The metabolite profiles showed that the SMs andrimid and holomyci n were 
produced in higher quantities on chitin84, indica ting that SM production and chitin 
degradation/utilization are connected . Since  vibrios are found frequently in association with chitin,  
the above studies suggest  that the strains likely ha ve an adapted lifestyle to growth on chitin.  33 
 In paper 1  we analyzed the GH -profiles of 1 57 Pseudoalteromonas strains to identify  which 
carbohydrates could potentially be utilized by members of the genus, and  thus guide us towards a 
cultivation -based discovery of SMs. As mentioned in chapter 3, w e found that pigmen ted and non -
pigmented strains differed based on their GH -profile s, and that pigmented strains had a more 
homogenous GH profile with signif icantly more chitinolytic genes13. The chitinolytic genes were the 
most important drivers of the diversification of the GH -profile compared to non -pigmente d strains . 
In paper 2 we analyzed the metabolite profile of P. galatheae S4498 and found that mannose (an 
algal component) and mari ne broth resulted in higher yields of the antibacterial compound TBP 
compared to chitin  (Figure 20)23. This finding is opposite  to the before mentioned studies of the 
Vibrionaceae strains, however, these studies were mostly compared to glucose containing media, 
and as mentioned, in the study by Giubergia et al. , mannose did increase the number of bioactive 
vibrio strains , but not as distinctly as chitin2. 
 
Figure 20. Production of Tetrabromopyrrole (TBP) by Pseudoalteromonas galatheae S4498 in five different 
media: mannose (Man), chitin (Chi), marine broth (MB), glucose (Glc) and N -acetylglucosamine (Nag) 
calculated as area under the curve per colony forming unit (AUC /CFU). The asterisk mark those samples 
that are significantly different  from the mannose sample  (Dunnett’s t -test, p -value less than 0.05) .  
 
 In paper 1 , we replicated the plate -based experiment from Giubergia et al.  comparing bioactivity  
on glucose, mannose and chitin , only to find that Pseudoalteromonas  strains already considered 
producers of antibacterial compounds (pigmented strains) were also bioactive on both glucose and 
chitin. Thus, this assay was not sensitive enough to determine if chitin could enhance  or induce the 
bioactivity of Pseudoalteromonas. We therefore used a more sensitive method to  investigate if 
chitin could affect  the production of SMs in  six Pseudoalteromonas  strains . Screening in chitin and 
mannose based media show ed that both carbon sources resulted  in the appearance of unique 
34 
 peaks , indicating that the Pseudoalteromonas strains have nutrient -specific SM responses (Figure 
21).  
 
Figure 21. Chromatograms of chitin (blue) and mannose (green) extractions of six pigmented strains of 
Pseudoalteromonas .  
 
Chitin is also present in the terrestrial environment and known as an inducer of SMs. In S. 
coelicolor A3(2), eight of 23 BGCs were upregulated  when grown in chitin -amended soil, including 
one cryptic BGC135. Interestingly, the BGCs were only upregulated in soil -amended cult ures or on 
agar plates with soil extract, but not in liquid media supplied with chitin. This suggests that there 
are factors present in the soil that trigger s the expression of the BGCs in  the presence of chitin. In 
a recent study, addition of free protein  in different ratios to a chitin -based fermentation of Serratia 
marcescens gave a positive effect on the yield of prodigiosin136. In Pseudoalteromonas, a 
peptidase containing a chitin -binding domain is present adjacent to the chitin degradation cluster. 
Since ‘natural’ chitin is always in complex with proteins, it is likely that addition of protein to t he 
growth medium  of Pseudoalteromonas strains , could be an additional factor to trigger SM 
production . In paper 3 we used ‘natural’ chitin (exoskeleton of Vannamei shrimps) for biofilm  and 
growth  experiments, but not for any other experiments linked to the analysis of SMs. The addition 
of free protein to the growth medium would be interesting for future studies  of chitin -based SM 
production in Pseudoalteromonas .   
35 
 5.6 Secondary metabolites from Pseudoalteromonas  
Pigmented strains of Pseudoalteromonas produce a wide array of low and high molecular weight 
compounds with activities such as antimicrobial, antifouling, algicidal and anticancer40. In paper 1 
we conducted a global in silico analysis of the BGCs within the genus and not surprisingly f ound 
that the pigmented species represent a rich source of secondary  metabolites.  Components of the 
pigments are reported to have antimicrobial properties  (Table 2). Several pigments can be 
produced by one species, i.e. Pseudoalteromonas tunicata  that produce both yellow and purple 
compounds and thus appear dark green in culture or on plates137. In paper 2  we describe that the 
novel species P. galatheae is devoid of the yellow pigment bromoalterochromide which belong to 
the NRP class, and thus a visual pigmentation is not prerequisite for antimicrobial activity23. 
Table 2. Examples of antimicrobial pigments and their associated colors produced by different species of 
Pseudoalteromonas.   
Species  Antimicrobial compound  Color  
P. luteoviolaceae  
P. tunicata  Violacein  Purple  
P. rubra  Prodigiosin  Red 
 Indigiodine  Blue 
P. piscicida  
P. flavipulchra  
P. peptidolytica  Bromoalterochromide  Yellow  
P. tunicata  Tambjamines  Yellow  
 
In general, a non-pigmented strain  dedicates 1.1% ± 0.9% of its genome to BGCs , whereas the 
pigmented strain s, dedicate  7.6% ± 4.2% of its genome to BGCs13. An interesting example  is P. 
rubra S4059 , which  produces the red pigment prodigiosin. Prodigiosin is not detected by 
antiSMASH , although we chemically detect it in paper 385, and it is likely tha t there are other BGCs 
not detected  in silico . The genome of P. rubra S4059 is 5.9 Mb and 15% of the genome is 
occupied by BGCs, not taken into consideration the potential unidentified B GC(s). This percentage  
is much more than the aver age bacterial genome that devotes 3.7 ± 3.1 % of its genome to 
BGCs138.  Of 1154 genomes analyzed, only 6.7% of the genomes devoted  more than 7.5% of their 
genome to BGCs , and not surprisingly, many of these ge nomes belonged to our most famous 
antibiotic producers, the Streptomyces138. Lack of similarity of the detected BGCs to other known 
compounds is a common feature of the pigmented strains13. This observation is important, as the re 
may be a good chance  for discovering novel drug candidates in these  strains . Apart from the many 36 
 unknown compounds, several drug -related compounds have already been isolated and described  
from Pseudoalteromonas  (Table 3).  
Table 3. Examples of drug -related compounds isolated from Pseudoalteromonas spp. All compounds are 
sensitive to various microorganisms. Table modified and edited from 114. 
Species  Compound  Structure  Ref 
P. phenolica  MC21 -A (bromphene)  
 
 
 139 
P. rubra  Prodigiosin  
 
Cyclyprodigiosin  
 
 4,140 
 Pseudoalteromone A  
 
 141 
P. piscicida  Norharman  
 
 142 
 (Bromo)alterochromides  
 
 143 
P. galatheae  Tetrabromopyrrole  
 23 
37 
  
 Pseudanes  
 
 23 
P. luteoviolaceae  Indolmycin  
 
 4 
 Violacein  
 
 144 
 Thiomarinols  
 
 
 145,146 
 Pentabromop seudilin  
 
 147 
P. peptidolytica  Korormicin  
 148 38 
 P. tunicata  Tambjamine  
 120 
 
Pseudoaltermonads are often associated with higher eukaryotic organisms and they are successful 
colonizers of biotic and abiotic surfaces. The p roduction of a wide range of SMs is hypothesized to 
confer an advantage to the host, e.g. by protection from biofouling149. It was also shown that 
compounds produced by Pseudoalteromonas  spp. can attract fouling organisms150, and is it 
acknowledged that antimicrobial compounds not only have killing activities  but have a range of 
different functions in the natural environment. In a recent study investigating the biofilm involved in 
larval settlement  of the worm Hydroides elegans , 40 different bacteria were isolated, and  of these, 
only six induced larval settlement, all of them being different pigmented Pseudoalteromonas 
species151. P. luteoviolaceae produce s the larval settlement cues tailocins, but none of the six 
isolates  produced tailocins. This suggests  that ot her SMs produced were  capable of inducing larval 
settlement , and that they very likely are highly active in small concentrations, due to their low 
abundance in the total microbiome of the larvae .  
 
5.6.1 Secondary metabolites produced by the novel species Pseudoalteromonas galatheae  
In paper 2 we describe that the novel species P. galatheae produces the potent antimicrobial 
compound tetrabromopyrrole (TBP) and a series of quinolone compounds c ollectively known as  
pseudanes23. The metabolite profile of P. galatheae was very different from the four type -strains 
with w hich it clustered  phylogenetically . As mentioned, t he closely related type -strains  all produce d 
the yellow compounds bromoalterochromides , and were phenotypically different to P. galatheae 
which appeared white on plates . A previously isolated strain Pseudo alteromonas sp. A757 showed 
high ANI similarity to our isolate of P. galatheae S449823. This enabled us to describe the novel 
species not only using data from our own isolate, but by combining our data with the data existing 
for strain A757.  
TBP was first described in yellow pigmented Pseudoalteromonas as a settlement cue of the coral 
Acropora millepora152 and later several other Caribbean corals153. TBP also display harmful effects 
in phytoplankton where it caused cellular stress and mortality within 24 -48 hours39. The genes 
involved in the biosynthesis of TBP are bmp1 -4 and bmp9 -10, originating from  the biosynthetic 39 
 pathway for production of the antimicrobial compound pentabromopseudilin , for which the genes 
bmp1 -10 are required  (Figure 22)27. The gene bmp1 encodes for an ACP -thioesterase , bmp2 and 
bmp5 encode for flavin -dependent brominases, bmp3+4 and 8 are involve d in brom opyrrole 
monomer biosynthesis, bmp6 is involved in biosynthesis of bromophene and polybrominated 
diphenyl ethers, bmp7 is involved in the oxidative coupling of bromophenol and bromopyrrole 
monomers in the presence of bmp9+10  and NADH27. Only bmp1 -4 are essential for the production 
of TBP154.  
 
Figure 22 The bmp cluster yielding A) pentabromops eudilin or B) tetrabromopyrrole. Figure edited from 27.  
 
Four versions of the bmp cluster can be found in Pseudoalteromonas , where P. luteoviolaceae and 
P. phenolica contain the complete or slighty modified pathway to produce pentabromopseudilin, 
and P. galatheae and an undescribed isolate only possess the genes for TBP production27. TBP is 
an interesting compo und because it has four bromines  that are all installed at the same time. TBP 
is biosynthesized from L -proline, and the halogenase , Bmp2, installs all four bromines  on the 
pyrrole ring , before it undergoes TE -mediated off -loading from the ACP module154. Bmp2 is the first 
described halogenase that installs more th an two halogens on the pyrrole. In paper 2, we describe 
that the halogenase is not specific to bromine, as chlorinated versions of the compound were also 
identified23. For production of pentabromopseudilin, TBP needs to be biosynthesized and then 
dehalogenated by Bmp8 to generate tribromopyrrole before further modification yields the final 
product155. Pentabromopseudilin was not identified in P. galatheae and the genomic data also 
showed that it only contained the genes responsible for TBP production23. An additional compound 
derived from the bmp pathway, dibromomaleimide (or 3,4 -dibromopyrrole -2,5-dione) was also 
40 
 identified in P. galatheae . Dibromomaleimide is an inhibitor of efflux pumps, and can be used to 
block the efflux pumps that play a key role in antibacterial resistance in Enterobacteriaceae and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and thus has potential to function as an adjuvant for existing 
antibiotics156. Dibromomaleimide is likely the oxygena ted version of TBP. Hence, s everal 
compounds with different bioactive properties can be isolated from one pathway, and this seems 
like a cost -effective way to produce compounds with different activities without occupying space in 
the genome for additional BGCs . From Figure 20 it is seen that growth on chitin does not affect the 
production of TBP, which indicates that chitin degradation and production of TBP is not connected. 
However, products of algal degradation could likely induce TBP production, as we se e higher 
production in mannose  and marine broth  media.  
We further more  identified several alkyl quinolones of different chain lengths , collectively called 
pseudanes, in the metabolome of P. galatheae23. The production of pseudanes was higher when 
grown in chitin and mannose media, compared to glucose, marine broth and GlcNAc (Fig ure 23). 
This suggests that both algal degradation products and chitin is involved in pseudane production.  
 
Figure 23.  Production of pseudanes by Pseudoalteromonas galatheae S4498 in five different media: 
mannose (Man), chitin (Chi), marine broth (MB), glucose (Glc) and N -acetylglucosamine (Nag) calculated as 
area under the curve per colony forming unit (AUC/CFU). The asterisk mark those samples that are 
significantly different from the mannose sample (Dunnett’s t -test, p -value less than 0.05).  
 
In particular, one of the pseudanes, pseudane V II (2-heptyl -4-quinolone (HHQ)), is previously 
reported from strains of Pseudoalteromonas157,158. HHQ induces mortality in the marine 
coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi158 and modulates microbial communities, favoring 
Pseudoalteromonas spp.159.  HHQ is commonly known as the precursor of the quorum sensing 
molecule 2 -heptyl -3-hydroxy -4-quinolone, which is known as the Pseudomonas quinolone signal 
(PQS)160. P. galatheae only produces pseudanes  and not the PQS molecule. The biosynthetic 
41 
 pathway of PQS  is well described in Pseudomonas aeruginosa because it is involved in virulence 
and persistence of the bacterium in chronic lung infections in cystic fibrosis  patients161. Homologs 
of the  P. aeruginosa  pqsABCDE operon responsible for HHQ production in a P. galatheae strain 
A757 was identified (Figure 24) 
 
Figure 24. Comparison of the b iosynthetic pathway alkylquinolones in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 and 
Pseudoalteromonas galatheae A757.  Figure modified from 158. 
 
The biosynthesis of pseudanes based on the PQS pathway i n P. aeruginosa  is as follows: PqsA  is 
an anthranilic coA ligase activates anthranilic acid into anthraniloyl -coA to react with PqsD, a 3 -
oxoacyl synthase27. This produces the intermediate anthraniloyl -PqsD which is further modified by 
the synthases PqsB and PqsC. It is believed that PqsE is a thioesterase that hydrolyzes the 
intermediate 2-aminobenzoylacetyl -coA to the precursor of HHQ. PhnA and PhnB are two 
anthranilate synthases that supply anthranillic acid. PqsH is a monooxygenase responsible for 
converting HHQ to PQS, and this gene is absent in the P. galatheae which also explains that PQS 
is not identified in the metabolome23,27.  
A distinct characteristic of P. galatheae was a sweet fruity odor  in both liquid cultures and on 
plates. The volatile compound  was associated to the pseudane containing fractions, and we noted 
that longer chain lengths rendered the odor more unplea sant (Figure 25). 
42 
  
Figure 25. Fractions containing pseudanes were associated with sweet and unpleasant odors depending on 
the chain length. Figure from the MSc thesis  of Markus Kirkegaard.  
 
We later found that the pseudanes were not themselves responsible for the fruity odor, but rat her 
an intermediate compound from the PQS pathway , 2-aminoacetophenone (2 -AA)162. Neither the 
pseudanes nor the fractions containing 2 -AA display ed antibacterial activity . Not much is known 
about the volatile 2-AA in the marine environment, but t here are reports of the  turbot Scopthalamus 
maximus  producing  2-AA, which  protect s against infections of fish lice163. Hence, production of 2 -
AA might confer an advantage to a pote ntial host of P. galatheae.  
Other v olatile compounds inhibiting Burkholderia cepacia have previously been described in the 
two non -pigmented strains Pseudoalteromonas atlantica  TB41  and P. haloplanktis TAC125164. 
Methylamine was identified as one of the volatiles in P. haloplanktis TAC125 , and i nterestingly, 
methylamine was only produced under conditions where single amino acids, such as L -methionine, 
were supplied to the growth medium165. Methylamine was described as a byproduct of primary 
metabolism, as opposed to 2 -AA, which  is an intermediate in the secondary metabolite pathway of 
the pseudanes.  
 
With the analysis of BGCs in P. galatheae  to the closely related type strains , we noticed that many 
of the BGCs w ere likely lost and acquired. The BGC encoding the yellow pigment 
bromoalterochromide , which is present in all the closest related strains,  is most likely lost from the 
genome and the BGCs  encoding for pseudanes and TBP ar e likely acquired by HGT23. HGT can 
43 
 be a way for bacteria to test the fitness effects of small molecules, and is also known from the 
marine genus Salinispora, where more than 50% of the BGCs occur only in one or two strains166. It 
is possible that the exchange of BGCs from highly related  and/or less re lated bacterial taxa has led 
to several speciation events in genus Pseudoalteromonas, as we describe the possibility of many 
novel pigmented species in paper 113. This is supported by the discovery of the novel species in  
paper 2 where we distinguish ed P. galatheae from the type strains  by using genomic data and 
metabolomics data23.  
 
From the metabolomics data of P. galatheae we identified TBP and pseudanes as the major 
antibacterial compounds produced . However, there were also compounds that were left 
unidentified, in this case mainly because the fractions from which  the compounds where identified 
did not s how antibacterial activity towards the target organisms . Prediction of BGCs in the  P. 
galatheae S4498  genome identifies several other potential candidates that could encode for novel 
antimicrobial compounds ( Figure 26). 
 
Figure 26. Biosynthetic gene clusters detected by antiSMASH ver. 5 in Pseudoalteromonas galatheae 
S4498. Eight clusters with no or little homology is predicted.  
 
Apart from the compounds already known  in P. galatheae , the in silico prediction of BGCs  along 
with the prediction of  BGCs in  P. rubra  S4059 in Figure 19, indicates  that we have only scratched 
the surface of the bioactive potential of the pigmented species within the genus 
Pseudoalteromonas.  
  
44 
 6. Conclusion and future perspectives   
 
At present, the marine environment is being explored as a source  of novel pharmaceutical 
compounds, especially within the field of finding compounds that can kill cancer  cells. However, w e 
still have a dire need for novel antimicrobial compounds, as antimicrobial resistant microorganisms 
are on the rise.  Today, the most prolific producers of antimicrobial compounds are species from the 
genus Streptomyces . In this work, the marine genus Pseudoalteromonas was investigated as a 
source for novel antimicrobial compounds. Pigmented species of the genus have a very large 
potential for producing novel antimicrobial compounds. Some compounds are already known, and 
the results from this PhD work  show  that these compounds  represent the tip of the iceberg of what 
the genus actually can provide.  This work gives evidence that pigmented species of genus 
Pseudoalteromonas have a similar potential for producing novel antimicrobial compounds as 
Streptomyces  as measured by how muc h percent  of their genome they dedicate to secondary 
metabolites . Pseudoalteromonas have  the benefit of being much less exploited  compared to 
Streptomyces, and should therefore be given much more attention  in the future  as a source of 
novel antimicrobial candidates .  
 
Sequencing of the Galathea3 Pseudoalteromonas  strains resulted in  description of a novel 
species, Pseudoalteromonas galatheae,  but also identified several additional strains that were 
likely novel species or wrongly annotated. Many species ar e described before the genomic era, 
and now whole -genome sequencing has become standard in several laboratories. Genomic data 
needs to be incorporated into the existing phylogeny  to assist  species delineation within the genus. 
Using the 16S rRNA gene as a phylogenetic marker for the genus should be done with care, 
especially if used for screening  candidates for drug  discovery. The novel species P. galatheae 
produce s a completely different set of secondary metabolites, as compared to the type strains , with 
which it shares more than 97% 16S rRNA gene sequence identity . For bioprospecting of novel 
antimicrobial compounds, strains of unknown species  risks elimination  if only the 16S rRNA gene 
is used as selection criteria , as they would likely classify as  already kn own species, from which the 
chemistry might already be known . This observation is important for future studies, concerning not 
only the genus Pseudoalteromonas , but also other genera where the 16S rRNA gene is a poor 
phylogenetic marker.  
 
Inspired by the ecology -based bioprospecting of marine bacteria from previous works within the 
GramLab group , we identified chitin as a potential elicitor of secondary metabolite s. Pigmented 
species were highly chitinolytic, and for the novel species P. galatheae , the pseudane compounds 
were affected by chitin (and mannose) but tetrabromopyrrole was not. In P. rubra S4059, the red 45 
 pigment prodigiosin was also not affected by chitin. Thus the link between chitin degradation and 
secondary metabolite product ion in the genus Pseudoalteromonas is not as strong as for vibrios. In 
vibrios, chitin regulates several cellular functions, but very little is known about chitin degradation 
and regulation in Pseudoalteromonas. One way, experimentally, to pursue this  would be  
transcriptomic and proteomic analyses that could reveal which genes and proteins are involved in 
chitin degradation . This would not only aid the detection of novel antimicrobial compounds (if linked 
to chitin degradation), but also the investigation o f individual genes, such as the GH19 chitinases, 
that to this date remain enigmatic. For future  purpose s, the choice of chitin is not irrelevant, as 
different degrees of processing  may affect gene expression.  
  
One of the aspects  of ecology -based bioprospecting is to use growth conditions that resemble  the 
natural lifestyle  of the bacterium . While changing the carbon source to be more ecologically 
relevant, we must not forget that we are growing the bacterium in a laboratory -based  setting, often 
in a mono -culture. Creating small (reproducible) microbial communities in a chitin -based setup to 
mimic mixed community biofilms, and thus adding an extra ‘ecological layer’ would be interesting 
for future studies.  
 
In P. galatheae , we ide ntified tetrabromopyrrole and pseudanes as the two major (known) 
compounds produced . The aim of this study was to identify novel compounds, but we , as many 
others, identified  already known compounds.  Although the dominant compounds produced by P. 
galatheae were already known, the genomic information revealed that there is much more to be 
discovered within this one strain.  One way to ‘silence’ high quantity compounds, is to knock out the 
gene(s) encoding for their production. This could allow for  the detection of compounds produced in 
lesser quantities, and that are potentially novel. Concluding, this work has unraveled the potential 
for production of a plethora of secondary metabolites, not only in P. galatheae , but also on a global 
scale within pigmented Pseudoalteromonas.  
  46 7.References
1. Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Growth on Chitin Impacts the 
Transcriptome and Metabolite Profiles of Antibiotic-Producing Vibrio coralliilyticus  S2052 
and Photobacterium galatheae  S2753. mSystems 2, 1–12 (2017).
2. Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Gotfredsen, C. H., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Influence of niche-
specific nutrients on secondary metabolism in Vibrionaceae . Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  (2016)  
doi:10.1128/AEM.00730-16.
3. Wietz, M., Månsson, M. & Gram, L. Chitin stimulates production of the antibiotic andrimid in  
a Vibrio coralliilyticus  strain. Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 3, 559–564 (2011).
4. Vynne, N. G., Månsson, M., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Bioactivity, Chemical Profiling, and 
16S rRNA-Based Phylogeny of Pseudoalteromonas  Strains Collected on a Global Research  
Cruise. Mar. Biotechnol.  13, 1062 –1073 (2011).
5. Gram, L., Melchiorsen, J. & Bruhn, J. B. Antibacterial activity of marine culturable bacteria  
collected from a global sampling of ocean surface waters and surface swabs of marine  
organisms. Mar Biotechnol  12, 439–451 (2010).
6. Whitman, W. B., Coleman, D. C. & Wiebe, W. J. Prokaryotes: The unseen majority. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 6578 –6583 (1998).
7. Pomeroy, L. R. The Ocean’s Food Web, A Changing Paradigm. Bioscience  24, 499–504
(1974).
8. Andryukov, B., Mikhailov, V. & Besednova, N. The biotechnological potential of secondary  
metabolites from marine bacteria. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 7, 1–16 (2019).
9. Carroll, A. R., Copp, B. R., Davis, R. A., Keyzers, R. A. & Prinsep, M. R. Natural Product 
Reports: Editorial. Nat. Prod. Rep. 23, 9–10 (2020).
10. Davidson, S. K., Allen, S. W., Lim, G. E., Anderson, C. M. & Haygood, M. G. Evidence for 
the Biosynthesis of Bryostatins by the Bacterial Symbiont ‘Candidatus Endobugula sertula ’ 
of the Bryozoan Bugula neritina . Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  67, 4531 –4537 (2001).
11. Ivanova, E. P., Jun Ng, H. & Webb K, H. The Family Pseudoalteromonadaceae . in The 
Prokaryotes: Gammaproteobacteria  575–582 (2014). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-3 8922-1 .
12. Bosi, E. et al. The pangenome of (Antarctic) Pseudoalteromonas bacteria: Evolutionary and 
functional insights. BMC Genomics 18, 1–18 (2017).
13. Paulsen, S. S., Strube, M. L., Bech, P. K., Gram, L. & Sonnenschein, E. C. Marine  
chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas  represents an untapped reservoir of bioactive potential.  
mSystems 4, (2019).
14. Vernikos, G., Medini, D., Riley, D. R. & Tettelin, H. Ten years of pan-genome analyses.  
Curr. Opin. Microbiol.  23, 148–154 (2015).
15. Gauthier, G., Gauthier, M. & Christen, R. Phylogenetic analysis of the genera Alteromonas , 
Shewanella , and Moritella  using genes coding for small-subunit rRNA sequences and  
division of the genus Alteromonas  into two genera, Alteromonas  (emended) and 47 Pseudoalteromonas  gen. nov., and proposal of tw. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 45, 755–
761 (1995). 
16. Parte, A. C. LPSN — list of prokaryotic names with standing in nomenclature. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 42, 613–616 (2014).
17. Wayne, L. G. International Committee on Systematic Bacteriology: Announcement of the 
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Reconciliation of Approaches to Bacterial Systematics. 
Syst. Appl. Microbiol.  10, 99–100 (1987).
18. Tindall, B. J., Rosselló-Móra, R., Busse, H. J., Ludwig, W. & Kämpfer, P. Notes on the 
characterization of prokaryote strains for taxonomic purposes. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  
60, 249–266 (2010).
19. Meier-Kolthoff, J. P., Auch, A. F., Klenk, H. P. & Göker, M. Genome sequence-based  
species delimitation with confidence intervals and improved distance functions. BMC 
Bioinformatics  14, (2013).
20. Konstantinidis, K. T. & Tiedje, J. M. Genomic insights that advance the species definition for 
prokaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 2567 –2572 (2005).
21. Goris, J. et al. DNA-DNA hybridization values and their relationship to whole-genome  
sequence similarities. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  57, 81–91 (2007).
22. Richter, M. & Rosselló-Móra, R. Shifting the genomic gold standard for the prokaryotic  
species definition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 19126 –19131 (2009).
23. Paulsen, S. S. et al. Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the  
Pseudomonas  quinolone system precursor, HHQ, by a novel marine species  
Pseudoalteromonas galatheae sp. nov. Submitted (2020).
24. The National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
25. Emami, K. et al. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry discriminates known species and marine  
environmental isolates of Pseudoalteromonas . Front. Microbiol.  7, 1–13 (2016).
26. Mocali, S. et al. Ecology of cold environments: New insights of bacterial metabolic  
adaptation through an integrated genomic-phenomic approach. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–13 (2017).
27. Busch, J. et al. Diversity and Distribution of the bmp Gene Cluster and its Products in the 
Genus Pseudoalteromonas . Environ. Microbiol.  1–32 (2019) doi:10.1111/1462-2920.14532.
28. Bosi, E. et al. Genome-scale phylogenetic and DNA composition analyses of Antarctic 
Pseudoalteromonas  bacteria reveal inconsistencies in current taxonomic affiliation.  
Hydrobiologia  761, 85–95 (2015).
29. Figueras, M. J., Beaz-Hidalgo, R., Hossain, M. J. & Liles, M. R. Taxonomic affiliation of new 
genomes should be verified using average nucleotide identity and multilocus phylogenetic  
analysis. Genome Announc.  2, 2–3 (2014).
30. Ciufo, S. et al. Using average nucleotide identity to improve taxonomic assignments in 
prokaryotic genomes at the NCBI. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  68, 2386 –2392 (2018). 48 31. Chun, J. et al. Proposed minimal standards for the use of genome data for the taxonomy of 
prokaryotes. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  68, 461–466 (2018).
32. Meier-Kolthoff, J. P. & Göker, M. TYGS is an automated high-throughput platform for state-
of-the-art genome-based taxonomy. Nat. Commun. 10, (2019).
33. Wietz, M., Gram, L., Jørgensen, B. & Schramm, A. Latitudinal patterns in the abundance of 
major marine bacterioplankton groups. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 61, 179–189 (2010).
34. Sunagawa, S. et al. Structure and function of the global ocean microbiome. Science (80-. ). 
348, 1–10 (2015).
35. Holmstrom, C. & Kjelleberg, S. Marine Pseudoalteromonas  species are associated with 
higher organisms and produce biologically active extracellular agents. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 
30, 285–293 (1999).
36. Nelson, E. J. & Ghiorse, W. C. Isolation and identification of Pseudoalteromonas piscicida  
strain Cura-d associated with diseased damselfish (Pomacentridae ) eggs. J. Fish Dis. 22,  
253–260 (1999).
37. Choudhury, J. D. et al. The Pathogen of the Great Barrier Reef Sponge Rhopaloeides  
odorabile  Is a New Strain of Pseudoalteromonas agarivorans  Containing Abundant and 
Diverse Virulence-Related Genes. Mar. Biotechnol.  17, 463–478 (2015).
38. Sandaa, R. A., Brunvold, L., Magnesen, T. & Bergh, Ø. Monitoring the opportunistic bacteria  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. LT-13 in a great scallop, Pecten maximus  hatchery. Aquaculture  
276, 14–21 (2008).
39. Whalen, K. E. et al. The chemical cue tetrabromopyrrole induces rapid cellular stress and 
mortality in phytoplankton. Sci. Rep. 8, 1–11 (2018).
40. Bowman, J. P. Bioactive compound synthetic capacity and ecological significance of marine  
bacterial genus Pseudoalteromonas . Mar. Drugs 5, 220–241 (2007).
41. Yan, B. Q. et al. Molecular analysis of the gene encoding a cold-adapted halophilic subtilase  
from deep-sea psychrotolerant bacterium Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SM9913: Cloning,  
expression, characterization and function analysis of the C-terminal PPC domains.  
Extremophiles  13, 725–733 (2009).
42. Bhattacharya, S., Choudhury, J. D., Gachhui, R. & Mukherjee, J. A new collagenase  
enzyme of the marine sponge pathogen Pseudoalteromonas agarivorans  NW4327 is 
uniquely linked with a TonB dependent receptor. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 109, 1140–1146
(2018).
43. Oh, C. et al. Cloning, purification and biochemical characterization of beta agarase from the 
marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas sp. AG4. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  37, 483–494  
(2010).
44. Makhdoumi, A., Dehghani-Joybari, Z., Mashreghi, M., Jamialahmadi, K. & Asoodeh, A. A 
novel halo-alkali-tolerant and thermo-tolerant chitinase from Pseudoalteromonas sp. DC14  
isolated from the Caspian Sea. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 12, 3895 –3904 (2015).
45. Médigue, C. et al. Coping with cold: The genome of the versatile marine Antarctica  49 bacterium Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis  TAC125. Genome Res. 15, 1325 –1335 (2005). 
46. Wilkins, D. et al. Key microbial drivers in Antarctic aquatic environments. FEMS Microbiol.  
Rev. 37, 303–335 (2013).
47. Qin, Q.-L. et al. Comparative genomics reveals a deep-sea sediment-adapted life style of 
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SM9913. ISME J.  5, 274–284 (2011).
48. McLean, M. W. & W illiamson , F. B. χ‐Carrageenase from Pseudomonas  carrageenovora . 
Eur. J. Biochem. 93, 553–558 (1979).
49. Gobet, A. et al. Evolutionary evidence of algal polysaccharide degradation acquisition by 
Pseudoalteromonas carrageenovora  9 T to adapt to macroalgal niches. Front. Microbiol.  9, 
1–16 (2018).
50. Offret, C. et al. Protective Efficacy of a Pseudoalteromonas  Strain in European Abalone,  
Haliotis tuberculata , Infected with Vibrio harveyi ORM4. Probiotics Antimicrob. Proteins 11,  
239–247 (2019).
51. Pham, D. et al. Selection and characterization of potential probiotic bacteria for Litopenaeus  
stylirostris  shrimp hatcheries in New Caledonia. Aquaculture  432, 475–482 (2014).
52. Kesarcodi-Watson, A., Miner, P., Nicolas, J. L. & Robert, R. Protective effect of four potential 
probiotics against pathogen-challenge of the larvae of three bivalves: Pacific oyster 
(Crassostrea gigas ), flat oyster ( Ostrea edulis ) and scallop ( Pecten maximus ). Aquaculture  
344–349, 29–34 (2012).
53. Gooday, G. W. The Ecology of Chitin Degradation. 387–430 (1990) 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-7 612-5_10.
54. Gooday, G. W. Physiology of microbial degradation of chitin and chitosan. Biodegradation  1, 
177–190 (1990).
55. Keyhani, N. O. & Roseman, S. Physiological aspects of chitin catabolism in marine bacteria. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 1473, 108–122 (1999).
56. Li, X. & Roseman, S. The chitinolytic cascade in Vibrios is regulated by chitin 
oligosaccharides and a two-component chitin catabolic sensor/kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U. S. A. 101, 627–631 (2004).
57. Meibom, K. L., Blokesch, M., Dolganov, N. A., Wu, C. & Schoolnik, G. K. Chitin Induces  
Natural Competence in Vibrio cholerae . Science (80-. ). 310, 1824 –1827 (2005).
58. Bai, Y., Eijsink, V. G. H., Kielak, A. M., Veen, J. A. Van & Boer, W. De. Genomic comparison  
of chitinolytic enzyme systems from terrestrial and aquatic bacteria. Environ. Microbiol.  18, 
38–49 (2016).
59. Beier, S., Jones, C. M., Mohit, V., Hallin, S. & Bertilsson, S. Global phylogeography of 
chitinase genes in aquatic metagenomes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  77, 1101 –1106 (2011).
60. Ramaiah, N. et al. Use of a chiA probe for detection of chitinase genes in bacteria from the 
Chesapeake Bay. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 34, 63–71 (2000). 50 61. Beier, S. & Bertilsson, S. Bacterial chitin degradation-mechanisms and ecophysiological  
strategies. Front. Microbiol.  4, 1–12 (2013).
62. Roy, J. C. et al. Solubility of Chitin: Solvents, Solution Behaviors and Their Related  
Mechanisms. in Solubility of Polysaccharides  (2017). doi:10.5772/intechopen.71385.
63. Berg, T., Schild, S. & Reidl, J. Regulation of the chitobiose-phosphotransferase system in 
Vibrio cholerae . Arch. Microbiol.  187, 433–439 (2007).
64. Colson, S. et al. The chitobiose-binding protein, DasA, acts as a link between chitin  
utilization and morphogenesis in Streptomyces coelicolor . Microbiology  154, 373–382
(2008).
65. Itoh, T. & Kimoto, H. Bacterial Chitinase System as a Model of Chitin Biodegradation. in 
Targeting Chitin-containing organisms  131–151 (2019).
66. Bassler, B. L., Yu, C., Lee, Y. C. & Roseman, S. Chitin utilization by marine bacteria:  
Degradation and catabolism of chitin oligosaccharides by Vibrio  furnissii . J. Biol. Chem. 266,  
24276–24286 (1991) .
67. Suginta, W. et al. Molecular Uptake of Chitooligosaccharides through Chitoporin from the 
Marine Bacterium Vibrio harveyi.  PLoS One 8, (2013).
68. Bhunia, A. K. Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio parahaemolyticus , and Vibrio vulnificus . in Foodborne  
Microbial Pathogens  (ed. Springer) 315–329 (2018). doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-7 349-1_18.
69. Lo Scrudato, M. & Blokesch, M. The regulatory network of natural competence and  
transformation of Vibrio cholerae . PLoS Genet. 8, e1002778 (2012).
70. Blokesch, M. Chitin colonization, chitin degradation and chitin-induced natural competence  
of Vibrio cholerae  are subject to catabolite repression. Environ. Microbiol.  14, 1898 –1912
(2012).
71. Hayes, C. A., Dalia, T. N. & Dalia, A. B. Systematic genetic dissection of chitin degradation  
and uptake in Vibrio cholerae . Environ. Microbiol.  19, 4154 –4163 (2017).
72. Kolstad, G. V., Tuveng, T. R., Mekasha, S. & Eijsink, V. G. H. Enzymes for Modification of  
Chitin and Chitosan. in Chitin and Chitosan: Properties and Applications  (ed. Sons, J. W. 
and) 189–228 (2020).
73. Hoell, I. A., Vaaje-Kolstad, G. & Eijsink, V. G. H. Structure and function of enzymes acting  
on chitin and chitosan. Biotechnol. Genet. Eng. Rev. 27, 331–366 (2010).
74. Ohno, T. et al. A modular family 19 chitinase found in the prokaryotic organism  
Streptomyces griseus  HUT 6037. J. Bacteriol. 178, 5065 –5070 (1996).
75. Martínez-Caballero, S. et al. Comparative study of two GH19 chitinase-like proteins from 
Hevea brasiliensis , one exhibiting a novel carbohydrate-binding domain. FEBS J.  281,  
4535–4554 (2014).
76. Kasprzewska, A. Plant chitinases - Regulation and function. Cell. Mol. Biol. Lett. 8, 809–824 
(2003). 51 77. García-Fraga, B., Da Silva, A. F., López-Seijas, J. & Sieiro, C. A novel family 19 chitinase  
from the marine-derived Pseudoalteromonas tunicata CCUG 44952T: Heterologous  
expression, characterization and antifungal activity. Biochem. Eng. J. 93, 84–93 (2015).
78. Watanabe, T. et al. Family 19 chitinases of Streptomyces species: Characterization and  
distribution. Microbiology  145, 3353 –3363 (1999).
79. Kawase, T. et al. Comparison of enzymatic and antifungal properties between family 18 and 
19 chitinases from S. coelicolor  A3(2). Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 70, 988–998 (2006).
80. Tsujibo, H. et al. Family 19 Chitinases from Streptomyces thermoviolaceus  OPC-520: 
Molecular cloning and characterization. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 64, 2445 –2453 (2000).
81. Prasanna, L., Eijsink, V. G. H., Meadow, R. & Gåseidnes, S. A novel strain of Brevibacillus  
laterosporus  produces chitinases that contribute to its biocontrol potential. Appl. Microbiol.  
Biotechnol.  97, 1601 –1611 (2013).
82. Tuveng, T. R. et al. Proteomic investigation of the secretome of Cellvibrio japonicus  during  
growth on chitin. Proteomics 16, 1904 –1914 (2016).
83. Monge, E. C., Tuveng, T. R., Vaaje-Kolstad, G., Eijsink, V. G. H. & Gardner, J. G. Systems 
analysis of the glycoside hydrolase family 18 enzymes from Cellvibrio japonicus  
characterizes essential chitin degradation functions. J. Biol. Chem. 293, 3849 –3859 (2018).
84. Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Growth on Chitin Impacts the 
Transcriptome and Metabolite Profiles of Antibiotic-Producing Vibrio coralliilyticus  S2052  
and Photobacterium galathea  S2753. mSystems 2, 1–12 (2017).
85. Wang, X. et al. A conjugation-based gene knock-out strategy for bioactive molecule  
producer Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059. Submitted (2020).
86. Kezuka, Y. et al. Crystallization and Preliminary X-Ray Analysis of the Catalytic Domain of  
Chitinase D from Bacillus circulans  WL-12. Protein Pept. Lett. 13, 951–954 (2006).
87. Perrakis, A. et al. Crystal structure of a bacterial chitinase at 2.3 Å resolution. Structure 2,  
1169–1180 (1994).
88. Vaaje-Kolstad, G. et al. An Oxidative Enzyme Boosting the enzymatic conversion of  
recalcitrant polysaccharides. Science (80-. ). 330, 219–222 (2010).
89. Fushinobu, S. Metalloproteins: A new face for biomass breakdown. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 
88–89 (2013).
90. Hemsworth, G. R., Johnston, E. M., Davies, G. J. & Walton, P. H. Lytic Polysaccharide  
Monooxygenases in Biomass Conversion. Trends Biotechnol.  33, 747–761 (2015).
91. Kuusk, S. et al. Kinetic insights into the role of the reductant in H2O2-driven degradation of 
chitin by a bacterial lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 1516 –1528
(2019).
92. Aachmann, F. L., Sørlie, M., Skjåk-Bræk, G., Eijsink, V. G. H. & Vaaje-Kolstad, G. NMR 
structure of a lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase provides insight into copper binding,  
protein dynamics, and substrate interactions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 18779 – 52 18784 (2012).  
93. Cody, R. M. Distribution of chitinase and chitobiase in bacillus. Curr. Microbiol.  19, 201–205  
(1989).
94. Techkarnjanaruk, S. & Goodman, A. E. Multiple genes involved in chitin degradation from 
the marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas  sp. strain S91. Microbiology  (1999)
doi:10.1099/13500872-145-4-925.
95. Delpin, M. W. & Goodman, A. E. Nutrient regime regulates complex transcriptional start site 
usage within a Pseudoalteromonas  chitinase gene cluster. ISME J.  3, 1053 –63 (2009).
96. Techkarnjanaruk, S., Pongpattanakitshote, S. & Goodman, A. E. Use of a promoterless lacZ  
gene insertion to investigate chitinase gene expression in the marine bacterium  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. strain S9. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  63, 2989 –2996 (1997).
97. Delpin, M. W. & Goodman, A. E. Nitrogen regulates chitinase gene expression in a marine  
bacterium. ISME J.  3, 1064 –1069 (2009).
98. Baty, A. M. et al. Differentiation of chitinase-active and non-chitinase-active subpopulations  
of a marine bacterium during chitin degradation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  66, 3566 –3573
(2000).
99. Dragoš , A. et al. Division of Labor during Biofilm Matrix Production. Curr. Biol. 28, 
1903-1913.e5 (2018).
100. Rosenthal, A. Z. et al. Metabolic interactions between dynamic bacterial subpopulations.  
Elife 7, 1–3 (2018).
101. Pande, S. et al. Fitness and stability of obligate cross-feeding interactions that emerge upon  
gene loss in bacteria. ISME J. 8, 953–962 (2014).
102. Vetter, Y. A. & Deming, J. W. Growth rates of marine bacterial isolates on particulate  
organic substrates solubilized by freely released extracellular enzymes. Microb. Ecol. 37,  
86–94 (1999).
103. Everuss, K. J., Delphi, M. W. & Goodman, A. E. Cooperative interactions within a marine  
bacterial dual species biofilm growing on a natural biodegradable substratum. Aquat. 
Microb. Ecol. 53, 191–199 (2008).
104. Tsujibo, H. et al. Molecular cloning of the gene encoding an outer-membrane- associated β -
N-acetylglucosaminidase involved in chitin degradation system of Alteromonas  sp. Strain O- 
7.Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.  64, 2512 –2516 (2000).
105. Orikoshi, H., Nakayama, S., Hanato, C., Miyamoto, K. & Tsujibo, H. Role of the N-terminal  
polycystic kidney disease domain in chitin degradation by chitinase A from a marine  
bacterium, Alteromonas  sp. strain O-7. J. Appl. Microbiol.  99, 551–557 (2005).
106. Tsujibo, H. et al. Cloning, sequence, and expression of a chitinase gene from a marine  
bacterium, Alteromonas  sp. strain O-7. J. Bacteriol. (1993) doi:10.1128/
jb.175.1.176-181.1993.
107. Tsujibo, H. et al. Molecular cloning of the gene which encodes β -N-acetylglucosaminidase 53 from a marine bacterium, Alteromonas  sp. strain O-7. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  61, 804–
806 (1995). 
108. Tsujibo, H. et al. Characterization of chitinase C from a marine bacterium, Alteromonas  sp. 
strain O-7, and its corresponding gene and domain structure. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  64, 
472–478 (1998).
109. Tsujibo, H. et al. Molecular analysis of the gene encoding a novel transglycosylative enzyme  
from Alteromonas  sp. Strain O-7 and its physiological role in the chitinolytic system. J. 
Bacteriol. 181, 1865 –1872 (1999).
110. Tsujibo, H. et al. Identification and Characterization of the Gene Cluster Involved in Chitin  
Degradation in a Marine Bacterium, Alteromonas  sp . Strain O-7. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  
68, 263–270 (2002).
111. Miyamoto, K. et al. The regulator CdsS/CdsR two-component system modulates expression  
of genes involved in chitin degradation of Pseudoalteromonas piscicida  strain O-7. Arch. 
Microbiol.  188, 619–628 (2007).
112. Meibom, K. L. et al. The Vibrio cholerae  chitin utilization program. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. 
S. A. 101, 2524 –2529 (2004).
113. Davies, J. Specialized microbial metabolites: Functions and origins. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 66,  
361–364 (2013).
114. Offret, C., Desriac, F., Chevalier, P. Le, Mounier, J. & Jégou, C. Spotlight on Antimicrobial  
Metabolites from the Marine Bacteria Pseudoalteromonas  : Chemodiversity and Ecological  
Significance. Mar Drugs 129, 1–26 (2016).
115. Reimer, J. M., Haque, A. S., Tarry, M. J. & Schmeing, T. M. Piecing together nonribosomal  
peptide synthesis. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 49, 104–113 (2018).
116. Desriac, F. et al. Antimicrobial peptides from marine proteobacteria. Mar. Drugs 11, 3632 –
3660 (2013).
117. Chen, H. & Duotong, L. Iterative Polyketide Biosynthesis by Modular Polyketide Synthases  
in Bacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  100, 541–557 (2017).
118. Christianson, D. W. Unearthing the roots of the terpenome. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 12, 141–
150 (2008).
119. Yamada, Y. et al. Terpene synthases are widely distributed in bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U. S. A. 112, 857–862 (2015).
120. Franks, A. et al. Isolation and structure elucidation of a novel yellow pigment from the 
marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas tunicata . Molecules  10, 1286 –1291 (2005).
121. Picott, K. J. et al. Isolation and characterization of tambjamine MYP1, a macrocyclic  
tambjamine analogue from marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas citrea . Medchemcomm  
10, 478–483 (2019).
122. Pinkerton, D. M., Banwell, M. G. & Willis, A. C. Total Syntheses of Tambjamines C, E, F, G, 
H, I and J, BE-18591, and a Related Alkaloid from the Marine Bacterium 54 Pseu doalteromonas tunicata . Org. Lett.  24, 27–30 (2007).  
123. Avalos, M., van Wezel, G. P., Raaijmakers, J. M. & Garbeva, P. Healthy scents: microbial  
volatiles as new frontier in antibiotic research? Curr. Opin. Microbiol.  45, 84–91 (2018).
124. Schulz-Bohm, K. et al. Calling from distance: Attraction of soil bacteria by plant root 
volatiles. ISME J.  12, 1252 –1262 (2018).
125. Yu, J. et al. Nematicidal activities of bacterial volatiles and components from two marine  
bacteria. Nematology  17, 1011 –1025 (2015).
126. Groenhagen, U., Maczka, M., Dickschat, J. S. & Schulz, S. Streptopyridines, volatile  
pyridine alkaloids produced by Streptomyces sp. FORM5. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 10, 
1421 –1432 (2014).
127. Groenhagen, U., Leandrini De Oliveira, A. L., Fielding, E., Moore, B. S. & Schulz, S. 
Coupled Biosynthesis of Volatiles and Salinosporamide A in Salinispora tropica . 
ChemBioChem  17, 1978 –1985 (2016).
128. Blin, K. et al. antiSMASH 5.0: updates to the secondary metabolite genome mining pipeline.  
Nucleic Acids Res. 1, 1–7 (2019).
129. Kaweewan, I., Komaki, H., Hemmi, H. & Kodani, S. Isolation and Structure Determination of 
New Antibacterial Peptide Curacomycin Based on Genome Mining. Asian J. Org. Chem. 6,  
1838–1844 (2017).
130. Bentley, S. et al. Complete genome sequence of the model actinomycete Streptomyces  
coelicolor  A3(2). Nature  417, 141–147 (2002).
131. Jensen, P. R., Moore, B. S., Fenical, W., Diego, S. & Diego, S. The Marine Actinomycete  
Genus Salinispora : A Model Organism for Secondary Metabolite Discovery. Nat. Prod. Rep. 
32, 738–751 (2015).
132. Romano, S., Jackson, S. A., Patry, S. & Dobson, A. D. W. Extending the “one strain many 
compounds” (OSMAC) principle to marine microorganisms. Mar. Drugs 16, 1–29 (2018).
133. Naughton, L. M., Romano, S., Gara, F. O. & Dobson, A. D. W. Identification of Secondary  
Metabolite Gene Clusters in the Pseudovibrio  Genus Reveals Encouraging Biosynthetic  
Potential toward the Production of Novel Bioactive Compounds. Front. Microbiol.  8, 1–15
(2017).
134. Bode, H. B., Bethe, B., Höfs, R. & Zeeck, A. Big effects from small changes: possible ways  
to explore nature’s chemical diversity. Chembiochem  3, 619–627 (2002).
135. Nazari, B. et al. Chitin-induced gene expression in secondary metabolic pathways of 
Streptomyces coelicolor  A3(2) grown in soil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  79, 707–713 (2013).
136. Nguyen, V. B. et al. Novel Efficient Bioprocessing of Marine Chitins into active anticancer  
prodigiosin. Mar. Drugs 18, 1–14 (2020).
137. Egan, S., James, S., Holmström, C. & Kjelleberg, S. Correlation between pigmentation and 
antifouling compounds produced by Pseudoalteromonas tunicata . Environ. Microbiol.  4, 
433–442 (2002). 55 138. Cimermancic, P. et al. Insights into Secondary Metabolism from a Global Analysis of 
Prokaryotic Biosynthetic Gene Clusters. Cell 158, 412–421 (2014).
139. Isnansetyo, A. & Kamei, Y. MC21-A , a Bactericidal Antibiotic Produced by a New Marine  
against Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus . Society 170, 481–490 (2003).
140. Lattasch, H. & Thomson, R. H. A revised structure for cycloprodigiosin. Tetrahedron Lett. 
24, 2701 –2704 (1983).
141. Ding, L., He, S. & Yan, X. Efficient preparation of pseudoalteromone A from marine  
Pseudoalteromonas rubra  QD1-2 by combination of response surface methodology and 
high-speed counter-current chromatography: A comparison with high-performance liquid  
chromatography. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  98, 4369 –4377 (2014).
142. Zheng, L., Chen, H., Han, X., Lin, W. & Yan, X. Antimicrobial screening and active  
compound isolation from marine bacterium NJ6-3-1 associated with the sponge  
Hymeniacidon perleve. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  21, 201–206 (2005).
143. Ross, A. C., Gulland, L. E. S., Dorrestein, P. C. & Moore, B. S. Targeted capture and 
heterologous expression of the Pseudoalteromonas  alterochromide gene cluster in 
Escherichia coli  represents a promising natural product exploratory platform. ACS Synth. 
Biol. 4, 414–420 (2015).
144. Yang, L. H., Xiong, H., Lee, O. O., Qi, S. H. & Qian, P. Y. Effect of agitation on violacein  
production in Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea  isolated from a marine sponge. Lett. Appl. 
Microbiol.  44, 625–630 (2007).
145. Shiozawa, H. et al. Thiomarinol, a new hybrid antimicrobial antibiotic produced by a marine  
bacterium fermentation, isolation, structure, and antimicrobial activity. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 
46, 1834 –1842 (1993).
146. Shiozawa, H., Shimada, A. & Takahashi, S. Thiomarinols D, E, F and G, new hybrid  
antimicrobial antibiotics produced by a marine bacterium. Isolated, structure, and 
antimicrobial activity [1]. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 50, 449–452 (1997).
147. Fehér, D., Barlow, R., McAtee, J. & Hemscheidt, T. K. Highly brominated antimicrobial  
metabolites from a marine Pseudoalteromonas  sp. J. Nat. Prod. 73, 1963 –1966 (2010).
148. Yoshikawa, K., Takadera, T., Adachi, K., Nishijima, M. & Sano, H. Korormicin, a novel  
antibiotic specifically active against marine Gram-negative bacteria, produced by a marine  
bacterium. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 50, 949–953 (1997).
149. Egan, S., Thomas, T., Holmström, C. & Kjelleberg, S. Phylogenetic relationship and  
antifouling activity of bacterial epiphytes from the marine alga Ulva lactuca . Environ. 
Microbiol . 2, 343–347 (2000).
150. Bernbom, N., Ng, Y. Y., Olsen, S. M. & Gram, L. Pseudoalteromonas  spp. Serve as initial  
bacterial attractants in mesocosms of coastal waters but have subsequent antifouling  
capacity in mesocosms and when embedded in paint. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  79, 6885 –
6893 (2013).
151. Vijayan, N. & Hadfield, M. Bacteria known to induce settlement of larvae of Hydroides  
elegans  are rare in natural inductive biofilm. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 84, 31–42 (2020). 56 152. Tebben, J. et al. Induction of larval metamorphosis of the coral Acropora millepora  by
tetrabromopyrrole isolated from a Pseudoalteromonas  bacterium. PLoS One 6, 1–8 (2011).
153. Sneed, J. M., Sharp, K. H., Ritchie, K. B. & Paul, V. J. The chemical cue tetrabromopyrrole
from a biofilm bacterium induces settlement of multiple Caribbean corals. Proc. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 281, 1–9 (2014).
154. El Gamal, A. et al. Biosynthesis of coral settlement cue tetrabromopyrrole in marine bacteria
by a uniquely adapted brominase-thioesterase enzyme pair.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
113, 3797 –3802 (2016).
155. Chekan, J. R. et al. Bacterial Tetrabromopyrrole Debrominase Shares a Reductive
Dehalogenation Strategy with Human Thyroid Deiodinase. Biochemistry  58, 5329 –5338
(2019).
156. Whalen, K. E., Poulson-Ellestad, K. L., Deering, R. W., Rowley, D. C. & Mincer, T. J.
Enhancement of antibiotic activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria by the efflux pump
inhibitor 3,4-dibromopyrrole-2,5-dione isolated from a Pseudoalteromonas  sp. J. Nat. Prod.
78, 402–412 (2015).
157. Kim, W. J. et al. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based rapid secondary-
metabolite profiling of marine P seudoalteromonas sp. M2. Mar. Drugs 14, 1–11 (2016).
158. Harvey, E. L. et al. A bacterial quorum-sensing precursor induces mortality in the marine
coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi . Front. Microbiol.  7, 1–12 (2016).
159. Whalen, K. E. et al. Bacterial alkylquinolone signaling contributes to structuring microbial
communities in the ocean. Microbiome  7, 1–17 (2019).
160. Dulcey, C. E. et al. The end of a long-standing hypothesis: the Pseudomonas  signalling
molecules 4-hydroxy-2-alkylquinolines are derived from fatty acids, not 3-ketofatty acids.
Chem Biol 27, 1–19 (2013).
161. Wade, D. S. et al. Regulation of  Pseudomonas  Quinolone Signal Synthesis in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa . J. Bacteriol. 187, 4372 –4380 (2005).
162. Harig, T. et al. Nitrogen-Containing Volatiles from Marine Salinispora pacifica  and
Roseobacter-Group Bacteria. J. Nat. Prod. 80, 3289 –3295 (2017).
163. Hastie, L. C. et al. Prevalence and infection intensity of sea lice ( Lepeophtheirus salmonis )
on Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ) host is reduced by the non-host compound 2-
aminoacetophenone. Aquaculture  410–411, 179–183 (2013).
164. Papaleo, M. C. et al. Sponge-associated microbial Antarctic communities exhibiting
antimicrobial activity against Burkholderia cepacia complex bacteria. Biotechnol. Adv. 30,
272–293 (2012).
165. Sannino, F. et al. Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis  produces methylamine, a volatile
compound active against Burkholderia cepacia  complex strains. N. Biotechnol.  35, 13–18
(2017).
166. Jensen, P. R. Natural Products and the Gene Cluster Revolution. Trends Microbiol.  24,
968– 977 (2016).  8.Research a rticles
Paper 1: Marine chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas represents an untapped reservoir of bioactive 
potential  
Paper 2: Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the Pseudomonas 
quinolone system precursor, HHQ, by a novel marine species Pseudoalteromonas gal atheae sp. 
nov. 
Paper 3: A conjugation -based gene knock -out strategy for bioactive molecule producer 
Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059  Paper 1  
Marine chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas represents an untapped reservoir 
of bioactive potential  Marine Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas Represents an
Untapped Reservoir of Bioactive Potential
Sara Skøtt Paulsen,a
Mikael Lenz Strube,a
Pernille Kjersgaard Bech,a
Lone Gram,a
Eva C. Sonnenscheina
aDepartment of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
ABSTRACT Chitin is the most abundant polymer in the marine environment and a
nutrient-rich surface for adhering marine bacteria. We have previously shown that
chitin can induce the production of antibiotic compounds in Vibrionaceae, suggest-
ing that the discovery of novel bioactive molecules from bacteria can be facilitatedby mimicking their natural habitat. The purpose of this study was to determine theglycosyl hydrolase (GH) proﬁles of strains of the genus Pseudoalteromonas to enable
selection of presumed growth substrates and explore possible links to secondarymetabolism. Genomic analyses were conducted on 62 pigmented and 95 nonpig-mented strains. Analysis of the total GH proﬁles and multidimensional scaling sug-gested that the degradation of chitin is a signiﬁcant trait of pigmented strains,whereas nonpigmented strains seem to be driven toward the degradation of alga-derived carbohydrates. The genomes of all pigmented strains and 40 nonpigmentedstrains encoded at least one conserved chitin degradation cluster, and chitinolyticactivity was phenotypically conﬁrmed. Additionally, the genomes of all pigmentedand a few nonpigmented strains encoded chitinases of the rare GH family 19. Pig-mented strains devote up to 15% of their genome to secondary metabolism, whilefor nonpigmented species it was 3% at most. Thus, pigmented Pseudoalteromonas
strains have a bioactive potential similar to that of well-known antibiotic producersof the Actinobacteria phylum. Growth on chitin did not measurably enhance the an-
tibacterial activity of the strains; however, we demonstrated a remarkable co-occurrence of chitin degradation and the potential for secondary metabolite produc-tion in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains. This indicates that chitin and its
colonizers of the Pseudoalteromonas genus represent a so far underexplored niche
for novel enzymes and bioactive compounds.
IMPORTANCE Infectious bacteria are developing and spreading resistance to con-
ventional treatments at a rapid pace. To provide novel potent antimicrobials, wemust develop new bioprospecting strategies. Here, we combined in silico and phe-
notypic approaches to explore the bioactive potential of the marine bacterial genusPseudoalteromonas. We found that pigmented strains in particular represent an un-tapped resource of secondary metabolites and that they also harbor an elaboratechitinolytic machinery. Furthermore, our analysis showed that chitin is likely a pre-ferred substrate for pigmented species, in contrast to nonpigmented species. Poten-tially, chitin could facilitate the production of new secondary metabolites in pig-mented Pseudoalteromonas strains.
KEYWORDS bioactivity, glycosyl hydrolases, Pseudoalteromonas, chitin
The increasing development and spread of antimicrobial resistance are a seriousthreat to human health, and humanity is in urgent need for novel antibiotics to
treat infectious diseases. In particular, soil bacteria have been explored extensively asa source of antibiotics, and bacteria belonging to the phylum Actinobacteria have been
a proliﬁc source, providing two-thirds of all known microbial antibiotics ( 1). ExploringCitation Paulsen SS, Strube ML, Bech PK, Gram
L, Sonnenschein EC. 2019. Marine chitinolytic
Pseudoalteromonas represents an untapped
reservoir of bioactive potential. mSystems 4:e00060-19. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems
.00060-19.
Editor Steven
J. Hallam, University of British
Columbia
Copyright © 2019 Paulsen et al. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International
license.
Address
correspondence to Lone Gram,
gram@bio.dtu.dk.
Received 4 February 2019
Accepted 24 May 2019
PublishedRESEARCH ARTICLE
Applied and Environmental Science
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19
 msystems.asm.org 118 June 2019
 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from new environments is one strategy for ﬁnding novel compounds that are not (yet)
affected by resistance. While promising bioactive molecules have been identiﬁed frommarine organisms, particularly from the family Pseudoalteromonadaceae (2–5), the
marine 
environment still remains an underexploited resource of novel bioactive com-
pounds ( 6–8).
The
exclusively marine genus Pseudoalteromonas constitutes, on average, 2 to 3% of
the bacterial abundance in the upper ocean waters ( 9).Pseudoalteromonas strains are
excellent bioﬁlm formers and are often found in association with eukaryotic hosts, suchas crustaceans or algae ( 10). As of 2018, 47 Pseudoalteromonas species
 had validly
published names (11). The genus is phenotypically and phylogenetically divided into
two
main clusters that are differentiated by the ability to produce pigments and the
lack thereof ( 12). The pigmented species produce an array of bioactive secondary
metabolites,
including violacein, indolmycin, and pentabromopseudilin, produced by
Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea ; prodigiosin, produced by P. rubra; bromoalterochro-
mides, produced by P. piscicida; and tambjamines, produced by P. tunicata, P. ﬂavipul-
chra, and P. maricaloris (13–16). In contrast, nonpigmented species have generally been
explored
as producers of unusual enzymatic activities ( 10).
On
a global marine research expedition, we isolated strains of both pigmented and
nonpigmented Pseudoalteromonas based on their antimicrobial activity ( 17); however,
the
nonpigmented strains did not retain antimicrobial activity following frozen storage
(13). The genomes of four pigmented and three nonpigmented strains were sequenced
and
mined for biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of secondary metabolites, revealing a
large untapped potential in the pigmented strains ( 18). For most of the BGCs, the
associated
chemistry has not been elucidated, potentially because the BGCs are not
expressed (e.g., are silent or cryptic) or are expressed at low levels under growthconditions hitherto used ( 13). Mimicking the natural growth substrate to induce
bioactivity 
has been successful in the Vibrionaceae. Providing vibrios with chitin, the
most abundant polymer in the marine environment, can enhance their antibacterialactivity ( 19,20) and can induce expression of their BGCs ( 21). Some Pseudoalteromonas
species 
can also degrade chitin (18, 22), but little is known about their chitinolytic
machinery
and a possible inﬂuence on secondary metabolism. In the Vibrionaceae,
speciﬁcally, Vibrio cholerae (23,24), chitin degradation relies on the secretion of
extracellular
chitinases. In bacteria, the majority of chitinases belong to glycosyl hy-
drolase (GH) family 18 ( 25). Recently, chitinases belonging to GH family 19 have been
discovered
in a few groups of prokaryotes ( 26–30), and we have found that the
genomes
of 10 marine chitinolytic bacteria, including Pseudoalteromonas, all contain at
least one GH19 chitinase ( 31).
The
purpose of this study was to determine the chitinolytic abilities of species of the
genus Pseudoalteromonas and explore possible links to their potential for secondary
metabolite production. We used a genome sequence-guided approach combined withphenotypic assays to assess chitin degradation and antibacterial activity.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The average nucleotide identity (ANI) of 253 Pseudoalteromonas genomes
 obtained
from isolates collected on a global marine expedition ( 17) and from the NCBI database
was
determined. The data set had a strong bias toward certain taxonomic subgroups
being overrepresented among the total number of genomes. Therefore, in the case ofan ANI of more than 98.3% (see Fig. S1 and S2 in the supplemental material), arepresentative for this phylogenetic subgroup was selected for further genomic anal-yses on the basis of sequence quality (Table S1). The resulting data set consisted of 157strains covering 37 of the 47 species with standing in the prokaryote nomenclature (Listof Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature [LPSN] [ 11]). Single nucleotide
polymorphism
(SNP)-based phylogenetic analysis ( Fig. 1) conﬁrmed the previous clus-
tering
based on 16S rRNA gene analysis and separated the Pseudoalteromonas strains
into two phylogenetic groups that correlated with the pigmented and nonpigmentedphenotypes ( 13), with the exception of two nonpigmented strains ( P.
 atlantica T6c andPaulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 2 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from Pseudoalteromonas sp. strain PLSV), which clustered in the pigmented group. Sixty-two
strains belonged to pigmented species, and 95 strains belonged to nonpigmented
species. Pigmented species had a genome size of 5.2 /H110060.6 Mb, while nonpigmented
species had smaller genomes of 4.4 /H110060.4 Mb (Table S1). In general, the phylogenetic
diversity was higher in the pigmented species, whereas nonpigmented species werephylogenetically more similar ( Fig. 1; Fig. S2). This could indicate a higher selection
pressure 
for pigmented strains or a more recent evolution of nonpigmented strains.
FIG 1 SNP-based phylogeny of 157 Pseudoalteromonas strains consisting of 50 of our isolates and 107 genomes downloaded from the NCBI database. Symbols
are color coded, where black symbols represent that the feature is present in the genome and white symbols represent that the feature is absent (squares,
chitinolytic genotype; triangles, GH19 chitinases are present in the genome). The pigmented strains are colored according to their pigmentation. Thephylogenetic tree was constructed using the CSI Phylogeny web server, and V. anguillarum 90-11-286 (GenBank accession no. CP011460 and CP011461) was
used 
as a root. Bootstrap values of /H110220.5 are included.Bioactivity of Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 3 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from Based on the ANI analysis (Fig. S2), several of the strains, particularly those within the
pigmented group, could belong to novel species. This is in agreement with the ﬁndingsof a recent study by Busch et al. ( 5), in which the authors noted that considerable
species-level 
diversity has yet to be described in the Pseudoalteromonas genus. Fur-
thermore, the ANI analysis also enabled some unclassiﬁed strains to become assignedto species. The whole genomes of 10 taxonomically classiﬁed species have not yet beensequenced, and therefore, these species were not included in the analysis and someunassigned strains could belong to these species. The ANI analysis also demonstratedthat the ANI of some strains were /H1102195% and, thus, that these strains should be
reclassiﬁed as other species ( 32).
The
high level of dissimilarity between some of the species could even suggest that
thePseudoalteromonas genus potentially represents multiple genera, as was the case
for the genus Algicola, consisting of the two species Algicola bacteriolytica and A.
sagamiensis, which belonged to the Pseudoalteromonas genus until 2007 ( 33). Since ANI
serves
as a genomic measurement only for species delineation and not for genus
delineation, this is only speculative. Nonetheless, the ANI analysis clearly visualized aproblem with species naming within the Pseudoalteromonas genus, as some strains
were not correctly assigned to a species. For example, P. undina DSM 6065 and P.
haloplanktis ATCC 700530 share 98% ANI similarity, thus exceeding the species cutoff
for ANI of /H1135095% ( 32). Also, P.
mariniglutinosa KCTC 22327 and P. haloplanktis ATCC
700530 have 99% ANI similarity and P. neustonica PAMC 28425 and P. porphyrae
UCD-SED9 share 99% ANI similarity, indicating that these are the same species. Similarissues with species delineation have been reported in the Pseudomonas genus ( 34), as
well 
as on a much larger scale for prokaryotes ( 35).
Genes
encoding chitin degradation machinery are common in pigmented
Pseudoalteromonas strains. Of the 157 strains, 102 strains had the genomic capacity
to degrade chitin (Fig. 1). The chitin-degrading genotype matched the chitin-degrading
phenotype
(Table S2). All 62 genomes of pigmented strains encoded chitinase genes
from both the GH18 and GH19 families. Forty-ﬁve percent (40 of 95) of the genomes ofthe nonpigmented strains encoded chitinase genes of the GH18 family. Of those, only10 genomes also encoded chitinases from the GH19 family.
The genomes of pigmented strains encoded, on average, 5.2 GH18 chitinases, while
the nonpigmented chitinolytic strains encoded, on average, 2.1 GH18 chitinases. Hence,the pigmented strains encoded signiﬁcantly more GH18 chitinases than nonpigmentedchitinolytic strains, with an average of 2.4 times more GH18 chitinases ( P/H110210.0001)
being found in pigmented strains. A three-gene chitin degradation cluster (CDC)(Fig. 2), encoding a GH18 chitinase of the ChiC type, a lytic polysaccharide monooxy-
genase
(LPMO), and a GH18 chitinase of the ChiA type, was found in all chitinolytic
strains and is likely a conserved feature in chitin-degrading Pseudoalteromonas strains
independent of pigmentation. The CDC was initially described in 2002 by Tsujibo et al.at a time when LPMOs had not been described ( 36). Today, it is known that chitin-
associated 
LPMOs are abundant in prokaryotes ( 37) and facilitate the breakdown of
chitin
by catalysis of the oxidative cleavage of glycosidic bonds ( 38–40). The genomes
of
the majority of pigmented strains belonging to the species P. luteoviolacea, P. rubra,
P. phenolica, and P. citrea encoded two CDCs.
The conservation of GH19 chitinases in all pigmented strains indicates an important
role of this enzyme in this group. GH19 chitinases are mostly known from plants andare rare and thus understudied in bacteria and fungi ( 37,41–43). In comparison, a
FIG 2 The chitin degradation cluster (CDC) present in all chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas strains. The CDC
consists of a GH18 chitinase of the chiC type, a lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase (lpmo), and a GH18
chitinase of the chiA type.Paulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 4 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from recent analysis of 40 Micromonospora strains whose whole genomes have been se-
quenced found that all genomes carried the chiC gene, encoding the GH18 chitinase,
but none contained the GH19-encoding genes ( 44). In plants, chitinases mainly serve as
antifungal
agents, and some studies have suggested that this could be one of the
functions of bacterial GH19 chitinases ( 27,30,41,45). Antifungal activity is, however,
not
limited to GH19 chitinases, as some GH18 chitinases also display antifungal
activities ( 46,47). The ﬁrst GH19 chitinase described in Pseudoalteromonas was anti-
fungal, but it also hydrolyzed colloidal and crystalline chitin ( 26). Thus, the functional
differences
between the GH18 and GH19 chitinases remain unresolved.
Pigmented and nonpigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains are distinct in their
GH proﬁles. A clustered heat map was generated based on the predicted GH proﬁles
of the strains (Fig. 3). Pigmented and nonpigmented strains contained, on average,
47/H110068
and 40/H1100613 GHs, respectively. The functional clustering divided the strains into
two groups, with one consisting solely of nonpigmented strains and the other consist-
ing of both pigmented and nonpigmented strains, and subclustering correlated withthe phylogeny and pigmentation. In total, 63 out of 156 entries of GHs described in theCAZy database by the start of 2019 ( http://www.cazy.org/) were represented in the
strains.
Of the 63 different GH families identiﬁed, 60 GH families were represented in
nonpigmented strains, whereas only 38 GH families were found in pigmented strains.The Shannon index was higher in the pigmented strains ( P/H110210.001), but the variation
was 8-fold larger in the nonpigmented strains. This suggests that even though theaverage pigmented strain genome based on gene counts contains more GHs than theaverage nonpigmented strain genome, the GH proﬁles of the nonpigmented strains aremore heterogeneous than those of the pigmented strains.
Interestingly, the functional clustering detected a pattern of co-occurrence between
the GH19 chitinase and the GH92 mannosidase, meaning that of the 71 genomescontaining at least one GH19 gene, 71.8% also contained a GH92 gene ( P/H110210.00001).
In the mycoparasitic fungus Trichoderma harzianum, chitinases and a GH92 mannosi-
dase were signiﬁcantly upregulated in response to pathogenic fungi ( 48). Since chitin
and
mannose are components of the fungal cell wall, this could indicate that the
natural role of bacterial GH19s is indeed antifungal, possibly in combination with GH92.
To evaluate if the GH proﬁles differed on the basis of pigmentation status, multi-
dimensional scaling (MDS) was conducted. MDS clearly separated pigmented andnonpigmented strains into two groups on the basis of their GH proﬁles ( Fig. 4). This is
in 
accordance with analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) showing a signiﬁcant effect of
pigmentation in multivariate space ( P/H110210.001) and suggesting that pigmentation
status explains /H1101150% of the GH proﬁle (r2/H110050.50). Listed in order of the most signiﬁ-
cant contribution, GH18, GH74, GH20, GH24, GH19, GH92, and GH23 had the majorimpact of this divergence for pigmented strains (loadings /H110210.5). For nonpigmented
strains, GH13, GH43, GH50, GH16, GH78, and GH109 had a major divergent impact onthe GH proﬁle (loadings /H11022/H11002 0.5) (Table S3). Thus, the GH18 chitinase was the strongest
contributor to the GH proﬁles of pigmented strains, as it was present in all genomesand was present at a higher abundance than it was in nonpigmented strains. Also, thechitinolytic GH19s and GH20s contributed prominently to the separation of the GHproﬁles of pigmented strains, proposing that chitin degradation is a key physiologicaltrait in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains. The loading coordinates of GH19 and
GH92 were very similar, conﬁrming their co-occurrence, as discussed above. For non-pigmented strains, GH13 was the strongest contributor to the diversiﬁcation frompigmented species. The contribution of GH13 in nonpigmented strains is reﬂected bya higher gene count compared to that in pigmented species. GH43, GH50, GH16, GH78,and GH109 also contributed to the intergroup diversity of the nonpigmented GHproﬁles, and all are enzymes that are active on marine algal polysaccharides, such asagar, porphyrin, carrageenan, starch, and glucan. The building blocks of algal polysac-charides are relatively few, but they have a high structural complexity, as they can belinked in almost inﬁnite ways and are also often subject to acetylation, methylation, orsulfation ( 49). The high diversity of GH families in nonpigmented species could indicateBioactivity of Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 5 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from FIG 3 Functionally clustered heat map based on the predicted glycosyl hydrolases (GH) of the 157 Pseudoalteromonas strains. The key displays the
log-transformed gene counts of GHs.Paulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 6 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from that this group favors the utilization of algal polysaccharides. Pigmented strains also
have the genetic capacity to utilize algal components, and many nonpigmented strainscan degrade chitin; however, the conserved chitinolytic machinery in pigmented strainsindicates a specialized adaptation to chitin utilization.
The general perception of the genus Pseudoalteromonas is that pigmented species
produce many bioactive secondary metabolites, whereas nonpigmented species pro-duce a larger amount of hydrolytic enzymes ( 10). The results presented herein partially
support
this assumption, as the diversity of GHs was higher in nonpigmented strains,
but not on a gene count basis. While having less diverse GH proﬁles, the genomes ofpigmented strains contained, on average, at least the same number of GHs as nonpig-mented strains or higher number of GHs than nonpigmented strains.
Pseudoalteromonas strains devote up to 15% of their genome to the biosyn-
thesis of secondary metabolites. The genomic bioactive potential of all Pseudoaltero-
monas strains was compared to that of well-known secondary metabolite producers
(50) by calculating the proportion of the genome dedicated to the biosynthesis of
secondary
metabolites (percent BGC) ( Fig. 5; Table S1). Mining the genomes using the
antiSMASH
tool, we found that the genomes of pigmented strains dedicated, on
average, 7.6% /H110064.2% to BGCs and that those of nonpigmented strains dedicated, on
average, 1.1% /H110060.9%. In comparison, the average prokaryote devotes 3.7% /H110063.1% of
its genome to BGCs ( 50). There was a strong linear correlation between genome size
and
percent BGC, which was especially pronounced in the pigmented strains ( r2/H110050.60,
P/H110210.00001, slope /H110055.18) compared to the nonpigmented strains ( r2/H110050.13, P/H110210.001,
slope/H110050.81), meaning that for every gigabase increase in genome size, a further 5.2%
of the genome is dedicated to BGCs for pigmented species. The genomes of pigmentedspecies encoded, on average, 6.8 times more BGCs (P /H110210.00001) than those of non-
pigmented species did. Thirty-six strains devoted more than 7.5% ( 50) of their genomes
to 
BGCs, with the highest percentage of BGCs being found in P. luteoviolacea and P.
rubra strains (12% to 15%). Thus, their genetic potential for the production of secondary
metabolites is equal to that of species generally well-known for the production ofsecondary metabolites, including those in the genera Streptomyces, Myxococcus, Soran-
gium, and Burkholderia (50). It is also comparable to that in species from the marine
FIG 4 Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot of pigmented (red dots) and nonpigmented (gray dots) Pseudoalteromonas
strains based on their glycosyl hydrolase (GH) proﬁle. GHs with loadings of more than /H110060.5 are shown in the graph.Bioactivity of Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 7 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from actinomycete genus Salinispora, devoting approximately 10% of the investigated ge-
nomes to secondary metabolism ( 51,52).
Genomic
analysis of representatives of each pigmented species and three unclas-
siﬁed pigmented strains using antiSMASH found that most of the predicted BGCs
showed little to no homology to known and characterized bioactive compounds(Table 1). Many of these BGCs may represent a novel chemistry or may encode novel
homologs 
of the compound classes ( 13). Bacteria from the phylum Actinobacteria have
been
the cornerstone of the antibiotic era, as two-thirds of all known microbial
antibiotics originate from these Gram-positive bacteria ( 1,53). They remain a focal point
of
antibiotic research, since genome mining has revealed the presence of many
potentially silent or cryptic BGCs in their genomes ( 54). Likewise, our study demon-
FIG 5 Proportion of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) in the Pseudoalteromonas genomes according to
genome size. Each circle represents one genome and is color coded based on pigmentation. The data
have been jittered to account for overlying points.
TABLE 1 Total number of predicted BGCs in a representative selection of pigmented species, including the most similar known BGCs
according to percent gene similaritya
Species and strainTotal no. of
predicted BGCs Most similar known BGC (% gene similarity)
P. luteoviolacea S2607 23 Violacein (80%), kalimantacin (10%), vibriobactin (18%),
griseobactin (17%), cystobactamide (8%)
P. spongiae S3655 5 Arylpolyene (35%), ﬂexirubin (5%), desferrioxamine B (60%)
P. phenolica S1189 6 Xenocyloins (25%), vulnibactin (25%)
P. rubra S4059 25 Indigoidine (40%), turnerbactin (15%), kalimantacin/batumin (10%)
Pseudoalteromonas sp.
strain S44989 Serobactins (15%)
P. piscicida S2049 18 Griseobactin (23%), feglymycin (10%), bromoalterochromides (14%),
alterochromides (90%)
P. ruthenica S2897 4 Arylpolyene (40%), desferrioxamine B (60%)
P. aurantia S2231 17 Kalimantacin/batumin (10%), pyoverdine (1%)
P. citrea S3895 17 Pyoverdine (1%), turnerbactin (15%), pyoverdine (1%), zeamine (17%)
P. ulvae TC14 4 APE_Vf (40%), violacein (80%)
P. piratica OCN0013 3 APE_Vf (40%), desferrioxamine B (60%)
Pseudoalteromonas sp.
strain 520P17 Violacein (80%), pyoverdine (2%), taxlllaid (6%), eicosapentaenoic
acid-like compound (18%)
Pseudoalteromonas sp.
strain HM SA0311 Bromoalterochromides (14%), hectochlorin (37%), alterochromides (100%), turnerbactin (15%)
P. amylolytica JW1 16 Violacein (80%), staphylobactin (12%)
P. denitriﬁcans DSM 6059 10 APE_Vf (45%), eicosapentaenoic acid-like (18%), bacillibactin (23%)
P. tunicata D2 5 Violacein (80%), prodigiosin (12%), desferrioxamine B (50%)
P. byunsanensis JCM 12483 14 Taxlllaid (4%), staphylobactin (12%), bromoalterochromides (14%),
violacein (80%)
P. elyakovii ATCC 700519 18 Bacillibactin (60%), alterochromides (95%)
aBGCs were predicted and percent gene similarity was deﬁned by use of the antiSMASH tool.Paulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 8 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from strates that pigmented Pseudoaltermonas species could be a potent and promising
source of new antimicrobials.
Enhanced antibacterial activity could not be detected on chitin. In some Vibri-
onaceae, BGCs are upregulated when the bacteria are grown on chitin, and the ﬁnding
of an elaborate chitinolytic machinery in Pseudoalteromonas led us to determine the
antibacterial activity of the strains when grown on four different carbon sources(glucose, N-acetylglucosamine [NAG], colloidal chitin, and crystalline chitin) mimicking
a natural chitinous habitat ( 55). Of the 50 strains, all 24 pigmented strains and one
nonpigmented 
strain (strain S558) were inhibitory toward the target pathogen, in
agreement with previous results ( 13); however, inhibition was independent of the
carbon
source (Table S2). Thus, the overall antibacterial activity was not enhanced on
chitinous media compared to glucose media, as has been seen for strains of theVibrionaceae family ( 20). The assay was not sensitive enough to quantify the antibac-
terial 
activity, and chitin could potentially still enhance the response of a metabolite
cluster that is also expressed without addition of chitin. This was seen for the antibioticandrimid in Vibrio coralliilyticus S2052 when grown on chitin compared to glucose ( 19).
Also, 
growth on chitin may alter the expression of BGCs encoding bioactivities other
than antibacterial activity.
Conclusion. Here, we demonstrate that chitin is likely an important carbon source
for pigmented Pseudoalteromonas species, as chitin hydrolysis is a key trait in this group
of bacteria. Pigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains and a few nonpigmented strains
contain GH19 chitinases, which are not common in bacteria. In plants, the main role ofGH19 chitinases is antifungal, and the ﬁnding of a co-occurring mannosidase of theGH92 family suggests that the fungal cell wall could be the target of GH19 chitinasesin bacteria as well. Nonpigmented Pseudoalteromonas strains have an extended algal
polysaccharide-degrading GH proﬁle compared to pigmented strains; in contrast, theirgenomic potential for producing bioactive compounds was much lower. The fact thatpigmented species devote up to 15% of their genome to BGCs qualiﬁes this genus tobe in the same antibiotic-producing league as the well-known Actinobacteria, with the
beneﬁt of being less explored. We hypothesized that growth on chitin would enhancethe bioactivity of the strains, but, when measured as antibiotic activity, this was notconﬁrmed. However, this study serves as an extensive basis for ecology-based bio-prospecting of secondary metabolites and hydrolytic enzymes and has uncovered apromising genomic potential for producing novel antimicrobial compounds in pig-mented Pseudoalteromonas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Pseudoalteromonas genomes. One hundred sixty-ﬁve Pseudoalteromonas genomes available in the
NCBI database in May 2018 and 88 Pseudoalteromonas genomes (see below) from our global Galathea
collection ( 17) were included. To avoid bias in the data set due to an uneven distribution of the number
of
strains per species and to exclude very similar isolates, an average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis
using the Python module pyani ( 56) was conducted using all 253 genomes to eliminate those sharing an
ANI
of greater than 98.3%. This cutoff was inferred by visually inspecting a plot of the number of isolates
versus the ANI value, in which there was a notable elbow at 98.3% identity (see Fig. S1 in the
supplemental material). Subsequently, 107 genomes from NCBI and 50 genomes sequenced in thepresent study were included in the bioinformatic analyses (Table S1). The data set included 15 pigmentedspecies (62 strains) and 23 nonpigmented species (95 strains). These numbers are approximate, as somestrains were not assigned to any species but clustered within either the pigmented or the nonpigmentedgroup.
Isolation of genomic DNA and genome sequencing. Ninety-eight Pseudoalteromonas strains were
isolated during the Galathea 3 global marine research expedition ( 17). They were isolated from seawater
or
swab samples from biotic or abiotic surfaces and selected on the basis of their antibacterial activity
against the ﬁsh pathogen Vibrio anguillarum. The origins and coordinates of isolation can be found in the
work of Gram et al. (2010) ( 17). The genomes of 12 strains were sequenced as part of a previous study
(18,57), and we were unable to purify DNA from 10 strains. Thus, 76 new genomes were sequenced as
part
of the present study. High-purity genomic DNA was extracted using a NucleoSpin tissue kit (catalog
number 740952; Macherey-Nagel) including an RNase treatment step. For half of the strains, we haddifﬁculties extracting high-purity DNA; therefore, a Qiagen Genomic-tip 20/G kit (catalog number 10223;Qiagen) and a genomic DNA buffer set (catalog number 19060; Qiagen) were used for extraction instead.Quantiﬁcation was done using a DeNovix DS-11/H11001 spectrometer (DeNovix, USA) and Qubit (v2.0) analyzer
(Invitrogen, United Kingdom). Genomes were sequenced at the Novo Nordisk Center for BiosustainabilityBioactivity of Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 9 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from (Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark) using 150-bp paired-end sequencing on an Illumina
NextSeq platform. Genomes were assembled using CLC Genomics Workbench software (v8; CLC bio,Aarhus, Denmark), and contig-based draft genomes were obtained; all had genome coverage of 105-foldor higher.
Phylogenetic analysis. A phylogenetic tree of the 157 genomes was generated with the SNP-based
procedure CSI Phylogeny ( http://cge.cbs.dtu.dk/services/CSIPhylogeny/)( 58).Pseudoalteromonas
 luteovi-
olacea DSM 6061T(WGS accession no. GCF_001625655.1) was used as a reference genome, and Vibrio
anguillarum 90-11-286
(GenBank accession no. CP011460 andCP011461) was used as the outgroup. The
maximum
likelihood phylogenetic tree was visualized using iTOL (https://itol.embl.de/)( 59).
Bioinformatic
analyses. The genomes sequenced in the present study were annotated using the
Rapid Annotation using Subsystem Technology (RAST) ( 60). The presence of a conserved chitin degra-
dation
cluster (CDC) was investigated using MultiGeneBlast ( 61) with the CDC query from (36). The lytic
polysaccharide
monooxygenase (LPMO) of the CDC was identiﬁed using Pfam (https://pfam.xfam.org/).
The
total numbers of GHs encoded in each genome was predicted using Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) searches against local versions of the dbCAN ( 62). A heat map of the GH proﬁles was constructed
in
R (v3.4.2) using the package pheatmap (63), in which the proﬁles were clustered by complete linkage
on
the log-transformed values for ease of visualization. The average GH18 gene content in pigmented
versus nonpigmented chitinolytic strains was tested with a ttest. A co-occurrence pattern between GH19
and GH92 was tested with a Fisher exact test. To visualize the differences in GH proﬁles based onpigmentation, a metric multidimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on a count matrix with the total numberof predicted protein sequences per GH family was conducted in R using Bray-Curtis distances. Loadingswith values of more than /H110060.5 were plotted in the MDS plot. Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) was used
to test whether the pigmentation status was predictive of the GH gene proﬁle in a multivariate context.To test if pigmentation status was associated with GH proﬁle diversity, the Shannon index was calculatedand tested with a ttest.
All 157 genomes were analyzed for secondary metabolite gene clusters using the antiSMASH (v4.0)
tool ( 64). The sizes of the predicted BGCs relative to the genome size were calculated for each strain (in
nucleobases)
and compared to the total size of the genome using linear regression. The percentage of
the genome dedicated to BGCs in pigmented versus nonpigmented strains was tested with a ttest.
Chitin degradation. To determine if the chitin-degrading genotype resulted in a phenotype, the 50
strains from the Galathea collection were tested for chitin degradation. Strains were grown with aerationat 25°C and 200 rpm overnight in marine broth (MB 2216; Difco BD). Two microliters of each culture wasinoculated in duplicate on chitin agar, consisting of 1.5% agar, 2% sea salt (catalog number S9883;Sigma), 0.3% Casamino Acids, and 0.2% colloidal chitin (catalog number C7170; Sigma). Colloidal chitinwas prepared as described previously ( 20). Plates were inspected daily for 10 days, and chitin degrada-
tion
was determined by the appearance of a clearing zone around the colonies.
Screening for antibacterial activity. The antibacterial activity of the 50 Galathea strains against the
ﬁsh pathogen V. anguillarum 90-11-286 ( 65) was tested using the agar-based assay described previously
(20) with either 0.2% glucose, 0.2% N-acetylglucosamine (NAG), 0.2% colloidal chitin, or 0.2% crystalline
chitin as the carbon source, in addition to 0.3% Casamino Acids. Bacterial strains were grown at 25°C and200 rpm overnight in MB. Two microliters of each culture was inoculated in duplicate on the four media.On each plate, bacteria were inoculated in rows of four strains with a horizontal and a vertical distanceof 25 mm from each other. Strains were allowed 2 days of growth before 2
/H9262l of an overnight culture of
the target strain, V. anguillarum 90-11-286, grown in MB was inoculated at a distance of 5 mm from the
Pseudoalteromonas strains. The plates were incubated at 25°C, and the colony growth of the target strain
was assessed 48 h after the target strain had been inoculated.
Data availability. The 76 new draft genomes are available at the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) database under accession numbers PNBS01 toPNEL01. All accession numbers are
listed
in Table S1. The strains are available upon request.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Supplemental material for this article may be found at https://doi.org/10.1128/
mSystems.00060-19.
FIG
S1, PDF ﬁle, 0.1 MB.
FIG S2, PDF ﬁle, 0.4 MB.
TABLE S1, PDF ﬁle, 0.4 MB.TABLE S2, PDF ﬁle, 0.3 MB.TABLE S3, PDF ﬁle, 0.2 MB.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The study was funded by the Villum Kann Rasmussen Annual Award 2016 to Lone
Gram.
We
thank Kai Blin, Christopher Workman, and Magnus Hallas-Møller for many helpful
comments on our analyses. We thank Jette Melchiorsen and Henrique Machado forassistance on DNA extractions and genome assembly.
The present work was carried out as a part of the Galathea 3 expedition under the
auspices of the Danish Expedition Foundation. This is Galathea 3 contribution no. P129.Paulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 10 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from The study was designed by S.S.P., L.G., and E.C.S. S.S.P. conducted the experiments
and analyzed the data with the help of L.G. and E.C.S. P.K.B. and M.L.S. conducted some
of the genomic analyses and analyzed the data with the help of S.S.P. S.S.P., L.G., andE.C.S. wrote the manuscript. We all reviewed and approved the ﬁnal version of themanuscript.
We declare no conﬂict of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Van Der Meij A, Worsley SF, Hutchings MI, Van Wezel GP. 2017. Chemical
ecology of antibiotic production by actinomycetes. FEMS Microbiol Rev
41:392–416. https://doi.org/10.1093/femsre/fux005.
2.
Kozuma S, Hirota-Takahata Y, Fukuda D, Kuraya N, Nakajima M, Ando O.
2017. Identiﬁcation and biological activity of ogipeptins, novel LPSinhibitors produced by marine bacterium. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 70:79–83.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2016.81.
3. 
Sannino F, Parrilli E, Apuzzo GA, de Pascale D, Tedesco P, Maida I, Perrin
E, Fondi M, Fani R, Marino G, Tutino ML. 2017. Pseudoalteromonas
haloplanktis produces methylamine, a volatile compound active against
Burkholderia cepacia complex strains. N Biotechnol 35:13–18. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2016.10.009.
4.
Whalen KE, Poulson-Ellestad KL, Deering RW, Rowley DC, Mincer TJ.
2015. Enhancement of antibiotic activity against multidrug-resistantbacteria by the efﬂux pump inhibitor 3,4-dibromopyrrole-2,5-dione iso-lated from a Pseudoalteromonas sp. J Nat Prod 78:402–412. https://doi
.org/10.1021/np500775e.
5.
Busch J, Agarwal V, Schorn M, Machado H, Moore BS, Rouse GW, Gram
L, Jensen PR. 2019. Diversity and distribution of the bmp gene cluster
and its products in the genus Pseudoalteromonas. Environ Microbiol
21:1575–1585. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.14532.
6.
Xiong Z-Q, Wang J-F, Hao Y-Y, Wang Y. 2013. Recent advances in the
discovery and development of marine microbial natural products. Mar
Drugs 11:700–717. https://doi.org/10.3390/md11030700.
7.
Naughton LM, Romano S, Gara FO, Dobson ADW. 2017. Identiﬁcation of
secondary metabolite gene clusters in the Pseudovibrio genus reveals
encouraging biosynthetic potential toward the production of novelbioactive compounds. Front Microbiol 8:1494. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2017.01494.
8. 
Giordano D, Coppola D, Russo R, Denaro R, Giuliano L, Lauro FM, di
Prisco G, Verde C. 2015. Marine microbial secondary metabolites: path-ways, evolution and physiological roles. Adv Microb Physiol 66:357–428.
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ampbs.2015.04.001.
9. 
Wietz M, Gram L, Jørgensen B, Schramm A. 2010. Latitudinal patterns in
the abundance of major marine bacterioplankton groups. Aquat Microb
Ecol 61:179–189. https://doi.org/10.3354/ame01443.
10.
Bowman JP. 2007. Bioactive compound synthetic capacity and ecolog-
ical signiﬁcance of marine bacterial genus Pseudoalteromonas. Mar
Drugs 5:220–241. https://doi.org/10.3390/md504220.
11.
Parte AC. 2014. LPSN—List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in
Nomenclature. Nucleic Acids Res 42:D613–D616. https://doi.org/10
.1093/nar/gkt1111.
12.
Offret C, Desriac F, Le Chevalier P, Mounier J, Jégou C. 2016. Spotlight on
antimicrobial metabolites from the marine bacteria Pseudoalteromonas:
chemodiversity and ecological signiﬁcance. Mar Drugs 14:E129. https://
doi.org/10.3390/md14070129.
13.
Vynne NG, Månsson M, Nielsen KF, Gram L. 2011. Bioactivity, chemical
proﬁling, and 16S rRNA-based phylogeny of Pseudoalteromonas strains
collected on a global research cruise. Mar Biotechnol (NY) 13:1062–1073.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10126-011-9369-4.
14.
Speitling M, Smetanina OF, Kuznetsova TA, Laatsch H. 2007. Bro-
moalterochromides A and A=, unprecedented chromopeptides from a
marine Pseudoalteromonas maricaloris strain KMM 636 T. J Antibiot60:36–42. https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2007.5.
15. 
Pinkerton DM, Banwell MG, Willis AC. 2007. Total syntheses of tambja-
mines C, E, F, G, H, I and J, BE-18591, and a related alkaloid from themarine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas tunicata. Org Lett 9:5127–5130.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ol7024313.
16. 
Fehér D, Barlow RS, Lorenzo PS, Hemscheidt TK. 2008. A 2-substituted
prodiginine, 2-(p-hydroxybenzyl) prodigiosin, from Pseudoalteromonas
rubra. J Nat Prod 71:1970–1972. https://doi.org/10.1021/np800493p.
17.
Gram L, Melchiorsen J, Bruhn JB. 2010. Antibacterial activity of marineculturable bacteria collected from a global sampling of ocean surface
waters and surface swabs of marine organisms. Mar Biotechnol (NY)12:439–451. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10126-009-9233-y.
18. 
Machado H, Sonnenschein EC, Melchiorsen J, Gram L. 2015. Genome
mining reveals unlocked bioactive potential of marine Gram-negativebacteria. BMC Genomics 16:158. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-015
-1365-z.
19. 
Wietz M, Månsson M, Gram L. 2011. Chitin stimulates production of the
antibiotic andrimid in a Vibrio coralliilyticus strain. Environ Microbiol Rep
3:559–564. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-2229.2011.00259.x.
20.
Giubergia S, Phippen C, Gotfredsen CH, Nielsen KF, Gram L. 2016.
Inﬂuence of niche-speciﬁc nutrients on secondary metabolism in Vibri-
onaceae. Appl Environ Microbiol 82:4035–4044. https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.00730-16.
21.
Giubergia S, Phippen C, Nielsen KF, Gram L. 2017. Growth on chitin
impacts the transcriptome and metabolite proﬁles of antibiotic-producing Vibrio coralliilyticus S2052 and Photobacterium galathea
S2753. mSystems 2:e00141-16. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00141
-16.
22. 
Delpin MW, Goodman AE. 2009. Nutrient regime regulates complex
transcriptional start site usage within a Pseudoalteromonas chitinase
gene cluster. ISME J 3:1053–1063. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2009.54.
23.
Hunt DE, Gevers D, Vahora NM, Polz MF. 2008. Conservation of the chitin
utilization pathway in the Vibrionaceae. Appl Environ Microbiol 74:
44–51. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01412-07.
24.
Li X, Roseman S. 2004. The chitinolytic cascade in vibrios is regulated by
chitin oligosaccharides and a two-component chitin catabolic sensor/
kinase. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA101:627–631. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0307645100.
25.
Beier S, Bertilsson S. 2013. Bacterial chitin degradation-mechanisms and
ecophysiological strategies. Front Microbiol 4:149. https://doi.org/10
.3389/fmicb.2013.00149 .
26.
García-Fraga B, Da Silva AF, López-Seijas J, Sieiro C. 2015. A novel family
19 chitinase from the marine-derived Pseudoalteromonas tunicata CCUG
44952T: heterologous expression, characterization and antifungal activ-ity. Biochem Eng J 93:84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2014.09.014.
27. 
Watanabe T, Kanai R, Kawase T, Tanabe T, Mitsutomi M, Sakuda S,
Miyashita K. 1999. Family 19 chitinases of Streptomyces species: charac-
terization and distribution. Microbiology 145:3353–3363. https://doi.org/
10.1099/00221287-145-12-3353.
28.
Kong H, Shimosaka M, Ando Y, Nishiyama K, Fujii T, Miyashita K. 2001.
Species-speciﬁc distribution of a modular family 19 chitinase gene inBurkholderia gladioli. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 37:135–141. https://doi.org/10
.1111/j.1574-6941.2001.tb00861.x.
29. 
Kawase T, Saito A, Sato T, Kanai R, Fujii T, Nikaidou N, Miyashita K,
Watanabe T. 2004. Distribution and phylogenetic analysis of family 19chitinases in Actinobacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:1135–1144.
https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.70.2.1135-1144.2004.
30. 
Honda Y, Taniguchi H, Kitaoka M. 2008. A reducing-end-acting chitinase
from Vibrio proteolyticus belonging to glycoside hydrolase family 19.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 78:627–634. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253
-008-1352-2 .
31.
Paulsen SS, Andersen B, Gram L, Machado H. 2016. Biological potential
of chitinolytic marine bacteria. Mar Drugs 14:E230. https://doi.org/10
.3390/md14120230.
32.
Goris J, Konstantinidis KT, Klappenbach JA, Coenye T, Vandamme P,
Tiedje JM. 2007. DNA-DNA hybridization values and their relationship towhole-genome sequence similarities. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 57:81–91.
https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.64483-0.
33. 
Nam Y-D, Chang H-W, Park JR, Kwon H-Y, Quan Z-X, Park Y-H, Lee J-S,
Yoon J-H, Bae J-W. 2007. Pseudoalteromonas marina sp. nov., a marine
bacterium isolated from tidal ﬂats of the Yellow Sea, and reclassiﬁcationBioactivity of Chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 11 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from ofPseudoalteromonas sagamiensis asAlgicola sagamiensis comb. nov. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 57:12–18. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.64523-0.
34.
Tran PN, Savka MA, Gan HM. 2017. In-silico taxonomic classiﬁcation of
373 genomes reveals species misidentiﬁcation and new genospecies
within the genus Pseudomonas. Front Microbiol 8:1296. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2017.01296.
35.
Varghese NJ, Mukherjee S, Ivanova N, Konstantinidis KT, Mavrommatis K,
Kyrpides NC, Pati A. 2015. Microbial species delineation using wholegenome sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 43:6761–6771. https://doi.org/10
.1093/nar/gkv657.
36. 
Tsujibo H, Orikoshi H, Baba N, Miyahara M, Miyamoto K, Yasuda M,
Inamori Y. 2002. Identiﬁcation and characterization of the gene clusterinvolved in chitin degradation in a marine bacterium, Alteromonas sp.
strain O-7. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:263–270. https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.68.1.263-270.2002.
37. 
Bai Y, Eijsink VGH, Kielak AM, Van Veen JA, De Boer W. 2016. Genomic
comparison of chitinolytic enzyme systems from terrestrial andaquatic bacteria. Environ Microbiol 18:38–49. https://doi.org/10
.1111/1462-2920.12545.
38. 
Hamre AG, Eide KB, Wold HH, Sørlie M. 2015. Activation of enzymatic
chitin degradation by a lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase. CarbohydrRes 407:166–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carres.2015.02.010.
39. 
Walton PH, Davies GJ. 2016. On the catalytic mechanisms of lytic poly-
saccharide monooxygenases. Curr Opin Chem Biol 31:195–207. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.04.001.
40.
Vaaje-Kolstad G, Westereng B, Horn SJ, Liu Z, Zhai H, Sørlie M, Eijsink
VGH. 2010. An oxidative enzyme boosting the enzymatic conversion ofrecalcitrant polysaccharides. Science 330:219–222. https://doi.org/10
.1126/science.1192231.
41. 
Kawase T, Yokokawa S, Saito A, Fujii T, Nikaidou N, Miyashita K, Wa-
tanabe T. 2006. Comparison of enzymatic and antifungal propertiesbetween family 18 and 19 chitinases from S. coelicolor A3(2). Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 70:988–998. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.70.988.
42. 
Berlemont R, Martiny C. 2015. Genomic potential for polysaccharide
deconstruction in bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 81:1513–1519.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03718-14.
43.
Han B, Zhou K, Li Z, Sun B, Ni Q, Meng X, Pan G, Li C, Long M, Li T, Zhou
C, Li W, Zhou Z. 2016. Characterization of the ﬁrst fungal glycosylhydrolase family 19 chitinase (NbchiA) from Nosema bombycis (Nb). J
Eukaryot Microbiol 63:37–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/jeu.12246.
44. 
Carro L, Nouioui I, Sangal V, Meier-Kolthoff JP, Trujillo ME, Mo C, Sahin N,
Smith DL, Kim KE, Peluso P, Deshpande S, Woyke T, Shapiro N, KyrpidesNC, Klenk H, Göker M, Goodfellow M. 2018. Genome-based classiﬁ-cation of Micromonosporae with a focus on their biotechnologicaland ecological potential. Sci Rep 8:525. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-017-17392-0.
45.
Huang L, Garbulewska E, Sato K, Kato Y, Nogawa M, Taguchi G, Shimo-
saka M. 2012. Isolation of genes coding for chitin-degrading enzymes inthe novel chitinolytic bacterium, Chitiniphilus shinanonensis, and char-
acterization of a gene coding for a family 19 chitinase. J Biosci Bioeng113:293–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2011.10.018.
46.
Suma K, Podile AR. 2013. Chitinase A from Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
shows transglycosylation and antifungal activities. Bioresour Technol133:213–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.01.103.
47. 
Babashpour S, Aminzadeh S, Farrokhi N, Karkhane A, Haghbeen K. 2012.
Characterization of a chitinase (Chit62) from Serratia marcescens B4A and
its efﬁcacy as a bioshield against plant fungal pathogens. BiochemGenet 50:722–735. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-012-9515-3.
48. 
da Mota PR, Ribeiro MS, de Castro Georg R, Silva GR, de Paula RG, Silva
RDN, Ulhoa CJ. 2016. Expression analysis of the /H9251-1,2-mannosidase from
the mycoparasitic fungus Trichoderma harzianum. Biol Control 95:1–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2015.12.013.
49.
Stengel DB, Connan S, Popper ZA. 2011. Algal chemodiversity and
bioactivity: sources of natural variability and implications for commercialapplication. Biotechnol Adv 29:483–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.biotechadv.2011.05.016.
50.
Cimermancic P, Medema MH, Claesen J, Kurita K, Brown LCW, Mavrom-
matis K, Pati A, Godfrey PA, Koehrsen M, Clardy J, Birren BW, Takano E,
Sali A, Linington RG, Fischbach MA. 2014. Insights into secondary me-tabolism from a global analysis of prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters.Cell 158:412–421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.034.
51.
Udwary DW, Zeigler L, Asolkar RN, Singan V, Lapidus A, Fenical W, Jensen
PR, Moore BS. 2007. Genome sequencing reveals complex secondarymetabolome in the marine actinomycete Salinispora tropica. Proc Natl
Acad SciUSA104:10376–10381. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.0700962104.
52. 
Penn K, Jenkins C, Nett M, Udwary DW, Gontang EA, Mcglinchey RP,
Foster B, Lapidus A, Podell S, Allen EE, Moore BS, Jensen PR. 2009.Genomic islands link secondary metabolism to functional adaptation inmarine Actinobacteria. ISME J 3:1193–1203. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ismej.2009.58.
53.
Aminov RI. 2010. A brief history of the antibiotic era: lessons learned and
challenges for the future. Front Microbiol 1:134. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2010.00134.
54.
Niu G. 2017. Genomics-driven natural product discovery in actinomyce-
tes. Trends Biotechnol 36:238–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech
.2017.10.009.
55.
Cordero OX, Datta MS, Sliwerska E, Gore J, Polz MF. 2016. Microbial
interactions lead to rapid successions on model marine particles. NatCommun 7:11965. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11965.
56. 
Pritchard L, Glover RH, Humphris S, Elphinstone JG, Toth IK. 2016.
Genomics and taxonomy in diagnostics for food security: soft-rottingenterobacterial plant pathogens. Anal Methods 8:12–24. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C5AY02550H.
57. 
Machado H, Vynne NG, Christiansen G, Gram L. 2016. Reclassiﬁcation of
Alteromonas fuliginea (Romanenko et al. 1995) as Pseudoalteromonas
fuliginea comb. nov. and an emended description. Int J Syst Evol Micro-
biol 66:3737–3742. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.001259.
58.
Kaas RS, Leekitcharoenphon P, Aarestrup FM, Lund O. 2014. Solving the
problem of comparing whole bacterial genomes across different se-quencing platforms. PLoS One 9:e104984. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0104984.
59. 
Letunic I, Bork P. 2016. Interactive tree of life (iTOL) v3: an online tool for
the display and annotation of phylogenetic and other trees. NucleicAcids Res 44:W242–W245. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw290.
60. 
Overbeek R, Olson R, Pusch GD, Olsen GJ, Davis JJ, Disz T, Edwards RA,
Gerdes S, Parrello B, Shukla M, Vonstein V, Wattam AR, Xia F, Stevens R.
2014. The SEED and the Rapid Annotation of microbial genomesusing Subsystems Technology (RAST). Nucleic Acids Res 42:D206–D214. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1226 .
61.
Medema MH, Takano E, Breitling R. 2013. Detecting sequence homology
at the gene cluster level with MultiGeneBlast. Mol Biol Evol 30:1218–1223. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst025.
62. 
Yin Y, Mao X, Yang J, Chen X, Mao F, Xu Y. 2012. dbCAN: a web resource
for automated carbohydrate-active enzyme annotation. Nucleic Acids
Res 40:W445–W451. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks479.
63.
Kolde R. 2018. R package pheatmap 1.0.10. https://github.com/
raivokolde/pheatmap.
64.
Blin K, Wolf T, Chevrette MG, Lu X, Schwalen CJ, Kautsar SA, Duran HGS,
Santos E, Kim U, Nave M, Dickschat JS, Mitchell DA, Shelest E, Breitling R,Takano E, Lee SY, Weber T, Medema H. 2017. antiSMASH 4.0––improvements in chemistry prediction and gene cluster boundaryidentiﬁcation. Nucleic Acids Res 45(W1):W36–W41. https://doi.org/10
.1093/nar/gkx319.
65.
Skov MN, Pedersen K, Larsen JL. 1995. Comparison of pulsed-ﬁeld gel
electrophoresis, ribotyping, and plasmid proﬁling for typing of Vibrio
anguillarum serovar O1. Appl Environ Microbiol 61:1540–1545.Paulsen et al.
July/August 2019 Volume 4 Issue 4 e00060-19 msystems.asm.org 12 on March 11, 2020 at DTU Library http://msystems.asm.org/ Downloaded from 1 
 Supplementary information  
 
Marine chitinolytic Pseudoalteromonas represents an untapped reservoir  of 
bioactive  potential  
Sara Skøtt Paulsen , Mikael  Lenz Strube, Pernille Kjersgaard Bech,  Lone Gram, Eva C. 
Sonnenschein   
 
Contents  
Table S1…………………… ………………………………………………………………. ……….2 
Table S2 ……………………………………………………………………………………………. .6 
Table S3 ……………………………………………………………………………………………. .7 
Figure S1 ………………………………………………………………………………………… …9 
Figure S2 ………………………………………………………………………………………… ..10 
  2 
 Table S1  
Species and strain name  
 Pigment  
 Genome 
size (Mb)  % BGC of 
genome  Accession /RefSeq  
 
P. tunicata  D2 + 5.0 3.79 GCF_ 002310815.1  
P. ulvae  TC14  + 4.6 1.92 GCF_002156545.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. '520P1 No. 423'  + 5.4 4.92 GCF_001269985.1  
P. denitrificans  DSM 6059  + 6.1 5.2 GCF_900112265.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. NBT06 -2 + 5.7 3.9 GCF_002276045.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BMB  + 5.3 9.75 GCF_001709235.1  
P. piscicida  DE2-B + 5.3 8.56 GCF_002208135.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. HM -SA03  + 5.2 9.72 GCF_002289345.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. GCY  + 5.4 10.51 GCF_002591815.1  
P. piscicida  36Y_RITHPW  + 5.1 7.72 GCF_002744175.1  
P. piscicida  S2049  + 5.3 8.36 PNEF00000000  
P. piscicida  S2724  + 5.2 6.61 GCF_000967575 .1 
P. elyakovii  ATCC 700519  + 5.5 12.92 GCF_000814665.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. NC201  + 5.4 12.26 GCF_002850255.1  
P. piscicida  JCM 20779  + 5.5 8.59 GCF_000238315.3  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S2755  + 5.2 7.59 PNDS00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S4498  + 5.3 5.89 PNCO00000000  
P. piratica  OCN003  + 4.8 1.39 GCF_000788395.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. P1 -9 + 4.8 2.98 GCF_001399975.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg24  + 4.7 2.11 GCF_002964745.1  
P. spongiae  S3655  + 4.8 2.45 PNBZ00000000  
P. spongiae  SAO4 -4 + 5.1 2.18 GCF_002814155.1  
P. spongiae  UST010723 -006 + 4.8 2.08 GCF_000238255.3  
P. citrea  DSM 8771  + 5.3 9.86 GCF_000238375.2  
P. aurantia  S2231  + 5.2 8.24 PNCL00000000  
P. citrea  S3895  + 4.8 9.11 PNBW00000000  
P. byunsanensis  JCM 12483  + 4.7 8.66 GCF_001854475.1  
P. amylolytica  JW1 + 4.9 8.8 GCF_001854605.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg23B  + 4.6 6.63 GCF_002964665.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S3663  + 4.7 0.9 SAMN08296079  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S3898  + 4.6 3.92 SAMN08296066  
P. phenolica  S4048  + 5.0 2.72 PNBV00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S1093  + 4.5 2.02 PNEC00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S1189  + 4.5 2.72 PNCM00000000  
P. phenolica  KCTC 12086  + 4.9 2.36 GCF_001444405.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. R3  + 5.8 11.71 GCF_001282135.1  
P. rubra  OCN096  + 5.8 8.17 GCF_001188445.1  
P. rubra  S1946  + 5.6 14.26 SAMN08389157  
P. rubra  S2471  + 5.7 12.46 GCF_000967655 .1 
P. rubra  S2599  + 5.6 13.31 PNCJ00000000  3 
 P. rubra  S2676  + 5.7 13 PNCI00000000  
P. rubra  S4059  + 5.8 14.51 PNBU00000000  
P. rubra  SCSIO 6842  + 5.9 10.57 GCF_001482385.1  
P. rubra  S2678  + 5.7 13.13 PNCH00000000  
P. rubra  ATCC 29570  + 6.0 12.47 GCF_000238295.2  
P. luteoviolacea  HI1 + 6.1 8.67 GCF_000814765.1  
P. luteoviolacea  H33 + 6.1 12.04 GCF_001625585.1  
P. luteoviolacea  IPB1  + 6.0 11.97 GCF_001696455.1  
P. luteoviolacea  S2607  + 6.0 14.54 GCF_001625575 .1 
P.luteoviolacea  S4054  + 6.2 11.69 GCF_001750185 .1 
P. luteoviolacea  S4060  + 5.9 11.43 GCF_001625705 .1 
P. luteoviolacea  NCIMB 1944  + 6.3 12.83 GCF_001625565.1  
P. luteoviolacea  NCIMB 1942  + 5.4 8.97 GCF_001625595.1  
P. luteoviolacea  CPMOR -2  + 5.8 10 GCF_001625645.1  
P. luteoviolacea  CPMOR -1 + 6.0 9.48 GCF_001625685.1  
P. luteoviolacea  H33-S + 6.1 11.84 GCF_001625695.1  
P. ruthenica  CP76  + 4.0 1.5 GCF_000336495.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SW0106 -04 + 4.1 2.66 GCF_001293805.1  
P. ruthenica  S2756  + 4.0 2.73 SAMN08094581  
P. ruthenica  S2897  + 4.1 2.53 PNCG00000000  
P. ruthenica  S2899  + 4.1 2.52 PNCE00000000  
P. ruthenica  S4388  + 3.9 2.51 PNBS00000000  
P. atlantica  T6c - 5.2 1.01 GCF_000014225.1  
P. haloplanktis  TAC125  - 3.9 1.41 GCF_000026085.1  
P. distincta  ANT/505  - 4.5 1.88 GCF_000212655.2  
P. marina  DSM 17587  - 4.2 0.26 GCF_000238335.2  
P. haloplanktis  ATCC 14393  - 5.0 1.3 GCF_000238355.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  arctica A 37 -1-2 - 4.7 1.63 GCF_000238395.3  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BSi20429  - 4.5 1.35 GCF_000238895.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BSi20311  - 4.0 0.59 GCF_000239875.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BSi20495  - 4.8 4.41 GCF_000241185.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S8 -8 - 4.9 1.33 GCF_000497875.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TAE56  - 4.6 1.13 GCF_000497955.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TB51  - 4.6 0.51 GCF_000498055.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TAB23  - 5.1 0.95 GCF_000498075.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TB64  - 4.8 1.82 GCF_000498095.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. NW 4327  - 4.4 0.52 GCF_000508785.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 23 GOM -1509m  - 4.1 0.57 GCF_000518425.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SCSIO 11900  - 3.7 0.29 GCF_000576475.1  
P. lipolytica  SCSIO 04301  - 4.7 1.15 GCF_000576675.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. A2  - 4.2 0.8 GCF_000738935.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. ND6B  - 4.2 0.44 GCF_000764215.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. PLSV  - 5.2 1 GCF_000767305.1  
P. distincta  ATCC 700518  - 4.5 0.48 GCF_000814675.1  4 
 P. tetradonis  UCD -SED8  - 4.0 0.58 GCF_001298405.1  
P. porphyrae  UCD -SED9  - 4.8 2.9 GCF_001298415.1  
P. lipolytica  UCD -48B - 4.6 1.47 GCF_001306915.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. P1 -8 - 4.5 1.49 GCF_001399985.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. P1 -11 - 4.4 1.53 GCF_001399995.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. P1 -25 - 4.4 0.42 GCF_001401805.1  
P. translucida  KMM 520  - 4.1 1.35 GCF_001465295.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. H105  - 4.5 0.5 GCF_001469215.1  
P. arabiensis  JCM 17292  - 4.5 1.49 GCF_001550155.1  
P. neustonica  PAMC 28425  - 5.0 2.81 GCF_001653135.1  
P. prydzensis  DSM 14232  - 5.1 3.02 GCF_001661495.1  
P. mariniglutinosa  KCTC 22327  - 5.0 1.3 GCF_001662245.1  
P. tetradonis  CSB01KR  - 3.7 0.3 GCF_001723425.1  
P. haloplanktis  ATCC 700530  - 4.0 0.58 GCF_001924935.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SK20  - 4.1 0.15 GCF_001974845.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SK18  - 4.0 1.69 GCF_001974855.1  
P. aliena  EH1 - 4.6 3.99 GCF_001999225.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. A601  - 4.9 2.2 GCF_002165575.1  
P. nigrifaciens KMM 661  - 4.3 2.3 GCF_002221505.1  
P. issachenkonii  KMM 3549  - 4.1 0.56 GCF_002310795.1  
P. tetradonis  GFC  - 4.1 0.56 GCF_002310835.1  
P. agarivorans  DSM 14585  - 4.5 1.47 GCF_002310855.1  
P. atlantica  ECSMB14104  - 3.7 0.3 GCF_002374815.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 3D05  - 4.5 0.51 GCF_002723455.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg75  - 3.6 1.5 GCF_002964705.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg88  - 3.4 1.6 GCF_002964765.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg48  - 3.6 1.52 GCF_002964785.1  
P. carrageenovora  IAM 12662  - 4.6 0.51 GCF_900239935.1  
P. undina  S1609  - 4.1 0.71 PNDJ00000000  
P. undina  S1612  - 4.0 0.46 PNDH00000000  
P. lipolytica  S1650  - 4.8 1.29 PNDF00000000  
P. issachenkonii  S1688  - 4.3 0.42 PNDE00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S1727  - 5.0 1.22 PNDT00000000  
P. issachenkonii  S201  - 4.3 0.43 PNDR00000000  
P. lipolytica  S2721  - 4.5 1.37 PNCZ00000000  
P. agarivorans  S2893  - 4.3 0.43 PNCY00000000  
P. issachenkonii  S3173  - 4.2 0.44 PNCX00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S3178  - 4.5 0.41 PNCW00000000  
P. issachenkonii  S3260  - 3.9 0.15 PNCV00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S3431  - 4.2 3.3 GCF_000690035  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S3785  - 4.2 0.44 PNCT00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S410  - 4.0 0.46 PNDW00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S4389  - 4.8 0.23 PNCS00000000  
P. shioyasakiensis  S4491  - 4.5 1.36 PNCQ00000000  5 
 Pseudoalteromonas  sp. S4492  - 4.6 1.33 PNCP00000000  
P. issachenkonii  S4741  - 3.8 0.16 PNCN00000000  
P. marina  S554  - 4.2 0.14 PNDV00000000  
P. aliena  S558  - 4.5 1.91 PNDU00000000  
P. agarivorans  S983  - 4.4 1.34 PNDL00000000  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SM9913  - 4.0 0.57 GCF_000184065.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BSi20652  - 4.2 0.45 GCF_000239855.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. BSi20439  - 3.9 0.48 GCF_000241165.1  
P. agarivorans  S816  - 4.4 1.51 GCF_000363985.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TB13  - 4.7 0.98 GCF_000497915.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TB41  - 4.6 2.52 GCF_000497975.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TB25  - 4.6 0.4 GCF_000497995.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. TAE79  - 5.0 0.6 GCF_000498015.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. P1 -30 - 4.3 1.54 GCF_001400005.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 13 -15 - 4.1 0.26 GCF_001468205.2  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 10 -33 - 4.2 0.55 GCF_001469195.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. H103  - 4.4 0.53 GCF_001469205.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. XI10  - 4.5 0.47 GCF_001469895.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. MQS005  - 4.2 0.55 GCF_001661605.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. EB27  - 4.5 1.44 GCF_001974875.1  
P. espejiana  DSM 9414  - 4.5 1.05 GCF_002221525.1  
P. marina  ECSMB14103  - 3.4 0.31 GCF_002407085.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 1_2015MBL_MicDiv  - 4.9 4.04 GCF_002407505.1  
P. arctica  MelAa3  - 4.5 1.46 GCF_002836095.1  
Pseudoalteromonas  sp. T1lg22  - 3.4 1.59 GCF_002964645.1  
P. undina  S1608  - 4.1 0.45 PNDK00000000  
P. agarivorans  S326  - 4.6 1.29 PNDQ00000000  
P. undina  S1610  - 3.9 0.46 PNDI00000000  
P. undina  DSM 6065  - 4.0 0.58 GCF_000238275.2  
 
  6 
 Table S2  
 
Strain   
Pigment  Chitin 
degradation  
 Inhibition of V. anguillarum on different carbon sources  
Glucose  N-acetylglucosamine  Colloidal 
chitin  Crystalline 
chitin  
S201  - + - - - - 
S326  - - - - - - 
S410  - - - - - - 
S554  - - - - - - 
S558  - + + + + + 
S816  - - - - - - 
S983  - - - - - - 
S1093  + + + + + + 
S1189  + + + + + + 
S1608  - + - - - - 
S1609  - + - - - - 
S1610  - + - - - - 
S1612  - + - - - - 
S1650  - + - - - - 
S1688  - + - - - - 
S1727  - + - - - - 
S1946  + + + + + + 
S2049  + + + + + + 
S2231  + + + + + + 
S2471  + + + + + + 
S2599  + + + + + + 
S2607  + + + + + + 
S2676  + + + + + + 
S2678  + + + + + + 
S2721  - + - - - - 
S2724  + + + + + + 
S2755  + + + + + + 
S2756  + + + + + + 
S2893  - - + + + + 
S2897  + + + + + + 
S2899  + + + + + + 
S3173  - + - - - - 
S3178  - - - - - - 
S3260  - - - - - - 
S3431  - - - - - - 
S3655  + + + + + + 
S3663  + + + + + + 
S3785  - + - - - - 
S3895  + + + + + + 
S3898  + + + + + + 
S4048  + + + + + + 
S4054  + + + + + + 
S4059  + + + + + + 
S4060  + + + + + + 
S4388  + + + + + + 
S4389  - + - - - - 
S4491  - + - - - - 
S4492  - + - - - - 
S4498  - + + + + + 
S4741  - - - - - - 
 7 
 Table S3  
 MDS1  MDS2  
GH1 -0.42117  -0.26314  
GH2 -0.38043  -0.24253  
GH3 -0.22242  -0.43467  
GH4 -0.13611  0.175117  
GH5 0.138036  -0.18002  
GH8 -0.31839  -0.10265  
GH9 -0.01321  0.001193  
GH10  -0.01751  -0.00147  
GH11  -0.00058  -0.00067  
GH13  -0.72773  -0.88561  
GH15  0.127772  -0.11234  
GH16  -0.25866  -0.78953  
GH18  2.463076  -0.36018  
GH19  0.541572  -0.1021  
GH20  1.066747  -0.4403  
GH23  0.611899  -0.00547  
GH24  0.976886  -0.19688  
GH25  0.181158  0.015096  
GH26  -0.0069  0.002221  
GH28  -0.05528  -0.13709  
GH29  -0.02057  -0.15065  
GH31  -0.16693  -0.03702  
GH32  -0.11153  -0.19814  
GH33  0.004853  0.046578  
GH36  -0.32145  0.002166  
GH37  0.112189  -0.13264  
GH39  -0.01437  -0.10174  
GH42  -0.07723  -0.09341  
GH43  -0.41987  -1.74226  
GH50  -0.27421  -0.53986  
GH63  -0.09032  -0.11359  
GH68  -0.02308  0.00294  
GH73  0.030718  -0.04107  
GH74  1.815976  0.09098  
GH76  -0.00494  -0.09532  
GH77  0.027596  -0.04329  
GH78  -0.07722  -0.56227  
GH82  -0.04677  -0.00788  
GH86  -0.09753  -0.12533  
GH87  -0.00354  -0.01373  
GH88  -0.0157  -0.12488  
GH92  0.548718  -0.11532  8 
 GH93  0.008992  0.001335  
GH94  -0.03951  -0.04344  
GH97  -0.04639  -0.18816  
GH99  0.008146  0.004824  
GH102  -0.00202  0.015596  
GH103  0.007846  -0.0945  
GH105  -0.07569  -0.30576  
GH106  -0.02447  -0.21043  
GH107  -0.03292  -0.0316  
GH108  0.075344  -0.04846  
GH109  -0.00086  -0.927 
GH110  -0.01751  -0.00147  
GH113  -0.00777  0.004529  
GH114  0.009683  0.11058  
GH117  -0.23679  -0.39671  
GH127  -0.0534  -0.25332  
GH130  -0.0069  0.002221  
GH135  -0.02072  -0.07244  
GH136  0.187281  -0.01119  
GH141  0.009374  -0.02561  
GH145  0.034633  -0.12678  
 
  9 
 Figure S1  
 
 
PNCV00000000PNDE00000000GCF_001661605GCF_000518425GCF_002310795GCF_000184065GCF_002310835GCF_000497975PNDR00000000GCF_000764215GCF_000738935PNCX00000000GCF_000576475GCF_001723425PNCN00000000GCF_001974845PNDJ00000000PNDI00000000PNDK00000000PNDH00000000GCF_000238275GCF_001298405GCF_001924935GCF_001974855GCF_000241165GCF_000239875GCF_000498095PNDU00000000GCF_001999225GCF_000497995GCF_000498015GCF_000212655GCF_000814675GCF_000497955GCF_001974875GCF_000497915GCF_000238895GCF_002836095GCF_000238395GCF_000497875GCF_000498075GCF_000239855GCF_002407505GCF_000241185GCF_000690035PNCT00000000GCF_001401805PNDL00000000GCF_002310855GCF_001399995GCF_000508785GCF_002374815GCF_001400005PNCY00000000GCF_000498055PNDQ00000000GCF_000363985PNBS00000000GCF_000336495SAMN08094581PNCG00000000PNCE00000000GCF_001293805PNCO00000000GCF_002208135PNEF00000000PNDS00000000GCF_002591815GCF_000238315GCF_000814665GCF_000967575GCF_001709235GCF_002289345GCF_002850255PNDW00000000GCF_001469195GCF_001468205GCF_002407085GCF_000238335PNDV00000000GCF_002221525PNCW00000000GCF_001469205GCF_900239935GCF_001465295GCF_000026085GCF_002221505GCF_001298415GCF_001653135GCF_002156545GCF_001661495GCF_002165575GCF_001469215GCF_002723455PNDT00000000GCF_000238355GCF_001662245GCF_000238375PNBW00000000PNCL00000000GCF_000767305GCF_000014225GCF_002310815GCF_002276045GCF_900112265GCF_001269985PNDF00000000PNCZ00000000GCF_001306915PNCP00000000PNCQ00000000GCF_001469895GCF_001399985PNCS00000000GCF_001550155PNBZ00000000GCF_002814155GCF_001399975GCF_002964745GCF_000238255PNBU00000000GCF_000238295GCF_001482385GCF_001188445SAMN08389157GCF_000967655PNCI00000000PNCH00000000PNCJ00000000GCF_001282135PNCM00000000PNEC00000000SAMN08296066SAMN08296079PNBV00000000GCF_001444405GCF_001625695GCF_001625585GCF_001750185GCF_000814765GCF_001625685GCF_002964765GCF_002964645GCF_002964785GCF_002964705GCF_001696455GCF_001625595GCF_001625575GCF_001625705GCF_000788395GCF_002744175GCF_001625645GCF_001854605GCF_002964665GCF_001854475GCF_000576675GCF_001625565P. issachenkoniiP. issachenkoniiPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. issachenkoniiPseudoalteromonas sp.P. tetradonisPseudoalteromonas sp.P. issachenkoniiPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. issachenkoniiPseudoalteromonas sp.P. tetradonisP. issachenkoniiPseudoalteromonas sp.
P. undinaP. undinaP. undinaP. undinaP. undinaP. tetradonisP. haloplanktisPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. alienaP. aliena
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. distinctaP. distinctaPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. arcticaP. arcticaPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. fuliginea
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
P. agarivoransP. agarivoransPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. atlanticaPseudoalteromonas sp.P. agarivoransPseudoalteromonas sp.P. agarivoransP. agarivorans
P. ruthenicaP. ruthenicaP. ruthenicaP. ruthenicaP. ruthenicaPseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. piscicidaP. piscicidaPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. piscicidaP. elyakoviiP. piscicidaPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. marinaP. marinaP. marina
P. espejiana
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. carrageenovora
P. translucidaP. haloplanktisP. nigrifaciens
P. porphyraeP. neustonica
P. ulvaeP. prydzensis
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. haloplanktisP. mariniglutinosa
P. citreaP. citreaP. aurantia
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. atlantica
P. tunicata
Pseudoalteromonas sp.
P. denitrificansPseudoalteromonas sp.
P. lipolyticaP. lipolyticaP. lipolyticaPseudoalteromonas sp.P. shioyasakiensisPseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. arabiensis
P. spongiaeP. spongiaePseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. spongiae
P. rubraP. rubraP. rubraP. rubra
P. rubraP. rubra
P. rubraP. rubraP. rubraPseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
Pseudoalteromonas sp.P. phenolicaP. phenolica
P. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolacea
P. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolacea
Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.Pseudoalteromonas sp.
P. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolaceaP. luteoviolacea
P. piratica
P. piscicidaP. luteoviolacea
P. amylolyticaPseudoalteromonas sp.P. byunsanensis
P. lipolytica
P. luteoviolacea
Pigment
UnclassifiedUnclassified
Classified
Unclassified
0.850.90.951Figure S2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paper 2 
 
 
Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the 
Pseudomonas quinolone system precursor, HHQ, by a novel marine 
species Pseudoalteromonas gal atheae sp. nov.  
 
 1 
 Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the Pseudomonas 1 
quinolone system precursor , HHQ,  by a novel marine species Pseudoalteromonas 2 
galatheae sp. nov.  3 
  4 
Sara Skøtt Paulsen, Thomas  Isbrandt , Markus  Kirkegaard , Yannick Buijs,  Mikael  Lenz 5 
Strube , Eva C. Sonnenschein , Thomas O. Larsen  and Lone Gram*  6 
 7 
 8 
*Corresponding author:  Lone Gram, gram@bio.dtu.dk  9 
 10 
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts 11 
Plads 221, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  12 
 13 
 14 
Keywords: Pseudoalteromonas , secondary metabolites, tetrabromopyrrole , pseudane,  15 
HHQ, PQS  16 
  17 2 
 ABSTRACT  18 
Novel antimicrobials are urgently needed due to the rapid spread of antibiotic resistant 19 
bacteria . In a genome -wide analysi s of Pseudoalteromonas  strains, strain S4498 was 20 
noticed due to its potent antibiotic activity . It d id not produce the yellow  antimicrobial  21 
pigment  bromoalterochromide , which was produced by several  type strains with which it  22 
shared a high nucleotide identity (>95%) . Also, it produced a sweet -smelling vo latile not 23 
observed from other strains . Mining the genome  of strain S4498 using the secondary 24 
metabolite predictor antiSMASH found eight  biosynthetic gene clusters  with no homology 25 
to known compounds , and s ynteny a nalyses revealed that t he yellow pigment 26 
bromoalterochromide  was likely lost during evolution . Metabolome profiling of strain S4498 27 
using HPLC -HRMS analyses found marked differences to the type strains. In particular , a 28 
series of quinolones known as pseudanes were identified and verified by NMR.  The 29 
characteristic odor of the strain was linked to  the pseudanes. The highly halogenated 30 
compound tetrabromopyrrole was detected  as the major antibacterial  component  by 31 
bioassay -guided fractionation . Combining genomic and metabolomic analyses 32 
demonstrates that strain  S4498  should belo ng to a novel species within  the genus 33 
Pseudoalteromonas, and we propose the name Pseudoalteromonas galathea e sp. nov. 34 
(type strain S4498T = NCIMB 15250T = LMG 31599T). 35 
  36 3 
 INTRODUCTION  37 
The emergence and spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria is a worldwide threat to human 38 
health1. Most antibiotics are of microbial origin and have been derived from terrestrial 39 
organisms2, however, in recent years, also marine microorganisms have been explored for 40 
novel natural products3,4. In 2017, 242 new natural product s identified from marine 41 
bacteria were reported, and 137 of these originated from Streptomyces species5, which 42 
are well known producers of antibiotic compounds2. During the Danish research  expedition 43 
Galathea 3, marine bacteria were isolated based on their antibacter ial activity  with the aim 44 
of identifying novel antimicrobial compounds6. Many of the isolates belong to  the marine 45 
genus Pseudoalteromonas6,7. The genus can  be divided into two groups based on 46 
phen otypic and genotypic traits : non -pigmented and pigmented species, of which the latter 47 
is known for its produc tion of antimicrobial compounds8. On a genomic level, pigmented 48 
species contain a large number of biosynthetic gene clusters (BG Cs), often  dedicating as 49 
much as 15% of their genome to production of secondary metabolites  (SMs) , most of 50 
which are still unknown9.  51 
 52 
In a recent genome -wide analyses of Pseudoalteromonas  strains9, strain S4498 was 53 
unique due to its  antibacterial activity,  a sweet -smelling odor and the lack of  yellow 54 
pigment ation  found in the closely related strains (Pseudoalteromonas piscicida and 55 
Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra ), with which it clustered  based both on 16 S rRNA gene 56 
sequence and average n ucleotide identity (ANI) analysi s. ANI analysi s is used to infer 57 
genetic relatedness  between strains based on whole genomes, where strains of the same 58 
species show ≥95% ANI  similarity  among themselves10. Strain S4498 exceeded the 59 
species level cut -off of 95% ANI similarity, which suggest ed that this strain represents a 60 
novel species . The yellow pigmented Pseudoalteromonas  and their b ioactive compounds, 61 
such as korormicins and bromoalterochromides, have been widely studied11. It is believed 62 
that the compound bromoalterochromide is responsible for the yellow pigment12. 63 
 64 
DNA -DNA hybridization (DDH) has for many years been the golden standard in identifying  65 
novel bac terial species, and strains showing ≥70% similarity are regarded as the same 66 
species13. The rapid advancements in genome sequencing technologies has enabled 67 
computation of genome relatedness of two or more genomes  based on their complete 68 4 
 genome sequences  using  tools , such as in silico DDH and ANI. Combined, these 69 
computational values have been coined as the Over all Genome Related Index (OGRI)14 70 
and can be used for de lineating species into known or novel species based on genome 71 
relatedness to type strains of a species.  Genomic comparison is typically combined with 72 
phenotypic testing and due to the marked bioactivity of strain S4498, we here used a 73 
global approach combining genomic and metabolomic comparison  and propose that strain 74 
S4498 (and strain A757 , NCBI accession number  of draft genome : QNQN01 ) belong to a 75 
new Pseudoalteromonas  species.  76 
 77 
RESULTS  AND DISCUSSION  78 
Recently, minimal standards for the use of genome data for the taxonomy of prokaryotes 79 
have been proposed in t he journal International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary 80 
Microbiology15. The minimal standards  ensure that the sequence quality and analyses 81 
performed meet the criteria , from which taxonomy can be inferred. We addressed the 82 
minimal standards using  bioinformatic analyses  and combined it  with chemical profiling, 83 
similar to approaches used for chemotaxonomy of filamentous fungi16, to propose a novel 84 
species belonging to the genus Pseudoalteromonas . The strain does not produce the 85 
yellow pigment, which is a phenotypic characteristic of its closest related type strains 86 
(Figure S1).  Early 2019, the genome sequence of Pseudoalteromonas sp. A757 was 87 
released in NCBI, and this strain had 99% ANI similarity with strain S4498. Several studies 88 
have been conducted with this stra in17–20 and it was therefore included in the analyses.  We 89 
propose the name  Pseudoalteromonas galathea e sp. nov. , after the research expedition , 90 
on which strain S4498 was isolated6.  91 
 92 
Genomic and phenotypic comparison  of strain  S4498 and Pseudoalteromonas  type 93 
strains  94 
The closest related type strains  to strain s S4498 and A757 , P. piscicida and P. flavipulchra 95 
were acquired  for comparison. Additionally, t o rule out that strain S4498 and A757  96 
belong ed to an existing species , which had not yet been whole -genome sequenced , a 16S 97 
rRNA gene sequence phylogeny of all type strains with validly published  names was 98 
conducted (Figure S 2). This identified t wo more  closely related , yellow pigmented species, 99 
P. maricaloris and P. peptidolytica, that were therefore acquired and genome sequenced . 100 5 
 Genome sizes of the six strains varied from 5.1 – 5.6 Mb and GC% varied from 42.4% – 101 
43.3% (Table 1). Strain A757 has a genome size of 5.1 Mb and GC% similar to that as 102 
strain S4498 of 43%.  The genome size of strain S4498 is 5.4 Mb, but t he genome sizes of 103 
strain S4498 and A757 a re likely dissimilar due to different sequencing and assembly 104 
methods. Species delineation based on 16 S rRNA gene sequence similarity can be flawed  105 
e.g. due to multiple alleles of the 16S rRNA gene in some species21. Indeed, in the genus 106 
Pseudoalteromonas species delineation based on the 16 S rRNA gene ha s very low 107 
resolution as strain  S4498 shares between 99.28% and 99.87% 16 S rRNA gene 108 
nucleotide identity with th e four type strains (Table 2). Previous ANI analysis indicated that 109 
S4498 does not belong to any  existing species in the genus , with an ANI similarity below 110 
95%9. The ANI values between the strains from this study also suggest that strain S4498 111 
and A757 belong to a novel species as they share less than 95% ANI similarity  with the 112 
closest related type strains  (Table 2). In silico DDH estimates were  well below the cut -off 113 
of 70% for all type strains (between 24.5% and 49.4% similarity) (Table 2).  Hence, the 114 
OGRI values confirmed the authenticity of strains S4498 and A757 as belonging to a novel 115 
species . 116 
 117 
The genomic era  has enabled  researchers  to address questions in microbial ecology and 118 
evolution  with more robust answers . Species delineation is one of such questions, and 119 
with the increasing genomic data available, it has become clear that there are cases where 120 
species discrepancies occur22. Assigning species to strains in the yellow pigmented group  121 
is complicated by the fact that P. piscicida shares 96% ANI similarity with  P. flavipulchra 122 
and P. maricaloris, which share 99% ANI similarity with each other ( Table  S1). This 123 
relatedness is visualized by the in silico  DDH values indicat ing that P. flavipulchra and P. 124 
maricaloris should be considered as the same species (DDH value 89.60%) and that P. 125 
piscicida is borderline to being a unique  species (DDH values to P. flavipulchra and P. 126 
maricaloris 68.70% [65.7 - 71.5%]) (Table S 2). Since type strains serve as key reference 127 
points in bacterial taxonomy , this should be further investigated . The “gold standard” fo r 128 
species description using ANI is often accepted as 95 -96%15. The species cutoff has even 129 
been suggested down to 94%23 and up to 97.1%24. In this case, the use of genomic 130 
information alone is not enough  to determine whether P. piscicid a should be grouped 131 
together with P. maricaloris and P. flavipulchra  to form a single  species .  132 6 
  133 
Phenotypic characterization using t he BiOLOG Gen III system grouped P. maricaloris and 134 
P. flavipulchra together, whereas P. peptiolytica, P. piscicida and strain S4498 all had 135 
different biochemical profiles (Table S3). These results  are consistent with the in silico 136 
carbon utilization  analysis, in which the carbohydrate active enzymes glycosyl hydrolases 137 
(GHs) w ere predicted using a HMMMER search with dbCAN225. The GH profiles, although 138 
quite similar, reflected the different species ( Table S 4). Hence, strains S4498 and A757 139 
grouped together, P. piscicida, P. maricaloris and P. flavipulchra grouped together, and P. 140 
peptidolytica represented the last group based on  GH profile. P. peptidolytica was the  141 
most different in terms of GH profile, which is in agreement with the ANI values, were P. 142 
peptidolytica is the least sim ilar to the other five strains. Our analyses suggests that P. 143 
maricaloris and P. flavipulchra shou ld be combined as one species, however, the full 144 
analysis of this is beyond the scope of this study.  145 
 146 
Biosynthetic gene cluster analysis  147 
In silico prediction of biosynthetic gene clusters ( BGCs ) was done using antiSMASH ver 148 
5.026 (Table 3). In total, eight BGCs were identified in strains  S4498 and A757 and the 149 
BGCs in the two strains were identical. The BGC encoding the yellow pigment 150 
alterochromide , was only identified in the four type strains, but not in strains S4498 and 151 
A757, and a manual BLAST search for the alterochromide cluster using the MIBig identifier 152 
BGC0000299 was conducted in the two genomes with no positive hits.  Chemical profiling 153 
(see below ) allowed identification of two additional BGCs not identified by antiSMASH, 154 
encoding for the production of  tetrabromopyrrole ( TBP) and pseudane III -X, including 2- 155 
heptyl -4-quinolone (HHQ ; also referred to as pseudane V II). Manual blast searches using 156 
the query genes for TBP and HHQ were conducted for all strains. The bmp cluster 157 
(including  bmp1 -bmp4  and bmp9 -bmp10  responsible for TBP production  in strain A75727) 158 
was identified in strain S4498 and P. peptidolytica . Genes responsible for HHQ production 159 
(pqsA -pqsE, phnA and phnB)  were only identified in strain S4498 and A75720. No BGC 160 
was shared between all the six strains, however , the BGC predicted by antiSMASH to 161 
encod e for a n N-tetradecanoyl tyrosine -like compound was identified i n all strains , but P. 162 
maricaloris. Since only two of the genomes are complete genomes, it is likely that this 163 
BGC would also be identified in P. maricaloris,  as BGCs are known to be difficult to detect 164 7 
 in contig -based genomes due to the repeat regions in BGCs28. The predicted BGCs in all 165 
six strains shared little to no sequence homology to already known BGCs (data not 166 
shown). The BGC encod ing for the production of a serobactin -like compound was only 167 
identified in strains S4498 and A757.  168 
 169 
BGCs are commonly subject to horizontal gene transfer  (HGT)  in bacteria29, and it was 170 
investigate d if key biosynthetic genes had likely be subjected to HGT . Synteny of g enes 171 
surrounding the alterochromide, pseudane and bmp cluster  was compared in the genomes 172 
of strain S4498 and P. piscicida . The genes surrounding the alterochromide cluster in P. 173 
piscicida were also present in the same order in strain S4498, suggesting that this cluster 174 
has been lost in an evolutionary event  (Figure 1 a). The opposite was the case for the 175 
pseudane cluster , which clearly seem to have  been acquired by strain S4498,  when 176 
compared to the surrounding genes in P. piscicida (Figure 1 b). The bmp cluster was also 177 
identified in P. peptidolytica and was theref ore investigated for synteny of genes 178 
surrounding the bmp cluster and compared to P. piscicida. Of the type strains in the yellow 179 
pigmented cluster, P. peptidolytica is most distantly related to strain S4498, and the bmp 180 
cluster has the same insertion site in strain S4498 and P. peptidolytica as compared to P. 181 
piscicida (Figure 1 c). This observation is similar to findings in the genus Salin ispora, in 182 
which  specific hotspots for insertion of BGCs are present  in the genome30. BGCs have 183 
been described as being “selfish operons” where exchange events are favored between 184 
closely related strains31. This explains  the acquisition of the bmp cluster by strains S4498 185 
and A757, since it is shared between several species of Pseudoalteromonas27. Extensive 186 
BGC diversity has been seen even among closely related strains, likely as a strategy of 187 
maximizing the BGC potential and minimizing the load of a single strain29,32. This could be 188 
a reason for the successful speciation event of P. galatheae as strains of the species could  189 
benefit from the products produced by other yellow pigmented strains without the 190 
production cost  itself.  191 
 192 
Chemical profiling of strain S4498  193 
Strain S449 8 has antibacterial activity and both genomic and phenotypic analyses 194 
revealed a potent chitinolytic machinery with four chitinases9. Since, growth on chitin may 195 
induce SM production in some marine bacteria33,34, strain S4498 was grown in chitin - 196 8 
 based media and the metabolome was compared to the strain grown on mannose . Strain 197 
S4498 produced  a series of quinolones known as pseudanes (Figure 2a), the halogenated 198 
TBP (Figure 2b), and several unknown metabolites. One of the pseudanes, p seudane VII , 199 
has also been reported from  strain  A75720. In positive ionization mode, a total of seven 200 
pseudanes (III -X) could be identified  from strain S4498 . The main components, pseudane 201 
V and pseudane VII were purified and their structures were confirmed by NMR 202 
spectroscopy ( Supplementary material S1 ). The identities of the remaining pseudanes 203 
were  based on comparison of MS/MS fragmentation patterns. Additionally, some 204 
pseudane analogues were also detected. Specifically, two  analogues of pseudane V and 205 
VII (m/z 214.1228 and m/z 242.1538) containing unsaturated side chains were observed, 206 
so called pseudenes35,36. The position of the double additional bond adjacent to the 207 
quinolone ring is in agreement with the observed shift in the absorption maximum, 208 
corresponding to the increase in the size of the chromophore and the MS/MS 209 
fragmentation pattern  (Supplementary material S2)  is in agreement with previous 210 
literature35. 211 
 212 
Pseudanes are commonly reported from Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  as their tautomeric 2 - 213 
alkanyl-4-quinoline forms, such as HHQ. In Pseudomonas, HHQ acts as a precursor of the 214 
quorum sensing molecule 2 -heptyl -3-hydroxy -4-quinolone, which is designated the 215 
Pseudomonas quinolone signal (PQS)37. PQS is not produced by S4498, and has not 216 
been found in strain A75720, which is in agreement with the absence of the pqsH  gene 217 
responsible for production of PQS in Pseudomonas . Pseudanes have also been detected 218 
in two other, yet un-sequenced strains , Pseudoalteromonas sp. M238 and 219 
Pseudoalteromonas sp. B030a20. These strains are distantly related to each other based 220 
on 16 S rRNA gene sequence similarity, as strain M2 clusters with Pseudoalteromonas 221 
neustonica and strain B303a clusters with Pseudoalteromonas espejiana, which are not 222 
related to strain S4498 and A757 . No antibiotic activity was found in  the pseudane 223 
containing fractions from preparative HPLC of the chitin -grown culture . However , a 224 
concentration of 10 µM HHQ has shown  antibacterial activity and could reduce biofilm 225 
formation39. The natural  function  of pseudanes in S4498 and pseudane VII in A757 is not 226 
known, but in  a recent mesocosm experiment , the addition of HHQ change d microbial 227 
diversity, particularly favoring an increased abundance of alpha - and 228 9 
 gammaproteobacteria, including species of genus Pseudoalteromonas18. HHQ produced 229 
by A757 induce s mortality in the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi and could thus mediate 230 
phytoplankton population dynamics20.  231 
 232 
Strain S4498 was characterized by a sweet fruity odor, which  has not been reported from 233 
any other pseudane -producing Pseudoalteromonas . However, P. aeruginosa produce s the 234 
well-known volatile 2 -aminoacetophenone (2 -AA) that is used a breath biomarker for P. 235 
aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis40. In P. aeruginosa , 2-AA is produced from the same pathway 236 
as HHQ and PQS, and 2 -AA was also identified in the reversed phase flash 237 
chromatography fraction  eluting just before pseudane V  from strain S4498 . The identity of 238 
2-AA was confirmed by comparison by LC -MS to an authentic standard . 2-AA produced by 239 
P. aeruginosa  has been reported to activate the quorum -sensing response regulator LuxR 240 
in Vibrio fischeri , and it is suggested that 2 -AA acts as an inter-species signal, as 2 -AA 241 
does not activate the quorum -sensing systems in P. aeruginosa itself41. 242 
 243 
TBP was responsible for the antibacterial activity  as determine d in bioassays . TBP is an 244 
intermediate compound from the bmp pathway with pentabromopseudilin as the end 245 
product27. Pentabromopseudilin was not detected in strain S4498 (o r strain A757), which is 246 
explained by the lack of genes bmp5-8. TBP induce s cellular stress and mortality in some 247 
phytoplankton specie s19, and can act as a cue for coral larval settlement42. Hence, TBP 248 
does not only act as an antimicrobial compound , but also as  a signaling molecule for some 249 
aspects of marine life. The bioactive fraction  as separated by  reversed phase flash 250 
chromatography  also contained small amounts of additional halogenated pyrroles, namely,  251 
tribromochloropyrrole and dichlorodibromopyrrole , the  tribrominated tribromopyrrole  and 252 
dibromomaleimide ( Supplementary material s S3).The halogenated pyrroles were detected 253 
in negative ionization mode exclusively, and while only a single isomer was detected, 254 
these compounds were detected in trace amounts, and the exact positions of the bromine 255 
and chlorine atom s have not been elucidated.  The halogenase, Bmp2, responsible for the 256 
bromination has been characterized in detail43, and the detection of chlorinated versions in 257 
strain S4498, suggests that bmp2  is not specific to bromination but is also able to 258 
incorporate chlorine, although to a much lower extent.  Fractions containing 259 
dibromomaleimide, also referred to as  3,4-dibromo pyrrole -2,5-dione, had antibacterial 260 10 
 activity. Dibromomaleimide has been identified  in strain A757  as a potent efflux pump 261 
inhibitor that enhances the effect of other antimicrobials17. We suspect d ibromomaleimide  262 
to be an oxidized by -product of TBP , as TBP was found in much higher quantities  in strain 263 
S4498 and is comparable to data from strain A75717. 264 
 265 
The production of bioactive SMs can be influenced  by the carbon source44, hence, the 266 
production of TBP and pseudanes was investigated  on five different carbon sources: 267 
mannose, chitin, glucose, the chi tin monomer N -acetylglucosamine (NAG) and marine 268 
broth (MB) . Pseudane  production (using pseudane V as proxy) per cell unit was similar on 269 
mannose as compared to chitin (p -value = 0.15), whereas the production of pseudane V 270 
was significantly lower on MB, glucose and NAG, with a production of ~ 50%, 5% and 37% 271 
compared to mannose, respectively (p -values < 0.05) (Figure S3). TBP was produced in 272 
high concentr ation on MB being close to double ( ~160% ) of the level produc ed on 273 
mannose (p -value < 0.05) . TBP production was reduced on chitin and glucose with a 274 
production of ~ 31% and 9% compared to mannose (p -values < 0.05), respectively. Thus, 275 
we do not see an increase in production of antimicrobial compounds when the strain  was 276 
grown in chitin media, as was the case for strains of the Vibrionaceae family34. The 277 
decrease of TBP in chitin media  might indicate  that the role of TBP in chitin -containing 278 
environments is not of antimicrobial character.  279 
 280 
Chemical profiling  of strain  S4498  and Pseudoalteromonas  type strains  281 
HPLC -DAD -HRMS data from cultivations of S4498 and four type strains grown on 282 
mannose, chitin and MB were compared by both manual inspection and using an in -house 283 
database of known SMs from the genus Pseudoalteromonas  obtained from Antibase 284 
(Wiley) and Reaxys (Elsevier). Bruker TargetAnalysis 1.3 (Bruker Daltonics) was used to 285 
search against the in -house database. All type strains produced alterochromides and their 286 
brominated and dibrominated analogs, while P. peptidolytica  also produced korormicin as 287 
well as TBP  (Table 4, supplementary materials S 4, S5). Strain  S4498 did not produce any 288 
alterochromides nor korormicin under any growth conditions. The alterochromide 289 
compounds are responsible for the pigmentation in the yellow Pseudoalteromonas45, 290 
supporting the observed absence of pigmentation in S4498. Pseudanes were only 291 
detected in  strain  S4498 . 292 11 
  293 
Concluding remarks  294 
Many strains of the genus Pseudoalteromonas  that produce  bioactive compounds  have 295 
not been assigned to any existing species.  Correct classification is important for 296 
understanding ecology and biodiversity and eases scientific communication.  We and 297 
others have previously reported discrepancies in species delineation in the genus9,27 and 298 
this study also provides an example of species discrepancy  between the species P. 299 
maricaloris and P. flavipulchra.  This study shows that traditional species descriptions using 300 
phenotypic information can be misleading  for genus Pseudoalteromonas  since our 301 
analyses suggests that P. maricolaris and P. flavipulchra should be combined as one 302 
species. However, we also show that genomic information cannot stand alone  either . 303 
Here, we have described a novel species belonging to genus Pseudoalteromonas using 304 
the minimal standards for the use of genome data for the taxonomy of prokaryotes15 and 305 
combined it with chemical profiling of the species itself as well as the  closest related  type 306 
strains. The release of the Pseudoalteromonas sp. A757 genome and extensive chemical 307 
profiling17–20 have enabled us to describe  a novel species using two strains . 308 
 309 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  310 
 311 
Bacterial strains, media and growth conditions   312 
P. galathea e S4498  was isolated on the Galathea 3 expedition from a crustacean in the 313 
North Atlantic Ocean (24.9963, -67.0263)6. Chemotaxonomic comparisons included the 314 
type strains P. piscicida NCIMB 1142T, P. flavipulchra  LMG 20361T, P. maricaloris  LMG 315 
19692T and P. peptidolytica DSM 14001T. Chemical data from Pseudoalteromonas  strain 316 
A75717–20 were included. Strains were grown at 25 °C at 200 rpm to a cell density of 109 317 
CFU/ml in sterile filter ed marine broth (MB Difco 2216) or  in marine minimal media46 318 
(MMM) with 0.2% mannose  or 0.2% crystalline chitin  (Sigma C7170) and 1.5% casamino 319 
acids.  In biological triplicates, single colonies of each strain were used to inoculate 5 ml 320 
overnight (ON) culture, after which 5 µl ON culture was used to prepare new 5 ml 321 
overnight cultures. After 24 hours the ON cultur es were used to inoculate 50 ml media in 322 
250 ml Erlenmeyer flask at a starting cell density of approximately 103 CFU/ml. Samples 323 
for HPLC -DAD -HRMS analysis  and antibacterial assays (described below) were taken 324 12 
 when the cultures reached a cell density of 109 CFU/ml. For fractionation and purification 325 
of compounds from Pseudoalteromonas  S4498, the cultivation on chitin was done in 8 x 1 326 
liter volumes. Phenotypic comparison of the strains were performed on solid media by 327 
streaking the overnight cultures on mar ine agar (Difco 2216 ), grown at 25 °C for two days.  328 
 329 
BiOLOG characterization  330 
Phenotypic characterization was performed for all strains using the BiOLOG ™ Gen III 331 
plates (catalog no. 1030). The protocol was modified to fit marine bacteria as follows: 332 
Strains were streaked from freeze stock on MA, and one single colony was inoculated in 333 
10 ml inoculation fluid IF-A (catalog no. 72401) supplemented with 1 ml  20% Sea Salt 334 
solution. 100 µl suspension was pipetted into each well and the plate incubated at 25 oC 335 
for 24 hours, afte r which the plates were read  in a plate reader  and analyzed according to 336 
the manufacturer’s protocol . 337 
  338 
Isolation of gDNA and genome se quencing  339 
Pseudoalteromonas  S4498, P. flavipulchra, P. peptidolytica and P. maricaloris  were grown 340 
overnight in sterile filtered MB. The genome sequence of the type strain of  P. flavipulchra  341 
is deposited in the NCBI database, but has been excluded from RefSeq and marked 342 
“untrustworthy as type” and the type strain was therefore sequenced in this study. High 343 
purity genomic DNA was isolated using the Qiagen ® Genomic -tip 20/G (Qiagen, 10233) 344 
and Genomic DNA Buffer set (Qiagen, 19060). Quantification was don e on Denovix DS - 345 
11+ 112 Spectrometer (Denovix, USA) and Qubit 2.0 analyser (Invitrogen, United 346 
Kingdom).  P. flavipulchra, P. maricaloris and P. peptidolytica were sequenced at the Novo 347 
Nordisk Center for Biosustainability (Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark) 348 
using 300 bp paired -end sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer using the MiSeq V3 349 
2x300 sequencing kit. Genomes were assembled using the Shovill pipeline 350 
(https://github.com/tseemann/s hovill ) which uses SPAdes at its core47 and resulted in 351 
contig -based draft genomes ( 68, 88 and 98 contigs , respectively). The genome of 352 
Pseudoalteromonas  S4498  was also sequenced using the minION sequencer using the 353 
EXP-FLP001flow cell priming kit, SQK -RAD004 sequencing kit, FLO -MIN106 R9 flow cell 354 
and the associated protocol (version RSE_9046_v1_revB -17Nov20 17). The near closed 355 
genome was obtained using raw Illumina reads obtained from a previous study9 and the 356 13 
 minION reads. The minION reads were filtered using the Filtlong pipeline 357 
(https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong ) and the genome was assembled using the Unicycler 358 
pipeline48 (https://github.co m/rrwick/Unicycler ) and annotated using prokka49. Quality 359 
assessment of the genomes were performed using QUAST50 360 
(https://github.com/ablab/quast ). Genomes are  available at  the National Center for 361 
Biotechnology Information ( NCBI ) under the accession number s PNCO01,  VSSD01, 362 
WEIA01  and WEHZ01.  Pseudoalteromonas S4498  is available upon request. The genome 363 
of Pseudoalteromonas  strain A75727 was downloaded from NCBI ( WGS access ion 364 
QNQN01 ). 365 
 366 
in silico type strain comparison  367 
Suspecting that S4498 was a novel species, we compared the genome to all 368 
Pseudoalteromonas  genomes in NCBI9. Using an ANI approach, strain A757 was highly 369 
similar to strain 4498 with 99.3% identity.  Based on previous ANI9, Pseudoalteromonas  370 
S4498  clustered within the group of P. piscicida , P. elyakovii  and P. flavipulchra . The type 371 
strain of P. elyakovii is descr ibed as a non -pigmented species51 and has been excluded 372 
from RefSeq and marked ‘untrustworthy as type’ in the NCBI database. Likewise, P. 373 
flavipulchra is also marked as ‘untrustworthy as type’. Since P. elyakovii  is a non - 374 
pigmented species and by 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity (see below) was correctly 375 
clustered in the non -pigmented group, it was not included in our analysis.  The type strain 376 
of P. fla vipulchra was acquired and sequenced (described below). Only 37 of 47 species 377 
with standing in prokaryotic nomenclature (List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in 378 
Prokaryotic Nomenclature [LPSN]52) are represented by their genome sequence  in NCBI 379 
by start 2019, and Pseudoalteromonas  S4498 could potentially belong to an un - 380 
sequenced species. A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree with 1000 bootstrap 381 
replications was constructed  in CLC Main Workbench ver. 7.0.3 using the Neighbor joining 382 
tree construction method and Jukes -cantor nucleotide distance method, consisting of all 383 
16S rRNA gene sequences of S4498, A757 and the 47 type strains of species with validly 384 
published names. The analysis showed that two species ( P. peptidolytica and P. 385 
maric aloris ) that have not been genome sequenced clustered in the yellow pigmented 386 
group. Also, by 16S rRNA gene sequence analyses P. elyakovii was correctly clustered in 387 
the non -pigmented group. Hence, the type strains of P. peptidolytica and P. maricaloris  388 14 
 were acquired and genome sequenced (see above). Full -length 16S rRNA gene 389 
sequences were extracted from the whole -genomes of the six strains and sequence 390 
similarity was compared. ANI was determined for the six (include A757 ) genomes with the 391 
pyani pipeline53 using the MUMmer method. DDH values were calculated using th e 392 
genome -to-genome distance calculator 2.154. Prediction of Glycosyl hydrolases was 393 
performed with the web -based tool dbCAN2 using the hidden marko v model database25. 394 
 395 
Analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters in Pseudoalteromonas  genomes  396 
The six strains were submitted for SM analysis in antiSMASH version 5.026. The bmp gene 397 
cluster was  identified using  the BLAST function in CLC using sequences from P. phenolica 398 
O-BC30 (accession KF540211.1)  as query and 2 -heptyl -4-quinolone (HHQ) was identified 399 
using the gene cluster from Pseudoalteromonas sp. A757 (accession KT879191 - 400 
KT879199). The genomes of S4498 and A757  were investigated for presence of the 401 
alterochromide gene cluster using the genes fr om MIBiG database55 with accession 402 
number BGC0000299. Genbank files from AntiSMASH analyses were used to calculate 403 
the proportion of the gen omes occupied by BGCs.  A BLASTp  search of genes surroun ding 404 
the alterochromide cluster ( P. piscicida ), pseudane cluster (S4498 ) and bmp cluster 405 
(S4498 and P. peptidolytica ) was conducted to identify regions of homology in genomes 406 
not carrying the respective clusters. Regions with similar gene arrangements were 407 
identified in all three strains, and regions of approximately 50 kb were selected for pairwise 408 
nucleotide alignment s in the NCBI webbrowser -based discontingious megablast program. 409 
Alignments were visualized using the GenoplotR package in R56. 410 
 411 
Extraction of secondary  metabolites  412 
Extracts  of S4498 and the four type strains grown in mannose, chitin and sterile filtered 413 
MB were produced in biological triplicates, by extracting liquid cultures 1:1 with ethyl 414 
acetate (EtOAc). MB cultures were grown at both stagnant and shaken conditions, 415 
whereas mannose and chitin were only grown at shaken conditions (200 rpm). The 416 
aqueous and organic phases were separated and the organic phase was evaporated 417 
under nitrogen. The dr ied extracts were re -dissolved in methanol (MeOH) before L C-MS 418 
analysis.  419 
 420 15 
 Chemical analysis  421 
Chemical a nalysis was performed  using UHPLC-DAD -HRMS on a maXis 3G orthogonal 422 
acceleration quadrupole time -of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) equipped with 423 
an electrospray ionization (ESI) source , as described by Holm et al.57. Data processing 424 
was performed using DataAnal ysis 4.0 and Target Analysis 1.3  software (Bruker 425 
Daltonics) . 426 
 427 
Fractionation of extracts for bioassays  428 
Fractionation for bioassays was done on the combined extract from 8 x 1L cultivations 429 
using chitin based media. The crude extract (520 mg) was fractionated by reversed phase 430 
(C18) chromatography on an Isolera One (Biotage) flash chromatography system, usin g a 431 
water -acetonitrile gradient running from 20 -100% acetonitrile over 50 minutes with a 432 
flowrate of 15 mL/min using a 10 g column. Fractions were collected every 30 mL, and 433 
subsequently analyzed by UHPLC -DAD -HRMS and tested in inhibition assays (described  434 
below). Pure pseudane V and VII were obtained by subjecting the enriched fractions to 435 
semi -preparative HPLC on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system  (Dionex) equipped with a 436 
Kinetex C18, 2.6μm, 2.1x100 mm column (Phenomenex) using a water -acetonitrile 437 
gradient of 10-100% acetonitrile over 15 min at a flowrate of 2 mL/min, at a temperature of 438 
40°C. Peaks were collected manually based on their absorption at 315 nm.  439 
Pure TBP was obtained as the retained fraction on an Isolute SCX (Waters) SPE column 440 
loaded with the TB P enriched fraction from the initial C18 fractionation. The column was 441 
equilibrated with 100% methanol followed by 70% methanol in water. The sample was 442 
loaded using 70% methanol and the column was washed with 70% methanol followed by 443 
100 % methanol. TBP w as eluted using 2% ammonium hydroxide in methanol.  444 
 445 
Influence of substrate on pseudane and TBP production in strain S4498  446 
To determine how the carbon source affected the production of pseudanes and TBP in 447 
strain S4498, the strain was grown in mannose, chitin, glucose, NAG and in MB media. 448 
Samples for CFU calculation was taken just before an aliquot of a 50 m L culture of each 449 
media was diluted 1:1 in acetonitrile and centrifuged at 3700 rpm for 5 minutes. Following 450 
centrifugation, each sample was analyze d by UHPLC -DAD -HRMS in negative ionization 451 
mode at the same conditions as described above. The relative amounts of pseudane V 452 16 
 and TBP were determined using the integral of the extracted ion chromatograms for 453 
pseudane V ([M -H]-  = 214.1240) and TBP (TBP’s b ase peak of m/z = 381.6734 was used 454 
rather than [M -H]- = 377.6767). The production of pseudane V and TBP was calculated as 455 
the area under the curve per CFU. A beeswarm boxplot was created in R (v3.4.2) and a 456 
Dunnett’s test was conducted to compare the prod uction of pseudane V and TBP on the 457 
different media. The Dunnett’s test was per formed with mannose as control.  458 
 459 
Testing for antibacterial activity  460 
Target organisms for antibacterial susceptibility testing were Vibrio anguillarum  90-11- 461 
28658 and Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) ATCC 33592 . V. 462 
anguillarum and MRSA were  grown aerated in 5 ml MB or Luria -Bertani broth (Difco, 463 
244620) overnight and 60 µl culture was used to inoculate 60 ml media containing 1% 464 
agar, 3% Instant Ocean Salts (Aquarium Systems), 0.3% casamino acids and 4% glucose. 465 
For MRSA, 1% peptone was added.  Five mm wells were punched in the agar in which 60 466 
µl extractions were added. Solvent  was added as control. Plates incubated at 25°C for two 467 
days and  clearing zones were evaluated.  468 
 469 
Acknowledgements  470 
We thank Jette Melchiorsen for assistance with DNA isolation and Professors Paul Jensen 471 
and Brad  Moore and Assistant Professor Kristen Whalen for sharing information about 472 
strain A757. The study was funded by the Villum Foundatio n (Annual Award 2016 to LG), 473 
The Danish National Research Foundatio n (DNRF137)  and Independent Research Fund 474 
Denmark (FTP) . This i s Galathea contribution no. X. 475 
 476 
Author contributions  477 
The study was designed by S .S.P., L.G., E.C.S.,  T.I. and T .O.L. S.S.P., T.I. and M .K. 478 
performed the experiments. The data was analyzed with help from M .L.S., E.C.S.,  Y.B., 479 
L.G. and T .O.L. S.S.P., L.G. and T .I. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved 480 
the final version of the manuscript.  481 
 482 
Competing interests  483 
The authors declare no competing interests.  484 17 
  485 
  486 18 
 References  487 
1. Tacconelli, E. et al.  Discovery, research, and development of new antibiotics: the 488 
WHO priority list of antibiotic -resistant bacteria and tuberculosis. Lancet Infect. Dis.  489 
18, 318–327 (2018).  490 
2. van der Meij, A., Worsley, S. F., Hutchings, M. I. & van Wezel, G. P. Chemical 491 
ecology of antibiotic production by actinomycetes. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.  41, 392– 492 
416 (2017).  493 
3. Xiong, Z. -Q., Wang, J. -F., Hao, Y. -Y. & Wang, Y. Recent Advances in the Discovery 494 
and Development of Marine Microbial Natural Products. Mar. Drugs  11, 700–717 495 
(2013).  496 
4. Giordano, D. et al.  Marine Microbial Secondary Metabolites: Pathways, Evolution 497 
and Physiological Roles.  Adv Microb Physiol  66, (Elsevier Ltd., 2015).  498 
5. Carroll, A. R., Copp, B. R., Davis, R. A., Keyzers, R. A. & Prinsep, M. R. Marine 499 
natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep.  36, 122–173 (2019).  500 
6. Gram, L., Melchiorsen, J. & Bruhn, J. B. Antibacterial activity of marine culturable 501 
bacteria collected from a global sampling of ocean surface waters and surface 502 
swabs of marine organisms. Mar Biote chnol  12, 439–451 (2010).  503 
7. Vynne, N. G., Månsson, M., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Bioactivity, Chemical Profiling, 504 
and 16S rRNA -Based Phylogeny of Pseudoalteromonas  Strains Collected on a 505 
Global Research Cruise. Mar. Biotechnol.  13, 1062 –1073 (2011).  506 
8. Bowman, J. P. Bioactive compound synthetic capacity and ecological significance of 507 
marine bacterial genus Pseudoalteromonas . Mar. Drugs  5, 220–241 (2007).  508 
9. Paulsen, S. S., Strube, M. L., Bech, P. K., Gram, L. & Sonnenschein, E. C. Marine 509 
Chitinolytic Pseud oalteromonas  Represents an Untapped Reservoir of Bioactive 510 
Potential. mSystems  4, 1–12 (2019).  511 
10. Goris, J. et al.  DNA -DNA hybridization values and their relationship to whole - 512 
genome sequence similarities. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  57, 81–91 (2007).  513 
11. Offret, C., Desriac, F., Chevalier, P. Le, Mounier, J. & Jégou, C. Spotlight on 514 
Antimicrobial Metabolites from the Marine Bacteria Pseudoalteromonas  : 515 
Chemodiversity and Ecological Significance. Mar Drugs  129, 1–26 (2016).  516 
12. Speitling, M., Smetanina,  O. F., Kuznetsova, T. A. & Laatsch, H. 517 
Bromoalterochromides A and A’, Unprecedented Chromopeptides from a Marine 518 19 
 Pseudoalteromonas maricaloris  Strain KMM 636 T. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo).  60, 36–42 519 
(2007).  520 
13. Wayne, L. G. International Committee on Systematic  Bacteriology: Announcement of 521 
the Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Reconciliation of Approaches to Bacterial 522 
Systematics. Syst. Appl. Microbiol.  10, 99–100 (1987).  523 
14. Chun, J. & Rainey, F. A. Integrating genomics into the taxonomy and systematics of 524 
the Bacteria and Archaea. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  64, 316–324 (2014).  525 
15. Chun, J. et al.  Proposed minimal standards for the use of genome data for the 526 
taxonomy of prokaryotes. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  68, 461–466 (2018).  527 
16. Frisvad, J. C. et al. Secondary metabolite profiling, growth profiles and other tools for 528 
species recognition and important Aspergillus  mycotoxins. Stud. Mycol.  59, 31–37 529 
(2007).  530 
17. Whalen, K. E., Poulson -Ellestad, K. L., Deering, R. W., Rowley, D. C. & Mincer, T. J. 531 
Enhan cement of antibiotic activity against multidrug -resistant bacteria by the efflux 532 
pump inhibitor 3,4 -dibromopyrrole -2,5-dione isolated from a Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 533 
J. Nat. Prod.  78, 402–412 (2015).  534 
18. Whalen, K. E. et al.  Bacterial alkylquinolone signaling contributes to structuring 535 
microbial communities in the ocean. Microbiome  7, 1–17 (2019).  536 
19. Whalen, K. E. et al.  The chemical cue tetrabromopyrrole induces rapid cellular stress 537 
and mortality in phytoplankton. Sci. Rep . 8, 1–11 (2018).  538 
20. Harvey, E. L. et al.  A bacterial quorum -sensing precursor induces mortality in the 539 
marine coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi. Front. Microbiol.  7, 1–12 (2016).  540 
21. Espejo, R. T. & Plaza, N. Multiple Ribosomal RNA operons in bacteria; Their 541 
concerted evolution and potential consequences on the rate of evolution of their 16S 542 
rRNA. Front. Microbiol.  9, 1–6 (2018).  543 
22. Varghese, N. J. et al.  Microbial species delineation  using whole genome sequences. 544 
Nucleic Acids Res.  43, 6761 –6771 (2015).  545 
23. Konstantinidis, K. T. & Tiedje, J. M. Genomic insights that advance the species 546 
definition for prokaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  102, 2567 –2572 (2005).  547 
24. Ciufo, S. et al. Using average nucleotide identity to improve taxonomic assignments 548 
in prokaryotic genomes at the NCBI. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.  68, 2386 –2392 549 
(2018).  550 20 
 25. Zhang, H. et al.  DbCAN2: A meta server for automated carbohydrate -active enzyme 551 
annotation. Nucleic Acids Res.  46, W95–W101 (2018).  552 
26. Blin, K. et al.  antiSMASH 5.0: updates to the secondary metabolite genome mining 553 
pipeline. Nucleic Acids Res.  1, 1–7 (2019).  554 
27. Busch, J. et al.  Diversity and Distribution of the bmp Gene Cluster and its Product s 555 
in the Genus Pseudoalteromonas . Environ. Microbiol.  1–32 (2019). 556 
doi:10.1111/1462 -2920.14532  557 
28. Meleshko, D. et al.  BiosyntheticSPAdes: reconstructing biosynthetic gene clusters 558 
from assembly graphs. Genome Res.  29, 1352 –1362 (2019).  559 
29. Jensen, P. R. N atural Products and the Gene Cluster Revolution. Trends Microbiol.  560 
24, 968–977 (2016).  561 
30. Letzel, A. C. et al.  Genomic insights into specialized metabolism in the marine 562 
actinomycete Salinispora. Environ. Microbiol.  19, 3660 –3673 (2017).  563 
31. Lawrence, J. G. & Roth, J. R. Selfish operons: Horizontal transfer may drive the 564 
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics  143, 1843 –1860 (1996).  565 
32. Seipke, R. F. Strain -level diversity of secondary metabolism in Streptomyces albus. 566 
PLoS One  10, 1–14 (2015).  567 
33. Giubergia,  S., Phippen, C., Gotfredsen, C. H., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Influence of 568 
niche -specific nutrients on secondary metabolism in Vibrionaceae . Appl. Environ. 569 
Microbiol.  (2016). doi:10.1128/AEM.00730 -16 570 
34. Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Nielsen, K. F. & Gram, L. Growth on Chitin Impacts the 571 
Transcriptome and Metabolite Profiles of Antibiotic -Producing Vibrio coralliilyticus  572 
S2052 and Photobacterium galathea  S2753. mSystems  2, 1–12 (2017).  573 
35. Depke, T., Franke,  R. & Brönstrup, M. Clustering of MS2 spectra using unsupervised 574 
methods to aid the identification of secondary metabolites from Pseudomonas 575 
aeruginosa. J. Chromatogr. B Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci.  1071,  19–28 (2017).  576 
36. Lohrer, B. & Bracher, F. A sh ort and divergent route to 2 -alkenyl -4-quinolones. 577 
Tetrahedron Lett.  59, 3632 –3635 (2018).  578 
37. Dulcey, C. E. et al.  The end of a long -standing hypothesis: the Pseudomonas 579 
signalling molecules 4 -hydroxy -2-alkylquinolines are derived from fatty acids, not 3 - 580 
ketofatty acids. Chem Biol  27, 1–19 (2013).  581 
38. Kim, W. J. et al.  Liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry -based rapid secondary - 582 21 
 metabolite profiling of marine pseudoalteromonas sp. M2. Mar. Drugs  14, 1–11 583 
(2016).  584 
39. Reen, F. J. et al.  The Pseudomonas quin olone signal (PQS), and its precursor HHQ, 585 
modulate interspecies and interkingdom behaviour. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol.  77, 413– 586 
428 (2011).  587 
40. Scott -Thomas, A. J. et al.  2-Aminoacetophenone as a potential breath biomarker for 588 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the cyst ic fibrosis lung. BMC Pulm. Med.  10, (2010).  589 
41. Kviatkovski, I. et al.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa activates the quorum sensing LuxR 590 
response regulator through secretion of 2 -aminoacetophenone. Chem. Commun.  51, 591 
3258 –3261 (2015).  592 
42. Sneed, J. M., Sharp, K. H., Ritchie, K. B. & Paul, V. J. The chemical cue 593 
tetrabromopyrrole from a biofilm bacterium induces settlement of multiple Caribbean 594 
corals. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.  281, 1–9 (2014).  595 
43. El Gamal, A. et al.  Biosynthesis of coral settlement cue tetrabromopyrrole in marine 596 
bacteria by a uniquely adapted brominase -thioesterase enzyme pair. Proc. Natl. 597 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  113, 3797 –3802 (2016).  598 
44. Ruiz, B. et al.  Production of microbial secondary metabolites : Regulation by the 599 
carbon source. Crit. Rev. Microbiol.  36, 146–167 (2010).  600 
45. Speitling, M., Smetanina, O. F., Kuznetsova, T. A. & Laatsch, H. 601 
Bromoalterochromides A and A′, unprecedented chromopeptides from  a marine 602 
Pseudoalteromonas maricaloris strain KMM 636T. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo).  60, 36–42 603 
(2007).  604 
46. Östling, J., Goodman, A. & Kjelleberg, S. Behaviour of IncP ‐1 plasmids and a 605 
miniMu transposon in a marine Vibrio  sp.: isolation of starvation inducible lac operon 606 
fusions. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.  86, 83–94 (1991).  607 
47. Kulikov, A. S. et al.  SPAdes: A New Genome Assembly Algorithm and Its 608 
Applications to Single -Cell Sequencing. J. Comput. Biol.  19, 455–477 (2012).  609 
48. Wick, R. R., Judd, L. M., Gorrie, C. L. & Holt, K. E. Unicycler: Resolving bacterial 610 
genome assemblies from short and long sequencing reads. PLoS Comput. Biol.  13, 611 
1–22 (2017).  612 
49. Seemann, T. Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics  30, 613 
2068 –2069 (2014).  614 22 
 50. Gurevich, A., Saveliev, V., Vyahhi, N. & Tesler, G. QUAST: Quality assessment tool 615 
for genome assemblies. Bioinformatics  29, 1072 –1075 (2013).  616 
51. Sawabe, T. et al.  Assignment of Alteromonas elyakovii KMM 162(T) and five strains 617 
isolated from spot -wounded fronds of Laminaria japonica to Pseudoalteromonas 618 
elyakovii comb. nov. and the extended description of the species. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 619 
Microbiol.  50, 265–271 (2000).  620 
52. Parte, A. C. LPSN — list of prokaryotic names with standing in nomenclature. 621 
Nucleic Acids Res.  42, 613–616 (2014).  622 
53. Pritchard, L. calculate_ani.py. Github Repos  (2014). Available at: 623 
https://github.com/widdowquinn/pyani.  624 
54. Meier -Kolthoff, J. P., Auch, A. F., Klenk, H. P. & Göker, M. Genome sequence - 625 
based specie s delimitation with confidence intervals and improved distance 626 
functions. BMC Bioinformatics  14, (2013).  627 
55. Medema, M. H. et al.  Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster. Nat. 628 
Chem. Biol.  11, 625–631 (2015).  629 
56. Guy, L., Kultima, J. R., Ander sson, S. G. E. & Quackenbush, J. GenoPlotR: 630 
comparative gene and genome visualization in R. Bioinformatics  27, 2334 –2335 631 
(2011).  632 
57. Holm, D. K. et al.  Molecular and chemical characterization of the biosynthesis of the 633 
6-MSA -derived meroterpenoid yanuthone D in Aspergillus niger . Chem. Biol.  21, 634 
519–529 (2014).  635 
58. Skov, M. N., Pedersen, K. & Larsen, J. L. Comparison of Pulsed -Field Gel 636 
Electrophoresis , Ribotyping, and Plasmid Profiling for Typing of Vibrio anguillarum  637 
Serovar O1. Appl Env. Microbiol  61, 1540 –1545 (1995).  638 
 639 
  640 23 
  
Figure 1. Synteny comparisons of genes surrounding a) the alterochromide cluster in P. 
piscicida compared to strain S4498, b) the pseudane cluster in strain S4498 compared to 
P. piscicida and c) the tetrabromopyrrole cluster in strain S4498 and P. peptidolytica  as 
compared to P. piscicida. Biosynthetic gene clusters are marked with red and differently  
grey-shaded bars display homology between regions.  
 641 
  642 
24 
  643 
 
 
Figure 2. Structures of the major identified secondary metabolites detected from  strain 
S4498. a) Pseudanes III -IX. The structures of pseudane V and pseudane VII were 
confirmed by NMR spectroscopy, and the identities of the remaining pseudanes were 
determined by similarities using their MS/MS fragmentation patterns. b) Structure of 
tetrabromopyrrole.  25 
  644 
Table 1 . Genomic data on Pseudoalteromonas  strains included in type strain comparisons . Nd: no data  645 
 
Species   
Strain   
Pigment  Genome size 
(Mb) GC%  N50 Accession no.  
P. galathea e S4498  White  5.4 43.0 4061465  PNCO01  
P. galatheae  A757  nd 5.1 43.0 224630  QNQN01  
P. piscicida  NCIM B 1142T Yellow  5.5 43.3 - NZ_CP011924.1/NZ_CP011925.1  
P. flavipulchra  LMG 20361T Yellow 5.4 43.2 337863  VSSD01  
P. maricaloris  LMG 19692T Yellow  5.6 43.1 266291  WEIA01  
P. peptidolytica  DSM 14001T Pale 
yellow  5.1 42.4 128830  WEHZ01  
 646 
  647 26 
  648 
Table 2 . 16S rRNA gene similarity and in silico  DNA -DNA hybridization values  of the four type strains and strain  A757 649 
compared to strain S4498 . DDH values are shown u sing formula 2 of the DSMZ GGDC Genome -to-Genome Distance 650 
Calculator 2.1   651 
 652 
   DNA -DNA hybridization values  
Species  16S rRNA gene 
similarity, %  Average nucleotide 
identity, %  DDH estimate , % Probability (%) that DDH > 
70% (i.e. same species)  avg Range  
P. strain  A757  99.35  99 94.2 92.3 - 95.5 96.99  
P. piscicida  99.28  93 48.6 46.0 - 51.3 15.57  
P. flavipulchra  99.87  93 49.4  46.8 – 52.0  17.41  
P. peptidolytica  99.74  86 24.5 22.2 – 27.0 0.01 
P. maricaloris  99.87  93 49.1 46.5 - 51.7 16.64  
 653 
  654 27 
  655 
Table 3. Genome analyses of strain S4498, A757 and the four type strains  using antiSMASH 5.0  and BLAST.  For antiSMASH, 656 
only BGCs of complete clusters are considered . + represents presence of the cluster  657 
   
Cluster   Detection of cluster ( +) and % homology  
S4498  A757  P. piscicida  P. flavipulchra  P. maricaloris  P. peptidolytica  
Tetrabromopyrrole * + +    + 
Pseudane*  + +     
Alterochromides    + (95%)  + (95%)  + (95%)  + (95%)  
Amonabactin    + (42%)     
Serobactin  + (23%)  + (23%)     
N-tetradecanoyl tyrosine  + (6%)  + (6%)  + (6%)  + (6%)   +(6%)  
Ikarugamycin      + (8%)   
* detected using BLAST, not identified in  antiSMASH  658 
 659 28 
  660 
Table 4. Known  secondary metabolites detected in strain  S4498 and the four type strains based on UHPLC -DAD -HRMS/MS 661 
analysis, as well as reported metabolites from strain  A757.  662 
 Presence of compound ( +) in Pseudoalteromonas  species  
 Compound  P. piscicida  P. flavipulchra  P. peptidolytica  P. maricaloris  S4498  A757  
Alterochromide A/A'  + (+) (+) (+)     
Bromoalterochromide A/A'  + + + +     
Dibromoalterochromide A/A'  (+) (+) (+) (+)     
Alterochromide  A'' +           
Bromoalterochromide A''  + + + +     
Alterochromide B/B'  + (+)         
Bromoalterochromide B/B'  + + (+) (+)     
Dibromoalterochromide B/B'  (+) (+) (+) (+)     
Alterochromide B''  (+)           
Korormicin      +       
Pseudanes (III -IX)         + +* 
Bromopyrroles      +   + +† 
Dibromomalemide          + + 
 + = detected ;  (+) = detected in trace amounts  
* Only pseudane VII has been reported (Harvey et al.  2016)  
† Only tetrabromopyrrole  (TBP)  has been reported (Whalen et al.  2018)  
 663 29 
  664 1 
 Supplementary information  1 
 2 
Production of the antimicrobial compound tetrabromopyrrole and the Pseudomonas 3 
quinolone system precursor, HHQ, by a novel marine species Pseudoalteromonas 4 
galatheae sp. nov.  5 
  6 
Sara Skøtt Paulsen, Thomas Isbrandt, Markus Kirkegaard, Yannick Buijs, Mikael Lenz 7 
Strube, Eva C. Sonnenschein, Thomas O. Larsen and Lone Gram*  8 
 9 
 10 
Figure S1 . Pigmentation of four strains of yellow pigmented Pseudoalteromonas (four type 11 
strains) and of strain S4498 (non -pigmented)  ................................ ................................ ...... 3 12 
Figure  S2. Phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA gene similarity from all 13 
Pseudoalteromonas type strains with validly published names in the genus.  ......................  4 14 
Figure S3.  Beeswarm boxplot of the production of pseudane V and tetrabromopyrrole 15 
(TBP) by Pseudoalteromonas strain S4498 calculated as area under the curve per colony 16 
forming unit (AUC/CFU) when grown on mannose, chitin, mari ne broth (MB), glucose or 17 
NAG. A multiple comparison using the Dunnett’s test was performed using mannose as 18 
the control. All P -values less than 0.05 are summarized with an asterisk.  ...........................  5 19 
Table S1 . Genomic  comparison (average nucleotide identity, ANI) of 6 strains of 20 
Pseudoalteromonas.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  6 21 
Table S2 . In silico  DNA -DNA hybridization values (DDH)  for the type strains of P. 22 
piscicida, P. maricaloris and P. flavipulchra.  ................................ ................................ ........  7 23 
Table S3.  Phenotypic characteristics of strain S4498, P. piscicida, P. Maricaloris, P. 24 
Flavipulchra and P. peptidolytica as per a salt -modified BiOLOG Gen III MicroPlate™ 25 
assay.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 8 26 
Table S4 . Predicted glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) in strains S4498 and A757 and type strains 27 
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  11 28 
Supplementary materials S1.   NMR tables and spectra for pseudane V and pseudane 29 
VII. ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  12 30 2 
 Supplementary materials S2 . a) Comparison of MS/MS fragmentation patterns and 31 
pathways for pseudane V and “pseudene V” at 20 and 4 0 eV CID (collision induced 32 
dissociation). b) Comparison of absorption spectra for pseudanes and pseudenes.  ..........  16 33 
Supplementary material s S3.  Mass spectra showing the characteristic isotopic patterns 34 
for the halogenated pyrroles identified in strain S4498.  ................................ ............................  17 35 
Supplementary materials S4. Base peak chromatograms of strain S4498, and each of 36 
the four type strains when grown on marine broth, with overlaid extracted ion 37 
chromatograms (EICs) of identified secondary metabolites. Secondary metabolites 38 
detected in trace  amounts are not included as EICs.  ................................ ................................  18 39 
Supplementary materials S5.  Mass spectra showing isotopic patterns or adduct patterns 40 
of ident ified secondary metabolites shown in Table 4, from the four type strains; P. 41 
piscicida, P. flavipluchra, P. peptidolytica, and P. maricaloris.  ................................ ................  19 42 
43 3 
   44 
 
 
Figure S 1. Pigmentation of four strains of yellow pigmented Pseudoalteromonas 
(four type strains) and of strain S4498 (non -pigmented)  
 
4 
  
Figure S 2. Phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA gene similarity from all 
Pseudoalteromonas  type strains with validly published names in the genus . 
 45 
 46 
 47 
 48 
  49 
5 
  
 
Figure S 3. Beeswarm boxplot of the production of pseudane V and tetrabromopyrrole 
(TBP) by S4498 calculated as area under the curve per colony forming unit (AUC/CFU) 
when grown on mannose, chitin, ma rine broth (MB), glucose or NAG . A multiple 
comparison using the Dunnett’s test was performed using mannose as the control. All P -
values le ss than 0.05 are summarized with an asterisk .  
 
  50 
6 
 Table S 1. Genomic  comparison (average nucleotide identity, ANI) of 6 strains of Pseudoalteromonas .  51 
 52 
 Average nucleotide identity, ANI  
 P.peptidolytica  S4498  P.maricaloris  P.piscicida  P.flavipulchra  A757  
P. peptidolytica  1.0 0.86 0.86 0.85 0.86 0.86 
P. strain S4498  0.86 1.0 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.99 
P. maricaloris  0.86 0.93 1.0 0.96 0.99 0.93 
P. piscicida  0.86 0.93 0.96 1.0 0.96 0.93 
P. flavipulch ra 0.86 0.93 0.99 0.96 1.0 0.93 
P. strain A757  0.86 0.99 0.93 0.93 0.93 1.0 
 53 
  54 7 
 Table S2. In silico  DNA -DNA hybridization values (DDH)  for the type strains of P. piscicida, P. maricaloris  and P. flavipulchra .  55 
 56 
 
Strain comparison  DH estimate and range, 
% Probability that DDH > 70% (i.e., 
same species)  Probability that DDH > 79% 
(i.e., same subspecies)  
P. piscicida  vs. P. maricaloris  68.70% [65.7 - 71.6%]  75.87%  26.44%  
P. piscicida  vs. P. flavipulchra  68.70% [65.7 - 71.5%]  75.85%  26.42%  
P. maricaloris  vs. P. flavipulchra  89.60% [87.3 - 91.6%]  95.67%  64.69%  
 57 
 58 8 
 Table S 3.  Phenotypic characteristics of strain S4498 , P. piscicida, P. maricaloris, P. 59 
flavipulchra  and P. peptidolytica  as per a salt -modified BiOLOG Gen III MicroPlate™ 60 
assay.  61 
 62 
 S4498  P. piscicida  P. maricaloris  P. flavipulchra  P. peptidolytica  
Dextrin  + + + + + 
D-Maltose  + + + + + 
D-Trehalose  + + + + + 
D-Cellobiose  + + - - + 
Gentiobiose  + + + + + 
Sucrose  + + + + + 
D-Turanose  + + + + + 
Stachyose  + + + + + 
D-Raffinose  + + + + + 
α-D-Lactose  + + + + + 
D-Melibiose  + + + + + 
β-Methyl -D-Glucoside  + + - - + 
D-Salicin  + + - - + 
N-Acetyl -D-
Glucosamine  + + + + + 
N-Acetyl -β-D-
Mannosamine  + + + + + 
N-Acetyl -D-
Galactosamine  + + - - + 
N-Acetyl Neuraminic 
Acid  + + + + + 
α-D-Glucose  + + + + + 
D-Mannose  + + + + + 
D-Fructose  + + + + + 
D-Galactose  + + + + + 
3-Methyl Glucose  + + + + + 
D-Fucose  + + + + + 
L-Fucose  + - + + + 
L-Rhamnose  + + + + + 
Inosine  + + + + + 
D-Sorbitol  + + + + + 
D-Mannitol  + + + + + 
D-Arabitol  + + - - + 
myo-Inositol  + + + + + 
Glycerol  + + + + + 
D-Glucose -  
6-PO4 + + + + + 
D-Fructose -  
6-PO4 + + + + + 
D-Aspartic Acid  - + - - - 
D-Serine  - + - - - 
Gelatin  + - + + + 
Glycyl -L-Proline  + + + + + 
L-Alanine  + + - - + 9 
 L-Arginine  + - + + + 
L-Aspartic Acid  - + + + + 
L-Glutamic Acid  - + + + + 
L-Histidine  + + + + - 
L-Pyroglutamic Acid  + + - - - 
L-Serine  + + - - + 
Pectin  + + + + + 
D-Galacturonic Acid  + + + + - 
L-Galactonic Acid 
Lactone  + + + + + 
D-Gluconic Acid  + - + + - 
D-Glucuronic Acid  + + + + - 
Glucuronamide  + + + + + 
Mucic Acid  + + + + + 
Quinic Acid  + + + + + 
D-Saccharic Acid  + - + + - 
p-Hydroxy -  
Phenylacetic Acid  - - - - - 
Methyl Pyruvate  - - - - - 
D-Lactic Acid Methyl 
Ester  + + - - - 
L-Lactic Acid  - - - - - 
Citric Acid  + - + + - 
α-Keto-Glutaric Acid  + + + + - 
D-Malic Acid  - - - - - 
L-Malic Acid  + - + + + 
Bromo -Succinic Acid  - + - - - 
Tween 40  + + + + + 
γ-Amino -Butryric Acid  - + - - - 
α-Hydroxy -Butyric 
Acid  - + - - - 
β-Hydroxy -D,L-Butyric 
Acid  + + - - - 
α-Keto-Butyric Acid  + + + + + 
Acetoacetic Acid  + + + + + 
Propionic Acid  + + - - - 
Acetic Acid  + + + + + 
Formic Acid  - + - - - 
pH 6  + - + + + 
pH 5  - - - - - 
1% NaCl*  + + + + + 
4% NaCl*  + + + + + 
8% NaCl*  + + - - + 
1% Sodium Lactate  + - + + + 
Fusidic Acid  + - + + + 
D-Serine  + - + + - 
Troleandomycin  - - - - + 
Rifamycin SV  + - + + + 
Minocycline  + - + + + 
Lincomycin  + + + + + 10 
 Guanidine HCl  + - + + - 
Niaproof 4  - - - - - 
Vancomycin  + - + + - 
Tetrazolium Violet  - - - - - 
Tetrazolium Blue  + + + + + 
Nalidixic Acid  - - - - - 
Lithium Chloride  + + + + - 
Potassium Tellurite  + - + + - 
Aztreonam  + - - + - 
Sodium Butyrate  - - - - - 
Sodium Bromate  - - - - - 
* The concentration is 2% higher, as the strains were inoculated with sea salt to accommodate growth. 63 11 
 Table S 4. Predicted glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) in strain s S4498 and A757 and type strains  64 
 Glycosyl hydrolases identified in Pseudoalteromonas genomes  
S4498  A757  P.piscicida  P. maricaloris  P. flavipulchra  P.peptidolytica  
GH1 0 0 1 1 1 0 
GH3 1 1 2 2 2 1 
GH5 0 0 0 0 0 1 
GH13  4 4 5 5 5 3 
GH15  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH16  0 0 2 2 2 0 
GH18  3 3 5 3 3 4 
GH19  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH20  2 2 5 5 5 3 
GH23  6 6 6 6 6 7 
GH24  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH37  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH63  1 1 1 1 1 0 
GH73  2 2 2 2 2 2 
GH77  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH92  1 1 1 1 1 0 
GH97  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH103  1 1 1 1 1 1 
GH108  0 0 0 0 0 1 
GH109  2 2 2 2 2 1 
Total  29 29 39 37 37 30 
 65 
 66 
67 12 
 Supplementary materials S1.  NMR tables and spectra for pseudane V and pseudane 68 
VII. 69 
              
Pseudane V      Pseudane VII    
  1H (δ, ppm)  13C (δ, 
ppm)      1H (δ, ppm)  13C (δ, 
ppm)  
1 0.93 (t, J = 6Hz)  14   1 0.9 (t, J = 6.9Hz)  14 
2 1.39 (m)  23.1   2 1.31 (m)  23.3 
3 1.39 (m)  32.2   3 1.31 (m)  32.6 
4 1.75 (m)  29.6   4 1.38 (m)  29.8 
5 2.7 (t, J = 7.5Hz)  34.7   5 1.42 (p , J = 7.5Hz)  29.8 
6 - 156.8    6 1.77 (dd , J = 7.7 / 7.7Hz)  29.8 
7 6.22 (s)  108.5    7 2.72 ( , J = Hz)  34.7 
8 - 180.3    8 - n/a 
9 - 125.3    9 6.23 (s)  108.5  
10 - 141.4    10 - n/a 
11 7.57 (t, J = 8.3Hz)  118.8    11 - n/a 
12 7.67 (t, J = 7.6Hz)  133.1    12 - n/a 
13 7.38 (t, J = 7.6Hz)  124.8    13 7.58 (dd, J = 8.3 / 1.4Hz)  118.8  
14 8.2 (dd, J = 8.1 / 
1.2Hz  125.6    14 7.69 (ddd , J = 8.3 / 7 / 
1.4Hz)  133.1  
        15 7.39 (ddd , J = 8.1 / 7, 
1.2Hz)  124.7  
   16 8.21 (dd , J = 8.1 / 1.2Hz)  125.7  
        
     
    
    
          
          
 70 
  71 
13 
   72 
1H NMR  
13C NMR 
DQF -COSY  Pseudane V  14 
  73 
  74 
edHSQC  
HMBC  Pseudane V  15 
 75 Pseudane VII  
1H NMR  
DQF -COSY  
edHSQC  16 
 Supplementary materials S2. a) Comparison of MS/MS fragmentation patterns and 76 
pathways for pseudane V and “pseudene V” at 20 and 40 eV CID (collision induced 77 
dissociation). b) Comparison of absorption spectra for pseudanes and pseudenes.  78 
 79 
a) 80 
 81 
 82 
b) 83 
 84 
 85 
17 
 Supplementary materials S3. Mass spectra showing the characteristic isotopic patterns 86 
for the halogenated pyrroles identified in strain S4498.  87 
 88 
 89 
 90 
 91 
 92 
 93 
 94 
 95 
 96 
 97 
18 
 Supplementary materials S4. Base peak chromatograms of strain  S4498, and each of the four 
type strains  when grown on marine broth , with overlaid extracted ion chromatograms  (EICs)  of 
identified secondary metabolites.  Secondary metabolites detected in trace amounts are not 
included  as EICs . 
 
19 
 Supplementary materials S5. Mass spectra  showing isotopic patterns  or adduct patterns  of 
identified secondary metabolites  shown in Table 4, from  the four type strains ; P. piscicida, P. 
flavipluchra, P. peptidolytica , and P. maricaloris . 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
  
 
 
 
  
21 
  
 
 
 
 
22 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paper 3 
 
 
A conjugation -based gene knock -out strategy for bioactive molecule 
producer Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059  
 
 For Review Only
A conjugation-based gene knock-out strategy for bioactive 
molecule producer Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059
Journal: Microbial Biotechnology
Manuscript ID Draft
Wiley - Manuscript type: Research Article
Date Submitted by the 
Author:n/a
Complete List of Authors: Wang, Xiyan ; Technical University of Denmark, Department of 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Paulsen, Sara; Technical University of Denmark, Department of 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Isbrandt , Thomas ; Technical University of Denmark, Department of 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Gram, Lone; Technical University of Denmark, Department of 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Zhang, Shengda
Keywords:Pigmented Pseudoalteromonas, Genetic manipulation, Gene knock-out, 
Chitinolytic genes
 
Microbial BiotechnologyFor Review Only
11 Title:
2 A conjugation-based gene knock-out strategy for bioactive molecule producer Pseudoalteromonas 
3 rubra S4059
4
5 Xiyan Wang, Sara Skøtt Paulsen, Thomas Isbrandt, Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen, Mikael Lenz Strube, 
6 Lone Gram and Sheng-Da Zhang*
7
8 Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads 
9 bldg. 221, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
10
11 * Corresponding author:
12 Sheng-Da Zhang
13 Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads 
14 bldg. 221, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
15  E-mail: shez@dtu.dk  Telephone: +45-50117765 
16
17 Running title: Genetic manipulation of Pseudoalteromonas rubra 
18Page 1 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
219 Summary 
20 Pigmented Pseudoalteromonas are associated with eukaryotic marine organisms and harbor a large 
21 untapped bioactive potential. These features make them ideal model organisms to discover new 
22 drugs and study their natural biological or ecological functions in marine communities. Precise 
23 genomic editing tools are needed for this, but remain underdeveloped in pigmented 
24 Pseudoalteromonas . Here, we adapted the conditional suicide plasmid pDM4 for in-frame deletion 
25 of a glycosyl hydrolase (GH) 19 family chitinase gene in an atypical pigmented bioactive strain 
26 Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059. In addition, two lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase (LPMO) gene 
27 deletion mutants were generated efficiently by optimizing the mating condition during conjugation 
28 and a precise genome editing platform was thus constructed in S4059. Using these mutants, we 
29 studied the predicted possible link between chitinolytic enzymes and the bioactive potential of 
30 S4059. We found that the secondary metabolites produced by S4059 were not altered by the 
31 absence of these genes, indicating that chitin utilization may not directly influence the production of 
32 secondary metabolites. In summary, the efficient conjugation system developed in this study 
33 expanded the genetic toolbox for efficient genome editing in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas, paving 
34 the way to further systematic studies of the bioactive potential at molecular level in pigmented 
35 Pseudoalteromonas .
36Page 2 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
337 INTRODUCTION
38 Marine micro and macroorganisms encompass an underexplored potential to produce novel 
39 antimicrobial compounds or hydrolytic enzymes (Parte et al. , 2017; Romano et al. , 2017). In 
40 particular, several species of the genus Pseudoalteromonas have been investigated and bioactive 
41 compounds with a range of antimicrobial, antifouling and algicidal activities have been discovered 
42 (Bowman, 2007; Zhao et al., 2012; Offret et al., 2016; Tang et al. , 2020). This genus is divided into 
43 pigmented and non-pigmented species. In general, pigmented species have larger genomes and 
44 harbor a high proportion of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) as compared to non-pigmented ones, 
45 which, on the other hand, produce a larger diversity of hydrolytic enzymes (Paulsen et al., 2019). 
46 Whilst some bioactive compounds from the pigmented species have been chemically characterized, 
47 the vast majority remains unknown mainly due to the genetic intractability of these species.
48 Currently, several genetic approaches are used to explore the potential of the bioactive marine 
49 bacteria (Buijs et al., 2019). Heterologous expression is an effective means to study gene function, 
50 which however can be challenging due to poor gene expression efficiency in different hosts (Zhang 
51 et al. , 2017, 2019; Buijs et al., 2019). Furthermore, heterologous expression provides limited 
52 information about the genuine biological function of the gene in the original organism. Transposon 
53 mutagenesis has been used in two pigmented strains, Pseudoalteromonas tunicata (Egan et al. , 
54 2002)  and Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolaceae (Thøgersen et al., 2016). Transposon mutagenesis is 
55 mostly random and subsequent analysis can be time consuming and labor intensive, which is evident 
56 for the case of P. tunicata,  where more than 6,000 mutants were screened. Instead, genetic 
57 engineering in situ  is a powerful and direct tool for studying gene functions in vivo. Unfortunately, 
58 there are very few successful genetic manipulating strategies for Pseudoalteromonas (Buijs et al. , 
59 2019). This is probably due to the fact that several features of Pseudoalteromonas  challenge the 
60 molecular and genetic manipulation as summarized by Wang et al. (Wang et al. , 2015). Briefly, 
61 multidrug resistance genes and efflux pumps are very active in Pseudoalteromonas,  enabling their 
62 resistance to a range of antibiotics and thus making it difficult to find an antibiotic marker to use in Page 3 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
463 genetic engineering. Secondly, the native restriction-modification systems in Pseudoalteromonas 
64 efficiently degrade foreign DNA and reduce transformation efficiency. Lastly, the halophilic nature of 
65 Pseudoalteromonas  does not comply well with most donor organisms of non-marine origin. This 
66 characteristic further eliminates the use of electroporation. Therefore, to date only few studies have 
67 engineered Pseudoalteromonas strains successfully (Zhao et al., 2011; Giuliani et al., 2012; Yu et al., 
68 2014, 2015; Wang et al., 2015; Delavat et al. , 2018). 
69 We recently demonstrated that the pigmented Pseudoalteromonas harbors a large, yet untapped, 
70 biosynthetic potential and dedicate as much as 15% of the genome to BGCs. This co-occurred with a 
71 strong chitin degrading machinery in the isolates with antibacterial activity (Paulsen et al., 2019). 
72 Chitin is the most abundant carbon source in the marine environment (Rinaudo, 2006) and its 
73 degradation is dependent on the secreted extracellular chitinases (3.2.1.14). Chitinases are glycoside 
74 hydrolases (GHs), and the majority of bacterial chitinases belong to the GH family 18 (Gooday, 1990). 
75 The GH18 family chitinases are common in bacteria, whereas the chitinases of the GH family 19 are 
76 less prevalent and mostly found in fungi (Pukatzki et al., 2013; Bai et al., 2016; Oyeleye and Normi, 
77 2018). Interestingly, all genomes of pigmented Pseudoalteromonas species contain GH19 chitinases 
78 and thus must have an important role in these species (Paulsen et al., 2019). A GH19 chitinase from 
79 the pigmented Pseudoalteromonas tunicata CCUG 44952T  has been cloned and expressed, and was 
80 found to degrade chitin and have antifungal activity (García-Fraga et al. , 2015). However, why only 
81 few bacteria harbor GH19 chitinases remains unknown. Cleavage of chitin chains can also be assisted 
82 by lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) (Levasseur et al. , 2013; Moreau et al., 2019), 
83 which are a group of extracellular metallo-enzymes classified as auxiliary activity family 10 (AA10). 
84 LPMOs play a crucial role in the degradation of recalcitrant chitin. These enzymes cleave glyosidic 
85 bonds in the crystalline surface of chitin via an oxidative mechanism and therefore facilitate the 
86 access of chitinases. LPMOs are a conserved part of the chitin degrading machinery in all chitin-
87 degrading Pseudoalteromonas, and some pigmented species, such as Pseudoalteromonas rubra, 
88 encode several copies of the gene (Paulsen et al. , 2019). Page 4 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
589 Due to the potent chitinolytic machinery in Pseudoalteromonas, we speculated if there could be a 
90 link between chitin degradation and secondary metabolism, as has been observed in several isolates 
91 of Vibrionaceae (Giubergia et al., 2016, 2017). We chose to explore P. rubra strain S4059, which is a 
92 red pigmented strain with high antimicrobial activity and has a promising in silico predicted 
93 antimicrobial profile (Paulsen et al., 2019). The red pigment is attributed to the class of antimicrobial 
94 compounds prodigiosins, and 15% of the P. rubra S4059 genome is dedicated to BGCs encoding 
95 secondary metabolites, most of which are unknown. Our long-term goal is to unravel bioactive 
96 compounds, and potentially novel drugs, of this strain. As an outset, we hypothesized that the 
97 chitinolytic machinery influenced the secondary metabolome as has been found for several 
98 Vibrionaceae (Giubergia et al. , 2016, 2017) and to address this, molecular manipulation of the 
99 organism is required. Thus, the purpose of this study was to develop and adapt a methodology that 
100 would allow for genetic manipulation in the pigmented P. rubra S4059.
101 RESULTS
102 The chitin degrading machinery and bioactive potential in P. rubra S4059 
103 The genome of S4059 consists of two circular chromosomes, of 4,595,233 bp and 1,348,119 bp, with 
104 an average G+C content of 47.70% and 46.93%. Fourteen genes encoding chitinolytic enzymes were 
105 identified including seven of the GH18 chitinase family, two of the GH19 chitinase family, and three 
106 of the GH20 hexosaminidase family, as well as two lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) of 
107 the auxiliary activity family 10 (Supplement Table S1). These chitinolytic genes were distributed on 
108 both chromosomes: five GH18, one GH19, two GH20 and one LPMO genes were found on the larger 
109 chromosome (chr I) and the others on the smaller one (chr II). Each chromosome contains one 
110 conserved chitin degrading gene cluster consisting of one GH18 chitinase gene chiC, one LPMO gene 
111 and a second GH18 chitinase gene chiA , as reported previously by Paulsen et al.  (2019). Thus, P. 
112 rubra S4059 contains multiple copies of chitinolytic GH genes in the genome.Page 5 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
6113 The genome of S4059 harbors seventeen predicted BGCs, distributed with twelve on chr I and five 
114 on chr II. Four of the BGCs located on chr I were predicted to produce prodigiosin, indigoidine, 
115 kalimantacin A and amonabactin P 750, while the products of other BGCs remain unclear, which 
116 indicates that P. rubra S4059 has the potential to produce up to ten new bioactive biosynthetic 
117 families of secondary metabolites.
118 GH19 chitinase and LPMOs are potential secreted chitinolytic enzymes in P. rubra  S4059. Based on 
119 dbCAN meta server (Zhang et al. , 2018), two GH19 chitinases (locus_tag: CWC22_10785, CWC22-
120 _21955) and two LPMOs (locus_tag: CWC22_09060, CWC22_24070) were annotated in P. rubra 
121 S4059. However, as predicted by SignaIP (Petersen et al., 2011), one of the GH19 chitinases 
122 (locus_tag: CWC22_10785) did not contain a signal peptide. Generally, chitinolytic proteins must be 
123 exported extracellularly to catalyze the hydrolysis of chitin polymers. Lack of signal peptide indicated 
124 a different function of the enzymes encoded by gene CWC22_10785. Due to the insoluble property 
125 of chitin, we focused on the chitinolytic enzymes having signal peptides. The domain structure of the 
126 chitinolytic enzymes is summarized in Figure 1. The GH19 chitinase (CWC22_21955) has an N-
127 terminal signal peptide, a GH19 domain, and a chitin-binding domain (CBD) at the C-terminus. The 
128 LPMOs show a highly similar domain arrangement in their N-terminus, including a signal peptide at 
129 the N-terminus, an LPMO_10 domain, and an N-acetylglucosamine-binding protein A (GbpA) domain 
130 2. However, LPMO10_1 has two CBD domains at its C-terminus while LPMO10_2 has one, the length 
131 of LPMO10_1 encoded by CWC22_09060 at chr I is thus 50 aa longer than that of LPMO10_2 
132 encoded by gene CWC22_24070 at chr II. 
133 To investigate the role of the GH19 chitinase and LPMOs in P. rubra S4059, we constructed in-frame 
134 deletion mutants and compared the mutants to the wild type with respect to growth kinetics, chitin 
135 degrading activity, biofilm formation and metabolome. 
136 In-frame deletion of GH19 chitinase gene and LPMOs genes in P. rubra  S4059. To find the most 
137 suitable antibiotic resistance for selecting mutants, the sensitivity of P. rubra S4059 to five different Page 6 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
7138 antibiotics was tested. P. rubra S4059 was sensitive to 10 μg/mL erythromycin and 30 μg/mL  
139 chloramphenicol on Marine Agar (MA). More than thirty genes in P. rubra S4059 were annotated to 
140 encode multidrug resistance-related proteins, such as antibiotic efflux pumps, multidrug major 
141 facilitator superfamily transporters, etc. Those genes may lead to P. rubra  S4059 being insensitive to 
142 the other three antibiotics. The suicide vector pDM4  contained a chloramphenicol resistance gene 
143 and this antibiotic was thus the obvious choice for transformant selection after conjugation.
144 The suicide plasmids pDM4-del-GH19, pDM4-del-LPMO-1 and pDM4-del- LPMO-2 were used to 
145 generate GH19 and LPMO in-frame deletion mutants with the approach described in Experimental 
146 Procedures. Several bacterial mating conditions were tested: mating 24 h at 20 °C, mating overnight 
147 at 25 °C and mating 4 h at 37 °C. However, only the condition of 24 h incubation at 20 °C allowed for 
148 transconjugants. The GH19 in-frame deletion mutant was confirmed by PCR on gDNA of colonies 
149 with primers GH19-p1/GH19-p2 (Figure 2B). A band of 2047 bp was found in colony 1-2, indicating 
150 the deletion of GH19 gene since a band of 3487 bp was observed in PCR products of WT gDNA. In 
151 addition, the deletion of GH19 gene was also confirmed by sequencing of the 2047-bp PCR product 
152 (Figure 2B). With the same procedure, LPMO10-2 single gene deletion mutant and LPMO genes 
153 double deletion mutant were also confirmed by PCR and sequencing as shown in Figure 2C and 2D. 
154 The deletion of GH19 chitinase and LMPO genes do not affect growth or chitin degradation. Wild 
155 type and mutants (Δ GH19, ΔLPMO and  ΔΔLPMOs) were grown in Marine Minimal Medium (MMM) 
156 supplemented with mannose, crystalline chitin, colloidal chitin or the chitin monomer, N-acetyl 
157 glucosamine (NAG) to investigate if the deletion of chitinolytic enzymes in P. rubra S4059 caused 
158 differences in growth rate or maximum biomass. All mutants grew in a similar manner to the wild 
159 type in all substrates (Figure S1, A-H3). Stationary phase (109 CFU/mL) was reached after 24 h in all 
160 carbon sources when the medium contained 0.3% casamino acids. When casamino acids were 
161 removed from the medium, the maximum cell density (107 CFU/mL) was reached after 48 h (Figure 
162 3). Growth rate and maximum cell density of wild type and mutants were similar in all substrates 
163 (Figure 3). Page 7 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
8164 P. rubra S4059 wild type and mutants were tested for chitin degradation on chitin (crystalline and 
165 colloidal chitin) plates. Unsurprisingly following the growth experiment, the mutants showed the 
166 same chitinolytic ability (the size of clearing zone) as the wild type (Figure S1, I-J). Thus, GH19 
167 chitinase and LPMOs that we knocked out are either not essential for chitin degradation in P. rubra  
168 S4059, or could be functionally replaced by other chitinolytic enzymes in S4059.
169 The deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs do not affect biofilm formation. Pseudoalteromonas is a 
170 good biofilm former and can colonize crustaceans in the marine environment (Saravanan et al., 
171 2006). Chitin colonization and biofilm formation of Francisella tularensis depends on chitinases, 
172 when chitin is the sole carbon source in the medium (Margolis et al., 2010). To investigate whether 
173 the deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs affected biofilm formation of P. rubra S4059 in chitin 
174 containing medium, the strains were grown in microtiter plates with four different carbon sources 
175 and biofilm formation assessed using the O’Toole & Kolter assay (O’Toole and Kolter, 1998). We 
176 found that mutants and wild type adhered at the same level to the plastic surfaces in all media 
177 (Figure S2). However, S4059 also formed strong biofilm on the surface of insoluble chitin polymers 
178 when grown in media supplied with shrimp chitin or colloidal chitin. Additionally, the insoluble chitin 
179 particles made the OD600 measurement difficult to be detected, and consequently the biofilm 
180 formation ability of these cultures could not be quantified accurately via this method. To circumvent 
181 this issue, we designed an experiment to compare the surface-attachment ability of P. rubra S4059 
182 wide type and three mutants by counting cells that attached to the surface of native chitin.
183 To investigate whether the deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs affects P. rubra S4059 chitin 
184 surface colonization, the growth and attachment of wild type and mutants on native chitin (shrimp 
185 shells) was assessed. In the liquid surrounding the shells, the wild type and mutants grew to the 
186 same level over the 10 days (107CFU/mL). After sonication that removed bacteria from the shrimp 
187 shells, the level of wild type and mutants in the surrounding liquid was still the same (108 CFU/mL) 
188 (Figure 4) indicating that the biofilm formation of wild type and mutants was similar. Clearly, the Page 8 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
9189 higher cell number after sonication, indicate that P. rubra S4059 had utilized native chitin for 
190 replication, not just as an adhesion platform.
191 Similar secondary metabolome pattern in wide type strain and mutants. The wild type and each of 
192 the mutant strains were grown in different media and extracts were analyzed by high-performance 
193 liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry (HPLC-HRMS) to investigate if 
194 deletion of GH19 and LPMOs affected the production of secondary metabolites in P. rubra S4059, 
195 Each strain was cultivated in triplicates on media containing one of five carbon sources: mannose, 
196 NAG, colloidal chitin, crab chitin, or shrimp chitin. From the chemical analysis, only prodigiosin and 
197 three of its analogues could be identified (Figure 5). However, the wild type and each of the mutant 
198 strains behaved similarly on each medium, with production of the same secondary metabolites at 
199 similar levels.
200 DISCUSSION
201 Pigmented species of the genus Pseudoalteromonas have an elaborate chitinolytic machinery and a 
202 consistent presence of the rare GH19 chitinase encoded in their genomes (Paulsen et al. , 2019). The 
203 high biosynthetic capacity of the pigmented species led us to ask whether the production of 
204 bioactive compounds could be influenced by chitin degradation, as has been seen for some 
205 members of the family Vibrionaceae (Giubergia et al., 2016, 2017). To address this question, we 
206 developed a biparental conjugal transfer system and a gene in-frame deletion system for 
207 manipulating selected chitin degrading genes in the pigmented P. rubra S4059.
208 Gene disruption is widely used to investigate the function of genes in vivo, however, the genetic 
209 toolsets for several marine bacteria are limited and especially some pigmented Pseudoalteromonas 
210 species are difficult to handle in the laboratory and often autolyze (Maansson et al.; Qin et al. , 2007). 
211 Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2015)  successfully developed a universal conjugation-based system to 
212 generate a few transconjugants in four Pseudoalteromonas strains, of which only the P. rubra DSM 
213 6842 strain is pigmented (Wang et al., 2015). Notably, the developed suicide vectors in Page 9 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
10214 Pseudoalteromonas  contain either oriV or pBR322/pMB1 replicon origins (Yu et al., 2014; Wang et 
215 al., 2015). The lack of targeted gene knockout systems, in particular for the pigmented species in the 
216 genus, prevents the molecular understanding of their physiology. To address this problem and 
217 expand the molecular toolbox, we tested whether the conditionally replicative ori R6Kγ-containing 
218 plasmids (Milton et al. , 1996), which were widely used in rapid and precise engineering of a few 
219 marine genera, can be used in engineering Pseudoalteromonas. Here, we adapted a R6K replicon 
220 origin vector pDM4 (Walton, 2000) into P. rubra by molecular manipulation and successfully 
221 generated in-frame deletion mutant of the GH19 chitinase gene (ΔGH19), the LPMO-2 (ΔLPMO) and 
222 a double deletion mutant (ΔΔLPMOs). In addition, mating temperature and duration were also 
223 studied. Unlike the P. rubra type strain that was conjugated at 20-30 oC by Wang et al, conjugation of 
224 strain S4059 was only successful at 20 oC after 24-hour incubation. This indicates that although it is 
225 crucial to have a universal conjugation protocol, optimal conditions should be established when 
226 using different plasmids in a given native strain.
227 The role of GH19 in P. rubra S4059 and more widely all bacteria remains enigmatic, although, they 
228 have been linked to antifungal activity (Ohno et al. , 1996; Martínez-Caballero et al., 2014; García-
229 Fraga et al. , 2015). These results have mainly relied on exogenous production of GH19 in hosts such 
230 as E. coli, which only provides information about the enzyme per se , but not about the role in its 
231 native host. We therefore tested the antifungal activity of the three P. rubra S4059 mutants as 
232 compared to wild-type strain. However, all strains displayed similar antifungal activity 
233 (supplementary data). This could be because the role of GH19 is not antifungal in P. rubra S4059, or 
234 that the myriad of different secondary metabolites in P. rubra S4059 have masked the antifungal 
235 activity of GH19. To the best of our knowledge, no study has unraveled the role of bacterial GH19 
236 chitinases in their native hosts, and genetic manipulation of the host is therefore indispensable. 
237 Pseudoalteromonas  GH19 chitinases have been reported to have chitin degrading activity ex vivo. 
238 We thus hypothesized that knocking out the GH19 gene could result in growth deficiency on chitin. 
239 However, the GH19 deficient mutant showed no difference in growth as compared to the WT (Figure Page 10 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
11240 3 and S1). Our results therefore indicate that GH19 chitinase is not the predominant chitin degrading 
241 enzyme in P. rubra S4059 given the wide array of other chitinolytic enzymes. Since GH19 gene 
242 presence predicts a large number of BGCs in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas (Paulsen et al. , 2019), 
243 and spreading of BGCs in bacteria are often driven by horizontal acquisition events for quick 
244 adaptation to a novel environments (Tran et al. , 2019), some level of evolutionary association would 
245 be expected. This appears to be unrelated to growth and phenotypes in our experiments, but may 
246 rather be due to the chitinolytic machinery facilitating DNA acquisition or horizontal gene transfer 
247 (HGT) events as proposed in Vibrio (Blokesch, 2017; Hayes et al., 2017; Metzger et al., 2019). The 
248 construction of the three mutants in this article provides thus an important entry point to study 
249 these questions in the future.
250 In conclusion, we demonstrated that the conditional suicide plasmid can be reconstituted in P. rubra 
251 S4059 to precisely delete genes in both chromosomes. This study thus expands the genetic toolset 
252 for specific and efficient genome editing in Pseudoalteromonas and also paves a new avenue to 
253 explore the bioactive potential of uncharactherized BGCs in novel isolated, atypical strains. 
254 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
255 Bacterial strains, plasmids and growth conditions. The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this 
256 study are listed in Table S1. P. rubra S4059 was isolated during the Galathea 3 expedition (Gram et 
257 al., 2010) and cultured in marine broth (MB, BD Difco 2216) or APY medium (1L artificial sea water, 
258 10g peptone and 5g yeast, pH7.0) at 25 oC, 200 rpm. The APY medium is modified from YPG medium 
259 (Zhang et al. , 2016) by removing the glycine. P. rubra  S4059 carrying chromosomal-integrated 
260 suicide plasmid was cultured in MB containing 30 µg/mL chloramphenicol (Sigma, C0378) at 25 oC, 
261 200 rpm. P. rubra S4059 mutants and wild type were cultured in marine minimal medium (MMM) 
262 (Östling et al., 1991) supplemented with four kinds of sole carbon sources (0.2% mannose, 0.2% 
263 crystalline chitin, 0.2% colloidal chitin or 0.2% NAG) for establishing growth kinetics and biofilm 
264 formation assay.Page 11 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
12265 Colloidal chitin was prepared as described previously (Paulsen et al. , 2016). In brief, 10 g of crab shell 
266 chitin (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany) was hydrolyzed in 400mL ice-cold 37% HCl for 6 h at 4°C with 
267 stirring. The solution was transferred to 4 L cold dH 2O overnight for settlement of chitin. The pH was 
268 adjusted to seven. Colloidal chitin was collected by centrifugation at 1,860xg for 5 min. Then 
269 colloidal chitin was resuspended in dH 2O for a final concentration of 2%. The stock solution was 
270 autoclaved at 121 °C for 15 min.
271 All Escherichia coli strains were cultured in Luria Bertani (LB) Broth (BD Difco 244520) at 37 ℃, 200 
272 rpm. E. coli GB dir-pir 116 (Wang et al. , 2016) was used for constructing suicide plasmid. E. coli  
273 WM3064 was used as the donor strain in intergeneric conjugation experiments. E. coli WM3064 is a 
274 dapA mutant that requires exogenously supplied diaminopimelic acid (DAP, Sigma, D1377) with a 
275 final concentration of 0.3 µM for growth (Meyer and Dehio, 1997).Plasmid pDM4 was used as the 
276 backbone of suicide vectors (Wang et al. , 2015). E. coli strains harboring pDM4 or its derivatives 
277 were grown in LB Broth with 10 µg/mL chloramphenicol or in LB agar with 15 µg/mL 
278 chloramphenicol.
279 Whole genome sequencing and assembly of P. rubra S4059. Genomic DNA of P. rubra  S4059 was 
280 extracted using the Genomic DNA buffer set (QIAGEN, 19060) following the supplier instructions. 
281 The closed genome of P. rubra S4059 was obtained by minION sequencing using the EXP-FLP002 
282 flow cell priming kit, SQK-RAD004 rapid sequencing kit, FLO-MINSP6 flow cell and the associated 
283 protocol (version RSE_9046_V1_revB-17Nov2017 and RSE_9046_V1_revB-14 AUG2019). lllumina 
284 reads were obtained from a previous study (Paulsen et al., 2019) and the minION reads were used 
285 for hybrid assembly using the Unicycler package (Wick et al., 2017). Prior to assembly, the minION 
286 reads were filtered using the Filtlong package, only keeping the top 500.000.000 bp. The genome 
287 was annotated using Prokka (Seemann, 2014). The genome is available at the National Center for 
288 Biotechnology Information (NCBI) under the accession number CP045429, and the strain is available 
289 upon request. Page 12 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
13290 In silico analysis of chitin degrading genes and secondary metabolites The assembled genome was 
291 analyzed using the CLC Main Workbench 8.0.1 (CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark) and the online platform 
292 MaGe MicroScope (Vallenet et al., 2019). The chitinolytic enzymes and the prediction of chitin 
293 degradation pathway in S4059 were annotated by dbCAN meta server (Zhang et al. , 2018). 
294 Functional domain of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs in this study were predicted in Pfam version 32.0 
295 (Finn et al. , 2014) and NCBI-Conserved Domains (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2017) by submitting amino 
296 acid sequences in FASTA format. Amino acid sequences of the candidate chitinases were also 
297 submitted to the SignalP 5.0 Server (Almagro Armenteros et al. , 2019) to identify the signal peptides. 
298 In addition, genomes were submitted to antiSMASH version 5.0 (Blin et al. , 2019) for the prediction 
299 of a putative biosynthetic gene clusters involved in the production of secondary metabolites.
300 DNA manipulation. Genomic DNA of P. rubra S4059 was extracted using the Genomic DNA buffer 
301 set (QIAGEN, 19060) as mentioned above. All primers used in this study are listed in Table 3. All DNA 
302 fragments, which were purified, were amplified using PrimeSTAR® Max Premix (TaKaRa, catalog 
303 number: R045A). Blue TEMPase Hot Start Master Mix K (catalog number: 733-2584) was used for 
304 homologous recombination event checking by PCR. All primers and plasmids were designed in A 
305 Plasmid Editor- ApE. The specificity of primers was checked by BLAST against the P. rubra S4059 
306 genome. All primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA technologies (Leuven, Belgium).
307 Construction of suicide plasmids for in-frame deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMO genes in P. 
308 rubra S4059. The suicide plasmid was constructed by direct cloning method using pDM4 as the 
309 backbone (Milton et al., 1996; Wang et al., 2016). The pDM4 plasmid contains a R6K replicon origin, 
310 mob genes and oirT for conjugation, and a chloramphenicol resistance gene cat and a sacB gene for 
311 counter selection (Milton et al. , 1996). An approximately 1-kb upstream and downstream region 
312 flanking of GH19 gene were amplified with primer pairs GH19-L-F/GH19-L-R, GH19-R-F/GH19-R-R 
313 (Table S1). The amplified recombining arms were fused with overlap extension PCR to form the 
314 recombining arm segments, which were cloned into pJET1.2 subcloning vector using CloneJET PCR 
315 Cloning Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, K1231) for sequencing. Subsequently, the homologous segment Page 13 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
14316 was amplified from sequencing-confirmed pJET1.2-dGH19 arms using primers GH19-pJET1.2-F and 
317 GH19-pJET1.2-R. The linear backbone was amplified from pDM4 suicide vector using primers (GH19-
318 pDM4-F/GH19-pDM4-R). After gel purification, the linear vector and the homologous fragment were 
319 co-electroporated into E. coli GB dir-pir116 and ligated by the RecET direct cloning system (Wang et 
320 al., 2016). Restriction cloning method was also attempted several times to construct this plasmid, 
321 however, unsucceed. All plasmids were extracted using QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit (QIAGEN, 27106). 
322 The suicide plasmids to knock out LPMO genes were constructed using the same approach.
323 Conjugation of P. rubra  S4059. The conjugation protocol was modified from Yu et al. (Yu et al. , 
324 2014). E. coli WM3064 harboring the suicide plasmid was used as the donor and P. rubra S4059 as 
325 recipient. Overnight cultures of donor and recipient were prepared as pre-cultures one day before 
326 the conjugation. During conjugation, both strains were diluted 100 times and grown to OD 600≈ 0.6. 
327 One-mL donor cells were harvested at 6,000xg for 1 min. The pellets were resuspended and washed 
328 once using 1 ml LB+DAP. Then, 1 mL recipient was added to the E. coli WM3064 pellet and 
329 centrifuged at 6,000xg for 1 min. One-mL MB+DAP was added to wash the mixture by pipetting and 
330 centrifuged at 6,000xg for 1 min. The supernatant was removed until 20-30 µl liquid remained. The 
331 mixture of cells were resuspended and placed on a 0.2-μm pore-size membrane (MF-Millipore, 
332 GSWP02500) that was placed on an APY+DAP agar plate. The mating plates were incubated at 20°C 
333 for 24h. The cells were suspended in 1mL MB and incubated with shaking at 750 rpm in an 
334 Eppendorf® thermomixer comfort, 25 °C for 1 h. After recovery, cells were spread on plates with 
335 antibiotics and incubated at 25 °C for 24-48 h.
336 Confirmation of the first crossing over mutants and deletion mutants. Colonies from the first 
337 crossover selective plates were picked and cultured in 5 mL MB containing 30 µg/mL 
338 chloramphenicol overnight. Genomic DNA extraction from pre-cultures using NucleoSpin® Tissue kit 
339 (Macherey-Nagel, 740952.250). To determine whether the plasmid integrated into target regions, 
340 the genomic DNA was used as the template for PCR checking with primers (Cmr-F/Cmr-R, GH19-
341 p1/GH19-p4, and GH19-p2/GH19-p3). Colonies carrying the integrated plasmid were cultured in MB Page 14 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
15342 with 30 µg/mL chloramphenicol at 25°C overnight as pre-culture. The pre-culture was diluted 100 
343 times and inoculated in 5 mL fresh MB without antibiotics until OD 600≈0.6.  The culture was 10-fold 
344 diluted and spread on the counter selection plates (half nutrients of MA) containing 10% sucrose. 
345 These counter selection plates were incubated at 20 °C until colonies were visible. Confirmation of 
346 the in-frame deletion mutants were carried out by PCR application and sequencing. Primers (GH19-
347 p1/GH19-p2) were designed to amplify mutation region and the PCR produced was purified and sent 
348 for DNA sequencing. The LPMO deletion mutants were confirmed as the similar steps with GH19 
349 chitinase deletion mutant.
350 Growth curves of wild type and mutants. Growth kinetics of P. rubra  S4059 WT (wild type), Δ GH19 
351 (GH19 chitinase mutant), Δ LPMO-2 (LPMO single mutant) and ΔΔLPMOs  (LPMO double mutants) 
352 were established in MMM with or without 0.3% casamino acids, and supplemented with 0.2% 
353 colloidal chitin, 0.2% crab chitin (C9752, Sigma) 0.2% mannose (63580, Sigma), or 0.2% NAG (A3286, 
354 Sigma), respectively, as carbon source. Pre-cultures of P. rubra WT and mutants were grown in MB 
355 overnight at 25°C. The cultures were diluted to a starting concentration of 103 CFU/mL in MMM. 
356 Samples were taken every 4 hours for estimation of cell density by plate counting. All experiments 
357 were done in biological duplicate.
358 Growth and attachment on shrimp shells. To study possible attachment and degradation of native 
359 chitin, small 6 mm diameter circular disks were prepared from the exoskeleton of Vannamei shrimps 
360 (description in supplementary material). Bacterial cultures (WT and mutants) were grown in 5 mL 
361 MB in 50 mL flasks at 25 °C, 200 rpm overnight. The overnight cultures were diluted to 104 CFU/mL 
362 in artificial sea water (3% sea salt, Sigma, S9883) and incubated with or without shrimp shells in 1.5 
363 mL Eppendorf tubes. Samples of the liquid were taken after 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 days incubation and plated 
364 after serial dilution. Then the tubes were sonicated five minutes at 50/60 Hz in a ultrasonic bath 
365 (Emmi D20 Q, EMAG, Germany) and vortexed 10 s to remove bacteria attaching the shrimp shells 
366 (Kim et al. , 2014). Then serial dilutions and colony counts were done to determine cell densities. The 
367 experiment was done in biological duplicate.Page 15 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
16368 Extraction of metabolites for chemical analysis. Bacterial cultures were grown in MMM as 
369 described earlier and samples taken for chemical analyses after 72 h incubation. To extract the 
370 secondary metabolites, 10 mL sample was extracted with an equal volume of high-performance 
371 liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade Ethyl acetate in 50 mL Falcon tubes. The organic phase was 
372 transferred to a new vial and evaporated under nitrogen. The dried extract was re-dissolved in 500 
373 μL methanol and stored at -20°C. Chemical analysis was performed in biological triplicate.
374 Chemical analysis by UHPLC-HRMS 
375 Chemical analysis was performed on a Bruker maXis 3G orthogonal acceleration quadrupole time-of-
376 flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source 
377 and connected to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Dionex). The column used was a reverse-phase 
378 Kinetex 1.7 μm  C18, 100 mm × 2.1 mm (Phenomenex). The column temperature was kept at 40°C 
379 throughout the analysis. A linear gradient of LC-MS grade water and acetonitrile both buffered with 
380 formic acid was used, starting at 10% (v/v) acetonitrile and increased to 100% in 10 min, maintaining 
381 this rate for 3 min before returning to the starting conditions in 0.1 min and staying there for 2.4 min 
382 before the following run. A flow rate of 0.40 mL/min was used. TOFMS was performed in ESI+ with a 
383 data acquisition range of 10 scans per second at m/z 75–1250. The TOFMS was calibrated using 
384 Bruker Daltonics high precision calibration algorithm by means of the use of the internal standard 
385 sodium formate, which was automatically infused before each run. This provided a mass accuracy of 
386 better than 1.5 ppm in MS mode. UV-visible spectra were collected at wavelengths from 200 to 700 
387 nm. Data processing was performed using DataAnalysis 4.0 and Target Analysis 1.2 software (Bruker 
388 Daltonics).
389Page 16 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
17390 Acknowledgements
391 This research was supported by Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC scholarship No. 201706170066), 
392 the Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF137) for the Center for Microbial Secondary 
393 Metabolites, the Independent Research Fund Denmark (grant DFF – 7017-00003), and the European 
394 Union's Horizon 2020 research and Innovation Programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant 
395 agreement no. 713683 (COFUNDfellowsDTU) via the H. C. Ørsted fellowship programme. 
396 We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Professor Youming Zhang and Dr. Zhen Li from Shandong University 
397 for kindly providing the RecET direct cloning strains and vectors.
398Page 17 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
18399 References
400 Almagro Armenteros, J.J., Tsirigos, K.D., Sønderby, C.K., Petersen, T.N., Winther, O., Brunak, S., et al. 
401 (2019) SignalP 5.0 improves signal peptide predictions using deep neural networks. Nat 
402 Biotechnol  37: 420–423.
403 Bai, Y., Eijsink, V.G.H., Kielak, A.M., van Veen, J.A., and de Boer, W. (2016) Genomic comparison of 
404 chitinolytic enzyme systems from terrestrial and aquatic bacteria. Environ Microbiol 18: 38–49.
405 Blin, K., Shaw, S., Steinke, K., Villebro, R., Ziemert, N., Lee, S.Y., et al. (2019) antiSMASH 5.0: updates 
406 to the secondary metabolite genome mining pipeline. Nucleic Acids Res 47: W81–W87.
407 Blokesch, M. (2017) In and out—contribution of natural transformation to the shuffling of large 
408 genomic regions. Curr Opin Microbiol  38: 22–29.
409 Bowman, J. (2007) Bioactive Compound Synthetic Capacity and Ecological Significance of Marine 
410 Bacterial Genus Pseudoalteromonas. Mar Drugs 5: 220–241.
411 Buijs, Y., Bech, P.K.P.K., Vazquez-Albacete, D., Bentzon-Tilia, M., Sonnenschein, E.C.E.C., Gram, L., 
412 and Zhang, S.D.S.-D. (2019) Marine Proteobacteria as a source of natural products: Advances in 
413 molecular tools and strategies, Royal Society of Chemistry.
414 Delavat, F., Bidault, A., Pichereau, V., and Paillard, C. (2018) Rapid and efficient protocol to introduce 
415 exogenous DNA in Vibrio harveyi  and Pseudoalteromonas sp. J Microbiol Methods 154: 1–5.
416 Egan, S., James, S., Holmström, C., and Kjelleberg, S. (2002) Correlation between pigmentation and 
417 antifouling compounds produced by Pseudoalteromonas tunicata. Environ Microbiol 4: 433–
418 442.
419 Finn, R.D., Bateman, A., Clements, J., Coggill, P., Eberhardt, R.Y., Eddy, S.R., et al. (2014) Pfam: The 
420 protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 42:.
421 García-Fraga, B., Da Silva, A.F., López-Seijas, J., and Sieiro, C. (2015) A novel family 19 chitinase from 
422 the marine-derived Pseudoalteromonas tunicata CCUG 44952T: Heterologous expression, Page 18 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
19423 characterization and antifungal activity. Biochem Eng J 93: 84–93.
424 Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Gotfredsen, C.H., Nielsen, K.F., and Gram, L. (2016) Influence of Niche-
425 Specific Nutrients on Secondary Metabolism in Vibrionaceae. Appl Environ Microbiol  82: 4035–
426 4044.
427 Giubergia, S., Phippen, C., Nielsen, K.F., and Gram, L. (2017) Growth on Chitin Impacts the 
428 Transcriptome and Metabolite Profiles of Antibiotic-Producing Vibrio coralliilyticus S2052 and 
429 Photobacterium galathea S2753. mSystems 2: 1–12.
430 Giuliani, M., Parrilli, E., Pezzella, C., Rippa, V., Duilio, A., Marino, G., and Tutino, M.L. (2012) A novel 
431 strategy for the construction of genomic mutants of the antarctic bacterium 
432 Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125. Methods Mol Biol  824: 219–233.
433 Gooday, G.W. (1990) The Ecology of Chitin Degradation. 387–430.
434 Gram, L., Melchiorsen, J., and Bruhn, J.B. (2010) Antibacterial activity of marine culturable bacteria 
435 collected from a global sampling of ocean surface waters and surface swabs of marine 
436 organisms. Mar Biotechnol 12: 439–451.
437 Hayes, C.A., Dalia, T.N., and Dalia, A.B. (2017) Systematic genetic dissection of chitin degradation and 
438 uptake in Vibrio cholerae. Environ Microbiol  19: 4154–4163.
439 Kim, E., Kinney, W.H., Ovrutsky, A.R., Vo, D., Bai, X., Honda, J.R., et al. (2014) A surface with a 
440 biomimetic micropattern reduces colonization of Mycobacterium abscessus. FEMS Microbiol 
441 Lett 360: 17–22.
442 Levasseur, A., Drula, E., Lombard, V., Coutinho, P.M., and Henrissat, B. (2013) Expansion of the 
443 enzymatic repertoire of the CAZy database to integrate auxiliary redox enzymes. Biotechnol 
444 Biofuels 6: 1–14.
445 Maansson, M., Vynne, N.G., Klitgaard, A., Nybo, J.L., Melchiorsen, J., Nguyen, D.D., et al. An 
446 Integrated Metabolomic and Genomic Mining Workflow To Uncover the Biosynthetic Potential Page 19 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
20447 of Bacteria. mSystems  1:.
448 Marchler-Bauer, A., Bo, Y., Han, L., He, J., Lanczycki, C.J., Lu, S., et al. (2017) CDD/SPARCLE: 
449 Functional classification of proteins via subfamily domain architectures. Nucleic Acids Res 45: 
450 D200–D203.
451 Margolis, J.J., El-Etr, S., Joubert, L.M., Moore, E., Robison, R., Rasley, A., et al. (2010) Contributions of 
452 francisella tularensis subsp. novicida chitinases and sec secretion system to biofilm formation 
453 on chitin. Appl Environ Microbiol  76: 596–608.
454 Martínez-Caballero, S., Cano-Sánchez, P., Mares-Mejía, I., Díaz-Sánchez, A.G., Macías-Rubalcava, 
455 M.L., Hermoso, J.A., and Rodríguez-Romero, A. (2014) Comparative study of two GH19 
456 chitinase-like proteins from Hevea brasiliensis, one exhibiting a novel carbohydrate-binding 
457 domain. FEBS J  281: 4535–4554.
458 Metzger, L.C., Matthey, N., Stoudmann, C., Collas, E.J., and Blokesch, M. (2019) Ecological 
459 implications of gene regulation by TfoX and TfoY among diverse Vibrio species. Environ 
460 Microbiol  21: 2231–2247.
461 Meyer, M. and Dehio, C. (1997) Maintenance of broad-host-range incompatibility group P and group 
462 Q plasmids and transposition of Tn5 in Bartonella henselae following conjugal plasmid transfer 
463 from Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 179: 538–540.
464 Milton, D.L., O’toole, R., Hörstedt, P., and Wolf-Watz, H. (1996) Flagellin A Is Essential for the 
465 Virulence of Vibrio anguillarum.
466 Moreau, C., Tapin-Lingua, S., Grisel, S., Gimbert, I., Le Gall, S., Meyer, V., et al. (2019) Lytic 
467 polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) facilitate cellulose nanofibrils production. Biotechnol 
468 Biofuels 12:.
469 O’Toole, G. and Kolter, R. (1998) Initiation of biofilm formation in Pseudomonas fluorescens 
470 WCS365. Mol Microbiol  28: 449–461.Page 20 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
21471 Offret, C., Desriac, F., Chevalier, P. Le, Mounier, J., and Jégou, C. (2016) Spotlight on Antimicrobial 
472 Metabolites from the Marine Bacteria Pseudoalteromonas : Chemodiversity and Ecological 
473 Significance. Mar Drugs  129: 1–26.
474 Ohno, T., Armand, S., Hata, T., Nikaidou, N., Henrissat, B., Mitsutomi, M., and Watanabe, T. (1996) A 
475 modular family 19 chitinase found in the prokaryotic organism Streptomyces griseus HUT 6037. 
476 J Bacteriol 178: 5065–5070.
477 Östling, J., Goodman, A., and Kjelleberg, S. (1991) Behaviour of IncP-1 plasmids and a miniMu 
478 transposon in a marine Vibrio sp.: isolation of starvation inducible lac operon fusions. FEMS 
479 Microbiol Lett 86: 83–94.
480 Oyeleye, A. and Normi, Y.M. (2018) Chitinase: Diversity, limitations, and trends in Engineering for 
481 suitable applications. Biosci Rep 38 : 1–21.
482 Parte, S., Sirisha, V.L., and D’Souza, J.S. (2017) Biotechnological Applications of Marine Enzymes 
483 From Algae, Bacteria, Fungi, and Sponges. Adv Food Nutr Res 80 : 75–106.
484 Paulsen, S.S., Andersen, B., Gram, L., and MacHado, H. (2016) Biological potential of chitinolytic 
485 marine bacteria. Mar Drugs 14 :.
486 Paulsen, S.S., Strube, M.L., Bech, P.K., Gram, L., and Sonnenschein, E.C. (2019)  Marine Chitinolytic 
487 Pseudoalteromonas Represents an Untapped Reservoir of Bioactive Potential . mSystems 4:.
488 Petersen, T.N., Brunak, S., Von Heijne, G., and Nielsen, H. (2011) SignalP 4.0: Discriminating signal 
489 peptides from transmembrane regions. Nat Methods 8: 785–786.
490 Pukatzki, S., Miyata, S.T., Bachmann, V., Song, Y., Xiao, X., Li, C., et al. (2013) Type VI Secretion 
491 System in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Secretion and multimerization of VgrG proteins. J Biol 
492 Chem 11: 1–12.
493 Qin, G., Zhu, L., Chen, X., Wang, P.G., and Zhang, Y. (2007) Structural characterization and ecological 
494 roles of a novel exopolysaccharide from the deep-sea psychrotolerant bacterium Page 21 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
22495 Pseudoalteromonas sp. SM9913. Microbiology  153: 1566–1572.
496 Rinaudo, M. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Prog Polym Sci  31: 603–632.
497 Romano, G., Costantini, M., Sansone, C., Lauritano, C., Ruocco, N., and Ianora, A. (2017) Marine 
498 microorganisms as a promising and sustainable source of bioactive molecules. Mar Environ Res 
499 128: 58–69.
500 Saravanan, P., Nancharaiah, Y.V., Venugopalan, V.P., Rao, T.S., and Jayachandran, S. (2006) Biofilm 
501 formation by Pseudoalteromonas ruthenica and its removal by chlorine. Biofouling 22: 371–
502 381.
503 Seemann, T. (2014) Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 30 : 2068–2069.
504 Tang, B.L., Yang, J., Chen, X.L., Wang, P., Zhao, H.L., Su, H.N., et al. (2020) A predator-prey interaction 
505 between a marine Pseudoalteromonas sp. and Gram-positive bacteria. Nat Commun 11: 1–14.
506 Thøgersen, M.S., Delpin, M.W., Melchiorsen, J., Kilstrup, M., Månsson, M., Bunk, B., et al. (2016) 
507 Production of the Bioactive Compounds Violacein and Indolmycin Is Conditional in a maeA 
508 Mutant of Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea S4054 Lacking the Malic Enzyme. Front Microbiol 
509 7: 1–11.
510 Tran, P.N., Yen, M.R., Chiang, C.Y., Lin, H.C., and Chen, P.Y. (2019) Detecting and prioritizing 
511 biosynthetic gene clusters for bioactive compounds in bacteria and fungi. Appl Microbiol 
512 Biotechnol  103 : 3277–3287.
513 Vallenet, D., Calteau, A., Dubois, M., Amours, P., Bazin, A., Beuvin, M., et al. (2019) MicroScope: an 
514 integrated platform for the annotation and exploration of microbial gene functions through 
515 genomic, pangenomic and metabolic comparative analysis. Nucleic Acids Res .
516 Walton, J.D. (2000) Horizontal Gene Transfer and the Evolution of Secondary Metabolite Gene 
517 Clusters in Fungi: An Hypothesis. Fungal Genet Biol 30: 167–171.
518 Wang, H., Li, Z., Jia, R., Hou, Y., Yin, J., Bian, X., et al. (2016) RecET direct cloning and Redαβ Page 22 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
23519 recombineering of biosynthetic gene clusters, large operons or single genes for heterologous 
520 expression. Nat Protoc 11: 1175–1190.
521 Wang, P., Yu, Z., Li, B., Cai, X., Zeng, Z., Chen, X., and Wang, X. (2015) Development of an efficient 
522 conjugation-based genetic manipulation system for Pseudoalteromonas. Microb Cell Fact 14: 
523 1–11.
524 Wick, R.R., Judd, L.M., Gorrie, C.L., and Holt, K.E. (2017) Unicycler: Resolving bacterial genome 
525 assemblies from short and long sequencing reads. PLoS Comput Biol  13: 1–22.
526 Yu, Z.C., Tang, B.L., Zhao, D.L., Pang, X., Qin, Q.L., Zhou, B.C., et al. (2015) Development of a cold-
527 adapted Pseudoalteromonas expression system for the Pseudoalteromonas proteins 
528 intractable for the Escherichia coli system. PLoS One 10 : 1–14.
529 Yu, Z.C., Zhao, D.L., Ran, L.Y., Mi, Z.H., Wu, Z.Y., Pang, X., et al. (2014) Development of a genetic 
530 system for the deep-sea psychrophilic bacterium Pseudoalteromonas sp. SM9913. Microb Cell 
531 Fact 13: 1–9.
532 Zhang, H., Yohe, T., Huang, L., Entwistle, S., Wu, P., Yang, Z., et al. (2018) DbCAN2: A meta server for 
533 automated carbohydrate-active enzyme annotation. Nucleic Acids Res 46: W95–W101.
534 Zhang, J.J., Tang, X., and Moore, B.S. (2019) Genetic platforms for heterologous expression of 
535 microbial natural products. Nat Prod Rep 36: 1313–1332.
536 Zhang, J.J., Tang, X., Zhang, M., Nguyen, D., and S. Moore, B. (2017) Broad-Host-Range Expression 
537 Reveals Native and Host Regulatory Elements That Influence Heterologous Antibiotic 
538 Production in Gram-Negative Bacteria. MBio 8: 1–16.
539 Zhang, S. Da, Santini, C.L., Zhang, W.J., Barbe, V., Mangenot, S., Guyomar, C., et al. (2016) Genomic 
540 and physiological analysis reveals versatile metabolic capacity of deep-sea Photobacterium 
541 phosphoreum ANT-2200. Extremophiles 20: 301–310.
542 Zhao, D.L., Yu, Z.C., Li, P.Y., Wu, Z.Y., Chen, X.L., Shi, M., et al. (2011) Characterization of a cryptic Page 23 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
24543 plasmid pSM429 and its application for heterologous expression in psychrophilic 
544 Pseudoalteromonas. Microb Cell Fact 10: 1–12.
545 Zhao, H.L., Chen, X.L., Xie, B. Bin, Zhou, M.Y., Gao, X., Zhang, X.Y., et al. (2012) Elastolytic mechanism 
546 of a novel M23 metalloprotease pseudoalterin from deep-sea Pseudoalteromonas sp. CF6-2: 
547 Cleaving not only glycyl bonds in the hydrophobic regions but also peptide bonds in the 
548 hydrophilic regions involved in cross-linking. J Biol Chem 287: 39710–39720.
549
550Page 24 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
25551 TABLE AND FIGURE LEGENDS
552 Figure 1. The domain structure of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs in Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059.
553 Figure 2. The in-frame deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMO genes in Pseudoalteromonas rubra 
554 S4059 was verified by PCR with primers P1 and P2 that target up- and downstream of the 
555 recombineering segments (A). The PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis (B-D). M: 1-kb 
556 DNA ladder; NC: negative control with water; WT: wild type strain S4059.
557 Figure 3. Growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 wild type and mutants (ΔGH19, 
558 ΔΔLPMOs) in (A) colloidal chitin and (B) crystalline chitin (crab chitin) without casamino acids. Circle: 
559 WT; square: GH19 deletion mutant ΔGH19; Triangle: LPMOs double deletion mutant ΔΔLPMO s. The 
560 points are of two biological replicates and error bars are standard deviation.
561 Figure 4. Growth and attachment of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 wild type and mutants 
562 (∆GH19, ∆∆LPMOs) on Vannamei shrimp shells. Open circle: wild type; open square diamond: 
563 ∆GH19; open triangle; ∆∆LPMOs. Black solid lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells 
564 before sonication. Grey solid lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells after sonication. 
565 Black dotted lines: samples from 3% Sigma sea salt without shrimp shells as a control. The points are 
566 of three biological replicates and error bars are standard deviation.
567 Figure 5. Chemical profile by HPLC-HRMS of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 when cultivated on 
568 marine minimal media using shrimp chitin as carbon source. The red pigment prodigiosin and three 
569 of its analogues could be identified in the extract. Mutants are indistinguishable from wild type.
570Page 25 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
26571
572 Figure 1. The domain structure of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs in Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059.
573Page 26 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
27574
575 Figure 2. The in-frame deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMO genes in Pseudoalteromonas rubra 
576 S4059 was verified by PCR with primers P1 and P2 that target up- and downstream of the 
577 recombineering segments (A). The PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis (B-D). M: 1-kb 
578 DNA ladder; NC: negative control with water; WT: wild type strain S4059.
579  Page 27 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
285800 24 48 720123456789A
Log(CFU/mL)
Time (h)
 
5810 24 48 720123456789B
Log(CFU/mL)
Time (h)
582 Figure 3. Growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 wild type and mutants (ΔGH19, 
583 ΔΔLPMOs) in (A) colloidal chitin and (B) crystalline chitin (crab chitin) without casamino acids. Circle: 
584 WT; square: GH19 deletion mutant ΔGH19; Triangle: LPMOs double deletion mutant ΔΔLPMO s. The 
585 points are average of two biological replicates and error bars are standard deviation. 
586Page 28 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
295870 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100123456789
Time (days)Log(CFU/mL)
588 Figure 4. Growth and attachment of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 wild type and mutants 
589 (∆GH19, ∆∆LPMOs) on Vannamei shrimp shells. Open circle: wild type; open square diamond: 
590 ∆GH19; open triangle; ∆∆LPMOs. Black solid lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells 
591 before sonication. Grey solid lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells after sonication. 
592 Black dotted lines: samples from 3% Sigma sea salt without shrimp shells as a control. The points are 
593 average of three biological replicates and error bars are standard deviation.
594Page 29 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only
30595
596 Figure 5. Chemical profile by HPLC-HRMS of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 when cultivated on 
597 marine minimal media using shrimp chitin as carbon source. The red pigment prodigiosin and three 
598 of its analogues could be identified in the extract. Mutants are indistinguishable from wild type. 
(A)Page 30 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only 
Figure 1. The domain structure of GH19 chitinase and LPMOs in Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059. Page 31 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only 
Figure 2. The in-frame deletion of GH19 chitinase and LPMO genes in Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 was 
verified by PCR with primers P1 and P2 that target up- and downstream of the recombineering segments 
(A). The PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis (B-D). M: 1-kb DNA ladder; NC: negative control 
with water; WT: wild type strain S4059. Page 32 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only 
Figure 3. Growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 wild type and mutants (ΔGH19,  ΔΔLPMOs) in 
(A) colloidal chitin and (B) crystalline chitin (crab chitin) without casamino acids. Circle: WT; square: GH19 
deletion mutant ΔGH19; Triangle: LPMOs double deletion mutant ΔΔLPMOs. The points are of two biological 
replicates and error bars are standard deviation. Page 33 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only 
Figure 4. Growth and attachment of Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059 wild type and mutants (∆GH19, 
∆∆LPMOs) on Vannamei shrimp shells. Open circle: wild type; open square diamond: ∆GH19; open triangle; 
∆∆LPMOs.  Black solid lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells before sonication. Grey solid 
lines: samples from liquid surrounding shrimp shells after sonication. Black dotted lines: samples from 3% 
Sigma sea salt without shrimp shells as a control. The points are of three biological replicates and error bars 
are standard deviation. Page 34 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60For Review Only 
Figure 5. Chemical profile by HPLC-HRMS of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 when cultivated on marine 
minimal media using shrimp chitin as carbon source. The red pigment prodigiosin and three of its analogues 
could be identified in the extract. Mutants are indistinguishable from wild type. 
192x81mm (600 x 600 DPI) Page 35 of 35 Microbial Biotechnology
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
601 
 Supplementary Materials  1 
Title:  2 
A conjugation -based gene knock -out strategy for bioactive molecule producer Pseudoalteromonas 3 
rubra  S4059  4 
 5 
Xiyan Wang, Sara Skøtt Paulsen, Thomas Isbrandt, Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen, Mikael Lenz Strube, 6 
Lone Gram and Sheng -Da Zhang*  7 
 8 
Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads 9 
bldg. 221, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  10 
 11 
* Corresponding author:  12 
Sheng -Da Zhang  13 
Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads 14 
bldg. 221, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  15 
 E-mail: shez@dtu.dk  Telephone: +45 -50117765  16 
 17 
Running title: Genetic manipulat ion of Pseudoalteromonas rubra    18 2 
 Table and Figure legends  19 
Supplement Table S1. The chitinolytic machinery in P. rubra  S4059  20 
Supplement Table S2 . Bacteria and plasmids used in this study  21 
Supplement Table S3.  Primers used in this study.  22 
Supplement Figure S1.  Growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas  rubra  S4059 wild type (WT) and 23 
mutants ( ΔGH19 , ΔLPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s) in mannose, crystalline chitin (crab chitin), colloidal chitin 24 
and NAG (chitin monomer) with casamino acid s. (A) WT and Δ GH19 growth in mannos e; (B) WT and 25 
ΔGH19 growth in colloidal chitin; (C) WT and Δ GH19 growth in crystalline chitin; (D) WT and Δ GH19 26 
growth in NAG; (E) WT Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in mannose; (F) WT Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s 27 
growth in colloidal; (G) WT Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in crys talline chitin; (H) WT Δ LPMO  and 28 
ΔΔLPMO s growth in NAG. (I) Chitin degradation activities of wild type and mutants on colloidal chitin 29 
plates. The points are bio -replicates and error bars are standard deviation . (J) Chitin degradation 30 
activities of wild ty pe and mutants on crystalline chitin plates. Square: WT; circle: Δ GH19 ; diamond: 31 
ΔLPMO ; triangle: ΔΔ LPMO s 32 
Supplement Figure S2. Biofilm formation on the microtiter -well plastic surface of 33 
Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059 wild type and mutants in four differen t sole carbon contained 34 
medium as determined by the O’Toole & Kolter crystal violet assay. (A) in mannose; (B) in NAG 35 
(chitin monomer); (C) in colloidal chitin; (D) in crab chitin.  Each experiments are repeated in bio - 36 
triplicates and error bars are standar d deviation . 37 
  38 3 
 SUPPLEMENTARY RESULTS  39 
Table S1. The chitinolytic machinary in Pseudoalteromonas rubra  S4059  40 
Name  locus tag  Location  Product Type  Signal peptide  
GH18  CWC22_08790  Chr I   Y 
 CWC22_09055  Chr I  ChiC Y 
 CWC22_09065  Chr I  ChiA Y 
 CWC22_10195  Chr I   Y 
 CWC22_13365  Chr I  ChiD Y 
 CWC22_24065  Chr II  ChiA Y 
 CWC22_24075  Chr II  ChiC N 
GH19  CWC22_10785  Chr I   N 
 CWC22_21955  Chr II   Y 
GH20  CWC22_15460  Chr I   Y 
 CWC22_17415  Chr I   Y 
 CWC22_22280  Chr II   Y 
LPMOs  CWC22_09060  Chr I  AA10 -type  Y 
  CWC22_24070  Chr II  AA10 -type  Y 
N: no signal peptide; Y: contain a signal peptide.   41 
  42 4 
  Figure S1. Growth kinetics of Pseudoalteromonas  rubra  S4059 wild type (WT) and mutants ( ΔGH19 , 43 
ΔLPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s) in mannose, crystalline chitin (crab chitin), colloidal chitin and NAG (chitin 44 
5 
 monomer) with casamino acid s. (A) WT and Δ GH19 growth in mannose; (B) WT and Δ GH19 growth 45 
in colloidal chitin; (C) WT and Δ GH19 growth in crystalline chitin; (D) WT and Δ GH19  growth in NAG; 46 
(E) WT, Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in mannose; (F) WT, Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in colloidal; 47 
(G) WT, Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in crystalline chitin; (H) WT, Δ LPMO  and ΔΔ LPMO s growth in 48 
NAG. (I) Chitin degradation activities of wild type and mutants on colloidal chitin plates. The points 49 
are bio -replicates and error bars are standard division . (J) Chitin degradation activities of wild type 50 
and mutants on crystalline chitin plates. Square: WT; circle: Δ GH19 ; diamond: Δ LPMO ; triangle: 51 
ΔΔLPMO s. 52 
 53 
Anti -fungal assay.  54 
P. rubra  S4059 WT and ΔGH19 were tested against Aspergillus niger  in an  antifungal assay. Both 55 
strains were antifungal against A. niger . However, there is no signficant difference between WT and 56 
ΔGH19  and neither of them could retain th e antifungal activity over time.  57 
 58 
 59 
6 
 Figure S2. Biofilm formation on the microtiter -well plastic surface of Pseudoalteromonas rubra  60 
S4059 wild type and mutants in four different sole carbon contained medium as determined by the 61 
O’Toole & Kolter crystal vio let assay. (A) in mannose; (B) in NAG (chitin monomer); (C) in colloidal 62 
chitin; (D) in crab chitin.  Positive control is Phaeobacter inhibens ; negative control is sterile media. 63 
Each experiments are repeated in bio -triplicates and error bars are standard deviation . 64 
  65 7 
 SUPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES  66 
Strains, plasmids and primers  67 
Table S2. Strains and plasmids used in this study.  68 
Strains/plasmids  Genotype or relevant characteristics  Reference 
or source  
Bacterial strains    
Escherichia coli    
    WM3064  RP4 (tra) in chromosome, Δ dapA , 37 ℃. 
Donner strains in conjuation.  (Meyer and 
Dehio, 
1997) 
    GB dir pir116 
 An arabinose -inducible ETγA  operon (full -
length recE , recT , redγ , and recA ), a copy -up 
pir116 gene. Host strain for constructing 
suicide plasmids with R6K replication origin.  (Wang et 
al., 2016)  
    TOP 10  
 F- mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS -mcrBC) Φ80 lacZ ΔM15 
Δ lacX74 recA1 araD139 Δ( araleu )7697 galU 
galK rpsL (StrR) endA1 nupG.  InvitrogenTM 
Pseudoalteromonas rubra    
    S4059  Wild type strain, Isolated from seaweed.  (Gram et al., 
2010)  
    ΔGH19  GH19 chitinase gene in -frame deletion mutant 
of P. rubra  S4059 ΔGH19   This study  
    ΔLPMO  LPMO gene in -frame deletion mutant of P. 
rubra  S4059 ΔLPMO  This study  
    ΔΔLPMOs  LPMOs genes in -frame deletion mutant of P. 
rubra  S4059 ΔΔLPMOs  This study  
Plasmids    
pDM4  Suicide vector for targeted mutagenesis; sacB; 
oriR6K; CmR (Milton et 
al., 1996)  
   
   
pDM4 –del-GH19  
 The left arm and right arm DNA region of the 
GH19 chitinase gene were PCR amplified from 
P. rubra  S4059 genome and cloned in the 
pDM4 plasmid by direct cloning  This study  
 
pDM4 -del-LPMO -1 The left arm and right arm DNA region of the 
LPMO -1 gene were amplified by PCR from P. 
rubra  S4059 genome and cloned in the pDM4 
plasmid by direct cloning  This stud y 
pDM4 -del-LPMO -2 The left arm and right arm DNA region of the 
LPMO -2 gene were amplified by PCR from P. 
rubra  S4059 genome and cloned in the pDM4 
plasmid by direct cloning  This study  
   
KanR: Kanamycin resistance; CmR: Chloramphenicol resistance  69 
 70 
 71 
  72 8 
 Table S3. Primers used in this study.  73 
Primer  Sequence  Description  Expected 
size (bp)  
LPMO -2-L-F GCtctaga GCATTACGATGACATCGCTG  
Left arm of LPMO -2 1032  
LPMO -2-L-R TTTCCTCACAAATTGAGGGTTATCTCCTG
CGGTG  
LPMO -2-R-F GCAGGAGATAACCCTCAATTTGTGAGGA
AAAAACATG   Right arm of LPMO -2 990 
LPMO -2-R-R CCG ctcgag GGGAATTCCCAGTCTATGTC  
LPMO -8-R-F GCtctaga ACCCTGAAGATGCATTGAC  
 Right arm of LPMO -8 1040  
LPMO -8-R-R AACTGTTTTGTCTGAAGTTTGCCTCTATC
ATAGGG  
LPMO -8-L-F TGATAGAGGCAAACTTCAGACAAAACAG
TTTTAAGC   Left arm of LPMO -8 1032  
LPMO -8-L-R CCG ctcgag GTCTACGCCGTCATAGAATT  
GH19 -L-F GCtctaga ACTCAATAATCCACTAAAGCC  
 Left arm of GH19  1032  
GH19 -L-R ATTAAAGCCTAAAAAAGGACATCCTTTA
CATGTTG  
GH19 -R-F TGTAAAGGATGTCCTTTTTTAGGCTTTAA
TTTTACTTCG   Right arm of GH19  1014  
GH19 -R-R CCG ctcgag AGGGTTCCTTTGTACTTAAAC  
CmR F GGCATTTCAGTCAGTTGCTC  Detection of CmR gene  525  
CmR R CCATCACAAACGGCATGATG  
GH19 -pJet1.2 -F CCACATGTGGAATTGTGAGCTAAAGCCG
CCACCAATGATG   GH19 homologous 
fragments  1914  
GH19 -pJet1.2 -R CTTATCGATACCGTCGACCCGGCAGACC
CAGAATAAGCG  
GH19 -pDM4 -F CATCATTGGTGGCGGCTTTAGCTCACAA
TTCCACATGTGG   pDM4 plasmid (GH19)  7054  
GH19 -pDM4 -R CGCTTATTCTGGGTCTGCCGGGTCGACG
GTATCGATAAG  
LPMO -2-
pJet1.2 -F GGTTACCCGCATGCAAGATCGCATTACG
ATGACATCGCTG   LPMO -2 homologous 
fragments  1977  LPMO -2-
pJet1.2 -R GCTTATCGATACCGTCGACCCCATGTAGT
CAGAAACTCGCG  
LPMO -2-pDM4 -
F CAGCGATGTCATCGTAATGCGATCTTGC
ATGCGGGTAACC   pDM4 plasmid (LPMO -
2) 7028  LPMO -2-pDM4 -
R CGCGAGTTTCTGACTACATGGGGTCGAC
GGTATCGATAAGC  
LPMO -8-
pJet1.2 -R GGTTACCCGCATGCAAGATCCCCTGAAG
ATGCATTGACCG   LPMO -8 homologous 
fragments  2018  LPMO -8-
pJet1.2 -F GCTTATCGATACCGTCGACCGAAGCGAC
GAAAACGTCACG  
LPMO -8-pDM4 -
F CGGTCAATGCATCTTCAGGGGATCTTGC
ATGCGGGTAACC   pDM4 plasmid (LPMO -
8) 7108  9 
 LPMO -8-pDM4 -
R CGTGACGTTTTCGTCGCTTCGGTCGACG
GTATCGATAAGC  
GH19 -p 1 GGGTTCCTTTGTACTTAAAC  
Confirmation of GH19 
mutants  1st: P1, 
P4  
2452a; 
1012b 
GH19 -p 2 CTTCAAGGACACATACCTTC   P2, P3  
2577a bp; 
1137b bp 
GH19 -p 3 CTATTCAGGCTACCAAAGC  2nd: P1, 
P2 
3487a bp; 
2047b bp 
GH19 -p 4 CAACAACATGTAAAGGATGTC                     
LPMO -8-p 1 GCATGACAAGAATGACGTG  
Confirmation of LPMO -2 
mutants  1st: P1, 
P4  
2998a bp; 
1561b bp 
LPMO -8-p 2 TATAGGCAGGACCATCATTG   P2, P3  
2602a bp; 
1165b bp 
LPMO -8-p 3 CGGATTACACCAAGGTTTG  2nd: P1, 
P2  
3663a bp; 
2226b bp 
LPMO -8-p 4 TCAACATACAAAGTATGGCG                        
LPMO -2-p 1 GGTACCAATGGCTGATGTC  
Confirmation of LPMO -8 
mutants  1st: P1, 
P4  
3083a bp; 
1493b bp 
LPMO -2-p 2 GACTATGGCCTGACACCTG   P2, P3  
3086a bp; 
1496b bp 
LPMO -2-p 3 CACCATCAGTATCTGCGATC  2nd: P1, 
P2  
3769a bp; 
2179b bp 
LPMO -2-p 4 GTACTACATGCCGATCACAG   
 
a  the size of WT;  b the size of mutants  74 
  75 10 
 Antibiotic sensitivity assay for selection marker. The antibiotic sensitivity of P. rubra  S4059 to five 76 
antibiotics was tested: Ampicillin (Sigma, A9518), Kanamycin (Sigma, K4000), Chloramphenicol 77 
(Sigma, C0378), Erythromycin (Sigma, E6376), Gentamycin (Sigma, G3632). P. rubra  S4059 was 78 
grown in MB at 25 °C to late exponential phase and a 10 -fold dilution series plated on MA plates 79 
with antibiotics in the final concentration of 10 µg/mL, 30 µg/mL, 50 µg/mL, 100 µg/mL. The plates 80 
were incubated at 25 °C for 48 h and inspected for colonies. The assay was performed in triplicate.  81 
Electroporation o f E. coli  strains. The electroporation procedure was modified from Wang et al 82 
(Wang et al. , 2016) . Briefly, a pre -culture was grown and diluted 100 times in 5 mL fresh LB and 83 
grown to OD 600≈0.4. 1.5  mL cells were harvested at 6,000xg for 1 min. The cells were washed twice 84 
in 1 mL MilliQ H 20 and harvested at 6,000xg for 1 min. Around 200 ng DNA was added to the 85 
harvested cells and MilliQ H 20 was added to a final volume of 30 µL. The mixture w as placed  in a 1 - 86 
mm electroporation cuvette and electroporated at 1,200 V. Cells were resuspended in 1 mL LB Broth 87 
without antibiotics immediately after electroporation and incubated in a 1.5 -mL Eppendorf® 88 
thermomixer comfort at 37 oC, 750 rpm for 1 h. The recovere d cells were spread on selection plates 89 
with antibiotics and incubated at 37 °C, overnight . 90 
Chitin degradation. The protocol was modified from Paulsen et al.  (Paulsen et al. , 2016) . The 91 
medium consisted of 2% sea salt (Sigma, S9883), 1.5% agar, 0.3% casamino  acid and 0.2% chitin 92 
(crystalline chitin from crab and colloidal chitin). Briefly, all strains (wild type and mutants) were 93 
grown in MB at 25 °C, overnight. The pre -cultures were diluted 100 times in 5 mL fresh MB and 94 
grown to OD 600=0.1. Twenty -µL culture  was spotted on chitin plates. The plates were incubated at 95 
25 °C for 7 days. For testing the effect of the LPMO mutants in presence of reductant (reductant 96 
(ascorbic acid) and copper, we added 1.48 g/L CuSO4·5H 20 and 17.6 g/L ascorbic acid to chitin 97 
media , as described above. For copper sulfate the amount in moles is 0.06 mM and for ascorbic acid 98 
is 100 mM. A qualitative grading of chitinase activity was measured as previous description (Paulsen 99 
et al. , 2016) .  100 11 
  101 
Biofilm formation assay. Biofilm formation was  evaluated in 96 -well polystyrene plates (Thermo 102 
scientific, 163320) with crystal violet staining as previous reported (O’Toole and Kolter, 1998) . Cells 103 
were incubated with 5 mL MB in 50 mL tubes at 25 °C, 200 rpm overnight. The overnight cultures 104 
were diluted to OD 600=0.01 in MMM with different c arbon sources (the same medium used for 105 
growth kinetics) in a volume of 0.5 mL. To establish the biofilm, 100 µL liquid from the diluted 106 
culture were added into each well in triplicate. The plates were incubated at 25 °C for 72 hours in a 107 
humidity chamber.  The biofilm was visualized by crystal violet staining and was dissolved in 95% 108 
ethanol to measure the absorbance at 590 nm. Phaeobacter inbibens  DSM17395 was used as 109 
positive control and fresh medium was used as negative control.  110 
Anti -fungal activity assay . Anti -fungal activity assay was done with a modified protocol from Paulsen 111 
et al . 2016 (Paulsen et al. , 2016) . In brief, Aspergillus niger  (IBT 32191) was precultured from IBT 112 
Culture Collection at Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical  University of 113 
Denmark. A volume of 20 µL spore suspension of A. niger was added to a puncture well in the center 114 
of a MA plate. Then, 20 µL of overnight culture of P. rubra  S4059 in MB was spotted 2 cm away from 115 
the center of well. Due to slow growth, we also tested that the spore suspension of A. niger  was 116 
added 4 days prior to the S4059 culture. Plates from both settings were incubated and checked the 117 
size of inhibition zone every day for 14 days.  118 
 119 
Shrimp shell preparation. Strip the shells off the shrim ps carefully by hand and put it into 1L beaker 120 
with fresh dH 20. After striping all of shells, a teeth brush was used for cleaning the shrimp shells 121 
under flowing water to make sure no tissues (or meat) left on the shell. Then put the cleaned shrimp 122 
shells into a new 1L beaker with fresh dH 20 for washing. Tear the shrimp shells and use the puncher 123 
machine to punch the shrimp shells out. Remember each piece of shrimp shell should only be used 124 
for punching once and only pick the perfect circular shrimp shells (do not use the gaped shells or 125 12 
 broken shells). Put the punched shrimp shells into 100 mL bottles with 30 mL, 3% Sea salts (Sigma, 126 
catalog number S9883). Do not let them dry. Otherwise, they will break easily. The shells in 3% Sea 127 
salts solution were autoc laved at 121 ℃ for 15 min and stored at 4 ℃.  128 
 129 
References  130 
Gram, L., Melchiorsen, J., and Bruhn, J.B. (2010) Antibacterial activity of marine culturable bacteria 131 
collected from a global sampling of ocean surface waters and surface swabs of marine 132 
organisms. Mar Biotechnol  12: 439 –451.  133 
Meyer, M. and Dehio, C. (1997) Maintenance of broad -host -range incompatibility group P and group 134 
Q plasmids and transposition of Tn5 in Bartonella henselae following conjugal plasmid transfer 135 
from Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol  179: 538 –540.  136 
Milton, D.L., O ’toole, R., Hörstedt, P., and Wolf -Watz, H. (1996) Flagellin A Is Essential for the 137 
Virulence of Vibrio anguillarum.  138 
O’Toole, G. and Kolter, R. (1998) Initiation of biofilm formation in Pseudomonas fluorescens 139 
WCS365. Mol Microbiol  28: 449 –461.  140 
Paulsen, S. S., Andersen, B., Gram, L., and MacHado, H. (2016) Biological potential of chitinolytic 141 
marine bacteria. Mar Drugs  14:. 142 
Wang, H., Li, Z., Jia, R., Hou, Y., Yin, J., Bian, X., et al. (2016) RecET direct cloning and Redαβ 143 
recombineering of biosynthetic gene clusters, large operons or single genes for heterologous 144 
expression. Nat Protoc  11: 1175 –1190.  145 
 146 