© 2002 Blackwell Science LtdMicroReview
Oxidative protein folding in bacteria
In eukaryotes, disulphide bond formation and isomer-
ization is catalysed in the endoplasmic reticulum by proteindisulphide isomerase (PDI) and related proteins. Althoughthis eukaryotic system has been intensely studied foralmost 40 years, many questions remain unanswered.
In 1991, it was discovered that disulphide bond for-
mation in the prokaryotic periplasm is also a catalysedprocess (Bardwell et al., 1991). The availability of genetic
tools in prokaryotes and the ease of handling the proteinsinvolved has allowed rapid progress in understanding ofthe process of disulphide bond formation in the bacterialperiplasm.
The oxidation pathway: from the discovery of DsbA
to the reconstitution of the complete system
The ﬁrst step: the discovery of DsbADsbA (for d
isulphide b ond) was the ﬁrst protein shown to
be involved in disulphide bond formation in the bacterialperiplasm. DsbA was simultaneously identiﬁed using twodifferent genetic approaches. One approach involved the use of an artiﬁcially constructed disulphide indicatorfusion protein (Bardwell et al., 1991). This protein had a
portion of the inner membrane protein MalF fused to b-
galactosidase. The MalF portion of this fusion directs theb-galactosidase to the inner membrane. In wild-type
strains expressing this fusion protein, b-galactosidase is
inactive because disulphide bonds are introduced in theportions of b-galactosidase protruding into the periplasm.
When dsbA is mutated, disulphide bonds are not intro-
duced and this restores b-galactosidase activity in the
cytoplasm.
The second approach involved screening for mutations
that affected the folding of alkaline phosphatase, a proteinthat contains two essential disulphides (Kamitani et al.,
1992). Some of the mutants that showed reduced alka-line phosphatase activity by failing to form these dis-ulphides were in the dsbA gene, again suggesting that it
was involved in disulphide bond formation.
Cells containing null mutations in the dsbA gene have
a pleiotropic phenotype as the correct folding of manyperiplasmic proteins is affected. They show reducedlevels of proteins that contain disulphides such as alka-line phosphatase, b-lactamase or the outer membrane
protein OmpA (Bardwell et al., 1991). dsbA mutants are
hypersensitive to the reductant dithiothreitol, benzylpeni-Molecular Microbiology (2002) 44(1), 1–8
Jean-Francois Collet1,2and James C. A. Bardwell1*
1Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.
2Groupe de recherches metaboliques, Universite
catholique de Louvain, UCL 75-39, B-1200 Brussels,Belgium.
Summary
Ten years ago it was thought that disulphide bond for-
mation in prokaryotes occurred spontaneously. Nowtwo pathways involved in disulphide bond formationhave been well characterized, the oxidative pathway,which is responsible for the formation of disulphides,and the isomerization pathway, which shufﬂes in-correctly formed disulphides. Disulphide bonds aredonated directly to unfolded polypeptides by theDsbA protein; DsbA is reoxidized by DsbB. DsbB gen-erates disulphides de novo from oxidized quinones.
These quinones are reoxidized by the electron trans-port chain, showing that disulphide bond formation is actually driven by electron transport. Disulphide isomerization requires that incorrect disulphides be attacked using a reduced catalyst, followed by the redonation of the disulphide, allowing alterna-tive disulphide pairing. Two isomerases exist inEscherichia coli , DsbC and DsbG. The membrane
protein DsbD maintains these disulphide isomerasesin their reduced and thereby active form. DsbD is keptreduced by cytosolic thioredoxin in an NADPH-dependent reaction.
Introduction
Proteins are synthesized on ribosomes as linear chains
of amino acids. In order to be biologically active, theymust fold into a unique three-dimensional structure. Onthe way to their active conformation, proteins are assistedby molecular chaperones that protect them from asso-ciating prematurely and forming insoluble aggregates. In addition, folding catalysts act to accelerate the rate-limiting steps in the folding pathway. One of these rate-limiting steps is the formation of correct disulphide bondsbetween cysteine residues in proteins.
Accepted 19 December, 2001. *For correspondence: E-mail: 
jbardwel@umich.edu; Tel. ( +1) 734 764 8028;Fax ( +1) 734 647 0884.cillin and some metal ions, such as Hg2+and Cd2+
(Missiakas et al., 1993; Stafford et al., 1999). It is also
reported that they are unable to fold halocytochrome c(Metheringham et al., 1995) or the FlgI component of
the ﬂagellar motor, which results in an inability of dsbA
–
strains to swim (Dailey and Berg, 1993).
DsbA, the most oxidizing protein known
DsbA is a small periplasmic protein (21 kDa) which 
possesses two active site cysteine residues present in a CXXC motif. This motif is shared with several other oxidoreductases, including protein disulphide isomerase,thioredoxin and various other Dsb proteins (see below)(Raina and Missiakas, 1997). In order to be active, thetwo cysteines of DsbA need to be in the oxidized state.Oxidized DsbA is very unstable (Zapun et al ., 1993) 
and reacts rapidly with unfolded proteins entering theperiplasm. After the transient formation of a mixed dis-ulphide between the substrate and the ﬁrst cysteine of the CXXC motif (Cys-30 in DsbA), the disulphide bond istransferred onto the folding protein and reduced DsbA isreleased.
DsbA is the most oxidizing protein known. Its oxidation
power originates from the structure of the CXXC motifand, more precisely, from an unusually low p K
aof the
most N-terminal cysteine in this active site, Cys-30. Thisresidue has the phenomenally low p K
aof ª3, compared
with normal p Kavaules of cysteine residues of ª9. Owing
to this low p Kavalue, Cys-30 is almost entirely in the thi-
olate anion state at physiological pH. The fact that thisanion is stabilized drives the reaction towards the reduc-tion of DsbA and the oxidation of the unfolded protein. Thevery oxidizing redox potential of DsbA (–120 mV) agreeswith the oxidant role of the protein (Zapun et al., 1993).
For comparison, thioredoxin, which acts as a reductant inthe cytoplasm, has a standard redox potential of –270 mV.
The three-dimensional structure of DsbA (Martin et al.,
1993) shows that DsbA consists of two domains linked bya ﬂexible hinge. One domain has a thioredoxin-like fold,whereas the second domain is a compactly folded helicaldomain, inserted into the thioredoxin-like fold. A rotationmotion occurs between the two domains upon binding ofthe substrate. Thioredoxin-like domains are present inDsbA, DsbC, DsbD and DsbG (see below), making thepresence of a thioredoxin-like fold one of the hallmarks ofthe Dsb family. The only Dsb protein thought not to havea thioredoxin-like domain is DsbB.
DsbA contains a relatively deep hydrophobic groove
running below the active site that is proposed to beinvolved in peptide binding (Guddat et al., 1997). Addi-
tional evidence that DsbA speciﬁcally interacts withunfolded proteins comes from the observations that conformational stability of DsbA is increased upon cross-linking to folded proteins. The detection by nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) of intermolecular nuclearoverhauser effects (NOEs) between DsbA and a cross-linked peptide indicates that DsbA binds peptides in ahydrophobic manner (Couprie et al., 2000).
In a paper entitled ‘Does DsbA have chaperone-like
activity’ Zheng et al . (1997) raised the possibility that
DsbA may function as a chaperone in addition to its function as an oxidoreductase. A chaperone activity forDsbA was previously suggested to be involved in piliassembly (Jacob-Dubuisson et al., 1994) and pullanase
secretion (Sauvonnet and Pugsley, 1998). However, itwas recently reported that the pullanase secretion defectis more likely due to a decreased disulphide bond forma-tion activity in one of the secretion component (Pugsleyet al., 2001).
Three-dimensional structure analysis and site-directed
mutagenesis studies have helped us to understand whythe active site Cys-30 of DsbA is so reactive. The abnor-mally low p K
avalue of Cys-30 appears to be the result of
electrostatic interactions that act to stabilize Cys-30 in athiolate anion form (Guddat et al., 1997). The residues
that are most important in this stabilization process arethose that are located in between the active site C
30PHC 33
motif, particularly His-32. Crystal structure analysisrevealed that this residue is hydrogen-bonded to Cys-30in the reduced but not in the oxidized DsbA (Guddat et al.,
1998). Mutations that alter His-32 greatly decrease theoxidizing power of DsbA and do so in a way that can bepredicted directly from the way in which they alter the p K
a
of Cys-30 (Grauschopf et al ., 1995). Other residues
nearby that are located near the active disulphide, suchas Pro-31, also contribute to the oxidizing power of DsbAbut are not as important.
How is DsbA reoxidized?
DsbA is reduced after the transfer of its disulphide bond to
the target protein. In order for it to act catalytically, DsbAneeds to be reoxidized. The protein responsible for DsbA’sreoxidation is an inner membrane protein called DsbB.
Mutations in the DsbB gene were isolated by using the
same MalF– b-galactosidase fusion approach that was
used to discover DsbA (Bardwell et al., 1993). Dailey and
Berg (1993) independently reported the identiﬁcation ofDsbB by the selection of mutants failing to assemble func-tional ﬂagella, and Missiakas et al. (1993) also isolated
mutants in dsbB and additional dsbgenes by screening
for dithiothreitol-hypersensitive mutants.
dsbB mutants exhibit the same pleiotropic phenotype
as DsbA mutants. The fact that mutations in dsbA and
dsbB produce similar defects in disulphide bond forma-
tion suggests that both proteins are on the same majoroxidation pathway. This hypothesis was conﬁrmed by the
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–82J.-F. Collet and J. C. A. BardwellOxidative protein folding in bacteria 3
observation that dsbB–strains accumulate DsbA in a
reduced form, whereas DsbA is found oxidized in wild-type strains (Bardwell et al ., 1993). The isolation of a
DsbA–DsbB complex, connected via a mixed disulphide,suggested that DsbA and DsbB interact directly (Guilhotet al., 1995; Kishigami et al., 1995). We conﬁrmed this by
showing that DsbA is rapidly oxidized in vitro by a mem-
brane preparation containing catalytic amounts of DsbB.
DsbB is a 21 kDa inner-membrane protein with four
transmembrane segments. DsbB has two pairs of essen-tial cysteine residues, one pair located in each of its twoperiplasmic domains. The ﬁrst pair of cysteines is locatedin a CXXC arrangement, an arrangement reminiscent ofthe CXXC motif present in many thioredoxin-like proteins.The three-dimensional structure of DsbB has not yet beensolved, but it is very unlikely that DsbB contains a domainwith a thioredoxin-like fold. The ﬁrst periplasmic domainis simply too small and, in addition, lacks the other fea-tures that are characteristic of thioredoxin-like proteins.The other pair of cysteines is in the second larger peri-plasmic domain.
The mechanism of how DsbB works is not yet fully
understood. A preliminary mechanism has been proposedbased on site-directed mutagenesis experiments in whichthe different cysteines of DsbB and DsbA were replacedin pair-wise combinations (Guilhot et al., 1995; Kishigami
et al., 1995; Kishigami and Ito, 1996). Such experiments
can allow for the accumulation of otherwise very unstablemixed disulphides, such as those that may form betweenDsbA and DsbB. These studies have provided us with apreliminary idea of the interactions that may occur in vivo .
For instance, when Cys-33 of DsbA is replaced by aserine, a mixed disulphide between DsbB and DsbA accu-mulates because this complex cannot be resolved byCys-33 (Kishigami et al., 1995). The observation that this
complex is not formed when Cys-104 of DsbB is mutatedsuggests that Cys-104 of DsbB is required for the for-mation of the mixed disulphide (Guilhot et al ., 1995;
Kishigami and Ito, 1996). Indeed, a mixed disulphidebetween Cys-30 of DsbA and Cys-104 of DsbB has beenobserved (Guilhot et al., 1995; Kishigami and Ito, 1996).
After the resolution of the mixed disulphide bond by theattack of DsbA’s Cys-33, DsbA is released in the oxidizedform while DsbB’s cysteines 104 and 130 are reduced.These two residues are thought to be then regeneratedby the two cysteines of the other periplasmic domain ofDsbB, Cys-41 and Cys-44 (Kishigami and Ito, 1996).
This model is based on the assumption that the stable
mixed disulphide bond that is observed between Cys-30of DsbA and Cys-104 of DsbB is a normal intermediate inthe reaction mechanism. However, reaction intermediatesare generally highly unstable; the more stable the mixed
disulphide is, the less likely it is that it represents a real
intermediate. When studying disulphide exchange reac-tions within a multicysteine protein, removal of one cys-
teine does not usually stop the reaction in its tracksleading to accumulation of the intermediate normallypresent prior to the block. The unstable reaction inter-mediates have a tendency to rapidly rearrange to themost stable conﬁgurations. Thus, the exact direction ofdisulphide ﬂow through DsbB needs to be conﬁrmed byadditional experiments.
Where do the electrons go?
DsbA is reoxidized by the membrane protein DsbB. This
leads to the obvious question: what reoxidizes DsbB? Thepossibility that molecular oxygen and the electron trans-port chain could be involved in the reoxidation of DsbBwas a hypothesis raised when DsbB was ﬁrst isolated(Bardwell et al., 1993). Four years passed, until the ﬁrst
evidence in favour of this hypothesis was reported. In1997, Kobayashi et al (1997) showed that mutants defec-
tive in haem or quinone biosynthesis accumulated DsbAand DsbB in a reduced form. In 1998, Bader et al. (1998)
showed that the oxidation of DsbA by DsbB stronglydepends on the presence of oxygen. One year later, theredox state of the four essential cysteines of DsbB wascharacterized (Kobayashi and Ito, 1999). In the presenceof oxygen, the CXXC motif of DsbB is very difﬁcult toreduce even at high dithiothreitol concentrations, butthese cysteines become easy to reduce when the mem-branes are prepared from cells that do not containquinone or haem (Kobayashi and Ito, 1999). Takentogether, these results suggested the involvement of therespiratory chain in the reoxidation of DsbB and DsbA.
The in vitro reconstitution of the disulphide bond cataly-
sis system using puriﬁed components veriﬁed the con-nection between electron transport and disulphide bondformation (Bader et al., 1999). DsbB transfers its elec-
trons on to oxidized ubiquinone, which then donates themto cytochrome oxidases, which reduce oxygen (Fig. 1).Under anaerobic conditions, DsbB passes its electrons on to menaquinone and then on to fumarate reductase or nitrate reductase. Therefore, DsbB uses the oxidizingpower of quinones to generate disulphides de novo
(Fig. 2). This novel catalytic activity is apparently themajor source of disulphide bonds in vivo (Bader et al. ,
2000). These results show where the oxidative power fordisulphide formation originates and how one step in thecatalysis of protein folding and cellular metabolism arelinked.
Titration experiments demonstrated that DsbB has only
one quinone binding site, which binds quinones with avery high speciﬁcity ( K
mof 2 mM and kcat/ Kmratio of
3¥106M–1s–1) (Bader et al., 2000). It has been suggested
that the oxidation of DsbB by quinones takes placethrough the CXXC motif of the ﬁrst periplasmic domain
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–8(Kobayashi and Ito, 1999). It has been shown that a
residue located close to the CXXC motif, Arg-48, seemsto play an important role in the interaction between DsbBand quinones. Replacement of this amino acid by a histidine residue increases the DsbB’s K
mfor ubiquinone
more than sevenfold (Kadokura et al., 2000). In addition,
insertion or deletion in a segment located immediatelyafter Cys-44 and ending at Arg-48 leads to the accumu-lation of an inactive DsbB in a reduced state (Kobayashiet al., 2001).
The isomerization pathway
The two prokaryotic disulphide isomerases: 
DsbC and DsbG
For any protein that contains more than two cysteines, the
possibility exists that incorrect disulphide bonds will form.The fact that DsbA can form inappropriate disulphides ina protein was demonstrated in vitro in RNase A refolding
experiments (Bader et al., 2000). DsbA, in the presence
of DsbB and quinones, completely oxidizes RNase A, butthe oxidized RNase A has no activity (Bader et al., 2000),
unless glutathione redox buffers are added. The intro-duction of non-native disulphide bonds by DsbA is prob-ably the reason that DsbA-oxidized RNase A is mainlymisfolded. In the cell, it is vital to resolve quickly any in-correct disulphides introduced by DsbA to prevent accu-mulation of non-native proteins. The enzymes that areable to ‘shufﬂe’ disulphides around are called proteindisulphide isomerases.
The ﬁrst step in the discovery of the isomerization
pathway in prokaryotes was the identiﬁcation of DsbC in 1994. Two different groups independently isolated the gene; one group found DsbC by screening for dithiothreitol-sensitive mutations (Missiakas et al., 1994),
whereas the other cloned genes that were able to complement DsbA. Like DsbA and DsbB mutants, DsbC
mutants are defective in disulphide bond formation, but thedefect in DsbC mutations is much milder (Rietsch et al.,
1996). For instance, mutations in DsbC do not affect thecell motility or the formation of OmpA (Rietsch et al., 1996).
DsbC was ﬁrst reported to catalyse disulphide bond for-
mation (Missiakas et al., 1994). However, it is now thought
that DsbC acts mainly as a disulphide isomerase in vivo .
DsbC can efﬁciently catalyse disulphide bond isomeriza-tion in proteins that have multiple S–S bonds, such asbovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (Zapun et al., 1995) or
RNase A (Bader et al ., 2000). In addition, DsbC is
required in vivo to ensure the folding of proteins with mul-
tiple disulphide bonds. The severity of the folding defectincreases with the number of disulphide bonds formed ina protein. For instance, the production of urokinase, aprotein with 12 disulphide bonds, is more than 100-foldreduced in DsbC mutants, whereas the production ofalkaline phosphatase, which has only two disulphides, isonly slightly affected (Rietsch et al., 1996). This is exactly
what is expected for isomerase mutants, in which thenumber of possibly incorrect disulphides grows exponen-tially with the number of cysteines in a protein. Finally, ithas been reported that DsbC is found in a reduced statein vivo . This is consistent with DsbC acting as an iso-
merase as the ﬁrst step in the resolution on an incorrectdisulphide is the attack of this disulphide by a reducedcysteine (Rietsch et al., 1997).
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–84J.-F. Collet and J. C. A. Bardwell
Fig. 1. Oxidation pathway in the E. coli
periplasm. Reduced proteins are oxidized bythe extremely oxidizing active site disulphidefound at the active site of the periplasmicDsbA protein, a rapid and unidirectionalprocess which helps to catalyse their folding.DsbA is reoxidized by the inner membraneprotein DsbB. Under aerobic conditions, DsbBis reoxidized by molecular oxygen in acytochrome oxidase- and ubiquinone-dependent reaction. Anaerobically alternativeﬁnal electron acceptors are used in amenaquinone-dependent reaction.Thedirection of electron ﬂow is shown by straightarrows. The direction of disulphide ﬂow isshown by curved arrows.
Fig. 2. DsbB is a quinone reductase that generates disulphides de
novo using the oxidizing power of quinones.Oxidative protein folding in bacteria 5
DsbC is a dimer (Zapun et al., 1995) of two identical 
23 kDa subunits. Each subunit has four cysteine residues.The Cys-98–Cys-101 pair is directly involved in DsbC’soxidoreductase activity (Zapun et al., 1995). The two other
cysteines of DsbC form a stable disulphide bond, whichprobably plays a structural role (Zapun et al., 1995).
The mechanism that has been proposed for DsbC
action can be summarized as followed: Cys-98 attacks anincorrect disulphide in a protein and a mixed disulphide isformed between DsbC and the misfolded protein. Thismixed disulphide is then resolved either by attack ofanother cysteine of the misfolded protein, resulting in theformation of a more stable disulphide in the substrate andreduced DsbC, or by attack of Cys-101 of DsbC. In thiscase, DsbC becomes oxidized and needs to be reducedin order to be recycled (see below).
DsbC possesses a peptide-binding activity, which
enhances the rate at which it interacts with folding pro-teins. Also, it has been reported that DsbC has a chap-erone activity and can assist the refolding of lysozyme orglyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Chen et al.,
1999).
The DsbC structure has recently been solved to a reso-
lution of 1.9 Å (McCarthy et al., 2000). DsbC appears as
a V-shaped protein, with each monomer forming one armof the V. Each monomer is subdivided into two domains:an N-terminal dimerization domain and a C-terminal cata-lytic domain with a thioredoxin-like fold, similar to that ofDsbA. The two active site CXXC motifs face each otherin the interior of the V. The surface of this V-shaped cleftis composed mainly of hydrophobic and unchargedresidues, suggesting that it might be involved in the non-covalent binding of substrate proteins.
That the N-terminal domains in DsbC are involved 
in the dimerization has been conﬁrmed by limited pro-teolysis experiments. When the N-terminal domain isremoved, the resulting DsbC fragment is no longer ableto dimerize (Sun and Wang, 2000). These studies alsodemonstrated that the C-terminal fragment is entirelylacking in the isomerase activity, although it does containthe active CXXC motif and has some oxidoreductaseactivity. This suggested that dimerization is necessary forisomerase activity.
Another Dsb protein, DsbG, was identiﬁed by Andersen
et al. (1997), who found that this gene, when present in
multiple copies, could confer on DsbB mutants resistanceto elevated concentration of dithiothreitol. DsbG is also a homodimer and shows 28% sequence identity and 56% sequence similarity to DsbC (Andersen et al., 1997).
DsbG is a non-essential disulphide isomerase, like DsbC,but with presumably different substrate speciﬁcity (Bessette et al., 1999). Shao et al. (2000) showed that
DsbG has a chaperone activity in vitro , which is more 
consistent with DsbG working as an isomerase.DsbD, the electron import machine
In order to be functional as isomerases, DsbC and DsbG
need to be kept reduced within the very oxidizing environ-ment of the periplasm. The enzyme that keeps DsbC and DsbG reduced is an inner membrane protein calledDsbD.
DsbD (also called DipZ or CutA2) was discovered in-
dependently by three groups working in different ﬁelds.This highlights DsbD’s central and important role. DsbDmutants are hypersensitive to dithiothreitol (Missiakaset al., 1995) and Cu
2+(Fong et al., 1995) and are unable
to synthesize mature c-type cytochromes (Crooke and
Cole, 1995). A dsbD null mutation also affects the folding
of proteins with multiple disulphides and leads to theaccumulation of oxidized DsbC and DsbG (Missiakaset al., 1995; Andersen et al., 1997; Rietsch et al., 1997;
Bessette et al., 1999). These results indicate that DsbD
is required to keep DsbC and DsbG reduced.
In order to reduce DsbC and DsbG, the DsbD protein
itself has to be reduced. The proteins required to facilitateDsbD reduction were elucidated by genetic studies.Rietsch and co-workers showed that mutations in eitherthioredoxin or thioredoxin reductase lead to the accumu-lation of oxidized DsbC (Rietsch et al ., 1996; 1997).
Thioredoxin is a cytoplasmic protein that reduces ribo-nucleotide reductase and helps to maintain cytoplasmicproteins in a reduced state. Thioredoxin itself is thenreduced by thioredoxin reductase and NADPH. Thesimilar phenotypes shared by thioredoxin, thioredoxinreductase and DsbD mutants indicate that these threeenzymes are members of a single pathway (Fig. 3) thatis involved in the transfer of reducing equivalents from thecytoplasm to DsbC or DsbG (Rietsch et al., 1996).
DsbD has a molecular mass of 59 kDa, making it the
largest protein in the Dsb family. DsbD is synthesized asa precursor with a cleavable signal peptide (Chung et al.,
2000; Gordon et al ., 2000). Topological studies have
revealed that DsbD has three distinct domains (Chunget al ., 2000; Gordon et al ., 2000): an N-terminal peri-
plasmic domain ( a-domain), followed by a hydrophobic
core with eight transmembrane segments ( b-domain) 
and, ﬁnally, a second periplasmic portion ( g-domain),
which is predicted to have a thioredoxin-like fold.
Each domain of DsbD has two conserved cysteine
residues. From site-directed mutagenesis experiments itseems that these cysteine residues are important for the mechanism of DsbD action, but whether or not theyare essential remains controversial. Single cysteine-to-alanine mutants accumulate oxidized DsbC and DsbGand are unable to produce active urokinase, similar toDsbD null mutants (Stewart et al., 1999; Chung et al.,
2000; Gordon et al., 2000). However, copper sensitivity
and cytochrome biosynthesis are affected only when two
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–8or more cysteines are replaced simultaneously; individual
replacements are reported to have no effect (Gordonet al., 2000).
A model for the mechanism of DsbD action has recently
been proposed which involves the successive transfer ofelectrons from thioredoxin to the b-domain of DsbD and
then successively on to the g- the a-domains and ﬁnally
on to DsbC. This model is based upon the observation ofdisulphide cross-links between DsbC and the a-domain
(Katzen and Beckwith, 2000; Krupp et al ., 2001) and 
preferential accumulation of some domains in a reducedform if the domain downstream is absent from the expres-sion system (Katzen and Beckwith, 2000). In addition,puriﬁed a-domain was recently shown to be able to
reduce DsbC in vitro . It is proposed that this succession
of disulphide exchange reactions involves major confor-mational change of DsbD.
It should be noted that this DsbD mechanism, like the
DsbB mechanism, depends on the assumption that themixed disulphide intermediates observed correspond toreal reaction intermediates. As for the oxidation system,it will be helpful to reconstitute the isomerization systemin vitro to study this mechanism in detail.
CcdA, a stripped down version of the DsbD protein that
lacks the a- and g-domains and contains only the b-
domain, has been identiﬁed in at least 35 prokaryoticspecies, including both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
organisms. Similar to DsbD mutants, CcdA mutants aredefective in c-type cytochrome biosynthesis (Deshmukh
et al ., 2000). CcdA is a ~26 kDa integral membrane
protein with six transmembrane segments and two con-served cysteines residues (Deshmukh et al., 2000).These
cysteines, which align with the conserved cysteines of the b-domain, are required for CcdA activity in c-type
cytochrome biosynthesis (Deshmukh et al., 2000).
The ccdA gene is adjacent to an open reading frame
(ORF) encoding a thioredoxin-like protein in at leastseven bacteria, including Streptomyces , Corynbacterium
and Mycobacterium . This suggests that evolution may
have acted to combine two modular proteins, CcdA anda thioredoxin like protein, into one functional unit, DsbD.However, a protein corresponding to the a-domain is not
found in bacterial genomes containing the ccdA gene,even though this domain is essential for the DsbD activ-ity. In addition, some organisms, such as Rhodobacter
capsulatus and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae , contain both
CcdA and DsbD, suggesting that these two proteins arenot simply redundant.
How are the oxidative and reductive pathways 
kept separate?
DsbA needs to be kept oxidized in order to function as a
disulphide donor, and DsbC needs to be kept reduced forit to work as a disulphide isomerase. The coexistence ofthese two systems, which have opposite goals, within thesame periplasmic compartment raises the interestingquestion of how the two systems are kept separate. If bar-riers that prevent cross-talk between the two systems didnot exist there would be a futile cycle in which DsbB wouldoxidize DsbC while DsbD reduced DsbC. How does DsbBdiscriminate between DsbA and DsbC?
DsbB reoxidizes DsbC at least 500-fold more slowly
than does DsbA, suggesting that DsbB can distinguishbetween these two proteins (Bader et al ., 2000). The 
molecular basis of this discrimination became clear whenwe selected for DsbC mutants that complement a dsbA
null mutation (Bader et al ., 2001). Analysis of these
mutants revealed that all the mutations were in the dimer-ization interface of DsbC and produced monomeric pro-teins. The ability of these monomeric mutants to rescuea dsbA
–phenotype depended on the presence of an
active DsbB. These results indicated that the DsbC activesite cysteines are protected from DsbB oxidation bydimerization.
Conclusions and future directions
A decade ago it was generally accepted that disulphide
bond formation in the bacterial periplasm is a sponta-
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–86J.-F. Collet and J. C. A. Bardwell
Fig. 3. Isomerization pathway in the E. coli periplasm. DsbC and
DsbG are disulphide isomerases. In order for them to be able toattack misformed disulphides they need to be in the reduced form.They are kept this way by the membrane protein DsbD. Theproposed direction of electron ﬂow within the DsbD domains a, b
and gis shown by straight arrows and that of disulphide ﬂow is
shown by curved arrows. DsbD is kept reduced by the reducingpower of thioredoxin, which is reduced by thioredoxin reductase(not shown) and then by NADPH.Oxidative protein folding in bacteria 7
neous process. With the identiﬁcation of ﬁve Dsb pro-
teins involved in two different pathways, we now have adetailed understanding of how this process is catalysed.
However, several important problems remain, including
the relative substrate speciﬁcity of the isomerases DsbGand DsbC and the mechanism of DsbB and DsbD action.For instance, how reducing equivalents cross the cyto-plasmic membrane remains to be elucidated.
The solution to these problems will not only increase
our understanding of the system, but will also be veryhelpful in other ﬁelds, e.g. biotechnology, with the pro-duction of pharmacologically important proteins that havemultiple disulphides.
Moreover, more insight into the different pathways
involving the Dsb proteins will also be very useful in study-ing disulphide bond formation in the much more complexeukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ursula Jakob for helpful criticism of
this manuscript. This work was supported by an NIH grant to J.C.A.B. J.F.C. is Charge de Recherches of the BelgianFonds National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. J.C.A.B. is aPew Scholar.
References
Andersen, C.L., Matthey-Dupraz, A., Missiakas, D., and
Raina, S. (1997) A new Escherichia coli gene, dsbG ,
encodes a periplasmic protein involved in disulphide bondformation, required for recycling DsbA/DsbB and DsbCredox proteins. Mol Microbiol 26:121–132.
Bader, M.W., Hiniker, A., Regeimbal, J., Goldstone, D.,
Haebel, P.W., Riemer, J., Metcalf, P., and Bardwell, J.C.(2001) Turning a disulﬁde isomerase into an oxidase: DsbCmutants that imitate DsbA. EMBO J 20:1555–1562.
Bader, M., Muse, W., Ballou, D.P., Gassner, C., and Bardwell,
J.C. (1999) Oxidative protein folding is driven by the elec-tron transport system. Cell98:217–227.
Bader, M., Muse, W., Zander, T., and Bardwell, J. (1998)
Reconstitution of a protein disulﬁde catalytic system. J Biol
Chem 273: 10302–10307.
Bader, M.W., Xie, T., Yu, C.A., and Bardwell, J.C. (2000)
Disulﬁde bonds are generated by quinone reduction. J Biol
Chem 275: 26082–26088.
Bardwell, J.C., McGovern, K., and Beckwith, J. (1991) Iden-
tiﬁcation of a protein required for disulﬁde bond formationin vivo . Cell67:581–589.
Bardwell, J.C., Lee, J.O., Jander, G., Martin, N., Belin, D.,
and Beckwith, J. (1993) A pathway for disulﬁde bond formation in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:1038–
1042.
Bessette, P.H., Cotto, J.J., Gilbert, H.F., and Georgiou, G.
(1999) In vivo and in vitro function of the Escherichia coli
periplasmic cysteine oxidoreductase DsbG. J Biol Chem
274: 7784–7792.Chen, J., Song, J.L., Zhang, S., Wang, Y., Cui, D.F., and
Wang, C.C. (1999) Chaperone activity of DsbC. J Biol
Chem 274: 19601–19605.
Chung, J., Chen, T., and Missiakas, D. (2000) Transfer of
electrons across the cytoplasmic membrane by DsbD, amembrane protein involved in thiol-disulphide exchangeand protein folding in the bacterial periplasm. Mol 
Microbiol 35:1099–1109.
Couprie, J., Vinci, F., Dugave, C., Quemeneur, E., and
Moutiez, M. (2000) Investigation of the DsbA mechanismthrough the synthesis and analysis of an irreversibleenzyme–ligand complex. Biochemistry 39:6732–6742.
Crooke, H., and Cole, J. (1995) The biogenesis of c-type
cytochromes in Escherichia coli requires a membrane-
bound protein, DipZ, with a protein disulphide isomerase-like domain. Mol Microbiol 15:1139–1150.
Dailey, F.E., and Berg, H.C. (1993) Mutants in disulﬁde bond
formation that disrupt ﬂagellar assembly in Escherichia
coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:1043–1047.
Deshmukh, M., Brasseur, G., and Daldal, F. (2000) Novel
Rhodobacter capsulatus genes required for the biogenesis
of various c-type cytochromes. Mol Microbiol 35:123–138.
Fong, S.T., Camakaris, J., and Lee, B.T. (1995) Molecular
genetics of a chromosomal locus involved in copper tolerance in Escherichia coli K-12. Mol Microbiol 15:
1127–1137.
Gordon, E.H., Page, M.D., Willis, A.C., and Ferguson, S.J.
(2000) Escherichia coli DipZ: anatomy of a transmembrane
protein disulphide reductase in which three pairs of cys-teine residues, one in each of three domains, contributedifferentially to function. Mol Microbiol 35:1360–1374.
Grauschopf, U., Winther, J.R., Korber, P., Zander, T.,
Dallinger, P., and Bardwell, J.C. (1995) Why is DsbA suchan oxidizing disulﬁde catalyst? Cell83:947–955.
Guddat, L.W., Bardwell, J.C., Zander, T., and Martin, J.L.
(1997) The uncharged surface features surrounding theactive site of Escherichia coli DsbA are conserved and are
implicated in peptide binding. Protein Sci 6:1148–1156.
Guddat, L.W., Bardwell, J.C., and Martin, J.L. (1998) Crystal
structures of reduced and oxidized DsbA: investigation ofdomain motion and thiolate stabilization. Structure 6:
757–767.
Guilhot, C., Jander, G., Martin, N.L., and Beckwith, J. (1995)
Evidence that the pathway of disulﬁde bond formation inEscherichia coli involves interactions between the cys-
teines of DsbB and DsbA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:
9895–9899.
Jacob-Dubuisson, F., Pinkner, J., Xu, Z., Striker, R., 
Padmanhaban, A., and Hultgren, S.J. (1994) PapD chaperone function in pilus biogenesis depends on oxidantand chaperone-like activities of DsbA. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 91:11552–11556.
Kadokura, H., Bader, M., Tian, H., Bardwell, J.C., and 
Beckwith, J. (2000) Roles of a conserved arginine residueof DsbB in linking protein disulﬁde-bond-formation pathwayto the respiratory chain of Escherichia coli . Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 97:10884–10889.
Kamitani, S., Akiyama, Y., and Ito, K. (1992) Identiﬁcation and
characterization of an Escherichia coli gene required for
the formation of correctly folded alkaline phosphatase, aperiplasmic enzyme. EMBO J 11:57–62.
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–8Katzen, F., and Beckwith, J. (2000) Transmembrane electron
transfer by the membrane protein DsbD occurs via a dis-ulﬁde bond cascade. Cell103: 769–779.
Kishigami, S., and Ito, K. (1996) Roles of cysteine residues
of DsbB in its activity to reoxidize DsbA, the protein dis-ulphide bond catalyst of Escherichia coli . Genes Cells 1:
201–208.
Kishigami, S., Kanaya, E., Kikuchi, M., and Ito, K. (1995)
DsbA–DsbB interaction through their active site cysteines.Evidence from an odd cysteine mutant of DsbA. J Biol
Chem 270: 17072–17074.
Kobayashi, T., and Ito, K. (1999) Respiratory chain strongly
oxidizes the CXXC motif of DsbB in the Escherichia coli
disulﬁde bond formation pathway. Embo J 18: 1192–
1198.
Kobayashi, T., Kishigami, S., Sone, M., Inokuchi, H., Mogi,
T., and Ito, K. (1997) Respiratory chain is required to maintain oxidized states of the DsbA-DsbB disulﬁde bondformation system in aerobically growing Escherichia coli
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:11857–11862.
Kobayashi, T., Takahashi, Y., and Ito, K. (2001) Identiﬁcation
of a segment of DsbB essential for its respiration- coupledoxidation. Mol Microbiol 39:158–165.
Krupp, R., Chan, C., and Missiakas, D. (2001) DsbD-
catalyzed transport of electrons across the membrane ofEscherichia coli . J Biol Chem 276: 3696–3701.
McCarthy, A.A., Haebel, P.W., Torronen, A., Rybin, V., Baker,
E.N., and Metcalf, P. (2000) Crystal structure of the proteindisulﬁde bond isomerase, DsbC, from Escherichia coli .
Nature Struct Biol 7:196–199.
Martin, J.L., Bardwell, J.C., and Kuriyan, J. (1993) Crystal
structure of the DsbA protein required for disulphide bondformation i n vivo . Nature 365: 464–468.
Metheringham, R., Grifﬁths, L., Crooke, H., Forsythe, S., and
Cole, J. (1995) An essential role for DsbA in cytochrome c synthesis and formate- dependent nitrite reduction byEscherichia coli K-12. Arch Microbiol 164: 301–307.
Missiakas, D., Georgopoulos, C., and Raina, S. (1993) Iden-
tiﬁcation and characterization of the Escherichia coli gene
dsbB , whose product is involved in the formation of disul-
ﬁde bonds in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:7084–7088.
Missiakas, D., Georgopoulos, C., and Raina, S. (1994) The
Escherichia coli dsbC (xprA) gene encodes a periplasmic
protein involved in disulﬁde bond formation. EMBO J 13:
2013–2020.
Missiakas, D., Schwager, F., and Raina, S. (1995) Identiﬁ-cation and characterization of a new disulﬁde isomerase-
like protein (DsbD) in Escherichia coli . EMBO J 14:
3415–3424.
Pugsley, A.P., Bayan, N., and Sauvonnet, N. (2001) Disulﬁde
bond formation in secreton component PulK provides apossible explanation for the role of DsbA in pullulanasesecretion. J Bacteriol 183: 1312–1319.
Raina, S., and Missiakas, D. (1997) Making and breaking
disulﬁde bonds. Annu Rev Microbiol 51:179–202.
Rietsch, A., Belin, D., Martin, N., and Beckwith, J. (1996) 
An in vivo pathway for disulﬁde bond isomerization in
Escherichia coli . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:13048–
13053.
Rietsch, A., Bessette, P., Georgiou, G., and Beckwith, J.
(1997) Reduction of the periplasmic disulﬁde bond iso-merase, DsbC, occurs by passage of electrons from cytoplasmic thioredoxin. J Bacteriol 179: 6602–6608.
Sauvonnet, N., and Pugsley, A.P. (1998) The requirement for
DsbA in pullulanase secretion is independent of disulphidebond formation in the enzyme. Mol Microbiol 27:661–667.
Shao, F., Bader, M.W., Jakob, U., and Bardwell, J.C. (2000)
DsbG, a protein disulﬁde isomerase with chaperone activ-ity. J Biol Chem 275: 13349–13352.
Stafford, S.J., Humphreys, D.P., and Lund, P.A. (1999) Muta-
tions in dsbA and dsbB , but not dsbC , lead to an enhanced
sensitivity of Escherichia coli to Hg
2+and Cd2+. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 174: 179–184.
Stewart, E.J., Katzen, F., and Beckwith, J. (1999) Six con-
served cysteines of the membrane protein DsbD arerequired for the transfer of electrons from the cytoplasm tothe periplasm of Escherichia coli . EMBO J 18:5963–5971.
Sun, X.X., and Wang, C.C. (2000) The N-terminal sequence
(residues 1–65) is essential for dimerization, activities, andpeptide binding of Escherichia coli DsbC. J Biol Chem 275:
22743–22749.
Zapun, A., Bardwell, J.C., and Creighton, T.E. (1993) The
reactive and destabilizing disulﬁde bond of DsbA, a proteinrequired for protein disulﬁde bond formation in vivo . 
Biochemistry 32:5083–5092.
Zapun, A., Missiakas, D., Raina, S., and Creighton, T.E.
(1995) Structural and functional characterization of DsbC,a protein involved in disulﬁde bond formation in Esche-
richia coli . Biochemistry 34:5075–5089.
Zheng, W.D., Quan, H., Song, J.L., Yang, S.L., and Wang,
C.C. (1997) Does DsbA have chaperone-like activity? Arch
Biochem Biophys 337: 326–331.
© 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 44, 1–88J.-F. Collet and J. C. A. Bardwell