 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Information and Common Questions on Marine Debris 
Compiled by the NOAA Marine Debris Program
 
The information contained in this document will be updated as new information becomes available.  
The use of the term “marine debris” herein is de fined as, any persistent solid material that is 
manufactured or processed and directly or indirectly, in tentionally or unintentionally, disposed of or 
abandoned into the marine environment or the Great Lakes. 
Plastic debris 
•	 It is becoming clear that there is a fair amount of small plastic distributed in the oceans and on 
beaches worldwide, not surprising given its durability and floatability.   
•	 Marine debris is often ingested by animals such as sea turtles, marine mammals, and seabirds. 
Items such as lighters and small plastic pieces ma y look like food to an animal, or have an 
animal’s natural food attached to it.  Debris may also be ingested accidentally with actual 
food items.  Exactly how many of them die each year due to marine debris ingestion is not 
known. 
•	 The detrimental effects of plastic marine debris  on Laysan albatross have been an object of 
research interest for many years but like most ecological questions it is not straightforward.  It 
is known that Laysan albatross do ingest mari ne debris, which can cause mechanical damage 
or harm in the form of entrapment and en tanglement, blockage of the digestive tract, 
perforation of the gut, impairment of nutrition by displacement of food or false satiety. Studies have found that ingested plastic debris is not a significant direct cause of death in these seabirds, but may be a likely cause for physio logical stress (Auman et al., 1997; Sievert 
and Sileo, 1993). More research is needed to see if these results have changed. 
o	 Auman, H.J., Ludwig, J.P., Giesy, J.P., and Colborn, T. 1997. Plastic ingestion by Laysan Albatross chicks on Sand Island, Midway Atoll, in 1994 and 1995. Albatross Biology and Conservation, pp 239-44.  
o	 Sievert, P.R., and Sileo, L. 1993. The effects of ingested plastic on growth and survival 
of albatross chicks. In : The status, ecology, and conservation of marine birds of the 
North Pacific. Can. Wildl. Serv. Spec. Publ, Ottawa. pg 212-217.  
•	 The results of a recent study conducted by Ryan in 2008 show the number of ingested plastic 
particles in five species of seabirds in the A tlantic and southwestern Indian Ocean have not 
changed significantly.  He found that the propor tion of nurdles (pre-production plastic pellets) 
decreased 44-79% in all five species.  “More data are needed on the relationship between 
plastic loads in seabirds and the density of plastic at sea in their foraging areas, but the 
consistent decrease in pellets in birds suggests there has been a global change in the composition of small plastic debris at sea over the last two decades.” 
o	 Ryan, P.G. 2008. Seabirds indicate changes in the composition of plastic litter in the Atlantic and south-western Indian O ceans. Mar. Poll. Bull. 56: 1406-1409 
•	 Research on other effects of plastic debris in the ocean is still needed.  For example, the impacts of contaminants that adsorb to the plastic. 
•	 To help address this need for additional research on plastics and toxins, the NOAA Marine 
Debris Program is coordinating a research wo rkshop, to be held in September 2008, to 
provide an opportunity for research scientists to convene and discuss some of the many 
pressing issues regarding mircoplastics and marine pollution. 
1  
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Information and Common Questions on Marine Debris 
Compiled by the NOAA Marine Debris Program
 
The information contained in this document will be updated as new information becomes available.  
North Pacific marine debris “hot spot”: The Convergence Zone 
•	 This North Pacific marine debris “hot spot” or Subtropical Convergence Zone (STCZ) is a 
known area of marine debris accumulation in the North Pacific.  This area moves seasonally 
between 23° and 37° N latitude.  The STCZ sh ifts further southward during periods of El 
Niño. 
•	 The term “garbage patch” may have originated  from a study done in 2001 by James Ingraham 
(with NOAA) and Curtis Ebbesmeyer wherein a computer model, called OSCURS, was used 
to predict where debris would move in the Paci fic - their results showed what they termed 
“eastern and western garbage patches.” 
o	 Ingraham Jr., W.J., Ebbesmeyer, C.C., 2001. Surface current concentration of floating marine debris in the North Pacific Ocean: 12-year OSCURS model experiments. In: Proceedings of the International Conferen ce on Derelict Fishing Gear and the Ocean 
Environment. Available online at <http://hawaiihumpbackwhale.noaa.gov/> . 
How long do various marine debris items take  to degrade in the marine environment? 
•	 Bottom line: Most debris items take a long tim e to degrade in the marine environment. 
•	 Figures on the amount of time it takes for durable debris items to break down in the environment are variable and rampant.  It is unknown where the numbers listed in degradation timelines for these durable items originated or how they were figured. 
•	 Degradation time depends upon numerous factors including material type, size, thickness, and 
environmental conditions (amount exposed to sunlight; location (e.g. on the beach, in the surf, 
floating at sea, etc). 
Is it true that plastics in the marine environment do not degrade? 
•	 Plastic polymers are extremely stable, and do not  readily enter into the degradation cycles of 
the biosphere. 
•	 Plastic photodegrades, breaking down into what we call “microplastics.”  Their effect on our oceans and marine life is being looked into, pa rticularly the rates of photo degradation when 
submerged in water. 
Is it true that 100,000 marine mammals and/or sea turtles die each year due to marine debris/plastics/plastic bags? 
•	 Origin of statement : PROCEEDNGS OF THE WORKSHOP ON THE FATE AND IMPACT 
OF MARINE DEBRIS 27-29 November 1984, Honolulu, Hawaii, July 1985 -- NOAA-TM­
NMFS-SWFC-54 
o	 "Debris entanglement is estimated to cause 50,000 to 90,000 deaths per year in the northern fur seal.  The population in 1983 was dropping on the main rookery in Alaska at about 8% per year.  At least 50,000 deat hs are thought to be due to entanglement; the 
other 40,000 deaths possible entanglement or possibly some unknown factor such as disease (Fowler 1983)." 
2  
 
 
     
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  Information and Common Questions on Marine Debris 
Compiled by the NOAA Marine Debris Program
 
The information contained in this document will be updated as new information becomes available.  
o	 In Conclusions: " Up to one hundred thousand marine mammals and possibly more die 
each year.   Half or more of the individuals of certain marine reptile  species are affected 
by the plastic litter, and beachcombing land ma mmals become snarled in nets and die. 
..." 
o	 Fowler, 1983 is a background paper for the 26th Annual Meeting of the Standing 
Scientific Committee of the North Pacific Fur Seal Commission. 
•	 Also mentioned in Wallace, N. 1985. Debris entanglement in the marine environment. A 
review. Pp 259-277 in: R. S. Shomura, H. O. Yoshida (eds.) Proceedings of the Workshop on 
the Fate and Impact of Marine Debris . NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS, NOAA-TM­
NMFS-SWFC-54. 
•	 Plastic Bags : no scientific literature or studies have been found to support this statement. 
Is it true that millions of seabirds die due to marine debris each year? 
•	 No information was found to supp ort this exact statement/figure. 
•	 The closest referenced figure published was “214,500-763,000 seabirds  are killed annually 
incidental to driftnet fishing by Japanese fishermen in the North Pacific Ocean (US 
Department of Commerce, 1981)” from Laist, 1987. This may refer to active fishing gear 
bycatch vs. marine debris. 
o	 Laist, D. W. 1987. Overview of the Biological Effects of Lost and Discarded Plastic 
Debris in the Marine Environment. Mari ne Pollution Bulletin, Vol. 18, No. 6B, pp. 
319-326 
Marine mammal entanglements – Ar e both active and derelict fishing g ear considered marine debris? 
•	 NO. NOAA does not consider active fishing gear marine debris, even though the animal may 
break it loose after the entanglement.  It is t ypically difficult to tell if entangling gear was 
active or derelict gear at the time of entanglem ent.  In the past the level of fouling and 
presence of numerous other types of gear were used  as factors to determine if entangling gear 
was indeed marine debris. 
•	 NOAA, across the nation, is involved in, a nd in many areas, leads, marine mammal 
disentanglement or response teams that take  action in a situation of entanglement. 
How much debris enters the ocean? 
•	 There is a study by the National Academy of Sc iences that gives an estimate of approximately 
1.4 billion pounds of trash per year enters the ocean.  This study was published in 1975, 
before MARPOL Annex V, a nd thus is quite dated. 
o	 This study only took into account debris from vessels.  Data were collected from 
vessels’ Garbage Record Books.   
o	 Today, with the implementation of MARPOL Annex V, Garbage Record Books are 
only required by vessels over 400 tons. 
3  
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Information and Common Questions on Marine Debris 
Compiled by the NOAA Marine Debris Program
 
The information contained in this document will be updated as new information becomes available.  
•	 In accordance with MARPOL Annex V, “all ships of 400 gross tonnage and above 
and every ship certified to carry 15 pers ons or more, and every fixed or floating 
platform engaged in explor ation and exploitation of the seabed, must provide a 
Garbage Record Book, to record all disposal and incineration operations.” 
(http://www.imo.org/Environment/mainframe.asp?topic_id=297#review ) 
o	 MARPOL = International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL) 
o	 Annex V = Annex V: Prevention of pollution by garbage from ships  
Entry into force: 31 December 1988 
•	 NOAA is working with other agencies and groups to investigate the best available 
information to work towards a more current estimate.
 
What happens to marine debris once it is  removed from the marine environment? 
•	 Depending on the type of debris, methods of dis posal may include recycling, reusing, or even 
using debris to create electricity. 
o	 Nets to Energy Program and Partnership in Hawaii -- Instead of adding these nets to 
already congested landfills, Hawaii's multi- partner marine debris group devised a 
unique program to recycle this marine debris into usable electricity. Today, all NOAA-funded marine debris removal projects in Hawai'i incorporate this recycling as a 
component for success.  100 tons of net create enough electricity to power 43 homes 
for a year each. 
o	 Fishing for Energy Program in Massachusetts -- The Fishing for Energy project aims to reduce the amount of unused fishing gear in the community and marine environment. The project provides a place for the fishing community to dispose of old or derelict 
fishing gear they recover while at sea at no co st. The Scituate Harbor site is the fourth 
site in the effort which is proposed to span the East Coast.  1 ton of derelict marine 
debris = fuel for a home for 25 days. 
What is being done to address marine debris? 
•	 Marine debris is a global problem.  It can be found on shorelines and beaches around the 
world. Much is being done on an internati onal level to raise awareness and address this 
pervasive problem 
o	 International Coastal Cleanup – The largest marine debris and litter cleanup event in 
the world. This event is held on the 3rd Saturday of every September and is coordinated 
by the Ocean Conservancy. 
•	 While this is a global problem, efforts are ongoing locally to solve it.  Together, through partnerships, work is being done nationwide to research, prevent, and reduce marine debris, as 
well as educate the public to be better stewards of our ocean. 
o	 Since 2005, the NOAA Marine Debris Program has funded and helped support over 110 projects working with partners and a ddressing marine debris across the nation. 
Examples include: 
4  
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 Information and Common Questions on Marine Debris 
Compiled by the NOAA Marine Debris Program
 
The information contained in this document will be updated as new information becomes available.  
•	 Temporal and Spatial Distribution of Marine  Debris on Selected Beaches in the Gulf 
of Alaska 
•	 Assessing change in Derelict Fishing Gear and Other Marine De bris in Deepwater 
Benthic Habitats Within the Monter ey Bay National Marine Sanctuary 
•	 Marine Debris Survey and Removal from the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands 
(NWHI) Marine National M onument: Maintenance Mode 
•	 Planning for Removal of Derelict Vessels and Vessel Debris in American Samoa 
•	 Gulf of Mexico Marine Debris Project 
•	 Marine Debris Characterization in Salt Marsh and Submerged Habitats in Coastal North Carolina 
•	 Impact Assessment, Recovery, and Prevention of Derelict Fishing Gear (crab traps) in Chesapeake Bay 
•	 Marine Debris Removal in Right Whale Habitat 
•	 Marine Debris Education Campaign for Guam 
•	 More can be found at http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/projects/welcome.html 
•	 Everyone, no matter how close to or far from the ocean, can contribute to the solution.  It’s simple: Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle -- (1) Try to Reduce  the amount of disposable items you 
use on a daily bases; (2) When yo u head to the beach this summer or have picnics in the park, 
make use of items that are Reusable  rather then disposable; and (3) when you do use 
disposable items, try to remember to recycle ! 
5 