HYDRODYNAMIC MODELLING
OF SECONDARY SETTLING
TANKS
(January 1997 to December, 2000)
Part 1: By GA Ekama and P Marais
Part 2: By D Kleine and BD Reddy
WRC Report No. 835/1/02
Water Research CommissionDisclaimer
This report emanates from a project financed by the Water Research Commission (WRC) and is
approved for publication. Approval docs not signify that the contents necessarily reflect the views
and policies of the WRC or the members of the project steering committee, nor does mention of
trade names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.
Vrv waring
Hicrdie verslag spruit voort uit 'n navorsingsprojek wat deur die Waternavorsingskommissie
(WNK) gefinansier is en goedgekeur is vir publikasie. Goedkeuring heteken nie noodwendig dat
die inhoud die siening en beleid van die WNK of die Iede van die projek-loodskomitee weerspicel
nie, of dat melding van handelsname of -ware deur die WNK vir gebruik goedgekeur of aanbeveel
word nie.UNIVERSITY OF CAPE TOWN
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment
Water Research Group, Department of Civil Engineering
Centre for Research in Computational and Applied Mechanics
FINAL REPORT
to the Water Research Commission
on the contract K5/S35
HYDRODYNAMIC MODELLING OF SECONDARY
SETTLING TANKS
(January 1997 to December, 2000)
PART 1: APPLICATION OF A HYDRODYNAMIC MOOEL TO FULL SCALE
SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
by
GA Ekama and P Marais
Part 2: DEVELOPMENT OF A FINITE ELEMENT 2D HYDRODYNAMIC MODEL
FOR SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
by
D Kleine and BD Reddy
ISBN No 1 86845 860 1 Water Research Group (WRG)
WRC Report No 835/1/02 Research Report No W107
WRC Contract No K5/835
March 2(102Ill
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This research project comprised two principal objectives, i.e.
1) to simulate with a commercially available 2 dimensional (2D) hydrodynamic secondary
settling tank (SST) model (SettlerCAD) a number of fullscale SSTs in different countries
(South Africa, Netherlands and USA) that have been hydraulically and solids loading rate
stress tested, to determine the applicability for design and operation of fullscale SSTs the
widely used ID idealized flux theory (1DFT), and
2) to develop a finite element program for 2D hydrodynamic modelling of fullscale SSTs.
The research work flowing from meeting these two objectives are presented in two parts in this
executive summary and in the more detailed final report that follows.
PART 1 - APPLICATION OF A IIVDRODYNAMIC MODEL
TO FULL SCALE SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Application of the idealized steady state ID flux theory (1DFT) to full scale circular (and
rectangular) SSTs indicate that the design procedures based on this theory over-predict the
permissible solids loading rate (SLR) by about 25 percent (Ekama et aL, 1997). This means that
fullscale SSTs have a flux rating or capacity of about 80% on (he 1DFT calculated SLR. The
reason for this loss of SST capacity was believed to be due to poor hydraulics caused by (i)
turbulence and density currents, (ii) poor effluent weir and baffle placement, (iii) effects of
sludge collection mechanisms and inlet arrangements, (iv) absence of flocculating centre and
stilling wells and (v) wind and temperature effects. However, there was no convincing evidence
that this 25% correction needed to be applied for all types of SST, and therefore a crucial
unanswered question was whether or not the observed SST failures on which the 25% reduction
was based, were specific to the particular design of the tested SSTs. Because the 1DFT based
procedures are widely used for design and operation of SSTs for activated sludge plants, it is
important to determine the applicability of the 1DFT to the design and operation of full scale
SSTs.
1.2 OBJECTIVES
In this task, the two dimensional (2D) hydrodynamic model SettlerCAD (Zhou et a!, 199S) was
applied to simulate full scale circular secondary settling tank (SSTs) with the principle aim to:IV
(1) establish whether or not it "automatically" reproduces a flux rating < 1.0 with respect to
the steady state ID idealized flux theory (1 DFT), where the flux rating is the capacity of
the SST as a % of the 1DFT calculated maximum surface overflow rate (SOR) and solids
loading rate (SLR) and;
(2) determine what factors influence this flux rating.
To do this, SST solids loading rate (SLR) stress tests reported in the literature were simulated.
The tests simulated were;
(1) the 4 tests done by de Haas et al. (1998) on four 35m diameter SSTs with Stamford baffle
of the Darvill wastewater treatment plant (WWTP), Pietcrmaritzburg, South Africa;
(2) the 15 tests done by Watts et al. (1996) on a single 28.96m diameter SST at the Kanapaha
WWTP (Florida, USA), and
(3) 6 each on the Rijcn and Oss SSTs of the STOWa (1981) SST test data set in which 47
tests were done on 25 different SSTs in Holland with 30 to 46m diameter (Stofkoper and
Trentelman, 1982).
Some details of the SSTs simulated are given in Table 1.
Table 1: Geometrical features of circular SSTs simulated with SettlcrCAD.
Diameter, 4\,, m
Side water depth, SWD, m
Bottom slope
Average depth, Have, m
4>s-,/HJve ratio
Sludge collection
Feed
Effluent launder
Feed well skirt baffle <f), m
Stamlord bailieDarvill
New
35
4.10
1:10
4.68
7.48
Scraper
Centre
Peripheral
6.0
YesOld
35
2.50
Flat
2.50
14.00
Suction
Centre
Peripheral
6.0
YesWatts
28.96
3.66
1:15.4
3.97
7.29
Suction
Centre
Peripheral
15.32
NoSTOWa
Rijen
45.5
2.25
1:12
2.88
15.79
Scraper
Centre
Inset1
4.552
NoOss
41,8
2.00
1:12
2.58
16.20
Scraper
Centre
rnset1
4.1S2
No
'The outside rim of the inset launder was blocked off so
3Actual dimensions not given - estimated from a surveyin effect it was peripheral.
of Dutch SSTs (STOWa, 1981c).
1.3 METHOD - FINDING THE MAXIMUM SOU AND ASSOCIATED SLR AND
HLR OF SETTLER CAD
From the measured Vo, n and feed concentration (XF) values of a particular SLR stress test, the
maximum SOR, and associated SLR, hydraulic loading rate (HLR) and actual hydraulic retentiontime (Rha), was calculated from the 1DFT. The data listed in the literature for the particular SST
and SLR stress test to be simulated, was given as input to SettlerCAD. Keeping the recycle flow
(QR) and feed concentration (XF) constant at the test values, the influent flow (Q,), calculated as
a % of the 1DFT limit value, was increased for successive simulation runs from a low value to
a high value, first in 2% of 1 DFT limit increments, and then in 0.25 % of 1 DFT limit increments
between consecutive safe and fail runs. SST failure was accepted to be an average effluent
suspended solids (ESS) > 50 mg/C over the final 2 actual hydraulic retention times (Rha) of the
run. In this way the steady state influent flow rate (Q,) for ESS > 50 mg/( was determined for
SeltlerCAD at an accuracy of 0.25 % of the 1 DFT limit and the first run with ESS > 50 mg/P was
accepted as the SettlerCAD predicted maximum influent flow rate limit. The SettlerCAD
predicted maximum SOR, and associated SLR, HLR and Rha, was calculated from the predicted
influent flow limit and the test QR and XF values. The predicted ESS and RAS concentrations
over the complete run were imported into a spreadsheet program, in which were calculated (i)
the average ESS and RAS concentrations over the final 2 actual hydraulic retention times (2xRhJ
and (ii) the % solids mass balance as the run proceeded. The outcome (fail or safe) of each
simulation run was recorded by checking sludge blanket height in SettlerCAD at the end of each
simulation and whether the average ESS concentration over the final 2xRha was greater (fail), or
less (safe) than 50 mg/C. The % mass balance at a particular time interval was calculated as the
sum of the masses of sludge in the return and effluent flows as a % of the mass of sludge entering
the SST with the influent and recycle flows.
Generally, the better the sludge settleability, the higher the Vo and the lower the n values in the
semilog equation linking the zone settling velocity Vzs and sludge concentration X (Vzs = Vo e"
nX) and the higher the concentration X, the lower the Vzs. Therefore, the better the sludge
settleability and lower the SST feed concentration (X,.-), the higher the term V(/(nXF), called the
flux load factor and the higher the flux load factor, the higher the SOR, SLR and HLR (and the
shorter the Rhil). High HLR arc more likely to cause hydraulic disturbances in the SST than low
HLR and therefore the flux rating of the SST can be expected to decrease as the flux load factor
increases. For this reason the SettlerCAD predicted SOR or SLR flux ratings (as a % of the
1DFT maxima) for the SSTs were plotted versus the flux load factor V0/(nXF) of the different
tests.
1.4 VALIDATION OF SETTLERCAD PREDICTION ACCURACY
The only tests which were helpful to check the accuracy with which SctllcrCAD simulated full
scale SSTs were the Watts tests. Of all 15 Watts tests simulated, SettlerCAD correctly predicted
the results of 12 tests, i.e. Tests 1,2 and 4 to 10 (safe) and 11 to 13 (fail) but incorrectly predicted
the results for 3 tests, i.e. Tests 3 (test safe, SettlerCAD fail) and Hand 15 (test fail, SettlerCAD
safe). Tests 4, 14, 13, 7, 9 and 12, which include 3 safe and 3 fail tests, fall in a very narrowVI
%1DFT SOR (and SLR) range of 2% of 1DFT SOR from 71.5 to 73.5% and the SettlerCAD
predicted SOR limit versus flux load factor line falls very close to these 6 tests (Fig 1). This
narrow range, indicates that apart from Test 3 and 15, SettlerCAD accurately identifies the SOR
and SLR capacity of the Watts SST. The SettlerCAD results of the Watts tests gives a good
indication that the SettlerCAD predictions arc valid for the simulation of full scale stress tests.
SettlerCAD correctly predicted the result of 2 of the 4 Darvill tests and all 12 Rijen and Oss tests
simulated. However, these tests were not help ful lo validate the accuracy with which SettlerCAD
predicted SST capacity, because, unlike the Watts tests, the range between the highest loaded
safe and lowest loaded fail tests was too large (>10% of 1DFT SOR).
Watts SST Tests 1 to 15
Fig 1: SettlerCAD predicted maximum soilids
loading rate (SLR) as % of the IDFT maximum
limits versus flux load factor. Also shown are
the positions and result (safe 0,fail 2) of the
15 actual tests identified by number.
6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.5
In all of the simulation runs, simulation times were selected which were >25 times the actual
hydraulic retention time (25 x Rha). These run times were sufficiently long to establish a final
steady state condition towards the end of the simulation, which was checked from the solids mass
balance calculated at each time step of the run. In the solids mass balance, the mass of solids
exiting the SST via the underflow and overflow is calculated as a % of the inflow mass of sludge.
Steady state was accepted to have been established when the % mass balance no longer changed.
The final ESS (XE) and RAS (XR) concentrations accepted for each run were the averages of the
predicted values over the last 2x Rha of the run. Provided the run ended safe (ESS < 50 mg/C),
the final concentrations yielded a solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100%. In contrast, runs
that ended in failure (ESS > 50 mg/1) yielded a lower than 99.5 % solids mass balance and the
greater the SST overload (i.e. higher the ESS concentration) the lower the solids mass balance
below 99.5 %, even as low as 86 % for some runs at 100 % of the 1DFT SOR. Halving the
simulation time steps and/or doubling the number of iterations per time step yielded identical
simulation results and no improvement in % mass balance and therefore it was accepted that the
low % mass balance was not due to numerical instability. It is suspected that the low mass
balance for the failed runs is due to a simple logical error in SettlerCAD. It seems that the RASVll
concentration is "corrected" by subtracting from it the ESS concentration, because the higher the
ESS concentration (or overload) the lower the RAS concentration. This is not consistent with
the flux theory. Theoretically for increasing Q, and constant QK and XF, the RAS concentration
should remain constant (at XR = jL/qR) once the SLR capacity (failure) has been reached. This
error does not influence the SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits because the ESS is still
low at the transition from safe to fail.
1.5 RESULTS
1.5.1 Flux rating ofthe simulated SSTs.
The results ofthe Settler CAD predicted SOR, as % ofthe 1 DFT calculated maximum SOR, and
associated SLR, also as % ofthe 1DFT calculated maximum SLR, of all the simulated tests on
the Darvill new and old, Watts, Rijen and Oss STTs are plotted together in Figs 2a and b. The
Rijen (•) and Oss (I) SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limit results lie below the Darvill old
(A) and new (•) and Watts (•) SST "lines", but closer to the Darvill old SST line. Considering
that with respect to external SST geometry (Table 1), the Rijen and Oss SSTs are closer in
likeness to the old Darvill SST than the Darvill new and Watts SSTs, the expectation is that the
Rijen and Oss results should fall near the old Darvill SST results, and this does indeed happen.
100
90 • •100
t
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h10.1 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h10.0
Figs 2a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fig 2a, left) and SLR (Fig 2b, right), as
a % ofthe I DFT limit values versus flux load factor VJ(nXf)for the 4 tests on the Dan-ill new
(M) and old (A ) SSTs, 15 ofthe 15 tests on the Watts ' SST (0), 6 each ofthe 14 and 10 tests
on the Rijen ( V) and Oss (I) SSTs.
The simulations of SST stress tests with the 2D hydrodynamic model SetterCAD indicate, as
would be expected, that the SST hydraulic non-idealities are intrinsically part ofthe model and
that SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR were significantly below those calculated
from the 1DFT. The simulations indicate that the capacity, or flux rating, ofthe 2.5m SWD flat
bottom Darvill old SST decreases from 86% to 70% ofthe 1 DFT maximum SLR as the flux loadvia
factor V</(nXF) increases (which increases HLR due to an improvement in sludge settleability
and/or decrease in feed concentration). The shallow Rijen and Oss SSTs have a lower flux rating
(SLR) than the Darvill old SST which decreases from 80% to 67% as flux load factor increases.
The 4.1 m SWD 1:10 sloping bottom Darvill new SST does not show this sensitivity of capacity
(or flux rating) to the flux load factor (or HLR) and the flux rating remained approximately
constant at around 87% of the 1DFT maximum SLR. The simulations show that the magnitude
of the flux rating is not a constant value, and seems to be dependent on SST depth and HLR - the
deeper the SST and the lower the HLR, the higher the flux rating. To determine the effect of the
Stamford baffle and SWD on the flux rating, additional simulation runs were done on the Darvill
SST (i) without the Stamford baffles and (ii) with interchanged SWD between the new and old
SSTs and on the Watts SST (i) with a Stamford baffle and (ii) with 6.0m SWD.
1.5.2 The effect of the Stamford baffle on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlcrCAD predicted maximum SLR (or flux rating) for the Darvill new and old and Watts
SSTs with and without Stamford baffles are shown in Figs 3a and b.
Darvill Old and New SSTs: Tests 1-4
ScttlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
_j
CO
a
Low Fce;<t Cnnc
Good Sedlcabilty
High Hydraulics
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h1CWatts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
90
85 • •
80 -•
75 -•
70roorSellkabilty
Low Ihdraulks
-^« ' i -+••'Low Fe(jd Cone
Good Scitlcabilty
High Hvdfaulics
!••
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.5
Figs 3a andbi SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for the Darvill (Fig 3a, left) and Watts (Fig
3b, right) SSTs with and without baffles. The actual test values, identified by number and result
(safe 0,fail I), are also shown.
For the Darvill SSTs, the SLR flux rating (Fig 3a) is about 2% of the 1DFT limit SLR higher
without the Stamford baffle. In contrast, for the Watts SST, the flux rating is about 2% of the
1DFT limit SLR lower without the Stamford baffle. From this, it is concluded that while the
Stamford baffle has a significant effect on the ESS concentration while the SST is underloaded,
its influence on the flux rating (or capacity) of the SST is small.IX
1.5.3 The Effect of depth on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for the Darvill new and old SSTs with interchanged
depths (i.e. new 2.5 m SWD, 1:10 sloping bottom and scraper sludge collection and old 4.1 m
SWD, flat bottom and suction sludge collection ) and the Watts SST with 6.0 m SWD are
compared with that of the SSTs as built, (i.e. new 4.1 m SWD, 1: 10 sloping bottom and scraper
sludge collection, old 2.5 mSWD, flat bottom and suction sludge collection and Watts with 3.66
m SWD, 1:15.4 sloping bottom and suction sludge collection) are plotted versus flux load factor
in Figs 4a and b.
Watts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
95
QDarvill
90 •
80 •
70 •
60 •Old and New SSTs
SettlerCAD Predictec
High
Pour
\.nvsFeed Cone
IvdrJiiIii'SM
*^
New
I ITests 1-4
Capacity
I New 4.I'm
=4—-JT "OifM.lm
^*
2.5m ^**"*X
Low Feed Cone
Good SettlejhiJty
Ui«h llMlrjuIki90 • •
E
£ 85
CO
i-
Q80
75
70High Iced Cone
Poor Scltlcabiliy
ton. Hydraulics. -low Ketd <«[»•
Good Scttlcahilly
UishHjiiraulks .
6.0m SW1)
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h10 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.5
Figs 4a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for the Darvill new and old SSTs (Fig 4 a,
left) with interchanged SWD (old 4. lm and new 2.5in) and the Watts SST (Fig 4b, right) with a
SWD of 6.0 m compared with the SSTs as built (new 4.1m, old 2.5m and Watts 3.66m). The
actual test values, identified by number and result (safe 0, fail I) are also shown.
For the Darvill SSTs, the 4.1m SWD old SST has approximately the same flux rating (SLR) as
the new 4.1 m SST (Fig 4a) and shows a small decrease from 89 to 85% of 1DFT SLR limit as
flux load factor increases from 3 to 9 m/h. Likewise 2.5 m new SST has a similarly low flux
rating as the 2.5 m old SST. The differences in flux rating between the new and old SSTs with
the same SWD probably arise from the different SST bottoms and sludge collection systems,
which for the old SST is flat and hydraulic suction and for the new SST is sloping 1:10 and
scraper. While SettlerCAD can accommodate these differences, the accuracy with which
simulates then is unknown.
For the Watts SST, 3.66 m SWD (as built) the 1DFT SLR limit (Fig 4b) shows a slight
decreasing trend from 80 to 77% of 1DFT SLR as sludge load factor increases from 6.0 to 7.3
m/h, For Test 13 and 14 conditions (X,. and qR), the same flux load factor of 6.3 m/h leads to
SettlerCAD predicted SLR predicted limits of 79 and 82% respectively. Ignoring Tests 4 and
14 (marked?) for reasons detailed in Section 7.2 of the report, the Watts SST with a 6.0 m SWDhas a flux rating of about 5% of IDFT SLR higher than with a 3.66 m SWD.
From the above it is clear that the greater the SWD, the higher the flux rating. Fior the Watts
SST, an increase in SWD from 3.66 to 6.0m represents a 60% increase in SST volume. For a
5% of 1DFT SLR increase in flux rating this volume increase is definitely not cost efficient - it
would be better to select the shallower SWD (3.66m for the Watts SST) and increase the surface
area to accommodate the lower flux rating.
1.6 CONCLUSION
The simulations of the full-scale SST SLR stress tests with the 2D hydrodynamic model
SettlerCAD indicate, as would be expected, that the SST hydraulic non-idealities are intrinsically
part of the model and that appropriate flux ratings for the full scale SSTs are reproduced
"automatically" in the model. The simulations therefore provide further convincing evidence that
the IDFT cannot be applied to the design of full-scale SSTs without an appropriate reduction
factor. The SettlerCAD simulations of the Darvill 35 m 0 SSTs indicated that the capacity, or
flux rating, of the old flat bottom shallow (2.5 m SWD) SSTs decreased from 86 to 70% of the
IDFT maximum SLR as the flux load factor (or HLR) increased from an improvement in sludge
settleability and/or decrease in feed concentration. The new sloping bottom deep (4.1m SWD)
SSTs did not show this sensitivity of capacity (or flux rating) to flux load factor (or HLR) and
the flux rating remained approximately constant at around 87% of the IDFT maximum SLR.
The magnitude of the flux rating therefore is not a constant value, and is shown to be dependent
on SST depth and HLR; the deeper the SST, the higher the flux rating and the less sensitive the
flux rating to flux load factor. Simulations of the Darvill new and old SSTs with inter-changed
SWD and the Watts SST with 6.0m SWD, continued the sensitivity of the flux rating to depth
and HLR. Furthermore, although the Stamford baffle can significantly reduce effluent suspended
solids (ESS) concentration while the SST is underloaded, it does not increase the flux rating (or
capacity) of the SST.
From the simulations the flux rating of 80% of the IDFT maximum SLR recommendation by
Ekama and Marais (19S6) remains a reasonable value to apply in the design of full scale SSTs
- for deep SSTs (4m SWD) the flux rating could be increased to 85% and for shallow SSTs
(2.5m SWD) decreased to 75%. It is recommended that (i) while the apparent interrelationship
between SST flux rating and depth suggests some optimization of the volume of the SST, that
this be avoided and that (ii) the depth of the SST be designed independently of the surface area
as is usually the practice and once selected, the appropriate flux rating is applied to the IDFT
estimate of the surface area.XI
PART 2 - DEVELOPMENT OF A FINITE ELEMENT 20 HVDRODYNAMIC MODEL
FOR SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
2.1 INTRODUCTION
The flow in a sedimentation tank is characterized by the simultaneous flow of suspended solids
and water. Hydrodynamic models have been developed for simulating secondary settling tanks
(SST) to get a better understanding of the complex flow patterns in these tanks and to make
design and optimization of the SST internal features possible. These models use mainly the finite
volume method (FVM) as a method for obtaining numerical solutions. The development of a
finite element program for (initially) 2D hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanks is
considered in this second task of the research project.
2.2 THE ADVANTAGES OF FEM
In this work a program code is developed that is performed by the finite element method (FEM).
Although this method has its origins in stress analysis, it is currently applied to sophisticated
problems in other areas such as heat transfer and fluid How.
All numerical solutions are discrete approximations to continuous solutions. Most of the
differences in techniques arise from the choice of discretization of the problem. The most common
methods are Finite Differences (FDM), Finite Volumes (FVM) and Finite Elements (FF,M).
The finite difference method approximates the derivatives in the differential equations via a
truncated Taylor series and combines the series of adjacent points to approximate the governing
equations. The FDM is simple and efficient to code in one, two and three dimensions on
structured grids, and it is easy to obtain higher-order schemes. The restriction to simple
geometries, static meshes and problems with smoothly varying properties are significant
disadvantages in complex flows.
The equations of fluid dynamics express the conservation of mass, momentum and energy in a
volume closed by a surface. There are situations where an accurate representation of the
conservation laws in their integral form is extremely important, for example, the imposition of the
incompressibility constraint, as a conservation law for mass, determines the pressure field. The
finite volume method achieves this by discrctizing the integral form of the equations and not the
differential form. Due to the combination of the formulation of a flow problem on control
volumes, with the geometric flexibility in the choice of the grid and the flexibility in defining theXll
discrete flow variables, makes the FVM very attractive in engineering applications. Additionally
the FVM approach is simple to understand and to program. The disadvantages of the FVM are
the difficulties in defining the derivatives. Since the grid is not necessarily orthogonal, as in the
FDM, the Taylor-expansion cannot be applied to define the derivatives. It is also not possible to
convert higher order derivatives into lower ones with the mechanism of a weak formulation, as
in the FEM. This is the main distinguishing feature of the finite element method. The equations
are multiplied by a weighting function before they are integrated over the entire domain. The
power of the finite element method lies in its ability to use an irregular grid. It provides more
flexibility in fitting irregular domains and in providing local grid refinement. The flexible geometry
of the FEM supports the description and adaptation of complex internal features of SSTs like inlet
and outlet arrangements. Furthermore, the FEM deals with strongly varying internal properties
and is applicable to Lagrangian moving-mesh problems. The disadvantage of the FEM is a
significantly greater computational complexity.
2.3 DEVELOPMENT OF A I KM CODE FOR HYDRODYNAMIC MODELLING OF
FULLSCALE SSTS
In this work a program is developed that is based on the finite element method (FFM). Unlike the
finite difference method (FDM) or the FVM, the finite element method is convenient for handling
arbitrarily shaped domains and variable resolution meshes.
The performance of a settling tank is determined by the tank hydraulics and the transport and
removal of solids. The hydrodynamic SST model solves the continuity, momentum and the solids
transport equations, as well as equations that model turbulence. A density state equation and a
settling velocity equation carry out the coupling of the solids transport and hydrodynamic
equations.
The finite element approach leads to a fully coupled matrix equation. The present work generally
follows the projection method to decouple the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. For
solving the coupled momentum and continuity equation a second-order accurate pressure
correction scheme is deployed. The treatment of incompressibility is taken into account by
splitting the coupled Navier-Stokes- and the continuity equations, and obtaining definite
expressions for the velocities as well as for the pressure.
The fractional-#-schcme is adopted to integrate the time derivative of the governing equations in
the temporal domain. This method has the merit of incorporating both implicit Ituler and Crank-
Nicolson schemes as special cases.Xlll
In order to improve stability the standard Navier-Stokes formulation is modified using the
Streamline Upwind Pctrov-Galerkin (SUPG) method. The problem of convergence no longer
simply associated with the convective nature of the equations, since in stratified How fields, as in
settling tanks, the gravity-production term reduces the efficiency of the upwinding scheme.
The piecewisc bilinear test functions and the trial functions for the velocity correction equation
and the pressure equation are same in the formulation. In case of the SUPG formulation the test
functions for the equation to evaluate the provisional velocity are performed by adding a
streamline upwind perturbation, which acts only in the flow direction.
The discretized mathematical model results in the solution of systems of linear equations to obtain
the nodal solution. The whole system, consisting of six coupled partial differential equations, is
decoupled through the use of an iterative scheme and linearisation of the system. Sophisticated
Krylov subspace iterations are adopted to solve the linear problems. The resulting symmetric and
positive definite linear problem is solved by the conjugate gradient method. The resulting non-
symmetric linear problem of the discrete momentum equations is solved by the generalized
minimal residual (GMRBS) method.
In this work, the finite clement model is applied to full scale circular SSTs. in two dimensions. The
performance of the model is analysed with tests done by de Haas ct al. (1998) on SSTs of the
Darvill wastewatcr treatment plant (Pietermaritzburg, South Africa), as well as with stress tests
done by Watts el al. (199(S) on one of the four SSTs at the Kanapaha Water Reclamation Facility
(Florida.USA).
The computational results show that the turbulent transport is strongly affected by buoyancy
effects. Without the buoyancy source term in the £-/>model the turbulence is not damped due to
stable stratification. The sediment eddy dilfusivity is related to the eddy viscosity by using the
Reynolds analogy between mass transport and momentum transport. By setting the Schmidt
number to typical values in the range between 0.5 and 1.0 the diffusion coefficient in the
concentration equation reaches the size of the settling velocity. In a stable stratification the
movement in the vertical direction is only determined by diffusion and settling motion. The
settlement of the sludge cannot take place when the motion due to diffusion is higher than the
convective motion due to the settling velocity of the sludge. Furthermore, the required recycle
concentration is not attainable, which must inevitably result in a failure of the SST. Especially at
the bottom of the tank the situation is critical: the higher the concentration the smaller the settling
velocity and the higher the influence of the diffusion on the settling motion is.
The question arises as to what extent the use of the Reynolds analogy is applicable, and whether
attention has to be paid to the rheo logical properties of highly concentrated activated sludce. DueXIV
The question arises as to what extent the use of the Reynolds analogy is applicable, and whether
attention has to be paid to the rheologieal properties of highly concentrated activated sludge. Due
to these uncertainties and the immense effect of the turbulent sizes on the settling process the
computational results do not provide a definitive answer. To properly validate the model further
information and calibration are needed. Unfortunately this information is not yet available in the
literature.
From the computational point of view the code needs to be improved with regard to
computational efficiency. This can be done by preconditioning, a more robust iterative treatment,
the implementation of a multigrid technique and by the choice of another element pair, which is
more robust, accurate and efficient. Furthermore, because of the progressive development of the
program, it is somewhat inefficient in computer time, because of numerous operations are
repeated several times, instead of having their results stored once in the computer memory. To
save on memory the matrix should be stored in a special way, for example using compressed
sparse row storage. More efficient streamlining of the calculation procedure and routines can also
reduce computation time. Finally, before the program can be released, it is necessary to build up
a user-friendly pre- and postprocessing procedure.XV
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The writers wish to express their gratitude to Reid Crowther Consulting Inc (Seattle, USA) (Dr
Z Cello Vitasovic) for donation of the SettlerCAD model to the Water Research Group (WRG)
at UCT on condition that it is used for exclusively for research.
A special word of thanks to Mr Jay Bhagwan of the Water Research Commission (WRC) as
chairman of the research steering committee for this project, for his support, positive critical
comment and advice on the research work and his efforts on the administration of the project.
Gratitude is also expressed to the following persons who were members of the steering
committee for this project, for their contribution to the overall success of the research work:
Project K5/835 -
Mr JN Bhagwan -
Dr I Msibi -
ProfBDReddy-
Prof GA Ekama -
Ms D Kleine -
Mr C Brouckaert -
Prof O Onyejekwe -
Mr SA van der Merwe
Dr A van Niekerk -
Mr AR Pitman -
Mr P Gaydon -
Mr MJ Arklcy -
Mr P Marais -Hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanks (This
project)
WRC and chairman of the steering committee for the project.
WRC
Dean of Science UCT, and Director of the Centre for Research in
Computational and Applied Mechanics (CERECAM) at UCT (Project
leader).
Dept of Civil Engineering, UCT (Project leader).
Research Officer, CERECAM, UCT
Dcpt of Chemical Engineering , University of Natal , Durban
Dcpt of Civil Engineering, University of Durban Westvillc.
Pretoria City Council
Wates Meiring and Barnard
Greater Johannesburg Metropolitan Council
Umgeni Water.
Cape Metropolitan Council
V3 Consulting, Masters student, Dept of Civil Eng, UCT.
and also of the 2 related WRC computational fluid dynamics (CFD) research projects with whom
joint steering committees WLTC held:
Project K5/1075 -
DrGOffringa-
Dr I Msibi -
Mr C Brouckaert -CFD modelling support (o water research projects. Dept of
Chemical Engineering, University of Natal, Durban (UND).
WRC, chairman of the steering committee for the project.
WRC
Dept of Chemical Engineering, UND (Project Leader)XVI
Prof CA Buckley -
ProfCGdcKduToit
ProfJHaarhof-
ProfMStarzak-
Mr W Pullcs -
Mr M Pryor -
Dr EP Jacobs -
DrVLPillay-
and-
Project K5/998
Mr JN Bhagwan -
Dr I Msibi -
ProfCGdcKduToit
Mr TN Lemmer -
Mr CF Pretorius -
Mr JC Geldenhuys -
Mr SA Pieterse -
and -Dept of Chemical Engineering, UND
Dept of Chemical Engineering , Potchefstroom Univ. for CHE
Dept of Civil Engineering, Rand Afrikaans University (RAU)
Dept of Chemical Engineering, UND
Pulles, Howard and de Lange Consultants
Umgeni Water
Polymer Research Institute, University of Stellenbosch
ML Sultan Technikon
Mr SA van der Merwe, Profs BD Reddy, Onyejekwe and Ekama of
the above project.
Modelling of flocculation, thickening and sedimentation in water
treatment - Potchefstroom Univ. for CHE (PotCHE)
WRC and chairman of the steering committee for the project.
WRC
Dept of Chemical Engineering, PotCHE (Project Leader)
Doctoral Student, Dept of Chemical Engineering, PotCHE
Wates, Meiring and Barnard Consultants
Rand Water
Cape Metropolitan Council
Mr CJ Brouckaert, Dr AR Pitman, Ms D Kleine and Profs CG du
Toit, GA Ekama, J Haarhof and BD Reddy, of the above two projects.XVII
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xv
TABLE OF CONTENTS xvii
OUTPUTS DURING CONTRACT PERIOD xxi
(January 1997 to June 2001)
PART 1: ESTIMATING THE CAPACITY OF FULLSCALE SSTS WITH A 2D
HYDRODYNAMIC MODEL
1 INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 SSTs limit wastewater treatment plant capacity. 1
1.2 Design of fullscale SSTs 2
1.3 Application of the 1DFT to fullscale SSTs 2
2 OBJECTIVES 5
3 SIMULATION OF SST PERFORMANCE WITH SettlerCAD 6
3.1 SettlerCAD description and input information 6
3.2 Finding the maximum SLR and HLR of SettlerCAD 8
4 SIMULATING THE DARVILL SSTs WITH SettlerCAD 11
4.1 The Darvill WWTP SST SLR stress tests 11
4.2 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Darvill SSTs 13
4.3 Conclusions from the Darvill SST simulations 19
5 SIMULATING THE WATTS' SSTs WITH SettlerCAD 21
5.1 The Watts1 SST SLR stress tests 21
5.2 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Watts' SSTs 24
5.3 Conclusions from the Watts' SST simulations 29
6 SIMULATING THE DUTCH STOWa SSTs WITH SettlerCAD 31
6.1 The STOWa SSTs SLR stress tests 31
6.2 Simulating the Rijen SST SLR stress tests with SettlerCAD 32
6.3 Finding the SeltlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Rijen SST 33XV111
6.4 Simulating the Oss SST SLR stress tests with SettlerCAD 41
6.5 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Oss SST 41
6.6 Conclusions from the Rijen and Oss SST simulations 49
7 EFFECT OF BAFFLING AND DEPTH ON SST FLUX RATING 51
7.1 The effect of baffling on SST flux rating (capacity) 51
7.2 The effect of depth on SST flux rating (capacity) 52
8 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 57
8.1 Validation of SettlerCAD prediction accuracy 57
8.2 Flux rating of the simulated SSTs 58
8.3 The effect of the Stamford baffle on SST flux rating (capacity) 59
8.4 The effect of depth on SST flux rating (capacity) 60
8.5 Closure 61
8.6 Recommendations 61
9 REFERENCES 62
APPENDIX 1 - ESTIMATION OF SECONDARY SETTLING TANK
CAPACITY WITH THE 1 DIMENSIONAL IDEALIZED FLUX THEORY (1DFT)
1 INTRODUCTION Al
2 MEASUREMENT OF THE FLUX CONSTANTS Vo AND n A2
3 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ZONE SETTLING VELOCITY
AND CONCENTRATION A3
4 FLUX DUE TO GRAVITY SETTLING A4
5 ID IDEALIZED FLUX THEORY - GRAPHICAL APPLICATION A6
6 DYNAMIC CONDITIONS A16
7 MATHEMATICAL APPLICATION OF THE ID FLUX THEORY A17
7.1 Mathematical properties of the theoretical flux equation A17
7.2 Aplication of tc exponential flux equation to SST A19
7.3 SST design and operating chart A21
8 DESIGN EXAMPLE A23
9 REFERENCES A27
APPENDIX 2 - LIST OF ABBREMATIONS AND SYMBOLS FOR PARTIXIX
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART 2: DEVELOPMENT OF A FINITE ELEMENT 2D HYDRODYNAMIC
MODEL FOR SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
INTRODUCTION
SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
3
2.1 Function of Secondary Settling Tanks 3
2.2 Hydrodynamic Modelling of SSTs 3
FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS
5
3.1 Conservation of Fluid Mass: Continuity Equation 5
3.2 Conservation of Momentum: The Navier-Stokes Equations 5
3.3 Conservation of Paniculate Mass: Concentration Equation 6
3.4 Solid Settling Equation 7
3.5 Density-State Equation 8
3.6 Turbulence Modelling 9
NUMERICAL MODELLING
II
4.1 Spatial Discretization 11
4.2 Weak Formulation of the Finite Element Equations 13
4.3 Upwinding Technique - Streamline Upwind Petrov-Galerkin Method 13
4.4 Temporal Discretization 14
4.5 Derivation of the Navier-Stokes Solver 15
4.6 Equation Solution Technique 16XX
EXAMPLE USE OF NUMERICAL MODEL AND EXPERIMENT 18
5.1 Geometry and Boundary Conditions for 2D-Modcl 18
5.2 Simulating the Darvill Old and New SST 23
5.2.1 Temporal and Steady State Result of Darvill Old SST 26
5.2.2 Temporal and Steady State Result of Darvill New SST 29
5.3 Simulating the Watts SST 32
5.3.1 Watts Test I 32
5.3.2 Watts Test 12 35
5.3.3 Watts Test 4 41
6 CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 42
7 REFERENCES 44
APPENDIX 3
1 LIST OF SYMBOLS FOR PART 2 A3.1
2 LIST OF FIGURES FOR PART 2 A3.3
3 LIST OF TABLES FOR PART 2 A3.4XXI
OUTPUTS DURING CONTRACT PERIOD
(January 1997 to June 2001)
1 PUBLICATIONS
1.1 Books
1 Ekama GA, Barnard JL, Giinthert FW, ICrebs P, McCorquodale JA, Parker DS,
Wahlbcrg EJ (1997) Secondary settling tanks: Theory, design, modelling and
operation. IAWQ STR No 6, pp216, International Association on Water Quality,
London.
1.2 International Conferences
1 Ekama GA, Barnard JL, Gunthert FW, Krebs P, McCorquodale JA, Parker DS,
Wahlberg EJ (1997) Secondary settling tanks: Theory, design, modelling and
operation". 2nd hit Conf. of the Association ofWastewater Treatment Experts of
the Czech Republic (ACECR). 26-27 May, Jihlava, CZ, Ed: Wanner J., ACECR,
Prague, 169-190.
2 Marais PM, Ekama GA and de Haas DW (2001) Comparison of the ID flux theory and
a 2D hydrodynamic model with full-scale secondary settling tank performance
data. Procs. 74th Water Environment Federation Conference and Exhibition,
Atlanta, 13-17 Oct. (2)
1.3 National Conferences
1 Kleine D, Reddy BD, GP Mitchell (2000) Finite Element Analysis of Flows in
Secondary Settling Tanks. Procs. SACAM 2000 Applied Mechanics International
Conference, Durban, 11-13 Jan.
2 Marais PM, Ekama GA and de Haas DW (2000) Comparison of the ID idealized flux
theory and a 2D hydrodynamic model with full-scale secondary settling tank
performance data. Procs 6"' biennial Water Institute of Southern Africa conference
and exhibition, Suncity, 28/5 to 1/6/2000. CD-ROM ISBN 0-620-25661-3.
3 Kleine D, Rcddy BD (2000) Hydrodynamic Modelling of Secondary Settling Tanks.
Presented at 6Ih biennial Water institute of Southern Africa conference and
exhibition, Suncity, 2S/5 to 1/6/2000.
1.4 Reports
1 Ekama GA and Marais P (2001) Hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanks
Part 1 - Application of a hydrodynamic model to full scale secondary settling
tanks, Final report to Water Research Commission on contract K.5/835, Report
K.5/835/1/01, WRC, PO Box 824. Pretoria, 0001, RSA.
2 KleineD and Reddy BD (2001) Hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanksXX11
Part 1 -Development of a finite element code for 2D hydrodynamic modelling of
secondary settling tanks, Final report to Water Research Commission on contract
K5/835, Report K5/835/1/01, WRC, PO Box 824, Pretoria, 0001, RSA.
3 Marais P and Ekama (2001) Comparison of the ID idealized flux theory and a 2D
hydrodynamic model with full scale secondary settling tank performance data.
Research Report No Will, Dept of Civil Eng., Univ. of Cape Town,
Rondebosch, 7701, Cape, RSA.
2 POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS
2.1 Doctoral
1 PhD Dorothce IClcmc - Development rv*7 a ^nite *="i^i"*^#^r-»t r^H*-* far
hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanks.
2.2 Masters
1 MSc (Eng) Pierre Marais - Comparison of the ID idealized flux theory and a 2D
hydrodynamic model with full scale secondary settling tank performance
data.UNIVERSITY OF CAPE TOWN
Department of Civil Engineering
Water Research Group
FINAL REPORT
to the Water Research Commission for the task
APPLICATION OF HYDRODYNAMIC MODELS TO FULL SCALE
SECONDARY SETTLING TANK (SST) BEHAVIOUR
in flic contract K5/835
HYDRODYNAMIC MODELLING OF SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
by
George A Eknma and Pierre Marais
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 SSTs limit wastewater treatment plant capacity.
The secondary settling tank (SST) of activated sludge systems is the bottle neck limiting the
capacity of the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). Two main factors influence this (i) the
settleability of the sludge and (ii) the hydraulics within the SST. In the past SSTs have been
designed by empirical rules such as the surface overflow rate (SOR) < 1 rn/h at peak wet weather
flow (PW'WF), but many SSTs already begin to discharge high effluent suspended solids (ESS)
concentrations (>30mg/C) long before they reach this capacity even with good settling sludges
(Diluted sludge volume index, DSVI < lOOmC/g). This causes a significant loss of SST, and
therefore also of WWTP, capacity. The reason for this loss of SST capacity often is poor
hydraulics caused by (i) turbulence and density currents, (ii) poor effluent weir and baffle
placement, (iii) effects of sludge collection mechanisms and inlet arrangements, (iv) absence of
flocculating centre and stilling wells and (v) wind and temperature effects. Current design
procedures, even those that recognize sludge settleability and reactor concentration, give very
little guidance on the design of these SST internal features and it has been shown that some o(
this guidance is inappropriate (e.g. limiting the effluent weir loading rate, Ekama <?/«/., 1997).
Design of these internal features has therefore been very subjective and their effectiveness has
depended mainly on the design engineer's experience.1.2 Design of fullscale SSTs
Currently the design of SSTs is usually done in two stages; in the first, zone settling and
thickening considerations are applied which lead to the specification of a surface area, and in
some procedures, also a depth. The SST design procedures (see Ekama et a/., 1997 for
explanation and use) essentially give the designer the means to determine these two basic
dimensions which define the external shell of the SST. With the proper incorporation of internal
features for good clarification, zone settling and thickening criteria usually govern the
specification of the area and depth of the SST. The specification of the depth should
accommodate both sludge accumulation and thickening as well as maximizing the clarification
efficiency. After specifying surface area and depth, the clarification efficiency of the tank is
optimized by considering detail design of the internal features of the tank which significantly
inlluencc trtis. 1 rscsc features, SUCH as \i) in«,i arran^i-mcm, \\\) umjs. couugiiiuuuii, (in) cunuoi
of hydraulic flow patterns, short circuiting and turbulence with baffling, (iv) flocculation
chambers and (v) sufficient sludge transport and collection capacity, can make the difference
between achieving a low or high ESS concentration for the design SOR and depth. In future,
with the advent of hydrodynamic SST models, design and optimization for settling, thickening,
flocculation and clarification will be done concomitantly in an integrated fashion.
Hydrodynamic (or glass box) models for SSTs allow design and optimization of the SST's
internal features such as geometry, side wall depth, baffling, inlet and sludge collection
arrangements. A few such models of various complexity and sophistication have been developed
for simulating circular and rectangular SSTs (see Krebs, 1995 or Chapter 5 in Ekama <?/«/., 1997
for a review of these models). Although application is limited at this stage, these models are
being used successfully in research programmes and design for 2D and 3D simulation of fullscale
SSTs. Improvements in the design and development of the internal features based on the
simulation results have shown improvement on SST capacity with a reduction in ESS
concentration. While the description of the hydrodynamics of the SSTs has progressed
dramatically with the advent of 2D and 3D hydrodynamic models, description of the sludge
settling behaviour in these models has not progressed very much beyond that in the ID flux
theory models and remains the major weakness in the models.
1.3 Application of the 1DFT to fullscale SSTs
Application of the idealized steady state ID flux theory (1DFT) to full scale circular (and
rectangular) SSTs indicate that the design procedures based on this theory over-predicts the
permissible solids loading rate (SLR) by about 25 percent (Ekama et ai.y 1997). However, there
was no convincing evidence that this 25% correction needed to be applied for all types of SST,
and therefore a crucial unanswered question was whether or not the observed SST failures on
which the 25% reduction was based, were specific to the particular design of the tested SSTs.
Since data was limited on tank types, confirmation of the applicability of the 1DFT for other tank
types remained a research need. Indeed, from the available information, which included thatobtained in the American Society of Civil Engineers - Clarifier Research Technical Committee
(ASCE-CRTC) study (see Wahlberg et til, 1995), it could not be definitively established whether
the clarification optimization techniques to reduce ESS by modifying the internal features of the
SST with baffling, inlet and outlet arrangements and sludge collection improvements, extends
the SLR capacity of the SST in terms of the 1DFT, or whether the clarification optimization
maintains low ESS concentrations within a fixed SLR capacity. The inability to definitively
establish the applicability of the 1DFT to circular and rectangular SSTs is a major weakness in
SST technology and is a high priority research need which requires the development of;
(1) a unified procedure for relating the 1DFT to the design of full scale SSTs,
(2) a unified procedure for evaluating the effect of the internal design features such as depth,
inlet and outlet arrangements, sludge transport and collection systems and baffling on
effluent quality, both magnitude and variability,
(3) hydrodynaniic models to simulate the effect of internal feature design on effluent quality.
The recent development of hydrodynaniic models for SSTs allow a measure of tank geometry
and internal feature optimization. With these models it has become possible to calculate the SLR
capacity of different SST designs and layouts and compare these with the 1DFT predictions. The
above 3 aspects were investigated in this research project.
In the idealized 1 DFT for SSTs, solids move only in a vertical direction. Because fullscale SSTs
have a very high surface area to diameter ratio, which results in liquid and solids flow in vertical
and horizontal directions, the applicability of the 1DFT to predict the maximum SOR and SLR
of full scale SSTs remains uncertain. Ekama and Marais (1986) found that the SLR to cause
solids overload was about 80% of that predicted by the 1DFT for 47 stress tests conducted on
25 full scale circular SSTs in Holland by STOWa (19S1). The SSTs were 30 to 46m in diameter,
had 1.5 to 2.5m side water depths (SWD) and a 1:12 sloping bottom with scraped sludge
collection. An evaluation of 15 SLR stress tests conducted by Watts et til (1996) on a 3.66m
SWD, 28.96m diameter circular SST with centre feed, peripheral and radial effluent overflow
and rotating multiple suction pipe sludge collection system indicated that this tank could only
achieve about 70% of the 1 DFT maximum SOR (or -80% of the SLR) (Ekama et al, 1997).
G6h\eetal. (1996), assessing a 470 m2(46 m longx 10.2 m wide) 5.6 m SWD longitudinal flow
rectangular SST fitted with a counter-current scraper sludge collection system and seven
transverse effluent launders distributed over the length of the tank, found raised sludge blankets
(>2 m) when the applied SLR exceeded 80% of that predicted by the 1DFT, a value similar to
that found for the shallow circular Dutch SSTs by Ekama and Marais (1986). Such reductions
compared with the 1DFT calculated limits are not unexpected because it is well known that the
capacity of SSTs is affected by their internal features such as (i) inlet arrangement, (ii) tank
configuration, (iii) control of hydraulic How patterns, short circuiting and turbulence with
baffling, (iv) flocculation chambers and (v) sufficient sludge transport and collection capacity.The 1DFT design procedure gives no information regarding the optimal arrangements of the
various internal features. Accepting that these features affect tank performance, it would be
valuable to determine with the aid of 2D SST hydrodynamic models how the arrangement of
these features influences the SLR (and SOR) capacity of the SST in relation to the maximum
SLR and (SOR) calculated from the 1DFT. By this means, a flux rating is established, the
magnitude of which gives the measure whereby the arrangements of the internal features within
the external shell of the SST (area and depth) have been optimized. In this respect the flux rating
of the Dutch, Watts and Gohle SSTs would be about O.S because the maximum SLR was found
to be about 0.8 of the 1DFT maximum SLR. With deeper tanks and with carefully designed and
placed baffles and inlet and outlet arrangements determined from optimization studies with the
newly developed hydrodynamic models, the flux rating could possibly be increased closer to 1.0,
WhlCh Ic tk<^ tligojv»tn'»*»l I113Xlry1lltrl ^n t'1"7 WQW *'")rl fill v rnlinn ^nulH Koroma -i moonc frtr
optimizing the internal features designed into the shell of the SST obtained from the 1DFT
design procedure. This conforms to the suggestion of Wahlberg et al. (1998) who state that "the
results of a state point analysis" (i.e. a steady state idealized 1DFT design) "should be considered
a theoretical limit, and hydrodynamic models give us the tools to develop better secondary
clarifier designs that can operate closer to this limit" (Fig 1). The primary objective of this task
of the research project is to determine the flux rating with a 2D computational fluid dynamic
(CFD) hydrodynamic model of different stress tested fullscale SSTs that have been reported in
the literature.
g1 80
E
co
£bu •
o
£40oO
UJ
nPoor Internal
Feature Design
— ——-//
/ /
7 /
Good Internal
Feature Design |
20 40 60 80
SST Loading (% of 1 DFT Limit)100Fig I: Hypothetical effluent suspended
solids (ESS) concentration versus SST
loading rate asa% of the I DFT limit. With
good internal feature design, the ESS
remains low as the loading increases but
with poor internal feature design the ESS
increases more rapidly and from lower
loading rates.
Non steady state ID SST simulation models have been developed over the past 20 years and
those of Ozinsky et al. (1994) and Watts et al. (1996) are recent examples of such models that
incorporate many of the refinements and improvements developed over this time(Ekamaef a/.,
1997). In order for these ID models to predict full-scale SST performance, a turbulent
diffusion/dispcrsion coefficient is introduced into the partial differential equations describing the
vertical motion of the solids in the SST. The effect of this coefficient is to introduce mixing
between the elemental horizontal layers making up the water depth in the SST. The values of
these coefficients have to be determined by calibration against full scale SST performance data.This is not a simple matter because the values have been found to vary with depth, influent and
recycle flow rate, tank geometry, baffling and other internal features of the tank. These
coefficients therefore incorporate the effect of the internal features and hydrodynamics in a single
lumped parameter. The values found are specific for the particular SSTs simulated and have the
overall effect of reducing the flux rating, i.e. reduce the maximum SLR to lower values than
calculated from the steady state 1DFT (Ozinsky et al., 1994; Watts et al, 1996).
Unlike in the non steady state ID flux SST simulation models, in 2D hydrodynamic model
SettlerCAD (Zhou et a/., 1998) there are no model "constants" that influence tank
hydrodynamics that can be adjusted to improve the correlation between experimental and
simulated results'. Therefore, the outcome of a stress test simulation (fail - raised sludge blanket
and high ESS, or safe - stable sludge blanket and low ESS) can be compared with observed full
scale SST performance without needing to do a major calibration exercise first. In this project
the maximum SOR and SLR predicted by SettlerCAD is compared with that predicted by the
1DFT using as a basis the fullscale SST stress tests reported by de Haas et al. (1998), Watts et
al. (1996) and STOWa (1981).
All the SST models mentioned above, i.e. the idealized steady state 1DFT , the dynamic non-
steady state ID models and the 2D hydrodynamic model SettlerCAD, have in common the
specification of the sludge settleability. In all of them, this is in the conventional way of relating
the solids vertical settling velocity with respect to the water due to gravity (Vs, m/h) to the local
suspended solids concentration (X,, kg/m3) with the empirical exponential equation, viz.
Vs = Voexp(-nX() m/h (1)
This, in fact, forms the unified basis between the different models and allows them to be
compared. It is only the hydraulic field in which solids settle that is modelled differently in the
different models from the very simple to the very complex. In the steady state idealized 1DFT
this is in the vertical direction only, in the dynamic non steady state ID models, this is also in
the vertical direction only but turbulent diffusion creates mixing in the SST to represent the non-
idealities, and in the 2D hydrodynamic models such as SettlerCAD, this is modelled
hydrodynamically in the more realistic vertical and horizontal directions.
2. OBJECTIVES
In this task, the 2D hydrodynamic model SettlerCAD (Zhou et al, 1998) was applied to full scale
circular SSTs with the principle aim to
'There are, of course, many model "constants" in 2D hydrodynamic models for SSTs which
would significantly change the simulation results if changed (see Fkama et al., 1997 for a review of
2D models). However, in SettlerCAD, except for those mentioned below, all the constants are in fact
constant and cannot he changed by the user.(1) establish whether or not it "automatically" reproduces a flux rating < 1.0 with respect to
the lDFTand
(2) determine what factors influence the magnitude of this flux rating.
To do this, SST SLR stress tests reported in the literature were simulated. These were
(1) ihe 4 tests done by de Haas et ai (1998) on 4 similar 35m diameter SSTs (2 new and 2
old) of the Darvill wastewater treatment plant (WWTP, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa)
(2) the 15 tests done by Watts et ai (1996) on a single 3.66m SWD, 28.96m diameter
circular SST with centre feed, peripheral and radial effluent overflow and rotating
and
(3) some of the 47 tests done by STOWa (1981) (Stopkoper and Trentelman, 1982) on 25
different SSTs with 30 to 46m diameter, 1.5 to 2.5m SWD and 1:12 sloping bottoms with
scraped sludge collection.
3. SIMULATION OF SST PERFORMANCE WITH SettlerCAD
3.1 SettlerCAD description and input information
The SettlerCAD model requires three groups of input viz., SST loading, SST geometry and
sludge settleability.
(1) The SST loading comprises the feed concentration (X,.), recycle flow (QR) and the
influent flow to the WWTP (Q,) (i.e. excluding recycle flow). The recycle flow can be
withdrawn uniformly over the lank bottom to simulate scraper sludge collection or by
means of hydraulic suction by a specified number of siphons at specified radii from the
centre, each with a specified proportion of the recycle flow. The influent and return
sludge flows and feed concentration were constant throughout each simulation. The
reactor concentration accepted for the simulation was the last value measured in the stress
test, which could be up to about 1 kgTSS/m3 lower than the initial value due to sludge
storage in the SSTs.
(2) SST geometry requires specification of the side wall radius, side water depth (SWD) and
bottom slope which together define the external shell of the SST. An inlet feedwell
radius and depth and a feedwell skirt radius and depth, which together define the inlet
arrangement also need to be specified. SettledCAD makes provision for two types of
baffle; a Crosby baffle, which is a small circular vertical wall on the bottom of the tank
usually with a radius about half that of the tank to deflect the density current upwards
into the tank to dissipate its energy, and a Stamford baffle, which is a horizontal plateextending radially inwards immediately below the peripheral effluent launder to deflect
the density induced current flowing upwards at the sidewall to the centre of the tank. The
Crosby baffle height and radius from the centre of the SST and the Stamford baffle height
above the bottom of the side wall are given as input; for SSTs without these baffles, zeros
are given. Other internal features such as effluent launder placement and design cannot
be modelled with SettlerCAD e.g., inboard (more than one average depth from the side
wall) versus inset (close to sidewall) and single peripheral versus double sided inboard
effluent launders. SettlerCAD models only single sided peripheral effluent launders.
(3) The sludge scttlcability can be defined either in terms of the Specific Sludge Volume
Index (SSVI) which is then internally converted to Vo and n values with the Wahlberg
et al. (1988) relationships (see Ozinsky and Ekama, 1995 or Ekama et al., 1997) or in
terms of the Takacs et al. (1991) double exponential equation. This equation is the usual
exponential Vs - XL equation (Eq 1 above) but includes an additional exponential term
which seeks to take into account of the slow and non- settling discreet (pin-point floe)
particles at low concentration (<100 mg/f), viz.
Vs = Vo [cxpl-nCX, - fnsXF)l " exp{k2(XrfrlkX,)}] rn/h (2)
where X, is the feed concentration from the biological reactor, fn. the fraction of this
solids concentration which does not settle at all (Vs=0), and K2 an empirical constant
which reduces Vs of the solids when the concentration X, becomes low. In SettlerCAD,
the fraction fns is fixed at zero so non-settling solids cannot are not included. In the
simulations, the K: constant was set at a very high value (10) to eliminate the effect of
second term on Vs. This reduced Eq 2 to be identical to Eq I so that the equation which
defines the sludge settling velocity in the 1DFT (Eq 1) and in SettlerCAD are the same
and dependent only on Vo n and X,. This also eliminated the effect of the non- and slow
settling solids on the ESS concentration predicted by SettlerCAD so that these would not
confound the identification oi^ SST failure from raised sludge blanket and ESS
concentration predictions. The Vo and n values measured just prior to each of the SLR
stress tests, or, where Vo and n were not measured, calculated from the measured DSVI
or SSVI during the tests from the Ekama and Marais(1986) relationships (see Ekama et
al., 1997), served as input to define the sludge scttleability.
SettlerCAD includes also a number of simulation parameters and those relevant in this research
were the time step (At, min), total number of time steps (Nls) in the simulation and the total
simulation time (Tsim). The developers of SettlerCAD recommend a At between 1 and 3 min and
this was adhered to. In an initial exploratory evaluation, Nrs was varied to examine (i) Tslltl as
a fraction of SST actual hydraulic retention time (Rlia) to obtain a sludge mass balance between
99 and 101% at ihc end of the simulation to ensure a final steady state had been achieved.8
Generally T5im had to be at least 15 times Rha, but usually longer at 20 to 25 times Rha.
Simulation run times selected were generally >30 times Rha making them more than 10 times
longer than the actual SLR stress test duration.
3.2 Finding the maximum SOR and SLR of ScttlerCAD.
From the measured Vo, n and feed concentration XF values of a particular SLR test, the maximum
SOR and minimum recycle ratio (R^) were calculated from the 1DFT. Details on how this
calculation is done are given in Appendix A (see also Ekama et al.y 1997). The principles are
shown in the 1DFT design & operating (D&O) chart (Fig 2a). The solids handling criterion
(SHC) I and II lines and the hyperbola (which marks the boundary where the SHC I does and
does not apply) are completely specified by the Vo, n and XF values. First the minimum recycle
*-otii-» /D ^ fr\r tViia mnvi murti .-n/rrfii-iwr rot«=> ir\ = O /A m/V^ ic Hotprni i nrirl /Pm tit A\K\/cottinrr
the equations for SHC I and II equal and solving for R which is R^. This R^,,, is used as a
reference recycle ratio to check whether SHC I or SHC II governs the maximum capacity of the
SST for the particular underflow rate (qR = QR/AST, m/h) of the SLR test. For Test Y in Fig 2a,
the locus of the SST operating point at constant underflow rate (qR, m/h) and increasing SOR (qA,
m/h) cuts at SHC I line with an R value (RY) < R^Cat Point Y). This means that the SHC I fixes
the maximum SOR and SLR of the SST for the fixed qK and X,: of the particular test and the
maximum SOR and SLR capacities in terms of the 1DFT are defined by Point Y, viz. SOR^
= qAV m/h, SLR^ = (qAY + qRV)XF or qAY(l + RY)XF kg/(m2h) and HLRmax = qAY (1+RY) or
SLR^/X,, m/h. For Test Z in Fig 2a, the locus of the SST operating point at constant qR and
increasing SOR (qA) cuts the SHC I line with an R value (Rz) > Rmin (at Point B). This means
that the SHC II fixes the maximum SOR and SLR of the SST for the fixed qR and XF of the
particular test and the maximum SOR and SLR capacities in terms of the 1DFT arc defined by
Point Z, viz. SORma, - qAZ m/h, SLRnm - (qAZ + qRZ)XF or qA7(l + RZ)XF kg/(m2h) and HLRmax
= qAZ(l+Rz)orSLRmax/XFm/h.
The input data listed above for a particular SST stress test to be simulated, was given as input
to SettlerCAD. Keeping the recycle flow (QR) and feed concentration (XF) constant at the test
values, the influent flow (Q,), calculated as a % of the 1DFT limit value, was increased for
successive simulation runs from a low value to a high value, first in 2% of 1DFT limit
increments, and then in 0.25% of 1DFT limit increments between consecutive safe and fail runs.
SST failure was accepted to be an average ESS > 50 mg/P over the final 2 actual retention times
(Rha) of the run. In this way the steady state influent flow rate (Q,) for ESS > 50 mg/f was
determined for ScttlerCAD at an accuracy of 0,25% of the 1DFT limit and the first run with ESS
> 50 mg/f was accepted as the SettlerCAD predicted maximum influent flow rate limit. The
SettlerCAD SOR, SLR and HLR limits were calculated from the predicted influent flow limit
and the test QR and X, values. Increasing Q, (qA) for fixed QK (qR) moves the operating point in
the steady state 1DFT D&O chart along the q,, line towards the SHC 1 or SHC II lines. Figure
2b shows the operating points for the SettlerCAD runs for Test 4 on the new DarviII SSTs (seeSection 4.2 below for details). The predicted ESS and RAS concentrations over the complete
run were imported into a spreadsheet program, in which were calculated (i) the average ESS and
RAS concentrations over the final 2 actual hydraulic retention times (2xRha) and (ii) the % solids
mass balance as the run proceeded. The outcome (fail or safe) of each simulation run was
recorded by checking sludge blanket height in SetllerCAD at the end of each simulation and
whether the average ESS concentration over the final 2xRha was greater (fail) or less (safe) than
50 mg/C. The % mass balance at a particular time interval was calculated as the sum of the
masses of sludge in the return and effluent flows as a % of the mass of sludge entering the SST
with the influent and recycle flows.
<
QL
O5.0
4.0 • •
3.0 • •
2.0 - -
1.0 - •
0.0\
Point A >
• v- \
Point Y /
Fail/
/Safe
SHC/
/ ,R/y
\
«Derbota
£-PomlB SHC II Fail
^W-PointZ S3fe
( Rmi Test Y
Rz
1 *—- 1DARVILL Test 4 on New SST
1D Ru< theoly (no correction)
4.0
LU
H
<
a.
lit
>3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0II) IJuv I
Fail X
- - KaiVo = 9.08 m/h
n = 0.29 I/n
X f.- }.45 »/l
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60
RECYCLE RATIO (R)0.80 1.000.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
Figs 2a and 2b: Design and operating (D& O) charts demonstrating the calculation method of
the 1DFT (Fig 2a, left) and SettlerCAD (Fig 2b, right) SOR and SLR limit values. Figure 2b is
for Test 4 on the new Darvili SSTs and the safe, fail and actual test positions are marked O, X
and I respectively.
With the lDFT, the design of SST surface area (AST) hinges round identifying Point A (in Fig
2a) for the specified X, and Vo & n, where Point A is the SST operating position for the Peak
Wet Weather Flow (PWWF, Qu-wwi-)- It gives the maximum overflow rate (qAmaJ for the
minimum recycle ratio (Rmjn). From Point A, the design SST surface area AST is given by AST
= Qi,pwwr /qAm» and t*ie recycle flow (QRil,ww,.-) by QR.PWWF - RmmqAmax. The maximum SLR and
HLR associated with the design Point A arc SLRma, = qAma,(l+Rnlill) XK kg/(m2h) and HLR^, =
qAmax(l+Rmin) or SLRma, /X,. m/h (see Appendix A for details).
Generally, from the IDFT, the better the sludge settles i.e. the higher the Vo and the lower the
n, and the lower the X,., the higher the SORltuv, SLR^ and HLR^ The factor V^nX,.) (m/h),
called \hc flu.x load factor, therefore is a relative measure for the HLRmjv. The higher the
V,/(nX,.), the higher the HLRIU lv. So the better the sludge settles and the lower the XF, the higher
the flux load factor and the higher the HLRIluV The relationship between the HLRniax and flux
load factor for the design Point A in Fig 2a for varying sludge settleability and Xh is shown in
Fig 3. For Fig 3, the sludge settleability was varied from a SSVI of 40 to l60mf/gandX, from10
2.5 to 4.5 g/C. The Vo & n values were calculated using the relationships of Ekama and Marais
(1986) (see Ozinsky and Ekama, 1995). The range in Vo and n was from 10.74 to 3.18 m/h and
0.30 to 0.61 Q/g respectively. The flux load factor varied from 1.15 to 14.28 m/h. It can be seen
in Fig 3 that the higher the flux load factor, the higher the SORmax and HLR^ and that the
increase is quite consistent2 with the flux load factor. This indicates that different Vo, n and XF
making up the same flux load factor value, lead to approximately the same SOR^ and HLR^.
Because it is expected that the magnitude of the HLR affects the degree of the non-idealities (i.e
hydraulic disturbance), the flux rating (i.e. the % of the IDFT maximum SLR that can be applied
to full-scale SSTs) determined by ScttlerCAD is expected to decrease with increasing flux load
factor V(/(nXp). Because the increase in SOR^ and HLR^ is consistent with increase in flux
load factor, this consistency is not apparent for the SLRmax.
cr
_t: 4<v-a
-oc(0 2
6o1D Idealized Flux Theory
Design Over- and Underflow Rates
5 --" qA+(
.. qA-
•
qR-
--
-- it.m/h
m/h
4.
* -t •
i—•
• iH
.4
•LRy
\+qI
k.
"so
I*
qR
—> —
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h16Fig 3: Design overflow (SOR, qA,
m/h) and underflow (qR, m/h) and
hydraulic loading (HLR, qA+qR,
m/h) rates versus the flux load
factor [VJ(nXh), m/h] calculated
from the 1DFT for the design
Point A in Fig 1 for SSVI 40 to
160 mf/g (yielding V0from 10.34
to 3.18 and n from 0.31 to 0.61),
and XFfrom 2.5 to 4.5 g/C. Note
that an increase in the flux load
factor leads to a consistent
increase in SOR and HLR.
'This appears true for V.. & n calculated from the SSV! relationship of Fieri ma and
(1986). It may not be as consistent for measured Vo & n values or other SSVI and Vo & n
relationships that do not conform lo the Iikama and Marais (1986) relationship.11
SIMULATING THE DARVILL SSTs WITH SettlerCAD
4.1 The Darvill WWTP SST SLR stress tests.
The Darvill WWTP has five 35m diameter circular SSTs, 2 old and 3 new. Details of these SSTs
are given in Table 1. The design capacity of the SSTs is 7.5 kgSS/(m2h) at a DSVI of around
80mC/g,MLSS concentration of 3.8 g/P, a PWWF of 162 Mf/d and a recycle ratio of 0.406 viz.
(162000/24)x(l+0.406)x3.8/(5x962) - 7.5 kgSS/(m2.h). Altogether four SLR stress tests were
conducted on these SSTs, the first three (Tests 1 to 3) with four SSTs in operation (2 old and 2
new) and the fourth (Test 4) with two SSTs (1 old and 1 new) in operation. The tests were
conducted by setting the sludge recycle (RAS) and influent (to WWTP) flows at rates that would
cause critical loading conditions on the SSTs, i.e. at around 80% of the maximum SLR
estimated from the 1DFT from the Vo and n values measured just prior to the stress tests.
However, during the stress tests, the reactor concentration declined significantly below the
normal operation value due to sludge storage in the SSTs. This reduced the applied SLR during
the tests and so also the applied/test SLR ratio below the target 80% of the 1DFT maximum. The
influent flow was kept constant and pumped from a diurnal flow balancing tank. The RAS and
influent flows were controlled with computer controlled variable speed pumps (de Haas et a!.,
1998) and the new and old SSTs were equally loaded. During the tests, which each lasted about
5 to 1 Oh depending on the SORandSLR, the reactor and underflow concentrations, the influent
and RAS flow rates, the sludge blanket height and the ESS concentration were measured at about
Ih intervals. A summary of the four tests is given in Tables 2 and 3.
Darvil! SST Stress Tests
Actual SLR stress Tests 1 to 4Darvill SST Stress Tests
Actual Stress Tests 1 to 4
%
S1
a:l
CO
T3
"o
'-a03a.I—
Li.
Q14
12
10
8
6
4
2
J-I-•
•
•
•
//
I—^~/
i •12
1—*—/
/
1 • ' —m
S3
E3
Fa
*—/
1
—t—
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Test Applied SLR - kg/(m2.h)14CO
T3
"O
o
CL
\-
u_
Q
•50)
"a,a.0.2 - -
0.0 —I
1 2 3
Stress Test No.
Figs 4a and 4b: Calculated 1DFT maximum SLR versus test applied SLR (Fig 4a, left) and test
applied to 1 OFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig 4h, right) for the four Darvill SLR stress
tests on the new and old SSTs.
From the measured Vo and n values and the feed concentration (X,.), the 1DFT predicted
maximum SOR and SLR were calculated with the method described above and are listed in12
Table 2. The 1DFT maximum and test applied SLRs and the test/lDFT maximum SLRs ratio
from Table 2 are plotted in Figs 4a and b. From Fig 4b, the test/1 DFT maximum SLR ratio for
the four tests are 87, 96, 77 and 91% respectively. Of the four tests, only Test 4 on both the new
and old SSTs ended in failure. From Table 2 it would therefore appear that the flux rating of the
new and old SSTs are similar and somewhere between 77% (Test 3 - safe) and 91% (Test 4 -
Fail).
Table 1: Description ofDarvil! oh! and new SSTs.
Parameter J| Old SSTs (3 of) (Tanks A & E)
Diameter (m)
Side Water Depth (m)
Floor
Sludge Collection
Recycle pumps and control
Iiffluent launders
Inlet feed arrangement
Baffling 1.
2.
3.35
2.5 (IIa,e- 2.50m)
Flat
Suction lift with manually controlled
valves (six per SST)
4 centrifugal of 1 1 Mf/d each
Level control in sump into which
suction lift siphons discharge
Single-sided peripheral
1.0 in diam. centre feed well
No scum board.
6-0 m diameter skirt baffle acting as
flocculator centre well to 1.8m water
depth. Gap to floor 0.70m
Peripheral Stamford baffle extending
1.2 m from side wallNew SSTs (2 of) (Tanks B & Q |
35
4.1 (Have = 4.68m)
Sloped (1:10)
Scraped to central hopper
2 variable speed drive pumps of 19
Mf/d each computer controlled to a
selected set point.
Single-sided peripheral
1.0 m diam. centre feed well
No scum board.
6.0m diameter skirt baffle acting as
flocculator centre well to 2.7m water
depth. Gap to floor 2.80m
Peripheral Stamford baffle extending
1.7 m from side wall
Table 2: Summan1 of the four SLR stress test results on the Darvill JVIVTP SSTs.
Parameter
SST
Actual test loading
conditions
Sludge settleabihty
1DFT predicted
limits
Flux ratingsNumber of SS Is
Surface area (AST nr)
Influent flow (Q, Mf/d)
Overflow rate (qA SOR m/h)
Recycle flow (QR Mf/d)
Underflow rate (qK m/h)
Recycle ratio (R)
Feed Concentration (XF g/C)
Applied flux [SLR kgSS/(m\h)]
Weir loading rate [WLR, mV(h.m)]
Hydraulic loading rate [qA+qR HLR nvh)]
V"u (nvh)
n (f/g)
DSVI(mfg)
Maximum SLR^ [kg/(m\h)]
Overflow rate SOR,,,,, (m/h)
Influent flow (e*ci QK): 1 SST (m'/h)
Flux load factor [V(/(nX(:), m/h)]
Test. 1DIT SLR ratio
Test 1 OFT SOR ratioTest 1
4
4x 962
80
0.866
64
0.693
0.800
4.60
7.17
7.57
1.56
7.71
0.390
78
8.26
1.104
1062
4.30
0.87
0.79Test 2
4
4x962
66
0.715
64
0.693
0.970
4.30
6.05
6.25
1.41
7.83
0.513
104
6.31
0.775
746
3.55
0.96
0.92Test 3
4
4x962
91
0,985
72
0.7S0
0.791
3.60
6.35
8.62
1.76
8.00
0.430
62
8.22
1.503
1446
5.17
0.77
0.66Test 4
2
2x962
115
2.49
34
0.736
0.296
3.45
11.13
21.78
3.27
9.08
0.29
49
12.19
2.796
9.08
0.91
0.8913
Table 3: Darvill WWTP SST SLR stress test results.
Test No
SST tvne
Feed concentration (XF gSS/P)
Recycle concentration (XH gSS/f)
Sludge blanket depth1 (m)
Effluent SS(mg'f)
Actual hydraulic retention time (Rhj, h)
Test duration (hours)
Test duration (number ol'Rh;i)
Test outcome Tail Safe'Test 1
New
4.60
10.0
2 2
17
3.0
10.5
3.5
SafeOld
4.60
9.5
1.0
6
1.6
10.5
6.6
SafeTest 2
New
4.30
9.0
2.0
5
3.3
12.0
3.6
SafeOld
4.30
9.0
1.4
4
1.8
12.0
6.7
SafeTest 3
New
3.60
9.0
2.7
10
2.7
10.0
3.7
SafeOld
3.60
8.0
1.6
16
1.4
10.0
7.1
SafeTest 4
New
3.45
15.0
1.6J
30
1.5
5.0
3.3
FailOld
3.45
16.0
0.3
252
0.8
5.0
6.3
Fail
1 Sludge blanket depth is the deptli of the top of the sludge blanket from the water surface.
" SST failure interpreted as raised sludge blanket to the water surface and gross solids loss.
3 Test 4 had to be terminated when the old SST failed. Although the ESS concentration was still spery low, the
sludge blanket rise rate in the new SST was the same as in the old SST and therefore failure of the new SST seemed
inevitable. The height of the sludge blanket was similar in the old and new SSTs. The onset of failure in the new
SST was postponed due to its greater sludge storage capacity afforded by its greater depth (4-1 m SWD) compared
with the old SST (2.5 m SWD).
Table 4: Summary of the SettlerCAD simulations results fur the SettlerCAD influent flow limit
of Tests I to 4 on the new ami old Darvill SSTs.
PARAMFIkR
QI =• Influent How rate (mJli)
Flux load factor Vu/(nX|:) - nvh
Infiuent Flow (m'/h) for 1 SST
% of 1DFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (nVh)
Recycle Flow (niVh)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied SLR (kgSS)'(nr.h)
% of 1DFT maximum SLR
Actual Retention Time (1))
Duration of Run (mm)
Duration o!'Run(# of RJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%Rhl)
Effluent SS(mg'f)"
Recycle Cone (mg/p)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (FSS>50nii!'nlest
New
4.30
820
77.25
0.87
667
0.693
o.so
7.17
86.0
3.0
6000
33.0
2.5
1.37
279
9792
98.8
Fail1
Old
4.30
759
71.50
0.84
666
0.693
0.82
7.05
82.5
1.6
3600
35.6
2.5
2.47
51
9728
99.5
FailTest
New
3.55
556
74.50
0.69
667
0.693
1.00
5.96
86.5
3.4
6000
27.1
2.5
1.13
80
7618
97.5
Fa.l2
Old
3.55
548
73.50
0.73
667
0.693
0 95
6.11
86.0
1.8
3600
30.3
2.5
2.10
54
7718
99.0
FailTest
New
5.17
1211
83.75
1.23
750
0.779
0.64
7.22
89.3
2.3
6000
43.5
2.5
1.81
338
8487
95.9
Fail3
Old
5.17
1038
71.75
1.21
750
0.779
0.64
7.17
81.4
1.3
3600
44.6
2.5
3.1 0
68
8349
98.4
FailTest
New
9.08
2272
84.50
1.88
708
0.736
0.39
9.02
87.7
1.8
3600
39.7
1.25
1.38
452
13056
99.9
Fail4
Old
9.08
1702
63.25
1.88
708
0.736
0.39
9.02
70.9
1.0
1800
30.1
1.25
2.09
56
11560
99.6
Fail
'Mean over the last 2 Rtu values.
4.2 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Darvill SSTs
The data listed in Tables 2 and 3, recalculated for a single SST, was given as input to
SettlerCAD. For each test, 16 SettlerCAD runs were setup. For the new SST, runs 1 to 7 were
at Q, from 74 to 86% of the 1DFT limit in 2% increments and an 8lh run at 100%. For the old
SSTs, the 7 runs ranged from CO to 72% with an S"1 at 100%. Runs 9 to 15 were setup between
consecutive safe and fail runs at 0.25% increments and the 16lhrun was at the actual test Q,. The
first run with ESS > 50 mg/C was accepted as the SettlerCAD predicted maximum influent flow14
rate limit. The SettlerCAD SLR limit was calculated from the Q, limit and the test QR and XF
values. The SettlerCAD predicted results of the first failure runs are given in Table 4 and are
shown plotted in Figs 5a and b as IDFT versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR (Fig 5a)
and SettlerCAD/lDFT maximum SLR ratio, or flux rating (Fig 5b). In Figs 5a and b it can be
seen that the SettlerCAD predicted flux rating for the new SSTs ranges from 0.86 (Test 1) to 0.89
(Test 3) and for the old SSTs from 0.71 (Test 4) to 0.86 (Test 2). The simulation results of the
runs at the actual test influent flow are given in Table 5.
Table 5: Summary of the SettlerCAD simulations results for the actual Tests 1 to 4 on the new
and old Darvill SSTs.
PARAMETER
QI = Influent flow rate (m'/h)
i iu,\ juiiu iiiLiui Vo^n-Apj - ni; ii
Influent Flow(mVh) for I SST
% of 1DFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (mVh)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied SLR (kgSS)/(m:.h)
% of IDFT maximum SLR
Actual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (# of RhJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%RhJ
Effluent SS (mg/P)*
Recycle Cone (mg/f)*
Mass Balance (%)•
Test Result (FSS>50mg/P)
Observed ResultTest
New
A in
H.JU
833
78.5
0.87
667
0.693
0.80
7.17
86.8
3.0
6000
33.3
2.5
1.39
495
9558
98.3
Fail
Safe1
Old
. ™
833
78.5
0.87
666
0.693
0.80
7.17
86.8
1.6
3600
37.4
2.5
2.60
227
9666
96 1
Fail
SafeTest
New
3.55
688
92.1
0.71
667
0.693
0.97
6.05
95.9
3.3
6000
30.0
2.5
1.25
933
7517
97.1
Fail
Safe2
Old
-. rr
J.JJ
6888
92.1
0.71
667
0.693
0.97
6.05
95.9
1.8
3600
33.8
2.5
2.35
348
7745
92.8
Tail
Safe"fest
New
5.17
948
65.6
0.99
750
0.779
0.79
6.36
77.3
2.7
6000
37.7
2.5
1.57
2.1
S14S
100.0
Safe-
Safe3
Old
5.17
948
65.6
0.99
750
0.779
0.79
6.35
77.3
1.4
3600
42.3
2.5
2.94
13.5
8119
99.8
Safe
SafeTest
New
9.Go
2396
89.1
2.49
708
0.736
0.296
11.13
91.3
1.5
3600
41.3
1.25
1.44
647
12863
99.6
Fail
Fail4
Old
9.OS
2396
69.1
2.49
708
0.736
0.296
11.13
91.3
0.8
1800
38.7
1.25
2.69
541
11751
89.8
Fail
Fail
*Mean over the last 2 R,,, values.
Darvill SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR stress Tests 1 to 4
<N
E
_J
CO
I-
u.a
•a
G)
2
ra
U16 -
14 -
12 •
10 -
8 -
6 •
4 -
2 -
0 -T
/
rT
V.V/ /m
Safe
m
Fail-New
Fail-OldDarvill SST Stress Tests
ScttlcrCAD SLR Stress Tests 1 to 4
j
or0.8 --F
0.6
0.4QT—
Q
O
i> 0.2
o
CO
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Predicted SettlerCAD SLR - kg/(m2.h)18o.o -New 2 Ns* J
Stress Test No.
Figs 5a and 5b: I DFT calculated maximum SLR versus SettlerCAD predicted SLR (Fig 5a, left)
and SettlerCAD predicted to IDFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig 5b, right) for the four
Darvill SLR stress tests on the new and old SSTs.Steady State ESS Concentration
UurvillQld SST- Test 4
800
£ 600 ••
& 400 ••
o 200 ••
102
100
98 • •
96 • •
94 •
92 •
90 • •
6060 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % of 1D Flux Limit
Solids Mass Balance
Oarvill Old SST - Test 4
70 80
% 1D Flux Limit90100
•
1*s_ ....
100Steady State RAS Concentration
DarvillOkl SST- Test 415
14000 •
12000 •
10000 •
8000 •
6000 •
4000 •
2000 •
0 ••
•
'•'-' • I • • t 1
60 70 80 90 100
Influent Flow- % of 1D Flux Limit
Solids Mass Balance
Darvill Old SST- Test 4
105
500 1000 1500
Simulation time (min)2000
Figs 6a to d: Final ESS and RAS concentrations (Figs 6a, top left and Fig 6b, top right) and %
mass balance (Fig 6c, bottom left) versus influent flow as % 1DFT limit showing runs ended safe
(0) and fail (&) and % mass balance versus simulation time (Fig 6d, bottom right) for the Test
4 SettlerCAD runs on the old Darvill SSTs.
In the simulation runs, simulation times of 6000 and 3600 min were selected for the new and old
SSTs respectively, which is more than 25x the actual hydraulic retention time (25xRha) for all the
runs (sec Table 4). These run times were sufficiently long to establish a final steady slate
condition. The final ESS (Xr) and RAS (XR) concentrations accepted for each run were the
average of the predicted values over the last 2xRha. The solids mass balance was based on these
final average X,. and XR concentrations (which are listed in Table 4). Provided the run did not
in the failure (ESS<50mg/C) the run yielded a solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100%. Runs
that ended in failure (ESS> 50 mg/f) yielded a lower than 99.5% solids mass balance and the
greater the SST overload (i.e. the higher the ESS concentration), the lower the solids mass
balance below 99.5%, even as low as 86% for Test 4 on the old SST at 100% of the 1DFT limit
influent flow. The ESS, RAS and % mass balance versus influent flow (as % of the 1 DFT limit
Q,) for Test 4 on the new SST arc given in Figs 6a to c. Halving the simulation time step and/or
doubling the number of pressure iterations per time step yielded identical step by step simulation
results and no improvement in % mass balance. From this it was accepted that the low % mass
balance for the failed runs was not due to numerical instability in the algorithms of the
programme. Figure 6d shows the % mass balance for the 8 runs at 60 to 72% and 100% 1DFT
Q[ for Test 4 on the old SST as the simulation progressed and shows that the mass balance
remains constant (indicating that ESS and RAS concentration did not change) at significantly16
below 99.5%. // is suspected that there is a simple logical error in SettlerCAD. It seems that
the RAS concentration is "corrected" by subtracting from it the ESS concentration, because the
higher the ESS concentration (or overload), the lower the RAS concentration (Figs 6a and b).
Theoretically, for increasing Q, and constant QR and XF, the RAS concentration should remain
constant once the SLR capacity (failure) has been reached. This error does not influence the safe
runs (because ESS concentration is low) and so does not influence the SettlerCAD predicted
SOR and SLR limits.
DARVILL Test 1 on New SST1D Flux theory (no correction)
JZ
1UJ
§
UJ
o1.0 -
0.5 -
00 -Hi
Fail X
• Fail
/ritiA
\
y
rSafe
Imil
\
\
I\
II
V
Salt0-7.71 m/h
- 0.39 l/g
. = A(,n ,,/j
Fnil
Safe
ual Test - Safe
O
IUJ
O
111
>
ODARVILL Test 1 on Old SST"ID Flux theory (no correction)
2.0
1.5 +
1.0 - -
0.5 - -
0.0IDF'I
- -
Fail \
Faililimit \
7rSafe
I\o
n =
%
Safe
1-7.71 m/li
0.39 l/s
= 4.6U g/|
Fail
Safe
Test - Safe
O
1
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
DARVILL Test 2 on New SST1D Flux theory (no correction)
1.52.000.00 0.50 1.00 1.50
RECYCLE RATIO l&)2.00
UJ
I1.0 - - H> Flu* limit
0.5 - -
0.0Vo = 7.83 ni/li
n = 0.513 1/g
= 4.30 e/l
Fail
Salt'
Safe ()
Actual Test - SafeDARVILL Test 2 on Old SST1D Flux theory (no correction)
1.5
LU
H
<
a:
o_i
LL
Ql
UJ
O1.0 - - ID Flux limit
0.5 - -
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)0.0Vo = 7.83 m/h
n = 0.513 l/g
XF = 4.30 ft/I
Fail
Safe
SafeO
pail j Actual Test - Safe
Safe
2.000.00 0.50 1.00 1.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.00
Figs 7 a to d: 1 DFT D&O charts showing the SST operating position and result (safe O.failX)
of the SettlerCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0,fail I) for Tests I and 2 on the Dan-ill new and
old SSTs.
The position and result (safe O, fail X) of the SettlerCAD simulation runs for each of the 4 tests
on the new and old SSTs are shown in the 1DFT D&O chart in Figs 7a to h. The actual test
position (safe •. fail X)and result also is indicated In the rh;irts, thrSetflerTAn predicted SOR
limit is given at the transition from the safe to the fail positions. If the actual test position safe17
(•) is within the safe (O) runs, then SettlerCAD predicted a safe result for the actual test and if
the actual test position fail (I) is within the fail (X) runs, then SettlerCAD predicted a fail result
for the actual test. From this it can be seen that SettlerCAD predicted a fail result for Tests 1,
2 and 4 for both the new and old SSTs and a safe result for Test 3 on both new and old SSTs.
Because the observed test results were safe for Tests 1, 2 and 3 and fail for Test 4, SettlerCAD
predicted the result of Test 3 and 4 correctly i.e. safe and fail respectively, but predicted the result
of Tests 1 and 2 incorrectly, i.e. fail for both when the observed result was safe for both. This
aspect is discussed further below.
DARVILL Test 3 on New SST1 D Flux theory (no correction)
2.5
JZ
UJ
<
Li-
ft:
UJ
>
O2.0 - -
1.5 - -
1.0 - •
0.5 - -
0.0ID Flux limit
Fail X\o-8.00 m/h
n = 0.43 l/g
X F = 3.60 g/1
Kail
Sale
0.00 0.50 1.00
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.50DARVILL Test 3 on Old SST1D Flux theory (no correction)
2.5
a,
LU
<
o_J
u_
UJ
>
o2-0 t
1.5 - -
1.0 - -
0.5 - -
0.0II) I'lux limiVo = 8.00 m/h
n = 0.43 I/R
X v = 3.60 R/I
;nil
Safe
Kail
0.00 0.50 1.00
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.50
DARVILL Test 4 on New SST
1D Flux theoty (no correction)
4.0
i
HI
I-
<
or
a:LU3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5ID Kluv l\ii(
0.0Fail
Safe
\ctual Test- Fail
Kail X
Vo = 9.08 m/h
n = 0.29 l/g
XF=3.45R/IDARVILL Test 4 on Old SST
1D Flux theory (no correction)
4.0
LU
o_l
LJ_
LU
o
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00Vo = 9.08 m/h
n = 0.29 l/g
X F = 3.45 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
Figs 7 etoh: I DFTD&O churls showing the SST operating position and result (safe O, fail X)
of the SettlerCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0. fail I) for Tests 3 and 4 on the Darvill new and
old SSTs.18
The ESS concentration versus Q, (as a % of the IDFT limit) for all the runs on the new and old
SSTs are shown in Figs 8a and 8b. For the new SST (4.1m SWD) (Fig 8a), the ESS
concentration increases precipitously above 50 mg/P at about 75% of the IDFT limit influent
flow for Tests 1 and 2 and about 84% for Tests 3 and 4. For the old SST (2.5m SWD) (Fig 8b),
the increase in ESS concentration is much more gradual and increases above 50 mg/P at about
70% for Test 1, 72% for Tests 2 and 3 and 63% for Test 4. This reduced capacity and gradual
increase in ESS concentration of the old SST is probably due to its shallowness (2.5m SWD)
compared with the new SST (4.1m SWD). However, it is possible that the sludge collection
system type also influenced this difference in behaviour - the 1:10 sloping bottom of the new
SSTs adds considerable extra volume i.e. Have = 4.68m, compared with the flat bottom shallow
old SSTs.
CO
UJSteady State ESS Concentration
Darvill New SST -Test 1 to 4
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 10C
Influent Flow - % of 1D Flux Limit•
•
•
• F aitim
•SS?50tng/l
•" V"; "1. i i i i i -/
r
i/
i—•—/ T4
-—•—Steady State ESS ConcentrationDarvill Old SST - Test 1 to 4
800
cCD
O
£Z
oO
CO
<nLU600 ---
400 - •-
200 -
60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
Influent Flow - % of 1D Flux Limit
Figs 8a and 8b: SettlerCAD predicted ESS concentration versus influent flow (as % of IDFT
limit) for Tests 1 to 4 on the Darvill new (Fig 3a, left) and old (Fig 3b, right) SSTs.
SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR, as a % of the IDFT limits, were plotted versus
the flux load factor for the new and old SSTs in Figs 9a and 9b. Also shown are the four actual
test points. These figures show clearly the much greater sensitivity of the shallow old SSTs to
the hydraulic flows compared with the new SSTs. As the IDFT maximum SOR increases from
the lowest value of Test 2 (0.78 m/h), through Test 1 (1.10 m/h) and Test 3 (1.50 m/h) to the
highest value of Test 4 (2.80 m/h) (see Table 2), the SettlerCAD predicted capacity of the
shallow old SST declines from 73% to 63% of the 1DFT SOR limit (or 85% to 70% of the IDFT
SLR limit). For the deeper new SSTs, the SettlerCAD predicted capacity increases from 73%
to 83% of the IDFT SOR limit (or 86% to 89% of the IDFT SLR limit).
This indicates that for the shallow old SSTs, the lower the HLR, i.e. for poor settling sludges
and/or and high X,, the greater the SST capacity as a % of the 1 DFT limit or flux rating, and the
higherthcHLR, i.e. good settling sludges and/or low X., the lower the flux ruling. Thenewdeqi
SSTs do not show this sensitivity to HLR.DarvillOldand NewSSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
o
m
oOH
to
QDarvillOldand NewSSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
90
80
70
60 -
50•T2 Sate
Hijjh Feed CT3 Safe
pne
Pour Scnlcaliiliy
[,im H\drau)icsNew
Sjfe
Low FeT4 Fail
* . .
™
SSTs
•d Cone
Good Scltkabilly
High H>((rau[ics
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h2 4 6 8 10
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h
Figs 9a and 9b SettlerCAD predicted capacity as % of the 1DFT maximum SOR (Fig 9a, left)
and SLR (Fig 9h, right) limits versus the flux load factor for the Darvill new (4.1m SWD, M and
old (2.5m SWD, A) SSTs. The actual test positions and outcome are also shown (safe 0,fait I).
The actual test values and result are also shown in Figs 9a and b (safe •, fail 1). Compared with
the SettlerCAD predicted limits, Test 2 is significantly above both the new (124%) and old
(126%) SST lines, Test 1 on the new (102%) SST line but above the old (109%) SST line, Test
3 significantly below both the new (79%) and old (91%) SST line and Test 4 slightly above the
new (105%) SST line but significantly above the old (141%) SST line (see Table 6). If
SettlerCAD is realistic, then Tests 1, 2 and 4 should have ended in failure, whereas in fact only
Test 4 ended in failure. Hence, SettlerCAD correctly predicts the result of Tests 3 and 4 only.
For test 1, the test and SettlerCAD predicted maximum overflow rates are very close, so that had
this test been run for longer, it may have ended in failure. However, this does not apply to Test
2, because this test was significantly overloaded with respect to the SetllerCAD limit (125%) so
should have failed but didn't for both the new and old SSTs.
Table 6: Comparison of SettlerCAD predicted result with the actual Tests I to 4 on the new and
old Darvill SSTs.
PARAMETER
Q, - Influent flow (e\cl QP)
TcstQ, for 1 SST(m',h)
% of 1DFT maximum Q,
1DFT predicted outcome
SettlerCAD predicted max Q, (mVli)
% of SettlerCAD predicted max Q,
SettlerCAD predicted outcome
Observed test resultlest 1
New
833
78.5
Safe
820.3
101.5
Fail
SafeOld
S33
78.5
Safe
759.3
109.7
Fail
SafeTest 2
New
6S8
92.1
Safe
555.9
123.8
Fail
SafeOld
688
92.1
Safe
548.4
125.5
Fail
SafeTest 3
New
94 S
65.6
Safe
1211.1
79.0
Safe
SafeOld
948
65.6
Safe
1037.6
91.4
Safe
SafeTest 4
New
2396
S9.1
Safe
2273.4
105.4
Fail
FailOld
2396
89.1
Safe
1701.1
140.8
Fail
Fail
4.3 Conclusions from the Darvill SST simulations
The simulations oi~ 35m dp Darvill full-scale SST SLR stress tests with the 2D hydrodynamic
model SettcrCAD indicate, as would be expected, that the SST hydraulic non-idealities are
intrinsically part of the model and that SetllerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR were20
significantly below those calculated from the IDFT. The simulations indicated that the capacity,
or flux rating, of the old flat bottom shallow (2.5m SWD) SSTs decreased from 0.86 to 0.70 of
the 1DFT maximum SLR as the flux load factor V,/(nXF) increased (which increases HLR due
to an improvement in sludge settleability and/or decrease in feed concentration). The new deep
4.1m SWD 1:10 sloping bottom (average depth 4.68m) SSTs did not show this sensitivity of
capacity (or flux rating) to the flux load factor (or HLR) and the flux rating remained
approximately constant at around 0.87 of the IDFT maximum SLR. The simulations showed
that the magnitude of the flux rating is not a constant value, and seems to be dependent on SST
depth and HLR - the deeper the SST and the lower the HLR, the closer the flux rating to 1.0. In
Section 7 below, additional Darvill SST runs (i) without the Stamford baffles and (ii) with
interchanged SWD between the new and old SSTs arc discussed to evaluate the effect of the
With the Darvill SST tests, the accuracy of the ScttlcrCAD predicted flux rating could not be
validated because the result of only two of the four tests (Tests 3 safe and 4 fail) on the new and
old SSTs were predicted correctly. The highest flux rating of a safe test is 0.96 (Test 2) and the
lowest flux rating of a fail test is 0.91, which is lower that that of the highest safe test. From the
actual tests, the flux rating of the old and new SSTs appear to be approximately the same, but this
may only appear to be so because none of the test SLRs and SORs fall between the old and new
SST flux rating lines predicted by SettlerCAD in Figs 9a and b. Furthermore, the flux rating
from the actual tests would seem to be much greater than that predicted by SettlerCAD,
especially for the old SST. It is possible that for one of the tests not predicted correctly, i.e. Test
1 which loaded the SSTs at 78% of the 1 DFT SLR, the test duration wasn't long enough to reach
a steady state and had it been run for longer, the test, which was observed to end safe, may have
ended fail. However, this docs not apply to the other test not predicted incorrectly (Test 2). This
test loaded the SST to 92% of the IDFT SLR maximum, which is significantly higher than Test
4, which ended fail and was correctly predicted by SettlerCAD. Therefore, even though the HLR
in Test 4 (3.23 m/h) was double that in Test 2 (1.61 m/h), it is likely that there was sufficient
time in Test 2 to reach a steady state.
Although the Darvill SST tests are not helpful for validating the SettlerCAD predicted flux
ratings, the simulations nevertheless provide further convincing evidence that the ID idealised
flux theory (IDFT) should not be applied to the design of full-scale SSTs without an appropriate
reduction factor (flux rating).21
5 SIMULATING THE WATTS' SSTs WITH SettlerCAD
Watts eta!. (1996) conducted 15 SLR stress tests on one of the 4 SSTs at the Kanapaha Water
Reclamation Facility (Florida, USA) over a 3 week period. The SSTs were 28.96 m in diameter
with 3.66 m and 4.60 m side water and centre depths respectively, giving a bottom slope of
1:15.4 or 6.5%. The centre influent feed well was bounded by an annular skirt baffle 2.44 m
deep (gap to floor 1.66 m) and occupying 28% ofthe SST surface area (i.e. 15.32 in diameter).
Peripheral and radial effluent launders collected the surface overflow. Settled sludge was
collected continuously via a rotating multiple pipe suctions system with 4 draw offs at radial
distances of 1.5, 5.2, 8.6 and 12.2 in from the centre. Waste sludge was pumped from the sludge
return flow and was included in the recycle flow in the simulations.
In the SLR tests, the influent and recycle flows were kept constant and each test lasted about 8
to 10 hours (3 to 6xRha). The feed (XF), effluent (XE, ESS), underflow (XR, RAS) and waste (Xw,
WAS) sludge concentrations were measured hourly. Sludge blanket height (SBH)
measurements were taken at about 15 min intervals and the position and movement ofthe sludge
blanket height (SBH) was used to determine the test result. Where the SBH remained constant,
the test was continued for at least 2 hours longer into the "steady state" period and the test ended
safe. Where the SBH continued increasing, the test was stopped just prior the SBH reaching the
effluent launders and the test ended fail.
During the three week testing period, the sludge settleability flux constants Vo & n were
measured in 7 sets of 6 multiple batch settling tests at concentrations ranging from 2 toI4 g/C
After rejecting 2 sets, the remaining 5 were pooled and the average Vo & n determined for the
15 SLR tests, viz. Vo - 7.62 m/h and n = 0.3055 nr/kg. In the 15 tests, of which the first 10
ended safe and the hist 5 ended fail, the overflow and underflow rates ranged from 0.72 to 1.66
m/h and 0.36 and 1.14 m/h respectively and the feed concentration from 3.44 to 4.13 kg/m3.
Because the Vo &. n were accepted to be the same for all 15 tests, the flux load factor V0/(nXr)
varied in a narrow range from 6.04 m/h forTest 4 to 7.24 m/h forTest 9 due to the small change
in feed (Xj.-) concentration. Details ofthe 15 tests are listed in Table 7.
From the measured Vo, n and X,., the 1DFT predicted maximum SOR and SLR were calculated
with the method described earlier in Section 3.2 and are listed in Table 7. The 1DFT predicted
and test applied SLRs and the Test/1 DFT SLR ratio from Table 7 are plotted in Figs 10a and b.
From Fig 10b, the Test/1 DFT maximum SLR ratio for the 15 tests are between 0.56 (Test 1) and
0.91 (Test 11) and Tests 3, 4, 7 and 9, which ended safe, have higher Test/1 DFT maximum SLR
ratios than Test 15, which was the test with the lowest SLR test that ended fail. From Fig Sa, the
line that best separates the safe (•) and fail (B) tests is about 0.S0 indicating that the Ikiux rating
ofthe Watts SST is about 0.80.22
Table 7: Summary of the 15 SLR stress test results on the Kanapaha WWTP SSTs by Watts et a
Pura ncter Test 1
SST
Actual test
loading
conditions
Sludge
scitkabilitv
IDFT
predicted
limit;
Rux ratingsNumber of SSTs
Surface area (nr>
Influent flow(Mf/d)
Overflow rale (m/h)
Recvclc now(Mf/d)
Underflow rate (m/h)
Recycle ratio
Feed Conccntralion (g/C)
Applied SLR [kgSSW.h)]
Weir ioEdinc rate [nrV(h.m)]
MLR [(qA+qR), nVh)]
V0(m/h)
n (f/g)
DSVI (mf/p)*
Maximum SLR [kg/(m:.h}]
Overflow rale (m/h)
Influent Q,(cxclQK):(mVh)
Flux load factor [Vo/(nXF), m/h)]
Test,'! DFT flux ratio
Test/IDFT overflow rate ratio1
659
11.4
0.72
9.5
0.60
0.837
4.053
5.37
5.22
1.32
7.62
0.3055
94
9.54
1.75
1153.9
6.15
56.2
41.2Test 2
1
659
14.9
0.95
9.6
0.60
0.639
3.972
6.15
6.84
1.55
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
1.80
1186.5
6.2S
64.4
52.5Test 3
1
659
18.9
1.20
5.8
0.36
0.304
3.801
5.94
8.67
1.56
7.62
0.3055
94
6.58
1.37
899.9
6.56
90.3
87.7Test 4
1
659
18.8
1.19
9.5
0.60
0.508
4.130
7.39
8.59
1.79
7.62
0.3055
94
9.54
1.71
1124.2
6.04
77.5
69.5Test 5
1
659
18.8
1.19
9.5
0.60
0.507
3.664
6.57
8.62
1.79
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
2.00
1319.4
6.81
68.8
59.4Test f.
1
659
IS.8
1.19
11.4
0.72
0.606
3.994
7.65
S.62
1.91
7.62
0.3055
94
10.81
1.98
1307.4
6.25
70.7
60.1Test 7
1
659
22.4
1.42
9.5
0.60
0.426
3.560
7.20
10.26
2.02
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
2.08
1369.1
7.01
75.4
6S.2Test 8
1
659
18.8
1.19
13.3
0.84
0.706
3.787
7.68
8.60
2.03
7.62
0.3055
94
11.94
2.31
1523.8
6.59
64.3
51.4/. (1996).
Test 9
I
659
24.4
1.54
9.5
0.60
0.391
3.444
7.40
11.19
2.15
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
2.17
1428.6
7.24
77.5
71.2Test 10
I
659
IS.6
1.17
9.5
0.60
0.514
3.885
6.91
8.50
1.78
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
1.85
1221.7
6.42
72.3
63.3Test 1 1
1
659
24.5
1.55
9.5
0.60
0.3S9
4.044
8.71
11.23
2.15
7.62
0.3055
94
9.54
1.76
1156.9
6.17
91.3
S8.3Test 12
I
659
26.3
1.66
9.5
0.60
0.363
3.444
7.80
12.04
2.27
7.62
0.3055
94
9.55
2.17
1428.6
7.24
81.7
76.7Test 13
1
659
24.5
1.55
13.3
0.84
0.543
3.987
9.55
11.24
2.40
7.62
0.3055
94
11.98
2.16
1423.6
6.26
79.7
71.8Test 14
1
659
24.5
1.55
17.1
1.08
0.69S
3.983
10.50
11.24
2.64
7.62
0.3055
94
13.31
2.26
1486.9
6.26
78.9
68. STest 15
1
659
24.2
1.53
18.1
1.14
0.746
3.618
9.68
11.10
2.68
7.62
0.3055
94
13.27
2.52
1662.3
6.89
73.0
60.7
Table 9: Comparison of SettlerCAD predicted result with the actual Tests 1 to 15 on the Walts SSTs.
PARAMFTliR
O, -Influent flow (exd O,.)
Tes:Q, for 1 SST (mVh)
% of 1 OFT maximum Q,
1DFT predicted outcome
SettlerCAD predicted max Q, (W/h)
% cf SettlcrCAD predicted max Q,
SettlerCAD predicted outcome
Observed lest resultTest 1
475.1
41.2
Safe
84S.1
56.0
Safe
SafeTest 2
622.S
52.5
Safe
875.1
71.2
Safe
SafeTest 3
788.9
S7.7
Safe
665.9
118.5
Fail
SafeTest 4
781.5
69.5
Safe
826.3
94.6
Safe
SafeTest 5
784.2
59.4
Safe
946.7
82.8
Safe
SafeTest 6
785.3
60.1
Safe
938.0
83.7
Safe
SafeTest 7
933.8
68.2
Safe
982.3
95.1
Safe
SafeTest 8
782.6
51.4
Safe
1066.6
73.4
Safe
SafeTest 9
1107.8
71.2
Safe
1021.4
99.6
Safe
SafeTest 10
773.5
63.3
Safe
888.8
87.0
Safe
SafeTest 11
1021.4
88.3
Safe
853.2
119.7
Fail
FailTest 12
1095.2
76.7
Safe
1021.4
107.2
Fail
FailTest 13
1022.5
71.8
Safe
1014.3
100.8
Fail
FailTest 14
1022.8
68.8
Safe
1085.5
94.2
Safe
FailTest 15
1009.6
60.7
Safe
1238.4
81.5
Safe
Fail23
Table 8: Summary of the SettlerCAD simulation results for the SettlerCAD influent flow limit (top) and actual test influent flow (bottom) for the 15
SLR tests on the Watts SSTs (Q,~ Influent flow in nr/h).
Sc!llcrCADQ1 LIMIT
Flux faclor Vtf'(nXF) - m/h
Influent Flow (m'/h) for 1 SST
% of 1DFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (m'/h)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS)/(m!.h)
% of IDFT maximum flux
Aclual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (# of RJ
Sim time Step (mm)
Sim lime Step (%Rhl)
Effluent SS (my/0*
Recycle Cone (mg/C)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (ESS>50mg/f)i Test 1
6.15
848.1
73.50
1.29
397.5
0.603
0.47
7.66
80.3
2.1
6000
47.6
2.5
1.98
53.5
12492
99.3
FailTest 2
6.28
875.1
73.75
1.33
398.0
0.604
0.45
7.68
80.3
2.1
6000
48.6
2.5
2.03
51.4
12479
99.1
FLU ITcsl 3
6.56
665.9
74.00
1.01
239.9
0.364
0.36
5.23
79.5
2.9
6000
34.6
2.5
1.44
55.0
14152
99.7
FailTest 4
6.04
826.3
73.50
1.25
396.9
0.603
0.48
7.67
80.4
2.1
6000
46.7
2.5
1.95
57.7
12459
98.8
FailTcst5
6.8!
946.7
71.75
1.44
397.7
0.604
0.42
7.48
78.3
1.9
6000
51.4
2.5
2.14
81.0
11988
98.4
FailTest 6
6.25
938.0
71.75
1.42
475.7
0.722
0.51
8.57
79.3
1.9
6000
54.0
2.5
2.25
97.2
11431
97.9
FmlTest 7
7.01
982.3
71.75
1.49
397.7
0.604
0.40
7.46
78.1
1.9
6000
52.7
2.5
2.20
92.2
11909
98.3
FailTest 8
0.59
1066.6
70.00
1.62
552.8
0.839
0.52
9.31
78.0
1.6
6000
61.9
2.5
2.58
50.6
10927
99.4
FailTest 9
7.24
1021.4
71.50
1.55
397.7
0.604
0.39
7.42
77.7
1.8
6000
54.2
2.5
2.26
50.2
11888.7
97.8
FuilTest 10
6.42
888.8
72.75
1.35
397.7
0.604
0.45
7.59
79.4
2.0
6000
49.1
2.5
2.05
54.5
12337.1
99.1
FailTest 11
6.17
853.2
73.75
1.30
397.2
0.603
0.47
7.68
80.5
2.1
6000
47.8
2.5
1.99
52.2
1248S.8
99.0
FailTest 1 2
7.24
1021.4
71.50
1.55
397.7
0.604
0.39
7.42
77.7
1.8
6000
54.2
2.5
2.26
50.2
11888.7
97.8
FailTest 1 3
6.26
1014.3
71.25
1.54
555.6
0.843
0.55
9.50
79.3
1.7
6000
60.0
2.5
2.50
52.0
11079.7
99.2
FailTest 14
6.26
1085.5
73.00
1.65
714.0
1.084
0.66
10.88
81.8
1.5
6000
68.7
2.5
2.86
50.5
9911.2
99.5
FailTcsl 15
6 89
1250.9
75.25
1.90
753.5
1.144
0.60
11.01
83.0
1.3
6000
76.6
2.5
3.19
64.2
9431.0
99.1
Fail
ACTUAL TEST INFLUENT FLOW
influent Flow (m'/h) for 1 SST
% of IDFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (m'/h)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS)/(m2.h)
% of 1 DFT maximum flux
Actual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (mm)
Duration of Run {tt of RhJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%RhJ
Effluent SS(mg/f)"
Recycle Cone (mg/f)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (ESS>50mg/f)
Observed Result475.1
41.2
0.72
397.5
0.60
0.837
5.37
56.2
3.0
6000
33.3
2.5
1.39
3.9
8891.9
100.0
Safe
Safe622.8
52.5
0.95
39S.0
0.60
0.639
6.15
64.4
2.6
6000
39.0
2.5
1.62
5.0
10200.2
100.2
Safe
Safe7SS.9
87.7
1.20
239.9
0.36
0.304
5.94
90.3
2.5
6000
39.3
2.5
1.64
484.3
1326S.3
91.2
Fail
Safe781.5
69.5
1.19
396.9
0.60
0.50S
7.39
77.5
2.2
6000
45.0
2.5
1.88
5.7
12236.7
99.9
Safe
Safe784.2
59.4
1.19
397.7
0.60
0.507
6.57
68.S
2.2
6000
45.2
2.5
1.88
5.8
10879.7
100.0
Safe
Safe7S5.3
60.1
1.19
475.7
0.72
0.606
7.65
70.7
2.1
6000
48,2
2.5
2.01
5.7
10577.1
100.0
Safe
Safe933.8
68.2
1.42
397.7
0.60
0.426
7.20
75.4
2.0
6000
50.9
2.5
2.12
6.8
11900.8
100.0
Safe
Safe7S2.6
51.4
1.19
552.8
0.84
0.706
7.68
64.3
2.0
6000
51.0
2.5
2.13
6.1
9137.8
100.0
Safe
Safe1017.8
71.2
1.54
397.7
0.60
0.391
7.40
77.5
1.8
6000
54,1
2.5
2.25
17.9
12205.3
100.0
Safe
Safe733.5
63.3
1.17
397.7
0.60
0.514
6.91
72.3
2.2
6000
44.7
2.5
1.86
5.3
11430.0
100.0
Safe
Safe1021.4
88.3
1.55
397.2
0.60
0.389
8.71
91.3
1.8
6000
54.2
2.5
2.26
479.9
12150.5
92.7
Fail
Fail1095.2
76.7
1.66
397.7
0.60
0.363
7.80
81.7
1.8
6000
57.0
2.5
2.38
238.0
11792.4
96.3
Fail
Fail1022.5
71.8
1.55
555.6
0.84
0.543
9.55
79.7
1.7
6000
60.3
2.5
2.51
66.9
11078.1
98.9
Fail
Fail1022.8
68.8
1.55
714.0
LOS
0.698
10.50
78.9
1.5
6000
66.3
2.5
2.76
9.9
9672.4
100.0
Safe
Fail1009.6
60.7
1.53
753.5
1.14
0.746
9.68
73.0
1.5
6000
67.4
2.5
2.81
7.5
8453.7
100.0
Safe
Fail
* Mean over the last 2 Rh. values.24
Watts SST Stress Tests
Actual SLR stress Tests 1 to 15
_j
•a
o
"edia.
i-
Ll_18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
02,5
• - -10 7\
/
h-»—4,9
<•
/«
I—•—L 15
/1V11/ *•
X..:.,r3 •
I i I i13/
/X-
-t-•
Saf
El
Fail/
—•-•^ 1.0Watts SST Stress Tests
Actual Stress Tests 1 to 15
0.8 • -I
CO
•a
§ 0.6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Test Applied SLR - kg/(m2.h)I-UL
a
Q.
Q.0.4 •
0.2 -
0.0 -
3 5 7 9 11
Stress Test No.13 15
Figs 10 a and b: Calculated 1 DFT maximum SLR versus test applied SLR (Fig 10a, left) and
test applied to 1 DFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig 1 Oh, right) for the 15 Watts stress test
on the Kanapaha SST.
Watts SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR stress Tests 1 to 15Watts SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR Stress Tests 1 to 15
csi
.§.
Qi
_J
(O
•a
••-<
o
QT
H14
12
10
S
6
4
2
//
//
i i iV
I •—!/
</
I I I>
/
I I I/
-
h-•
Sa
ffl
Fafe
t I i Q 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
SetCAD Predicted SLR - kg/{m2.h)o.o J
141 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Stress Test No.
Figs lla and b: 1 DFT calculated maximum SLR versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR
(Fig lla, left) and SettlerCAD predicted to 1 DFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig lib,
right) for the 15 Watts SLR stress tests on the Kanapaha SSTs.
5.2 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Watts SSTs
The data given in Table 7 was given as input to SettlerCAD. For each of the 15 tests, 16
SettlerCAD runs were setup. Runs 1 to 7 were at Q, from 66 to 78% of the 1DFT SOR in 2%
increments and an 8Ih run at 100%. Runs 9 to 15 were setup between consecutive safe and fail
nins at 0.25% increments and the 1 (Vhnm w;is at the actual test Q. The first run with FSS > 50
mg/f was accepted as the SettlerCAD predicted influent flow rate limit. The SettlerCAD flux25
limit was calculated from the Q, limit and the test QR and XF values. The SettlerCAD predicted
results of the first failure runs arc given in Table 8 and are shown plotted in Figs 1 la and b as
1DFT versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR (Fig 1 la) and SettledCAD/lDFT maximum
SLR ratio i.e. flux rating (Fig 11b). The results from the runs at the actual test influent flow rate
are also given in Table 8. In Figs 11 and b, it can be seen that the SettlerCAD predicted flux
rating of the Watts SST ranges between 0.777 (Test 9) and 0.825 (Test 15). Fig 1 la shows the
SettlerCAD maximum predicted SLR (flux rating) of the 15 tests fall very close to the 0.80 flux
rating line. The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (as % of the 1DFT maximum) ranged
between 70.0% (Test 8) and 74.5% (Test 15).
In the simulation runs, a simulation time of 6000 min was selected which was more than 35x the
actual hydraulic retention time (35xRKa) for all the runs (see Table 8). As for the Darvill SST
runs, these run times were sufficiently long to establish a final steady state condition and the final
ESS (XE) and RAS (XK) concentrations accepted for each run were the averages of the predicted
values over the last 2xRha. The solids mass balance was based on these final average ESS and
RAS concentrations (which are listed in Table 8). The same pattern regarding the mass balance
was observed - provided the run did not end in the failure (ESS< 50 mg/C), the run yielded a
solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100% and runs that ended in failure (ESS> 50 mg/C) yielded
a lower than 99.5% solids mass balance; the greater the SST overload (i.e. the higher the ESS
concentration), the lower the solids mass balance below 99.5%. The ESS, RAS and % mass
balance versus influent flow (as% of the 1DFT limit Q,) for Test 11, which had the highest
Test/IDFT SOR and SLR ratios, are shown in Figs 12a to c. In Fig 12d, the % mass balance
versus simulation time for runs 1 to S of Test 11 at 66 to 78% of the 1DFT maximum overflow
rate are shown - it can be seen that for the failed runs (i) even though a final steady state is
achieved, this steady state does not yield a mass balance.
Steady State ESS Concentration
Watts SST-Test 11
1000
f 800 4-
c
~ 600 +
c
Q>
ocoo
CO
CO
LU400 ••
200 ••
0Steady State RAS Concentration
Watts SST - Test 11
14000
15, 12000 +
E
^T 10000 +
o
'15 8000 +
o
O
CO6000 +
4000
2000
0
65 70 75 80 85 90 95 10C
Influent Flow - % of 1 DFT Limit65 70 75 80 85 90 95 10C
Influent Flow - % of 1D F!ux Limit
Figs 12a and b: Final ESS and ItrtS concentrations (Figs 12a, left and Fig 12b, right) versus
influent flow as % 1DFT limit showing runs ended safe (0) and fail (s) for the Test 11
SettlerCAD runs on the Watts SSTs.26
<D
03
CO
W
CO
"cc
cCD
O102
100
98
96
94
92
90Solids Mass Balance
Watts SST-Test 11
V
(—1— 1—•—\
i—"—\
i is
i—1—\ i—i—
65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
°/n m FIMY I imif102
CDSolids Mass Balance
Watts SST-Test 11
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Simulation time (min)
Figs 12c and d: % Mass balance versus influent flow as % I DFT limit (Fig 12c, left) showing
runs ended safe (0) and fail (&) and versus simulation time (Fig I2d, right) for the Test 11
SettlerCAD runs on the Watts SSTs.
The position and result (safe O, fail X) of the SettlerCAD simulation runs for Tests 1, 3, 4, 9, 11,
13, and 15 are shown in the D&O charts in Figs 13a to g. The actual test position and result (safe
• or fail I) also is indicated. In the charts, the SettlerCAD predicted SOR limit is given at the
transition from the safe to the fail positions. If the actual test position (•) is within the safe (O)
runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a safe result for the actual test, and if the actual test
position (I) is within the fail (X) runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a fail result for the
actual test. The 7 tests in Fig 13 were selected to demonstrate the following:
Test 1: Lowest test/1 DFT SOR (0.412) and SLR (0.562) ratios with SHC I governing capacity;
Test ended safe and SettlerCAD predicted result correctly.
Test 3: Second highest test/1 DFT SOR (0.877) and SLR (0.903) ratios with SHC I governing
capacity; Test ended safe but SettlerCAD predicted result incorrectly as fail.
Test 4: Lowest flux load factor V0/(nXF) = 6.04 m/h with SHC I governing capacity; Test ended
safe and SeltlerCAD predicted result correctly.
Test 9: Highest flux load factor V0/(nXF) = 7.24 m/h with SHC I governing capacity; Test ended
safe and SettlerCAD predicted result correctly.
Test 11: Highest test/1 DFT SOR (0.883) and SLR (0.913) ratios with SHC I governing capacity;
Test ended fail and SettlerCAD predicted result correctly.
Test 13: Test/1 DFT SOR (0.718) and SLR (0.797) ratios very close to SettlerCAD/lDFT SOR
(1.01) and SLR (1.01) ratios with SHC II governing capacity; Test ended fail and
SettlerCAD predicted result correctly.
Test 15: Low tcst/lDFT SOR (0.607) and ST R (0.703) ratios with SHC II governing capacity;
Test ended fail but SettlerCAD predicted result incorrectly.Watts SST Test 1
I,HI
I-
<
o
an
UJ
>
o3.0 -
2.5 -
2.0 -
1.5 •
1.0 -
0.5 -
nn -1D Flux theory (no correction)
/Vo
n =
Fail XF
VSafe
J Actual Test-
I -£ 1= 7.62 m/h
0.306 l/g
= 4.05 q/l
Safe'
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
LU
O
LU3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0Watts SST Test 41D Flux theory (no coriection)
- - SafeFailVo = 7.62 m/h
n = 0.306 l/g
XF = 4.13 g/r
SafeO
Actual Test • Safe
Safe
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Watts SST Test 111.00
in
o
LU2.5 -
2.0 -
1.5 -
1.0 •
0.5 -
no -"ID Flux theory (no correction)
\
• IDFTLimiy' \
/ Actua
- Fail/
/Safef- Saf
Test
Vo
n =
XFFail
Safe
^_
-Fail
= 7.62 m/h
0.306 l/g
= 4.04 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCYLE RATIO (R)
Watts SST Test 151.00
UJ
o
UJ
O2.5 -
2.0 -
1.5 -
1.0 -
0.5 -
00 -1D Flux theory (no
Fail
Safe
/
/
/
- Fail/
/safeTVcorrection)
„ 1DFT Limit
V /FailX
\ I? ySafeO
Actual Test - Fail ' ^^*^>
Vo = 7.62 m/h
n = 0.306 l/g
XF = 3.62 g/l
I
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.003.0Watts SST Test 31D Flux theory (no correction)27
E_
LJJ
r-
o
u_
UJ
O0.5 - -
0.0\
Vo = 7.62 m/h
n = 0.306 l/g
XF = 4.05 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Watts SST Test 9
1D flux theory (no correction)1.00
UJ
O
-j
LL
CC
UJ
>
o0.5 - -
0.0Vo = 7.62 m/h
n = 0.306 l/g
XF = 3.44 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Watts SST Test 13
1D Flux theory (no correction)1.00
UJ
o
LU2.5 -
2.0 -
1 S -
1.0 -
0.5 -
on •1DFT Limit
-
/
/
- Fail/
/saferf
tFail
Safe
s- FailX
^^ Safe O
Actual Test • Fail
Vo = 7.62 m/h
n = 0.306 l/g
XF = 3 99 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
Figs 13 a to i: 1DFTD&O charts
showing the SST operating positions
and result (safe O, fail X) of the
SeWerCAD runs and actual tests (safe
0, fail J) for Tests 1, 3, 4, 9, 11, 13 and
15 on the Watts SST.28
From all 15 D&O charts, SettlerCAD correctly predicted the result for 12 tests, i.e. Tests 1,2 and
4 to 10 (safe) and 11 to 13 (fail) but incorrectly predicted the result for 3 tests, i.e. Tests 3 (actual
test safe, SettlerCAD fail) and 14 and 15 (actual test fail, SettlerCAD safe). This aspect is
discussed further below.
The ESS concentration versus Q, (as a % of the 1DFT limit) for all the runs are shown in Fig 14.
It can be seen that the ESS concentration increases gradually above 50 mg/C in the narrow range
between 70 and 74% of the 1DFT limit influent flow. The precipitous increase in ESS
concentration observed with the new (deep) DarviU SST is not apparent, the increase in ESS of
the Watts SST resembles more the gradual increase in ESS of the old (shallow) DarviU SST.
However, the Watts SST geometry resembles more the new DarviU SST with a 3.66m SWD and
1:15.4 sloping bottom compared with a 4.1 rn SWD and a 1:10 sloping bottom.
LUSteady State ESS Concentration
Watts SST-Tests 1 to 15
1000
800 -•
600 ••
400 -•
200
65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Influent Flow - % of 1 DFT Limitc0)ocoo
CO
CO
UJSteady State ESS Concentration
Watts SST-Tests 1 to 15
100
80 -•
60 --
10040 -•
20 -•
66 68 70 72 74
Influent Flow-% of 1D Flux Limit76
Figs 14a and b; SettlerCAD predicted steady state ESS concentration versus influent flow (as
% of I DFT limit) showing the whole field (Fig 14a, left) and zoomed in detail (Fig 14b, right).
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR, as a % of the 1DFT limits, are plotted
versus the flux factor V0/(nXF) in Figs 13a and b. Also shown are the 15 actual test points (safe
•, fail I). In these figures, the actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (2) which plot below and
above the SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits (a), are tests the result of which
SettlerCAD predicted correctly; the actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (I) which plot above
and below the SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits (H), are tests the result of which
SettlerCAD predicted incorrectly. Table 9 gives more detail on this listing the actual test SOR
as a % of the SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR, and the SettlerCAD predicted and observed
result of the tests. From this, the test results which SettlerCAD predicts incorrectly are Tests 3
(observed safe but SettlerCAD predicts fail) and 14 and 15 (observed fail but SettlerCAD
predicts safe). Of these 3 tests, only Tests 3 and 15 plot far from the ScttlerCAD predicted
maximum SOR and SLR results and therefore are definitely incorrectly predicated. However,
Tests 4, 14, 13, 7, 9 and 12 all plot very close to the SettlerCAD predicted limits and are all29
correctly predicted. This indicates that apart from Tests 3 and 15, SettlerCAD accurately
identifies the SOR and SLR capacity of the Watts SST.
enotn
t-
u.Q90
80
70
60
50
40Watts SST Tests 1 to 15 Watts SST Tests 1 to 15
il
• - -14 x •
4 13
-10-1SciUerCAD
KJ
El
15liric.95
i 85
75 •
65 - •
5513
k
2•ic
—i3
"V
8
liScttlerCAP
1" " *H" "'
• 15<-5 ;
••I i1line
6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.5
Figs 15a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fig 15a, left) and SLR (Fig 15b, right)
as % of the 1DFT maximum limits versus flux load factor. Also shown are the positions and
result (safe 0, fail I) of the 15 actual tests identified by number.
100
~ 90
E
a:o
t-80 - -
70 -•
60Darvill old SSTt,
t " t100
60
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Factor - Vo/(n.Xo) - m/h10.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Factor - Vo/(n.Xo) - m/h10.0
Figs 16a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fig 16a, left) and SLR (Fig 16b, right)
as % of the 1DFT maximum limits versus flux load factor for the Watts (3.66 m SWD, A)
and Darvill new (4.1m SWD, 0) and old (2.5m SWD, 0) SSTs.
Figures 15a and b show a small decreasing trend in SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR (S) as
the flux load factor increases - for the SOR (B, Fig 15a) from 74% (Test 4) to 71 % (Tests 9 and
12) and for the SLR (H, Fig 15b) from 81% (Test 4) to 79% (Tests 9 and 12). This seems to
suggest that the Watts SST is as insensitive to HLR as the Darvill new SST (Figs 9a and b).
However, the flux factor range for the Watts tests is very narrow - only from 6.0 to 7.2 m/h,
whereas for the Darvill tests the flux load factor range was from 3.5 to 9.0 m/h, leading to a much
greater range in 1DFT SORs and SLRs. To place the Watts SettlerCAD simulation results in
context of the Darvill simulation results, the Darvill and Watts simulation results are plotted
together in Figs 16a and b. The Watts SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limit results (A) lie
between the old (•) and new (•) Darvill SST lines, but closer to the old SST line. Considering30
between the old (•) and new (•) Darvill SST lines, but closer to the old SST line. Considering
that with respect to external SST geometry, the Watts SST (3.66m SWD and 1:15.4 sloping
bottom) is closer in likeness to the new Darvill SST (4.1m SWD and 1:10 sloping bottom) than
to the old Darvill SST (2.5m SWD and flat bottom), the expectation was that the Watts results
should fall closer to the new Darvill SST results than those of the old SST, but this did not
happen. However, a relatively consistent pattern does seem to be emerging because at least the
Watts SST results fall between the Darvill new and old SST results and show a similar
decreasing trend in capacity as the flux load factor increases. Greater clarity may be obtained
from simulating some of the 45 SLR stress tests done on the Dutch shallow (1.5 to 2.5m SWD)
SSTs by Stofkoper and Trentclman (1982) and reported by STOWa (1981). Also, in Section
7 below, additional Watts SST runs (i) with a Stamford baffle and (ii) with a 6.0 m SWD arc
discussed to evaluate the effect of baffles and SWD on the flux rating.31
6 SIMULATING THE DUTCH STOWa SSTs WITH ScttlcrCAD
6.1 The STOWa SST SLR stress tests.
Stofkoper and Trenlelmann (1982) conducted 47 SLR stress tests on 25 different circular SSTs
with 30 to 46m diameter (<))), 1.5 to 2.5m SWD and 1:12 sloping bottoms with scraper sludge
collection to a central hopper. Details of these tests are reported by STOWa (1981a,b,c). The
larger SSTs had double sided inset (<lxSWD from periphery) effluent launders but the outer
edge was blocked off so that effluent flowed only over the inner edge of the launder (see Ekama
et a!., 1997 pg 173). The first 14 tests were done on the 45.5m 4>, 2.25m SWD Rijen SST
(STOWa Tests 1 to 14, Rijen Tests 1 to 6a, 6b and 7 to 13), the second 10 tests on the 41.8m ()>,
2.0m SWD Oss SST (STOWa Tests 15 to 24, Oss Tests 1 to 10), and the final 23 tests on 23
different SSTs. In the tests, influent to the plant was shut off and accumulated in the sewer. At
the same time, sludge return flow was set to the required rate and while the influent was
withheld, most of the sludge in the SST was transferred to the biological reactor. The test was
commenced when the influent pumps were started and set at the required rate to give a selected
SOR. The influent and recycle flows were kept constant until test led to (i) sludge loss with the
effluent, in which case the test ended in fail (F), (ii) a steady state in which the sludge blanket
height (SBH) remained constant, in which case the test ended safe (S), or (iii) an inability to
maintain the influent flow at the required rate due to insufficient sewage, in which case the test
result was inferred from SBH measurements - if this was not possible with reasonable accuracy,
the test was deemed inconclusive (NE, no equilibrium). During each test the following were
measured at regular intervals (i) influent and recycle flows, (ii) sludge settleability with the SSVI
and DSVI tests, (iii) SBH , (iv) feed, RAS and ESS concentrations and (v) concentration - depth
profiles at various radial distances from the centre. Multiple batch zone settling velocity tests,
from which the Voand n values could be calculated, were also measured. However, these results
could not be used for defining the sludge settleability because these tests were conducted over
too narrow a concentration range (1.0 to 4.5 g/C). Hence for this investigation, the Vo and n
values for the different tests were calculated from the measured SSVI or DSVI with the
relationships reported by Ekama and Marais (1986) (sec O/insky and Ekama, 1995; Ekama et
a!., 1997).
Internal feature detail such as the dimensions of the feedwell skirt diameter (4>FS) and depth (hFS)
and the inlet feedwell diameter (4>n) and depth (h]F) required as input by SettlerCAD were not
available for all the SSTs stress tested. The detailed reports of the SST evaluation project
(STOWa, 1981 a,b,c) cite some internal feature detail of 22 SSTs surveyed in Holland. However,
only 7 of these 22 SSTs were among the 25 SSTs stress tested. From the information of the 22
SSTs surveyed, the feedwell skirt diameter (4>,.s), as a fraction of the SST diameter (4>ST) i.e.
^FS^ST varied from 0.05 to 0.16 with a mean of 0.10 and the feedwell skirt depth (hFS), as a
fraction of the SST depth at the radius of the feedwell skirt (hST) i.e. h,.-s/liST varied from 0.27 to
0.55 with a mean of 0.42. So for the STOWa SSTs simulated, the feedwell skirt diameter (<i>FS)32
and depth (hFS) were set at these mean values. No information was given on the inlet fecdwell
diameter (4>1F) and depth (hIF) so these dimensions were fixed at a 2.0m diameter and a depth
0.3m less than the feedwell skirt depth. To check the sensitivity of the simulations on the inlet
dimensions, 16 SettlerCAD runs were set up for the Rijen SST under Rijen Test 1 conditions.
The first 8 runs had the same inlet arrangement as defined above but had increasing influent flow
rate to determine the SettlerCAD SOR and SLR capacity. The last 8 mns had a constant SOR
and SLR of the first fail run but different inlet dimensions, i.e. feedwell skirt diameters ((JJrs) and
depths (hFS) (in m) of 2.8 and 1.1, 4.6 and 1.7, and 6.0 and 2.1m in combination with inlet
feedwell diameter ((J),,.) and depths (h,F) (in m) 1.0 and 1.0, 1.0 and 1.4, and 2.0 and 1.4. It was
found that the runs with the large and deep inlet fecdwell in combination with the 4.6 m <}>
((JW^ST = 0.10) am* 6.0 m (J) (<|>FS/(t>ST = 0-13) and 1.7 deep (hFS/hST = 0.42) feedwell skirt ended
, , , 1-, „ .. ,-, „,the other runs ended fail. This confnincu ihc selection of the fccdwell skirt of
(J)FS/c|)ST = 0.10 and hFS/hST = 0.42 with fixed inlet feedwell diameter of 2.0m and a depth 0.3m
less than the feed well skirt.
6.2 Simulating the Rijen SST SLR stress tests with SettlerCAD
From the Vo, n and XF, the 1 DFT predicted maximum SOR and SLR were calculated for the 14
Rijen SLR tests with the method described in Section 3.2 above and are listed in Table 10. The
1DFT predicted and test applied SLRs and the Test/1 DFT SLR ratio from Table 10 are plotted
in Figs 17a and b.
STOWa Rijen SST Stress Tests
Actual SLR stress Tests 1 to 14STOWa Rijen SST Stress Tests
Actual Stress Tests 1 to 14
1.4
1 2 3 4 j fa / H 9 10 11 12 13 14
Stress Test No.
Test Applied SLR - kg/(m2.h)
Figs 17a and h: I DFT maximum SLR versus test applied SLR (Fig 17a, left) and Test/1 DFT
maximum SLR ratio (Fig 17b, right) for the 14 Stress tests reported by STOWa (1981) on the
Rijen SST.33
Of the 14 tests, 6 tests ended fail (F, H, Tests 1,2,4, 5, 8 and 9), 5 ended safe (S, •, Tests 10 to
14) and 3 inconclusive (NE, Tests 3, 6 and 7). From Fig 17b, the Test/IDFT maximum SLR
ratio for the 14 tests are between 0.457 (Test 14) and 1.322 (Test 8). Tests 1 to 9 all have
Test/IDFT SLR ratios >0.80 and therefore can be expected to fail and do. It is quite likely that
had the inconclusive Tests 3, 6 and 7 been nin for longer that these would have ended fail
because they have Test/IDFT maximum SLR ratios > 0.85. Of the 5 safe tests, it is expected
that the 4 Tests 11 to 14 ended safe (•) because they have low (<0.65) Test/IDFT maximum
SLR ratios. The only odd test of the 14 is Test 10, which at a Test/IDFT maximum SLR ratio
of 1.00 ended safe (•); in Fig 17a it plots near the 3 inconclusive tests (A). In Fig 17a, the 2
safe Tests 11 and 13 and the 4 fail Tests 1, 9, 5 and 2 define the measured capacity of the Rijen
SST to be between 0.75 and 0.85 of the 1DFT SLR maximum.
6.3 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Rijeii SST.
The data given in Table 10 was given as input to SettlerCAD. For 6 of the 14 tests, 16
SettlerCAD runs per test were setup. The 6 tests selected were the 2 tests with the highest flux
load factor V0/(nX,:) (Tests 1 and 3), the 2 tests with the lowest flux load factor (Tests 4 and 8)
and the 2 tests nearest the average flux load factor (Tests 2 and 11). SettlerCAD runs 1 to 7 for
each of the 6 tests simulated were at Q, from 60 to 72% of the 1DFT SOR in 2% increments and
an Slh run at 100%. Runs 9 to 15 were setup between consecutive safe and fail runs at 0.25%
increments and the 16lhrun was at the actual test Q,. The first run with ESS > 50 mg/f was
accepted as the SettlerCAD predicted maximum influent flow rate limit. The SettlerCAD SLR
limit was calculated from the Q, limit and the test QR and X,. values. The SettlerCAD predicted
results of the first failure runs are given in Table 11 and are shown plotted in Figs 18a and b as
1DFT versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR (Fig 18a) and SettlcdCAD/1 DFT maximum
SLR ratio i.e. flux rating (Fig 18b). The results from the runs at the actual test influent flow rate
are also given in Table 11.34
Table 10:
'ararncter
SST
Actual tcsl
loading
jond lions
Sludge
reusability
DP"
predicted
limits
Flux ratingsSummcuy of the 14 SLR stress test
STOWa Test '4
Rijcn Test n
Number of SSTs
Surface area (rrr)
Influent flow(M(/d)
Overflow rate SUR (m/h)
Recycle flow (Mf/d)
Underflow rate (m/h)
Recvcle ratio
l:ccd Concentration (g/C)
Applied SLR [kgSS/(m2.h)]
Weir loading rate [rrrV(h.m)]
HLR[(qA+qR),m/h)]
Vo (m/h)
n (f/g)
SSVI(DSVI)(mf/g)*
Maximum SLR [kg/(m\h)]
Overflow rale (m/h)
Influent Qtfexcl QR): (m"h)
Flux load factor [V(/(nXf), m/h)]
Test/1 DPT SLR ratio
Tcst/IDFT overflow rate ratioTest 1
Test I
1
1626
42.5
1.09
I2.S
0.327
0.300
2.720
3.85
12.40
1.417
6.53
0.406
90
4.39
1.289
2095.8
5.91
87.7
84.6results
Test 2
Test 2
I
1626
42.5
1.09
24.2
0.621
0.570
3.410
5.83
12.40
1.711
6.33
0.415
(140)
6.77
1.363
2217.3
4.47
86.2
79.9on the
Test 3
Test 3
1
1626
34.3
0.S8
6.9
0.176
0.20(1
2.500
2.64
10.01
1.056
6.53
0.406
90
2.71
0.908
1476.5
6.43
97.4
96.9STOWA Rijen
Test 4
Test 4
1
1626
34.3
0.8S
12.7
0.326
0.370
3.200
3.86
10.01
1.206
4.86
0.4SS
120
3.38
0.731
11 89.0
3.11
114.1
120.4Test 5
Test 5
1
1626
34.3
0.88
24.4
0.625
0.710
3.650
5.49
10.01
1.505
5.94
0.433
100
6.37
1.121
1822.2
3.76
86.2
78.5WWTP
Test 6
Test 6a
1
1626
2S.9
0.74
6.9
0.178
0.241
3.500
3.21
8.42
0.918
7.15
0.379
so
2.98
0.675
1097.0
5.39
107.7
109.7SSTs.
Test 7
Test 6b
1
1626
28.9
0.74
6.9
0.178
0.241
2.900
2.66
8.42
0.918
5.38
0.460
110
2.32
0.621
1009.4
4.03
114.9
119.2Test 8
Test 7
1
1626
28.9
0.74
12.7
0.326
0 441
3.S2O
4.07
8.42
1.066
4.86
0.488
120
3.38
0.560
910.3
2.61
120.3
132.2Test 9
Test 8
1
1626
28,9
0.74
24.3
0.622
0.841
3.440
4.69
8.42
1.362
4.86
0.488
120
5.23
0.898
1459.7
2.89
89.6
82.4Test 10
Test 9
1
1626
24.6
0.63
6.9
0.176
0.279
3.100
2.50
7.17
0.806
5.94
0.433
100
2.49
0.628
1021.0
4.42
100.3
100.3Test 11
Test 10
1
1626
24.6
0.63
12.8
0.328
0.521
2.560
2.45
7.17
0.958
5.38
0.460
110
3.70
1.117
1816.4
4.56
66.3
56.4Test 12
Test 11
1
1626
24.6
0.63
24.4
0.624
0.990
2.900
3.64
7.17
1.254
6.53
0.406
90
7.01
1.794
2917.8
5.55
51.9
35.1Test 13
Test 12
I
1626
20.3
0.52
12.8
0.32Js
0.631
3.530
2.99
5.92
0.848
6.33
0.415
(140)
4.2S
0.884
1437.1
4.32
70.0
58.8Test 14
Test 13
1
1626
20.3
0.52
24.4
0.624
1.200
2.800
3.20
5.92
1.144
6.53
0.406
90
7.01
1.880
3057.9
5.75
45.7
27.7
Table 12: Comparison of SettlerCAD predicted result with the actual Tests 1 to 14 on the STOWa Rijen SSTs.
PARAMETER STOWa Test tt
O, = Influent flow (evel O.,) Riicn #
Test Q, for ! SST(mVh)
% of 1 DFT maximum Q,
1 DFT predicted outcome
Sett crCAD predicted max Q, (mVh)
% of SettlerCAD predicted max Q,
Sett erCAD predicted outcome
Observed test resultTest 1
Test 1
1772.5
84.6
Safe
1461.8
121.3
Fail
FailTest 2
Test 2
1772.5
79.9
Safe
1396.9
126.9
Fail
FailTest 3
Test 3
1431.0
96.9
Safe
959.7
149.1
Fail
No Equillest 4
Test 4
1431.0
120.4
Fail
749.1
191.0
Fail
FailTest 5
Test 5
1431.0
78.5
Safe
FailTest 6
Test 6 a
1203.4
109.7
Fail
No EquilTest 7
Tcsl 6b
1203.4
119.2
Fail
No EquilTest 8
Test 7
1203.4
132.2
Fail
564 4
213-2
Fail
FailTest 9
Test 8
1203 4
82.4
Safe
FailTest 10
Test 9
1024 5
100.3
Fail
SafeTest 11
Test 10
1024.5
56.4
Safe
1180.7
86.8
Safe
SafeTest 12
Test 11
1024.5
35.1
Safe
SafeTest 13
Test 12
845.6
58.8
Safe
SafeTest 14
Test 13
845.6
27.7
Safe
Safe35
Table 11: Summary of the SettlerCAD simulation results for the SettlerCAD influent flow limit (top) and actual test influent flow (bottom) for the
14 SLR tests on the STOWa Rijen SST (0, = Influent flow in
ScltlerCADQ, LIMIT STOWa f
Rnen Test tf
Flux factor \y(nXF} - m'h
Influent Flow (nr/h) for 1 SST
% of 1 DFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (mJ/h)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS).'(nv.h)
% of 1DFT maximum flux
Aciual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (tf of RhJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%Rhl)
Effluent SS (mg/f)*
Recycle Cone (mg/t)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (ESS>50mg/f)Test 1
Test 1
5.91
1461.S
69.75
0.90
531.8
0.327
0.36
3.33
75.9
2.4
4000
28.4
2.5
1.77
63.8
9494
94.8
FailTest 2
Tcsi 2
4.47
1396.9
63.00
0.86
1009.9
0.621
0.72
5.05
74.6
1.9
4000
34.2
2.5
2.14
50.9
8037
99.8
FailTcsi 3
Tcsi 3
6.43
959.7
65.00
0.59
186.2
0.176
0.30
1.92
70.7
3.8
4000
17.7
2.5
I.I!
52.7
9942
93.0
FailTest 4
Test 4
3.1 I
749.1
63.00
0.46
530.1
0.326
0.7!
2.52
74 4
3.7
400O
18.2
2.5
1.14
50.7
7551
98.7
FailTest 5
Test 5
3.76Test 6
Test 6a
5 39Test 7
Test 6b
4.03Test 8
Test 7
2.61
564.4
62.00
0.35
530.1
0.326
0.94
2.57
76.0
4.3
4000
15.6
2.5
0.97
85,8
7672
9S.4
FailTest 9
Test 8
2.89Test 10
Test 9
4.42Test 11
Test 10
4.56
1180.7
65.00
0.73
533.4
0.328
0.45
2.70
72.9
2.7
4000
24.4
2.5
1.52
54.7
7989.7
98.6
FailTest 12
Test 1 1
5.55Test 13
Test 12
4.32Test 14
Test 13
5.75
ACTUAL Tf-ST INFLUENT FLOW
Influent Flow (mVh)for 1 SST
% of 1 DFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (mVh)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS)/(m:.h)
% of 1 DFT maximum flux
Actual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (ft1 of RhJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%Rha)
Effluent SS (mg/C)*
Recycle Cone (mg/f)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (ESS>50mg/C)
Ohiprvprf Rp^itlt1772 5
S4.6
1.09
12.8
0.327
0.300
3.85
87.7
2.0
4000
32.S
2.5
2.05
503.5
9258.9
92.8
Fail
Fnil1772.5
79.9
1.09
24.2
0.621
0.570
5.83
86.2
1.7
4000
39.6
2.5
2.47
399.0
8317.2
96.0
Fail
Fnii1431.0
96.9
0.88
6.9
0.176
0.200
2.64
97.4
2.7
4000
24.4
2.5
1.53
581.4
10591.5
90.0
Fail1431.0
120.4
0.S8
12.7
0.326
0.370
3.86
114.1
2.4
4000
27.9
2.5
1.74
1271.3
7369.1
91 2
Fail143I.O
7S.5
0.88
24.4
0.625
0.710
5.49
86.2
1.9
Fail1203.4
109.7
0.74
6.9
0.1 78
0.241
3.2!
107.7
3.1
Vn Ffjinl1203.4
119.2
0.74
6.9
0.178
0.241
2.66
114.9
3.1
Mn Fijinl1203.4
132.2
0.74
12.7
0.326
0.441
4.07
120.3
2.7
4000
24.7
2.5
1.54
1761.2
7500.5
60.7
Fail
F-.il1203.4
82.4
0.74
24.3
0.622
0.841
4.69
S9.6
2.1
Fnil1024.5
100.3
0.63
6.9
0.176
0.279
2.50
100.3
36
*S 1 t>1024.5
56.4
0.63
12.8
0.328
0.521
2.45
66.3
3.0
4000
22.2
2.5
1.39
3.7
7472
100.0
Safe1024.5
35.1
0.63
24.4
0.624
0.990
3.64
51.9
2.3
Snfr845.6
5S.8
0.52
12.8
0.328
0.631
2.99
70.0
3.4S45.6
27.7
0.52
24.4
0.624
1.200
3.20
45.7
2.5
Safp
'Mc3n over the last 2 R,, values.36
In Figs 18a and b (or Table 10) it can be seen that the SettlerCAD predicted flux rating of the
Rijen SST ranges between 0.707 (Test 3) and 0.760 (Test 8). Fig 18a shows the SettlerCAD
maximum predicted SLR (flux rating) of the 6 tests all fall above the 0.80 flux rating line
indicating that the SettlerCAD maximum SLR is around 0.74 of the 1DFT maximum. The
SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (as % of the 1DFT maximum) ranged between 62.0%
(Test 8) and 69.7% (Test 1).
STOWa Rijen SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR Stress Tests 1 to 14
E
LC
CL
LL.
O6 -
4 -
2 -
0 -e
/// /
/
I • I/
m
FailSTOWa Rijen SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR Stress Tests 1 to 14
1.2
DC
_i
•a
I-
Q
Q
<
0 2 4 6
SetCAD Predicted SLR - kg/(m2.h)0.2
0.0 -42W-H5 6 7 B 9 10 11 12 13 14
Stress Test No.
Figs 18a and b: IDFT calculated maximum SLR versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR
(Fig 18a, left) and SettlerCAD predicted to 1DFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig 18b,
right) for SLR stress Tests 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 11 on the Rijen SST.
In the simulation runs, a simulation time of 4000 min was selected which was 18 to 34 times the
actual hydraulic retention time (RhJ for all the SettlerCAD runs for determining the SettlerCAD
predicted SOR and SLR limits (see Table 11) and 21 to 40 times Rha of the actual tests. As for
the Darvill and Watts SST runs, these run times were sufficiently long to establish a final steady
state condition and the final ESS and RAS (XR) concentrations accepted for each run were the
averages o f the predicted values over the last 2xRha. The solids mass balance was based on these
final average ESS and RAS concentrations (which are listed in Table 11). The same pattern
regarding the mass balance was observed - provided the run did not in the failure (ESS< 50
mg/Q, the run yielded a solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100% and runs that ended in failure
(ESS> 50 mg/tf) yielded a lower than 99.5% solids mass balance; the greater the SST overload
(i.e. the higher the ESS concentration), the lower the solids mass balance below 99.5%. The
ESS, RAS and % mass balance versus influent flow (as% of the 1DFT limit Q,) for Test 2, which
had the highest Test applied SLR and SOR, are shown in Figs 19a to c. In Fig 19d, the % mass
balance versus simulation time for runs 1 to 8 of Test 2 at 60 to 72% of the 1DFT maximum
influent flow arc shown - it can be seen that for the failed runs even thou°h a final steadv state
is achieved, this steady state docs not yield a mass balance.37
Steady State ESS Concentration
STOWa Test 2 - Rijen SST Test 2
O)
co
coo
CO
enLJJ1000 •
800 •
600 •
400 •
200 •
0 •yyy
i i
60 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % of 1DFT Limitilanc
m
</>
CJ
D)
JSCO
cou
CD
Q.102
100
98
96
94
92
90
60 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % 1 DFT Limit10
Solids Mass Balance
ST0W3 Test 2 - Rjjen SST Test 2
i 1 1 ' 1 1 1 1 1 Io
"c
Q
u
c
o
O
CO
<
a:
o
3
ao
10CSteady State RAS Concentration
STOWa Test 2 - Rijen Test 2
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
60 70 80 90 10C
Influent Flow - % of 1 DFT Limit
Solids Mass Balance
STOWa Test 2 - Rijen SST Test 2
105I I I
15 100
m
a)
V)
TO68%, 66%, 64'/
72%: 70% Fail
1000 2000 3000
Simulation time (min)40(
Figs 19a to d: Final ESS and RAS concentrations (Figs 19a, top left and Fig 19b, top right) and
% mass balance (Fig 19c, bottom left) versus influent flow as % 1 DFT limit showing runs ended
safe (0) and fail ($) and % mass balance versus simulation time (Fig 19d, bottom right) for the
SettlerCAD runs on the Rijen SST Test 2.
CD
O
coo
CO
CO
LUSteady State ESS Concentration
Riien SST - STOWa Tests 1 to 4, 8 & 11
1200
60 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % of 1D Flux LimitThe final average ESS concentration versus Q,
(as a % of the 1DFT limit) for the 6 Rijen tests
simulated arc shown in Fig 20. It can be seen
that the ESS concentration increases gradually
above 50 mg/f in the range between 60 and 70%
of the 1DFT limit influent flow. The gradual
increase in ESS concentration of the shallow
(2.25m SWD) Rijen resembles the gradual
increase in ESS of the old (2.5m flat) Darvill
SST. Compared with this SST, even though
100 shallower, considerable extra volume exists in
the Rijen SST from its 1:12 bottom slope and
Fig 20: Final steady state ESS concentration la diameter (Have = 2.88m).
versus influent flow as a % of the 1DFT SOR
limit for the 6 Rijen SST tests simulated.38
The position and result (safe O, fail X) of the SettlerCAD simulation runs for the 6 simulated
Tests 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 11 are shown in the D&O charts in Figs 21a to f. The actual test position
and result (safe • or fail 1) also is indicated. In the charts, the SettlerCAD predicted SOR limit
is given at the transition from the safe to the fail positions. If the actual test position of the safe
runs (•) is within or below the safe (O) runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a safe result
for the actual test. Similarly, if the actual test position of the fail tests (X) is within or above the
fail (X) runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a fail result for the actual test. From the six
D&O charts, SettlerCAD correctly predicted the result for the 6 tests simulated if it is assumed
that Test 3, which ended No Equilbrium (NE, A in Fig 17a), ended fail. From Fig 17a, this is
a reasonable assumption because it had Test/IDFT SLR ratio - 0.97 (this applies also to Tests
6 and 7 which ended NE because these had Test/1 DFT SLR ratios of 1.08 and 1.15 respectively).
In fact, had a!! 14 Rijen tests been simulated, SettlerCAD would have predicted the test result
correctly of all the tests except Test 10. This can be seen in Fig 22a and b, which plot the
SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR versus the flux load factor.
LJJ
3o
UJ
O
DC
LU
>
oRijen Test 1 - STOWa Test 11D Flux theory (no correction)
FailVo ~ 6.53 m/h
n = 0.406 l/g
XF = 2.72 g/l
0.0
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Rijen Test 3 - STOWa Test 31.00
1D Flux theory (no correction)
3.0
£• 2.5+
iUJ 2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.01DFT Limit
- - FailActual Test
FailX
Mf , Safe O
'SafeVo = 6.53 m/h
n - 0.406 t.'g
XF = 2.50 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.0.c
I
UJ
£o-iu.ccill
LJJ
o
Q:
UJ
>
oRijen Test 2 - STOWa Test 2
2.0
1.5
1.0 -
0.5 -1D Flux theory (no correction
0.01DFT Limit
Vo = 6.33 m/h
n = 0.415 l/g
XF = 3.41 g/l
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Rijen Test 4 - STOWa Test 41D Flux theory (no correction)
1.51.00
1.0 - •
0.5 - -
0.0Fail
Safe
0,00 0.50 1.00
RECYCLE RATIO (SJ1.50
Figs 21a to d: 1DFTD&O charts showing the SST operating positions and result (Safe O, Fail
X) of the SettlerCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0, fail I) for Tests 1 to 4 on the Rijen SST.39
Rijen Test 7 - STOWa Test 81D Flux iheory (no correction)Rijen Test 10 - STOWa Test 11
IQ
UJ
O0.5 •
00 •TV
/Fail/
/safe
^ 1/ \
1Fail
Sale
HJmit
§— Safe 0 ^***11'-
Vo = 4.856 m/h
n = 0.4381/g
XF = 3.82 g/l
1£1
\
UU
O
o2.0 -|
1.5 •
1.0 -
0.5 -
o n -1D Flux theory {no correction)
- 1DFT Limit
/
Fail/
/safe\
/\
/Fail X
jf y SaFail
Safe
^&^+~ Actual Test - Safe
IVo
n =
XF= 5.38 m/h
0.461 l/g
= 2.56 g/l
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.00 0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
Figs 21e and f: I DFT D&O charts showing the SST operating positions and result (safe O,faii
X) of the SettlcrCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0, fail I) for Tests 7 and 10 on the Rijen SST.
QSTOWa Rijer
120 •
100 -
80 •
60 •
?n •8
. x
9
• ISSI Tests 1 tc
4
x -
5
** T~~7
10
3* »11
——I 1 —-H14
X
M
•12
• 14
I' ' t •1'SLR Li1DF1STOWa Rijen SST Tests 1 to 14
120
100 - •
80 -•
60 -•
408
I,
Settler
• lX
4
3 X5
t:AD Line
i i 'k7
Z2
I i i*6
X
12
• 1
) • iA3
1
4
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Ftux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.02.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.0
Figs 22a and h: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (&) (Fig 22a, left) and SLR (is?) (Fig 22b,
right), as a % of the 1 DFT limit values versus flux load factor VJ(nXF). Also shown are the 14
actual test points (safe 0, fail lor No Equil A ) identified by test number.
Also shown In Figs 22a and b are the 14 actual test points (safe •, fail I and no cquil A). In
these figures, the actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (X, A) which plot below and above the
SettlcrCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits (line through B) respectively, are the tests that
SettlerCAD would predict correctly. Similarly, the actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (X,
•) which plot above and below the SettlcrCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits (line through a),
arc tests which SettlcrCAD would predict incorrectly. Table 12 gives more detail on this listing
the actual test SOR as a % of the SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR, and the SettlerCAD
predicted and observed result of the tests. From this, the only test which SettlcrCAD would
predict incorrectly is Test 10 (observed safe but SettlerCAD would predict fail). In Figs 22a and
b. Tests 9, 5, 2 and 1 (all fail) plot at around 80% and 88% respectively of the 1 DFT SOR and
SLR limits above the "SettlerCAD lines" and Tests 13 and 11 (both safe) plot at around 60% and
70% of the 1DFT SOR and SLR limits below the "SettlerCAD lines*'. The gap between the safe40
and fail tests therefore is quite large 15%. This means the SettlerCAD lines can plot in a 15%
range and still predict 13 out 14 test results correctly. Therefore unlike the Watts tests, the Rijen
tests are therefore not very useful for checking the accuracy with which SetllerCAD predicts SST
capacity.
STOWa Rijen SST Tests 1 to 14 STOWa Rijen SST Tests 1 to 14
80
72
70SettlerpAD Line(
t • i • i
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h7.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h
Figs 23a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (B) (Fig 23a, left) and SLR (0) (Fig 23b,
right), as a % of the 1DFT limit values versus flux load factor VJ(nXF)for the six test simulated
with SettlerCAD identified by test number.
Figures 23a and b, which are the same as Figs 22a and b but with a vertical scale range of only
10% of 1DFT limit SOR and SLR, show a small increasing and decreasing trend respectively in
the ScttlerCAD predicted SOR (s) and SLR (B) as the flux load factor increases for the 6 tests
simulated - for the SOR (H, Fig 23a) from 62% (Test 8) to 67% (between Tests 1 and 3) and for
the SLR (a, Fig 23b) from 76% (Test 8) to 74% (between Tests 1 and 3). This indicates that the
Rijen SSThasa low flux rating of around 74% of the lDFTSLR limit (or a hydraulic capacity
64% of the 1DFT SOR limit) but it appears to be relatively insensitive to HLR variation arising
from a wide range in flux load factor from 2.5 to 6.4 m/h.41
6.4 Simulating the Oss SST SLR stress tests with SettlerCAD
From the Vo, n and XF, the lDFT predicted maximum SOR and SLR were calculated for the 10
Oss SLR tests with the method described earlier in Section 3.2 and arc listed in Table 13. The
lDFT predicted and test applied SLRs and the Test/1 DFT SLR ratio from Table 13 are plotted
in Figs 24a and b. Of the 10 tests, 3 tests ended fail (F, B, Tests 15, 21 and 23) and 7 ended safe
(S, •, Tests 16 to 20, 22 and 24). From Fig 24b, the Test/1 DFT maximum SLR ratios for the
10 tests are between 0.422 (Test 18) and 1.417 (Test 15). Tests 5, 21 and 22 all have Test/1 DFT
SLR ratios > 1.10 and therefore can be expected to fail and do. Of the 7 safe tests, it is expected
that the 3 Tests 18, 23 and 24 end safe (•) because they have low (<0.65) Test/1 DFT maximum
SLR ratios. The only possibly odd test of the 10 is Test 20, which at a Test/IDFT maximum
SLR ratio of 0.S3 ended safe (•). There are no incorrectly placed tests in Fig 24a - all safe tests
plot above the diagonal and all fail tests below the diagonal. The safe test with the highest
Test/IDFT maximum SLR ratio is Test 20 at 0.823, which is possibly close or slightly over the
SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR. The fail test with the lowest Test/IDFT maximum SLR
ratio is Test 21 at 1.13. This makes the range between the highest safe and lowest fail tests very
large (30%), with the result that the Oss tests are not useful to check the accuracy with which
SettlerCAD predicts SST capacity.
STOWa Oss SST Stress Tests
Actual SLR stress Tests 1 5 to 24
8STOWa Oss SST Stress Tests
Actual Stress Tests 1 5 to 24
1.6
CO
f-
U-
Q
0 +
0 2 4 6
Test Applied SLR - kg/(m2.h)o.o - 15 16 17 IS 19 20 21 22 23 24
Stress Test No.
Figs 24a and b: 1 DFT maximum SLR versus test applied SLR (Fig 24a, left) and Test/IDFT
maximum SLR ratio (Fig 24b, right) for the 10 stress tests reported by STOWa (1981) on the Oss
SST.
6.5 Finding the SettlerCAD maximum SOR and SLR for the Oss SST.
The data given in Table 13 was given as input to SettlerCAD. Like for the Rijen tests, for 6 of
the 10 Oss tests, 16 SettlerCAD runs per test were setup. The 6 tests selected were the 2 tests
with the highest (Tests 18 and 17), the 2 tests with the lowest (Tests 22 and 15) and the 2 tests
nearest the average flux load factor (Tests 16 and 19). SettlerCAD runs 1 to 7 for each of the 642
tests simulated were at Q, from 60 to 72% of the 1DFT SOR in 2% increments and an 8th run at
100%. Runs 9 to 15 were setup between consecutive safe and fail runs at 0.25% increments and
the 16Ih run was at the actual test Q,. The first run with ESS > 50 mg/( was accepted as the
SettlerCAD predicted maximum influent flow rate limit. The SettlerCAD SLR limit was
calculated from the Q, limit and the test QR and XF values. The SettlerCAD predicted results of
the first failure runs are given in Table 14 and are shown plotted in Fig 25a and b. The results
from the runs at the actual test influent flow rate are also given in Table 14.
In Fig 25a and b (or Table 14) it can be seen that the SettlerCAD predicted flux rating of the Oss
SST ranges between 0.730 (Test 19) and 0.832 (Test 22). Fig 25a shows the SettlerCAD
maximum predicted SLR (flux rating) of 5 of the 6 tests (not Test 22) fall above the 0.80 flux
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (as % of the 1 DFT maximum) ranged between 60.2%
(Test 15) and 63.5% (Test 19).
STOWa Oss SST Stress Tests
^-SettlerCAD SLR Stress Tests 15 to 24
.C
16 -•
CO
O>
_O
T3
Qi
a.
LL
Q4 - -
2 - -
0/18
1£
19E/
\ i I16/
/
/:...
i—i—i•
• Pail
0 2 4 6
SetCAD Predicted SLR - kg/{m2.h)STOWa Oss SST Stress Tests
SettlerCAD SLR Stress Tests 1 5 to 24
1.0
.2a
a:
CO
LL
Q
Q
a 0.2 -H
aCO
0.0 J0.8 -
0.6 -
0.4
15 16 17 IB 19 20 21 22 23
Stress Test No.
Figs 25a and b: I DFT calculated maximum SLR versus SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR
(Fig 25a, left) and SettlerCAD predicted to I DFT calculated maximum SLR ratios (Fig 25b,
right) for STOWa SLR stress Tests 15 to 19 and 22 on the Oss SST.43
Table 13:
Parameter
SST
Actual test
loading
;onditions
Sludge
^etlleabi 1 ity
IDFT
predicted
limits
Flux ratinesSummary of the 10 SLR stress test results on the STOWA Oss SST.
STOWa Tcst#
Oss Test n
Number of SSTs
Surface area (nr)
Influent now(MC/d)
Overflow rate (nVh)
Recycle flow (MC/d)
Underflow rate (m/h)
Recycle ratio
Feed Concentration (g/f)
Applied SLR [kgSS/(nr.h)]
Weir loading rate [mV(h.m)]
HLR [(qA+qR), m/h)]
V0{m/h)
n ((•'&)
SSVI(DSVI)(mf/g)*
Maximum SLR [kg/(nr.hj]
Overflow rate (m/h)
Influent Q,(cxcl QR): (nv/h)
Flux load factor [V^nX,), m/h)]
Test/'IDFT flux ratio
Tcst/1 DFT overflow rate ratioTest ] 5
Test 1
1
1372
27.0
0.S2
13.0
0394
0.48
5.900
7.16
S.57
1.214
6.53
0.406
90
5.06
0,463
653.3
2.73
141.7
177.2Test 16
Test 2
1
1372
27.0
0.82
20.3
0.615
0.75
3.100
4.45
8.57
1.435
5.94
0.433
100
6.31
1.419
1947.4
4.42
70.6
57.8Test 17
Test 3
1
1372
24.4
0.74
13.2
0.400
0.541
2.700
3.08
7.73
1.140
5.94
0.433
100
4.67
1.330
1825.5
5.08
65.9
55.6Test 18
Test 4
1
1372
24.4
0.74
20.5
0.622
0.841
1.900
2.59
7.73
1.362
5.94
0.433
100
6.14
2 607
357S.7
7.22
42.2
28.4Test 19
Test 5
1
1372
22.4
0.68
13.2
0.401
0.590
2.640
2.85
7.11
1.0S1
5.20
0.470
(170)
4.16
1.174
1611.5
4.20
6S.6
57.9Test 20
Test 6
1
1372
22.4
0.68
20.4
0.619
0.910
2.950
3.83
7.11
1.299
4.37
0.515
130
4.65
0.956
1312.2
2.SS
82.5
71.1Test 21
Test 7
1
1372
21.1
0.64
13.1
0.397
0.620
5.380
5.58
6.69
1.037
6.33
0.415
(140)
4.93
0.520
713.4
2.83
113.!
123.1Test 22
TestS
1
1372
21.1
0.64
20.5
0 621
0.970
5.210
6.57
6.69
1.261
5.38
0.460
110
5.76
0.485
665.3
2.24
114.0
132.0Test 23
Test 9
1
1372
16.8
0.51
20.2
0.612
1.200
3.500
3.93
5.33
1.122
5.94
0.433
!00
6.2S
1.184
1624.5
3.92
62.5
43.1Test 24
Test 10
1
1372
15.2
0.46
20.6
0.626
1.361
2.500
2.72
4.81
1.086
4.86
0.488
120
5.15
1.434
196S.6
3.9S
52.7
^2.1
Table 15: Comparison of SettlerCAD predicted result with the actual Tests J to JO on the STOWa Oss SST.
PARAMETER STOWa Test #
O, = Influent How (exel On) Oss #
TcstQ, for I SST(nvVh)
% of IDFT maximum Q,
1 DFT/ predicted outcome
SeltlerCAD predicted max Q, (mVh)
% ofSetllerCAD predicted max Q,
SettlerCAD predicted outcome
Observed test resultTest 15
Test 1
1125.4
177.2
Fail
382.7
294.0
Fail
FaitTest 16
Test 2
1125.4
57.8
Safe
1226.9
91.7
Safe
SafeTest 17
Test 3
1015.6
55.6
Safe
1204.8
84.3
Safe
SafeTest IS
Test 4
1015.6
2S.4
Safe
2165.1
46.9
Safe
SafeTest 19
Test 5
933.3
57.9
Safe
1027.3
90.8
Safe
SafeTest 20
Test 6
933.3
71.1
Safe
SafeTest 21
Test 7
878.4
123.1
Fail
FailTest 22
Test 8
878.4
132.0
Fail
410.8
213.8
Fail
FailTest 23
Test 9
700.0
43.1
Safe
SafeTest 24
Test 10
631.3
32.1
Safe
Safe44
Table 14: Summary of the SettlerCAD simulation results fo)
10 SLR tests on the STOWa Oss SST(Q, = Influent flow in mthe SettlerCAD influent flow limit (top) and actual lest influent flow (bottom) for the
-'/hi
SettlerCAD Q, LIMIT STOWa #
Oss Test H
Faix factor VytnXi) - m/h
Influent Flow(mVh) for 1 SST
% of 1 DPT maximum Q,
Ovc-fiow Ratc(m-'h)
Recycle Flow (m'/h)
Underflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS)/(nr.h)
% of IDFT maximum flux
Actual Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (# of RJ
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%Rhl)
Effluent SS (mg/f)*
Recycle Cone (mg/f)*
Mass Balance (%)•
Test Result (ESS>50mg/.r)Test 15
Test 1
2.73
3S2.7
60.25
0.2S
540.7
0.395
1.41
3.97
78.5
3.8
4000
17 A
2.5
1.09
64.8
9949
99.2
FailTest 16
Test 2
4.42
1226.9
63.00
0.89
844.1
0.615
0.69
4.68
74.2
1.7
4000
39.0
2.5
2.44
54.9
7510
99.8
FailTest 17
Test 3
5.08
1204.8
66.00
0.8S
549.0
0.400
0.46
3.45
73.9
2.0
4000
33.0
2.5
2.06
63.6
8350
98.4
FailTest 1 8
Test 4
7.22
2165.1
60.50
1.5S
S53.7
0.622
0.39
4.18
68.1
1.2
4000
56.8
2.5
3.55
50.1
65 85
99.9
FailTest 19
Test 5
4.20
1027.3
63.75
0.75
550.4
0.401
0.54
3.03
73.0
2.2
4000
29.7
2.5
1.86
50.9
7456
99.8
FailTest 20
Test 6
2.88Test 21
Test 7
2. S3Test 22
Test 8
2.24
410.8
61.75
0.30
852.3
0.621
2.07
4.79
83.2
2.S
4000
23.8
2.5
1.49
52.1
7670
99.7
FailTest 23
Test 9
3.<J2Test 24
Test 10
3.98
ACTUAL TEST INFLUENT FLOW
Inflicnt Flow (mVh) for 1 SST
% of IDFT maximum Q,
Overflow Rate (m/h)
Recycle Flow (mVh)
Underflow Rate (mil)
Recycle Ratio
Applied Flux (kgSS)/(m\h)
% of 1 DFT maximum flux
AcU.al [Retention Time (h)
Duration of Run (min)
Duration of Run (U of Rhj)
Sim time Step (min)
Sim time Step (%Rhi)
Effluent SS (mg/f)'
Recycle Cone (mg/C)*
Mass Balance (%)*
Test Result (ESS>50mg/f)1125.4
177.2
0.82
13.0
0.394
0.4S0
7.16
141.7
2.1
4000
31.4
2.5
1.96
2768.1
10929.8
91.8
Fail
F.iil1125.4
57.S
0.82
20.3
0.615
0.750
4.45
70.6
1.8
4000
37.1
2.5
2.32
6.3
7224
100.0
Safe1015.6
55.6
0.74
13.2
0.400
0.541
3.08
65.9
2.3
4000
29.5
2.5
1.84
2.8
7691.0
100.0
Safe
Snfr1015.6
2S.4
0.74
20.5
0.622
0.841
2.59
42.2
1.9
4000
35.2
2.5
2.20
0.9
4159.4
100.0
Safe
Snfr933.3
57.9
0.68
13.2
0.401
0.590
2.85
68.6
2.4
4000
27.9
2.5
1.75
7.0
7105.6
100.0
Safe
S:,fr933.3
71.1
0.68
20.4
0.619
0.910
3.S3
82.5
2.0
4000
33.6
2.5
2.10878.4
123.1
0.64
13.1
0.397
0.620
5.58
113.1
2.5
4000
26.8
2.5
1.67
Fail878.4
132.0
0.64
20.5
0.621
0.970
6.57
114.0
2.0
4000
32.6
2.5
2.04
2036.3
7926.0
94.8
Fail
Fnil700.0
43.1
0.51
20.2
0.612
1.200
3.93
62.5
2.3
4000
29.0
2,5
1.81
Snfr631.3
32.1
0.46
20.6
0.626
1.361
2.72
52.7
2.4
4300
28.1
2.5
1.75
'Meai over the last 2 Rfc, values.45
In the simulation runs, a simulation time of 4000 min was selected which was 18 to 57 times the
actual hydraulic retention time (Rha) for all the SettlcrCAD runs for determining the SettlerCAD
predicted SOR and SLR limits (see Table 14) and 27 to 37 times Rha of the actual tests. As for
the the previous SST runs, these run times were sufficiently long to establish a final steady state
condition and the final ESS (XE) and RAS (XR) concentrations accepted for each run were the
averages of the predicted values over the last 2xRha. The solids mass balance was based on these
final average ESS and RAS concentrations (which arc listed in Table 14). The same pattern
regarding the mass balance was observed - provided the run did not in the failure (ESS< 50
mg/C), the run yielded a solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100% and runs that ended in failure
(ESS> 50 mg/C) yielded a lower than 99.5% solids mass balance; the greater the SST overload
(i.e. the higher the ESS concentration), the lower the solids mass balance below 99.5%. The
ESS, RAS and % mass balance versus influent flow (as% of the 1DFT limit Q,) for Test 16,
which is one of the safe tests, are shown in Figs 26a to c. In Fig 26d, the % mass balance versus
simulation time for runs 1 to S of Test 16 at 60 to 72% of the 1DFT maximum influent flow are
shown - it can be seen that for the failed runs, even though a final steady state is achieved, this
steady state does not yield a mass balance.
Steady State ESS Concentration
STOWa SST Test 16 - OSS Test 2
1000
E
CO
atF
ion ( RAS ConcentraSteady
8000 -
6000 •
4000 -
2000 •
0 •f State
STOWaRAS Concentration
SST Test 16 - Oss Test 2
—H1 i < 1 • ' 1 -—I
60 70 80 90
Influent Row - % of 1D Flux Limit100 60 70 80 90
Influent Flow- % of 1D Flux Limit100
100 •
96 •
94 •
92 •
Qn -Solids Mass Balance
STOWa SST Tesl 16 • Oss Test 2
^*S^ . . .
1 -^" 1 i *102
100Solids Mass Balance
STOWa SST Test is • Oss Test 2
Q.
60 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % 1DFT Limit100 1000 2000 3000 400
Simulation time (min)
Figs 26a to d: Final ESS and RAS concentrations (Figs 26a, top left and Fig 26b, top right) and
% mass balance (Fig 26c, bottom left) versus influent flow as % IDFTlimit showing runs ended
.safe (0) and fail ($) and % mass balance versus simulation time (Fig 26d, bottom right) for the
SettlerCAD runs on the STOwa Test 16 on the Oss SST.46
Steady State ESS Concentration
SST Tests 1 to 5 & 8 (15-19&22)
E,
co
"c<D
O
coo
CO
UJ
0 -•
60 70 80 90
Influent Flow - % of 1D Flux Limit100
tig 27; rinat steady state ESS concentration
versus influent flow as a % of the ID FT SOU
limit for the 6 Oss SST tests simulated.The final average ESS concentration versus Q,
(as a % of the 1DFT limit) for the 6 Oss tests
simulated are shown in Fig 27. It can be seen
that the ESS concentration increases gradually
above 50 mg/G in the range between 60 and
66% of the 1DFT limit influent flow. The
gradual increase in ESS concentration of the
shallow (2.0m SWD) Oss SST resembles that
of the DamII old and Rijen SSTs. This
appears consistent because the average depths
(adding the volume of the bottom cone as
^,,,.;..„!„.,• currw «r+t,-,-rt ccr- i en -_J
4_Ljuivai^iii Owi_y^ ui ui^so o j i a m v- ^..~I\J and
2.88m respectively, while that of the Oss SST is
2.58m.
The position and result (safe O, fail X) of the SettlerCAD simulation runs for the simulated Tests
15 to 19 and 22 are shown in the D&O charts in Figs 28a to f. The actual test position and result
(safe • or fail X) also is indicated. In the charts, the SettlerCAD predicted SOR limit (for the test
qR and XF) is given at the transition from the safe to the fail positions. If the actual test position
of the safe runs (•) is within or below the safe (O) runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a
safe result for the actual test. Similarly, if the actual test position of the fail tests (X) is within
or above the fail (X) runs, then SettlerCAD correctly predicted a fail result for the actual test.
From the 6 D&O charts, SettlerCAD correctly predicted the result for all 6 tests simulated. In
fact, had all 10 Oss tests been simulated, SettlerCAD would have predicted the test result
correctly of all the tests except possibly not Test 20. This is shown in Figs 29a and b, which plot
the SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR versus the flux load factor.
Oss Test 1 - STOWa Test 15ID Flu* theory (no correction)
1.0
0.5 ••
0.0FaOss Test 2 - STOWa Test 161D Flux theory {no correction)
.c
E,
-
oLL
cc
UJ
O1.5 -
1.0 -
0.5 -
0.0 -Fall
Safe
1DFT Limit
y/
///Fai/
/Safe\ Vo
\ ;;
Y
7 \FailX?^ -^
SafeO/\
Actual Test
I= 5.94 m/h
0.433 l/g
= 3.10 9/
10-Safe
000 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
RECYCLE RATIO (R)0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO <R)1.00
FiffS 28a and b: ID FT D&O rluiri\ \hnwinu thp SST nnpratino nnsitinns: miff result (tnfr (1 fail
X) of the SettlerCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0,fail I) for the STOWa Tests 15 and 16 on the
OSS SST.Oss Test 3 - STOWa Test 171D Flux theory (no correction}
1.5 -
1.0 -
on •Pin
Safe
1DFTL
fail
JI
/
/
1SafeA
/\i. VO
X n =
>V XF
^-FaiiX ^>
•^k ^— Safe 0
*>•5.94 m/h
0.433 l/g
= 2.70 g/l
^ Actual Test - Safe
1Oss Test 4 - STOWa Test 181D Flux theory (no correction)
3.047
2.5 - -
IUJ 2.0
1.5 - -
iLU
O 0-5
0.01DFT LimitFail
Safo
Actual Test -Safe
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.00
Oss Test 5 - STOWa Test 19ID Flux theory (no correction)
2.0Oss Test 8 -STOWa Test 221D Flux theory (rlo correction)
1.0 - -
rrLU 0.5
O
o.oIDFTLimVo = 5.20 m/h
n = 0.470 l/g
Fai| XF = 2.64 g/l
Sale
Sateft*Safe 0 \
Actual Test-Safe
RAl
s
oOVERFL0.50 -
0.25 •
0.00 -Actual Test - Fail\
1DFT Limit v
. Fall **.
Safe y^~
/
Fa\\/
/safe
-** -t •— t —VO - 5.38
m/h
V n = 0.461 l/g
FallX^H^^.
Sale O
^* — 1
0.00 0.50
RECYCLE RATIO (R)1.000.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.50
Figs 28c to f: IOFT D&O charts showing the SST operating positions and result (safe O.fail
X) of the SettlerCAD runs and actual tests (safe 0Jail I) for the STOWa Tests 17 to 19 and 22
on the OSS SST
Oss Tests 1-10: STOWa Tests 15-24
180
E_J
O
Q15
. X
. 22 I
•21 - -
Sett20 " "
23.erCAC
It
19 16*24
1 i 1 I 1m
17
I I I• 18Oss Tests 1-10 : STOWa Tests 15-24
160
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h
1DFTSLRI140
120
100
80
60
40
20
8.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h8.0
Figs 29a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (8) (Fig 29a, left) and SLR (&) (Fig 29b,
right), as a % of the IDFTlimit values versus flux factor V(/(nXF). Also shown are the 14 actual
test points (safe 0, fail lor No Equil A ) identified by test number.
Also shown In Figs 29a and b arc the 10 actual test points (safe •, fail X). In these figures, the
actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (X) which plot below and above the SettlerCAD predicted
SOR and SLR limits (line through H) respectively, are the tests that SettlerCAD would predict48
correctly. Similarly, the actual tests that ended safe (•) and fail (X) which plot above and below
the SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits (line through B), are tests which SettlerCAD
would predict incorrectly. Table 15 gives more detail on this listing the actual test SOR as a %
of the SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR, and the SettlerCAD predicted and observed result
of the tests. From this, the only test which SettlerCAD would predict incorrectly is possibly Test
20, which ended safe but plots slightly above the SettlerCAD line. In Figs 29a and b, Tests 21
and 22 (both fail) plot at around 114% and 125% of the lDFT SOR and SLR limits above the
"SettlerCAD lines" and Tests 23, 19, 16 and 17 (all safe) plot at around 60% and 70% of the
lDFT SOR and SLR limits below the "SettlerCAD lines". The gap between the safe and fail
tests therefore is very large at 40%. This means the SettlerCAD lines can plot in a 40% range
and still predict 10 out 10 test results correctly. Therefore, like the Rijen tests but only worse so,
*i r\~~ .* , « r. ,i r- i. _ _i.:... .1. _ .".i. ...1.: ,1. f .ui -c * i~~i . !-•- OOT-
UIO Uss
capacity.
Oss Tests 1-10 : STOWa Tests 15-24
70
- 68
EDss Tests 1-10 : STOWa Tests 15-24
85
O66 +
64
62
6022
S!
1
—HSH I—1—119
Sf
I i I17
I I I18
El
I •
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h8.0 2 0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h8.0
Figs 30a andb: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (®) (Fig 30a, left) and SLR (8) (Fig30b.
right), as a % of the lDFT limit values versus flux load factor VJ(nXh)for the six Oss SST tests
simulated with SettlerCAD identified by test number.
Figures 30a and b, which are the same as Figs 29a and b but with a vertical scale range of only
10% and 25% of 1DFT limit SOR and SLR respectively, show a small increasing and decreasing
trend respectively in the SettlerCAD predicted SOR (H) and SLR (H) as the flux factor increases
for the 6 tests simulated - for the SOR (H, Fig 30a) from 60% (Test 15) to 66% (Test 17) and for
the SLR (a, Fig 30b) from 82% (between Tests 15 and 22) to 68% (Test 18). This indicates that
the Oss SSThas a low hydraulic capacity of around 64% of the lDFT SOR limit (or 74% of the
lDFT SLR limit) but appears to be relatively insensitive to hydraulic loading variation arising
from a wide ran£»c in flux load factor from 2.5 to 6.4 m/h.49
6.6 Conclusions from the Rijcn and Oss SST simulations
To place the Rijen and Oss SettlerCAD simulation results in context of the Darvill and Watts
simulation results, all the results are plotted together in Figs 27a and b. The Rijen (T) and Oss
(I) SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limit results lie below the Darvill old (A) and new (•)
and Watts (•) SST "lines", but closer to the Darvill old SST line. Considering that with respect
to external SST geometry, the Rijen (2.25 m SWD, 1:12 sloping bottom, 2.88m Have) and Oss
(2.0 m SWD, 1:12 sloping bottom, 2.58m Have) SSTs are closer in likeness to the old Darvill SST
(2.5m SWD and flat bottom) than the Darvill new (4.10 m SWD, 1:10 sloping bottom, 4.68m
Have) and Watts (3.66 m SWD, 1:15.4 sloping bottom, 3.97 m Havc), the expectation is that the
Rijen and Oss results should fall near the old Darvill SST results, and this does indeed happen.
100 100
ELi
u.
Q90 • •
80 • •
70 •I
Rijon SST^--^. Darvill-new
>— —
• * WallsRST- - - .
1 •
SST
arvill old SST
sSST
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/{n.XF) - m/h10.060
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/{n.XF) - m/h
Figs 31a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fig 31a, left) and SLR (Fig 31b, right),
as a % of the IDFT limit values versus flux load factor V(/(nXF)for the 4 tests on the Darvill new
(M) and old (A ) SSTs, 15 of the 15 tests on the Watts ' SST (0), 6 each of the 14 and 10 tests
on the Rijen ( 7) and Oss (I) SSTs.
The gap between the lowest loaded safe and highest loaded fail tests in the Rijen and Oss SST
data sets is very wide, i.e. about 15% and 30% of the IDFT SLR limit values respectively. These
tests therefore do not help to provide additional validation of the accuracy with which
SettlerCAD predicts SST failure. The same problem is apparent in the 23 remaining STOWa
SST tests on the 23 different SSTs. In these 23 tests, the lowest and highest loaded safe tests are
at 21 (Test 34) and 149% (Test 26) of the IDFT SLR limit respectively, and the lowest and
highest loaded fail tests are at 54 (Test 45) and 161% (Test 33) of the IDFT SLR limit
respectively. Eliminating the 7 tests with exceptionally high DSVIs (>400 mP/g) and/or low feed
concentrations (< 0.6 g/P) (i.e. Tests 26, 27, 33, 34,38, 39 and 41), reduces these gaps somewhat
(i.e. for the safe tests from 45 lo 94% and for the fail test from 54 to 123% of the IDFT SLR
limit) but not sufficiently to be able to provide additional validation of the accuracy with which
SettlerCAD predicts SST failure (see Figs 32 a and b). Therefore none of these other 23 STOWa
tests were simulated for this report. It was deemed more important to concentrate on evaluating
the effect of SST depth and baffling on the flux rating. This is discussed in the next section.50
STOWa SST Stress Tests
Stress Tests 25 to 47
sz
•
DC
c/)
•a*J
o
TJ
0)i—
Q_
:lux
(-116
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. a3I«
• /
33 33»28
*\y*46- -X/•Safe
ES
Fail
•
NO EquilSTOWa SST Stress Tests
Actual Stress Tests 25 to 47.2 2.0
"fa
a:
•a
<D
•-•
o
a.
i-u_Q1.5
1.0 -
^ 0.5 -Iaa
0.0 -25 27 29 31 33 35 37 41 43 45 47
Stress Test No.Test Applied SLR - kg/{m2.h)
Figs 32a and b: 1 DFT maximum SLR versus test applied SLR (Fig 32a, left) and Test/1 DFT
maximum SLR ratio (Fig 32b, right) for the 23 stress tests reported by STOWa (1981) on the 23
different SSTs.51
7 EFFECT OF BAFFLING AND DEPTH ON SST FLUX RATING (CAPACITY)
To evaluate the effect of the (i) Stamford baffle and (ii) S WD on the flux rating, the SettlerCAD
predicted maximum SOR was determined for the 4 tests on the Darvill new and old SSTs (i)
without Stamford baffles and (ii) with interchanged SWD. None of the other internal features
were changed and were as listed in Table 1. The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and
associated SLR, HLR and actual retention time (Rha) are listed in Table 16 and compared with
the results for the SSTs as built. Similarly, the SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR was
determined for the Watts SST(i) with a Stamford baffle extending 1.2 m from the side wall and
0.5 m below the water surface and (ii) with a 6.0 m SWD. None of the other internal features
were changed. Not all 15 Watts tests were simulated. Six tests were selected that (i) represent
the full range of flux load factor for all 15 tests (ii) lie closest to the previously predicted
SettlerCAD line (Fig 15) and (iii) include both safe and fail tests. The SettlerCAD predicted
maximum SOR and associated SLR, HLR and actual retention time (Rha) for the Watts SST are
listed in Table 17 and compared with the results for the SSTs as built.
7.1 The Effect of baffling on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and associated SLR, HLR and actual retention time
(Rha) for the Darvill new and old and Watts SSTs with and without Stamford baffles are shown
in Figs 33a to d. For the Darvill SSTs, the flux rating (SLR, Fig 33b) of the new SST (4.1m
SWD, 1:10 sloping bottom, scraper sludge collection) and old SST (2.5m SWD, flat bottom,
suction sludge collection) is respectively 1.7 to 2.6% and 1.4 to 1.8% of the 1DFT limit SLR
higher without the Stamford baffle. For the old SST, the increase in flux rating without the
Stamford baffle decreases as the flux load factor (or HLR) increases, but for the new SST,
increase appears insensitive to flux load factor. In contrast, for the Watts SST (3.66m SWD,
1:15.4 sloping bottom, suction sludge collection), the flux rating is about 2% of the 1DFT limit
SLR lower without the Stamford baffle and is closely the same across the (narrow) flux load
factor range.
From the above, it is concluded that while the Stamford baffle has a significant effect on the ESS
concentration while the SST is underloaded, its influence on the flux rating (or capacity) is small
and variable. With a Stamford baffle, the flux rating of the Darvill new and old SSTs is about
2% (of 1DFT SLR limit) lower while the flux rating of the Watts SST is about 2% (of 1DFT
SLR limit) higher. This small influence of the Stamford baffle is in conformity with the
expectation from Fig 1 - good internal feature design will keep ESS concentration lower while
the SST is underloaded, (defined in this report as ESS < 50 mg/C) while the capacity is not
significantly affected.52
or
oen
QDarvill Old and New SSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
90 -"-
onoCO
tD•- - - -New SSTs :---
60 • -High Feed Cone
Poor Scttleabilty
50Old SSTs
lun Tec*] "Cone
! Good Sclllcabilty
Ilish llvdraulics
I 1 I iDarvill Old and New SSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h
Watts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
801C
75 - -
70 • •
65 ••
60High Feed c!onc
Poor Seltleabilty
].<m Hydraulics
i > i' i I iLow Kcccl Cone
Good Scttltabilty
Hiiili Ihdratilics
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.550
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h
Watts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity10
Poor Settleabilty
Low H\drauiic5
70
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.5
Figs 33a to d: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Figs 33a andc, left) and SLR (Fig 33b and
d, right) for the Dan'ill (top) a/id Watts (bottom) SSTs with and without baffles. The actual test
values, identified by number and result (safe 0, fail I), are also shown.
7.2 The Effect of dcptli on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and associated SLR, HLR and actual retention time
(R,w) for the Dan'ill new and old SSTs with interchanged depths (i.e. new 2.5 m SWD, 1: 10
sloping bottom and scraper sludge collection and old 4.1 m SWD, flat bottom and suction sludge
collection) and the Watts SST with 6.0 m SWD are compared with that of the SSTs as built, (i.e.
new 4.1 m SWD, 1: 10 sloping bottom and scraper sludge collection, old 2.5 m SWD, flat bottom
and suction sludge collection and Watts with 3.66 m SWD, 1:15.4 sloping bottom and suction
sludge collection) in Figs 34a to d.53
Darvill Old and New SSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
oif)
h-
o90
80
70
60 - -nr.
50,fi Feed Cjine "
Poor Sdtleabillyl:<mTet(l Cone"
Good Sellleabilly
High Hyi|raulk-s
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/hDarvill Old and New SSTs
SettlerCAD Predicted
100
E
_i
or_i
wH
LJ_
Q
1070 • •
6090 • •
80
High Feed Cone
Tour Sf tlleabilty
l.oiv HvdraulitsTests 1-4
Capacity
Low Feed Cone
Good Scltfeabilty
High H>draulics
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h10
QWatts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
90
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.5tWatts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettterCAD Predicted Capacity
95High J'eed Cone
'. PoorSeltleabfltv
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/{nXF) - m/h7.5
Figs 34a to d: SettterCAD predicted maximum SOR (Figs 34a andc, left) and SLR (Fig 34b and
d, right) for the Darvill new and old SSTs (top) with interchanged SIVD (old 4. lm and new 2.5m)
and the Watts SST(bottom) with aSWDof6.0m compared with the SSTs as built (new 4.1m, old
2.5m and Watts 3.66m). The actual test values, identified by number and result (safe 0,fail I)
are also shown.
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR for the Darvill new and old SSTs with
interchanged SWD are compared in Figs 34a and b, and for the Watts SST with SWD of 3.66
(as built) and 6.0 m in Figs 34c and d.
For the Darvill SSTs, the 4.1 m SWD old SST has approximately the same flux rating (SLR) as
the new 4.1 m SST (Fig 34b) and shows a small decrease from 89 to 85% of 1 DFT SLR limit
as flux load factor increases from 3 to 9 m/h. Likewise 2.5 m new SST has a similarly low flux
rating as the 2.5 m old SST - the only difference is thai the flux rating of the 2.5 m old SST
decreases approximately linearly from 85 to 70% of 1 DFT SLR limit as flux load factor increases
from3 to 9 m/h, whereas the flux rating of the new 2.5 m SST decreases from 82 to 78% of 1 DFT
SLR for flux load factor from 3.5 to 4.2 m/h and thereafter remains approximately constant at
76% of 1 DFT SLR for flux load factor from 4.2 to 9 m/h. The differences in flux rating between54
the new and old SSTs with the same SWD probably arise from the different SST bottoms and
sludge collection systems, which for the old SST is flat and hydraulic suction and for the new
SST is sloping 1:10 and scraper, differences which SettlerCAD can take into account, but the
accuracy with which it simulates these is unknown.
For the Watts SST, 3.66 m SWD (as built) the 1DFT SLR limit (Fig 34d) shows a slight
decreasing trend from 80 to 77% of 1DFT SLR as sludge load factor increases from 6.0 to 7.3
m/h. For Test 13 and 14 conditions (XF and qK), the same flux load factor of 6.3 m/h leads to
SettlerCAD predicted SLR predicted limits of 79 and 82% respectively. The feed concentration
forTests 13 and 14 are the same (3.98 g/(), but the underflow rate (qR) is significantly different
at 0 84 m/h for Tp<;t 1 ^ and 1.08 m/h for Test 14. However, the hichcr Go of Test 14 does not
give a significantly higher 1DFT SOR (Table 17) because the Test 13 qK value is already close
to the SHC I one limit (see Fig 13f. So the higher HLR for Test 14 is mainly due to the higher
qR. Curiously, Test 13 with the lower HLR (2.38 m/h) has the lower SettlerCAD predicted SOR
(71.25% of 1DFT SOR) compared with Test 14 (73.0% of 1DFT SOR) (Fig 34d). It was
expected that this should would be the other way around, i.e. Test 13 with the lower HLR should
have the higher SeltlerCAD predicted %1DFT SOR. The fact that this was not the case,
indicated that low HLRs do not necessarily lead to high flux rating values. While no unusual
features were observed in the flow field and velocity vectors of Test 14, it's result was regarded
spurious. With the 6.0 m SWD, the difference between Tests 13 and 14 is much greater - from
84 to 91% of 1DFT SLR (Fig 34d). It is not clear why Test 14 conditions lead to such an
unusually a high flux rating of 91%. Moreover, in Fig 34d, for Test 4, there is a very little
difference in the flux rating (SLR) of the 6.0 m and 3.66 m SWD SSTs - both are around 81%.
For the 6.0 m SST, this is 10% of 1DFT SLR lower than for Test 14. Examining the flow field
for Test 4, it was noticed that from around the middle of the simulation run time, the sludge
blanket developed a seiche that persisted to the end of the run; also the velocity vectors were
alternatively clockwise and anti-clockwise at successive simulation steps. It was concluded that
for form of stable resonant oscillation developed in the SST that did not cause numerical
instability. The results of Test 4 are therefore considered spurious and arc marked ? in Figs 34c
and d. Ignoring Tests 4 and 14, the Watts SST with a 6.0 m SWD has a flux rating of about 5%
of 1DFT SLR higher than with a 3.66 m SWD.
From the above it is clear that the greater the SWD, the higher the flux rating. However, an
increase in SWD from 3.66 to 6.0m represents a 60% increase in SST volume. For a 5% of
1DFT SLR increase in flux rating this volume increase is definitely not cost efficient - it would
be better to select the shallower SWD (3.66m for the Watts SST) and increase the surface area
to accommodate the lower flux rating.55
Table 16: IDFT calculated, test applied and SettlerCAD predicted SOR and associated SLR,
HLR and actual retention time (RhJ for the Dar\>ill new and old SSTs (i) as built, (ii) without
Stamford baffles and (Hi) with interchanged SWD.
lest 1
NPW
IDFTCALCULATED
IDFT SOR, m/h
IDFT SLR, kg/(nrh)
IDFT HLR, m/h
V^nX,:), m/h
qR, m/h
Havi,, m
XP g/f
TEST APPLIED
% IDFTSOR
%1DFTSLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time, Rha, h
(i) SLITLERCADP
%IDFTSOR
%IDFTSLR
HLR,m/h
Act Ret Time, Rhj, h
(11) SETTLERCAD I
% IDFTSOR
% IDFT SLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time, Rlu, h
(in) SETTLERCAD
% IDFT SOR
% IDFT SLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time. R,,,, h1.104
8.26
1.80
4.30
0.693
4.68
4.60
78.5
86.79
1.56
3.00Old
1,104
8.26
1.80
4.30
0.693
2.50
4.60
78.5
86.79
1.56
1.601
Now
0.775
6.31
1.47
3.55
0.693
4.68
4.30
92.1
95.83
1.41
3,33
RED1CTED RESULTS FOR
77.25
86.02
1.55
3.03
PREDICTED
63.00
77.27
1.39
3.37
PREDICTED
80.00
87.71
1.58
2.9771.50
82.49
1.48
1.69
RESUL'I
7S.25
86.64
1.56
1.61
RESUL1
74.50
84.33
1.51
1.6574.50
86.53
1.27
3.69
SFOR
67.50
82,84
1.22
3.85
SFOP
74.30
86.43
1.27
3.69est 2
Old
0.775
6.31
1.47
3.55
0.693
2.50
4.30
92.1
95.83
1.41
1.78
SSTs AS
73.50
86.00
1.26
1.98
SSTs Wl
82.50
90.76
1.33
l.SS1
\PW
1.503
8.22
2.28
5.17
0.779
4.68
3.60
65.6
77.35
1.76
2.65
BUILT
83.75
89.30
2.04
2.30est 3
Old
1.503
8.22
2.28
5.17
0.779
2.50
3.60
65.6
77.35
1.76
1.42
71.75
81.40
1.86
1.35
III SWITCHED!)
63.75
76,13
1.74
2.70
.SSTs WITH NO
76.25
87.46
1.28
L 1.9587.30
91.64
2.09
2.2482.75
88.64
2.02
1.241
2.796
12.19
3.53
9.08
0.736
4.68
3.45
89.1
91.37
3.23
1.45
84,50
87,73
3.10
1.51
:PTHS
78.50
82.98
2.93
1.60
STAMFORD BAI
75. SO
84.06
1.92
1.3089.00
91.29
3.22
1.45est 4
Old
2.796
12.19
3.53
9.08
0.736
2.50
3.45
89.1
91.37
3.23
0.77
63.25
70.91
2.50
1.00
81.25
85.16
3.01
0.S3
TITS
65.00
72.29
2.55
0.9856
Table 17: 1DFT calculated, test applied and SettlerCAD predicted SOR and associated SLR,
HLR and actual retention time (Rha,)for the Watts SSTs (i) as built, (ii) with Stamford baffle and
(Hi) mth 6.0 m SIVD.
Test 4 lest 7 Test 9 Test 12 Test 13 Test 14
1DFT CALCULATED
lDFTSOR,m/h
1DFTSLR, kg/(nrh)
1DFTHLR, m/h
V(/(nXF), m/h
Underflow rate, qR, m/h
Average depth, HJVC, m
Feed Cone. Xr: P/P1.71
9.54
2.31
6.04
0.603
3.97
4 HO2.08
9.55
2.68
7.01
0.604
3.97
3 5602.17
9.55
2.77
7.24
0.604
3.97
3.4442.17
9.55
2.77
7.24
0.604
3.97
1 Add~ • • • •2.16
11.98
3.00
6.26
0.843
3.97
7 0S7-•' ~ •2.26
13.31
3.34
6.26
1.084
3.97
3 og-t
TEST APPLIED
%1D1TSOR
%IDFTSLR
HLR, ni/h
Act Ret Time, Rhj, h69.52
77.47
1.79
2.2268.21
75.36
2.02
1.97
(i) SETTLERCAD PREDICTED RESULTS FOR
%1DFTSOR
%IDFTSLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time, Rh,, h73.50
80.41
1.86
2.1471.75
78.11
2.09
1.90
(n) SE'ITLERCAD PREDICTED RESULTS FOF
%1DFTSOR
%1DFTSLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time, R,,,. h75.00
84.52
1.88
2.1176.25
81.60
2.19
1.8171.25
77.51
2.15
1.8576.67
81.75
2.27
1.75
SSTs AS BUILT
71.50
77.71
2.15
1.8471.50
77.71
2.15
1.8471.83
79.73
2.40
1.6668.78
78.93
2.64
1.51
71.25
79.32
2.38
1.6773.00
81.76
2.73
1.45
.SSTs WITH 6.0 mSWD
77.00
82.01
"I T~7
1.75
(iii) SE'lTLHRCAD PREDICTED RESULTS FOR SSTs WI'
% 1DFT SOR
%1DFTSLR
HLR, m/h
Act Ret Time, R,u, h76.00
82.26
1.90
2.0975.00
80.53
2.16
1.8474.75
80.25
2.22
1.7876.75
81.81
2.27
1.7578.50
84.54
2.54
1.56S7.25
91.39
3.05
1.30
II STAMFORD BAFFLES
74.75
80.25
2.22
1.7874.50
81.66
2.45
1.6278.00
85.14
2.84
1.4057
8 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
8.1 Validation of SettlerCAD prediction accuracy
The only tests which were helpful to check the accuracy with which SettlerCAD simulated full
scale SSTs were the Watts tests. Of all 15 Watts tests simulated, SettlerCAD correctly predicted
the results of 12 tests, i.e. Tests 1,2 and 4 to 10 (safe) and 11 to 13 (fail) but incorrectly predicted
the results for 3 tests, i.e. Tests 3 (test safe, SettlerCAD fail) and 14 and 15 (test fail, SettlerCAD
safe). Tests 4, 14, 13, 7, 9 and 12, which include 3 safe and 3 fail tests, fall in a very narrow
%1DFT SOR (and SLR) range of 2% of 1DFT SOR from 71.5 to 73.5% and the SettlerCAD
predicted SOR limit versus flux load factor line falls very close to these 6 tests. This narrow
range, indicates that apart from Test 3 and 15, SettlerCAD accurately identifies the SOR and
SLR capacity of the Watts SST. The SettlerCAD results of the Watts tests gives a good
indication that the SettlerCAD predictions arc valid for the simulation of full scale stress tests.
SettlerCAD correctly predicted the result of 2 of the 4 Darvill tests and all 12 Rijen and Oss tests
simulated. However, these tests were not helpful to validate the accuracy with which SettlerCAD
predicted SST capacity, because, unlike the Watts tests, the range between the highest loaded
safe and lowest loaded fail tests was too large (>10% of 1DFT SOR).
In all of the simulation runs, simulation times were selected which were >25 times the actual
hydraulic retention time (25 x Rha). These run times were sufficiently long to establish a final
steady state condition towards the end of the simulation, which was checked from the solids mass
balance calculated at each time step of the run. In the solids mass balance, the mass of solids
exiting the SST via the underflow and overflow is calculated as a % of the inflow mass of sludge.
Steady state was accepted to have been established when the % mass balance no longer changed.
The final ESS (X[:) and RAS (XR) concentrations accepted for each run were the averages of the
predicted values over the last 2x Rlw of the run. Provided the run ended safe (ESS < 50 mg/C),
the final concentrations yielded a solids mass balance within 0.5% of 100%. In contrast, runs
that ended in failure (ESS > 50 mg/1) yielded a lower than 99.5 % solids mass balance and the
greater the SST overload (i.e. higher the ESS concentration) the lower the solids mass balance
below 99.5 %, even as low as 86 % for some runs at 100 % of the 1DFT SOR. Halving the
simulation time steps and/or doubling the number of iterations per time step yielded identical
simulation results and no improvement in % mass balance and therefore it was accepted that the
low % mass balance was not due to numerical instability. It is suspected that the low mass
balance for the failed runs is due to a simple logical error in SetllerCAD. It seems that the RAS
concentration is "corrected" by subtracting from it the ESS concentration, because the higher the
ESS concentration (or overload) the lower the RAS concentration. This is not consistent with
the flux theory. Theoretically for increasing Q, and constant QR and X,, the RAS concentration58
should remain constant (at XR - JV^R) once the SLR capacity (failure) has been reached. This
error does not influence the SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limits because the ESS is still
low at the transition from safe to fail.
8.2 Flux rating of the simulated SSTs.
The results of the Settler CAD predicted SOR, as % of the 1DFT calculated maximum SOR, and
associated SLR, also as % of the 1DFT calculated maximum SLR, of all the simulated tests on
the Darvill new and old, Watts, Rijen and Oss STTs are plotted together in Figs 35a and b. The
Rijen (T) and Oss (X) SettlerCAD predicted SOR and SLR limit results lie below the Darvill old
(A) and new (•) and Watts (•) SST "lines", but closer to the Darvill old SST line. Considering
that with resnect to external SST peometrv (Table H the Fn^n -'nd Oss SSTs arc closer in
likeness to the old Darvill SST than the Darvill new and Watts SSTs, the expectation is that the
Rijen and Oss results should fall near the old Darvill SST results, and this does indeed happen.
100
t100
90 •
80 •
70 • •
60
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h60
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h10.0
Figs 35a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fig 35a, left) and SLR (Fig 35b, right),
as a% of the I DFT limit values versus flux load factor VJ(nXF)for the 4 tests on the Darvill new
(M) and old (A ) SSTs, 15 of the 15 tests on the Watts' SST (0), 6 each of the 14 and 10 tests
on the Rijen ( V) and Oss (I) SSTs.
The simulations of SST stress tests with the 2D hydrodynamic model SetterCAD indicate, as
would be expected, that the SST hydraulic non-idealities are intrinsically part of the model and
that SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR and SLR were significantly below those calculated
from the 1DFT. The simulations indicate that the capacity, or flux rating, of the 2.5m SWD flat
bottom Darvill old SST decreases from 86% to 70% of the 1 DFT maximum SLR as the flux load
factor V0/(nXF) increases (which increases HLR due to an improvement in sludge settleabilily
and/or decrease in feed concentration). The shallow Rijen and Oss SSTs have a lower flux rating
(SLR) than the Darvill old SST which decreases from 80% to 67% as flux load factor increases.
The 4.1m SWD 1:10 sloping bottom Darvill new SST does not show this sensitivity of capacity
(or flux rating) to the flux load factor (or HLR) and the flux rating remained approximately59
constant at around 87% of the IDFT maximum SLR. The simulations show that the magnitude
of the flux rating is not a constant value, and seems to be dependent on SST depth and HLR - the
deeper the SST and the. lower the HLR, the higher the flux rating. To determine the effect of the
Stamford baffle and SWD on the flux rating, additional simulation runs were done on the Darvill
SST (i) without the Stamford baffles and (ii) with interchanged SWD between the new and old
SSTs and on the Watts SST (i) with a Stamford baffle and (ii) with 6.0m SWD.
8.3 The effect of the Stamford baffle on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR (or flux rating) fortheDarvill new and old and Watts
SSTs with and without Stamford baffles are shown in Figs 36a and b.
For the Darvill SSTs, the SLR flux rating (Fig 36a) is about 2% of the IDFT limit SLR higher
without the Stamford baffle. In contrast, for the Watts SST (Fig 36b), the flux rating is about 2%
of the 1DFT limit SLR lower without the Stamford baffle. From this, it is concluded that while
the Stamford baffle has a significant effect on the ESS concentration while the SST is
underloaded, its influence on the flux rating (or capacity) of the SST is small.
Darvill Old and New SSTs: Tests 1-4
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
100
en_i
CO
t-
U-
o
5090
70
60 High Feed Cpne.
Poor Selllrahilty
U» HwJrjulits
-»• I_ Low ETec,d Owe
Good Sclllcabilty
Ni^li Hydraulics
' I
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/hCO
Q90Watts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14
SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
85 •--
75 • •
70High Feed Cbnc
Poor Settleabilty
Low IhdraolicsLow Keijd Cone
Coo<] Settleabilty
HiCh H>draulics
»••* + *•
5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h
36a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for (he Dar\ill (Fig 36a, left) and IVatts (Fig
36b, right) SSTs with and without baffles. The actual test values, identified by number and result
(safe 0, fail I), arc also shown.
8.4 The Effect of depth on SST flux rating (capacity)
The SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for the Darvill new and old SSTs with interchanged
depths (i.e. new 2.5 in SWD, 1:10 sloping bottom and scraper sludge collection and old 4.1 m
SWD, flat bottom and suction sludge collection ) and the Watts SST with 6.0 m SWD are
compared with that of the SSTs as built, (i.e. new 4.1 m SWD, 1:10 sloping bottom and scraper
sludge collection, old 2.5 m SWD, flat bottom and suction sludge collection and Watts with 3.66
m SWD, l:I5.4slopingbottom and suction sludge collection) are plotted versus flux load factor60
in Figs 37a and b.
FortheDarvill SSTs, the 4.1m SWD old SST has approximately the same flux rating (SLR) as
the new 4.1 m SST (Fig 37a) and shows a small decrease from 89 to 85% of 1DFT SLR limit as
flux load factor increases from 3 to 9 m/h. Likewise 2.5 m new SST has a similarly low flux
rating as the 2.5 m old SST. The differences in flux rating between the new and old SSTs with
the same SWD probably arise from the different SST bottoms and sludge collection systems,
which for the old SST is flat and hydraulic suction and for the new SST is sloping 1:10 and
scraper. While SettlerCAD can accommodate these differences, the accuracy with which
simulates then is unknown.
Darvi!! Old and New SSTs
SettlerCAD Predicted
100
90 • •
O
70 • •
60High Teed Cone
I'oor Srdlcabilty
I.o» H\ilraulilsITests 1 - A,
Capacity
New 4.1'rn
Low Kccd Cone
Good SdOribiUy
High HwlraulioWatts SSTs: Tests 4, 7, 9, 12-14SettlerCAD Predicted Capacity
95
- 90 ••
Q85
80
75
70llilih VneA t ojie
I*(Kir ScttlcabrllyLow f-'ced t unc
Good Settleahiliy
_ . _ Hi°h Hydraulics.
2 4 6 8
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h10 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(nXF) - m/h7.5
Figs 3 7d andb: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SLR for the Dan'ill new and old SSTs (Fig 3 7a,
left) with interchanged SWD (old 4.1m and new 2,5m) and the Watts SST (Fig 3 7b, right) with
a SWD of 6.0 m compared with the SSTs as built (new 4. lm, old 2.5m and Watts 3.66m). The
actual test values, identified by number and result (safe 0,fail I) are also shown.
For the Watts SST, 3.66 m SWD (as built) the 1DFT SLR limit (Fig 37b) shows a slight
decreasing trend from 80 to 77% of 1DFT SLR as sludge load factor increases from 6.0 to 7.3
m/h. For Test 13 and 14 conditions (XF and qR), the same flux load factor of 6.3 m/h leads to
SettlerCAD predicted SLR predicted limits of 79 and 82% respectively. Ignoring Tests 4 and
14 (marked ?) for reasons detailed in Section 7.2 of the report, the Watts SST with a 6.0 m SWD
has a flux rating of about 5% of 1DFT SLR higher than with a 3.66 m SWD.
From the above it is clear that the greater the SWD, the higher the flux rating. For the Watts
SST, an increase in SWD from 3.66 to 6.0m represents a 60% increase in SST volume. For a
5% of 1DFT SLR increase in flux rating this volume increase is definitely not cost efficient - it
would be better to select the shallower SWD (3.66m for the Watts SST) and increase the surface
area to accommodate the lower flux rating.61
8.5 Closure
The simulations of the full-scale SST SLR stress tests with the 2D hydrodynamic model
SettlerCAD indicate, as would be expected, that the SST hydraulic non-idealities are intrinsically
part of the model and that appropriate flux ratings for the full scale SSTs are reproduced
"automatically" in the model. The simulations therefore provide further convincing evidence
that the IDFT cannot be applied to the design of full-scale SSTs without an appropriate reduction
factor. The SettlerCAD simulations of the Darvill 35 m 0 SSTs indicated that the capacity, or
flux rating, of the old flat bottom shallow (2.5 m SWD) SSTs decreased from 86 to 70% of the
IDFT maximum SLR as the flux load factor (or HLR) increased from an improvement in sludge
settleability and/or decrease in feed concentration. The new sloping bottom deep (4.1m SWD)
SSTs did not show this sensitivity of capacity (or flux rating) to flux load factor (or HLR) and
the flux rating remained approximately constant at around 87% of the IDFT maximum SLR.
The magnitude of the flux rating therefore is not a constant value, and is shown to be dependent
on SST depth and HLR; the deeper the SST, the higher the flux rating and the less sensitive the
flux rating to flux load factor. Simulations of the Darvill new and old SSTs with inter-changed
SWD and the Watts SST with 6.0m SWD, confirmed the sensitivity of the flux rating to depth
and HLR. Furthermore, although the Stamford baffle can significantly reduce effluent suspended
solids (ESS) concentration while the SST is underloaded, it does not increase the flux rating (or
capacity) of the SST.
8.6 Recommendations
From the simulations the flux rating of 80% of the IDFT maximum SLR recommendation by
Ekama and Marais (1986) remains a reasonable value to apply in the design of full scale SSTs
- for deep SSTs (4m SWD) the flux rating could be increased to 85% and for shallow SSTs
(2,5m SWD) decreased to 75%. It is recommended that (i) while the apparent interrelationship
between SST flux rating and depth suggests some optimization of the volume of the SST, that
this be avoided and that (ii) the depth of the SST be designed independently of the surface area
as is usually the practice and once selected, the appropriate flux rating is applied to the IDFT
estimate of the surface area.62
9 REFERENCES
de Haas DW, Wentzcl MC, Gaydon P and Ekama GA (1998) Use of simultaneous chemical
precipitation in modified activated sludge systems exhibiting enhanced biological
phosphorus removal. Research Report W98, Dept. of Civil Eng., Univ. of Cape Town.
Ekama G.A. and Marais G.vR. (19S6) Sludge settleability and secondary settling tank design
procedures. Water Pollution Control, 85(1), 101-113.
Ekama GA, Barnard JL, Gunthert FW, Krebs P, McCorquodale JA, Parker DS and Wahlberg EJ
(1997) Secondary settling tanks: Theory, design, modelling and operation. IAWQ STR
No 6, pp216, International Association on Water Quality, London.
GohleF., Finnson A. and Hultman B. (1996) Dynamic simulation of sludge blanket movements
in a full-scale rectangular sedimentation basin. Water Sci, Techno!., 33(1), 89-99.
Krebs P (1995) Success and shortcomings of clarifiermodclling. Wat. Sci. Technol. 31(2) 181-
191.
Ozinsky A E, Ekama G A and Reddy B D (1994). Mathematical simulation of dynamic
behaviour of secondary settling tanks. Research Report W85, Dept. of Civil Eng., Univ.
of Cape Town, Rondebosch, 7701, Cape, RSA.
Ozinsky A.E. and Ekama G.A. (1995b) Secondary settling tank modelling and design Part 2:
Linking sludge settleability measures. Water SA, 21(4), 333-349.
Stofkoper J.A. and Trcntelman C.C.M. (1982) Richtlijnen voor het dimensioneren van ronde
nabezinktanks voor actiefslibinstallaties. H2O, 15(14), 344-354.
STOWa (Stichting Toegepast Onderzock Waterbcheer. Formerly STORA - Stichting Tocgepast
Onderzock Reiniging Afvalwater ) Hydraulische en technologische aspecten van het
nabezink-process.
(1981a) Rapport 1 - Literatuur
(1981b) Rapport 2 - Rondc nabezinktanks (Praktijkonderzoek)
(1981c) Rapport 2 - Ronde nabezinktanks (Ontwerpgcgevens en bedrijfservaring)
(1983) Rapport 3 - Rcchthoekigc nabezinktanks (Inventarisatie en praktijkonderzoek).
Poslbus 8090, RB 3505, Utrecht, Holland.
Takacs I., Patry G. G. and Nolasco D. (1991) A dynamic model for clarification-thickening
process. Water Research, 25(10), 1263-1271.
Wahlberg E.J. and Keinath T.M. (1988) Development of settling flux curves using SVI. Journal
WPCF, 60(12), 2095-2100.
Wahlberg E.J., Augustus M., Chapman D.T., Chen C-L.f Esler J.K., Keinath T.M., Parker D.S.,
Tekippe R.J. and Wilson T.E. (1994b) Evaluating activated sludge secondary clarifier
performance using the CRTC protocol: Four case studies. Procs. 67th Annual WEF
Conference and Exposition, Chicago, I, 1-12.
Wahlberg E.J., Gerges H.Z., Gharagozian and Stcnstrom M.K. (199S) Discussion on "Secondary
clarifier analysis using data from the Clarifier Research Technical Committee protocol"
by Vitasovic Z.C., Zhou S., McCorquodale J.A. and Lingren K (1997) Water
Environment Research, 69(5), 999-1007, Water Environment Research, 70(2),249-253.
Watts RW, Svoronos SA and Koopman B (1996). One dimensional modelling of secondary
clarifiers using a concentration feed velocity dependent dispersion coefficient. Water
Research, 30(9), 2112-2124.
Zhou S, Pfeil R, Strand E, Ji Z and Vitasovic C (1998) ScttlcrCAD (formerly Clarity) Release
1.1 - A 2D hydrodynamic model for secondary clarifiers. Reid Crowthcr Consulting,
Seattle, WA.Al
APPENDIX 1
ESTIMATION OF SECONDARY SETTLING TANK CAPACITY WITH THE
ONE DIMENSIONAL IDEALIZED FLUX THEORY (1DFT)
1. INTRODUCTION
BBiological sludges usually show a strong flocculating tendency even at low concentrations (~
1000 mgTSS/C). This gives rise to a zone settling behaviour if a batch of mixed liquor is allowed
to settle under quiescent conditions (Fig Al). In zone settling, the particles, irrespective oftheir
size, all settle at the same rate throughout the zone depth. The rate of settlement is controlled by
the rate at which the particles subside through the water and this rate is inversely related to the
sludge concentration. Although the sludge blanket settles with a well-defined clear
supernatant/mixed liquor interface, the sludge particles are suspended by the water between the
particles; the upper particles are not mechanically supported by the lower ones.
Fig Al: Chronological progress of a
stirred batch settling test showing the
four different settling regimes in the
column at different stages of settling
from the start: Fig AI (a) lag stage -
column filled with sludge at
concentration X represented by B
before settling commences; Figs Al
(b) and (c) at some time during
settling, sJiowing an increasing
volume of clear supernatant (A)
appearing at the top and three
. . regimes of settling viz, (i) zone
settling (B) at concentration X below
the clear supernatant, (ii) a transition zone (C) in which zone settling still takes place but the
concentration increases with depth and (Hi) a compaction zone (D) at the bottom of the column;
and Fig Al(d) towards the end of the settling test when zone settling regimes B and C have
subsided into the bottommost compaction regime (D) and only thickening by compression takes
place.
Sludge floes reaching the bottom of the batch cylinder build up as a compression layer (Fig A1).
Compression is distinctly different to zone settling. In the compression region, each layer of
particles provides mechanical support for the layers above it. Particle movement no longer isA
B
C
to ••A
B
C
Igoverned only by the hydraulic frictional forces and the linkage between the particles, as in the
zone settling region, but instead the net force downward of each floe is transmitted to the
particles below by mechanical contact. This causes water to be squeezed out from the
compressing particles and the settling behaviour in the compression stage is governed by the
interstitial pressure, compressibility and permeability of the sludge.
2. MEASUREMENT OF THE FLUX CONSTANTS V,, AND n
During zone settling, the subsidence rate of the solid/liquid interface is called the zone settling
velocity; if the column is stirred, n is calied the stirred zone settling velocity (SZSV). Because
the sludge concentration of the zone settling region remains constant during this stage and is
equal to the concentration of the mixed liquor with which the column was filled, the SZSV is
defined as the stirred settling velocity of the sludge Vzs, at a concentration equal to the mixed
liquor concentration X. Standard Methods No, 213 D (1985) recommends that a column at least
1 m tall and 100 mm in diameter be used for the SZSV test.
The SZSV (Vzs) of the sludge is obtained from a solid/liquid interface depth versus time plot
(Fig A2) and is given by the slope of the straight line part of the interface height versus time
curve. The Vzs decreases as the concentration (X) increases (Fig A2). By conducting a number
of stirred settling tests at different concentrations ranging between 1 to 12 gMLSS/G (at least 6),
the Vzs at different concentrations (X) is obtained.
0 40 60
TIME (min)80 100 120Fig .42: Solid-liquid interface height versus
time obscn'ed in stirred batch settling tests at
different initial solids concentrations. Slope of
straight line section gives the zone settling
velocity (V7J which decreases from V7Slto V?S6
as concentration (X) increases from X, to X6.A3
3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ZONE SETTLING VELOCITY AND
CONCENTRATION
Considerable research has been undertaken to establish the form of the relationship between the
Vzs and X and a number of mathematical expressions have been proposed, e.g. hyperbolic,
logarithmic, power and exponential. Of these, the two most popular forms are exponential (by
Vesilind, 1968a,b) and logarithmic (by Dick and Young, 1972). The exponential form
V2S = Vo exp(-nX) (m/h) Al
appears to have been accepted over the years for the following reasons- (i) The WRc design
procedure is based on it (White, 1975, 1976); (ii) Rachwal ct al. (1982) present a large number
of full scale plant data (733) showing that it gives the best correlation over the other three forms
cited above; (iii) Smollen and Ekama (1984) and Ekama et al. (1984) show that unlike the
logarithmic, the exponential form gives (a) a theoretically consistent description of the settling
flux curve (for X > 1 g/f) with defined turning and inflection points, (b) a more internally
consistent SST model and (c) a better correlation with their own full scale plant data set, the
extensive data set of Pitman's (1980, 1984) from full scale plants accumulated over a number of
years, and the pilot scale data set of Tuntoolavest et al. (1983) (R2 for all >0.96).
CALCULATION OF FLUX CONSTANTS
10.00
5 ioo
o
o
§ 0.10
UJ
0.01(I)O I UJ
• o JJ L u
mData
Best LineFig A3: Determination of flux
theory settling constants Vu and n
from multiple batch stirred settling
tests over a range of concentrations.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
CONCENTRATION (g/l)
The constants Vo and n in the exponential equation, Eq Al are obtained by linear least squares
regression of natural logarithm In Vzs versus X over a range of concentrations from I to 12 g/fi
(Fig A3). These constants (which have units m/h and mVkgMLSS or f/g respectively) reflect the
settling characteristics of the sludge. Generally, good settling sludges have high Vo values around
13 m/h and low n values around 0.25 nrVkg, whereas poor settling sludges have low Vn values
around 5 m/h and high n values around 0.5 mVkg. The relatively consistent changes in the Vo and
n values from good to poor settling sludges led Pitman (1984) (see also Ekama et al., 1984,
1997) to propose that the parameter V0/n [i.e. Vo divided by n, which has the same units as fluxA4
kg/(m2h)] defines numerically the sludge settleability for the flux theory. Once the values of the
constants Vo and n are known, no further information is required to apply the flux theory to SSTs
(Vesilind, 1968b; Pitman, 1984, Ekarna et al, 1984, 1997; Daigger and Roper, 1985).
Application of the steady state ID idealized flux theory (1DFT) to the design of SSTs is
discussed in this Appendix.
Unfortunately, there are three problems associated with measuring the flux theory constants Vo
and n. (1) It is labour intensive in that at least 6 to 10 settling velocity tests are required over a
concentration range up to at least 12 e/i>; at the higher concentrations (>6 g/f) the test is tedious
and time consuming, requiring 2 \o J hours settlement to properly identify the SZSV. Such
extended periods of settlement with nitrifying sludges often lead to the second problem viz. (2)
denitrification in the settling column, which causes severe retardation of the SZSV (and
sometimes flotation!). Denitrification can be detected by the escape of gas bubbles from settling
sludge and generally causes a poor correlation with Eq Al, i.e. R2 < 0.90 or very high n values
(> 0.5 f/g) for poor settling sludges (low Vo). These problems can be overcome with careful and
vigilant work making the test acceptable for practical research. However, the effort is such that
measurement of Vo and n at activated sludge plants is unlikely to be adopted in routine practice.
(3) The results arc variable and some scatter in Vo and n values is obtained with repeated tests.
As a result of (I) and (2) above, the simpler sludge settleability parameters Sludge Volume Index
(SVI), Dilited SVI (DSVI) or Stirred Specific Volume Index (SSVI) are preferred. However,
with these, the benefits of the flux theory cannot be utilized. This problem has been overcome
by developing empirical relationships between the simpler sluge settlcability measures and the
Vo and n. These empirical relationships allow "indirect" access to the flux theory. The different
empirical relationships that have been developed are compared by Ozinsky et al. (1995) and
summarized by Ekama et al. (1997).
4. FLUX DUE TO GRAVITY SETTLING
The solids transport through a unit area per unit time, or flux (j), due to settling induced by
gravity (js), is defined as the product of zone settling velocity Vzs (m/h) and the solids
concentration X (kgSS/m3), i.e
Js-VzsX kgSS/(m2h) A2
where
js = gravity flux kgSS/(m2h)
Vzs - zone settling velocity m/h and
X - solids concentration kg/m3A5
A graph of the gravity flux versus concentration is given in Fig A4. When the concentration X
is very low, the gravity flux js is very low, but the gravity flux quickly increases with
concentration reaching a maximum flux at around 2 to 3 g/0. For concentrations greater than
around 4 to 5 g/C, the gravity flux decreases rapidly due to the reduction in the zone settling
velocity Vzs with concentration.
6.0Gravity Flux Curve
Fig A4; The gravity flux versus
sludge concentration curve. The
gravity flux is the transport of sludge
to the bottom of the SST due to
gravity settling of the sludge with
respect to the water.
0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)
The above definition of the gravity flux forms the basis of the flux theory and is implemented
as such in various SST models from the simple steady state ID idealized flux theory (1DFT),
through the more complex dynamic ID SST models, to the very sophisticated 2D hydrodynamic
models for SSTs such as ScttlerCAD (Zhou et al., 1998). In these models the settlement of the
solids are essentially modelled in the same way via the gravity flux defined by Eqs Al and A2.
Essentially, it is only the water movement that is modelled differently in the different models
from the very simple to the very complex. In the steady state 1DFT model, this is in the vertical
direction only, in the dynamic non-steady steady ID models, such as those by Ozinsky et al.
(1994), Grijspeert et al. (1995) and Watts et al. (1996), this is also in the vertical direction only,
but turbulent diffusion/dispersion is included, creating mixing between the stacked horizontal
layers making up the depth of the SST to represent the hydraulic non-idealities, and in the 2D
hydrodynamic models such as SettlerCAD, this is modelled hydrodynamically in the more
realistic vertical and horizontal directions.
5. ID IDEALIZED FLUX THEORY - GRAPHICAL APPLICATION
The graphical design procedure for the 1 DFT is outlined first to give a visual representation of
what is done mathematically in the analytical design procedure with the design and operating
chart discussed later. It must be remembered that this graphical procedure was developed byA6
Yoshioka et al. (1957) and others a decade before the empirical relationships between Vzs and
X were developed which allowed a mathematical approach to be followed. However, most of
the basic principles of the IDFT were established with the graphical approach.
Influent
flow 01Sludge A
waste
flow
Operating
cunoattiufion
AST •» Surface
area
Underflow
concentration
Thickened sludge
return flow <,mClorifled
effluentFig A5: Idealized ID secondary
settling tank in the activated
sludge system showing water and
sludge movement in the vertical
direction only and perfect
Underflow separation of the influent (QJ and
recycle (Q^ flows at the feed
point leading to an upward
overflow rate (cjj by the influent
flow and a downward underflow
rate (qR) by the recycle flow.Overflow
rate
Q I/AST = qA
rate
QR/AST = qR
In the idealised one dimensional (1D) continuously operating settling tank (shown schematically
in Fig A5), water and solids move in a vertical direction only. The feed flow entering the SST,
which comprises the influent How to the treatment plant (Q,) and the sludge return flow (QR) is
perfectly separated at the feed point into the influent flow moving vertically upwards and the
recycle flow moving vertically downwards. The upward water velocity from the influent flow
is called the overflow rate qA (=Q/AST) and the downward water velocity from the recycle flow
is called the underflow rate qR (=QR/AST). The solids entering the settling tank with the feed flow
QF(=QI+QR) is transferred to the bottom ofthcSSTby two flux components: (1) the gravity flux
(js), which results from the settlement of the solids with respect to the water and (2) the bulk flux
(jB), which results from the downward movement of the water with respect to the bottom of the
SST due to the underflow rate. The gravity flux js is given by Eq A2. The bulk flux jEJ is the
product of the local sludge concentration (X) and the underflow rate (qR), viz.
= X qR m/h A3
where
= underflow rate m/h
QR= surface area settling tank
= sludge return flowm2
mVh
For a fixed underflow rale (qR), the bulk flux j,j is proportional to sludge concentration X. This
is shown graphically in Fig A6.E
I
X
CQ6.0
4.0 -
2.0
0 0Bulk Flux
JB =qRXCurve
/^
X
, 1 , rqRA7
Fig A6: The bulk flux curve versus
sludge concentration for constant
underflow rate qR Bulk flux is the
transport of sludge due to downward
movement of the water with respect to
the SST bottom.
I U.U
Concentration (kg/m3)
The total solids transport or flux to the bottom to SST (jT) is the sum of the gravity (js) and bulk
Q"u) fluxes i.e.
JT
8.0= JS+JB
- X (Vzs+qR)
Total Flux Curvekg/(m2h)
kg/(m2h) A4
Fig A7; Total downward flux to (he
SST bottom versus concentration,
which is the sum of the gravity and
bulk fluxes.
0
0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)
I;or the design of the SST, the maximum influent flow (Q,) is usually the peak wet weather flow
(PWWF) QJPWWF- For a selected value of the underflow rate (qR), the two flux components can
be added graphically which is shown in Fig A7. For the particular choice of underflow rate, the
total flux (]-,) attains a minimum value (j,, Point B in Fig A7) at a certain concentration called
the limiting concentration XL. This concentration XL has the minimum flux or solids transportA8
to the bottom of the SST of all the other concentrations that can arise between a very low
concentration (say half of the feed concentration, XF) and the high underflow concentration (XR).
This means that for the selected underflow rate, all solids concentrations in the SST higher or
lower than X, have fluxes greater than that of the concentration X, and would be transported
faster to the bottom of the SST than XL concentration. Because a concentration of XL can
realistically exist in the SST in a particular concentration layer between the feed point and the
SST bottom, this concentration layer limits the solids transport rate, or flux, to the bottom of the
tank. This situation could also be visualized as follows; all the sludge entering the SST and
exiting via the underflow, passes through a range of concentrations as it settles and concentrates
from say half the feed concentration up to the underflow concentration XR, one of which is the
XL concentration. This X, concentration is the bottle-neck concentration because it has the
lowest flux of all the concentrations that can exist in the SST. Hence, to insure that all the solids
entering the SST can reach the bottom, the sludge mass applied to the SST at the feed point per
unit surface area and time (called the applied flux, jAP) must be less than or at most equal to the
limiting flux (j,), which is the flux of the layer with the XL concentration. Now the applied flux
(jAP) on the SST is given by the product of the feed (or reactor) concentration X,. and the total
hydraulic loading rate (HLR = QF/AST), which is the combined underflow qR (=QR/Asr) and
overflow qA (=Q, PWWF /AST) rates (see Fig A5). Therefore, for safe or underloaded operation of
the SST
jAP<jL kg/(m2h) A5
where
JA, = XF(Q, + QR )/Asr or XF (qA+qR) kg/(m2h) A6
and
JL = Xi,(VSxL + qi<) kg/(m2h) A7
where
VSX1 - zone settling velocity of the X( concentration m/h
and the SST is critically loaded, i.e. at the point of failure, when
jAP=j,. kg/(nrh) AS
Equation AS therefore fixes the capacity of the SST and hence the surface area AST for the
selected underflow rate qR, is found from Eqs A6 and A7, viz.
AS1 = QI.PWWK^A m2 A9
where
A10A9
From the above, to determine AST requires XL to be known. The X, concentration and its
associated limiting flux jL is determined graphically from a plot like Fig A7. A horizontal line
(ABC) tangential to the minimum total flux jL (Point B) sets jAP = jL and gives the maximum
applied flux jA(J, which can be read off the vertical axis at Point A.
XR =
=
where
xRxF
xF
JAI'(Qi + QR) /QR
(1+R)/R
^R
= solids conceFor the selected qR, which fixes also the recycle flow (QR) and recycle ratio (R), the underflow
concentration XR is determined from the solids mass balance around the SST, i.e.
XR QR + XE Q, - XF (Q, + QR) or kg/h
XR qR + XE qA = XF (qA + qR) = jAP kg/(m2h) Al 1
For safe operating conditions, i.e. where jAl, <jL, all the solids entering the SST exit it via the
sludge underflow, i.e. XE — 0 and hence from Eq Al 1, the underflow concentration XR is given
by,
kgSS/nr A 12a
kgSS/m3 A 12b
kgSS/m3 A12c
tion in the underflow recycle kgSS/m3
The underflow concentration XK can also be determined graphically from Fig A7. The X value
where the horizontal line representing jAP = jL cuts the bulk flux line (at Point C) is XR which
is the concentration at which the bulk flux (jB) equals the applied flux for zero gravity flux (js
=0), i.e. jn = jAP = qR XR, from which XR = jAP /qR and is the same as Eq 12c. In Fig A7, it can
be seen that Hie slope of the hulk flux line is given byjAP/XR = qR m/h.
For the specified reactor concentration (XF) and maximum influent flow rate (QIPWWF), the
required area of the settling tank (AST) is found by repeating the graphical procedure outlined
above for different underflow rates (qR), which requires the construction of a new jT versus X plot
like Fig A7 for each qK. If this is done, it will be found that as qK increases (which concomitantly
increases QR and R), the overflow rate (qA) increases and the area of the SST (AST) decreases.
The required AS1 will be the largest area obtained for the anlicipaled range of qR to be applied
on the SST, which generally will be for the lowest qR (and hence lowest QK and R) selected. This
can be seen in Fig AS, which shows qA increasing for increasing qR. From Fig A8, in order to
minimize the area of the SST, the largest possible underflow rate qR needs to be selected. When
constructing the total flux (jT) versus concentration (X) plot like Fig A7 for incremental increases
in qR, it will be noticed that for qR values greater than a certain critical one, called qRr.;,, a
minimum in the total flux (jT) line no longer exists. A value for XL therefore cannot beA10
determined for q^q^^ and the limiting flux concept of the flux theory therefore no longer
applies. The highest underflow rate for which a XL can be determined, and therefore for which
the limiting flux concept applies, is qRcril, which in turn gives the critical recycle flow, QRcti[ (=
qRcrj[ xAST) and a critical recycle ratio, Rcrit(=QRcri/ QI,PWWF)- The critical underflow rate qRcrjl is
the qK value which makes a point on the jt line exactly horizontal without the existence of a
minimum (see Fig A9). TheX value of the horizontal point along the jT line forqR = qRcrj[ is the
last valid XL that can be determined and is the minimum valid XL value and therefore is named
XLmm. This XLmm gives the highest jL value and so this maximum jL value is called jLmax, which
in turn gives the maximum overflow rate qA and hence the minimum surface area (see Fig A8).
For qR < qRcrit the jT line will always have a horizontal point and a minimum j, so for qR <. qRcnt
there will always be a XL and so the limiting flux concept of the flux theory applies. This limiting
flux concept criterion of the flux theory is called solids handling criterion (SHC) 1.
^ Graphical Design Procedure
••-'
TO1.5
1.0
1.5|
O
c
Ql.OSolids Handling
Criterion II
Solids Handling
Criterion ICritical
Underflow
Rate qR.cntFig A8: Design overflow rate (qj
versus selected underflow rate (qR)
obtained from the graphical design
procedure for incremental increases
in underflow rate, showing the
maximum over/low rate of solids
handling criterion (SHC) I slightly
above that for SHC II.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Selected Underflow Rate (qR, m/h)
WhenqR >qRtm, the slope of the jT versus X line is always positive, i.e. j, increases for all X and
so the limiting flux concept or SHC I no longer applies. When qR > qK(Tll, solids handling
criterion (SHC) II governs the maximum flux and hence the surface area of the SST. White
(1975) and Merkcl (1974) independently suggested that when SHC I no longer applies, the
limiting fluxjLoftheSST is given by the flux of the feed concentration X,.. Mathematically this
is expressed as follows
X, = jA, < jL = X,- ( VZSX|:qR) kgSS/(m2h) A13a
which simplifies to
Q/VI'WWI-' Vl.I' WVVI- VZSXFm/h A13bTotal Flux Curve
E
'lux - kg/ fatal FA
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0 J
n/
nR ^^
/
//
/
/
ALmln
n A/
XRniin
Concentration (kg/m3)All
Fig A9: Total flux versus sludge
concentration for the critical
underflow rate (qRcrJ giving the
maximum limiting flux j^^ and the
minimum limiting concentration XLmm,
which is the upper limit for SHC I.
For underflow rates greater than
Q/tcnt' a minimum in the total flux
versus concentration curve no longer
appears and a different criterion is
required to determine the SST area
i.e. SUCH.
Equation A13 is SHC II, which states that the overflow rate at PWWF must not exceed the
settling velocity of the sludge at the feed concentration (Vzsxr, m/h). This conclusion is
confirmed theoretically from the state point approach of Yoshioka et al. (1957) which is
discussed below. Equation A13 shows that SHC II is independent of recycle flow (QK) and
therefore the area of the SST remains constant for qR>qRcn[and plots as a horizontal line in Fig
A8 at a value qA slightly lower than the minimum value found from SHC I (see Fig A8).
Yoshioka et al. (1957) simplified the graphical method for determining XL and introduced the
SST steady state operating position or state point into the graphical method (Fig A10). In Fig
A7, they rotated line ABC clockwise about Point A on the vertical axis (which represents jAP =
j[), until Point C (which represents XR) was on the horizontal axis. This in effect changes the
slope of the bulk flux line (which represents qR) to zero, and restores the total flux jT line back
to the gravity flux (js) curve. This rotation docs not change the X, value of Point B and
geometrically, from similar triangles, the slope of the bulk flux line in Fig A7 is numerically
equal to the slope of line ABC in Fig A10, except that in Fig A7 it has a +ve slope whereas in
Fig A10 it has a-ve slope. The line ABC in Fig A10 therefore represents the underflow and its
slope is equal to the underflow rate (qR, m/h). Hence, in Fig A10, a whole range of qR values can
be tested in the same gravity flux curve where the qR values are represented by underflow lines
similar to line ABC, with different slopes equal to the selected qR, each touching tangentially on
the inside of the downward leg of the gravity flux curve. The X value of the tangent Point B is
XL and the intersection points of the underflow line with the vertical and horizontal axes at Points
A and C respectively arc the limiting flux jL and underflow concentration XR respectively. This
graphical construction is clearly much more convenient than constructing the total flux curve like
Fig A7 for each selected qR.%*•
X
LL
>
TO
o
0.n
u
A
0 -
-
0 -
0 -J1
•/
/
-IGravity Flux Curve
= JAP Feed XF
^^^ p Concentration
c\//\ / Overflow
Yp""Ra(eqA
|\\ Underflow
L NN. Rate qR
XF :XL NT^—^__
1 ' ' ' ' ' ' 'c "^0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)A12
Fig AW: The Yoshioka et al. (1957)
simplified graphical procedure and
state point, which superimposes the
operating condition of the SST onto
the gravity flux curve. The state point
defines the loading state of the SST
and the underflow rate (q^), overflow
rate (qj and feed concentration lines
intersect at the state point. When the
underflow line makes a tangent to the
gravity flux curve (as shown), the SST
is critically loaded.
The graphical method of Yoshioka et al. (1957) allows the SST steady state operating point, or
state point, to be superimposed on the gravity flux graph. The feed concentration (XF) is
represented by a vertical line at X - XF. The state point is the intersection point of the feed
concentration and underflow lines. This slope of a line drawn from the origin of the graph to the
state point is the overflow rate (qA). Hence, the underflow, feed concentration and overflow lines
intersect at the state point which represents the steady state operating conditions of the SST,
where the slopes of the underflow and overflow lines are the underflow (qR) and overflow (qA)
rates respectively. Note that these lines have opposite slopes, i.e. qR is -ve and qA is +ve, which
is consistent because in the idealised ID SST (Fig A5), these two flows move in opposite
directions.
For a given X,, and selected qR and qA, if the underflow line is within the gravity flux curve and
does not touch the downward leg of the gravity flux curve, the SST is underloaded and jA1, < jL.
When the underflow line touches the gravity flux curve as a tangent, then the SST is critically
loaded and }M,~'}X • When the underflow line cuts the gravity flux curve in three places, i.e. once
on the rising leg (at very low X) and twice on the downward leg (at higher X), the SST is
overloaded and jAP > jL. The feed concentration, underflow and overflow lines intersecting at
the state point therefore superimpose the steady state operating condition of the SST onto the
gravity flux curve (which is fixed by the sludge settleability parameters Vo and n). When the
underflow line is within or tangential to the gravity flux curve, then the operating conditions of
the SST fit within th envelope of the gravity flux curve and the SST is under- (jAP < jL) or
critically- {jM, = j,) loaded for the selected qR and accepted sludge settleability.
From the above, the graphical design procedure of Yoshioka et al. (1957) is as follows (Fig
Al 0): For a given gravity flux curve (which requires only Vn and n to be known) and a chosen
Xj.- and qR, (i) draw the underflow line at a slope of qR m/h so that it touches the gravity fluxA13
curve in a tangent on the inside of the curve, (ii) draw the vertical feed concentration line at X
= XF and (iii) draw the overflow line from origin to the state point, which is the intersection point
of the feed concentration and underflow lines. The slope of the overflow line is the maximum
overflow rate for the selected qR, from which the area of the SST (AST) is calculated with Eq A9.
The applied flux (jAi,), underflow concentration (XR) and the limiting concentration (XL) are
given by the underflow line intersection points on the vertical axis (Point A) and horizontal axis
(Point C), and X value of tangent point on the gravity flux curve (Point B) respectively. With
the AST qR and qA known, the recycle flow QR and ratio R are found from QR = ASI qK and R =
qR /qA. By selecting increasing qR values, the identical qA versus qR plot as in Fig A8 will be
obtained for SHC I.
From the curvature of the gravity flux curve (Fig A4), for X > X for which j = jmax, i.e. > 2 to 3
g/0, there is an inflection point on the downward leg of the gravity flux curve. To the right ofjmax
but near it, the curvature is +ve (convex) but further beyond jmax (higher X) the curvature is -ve
(concave). The point at which the curvature changes from +ve to -ve is the inflection point.
Now, tangential underflow lines can only be drawn on the inside of the gravity flux curve with
-ve curvature, i.e. for X values greater than the X value of the inflection point, i.e. to the right of
the inflection point. Therefore, the steepest tangential underflow line that can be drawn to the
gravity flux curve, is one with a slope equal to the slope of the gravity flux curve at the inflection
point. This is qRcm, which gives this steepest sloping overflow rate line and hence the highest
overflow rate in terms of SHC I. An underflow line tangential to the gravity flux curve at the
inflection point is therefore represented in Fig A8 at qR crj[, which gives the minimum surface area
(ASTm,n) and is the limit of SHC I. When the underflow line is steeper than QR>cril, the curvature
of the gravity flux curve (now +ve) is such that the state point now can be on the gravity flux
curve and the underflow line only cut it once, with the result that the feed concentration,
overflow and underflow lines now intersect on the gravity flux curve. With the state point on
the gravity flux curve the slope of the underflow line is now not governed by the slope of the
gravity flux curve but dependent only on the position of the XF line. The lower the X,,, the
steeper the overflow line and the higher the overflow rate. By definition, with the state point on
the gravity flux curve, the slope of the overflow line qA is js/XF, hence qA = V7SXF XF /XF = VZSXF.
This is the theoretical basis for SHC II (Eq A14b). The overflow rate for SHC II is independent
of qR and dependent only on the feed concentration XF through VZSXF. The convenience of the
Yoshioka et al. (1957) graphical method is that the complete design for the range of underflow
rates can be done on the same gravity flux curve.A14
6.0State Point Operation
Constant XF 1 Safe
2 Critical
3 Failure
Constant qA
State Point
Decreasing qR
6.00.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)
State Point Operation
Increasing XF 1 Safe
2 Critical
3 Failure
Constant qA
State Points
Constant qR
0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)State Point Operation
0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
Concentration (kg/m3)
Figs AH a, b , c: Graphical representation of
the SST operating conditions on the gravity flux
curve showing the effect of incremental (i)
decreases in underflow rate (Fig Al la, top
left), (ii) increases in overflow rate (Fig A lib,
top right) and (Hi) increases in feed
concentration (FigAllc, left) from 1 - safe, 2 -
critically to 3 -failed loading conditions.
The state point defines the operating conditions oftheSST, and operating changes in underflow
rate (qR), overflow rate (qA) and feed concentration (X,.) are reflected on the gravity flux curve
as follows: (i) a decrease in the underflow rate rotates the underflow line about the state point in
an anti-clockwise direction, but the state point remains in position (see Fig Al 1 a); (ii) an increase
in overflow rate rotates the overflow line about the origin in an anti-clockwise direction and
moves the state point upwards along the feed concentration line, while the underflow line slope
remains constant but intersects the state point (sec Fig Allb), (iii) and increase in feed
concentration moves the vertical feed concentration line to the right and because the slopes of
the overflow and underflow rates remains unchanged, the state point moves along the overflow
line while the underflow line continues to pass through the state point (see Fig Al lc).
Because the state point defines the operating condition of the SST, the state point position in theA15
gravity flux graph defines the loading condition on the SST, i.e. whether under-, critically- or
overloaded, and whether SHC I or II governs the capacity of the SST. Referring to Figs lla, b
and c:
(1) When the state point is within the envelope of, and not on, the gravity flux curve, SHC
II is met and SHC I governs the capacity of the SST. When the underflow line
(i) cuts the gravity flux curve in one point only, i.e. through the rising leg of the
gravity flux curve, safe operating conditions prevail,
(ii) cuts the gravity flux curve at one point only, i.e. through the rising leg of the
gravity flux curve and is tangential on the inside of the gravity flux curve at high
X; critical loading conditions prevail,
(iii) cuts the gravity flux curve in three points, i.e. once through the rising leg of the
gravity flux curve and twice through the descending leg of the gravity flux curve,
overloaded conditions prevail;
(2) when the state point is on the gravity flux curve, critically loaded conditions with respect
to SHC II prevail; if the feed concentration XF is greater than the concentration X of the
inflection point, the underflow line has to be tangential to the gravity flux curve and
hence the loading condition also is critical with respect to SHC I, but if XF is less the X
of the inflection point, SHC I does not apply.
(3) If the state point is outside the envelope of the gravity flux curve, the SST is overloaded
with respect to both SHC II and SHC I; SHC I also is not met because conditions 1 (i) and
1 (ii) above are not met.
The above conditions can be readily applied to design for given peak influent flow (QiiPWWF) and
feed concentration (XF) to find the minimum surface area ASTmin viz: (1) Identify the inflection
point on the gravity flux curve and draw a tangent underflow line to it. (2) Draw in the vertical
feed concentration line and the intersection point of this line with the underflow line is the state
point. (3) Draw the overflow line from the origin to the state point. The slope of this line gives
the maximum overflow rate qAmax for SHC I. (4) Determine the settling velocity of the sludge
at the feed concentration Vzsxr, which is equal to the maximum overflow rate for SHC II. (5)
Select the lower of qAmax and Vzsx, and AbImin = Q,,Pwwl./( qAmax or Vzsx,). With AM known, the
recycle flow QR is found from QR = qR AST and the recycle ratio R from R = QR/QI,PWWF- ^ W'U
be found that usually VZSXF < qAmax of SHC I and hence usually ASTmm = QJ.PWWF^ZSXF)- Any
underflow rate qR lower than the slope of the inflection point of the gravity flux curve will lead
to a greater AST. For qR lower than that of the slope of the inflection point, the design procedure
is the same except now the underflow line is drawn tangentially to the gravity flux curve at a
value of X greater than the inflection point X value.
Although the above graphical procedure is still a "trial and error" one in that repeated selectionA16
of the underflow rate qK is made and the corresponding qA, AST, QR and R determined for safe
operation, it is far simpler than the total flux curve method because each selected qR can be
analysed on the same gravity flux curve, thereby obviating the need for constructing different
total flux curves like Fig A7 for each qR. Note that the two graphical methods give identical
results because the condition described the horizontal line at jL in Fig A7 is identical to that
described by the underflow line tangential to the gravity flux curve in Fig A10.
6. DYNAMIC CONDITIONS
Under normal dry weather daily operation of the SST, the feed concentration (XF) and underflow
rate (qR) can be taken as remaining approximately constant. However, the influent flow, and
hence the overflow rate (qA) and recycle ratio (R), change cyclically over the day causing the
state point to move (Fig Al lb). This results in temporary sludge storage in the SST from two
causes: (1) With diurnal variation in qA and R, the underflow concentration XR, varies over the
day (see Eq A12a). At high influent flow, R is low and hence XR is high. To obtain higher XR
in the recycle flow requires longer thickening times on the SST bottom. Hence, even if the SST
is underloaded throughout the 24 hour day, the sludge blanket height will increase and decrease
over the day in phase with the increasing and decreasing influent flow due to the changing
compaction times required to achieve the required XR. Depending on the magnitude of QR and
the scttleability of the sludge, the diurnal movement in sludge blanket height in the bottom
compaction zone of the SST is around 0.75 to 1.0 m. (2) It may happen that during the peak dry
weather flow (PDWF) period overloaded conditions develop in the SST, in which event a rising
sludge blanket (theoretically at a concentration of XL) will develop. The overload, depending
on its severity, may persist for a few hours without sludge loss, because the SST has sufficient
depth to accommodate the sludge accumulating in it, thereby avoiding the sludge blanket to rise
up to within 1 m of the effluent launders. Consequently, the continuously changing sludge
loading rate and different compaction times over the day cause the sludge blanket to move up
and down in the SST, which may even be temporarily overloaded, without significant sludge loss
with the effluent.
The principal factor that prevents sludge loss during a temporary overload is the sludge storage
capacity of the SST, which once the area has been fixed, is directly proportional to the depth.
Generally, the deeper the SST, the higher (if short) or longer (if small) the temporary overload
that can be sustained without sludge loss. Unfortunately no guidance regarding the depth of the
SST can be derived from the 1DFT and depth design is based on primarily practical experience.
The Abwasscrtechnischcn Vercinigung (AT V, 1976,1991) have developed empirical procedures
based on the DSVI to calculate four different zone depths in the SST, viz. the clear water,
separation, sludge storage and compaction depths (sec Ekama et al., 1997). An average depth
of 3 to 4 m is common. Deep SSTs (>4m) have the advantage that ample allowance is made inA17
the SST for the various zones depths, thereby keeping the sludge blanket well below the effluent
lauders (>lm). Deep SSTs are also less prone to hydraulic disturbances from influent flow
variations, density currents, inlet and outlet arrangements and sludge collection systems. 2D
hydrodynamic modelling studies have indicated that the greater the SST depth, the greater the
flux rating, i.e. the greater the percentage of the 1DFT theoretical maximum solids and hydraulic
loading rates that can be applied to the SST (Ekama and Marias, 2001).
7. MATHEMATICAL APPLICATION OF THE ID FLUX THEORY
Clearly the graphical approach to the 1DFT described above gives considerable insight into
design and operation of SSTs taking due consideration of the sludge settling characteristics and
feed concentration. However, despite the convenient developments in this graphical approach,
the procedure remains rather tedious and time consuming because the design has to be executed
manually. The biggest difficulty is that the shape of the gravity flux curve can only be
approximated graphically between the measured concentrations and settling velocities, with the
result that estimation of the position of the gravity flux curve is uncertain. This causes a
significant measure of error and uncertainty in the estimations from the procedure.
In order to overcome the difficulties associated with the graphical approach, a mathematical
approach was developed, which required defining a mathematical equation linking the zone
settling velocity and sludge concentration. When this approached was developed around 1970,
the form of this equation evoked significant debate (Smollen and Ekama, 1984, Ozinsky and
Ekama, 1995) but today it seems that the exponential form is almost universally accepted (see
Section 3 above). It should be noted that aside from the somewhat better correlation that the
exponential form yields over the other forms for most of the experimental data, this form is just
as empirical as the other forms. However, the properties of the exponential form arc better suited
to the 1 DFT problem because it yields an more internally consistent model for the SST.
7.1 Mathematical properties of the theoretical flux equation
From the exponential equation linking settling velocity and concentration (Eq Al), the gravity
flux is given by
Js =x Vzs = X Vo exp(-nX) kg/(m2h) A14
The slope of the gravity flux curve is given by the derivative of Eq A14, viz.
i) m/h A15
dX °E,
3
x-
LLA
/
/XTP
\\max = 4Vo/(neA2) = 2JIP
Turning Point
^/jm« = Vo/(ne)
^\ Inflection Point
= Vn
XIP\ Slope -
\ / Vo/(eA2)
\^^ Xlimin = 4/n
= 2/nA1S
Fig A12: Mathematical properties of the
gravity flux cun'e based on the semi-log
equation linking the zone settling velocity and
sludge concentration (Eq Al),
Concentration (kg/m3)
which, when set to 0, gives a turning point in the gravity flux curve at X = 1/n and a flux of
V(/(ne) (Fig A12). Differentiating Eq A15 with respect to X and substituting 1/n for X shows
that the turning point with coordinates +l/n, +V(/(ne) is a maximum, giving the maximum flux
.W ~ V(/(ne). Setting the second derivative to zero shows that there is an inflection point on the
gravity flux cun'e at coordinates +2/n, +2V0/(nc2). This is the inflection point at which SHC I
ceases to be valid in the graphical method because no steeper underflow line can make a tangent
to the inside of the gravity flux cun'e (Fig A12) . The slope of the gravity flux curve at the
inflection point is found by substituting 2/n forX into Eq A15 which yields -V(/(e2) m/h, which
is the maximum underflow rate qR for SHC I. The intercept of the underflow line tangential to
the inflection point with the vertical and horizontal axes are respectively the maximum limiting
flux (jt max)and the minimum underflow concentration (XRm)n) for the SHC I to govern the design
of the SST, which, from the coordinates and slope of the inflection point are;
4/r
4'/^
IPkg/(m2h) A 16a
kg/m3 A 16b
wliere subscripts IP and TP refer respectively to the inflection and turning points (see Fig A12).
7.2 Application of the exponential flux equation to SST
The overflow rate to satisfy the SHC I is found from Eqs AS and A6 and is given by
JL
XRR
where
XR - XF(l+R)!Rm/h
kg/nvA17
A12bA19
Note that Eq A8 above, like the state point concept, is valid only under safe operating conditions
as defined above, i.e. equal mass flow rates of sludge in the feed and recycle flows (XF =0).
The general equation of the underflow line with a point of tangency to the gravity flux curve is
I - jL (1 -X/XR) kg/(m2h) A18
and its slope is given by
dj/dX = ~jLtXR m/h A19
At the point of tangency (see Fig A10), i.e. at X = X,, both the fluxes and the slopes of the
gravity flux curve and underflow line are equal, i.e. Eq A14 = Eq A18 and Eq A15 = Eq A19.
Equating the slopes and fluxes of the gravity flux curve and underflow line yields two equations
with two unknowns, XL and j,, viz.
JLi L_
Vocxp(-nXL)(\ nXL) - jJXRkg/(m2h) A20
m/h A21
Making jL the subject of Eq A20 and substituting this for jL into Eq 21 eliminates jL and yields
a quadratic for XL. Solving for Xt and ignoring the unrealistic solution1 yields,
XL kg/m] A22
Note that in Eq A22, no solutions for X, are possible when the square root term is negative, i.e.
for XR > 4/n, which from Fig A12 is XRmin. Hence when XR = 4/n, X, is a minimum and equal
to the X value of the inflection point, i.e. XLmin = XR/2 = 2/n.
Substituting Eq A22 for XL into Eq A20 yields the limiting flux j, associated with X, in terms
of XR, i.e.
h0+cQ
(1-a)expnXR{\+a)
kg/(m2h) A23a
'Because of the quadratic form of the equation, a ± appears before the square root
term of Eq 22. The unrealistic solution is the -vc one, i.e. the lower of the two X, solutions.
This unrealistic solution for XL is mathematically possible but represents failure of the SST.
It is the "underflow line" from the XR concentration on the horizontal axis touching the
gravity flux curve on the outside between the inflection and turning points i.e. XL < X,,,. The
realistic solution is the higher X, value which has a point of tangency on the inside of the
gravity flux curve at XL values greater than the X value of the inflection point i.e. X, > X,PA20
where
a = fi-4f(nXR)] A23b
If a < 0, there is no solution for j,. Setting a = 0 yields XR = X,^,, = 4/n and hence from Eq A23,
jL = 4V0/(ne2), which is jLmax (Fig AI2). No solution for jL is possible for XR < 4/n because the
curvature of the gravity flux curve is such that no valid tangential underflow line can be
constructed within the envelope of the gravity flux curve. From the graphical method, this is
known to be the limit of SHC I.
Substituting Eq A12b for XR into Eq A23 and substituting Eq A23 into Eq A17, yields the
maximum overflow rate qA versus R for SHC I to be met, viz.
V
(1 -a) exp•n(l+R)XM+a)
2Rm/h A24a
where
a = 1 — A24b
n(\+R)XF
Equation A24 relates the overflow rate qA to the recycle ratio R for specified values of feed
concentration XF and setting characteristics of the sludge Vo and n to meet SHC I. If a = 0, XK
- 4R/[(1+R)n]. Hence from Eq A24, if a - 0,
qA = VQ/(e2K) m/h A25
Transferring the R in Eq A25 to the left hand side, gives underflow rate qR = qA R = V0/e\ which
can be recognized as the slope of the tangential underflow line at the inflection point, i.e.
<ZR,cnt = iAmaxSHCIRcrH = VJ^ m/h A26
The qA of Eq A25 is therefore the maximum overflow rate allowed in terms of SHC I, qAmaxSnr
i and represents the limit of this criterion (see Fig AS). The recycle ratio R at this point is Rcrit
and from Eqs A12 and 25, is given by
Knt — = —^— A27
As before in the graphical method, when the underflow rate is greater than the slope of the
gravity flux curve at the inflection point, then SHC II governs the area design of the SST. From
Eq A9, this is defined by
V0 e "^ m/h A28A21
7.3 SST design and operating chart
By plotting q^ versus R from Eqs A24 and A28 for known values of Vo and n and selected XF,
the steady state design and operating (D&O) chart for the SST is obtained (Fig A13). The SHC
I (Eq A24) is represented by the s-shaped line from the origin to point D and shows that as R
increases so the permissible overflow rate increases. This line represents all the possible SST
designs for underflow lines (rates) making tangents to the gravity flux curve from very low
underflow rates (very low R) up to the critical underflow rate q^cnl (Rcm). At point D, qRcfj[ (-
Vo/ez) is reached, SHC I stops and Eq A24 no longer gives solutions for qA for R values greater
than Ren, at Point D. The SST loading condition at Point D in the D&O chart is represented on
the gravity flux curve at the inflection point. Hence at Point D, qR = qR.cnl, XL = X, min, XR = XKmm
= 4/n, jL = jLmax = 4Vc/(ne\ R- = Xr/(4/n-X,-) and qAltulA3iiC. = Vc/(e2 R^V Point n in the D#O
chart is identical to the maximum qA point for SHC I (giving minium AST) in the qA versus qR plot
of Fig A8. The SHC II (Eq A28), being independent of R, plots as a horizontal line in the D&O
chart and cuts the SHC I line on or below Point D. Because both SMC I and II have to be met
for R < Rcril, safe operation of the SST is represented in the D&O chart by qA - R points below
both the SHC I and II lines; for R > Rcril, qA - R points below the SHC II line only because SHC
I does not apply. There are some instances where the qAnmSMC , is greater than qAmaxSHC n-
Therefore, in general, the design point for minimum area of the SST for PWWF is not Point D
in the D&O chart, but the
intersection point of the SHC I and II
lines - for the cases where the
q ^* Q ( trie R V-tiliiG or
AmaxSilCI MAmuxoitC II *
the SHC I and II lines intersection
point is less than Rmr This is the
same as the maximum overflow rate
for SHC I being slightly higher than
that for SHC II in thc qA versus qR ^
graph developed from the graphical o
procedure (Fig AS). £2.0
E.1-5
UJ
<
> 1.0D&O CHART
1 D Flux theory (no correction)
If, for the same Vo and n, XF is
varied and the SHC I and II lines
plotted in the same D&O chart, it
will be found that the SHC I plots as
a family of s-shaped lines from the
origin to a hyperbola represented by
qRtri( = V0/e2 (i.e. the slope of thc
inflection point) and the SHC II as a
family of horizontal lines cutting theo•
—*^- 1—Critical Vo - 5.93 m/li
Recycle n-0.431 1/g
Ratio Rent XF = 3.5g/l
Solids Handling
Criterion II
Solids Handling
Criterion I
1 1 1 : :0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
RECYCLE RATIO (R)
Fig A13: Design and operating chart for fixed flux
settleability constants VQ and n and selected feed
concentration XF showing Solids Handling Criteria I
and II and the critical recycle ratio (Rcn) where SHC
hlntp thnt ths> nyt?rf!Q'\\' rate for SHC II is
slightly lower than that for SHC I.A22
SHC I line near but always below the SHC I end point on the hyperbola (Fig A14). For design,
in the region below the hyperbola, both SHC I and II have to be met and in the region above the
hyperbola, only SHC II.
2.5
£ 2.0
LU
1*1.5
DCD&O CHART
1D Flux theory (no correction)Vo = 5.93 m/h
n ~~ 0l431 ^
O1.0
LU
O0,5
0.0:: \ XF-2.5
:: / V^ Hypg/1
3rbola -SHC II
Critical
;; / V"* Underflow Rate
- K'-'• I1/~SHC IXF-3
XF
•^-^qiUril
SHC U
5 g/1
SHC n
-4.5 g/1Fig A14: D&O chart for fixed flux
settleability constants Vo and n and
varying feed concentration XF. The
line of the points where SHC I ceases
at different XF concentrations is the
hyperbola critical underflow rate
aR.cnt ~ aAmaxSHC I "en! = * 0 'e i^Q
A25). The area below the hyperbola is
where SHC I and II both need to be
met and the area above the hyperbola
is where SHC II only needs to be met
for safe operating conditions.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.0
From the above mathematical development, it is clear that the inflection point on the gravity flux
curve, or Point D in the D&O chart, plays a major role in the design of the SST - it in fact
governs the maximum overflow rate for SHC I (qAmaxSnci)i which, m some instances (usually
good settling sludges), is only slightly higher than that for SHC II (qAmaxSliC n). The advantage
of the exponential equation linking Vzs and X is that it implicitly includes the definition of (i)
a low flux at very low concentration (0.1 -1.0 g/C), (ii) a turning point in the gravity flux curve
and (iii) an inflection point when determining the Vo and n by means of semi-log least squares
regression. For the logarithmic form, even though two settleability parameters are being
determined with log-log least squares regression [i.e. a and b in V/s = a(X)*b], these three
properties have to be manually drawn into the gravity flux versus concentration curve - these
properties are not implicitly included in the log-logVs = a(X)b equation like in the semi-log Vs
- V0e"nX equation (Smollen and Ekama, 1984). Mathematically, the semi-log equation (Eq Al)
therefore makes a much better 1DFT model than the log-log equation.
The D&O chart is also valid for diurnal flow conditions. For successful (safe) operation of the
SST, the conditions prescribed by the D&O chart must be met at all times of the day. For
example, for a fixed SST area, as the influent flow increases, so the recycle ratio decreases and
the overflow rate increases. This moves the operating point, represented by the qA - R value pairs
in the D&O chart, upwards and to the left along a constant qR line, represented by a hyperbola
qR = qA R m/h. At all times of the day, the qA - R value pairs must be within the safe operating
area, i.e. below the SHC II line for R>Rcrit and below both the SHC I and II lines for R< RcrirA23
This approach is of course conservative and assumes the SST has no depth and therefore no
sludge storage, which is clearly not realistic. However, it does give a good guide to the design
and operation of the SST under diurnal flow conditions. The 1DFT design procedure is
demonstrated in a design example below.
8 DESIGN EXAMPLE
The MLSS concentration of an activated sludge reactor XF is 3.5 kgTSS/m3, and the flux
constants Vo and n were measured to be 5.93 m/h and 0.43 mVkgSS respectively (see Fig A3).
These constants give a SS VI and DS VI of about 100 mf/g and 150 mf/g respectively indicating
that the sludge is of rather poor settleability and approaching a bulking sludge. The average dry
weather flow (QI,ADWF) ls 220 mVh (5.28 MC/d), and the dry weather flow varies in a cyclic
pattern with a minimum QI.MDWK °fO.41QIADWF and apeak QKpDwFof 1-59Q!ADWF. The peak wet
weather flow (QLPWWF) is 2.39Q, ADWF.
For the Vo, n and XF values, the following are calculated for the design:
XR,m = 4/n =
Rcm = 3.5/(4/n-3.5) =
qR.cn, = V0/e2 =
XLmm = 2/n or XR,ril /2 =
e2) = XRcn, x qRctit =9.28
0.605
0.803
4.64
7.46
1.328
1.314g/f
-
m/h
g/P
kg/(m2h)
m/h
m/hEq AI6b
EqA27
EqA26
Eq A16b
Eq A16a
Eq A10
Eq A28
For the Vo and n values, the D&O chart is constructed as set out above. At Q[>PWWF, SHC II must
be met and because qAmaxSnc „ < qAmaxSHc-1 (only slightly), the area is calculated on the basis of
qAmaxSHC „ and SHC I is met by adjusting the recycle ratio R to the value where qAmaxSf|C i -
qAmaxsncii- This R value, which is less than Rcrj[ and found by trial and error, is the minimum R
to satisfy SHC I and is called Rmm. In this example, Rmin = 0.588. For high XF and/or poor sludge
settleability there is usually a much larger difference between Rmm and Rgril. The QU.WWF is
2.39x220 = 525 mVh. From Eq A28 (Fig A14), the maximum overflow rate at XF = 3.5 kg/m3
is 1.314 m/h (given by horizontal SHC II line). Hence the minimum SST area is 525/1.31 =401
m2. In order that SHC I is met under PWWF conditions, the recycle ratio at PWWF with respect
to PWWF (RPWWF) must De greater than Rmm - 0.588, given by the R value of the intersection
point of the SHC I and II lines which is slightly to the left of the hyperbola (see point D in Fig
A14). Hence, at PWWF, the recycle flow QK should be equal to or greater than 0.588x525 = 309
mVh or 1.40 times QliADWK, otherwise failure (gross sludge loss) will occur, i.e. for RPWWF < 0.588,
the qA - R intersection point falls above the SHC I line in Fig A14.1.5D&O CHART
1D Flux theory (no correction)
LU
I-
o
LL
crLU
o1.0
0.5 --
0.0PDWF
SHCPWWF SHC II
Vo = 5.93 m/h
n = 0.431 1/g
= 3.5g/lA24
Fig A14: D&O chart for the design
example showing the showing the
SST'PWWFcapacity defining Point
D and the diurnal DWF operating
positions at constant recycle flow
for Peak DWF (Point A), Average
DWF(Point B) and Minimum DWF
(point C).
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.0
The overflow rate at PDWF is 1.59x220/401 - 0.872 m/h. This is well below the SHC II limit
of 1.314 m/h. In order that SHC I is met at PDWF, the underflow recycle ratio R with respect
to PDWF must be at least 0.405, given by the R value of the intersection point of the horizontal
qA = 0.876 m/h line and the SHC I line for Xv = 3.5 kg/m3 (see point A in Fig A14). Hence the
recycle flow QR at PDWF should be at least 0.405x1.59x220 = 142 mVh or approximately 0.645
with respect to QunWF. Accepting the SST area of 401 m2 and fixing the recycle flow QR at a
constant 142 m3/h, the overflow rate (qA) and recycle ratio (R) at ADWF are 0.548 m/h and
0.645:1 with respect to QIADWK respectively (see point B in Fig A14). The overflow rate and
recycle ratio at minimum dry weather flow (MDWF) are 0.225 m/h and 1.571:1 with respect to
QI.ADWF respectively (see point C in Fig A14). Hence in the D&O chart, the locus of the points
defining the PDWF, ADWF and MDWF operating conditions moves between points A and C
through B in Fig A14, falling on the hyperbola qR = 142/401= 0.354 m/h. All these points
represent safe operating conditions with respect to the two sludge handling capacity criteria.
Hence, under diy weather conditions, the SST should operate satisfactorily. Provision for wet
weather flow is made up to a PWWF of 2.39QIADWF, but the recycle flow QR needs (o be
increased from 142 to 308 nr/h to accommodate this. For lower WWFs than this peak, the
recycle flow need not be increased so high. The required recycle flow can be determined from
the D&O chart along the SIIC I line as was done for the PDWF.
The applicability of the ID idealized flux theory (1DFT) for design of SST was evaluated by
Marais et ah (2000, 2001) and Ekamaand Marais (2001) by comparing its predicted maximum
surface overflow (SOR) and solids loading (SLR) rales with that calculated from the 2D
hydrodynamic model SettlcrCAD using as a basis 35 full scale SST stress tests conducted on
different SSTs with diameters from 30 to 45m and 2.25 to 4.1m side water depth, with and
without Stamford baffles. The results of some simulations are summarized in Fig A15a and b.A25
100
.-£ 90 ••
V) 80 •
70 •
60
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Factor - Vo/(n.Xo) - m/h10.090 •
80 -
70 •
60• '•
| farvll
; f •oaw SSts
rf*^ '•>. A A Wan* SSTs
"^^.^pjrvlll old SSTt
2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Flux Load Factor - Vo/(n.XF) - m/h10-0
Fies 15a and b: SettlerCAD predicted maximum SOR (Fiv la left) and SF.R (Fiv Ih richt) as
a % of the IDFT limit values, versus flux load factor VJ(nXh)for the 4 tests on the Darvill new
(M) and old (0) SSTs, 15 of the 15 tests on the Watts ' SST (A), 6 of the 14 tests on the Rijen
SST ( T) and 6 of the 10 tests on the Oss SST (I).
From the simulations, a relatively consistent pattern appeared, i.e. that the IDFT can be used for
design but its predicted maximum SLR needs to be reduced by an appropriate flux rating, the
magnitude of which depends mainly on SST depth and hydraulic loading rate (HLR).
Simulations of the Watts et al. (1996) SST with 6.0m SWD, and the Darvill new (4.1m SWD)
and old (2.5m SWD) SSTs with interchanged SWT), were run to confirm the sensitivity of the
flux rating to depth and HLR. Simulations with and without Stamford and/or Crosby baffles
were also done. While the design of the internal features of the SST, such as baffling, have a
marked influence on the effluent SS concentration, these features appeared to have only a small
influence on the flux rating, i.e. capacity, of the SST.
1.5D&O CHART
1D Flux theory (no correction)
LU
<
or
>
61.0
0.5
LJJ
o
0.0 -
0--
PDWF/
SHc/
/
- JD\
/
iA
VPWWF
\
• \
\CJR,crit
B
*ADWF
^RcritVo
n =
XF
\
R.DWF
"*- -.sue n
= 5.93 m/h
0.431 1/g
= 3.5g/l
C
MDWFFig A16: D& O chart for the design
example with the SST area
increased by 25%. Note that the
P WWF PD WF, A D WF and MD WF
operating positions have moved
vertically downwards (i.e. recylce
ratios have not changed) and fall
well below the SHC I and II lines to
account for the non idealities in full
scale SSTs.
0.5 1.0 1.5
RECYCLE RATIO (R)2.0A26
As a consequence of the reduced capacity of full scale SSTs compared with that calculated from
the 1DFT, the 1DFT calculated maximum SOR and SLR need to be reduced. Until more
information is obtained, it would appear that from the simulations that the flux rating of 0.80 of
the 1DFT maximum SLR recommended by Ekama and Marais (1986) remains a reasonable
value to apply in the design of full scale SSTs - for deep SSTs (4m SWD) the flux rating could
be increased to 0.85 and for shallow SSTs (2.5m SWD) decreased to 0.75 (Fig A16b, left).
Reducing the 1UFT SLR to 80% of the calculated value is equivalent to increasing the SST
surface area by 25% (1/0.80-1.25). Increasing the area by 25% gives a 400x1.25-500 m2 SST
for this design example. This increased area changes the PWWF, PDWF, ADWF and MDWF
operating positions in the D&O chart, which are shown in Fig A16. Increasing the SST area
moves the operating positions vertically downward in the D&O chart, i.e. the recycle ratio values
do not change because the design influent and recycle flows have not changed; however, the
overflow and underflow rates have decreased to 80% of the 1DFT values.
9 REFERENCES
ATV - Abwasscrtcclinische Vereinigung (1976) Erlauterungen und Ergiinzungen zum
Arbeitsbericht des ATV-Fachausschusses 2.5 Absct/verfarhcn. Die Bemcssung der
Nachklarbecken von Belebungsanlangen. Korrespondenz Abwasser, 23(8), 231-235.
ATV - Abwassertechnische Vereinigung (1991) Dimensioning of single stage activated sludge
plants upwards from 5000 total inhabitants and population equivalents. ATV Rules and
Standards- Wastewater- waste, UDC 628.356:628.32.001.2(083). Issue No. 11/92.
DaiggerG.T. and Roper R.E. (1985) The relationship between SVI and activated sludge settling
characteristics. Journal WPCF, 57(8), 859-866.
Dick R.I. and Young K.W. (1972) Analysis of thickener performance of final settling tanks.
Presented at 27th Purdue Industrial Waste Conference, Lafayette, Indiana.
Ekama G.A., Pitman A.R., Smollen M. and Marais G.vR. (1984) Secondary settling tanks -
Chapter 8 in Theory design and operation of'nutrient removal activated sludge'processes.
Water Research Commission, P O Box 824, Pretoria, 0001, RSA.
Ekama G.A. and Marais G.vR. (1986) Sludge settleability and secondary settling tank design
procedures. Water Pollut. Control, 5(1), 101-113.
Ekama GA, Barnard JL, Gunthert FW, Krcbs P, McCorquodale JA, Parker DS, Wahlbcrg E.I
(1997) Secondary settling tanks: Theory, design, modelling and operation. IAWQ STR
No 6, pp216, International Association on Water Quality, London.
Ekama GA and Marais P (2001) Hydrodynamic modelling of secondary settling tanks - Final
report to the Water Research Commission on contract K.5/835. WRC Report 835/1/01,
Water Research commission, PO Box 824 , Pretoria, 0001, RSA.
Grijspeerdt K, Vanrollegheni P, and Verstracte W (1991) Selection of one dimensional models
for online use. Wat, Sci. Technol. 31(2), 193-204.
Marais P, Ekama GA and dc Haas DW (2000) Comparison of the ID idealized flux theory and
a 2D hydrodynamic model with full-scale secondary settling tank performance data.
Procs. 6'1'biennial Water Institute of Southern Africa conference and exhibition, Suncity,A27
28/5 to 1/6/2000. CD-ROM ISBN 0-620-25661-3.
Marais P and Ekama GA (2001) Comparison of the ID idealized flux theory and a 2D
hydrodynamic model with full scale secondary settling tank performance data. Research
report Wll 1, Dcpt. of Civil Eng., Univ. of Cape Town, Rondebosch, 7701, Cape, RSA.
Marais PM, Ekama GA and de Haas DW (2001) Assessing the applicability of the ID flux
theory to full-scale secondary settling tank design with a 2D hydrodynamic model. Procs.
74th Water Environment Federation Conference and Exhibition, Atlanta, 13-17 Oct. (2)
Merkcl W. (1974) Die Bcmcssung horizontal durchstromter Nachklarbecken von
Belebungsanlagen. gwf-Wasser/Abwasser, 115 H(6), 272-282.
Ozinsky A.E. and Ekama G.A. (1995) Secondary settling tank modelling and design Part 2:
Linking sludge settleability measures. Water SA, 21(4), 333-349.
Pitman A.R. (1980) Settling properties of extended aeration sludges. Journal WPCF, 52(3),
524-536.
Pitman A.K. (1984) Settling of nutrient removal activated sludges. Water Sci. Technoi,
17(Amsterdam), 493-504.
Rachwal A.J., Johnstone D.W.M., Hanbury M.J. and Critchard D.J. (1982) The application of
settleability tests for control of activated sludge plants. Chapter 13 in Bulking of activated
sludge - Preventative and remedial methods, Eds: Chamber B. and Tomlinson E. J.,
Ellis-Hopwood Publishers, Chichcstcr, UK, 224-242.
SmoIlenM. and Ekama G.A. (1984) Comparison of empirical settling velocity equations in flux
theory for secondary settling tanks. Water SA, 10(4), 175-184.
Standard Methods (1985) Standard Methods for the examination of water and wastewater, 16th
Edn., AWWA, WEF, APHA, 1015 Fifteenth St. NW, Washington. DC 20005.
STOWa (1981) (Stichting Toegcpast Ondcrzock Watcrbchccr. Formerly STORA - Stichting
Toegepast Ondcrzock Rciniging Afvalwater) Hydraulische en lechnologische aspecten
van het nabezink-process. Rapport 2 - Ronde nabezinktanks - Praktijkonderzoek,
Ontwerpgegevens en Bedrijfservaring. Postbus 8090, RB 3505, Utrecht, Holland.
Tuntoolavest M., Miller E. and Grady CPL Jr. (I9S3) Factors affecting the clarification
performance of activated sludge final settlers. Journal WPCF, 55(3), 234-248.
Vcsilind P. A. (1968a) Discussion of'Evaluation of activated sludge thickening theories' by Dick
R.I. and Ewing B.B. in J. San, Eng. Div., ASCE, 93(SA4), 9-29, J. San. Eng. Div.,
ASCE, 94(SA1), 185-191
VesilindP.A. (1968) Design of prototype thickeners from batch settling tests. Water and Sewage
Works, 115(July), 302-307.
Watts RW, Svoronos SA and Koopman B (1996). One dimensional modelling of secondary
clarifiers using a concentration feed velocity dependent dispersion coefficient. Water
Research, 30(9), 2112-2124.
White M.J.D. (1975) Settling of activated sludge. Technical Report TR11, Water Research
Centre, England.
White M.J.D. (1976) Design and control of secondary settlement tanks. Water Pollut. Control,
75(4), 459-467.
Yoshioka N., Hotta Y., Tanaka S., Naito S. and Tsugami S. (1957) Continuous thickening of
homogenous flocculated slurries. Chcm. Eng.(Kagaku Kogaku), Tokyo, 21, 66-74.
Zhou S, Pfeil R, Strand E, Ji Z and Vitasovic C (1998) SettlerCAD (formerly Clarity) Release
1.1 - A 2D hydrodynamic model for secondary clarifiers. Reid Crowther Consulting,
Seattle, WA.A2.1
APPENDIX 2
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS FOR PART 1
ADWF
ASCH
ATV
CFD
CRTC
d
D&O
DSVI
DWF
e.g.
Eq
ESS
et a I.
cxp
Fig
g
h
HLR
HRT
i.e.
IAWQ
IP
kg
L
In
log
M
m
max
MDWF
mg
mg/C
min
mf
MC
Mf/d
mf/g
MLSSAverage Dry Weather Flow
American Society of Civil
Engineers
Abwassertechnischen
Vereinigung
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Clarifier Research Technical
Committee of the ASCE
day
Design and Operating chart
Diluted Sludge Volume Index
Dry Weather Flow
For example
Equation
Effluent Suspended Solids
and others
exponent
Figure
gram
hour
Hydraulic Loading Rate
Hydraulic Retention Time
that is
International Association for
Water Quality
Inflexion point
kilogram
Length
litres
logarithm to the base e
logarithm to the base 10
Mass
metre
maximum
Minimum Dry Weather Flow
milligrams
milligrams per litre
minutes
mi Hi litres
Megafitres(106l) (-0.264
million US gallons)
Megalitrcs per day (=0.264 mgd)
millilitres per gram
Mixed Liquor Suspended Solidsmm
PDWF
PWWF
RAS
RSA
SBH
SHC
SLR
SOR
SS
SST
SSVI
STOWa
STR
SVI
SWD
szsvTP
TSS
UCT
USA
viz.
WAS
WLR
WRC
WW
WWF
WWTP
zsvID
IDFT
2Dmillimetres
Peak Dry Weather Flow
Peak Wet Weather Flow
Return Activated Sludge
Republic of South Africa
Sludge Blanket Height
Solids Handling Criterion
Solids Loading Late
Surface Overflow Rate
Suspended Solids concentration
Secondary Settling Tank
Stirred Specific Volume Index
Stichting Toegepast Reiniging
Waterbeheer (Holland)
Scientific and Technical Report
Sludge Volume Index
Side Water Depth of SST
Stirred Zone Settling Velocity
Turning Point
Total Suspended Solids
University of Cape Town
United States of America
that is to say (videlicet)
Waste Activated Sludge
Weir Loading Rate
Water Research Commission
(South Africa)
Wastewater
Wet Weather Flow
Wastewater Treatment Plant
Zone Settling Velocity
One Dimensional
One dimensional steady state
idealized flux theory
Two DimensionalA2.2
a
A
•
4>IF
<f>FS
<f>ST
a
AST
LSTmin
IF
H
J
JAP
JB
JL
jLmax
Jmax
Js
Jr
in
k2
n
n
NTS
Q
QE
QF
QI
Ql.AUWI
XI.MDWF
Vl.PDWF
Vl.PWWl-
QR
VR.PWWF
QwLIST OF SYMBOLS FOR PART 1
Square root term in overflow rate - recycle ratio Equation A24
General symbol denoting change or difference
Diameter
Diameter of inlet feedwell
Diameter of feedwell skirt baffle
Diameter of SST
Constant in log-log zone settling velocity equation
Surface area of SST
Minimum surface area of SST
Constant in log-log zone settling velocity equation
Base number of the natural logarithm scale (e = 2.713..)
traction ot non-settling particles in the feed solids concentration (XF)
Depth of inlet feedwell
Depth of feedwell skirt baffle
Depth of SST at feedwell skirt baffle
General symbol for water depth in SST
Average water depth
Side water depth
General symbol for flux [kgSS/(m2.h)]
Apploied flux to SST
Flux due to the movement of water relative to SST wall (bulk flux)
Limiting flux
Maximum limiting flux
Maximum flux
Flux of the settling SS with respect to the water (gravity settling flux)
Total flux of SS with respect to SST wall (gravity flux + bulk flux)
Slope of SST floor (m:l)
Constant in Takacs double exponential settleability Equation 2
Flux theory constant in semi-log V7S - ^Equation 1
Constant in Takacs double exponential settleability Equation 2
Number of steps in simulation run time
General symbol for volumetric flow rate (mVh)
Effluent flow rate from SST (= Q, - Qw)
Feed flow rate to SST ( - Q, + QR - Qw)
Influent flow rate to wastewater treatment plant
Influent flow rate at Average DWF
Influent flow rate at Minimum DWF
Influent flow rate at Peak DWF
Influent flow rate at Peak WWF
Return activated sludge (RAS) flow rate (before underflow WAS abstraction)
RAS flow rate at ADWF with respect to ADWF
Critical RAS flow rate
RAS flow rate at PWWF with respect to PWWF
Waste activated sludge (WAS) flow rate
Surface overflow rate (Q|/AST)
Overflow rate at DWFL
L
L
L
L2
L2
L
L
L
L
L
L
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
M/(L2T)
L3/M
L3/M
L3/M
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L3/T
L-VT
L3/T
LVT
L/T
L/TA2.3
qA,P\v\vF Overflow rate at WWF L/T
qAmax Maximum surface overflow rate L/T
qAmaxSHC[ Solids Handling Criterion I maximum surface overflow rate L/T
qAmaxsnc ii Solids Handling Criterion II maximum surface overflow rate L/T
qR Underflow rate (QR/AST> m/h) L/T
qRct]1 Critical underflow rate in flux theory (i.e. qR = Vo /e2 m/h) L/T
qw Weir loading rate [mV(h.m)] L3/(LT)
R Underflow recycle ratio (= QR /Qj)
Rcm Critical underflow rate
RADWF Underflow recycle ratio with respect to ADWF
Rha Actual hydraulic retention time T
RPWWF Underflow recycle ratio with respect to PWWF
t Time T
T Time T
Tsim Simulation run time T
Vti Flux theory constant in semi-log V^ - Xrelationship L/T
VST Volume of SST L3
Vs Settling velocity of the sludge (= Vzs) L/T
VSXF Settling velocity of the feed concentration (XF) L/T
^SXL Settling velocity of the limiting concentration (XL) L/T
Vzs Stirred /one settling velocity of the sludge L/T
X Suspended solids concentration (mgSS/1) M/L3
XE Effluent suspended solids concentration M/L3
XF Feed SS concentration to SST M/L3
XL Limiting solids concentration of the flux theory M/L3
X[mjn Minimum limiting solids concentration of the flux theory M/L3
XR Underflow sludge concentration M/L3
XRmm Minimum underflow sludge concentration M/L3
XRxril Critical underflow concentration (= XRmjn) M/L3
X, Total suspended solids concentration M/L3
Xw Wastcflow suspended solids concentration M/L3UNIVERSITY OF CAPE TOWN
Department of Civil Engineering
Water Research Group
FINAL REPORT
to the Water Research Commission for the task
DEVELOPMENT OF A FINITE ELEMENT 2D If YDRODYNAMIC MODEL FOR
SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
in the contract K5/835
HYDRODYNAFvIIC MODELLING OF SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
by
Dorothce KIcine and Daya Reddy
1 INTRODUCTION
Secondary settling tanks (SSTs) form a crucial part of wastewater treatment plants. Besides
having to produce the separation of suspended solids and clarified effluent the final settling tank
is used to concentrate and recycle the settled sludge to the biological reactor. The efficiency of
the biological reactor in the wastewater treatment system is determined by the efficiency of this
final clarifying process. Problems arise due to the dominating two-phase How in the settling tanks.
The lack of knowledge regarding this complex flow often leads to false estimations with regard
to the design of the inlet and outlet structure, and to oversizing during the renovation and
construction of new plants. One way of promoting improved design and of resolving the
bottleneck of exist ing settling tank is through the use of Computational Fluid Dynamics modelling
of final settling tanks. The degree of flow and solids maldistribution can be qualified and
suggestions can be made concerning improvements. This could lead to lower operating costs,
higher capacities and to delayed investment expenditures.
Hydro dynamic models have been developed for simulating secondary settling tanks to get a better
understanding of the complex flow patterns in these tanks and to make design and optimization
of the SST internal features possible. These models use mainly the finite volume method (FVM)
as numerical method (McCorquodale and Zhou, 1993; Lakchal et £//., 1999).The purpose of this work is to develop and implement a finite element analysis of SSTs. Although
this method is originated in stress analysis, applications of the finite element method in heat
transfer and fluid flow are now widespread.
Both numerical methods, the FEM and the FVM, have their pros and cons. The power of the
finite element method lies in its ability to treat problems on irregular domains, and to provide local
grid refinement. The flexible geometry of the FEM supports the description and adaptation of
complex internal features of SSTs like inlet and outlet arrangements.
The hydrodynamic SST model solves the continuity, momentum and the solids transport
equations, as well as the £w>turbulence equations that are described in Chapter 5 of the book
"Secondary Settling Tanks: Theory, Modelling, Design and Operation", 1AWQ STR 6 (likama
etaL 1997).
The physical and mathematical extension requires efficient and robust solution schemes for the
coupled system of equations describing the problem. The characteristically complex and highly
unstable flow in SSTs imposes great challenges on the numerical and computational approaches.
The treatment of the convection terms and the gravity-density term in the Navier-Stokes
equations is an important issue to be addressed. The flow pattern in SSTs strongly depends on
the viscosity and on buoyancy forces. Furthermore, at high concentration range the settling
velocity of the sludge approaches the magnitude of the turbulent diffusivity, which makes the
settling motion difficult or even impossible to obtain. Questions arise as to what extent the settling
motion in the high concentration range is hindered by diffusion or its turbulent part, and what
influence the turbulence has particularly in stable stratification of SSTs. Since the velocities in the
main section of SSTs are very small, it is difficult to carry out measurements that can give suitable
data to describe the rheology of sludge in the high concentration range.
The problems that arise in the numerical treatment of these partial differential equations arise from
the strong nonlinearity of the system of equations, the incomprcssibility constraint, local changes
of the problem character in space and lime, and the temporarily stiff systems of differential
equations.
The main goal of this project is to compile a working Unite clement package for 21) hydrodynamic
modelling of SSTs that is capable of simulating the benchmark results available in the literature.2 SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
2.1 Function of Secondary Settling Tanks
Secondary settling tanks form a crucial part of wastewater treatment plants based on activated
sludge. Activated sludge is biological mass (floes) produced in the treatment of wastewater by the
growth of suspended bacteria. The activity of these living organisms results in the biodegradation
of wastewater or sludge components. In the secondary settling tank the activated sludge is
subsequently separated from the treated wastewater by gravity sedimentation and is returned to
the process (Fig 1).
Influent Flow _, ._ .
from the M*^ ' - Clarified
Biological Reactor
• r, x
Sludge Return Flow
Fig I; Secondary Settling Tank
2.2 Hydrodynamic Modelling of SSTs
Fluid dynamics problems must obey the two governing equations of continuity and momentum.
In addition, the flow in a sedimentation tank is characterized by the simultaneous flow of two
phases. This two-phase system is a suspension of particles in a fluid, which comprises suspended
solids and water. In settling tanks the sludge particles have different shapes and forms. Due to
these different forms and shapes the sludge particles enclose the surrounding fluid. As a result the
solids influence the liquid and vice versa, and with that the flow distribution can completely
change.
The dynamics of sedimentation are determined by the interaction between buoyancy and drag
forces. Due to their higher density the suspended solids have a tendency towards sedimentation
and to accumulation at the bottom of the tank, leading to a stratified flow field. The sedimentation
process involves a relative velocity of the solids with respect to the fluid phase. In the low
concentration range the activated sludge is flocculcnt, which means that particle diameter and
hence the settling velocity increase with concentration. At a certain concentration the difference
between the velocities of the two phases decreases with increasing particle concentration due to
increasing cohesive forces. This is the concentration range of hindered settling.Many complications arise due to factors such as the wide variety of sizes and shapes of the
particles, nonuniform flow patterns, agglomeration, and interparticle forces.
Different mathematical models have been developed to describe two-phase flows (Gidaspow,
1994). In these models each phase is calculated by a separate momentum equation. The coupling
of the two phases takes place over interphase-friction forces, the pressure, and the requirement
that over the entire flow domain, the volume of the two phases forms a continuum.
Due to the strong interlink between the activated sludge and the water it is assumed that the two
phases react as a fluid mixture with variable density. In the mathematical model this fluid mixture
of water and suspended solids is calculated by a momentum equation that includes a source term
to represent the forces due to change in the density of the fluid mixture. The local density of this
fluid mixture depends on the local concentration of the sludge particles, which is solved by a
particulate mass conservation equation. This equation involves the relative velocity between the
two phases due to their different densities. A density-state equation then gives the local density
of the fluid mixture with respect to the solid concentration. The coupling between the momentum
equation and the solids transport equation / density-state-equation is achieved through the
gravity-density term in the momentum equation (Fig 2).
Fluid Mixture = Pure Water + Suspended Solids
Momentum- and Mass Conservation
1Velocity - and Pressure - Field
IParticipate Mass Conservation +
Settling-Velocity-Equation
1Concentration - Field
1Density-State-ELquatton
Density - Field>
Gravity - Density - Term
Fig 2: Modelling of fluid-solid flow in SSTs3 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS
As described in the above chapter the distribution of mean flow quantities in settling tanks is
governed by the conservation equations for mass, momentum and solid concentration. For the
modelling of two-dimensional unsteady, turbulent, density stratified flow in secondary settling
tanks the following system of equations is required (Ekama et al, 1997):
3.1 Conservation of Fluid Mass: Continuity Equation
The continuity equation describes the physical principle of mass conservation. In the case of
settling tanks the fluid mixture is treated as if it were a single phase fluid, and the equation is
drmU drmV
The variables (7 and Kare the temporal mean velocity components in the rand ^directions, m=\
for the cylindrical coordinates and m = 0 with r = x for the Cartesian coordinates.
In the above equation the use of the Boussinesq approximation has been made. The change of the
fluid volume caused by the variable density of the fluid mixture is very small, so that the continuity
equation for incompressible How is assumed. With the Boussinesq approximation the influence
of the variable density p appears only in the gravity-density term in the momentum equation.
3.2 Conservation of Momentum: The Navicr-Stokcs Equations
The physical principle is described by Cauchy's equation of motion, which says that the total force
on a body equals its change of momentum. In general, forces acting on a fluid system may be
classified as body forces proportional to the volume or mass of the system, such as gravity, and
surface forces proportional to the area of surface on which they act, such as pressure and viscous
forces.
The set of momentum equations describing two-dimensional, unsteady, turbulent, flow in
rectangular or circular settling tanks are:
Conservation of Momentum in the Horizontal (x) resp. Radial Direction (r)
dV dU dV 1 dp 1 d { 3U\ 1 d ( \
(2)Conservation of Momentum in the Vertical Direction (y)
dV dV dV 1 dp 1 1 ( m dV) 1 1 ( m dv\
+U — + V = - — + r v „ + — r v + Sa^ i J3 1 m 3 \ eff 3 I m 3 eff -> ~ UV
dt dr dy pr ay r dry }] drJ r dy\ n dy)
(3)
where
rm dr\ dr) rm dy\ dr) r
and
i d ( _. dv\ \ d { _ dv\ p- Pm
(5)
The variables U and V are the temporal mean velocity components in the r (resp. ,v) and y
directions,/? is the general pressure less the hydrostatic pressure at reference density/^, p is the
fluid density and g is the component of gravitational acceleration in the vertical direction. The
effective viscosity v^is the sum of the kinematic laminar and turbulent viscosity. The last term
in Eq. 5 represents the force due to changes in the density of the fluid mixture.
3.3 Conservation of Particulate Mass: Concentration Equation
The equation for particulate mass equation consists of a convective part that is responsible for the
particle movement in flow direction, and a diffusive part that distributes the solids in the direction
of the concentration gradient. It describes the balance of the temporal and spatial rates of change
of solid mass and the solid mass transport movement due to mixing and settling. The equation is
dC dC dC 1 d, (6)or oy rar\ or j r ay \ • ay j
where
Veff
Vsr = in horizontal direction [m2/sl
(7)
Veff r '/ 1
V,,, = in vertical direction L -1 '
C is the suspended solid concentration. The effective diffusivity of the solid concentration \\r and
vxy is described with the use of the Reynolds analogy of mass transport and momentum transport
involving the Schmidt numbers rrir in the r- or x-direction and ffsv in thej'-direction. Typical valuesof the Schmidt number He in the range of 0.5 to 1.0. Vs is the particle settling velocity, which is
determined according to the local concentration by an approach described in the following
chapter.
3.4 Solid Settling Equation
The settling equation by Takacs et al (1991) appears to be the best overall description of
biological floes in secondary clarifiers. The settling process is modelled using the
double-exponential settling, which relates the solid settling velocity to the local concentration by
K(C-Cnnn) -Kl(C-C ruin) I
(8)
Here VQ is a reference velocity (Stokes velocity), K and A", are empirical coefficients for rapidly
settling particles and for poorly settling particles respectively, and Cmm is the non-settleable
concentration. For the computation the second part of Eq. 8 is ignored, i.e. the poorly settling
particles are not taken into account. Fig 3 shows the settling velocity against the concentration
of the activated sludge for a set of parameters that is used for the simulation of the Darvill Old
and New SST. as well for the Watts SST. For example, with a feed concentration of 3.6 g/f and
a recycle concentration of 8.15 g/f for Darvill Test 3 the settling velocity decreases from
0.47 mm/s to 0.067 mm/s.
• Darvill Tanks - - - Walls Tank
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
— 1.6
| 1.4
— 1
> 0.8
0.6
U.4
0.2
0\
V
\—i
— ;"f ~
L
• .--
—-
.•
—_._
i- —— ,.
!
!
•- —
-
Solid Concentration [ g/l ]
Darvill Old and New Tank: Vo= 2.22 mm/s ( = 8.00 m/h ) and K - 0.4300 l/g
Watts "lank: Vo- 2.12 mm/s ( = 7.62 m/h ) and K = 0J055 l/g
Fig 3: Modified settling function ofTacacs8
3.5 Density-State Equation
The paniculate mass conservation equation gives the concentration field, and with the
density-state-equation the local density of the liquid-solid fluid mixture can be calculated
according to
p_
Ps(9)
Here ps is the density ofthe dry particles solids, C the solids concentration in the same units as
p, and/?r is the reference density (clear water). Fig 4 shows the density ofthe fluid mixture against
the solid concentration. The small changes in the density ofthe fluid mixture have huge effects
on the flow pattern in these SSTs, which is demonstrated in Chapter 5. For example, the liquid-
solid density with a feed concentration of 3.6 g/£ is with 1000.83 kg/m3 only 0.83 %o higher than
the reference density of clear water, and increases to 1001.88 kg/m3 by a recycle sludge
concentration of 8.15 g/f, which corresponds to less than 2 %o increase in the density of clear
water.
it003
002
001
000
999
QO«- •• -
--—*^^--
r
-
—- -
——...^-"
1
—
•• --
———
\ to
Solid Concentration [g/l|
pr = 1000 kg/m3 and ps = 1300 kg/m3
Fig 4: Density state equation
With the density-state equation the concentration ofthe solids is coupled to the hydrodynamics.3.6 Turbulence Modelling
The flows of practical relevance are almost always turbulent. There is no unique definition for
turbulent flow. In general turbulent fluid motion is irregular, random, unsteady and always 3D,
in contrast to laminar flow, which can be 2D or 1D. The most accurate approach to turbulence
simulation is to solve the Navier-Stokes equations. But the turbulent motion contains elements,
which are much smaller than the extent of the flow domain.
In general turbulence is an eddying motion, which has a wide spectrum of eddy sizes. The eddies
can be considered as vortex elements, which stretch each other, thereby passing energy on to
smaller and smaller eddies until viscous forces become active and dissipate the energy. When
buoyancy forces are present, there is also an exchange between potential energy of the mean flow
and turbulent kinetic energy.
The engineer is not interested in the details of the fluctuating motion, but in the average character
of real turbulence. Therefore the instantaneous values of the velocity, the pressure and the scalar
quantity, in this context the solid concentration are separated into mean and fluctuating quantities.
The turbulent velocity fluctuations act as a stress on the fluid as a result of the increased internal
friction. Likewise the fluctuations of the solid concentration produce a turbulent mass flux. In
most flow regions, the turbulent stresses and fluxes are much larger than their laminar
counterparts.
Different mathematical approaches have been adopted to describe turbulence. They differ in their
complexity and their numerical expense. The turbulence model should simulate the average
character of real turbulence and together with the mean flow equations it forms a closed set.
Furthermore, turbulent transport is strongly affected by buoyancy effects. For instance, the
stratified flow in settling tanks reduces turbulence, which means the turbulent viscosity and
turbulent diffusivity arc reduced. The characteristic of stable stratification permits the use of a
constant turbulent or eddy viscosity / diffusivity in the whole tank (Krebs, 1989). One obvious
disadvantage is the determination of suitable values for the turbulent sizes. Furthermore, regions
of higher and lower turbulence are not distinguishable, as for example the inlet region and the
main section of the settling tank.
The most commonly used turbulence model is the A-f-turbulence model (Rodi, 1980) which
determines the isotropic eddy viscosity v, as a function of the turbulent kinetic energy k and its
dissipation rate t: by the formula
k2
v=0.09— . (10)10
The distribution of k and /; are determined from the semi-empirical transport equations
dk dk dk 1 d [ m v, dk I 1 d { m v, dk
at Or dy r or \ <Jk or J r akP2-€
and
de dc 1 d v.
m
cr
where
dydv um\—
\r1 3 [ v, SE I £
1 + C, -/•'" dy \ a dy k
du+2\dy dre1
2 /
(12)
(13)
represents the rate ofproduction of turbulent kinetic energy resulting from the interaction of the
turbulent stresses and velocity gradients, and
(14)
the rate ofproduction due to buoyancy effects.
The emprical constants C ,(',. and f V aswcllas the turbulent Prandtl numbers for k and £, <rkand
a, are given by Rodi (1980): Cu - 0.09, C, - 1.44. C,- 1.92,ffL= 1.0andfff= 1.3.
In this work it is assumed that the eddy diflusivity that governs the solid mixing in the tank is
proportional to the eddy viscosity, although this assumption has not yet been demonstrated (see
Chapter 5.6.3 of the book ''Secondary Settling Tanks: Theory, Modelling, Design and Operation",
1AWQ STR 6 (likama et at.. 1997).
The buoyancy correction term /', is often omitted as a first approximation (DeVantier and I .arock,
1986; Zhou etui, 1998).11
NUMERICAL MODFXLING
The modelling of tin's unsteady, multidensity, highly nonlinear tluid flow requires a very eflicient
and robust solution scheme. The following topics have to be taken into account:
*• Treatment ofthe incompressibility
• Treatment ofthe nonlinearity
• Complete inner and outer control
The whole system of equations consists of six partial differential equations with six unknowns,
namely the velocities in the horizontal and vertical direction, the pressure, and the solid
concentration, as well as the turbulent kinetic energy and its dissipation. The system is solved by
the finite element method and the fractional -^-scheme in the spatial and temporal domains,
respectively.
4.1 Spatial Discretization
Spatial approximation is achieved by the Cialerkin weighted residual approach (Taylor and
Hughes, 1981; Reddy, 1998). The finite element method subdivides the domain into a set of
discrete volumes or finite elements, on which the solution is approximated by polynomials.
In the following the equations will be expressed in tensor notation in which indices * andy range
over the dimension ofthe spatial domain. The usual summation convention on repeated indices
is employed. In what follows, W\s a test function.
For the continuity equation and the Navier-Stokes equations the residual formulations are
f U
dx.Ldn= 0(15)
and
[ wdt
1 ddxj
r'"vpr dx
1 dPr
(
r'" dxr'VV
(16)12
The scalar equations for the variables C, k and e are all similar in their formulation and we
therefore show only the details of the concentration equation, for which
\oWdC dC 1 3
+ £/.. -—-—r^— I rd7+U'dx dx. dx.(17)
Integration by parts and use of the divergence theorem lead to the following expression
WdUt
dtdUj 1 dp p- pr
pr Pr
rm dx/ ^
for the momentum equation, wherem a yeff
r dx} JJdn=s(18)
dU
dr
Here n, is the /-component of the outward unit nonnal vector on the boundary 7".
For the scalar equation of the concentration C we have(19)
WdC
~dtLI.dC d(VsC)
' dx. dxi Jdw veff dc
dxt asi dxt
(20)
4.2 Weak Formulation of (he Finite Element Equations
The discrete solution for the dependent variables (U, V, p, C.kand e) can be approximated within
each clement as a linear combination ofappropriate interpolation function or basis (trial) function
N. The approximate solutions of the variables U, arc
(21)13
and for C (likewise for the other scalar variables/>, k and e)
Xm > (22)
where Nr is the total number ofnodes on each element.
The classical Galcrkin finite element method uses the same class of functions for the weighting
function JFand the basis function N. The approximate form (21) and (22) are substituted into the
weighted residual formulations to obtain a set of equations for the unknowns {U)m, Cm and pni,
as well as for km and em.
The nonlinear terms (conveetive ilux and source term) are linearized using Picard iteration
(Kelly, 1995). The transformation from Cartesian coordinates to the local coordinates is
performed by the use of isoparametric finite elements. In this work a four noded isoparametric
element is used. The piecewise bilinear interpolations for all variables are same in the formulation.
The transformed integrals are then integrated numerically by 2 x 2 Gaussian Quadrature.
4.3 Upwinding Technique - Streamline Upwind Petrov-Galerkin (SUPG) Method
It is well known that conveetive dominated cases lead to oscillating solutions. Those flows are
characterised by a high Reynolds number or Peclet Number. The Galerkin method leads to
central-difference type approximations of differential operators. At high Peclet numbers the
central-differencing uncouples the unknowns, i.e. only variables with uneven or even indices are
connected. This results in oscillations of the solution. One possible way of eliminating the
oscillations is to severely refine the mesh, so that convection no longer dominates on an element.
Another possibility is the use of upwinding techniques.
Upwind differencing amounts to approximating the conveetive derivatives with solution values
at the upstream. The Streamline Upwind / Petrov-Galerkin method SUPG (Hughes and
Brooks, 1982; Zienkiewicz and Taylor, 2000) is a modification of the classical Galerkin method
to increase control over the advective / convective-derivative term. The weighting function for
a typical node is modified to weight the element upwind of the node more heavily than the
downwind element. The interpolation function A'and the weighting function ffare distinct. SUPG
requires discontinuous weighting functions, which are the sum of the continuous weighting
function used in the classical Galerkin method, and a discontinuous streamline upwind
contribution. The modified weighting function is applied to all terms in the equation, resulting in
a consistent residual formulation; W\s given by14
ah/2 dN
U, —~ , (23)
where a (= coth(/>e) - \IPe) is the streamline upwind parameter, which depends on the clement
Peclet number Pe(=\/2h\u\/v), and h is the characteristic length scale of the element (for detailed
implementation see Zienkiewicz and Taylor, 2000).
From the mathematical point of view in this work the convergence problem is no longer a pure
convective transport problem. In stratified How fields, as in settling tanks, the gravity-production
term can reduce the efficiency of the upwind ing scheme.
4.4 Temporal Discretization
The discretization in time can be performed by the usual methods such as Forward or Backward
Euler-, the Crank-Nicolson or the Fractional-step-0-scheme obtaining for each time step a
sequence of generalised stationary problems, which is shown here, by way of example, for the
Navier-Stokcs equations
, (lom
At pr dxk pr
with
ve
IJy choosing suitably the value oi'O the mathematical model would be integrated either implicitly
or explicitly in the temporal domain, e.g. 0 = 1 for the implicit Huler scheme, 0=1/2 for the
Crank-Nicolson scheme, or ()--{) for the explicit Eulcr scheme. These schemes have their
advantages and deficiencies concerning accuracy and stability.
In this work the fractional-stcp-0-scheme is adopted to integrate the time derivative
(Turek, 1998). In this method the macro time step At is defined as a sequence of 3 time (sub-)
steps OAt, 0 'At and OAt, and the corresponding implicit weighting factors are set to aO, /JO' and
aO, respectively, where 0' - 1 - 20, a - (\ - 20)/(\ - 0) and fi - 0/(\ - 0). By choosing a special
value for 0. i.e. 0= 1 - V2 / 2 , the scheme is of second-order accuracy, strongly A-stable and
physical oscillations are well preserved.15
4.5 Derivation of the Navier-Stokes Solver
The lack of an independent equation for the pressure complicates the solution of the
Navier-Stokes equations. Furthermore mass conservation is a kinematic constraint on the velocity
field tn incompressible flows. One way to overcome this difficulty is to create a pressure field to
satisfy the continuity equation.
There is a large variety of schemes all of which have been used in practice for several years. In
this work a second-order accurate pressure-correction scheme by Van Kan (1986) is deployed
to solve the unsteady, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations.
The treatment of incomnressihilify is tnken into ;icconnt by splitting the coupled problem of the
Navier-Stokes-equations and the continuity equation and obtaining definite problems for the
velocities as well as for the pressure, independently.
The solution at each time step A / is obtained through three substeps:
AU] = U' - £/,' =
withdp' p'-Pr
Pr Pr(26)
K= -dU. 1 d
dXj r'" dXjrmv..dU,
dx1 d
r dxi ) (27)
In the first step starting at time / the linearized convection-diffusion equation for an intermediate
velocity U* is solved. The right hand side contains the gravity force and an "old" pressure
approximation.
Aor Ul or A u}
dx: dx(28)
An update equation for the pressure, a prcssurc-Poisson equation, is solved with the divergence
of the intermediate velocity U* and the velocity Ul of the previous time / on the right hand side.16
Step 3:
In step 3 the new pressure/? (/1 A t) and the new "discretely divergence-free" velocity Ut(t\A t)
will be updated.
»(/ + At) = p{t)+bp
1 / ' ' (29),(30)
AUt= Ut(t+At)- U(t)AU*At P
dx
The above-mentioned steps are repeated till a steady-state condition is reached. With the initial
pressure p = 0 for each time step the projection scheme is analogous to the scheme proposed by
Chorin(1968).
4.6 Equation Solution Technique
The numerical scheme for diseretizing the mathematical model requires the solution of systems
of linear equations to obtain the nodal solution. The whole equation system is coupled, i.e. the
dominant variable of each equation occurs in some of the other equations. There are two
approaches to solve such coupled systems: the simultaneous and the sequential approach.
In this work the whole equation system is decoupled through the use of an iterative scheme and
linearisation of the system. Owing to the nonlinearity of these equations, an iterative process is
required. The complete numerical solution process is split into two parts: the inner and the outer
iterations. At each inner iteration the source terms and the coefficients that depend on the other
variables are kept fixed. At the outer iterations the coefficient matrices and the source vector must
be updated and the process repeated to obtain a solution that satisfies all of the equations. The
right number of inner iterations per outer iteration has to be chosen carefully to optimize the
solution process.
Nonstationary iteration methods arc used to solve the system of equations (Barett et al. 1994;
Kelly, 1995). In contrast to the stationary methods such as, the successive overrelaxation method,
the computations involve information that changes at each iteration. The Conjugate Gradient
(CG) method, is used to solve the symmetric positive definite system, i.e. the Pressure-Poisson
equation. The CG proceeds by generating successive approximations to the solution. Two
coupled recurrences are used, one that updates residuals using a search direction vector, and one
that updates the search direction with a newly computed residual.17
The Generalized Minimal Residual (GMRES) method is employed to solve the resulting non-
symmetric nonlinear system of the discrete momentum and scalar equations (Saad et al. 1986).
The GMRES method generates a sequence of orthogonal vectors, wliich are the residuals of the
iterates. But in the absence of symmetry the previously computed vectors in the orthogonal
sequence have to be retained. To avoid large storage requirement and work per iteration the
restarted version of GMRES is adopted. The right decision of when to restart is one of the critical
components for successful application of this method.
CG and GMRKS are attractive as they provide a reference for checking the convergence of the
inner iterations. At the same time they provide a measure of the convergence of the outer
iterations.18
5 EXAMPLE USE OF NUMERICAL MODEL AND EXPERIMENT
The performance of the model is analysed with tests done by de Maas et al. (1998) on SSTs of
the Darvill wastewater treatment plant (Pietermarit/.burg, South Africa), as well as with stress
tests done by Watts et al. (1996) on one of the four SSTs at the Kanapaha Water Reclamation
Facility (Florida,USA).
To take turbulence effects into account two different models were used. A constant turbulent
viscosity was chosen for the Darvill Old and New Tank. This assumption is appropriate due to
the fact that the turbulent inlet section of both tanks are small compared with the main section of
the tank. This is not the case for the Watts Tank. The special construction of this SST makes it
impossible to use a constant turbulent viscosity. The location of the skirt baffle divides the Watts
Tank into two main sections of similar size: an inlet section of high turbulence, which acts as a
mixing zone and the settling section of low turbulence, where settling takes place. Herewith the
turbulence of the inlet section and its influence on the second section cannot be neglected. The
use of the k-c model was made for the simulation of the Watts Tank to take the different
turbulence regions and their interaction into account. For the modelling of the diffusion coefficient
in the concentration equation different modifications have been made. Best results could be
reached by using Schmidt numbers higher than 1. Additional information is required in order to
determine the extent to which the concentration distribution is affected by diffusion.
Furthermore the described mathematical model does not consider sludge compaction due to the
hydrostatic pressure on the bottom of the tank. Those stress tests with very extreme loading
conditions cannot verify the numerical model.
5.1 Geometry and Boundary Conditions for 2D-ModeI
The geometry and the boundaries of the simplified circular Darvill Old and New Tank as well as
for the Watts Tank are shown in Fig 5.
Both Darvill tanks have a diameter of 35 m. The side water depth of the Old Tank is 2.5 m and
4.1 m for the New Tank. The Old Tank has a (lat floor and six suction lifts for the settled sludge.
The New Tank has a 10 % sloping floor and the sludge is scraped to the central hopper. A 6.0 in
diameter skirt baffle is acting as flocculator at the centre well to 1.8 m water depth and 2.7 m for
the New Tank, respectively. A peripheral Stamford baffle at the effluent outlet extends 1.2 m
respectively 1.7 m from the side wall.
The circular Watts lank has a diameter of 29 m. a side water depth of 3.66 m and a centre feed,
peripheral and radial effluent overflow and rotating multiple suction pipe sludge collection system
(Fig 5).Darvill Old Tank19
Inlet Skirt Baffle Effluent Outlet
IStamford Baffle
6 Suction Lifts
0.502.900.20TJn cr
* *12.701.2
17.5094-
a
Inlet Skirt Baffle
8
Sludge OutletDarvill New Tank
Sloped Bottom10%Fffluent Outlet
Stamford Baffle i
0.502.900.2012.10 1.8
17.50
Inlet
at"
1.50Watts Tank
Start Baffle
Sloped Bottom 6.5%
6.204 Suction Lifts for die Sludge
0.20Effluent Outlet
o
8CO
6.60
14.50
Fig 5: Geometry and boundaries for Darvill Old and New SST, as well as for the
Watts SST20
To complete the mathematical description for the model boundary conditions (BC) on all
unknown problem variables have to be set. There are two prevalent boundary conditions:
- Essential (Dirichlet) BCs, where the value of the variable is prescribed.
- Natural (Neumann) BCs, where the first derivative is prescribed.
In the following the boundary conditions for the dependent variables are explained. In Fig 5 the
boundaries of the simplified circular tank of the Darvill Old and New Tank, as well as one of the
Watts SSTs are shown. There are six boundaries that have to be defined: inflow, effluent outlet,
the outlet for the thickened sludge, the water surface, the bottom of the tank and the rigid walls.
All loading conditions, parameters and results are listed in Table 1 at the end of Section 5.1.
Inlet Boundary
In the model the inlet condition is idealized. The values of the variables (/, \\ k, rand C arc
assumed to be uniformly distributed at the inflow boundary. A uniform horizontal inflow is
imposed, i.e. the radial velocity U= Un and the vertical velocity V= 0 and the inlet concentration
C = C,,. The turbulent kinetic energy k is related to the inlet kinetic energy by k = Ki/J , where
K is 0.2. The inlet dissipation rate was approximated assuming equilibrium of turbulence
production and dissipation by
L
where /,„ = C (0.5 //o) the mixing length. Cfl ~- 0.09 and II0 is the water depth of the settling
tank inlet (Celik <•/<//.. 1985).
Effluent Outlet Boundary
The natural boundary conditions, which prescribe the gradients, are zero at the boundary of the
effluent outlet. In order to have a well-posed problem the reference pressure is set to zero at the
effluent outlet. The baffles and the effluent weir are treated as a reflecting boundary, where the
natural boundary conditions of the sludiie concentration C are zero.g
Removal Boundary
The velocity normal to the bottom is equal to the return activated flow divided by the bottom area
affected. In practice the sludge in the Darvill Old Tank and Watts Tank is removed by rotating
multiple suction pipe sludge collection system, which cannot be simulated with a 2D-model. The
scraper of the Darvill New Tank, which exerts a shear force, is not included in the model. The
turbulent kinetic energy k and its dissipation fare treated like for the outflow boundary, their
natural boundary conditions are set to zero.21
Bottom and Water Surface Boundary for the Sludge Concentration
At the bottom of the tank and at the water surface additional natural boundary conditions are
necessary. For the prediction of the solid phase the settling velocity is added to the vertical
velocity. As a result there arc vertical velocities at the bottom of the tank and at the water surface.
This corresponds to convective mass flux over the boundary of the domain. At the water surface
there is a mass flux in the tank and at the bottom a mass flux out of the tank. In order to avoid this
mass flux, an additional boundary condition has to be set. With that the sum of the convective and
the mass transport due to diffusion must be zero. Taking the surface integral or line integral, the
concentration gradient times the diffusion coefficient must be equal the settling velocity times the
concentration as proposed by Imam el at. (1983):
- -V C
v s ^ at the water surface (32)
= V C
y s ^ at the bottom of the tank (33)
Here nx is the unit outward normal at the bottom and at the surface of the tank.
Free Surface Boundary
At the water surface, the rigid-lid approximation is made that assumes that there is negligible
change in water surface elevation over the tank. The symmetry condition is applied that includes
zero gradients and fluxes perpendicular to the boundary. The vertical velocity component is V— 0
and the horizontal component U is assuming full slip, i.e. no shear stress at the surface. The
turbulent kinetic energy k can be set to zero and for its dissipation ^thc following empirical
boundary condition (Cclik and Rodi, 1988) is used
(34)
Here H is the depth of the tank.
Solid and Tank Bottom Boundaries
At the rigid walls, the velocities are zero due to the no-slip condition and the log-law of the wall
is used. The near-wall velocities are determined from a local application of the log-law, and the
near-wall k and ^rarc derived in terms of wall shear stresses using the near-wall assumption that
production equals dissipation. (Hill and Basharone, 1997).22
Parameter
SST
Loading Conditions
Sludge Settleability
Retention Time (h)
Observed Rest Result
Test Result (ESS2 >50mg/C)Surface Area (nr)
Influent Flow (m3/h)
Recycle Flow (mVh)
Recycle Ratio
Feed Concentration (g/f)
I'o (m/h)
K (or n)
DSVI1 (mf/g)
Experiment
SettlerCAI) (Zhou, 1998)
(see Part 1 of this report)Darvill
OldTank
Test 3
962
948
750
0.79
3.600
8.00
0.430
62
1.3
Safe
SafeDarvill
OldTank
Test 3 +
10%
962
1074
750
0.7
3.600
8.00
0.430
62
1.4
Not Tested
FailDarvill
NcwTank
Test 3 +
10%
962
1074
750
0.7
3.600
8.00
0.430
62
2.5
Not Tested
SafeWatts
Test 1
659
475.1
397.5
0.84
4.053
7.62
0.3055
94
2.1
Safe
SafeWatts
Test 4
659
788.9
397.5
0.51
4.130
7.62
0.3055
94
2.1
Safe
SafeWatts
Test 12
659
1095.8
397.5
0.36
3.444
7.62
0.3055
94
1.8
Fail
Fail
Table 1: Summary of the loading conditions used for the simulation of the Darvill Old and New Tank, as well as for the Walls Tank
Diluted Sludge Volume Index
"Effluent Suspended Solids23
5.2 Simulating the Dnrvill Old and New SSTs
The loading condition of Test 3 (see Part 1 of this report) is chosen such that both the Old and
the New Tank are safe (Table 2). At a 10 % higher influent flow the sludge blanket in the Old
Tank already reaches the effluent outlet while the New Tank is still in a stable and safe condition.
Parameter
SST
Loading Conditions
Sludge Settleability
Retention Time (h)
Time Step A t (s)
Turbulent Constant
Viscosity v, (nr/s)
Schmidt Number a,Surface Area (nr)
Influent Flow (mVh)
Recycle Flow (mVh)
Recycle Ratio
Feed Concentration (g/C)
V* (m/h)
K (or n)
DSYI(mf/g)Oarvill
Old Tank
Test 3
962
948
750
0,79
3.600
8.00
0.430
62
1.3
5.0
0 0005
5.0Darvill
Old Tank
Test 3 +
10%
962
1074
750
0.7
3.600
8.00
0,430
62
1,4
5.0
0.0005
5.0Darvill
New Tank
Test 3 +
10%
962
1074
750
0.7
3.600
S.00
0,430
62
2,5
5.0
0.0005
5 0
Table 2: Darvill Old and New Tank: Loading conditions and model parameter
A mesh of 85 elements in the horizontal direction and 25 elements in the vertical direction for
the Old Tank, and 58 elements for the New Tank in the vertical direction, is chosen (Fig 6). In
Fig 7 the flow pattern of the neutral density case is shown for both tanks. These are the initial
values for the computation of the Darvill SSTs.s.•~\
K)tit
U,
Ttt
r r t
fti
tit.I
I
Ull!
I I I I I
HIM
lUUUIIini i
v-.\\\\\\UMt! ,s:
•8
I26
5.2.1 Temporal and Steady State Result of Dan ill Old SST
The temporal behaviour of the Old Tank is illustrated in Fig 8 and 9. The incoming jet from the
inlet chamber moves along the bottom of the tank because of its higher density than the
surrounding fluid. Mass conservation and viscous forces influences the flow pattern in the settling
section, resulting in a complete flow circulation with a strong bottom forward current and a
reverse current at the water surface.
100 sec
300 sec
400 sec
531
500 sec
10 min
8: Dan-ill Old Tank Test3: After 100 sec to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/Q27
After 15 min the sludge current reaches the end ofthe tank, the region ofthe upward current to
the effluent outlet. The sludge level is continuously rising, as is the sludge concentration. The jet
coming from the inlet chamber with a smaller density is continuously lifted due to the increasing
sludge concentration in the main section ofthe tank.
g20 min
tsmmm^^
60 min
•*.6 hours
/g 9: DarviU Old Tank Test 3: After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/H28
The steady state case illustrated in Fig 10 is reached when potential and kinetic energy have
reached their balance. The loading conditions of Test 3 do not cause failure of the Old Tank. The
sludge blanket reaches equilibrium and does not rise to the outlet for the clarified water. Fig 11
shows the steady state result with a 10% higher influent flow. I lere the sludge blanket reaches the
effluent outlet and the current coming from the inlet chamber is raised to the water surface.
Fig 10: Darvill Old Tank Test 3: Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in
Fig 11: Darvill Old Tank Test 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in gft29
5-2.2 Temporal and Steady State Result of DarviU New SST
In Fig 12, 13 and 14 the computational results are shown for the New Tank under the 10 %
higher influent flow than Test 3 (see Table 2).
100 sec
400 sec
^!i:!l iiil!^1^^^ lilliii!:!
Fig 12: DarviU New Tank Test .? with a 10% higher influent flow
After 100 sec to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/H30
15 min
40 min
&4\?lz. -. -•'"••-•-"--• -
60 min
"•=;=i=iHHiI!i|i!! iMJ! !!f!;iil!!ii{f! Fp
6 hours
Fig 13: Darvill \'ew Tank Tesi 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/H
The incoming lluid mixture cascades down, in the process drawing in fluid from the settling
section. Due to its higher density in connection with the height of 5.8 m the inllow contains a high
potential energy that is changed into kinetic energy at the bottom. No particular construction
guides the inflow into the settling seetion whirling up the hopper region as a result.31
The sludge level rises continuously and the sludge current moves along the bottom to the end of
the tank, also causing a complete flow circulation. The interaction between potential and kinetic
energy results in waves that are clearly seen just behind the inlet chamber, first due to the impact
with the bottom of the tank and then again due to the impact with the outside wall after 35 min
(Fig 13).
&J&
^^m$^mm^m
Fig 14: DarviJI New Tank Test 3 with a 10% higher influent flow:
Steady state case
Predicted flow patten and sludge distribution C in glQ.
The New Tank exhibits a safe behaviour, which is shown in Fig 14. This can be ascribed to the
fact that this SST has a much bigger storage zone than the Old Tank, which leads to stable and
constant behaviour over a wide range of loading conditions (see Part 1 of this report).32
5.3 Simulating the Watts SSTs
5.3.1 Watts Test 1
The simulation of Watts Test 1 pointed out that an adjustment of some 'free' parameters in the
transport and sedimentation sub-model are required. Watts Test 1 is the safest stress test. Fig 15
shows the flow pattern and the sludge distribution by using a Schmidt number <ys of 1. For this
case the turbulent difliisivity is equivalent to the predicted turbulent viscosity field in Fig 15.
fig 15: Walts Tank Test 1: Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution
C in g/f, using a Schmidt number a; of 1.0, as well as the
predicted turbulent viscosity field v, in m2/s33
The simulation predicted failure for Test 1, which contradicts the observed test results. It prompts
the question as to what extent the sludge particles are influenced by diffusion. Only the very small
sludge particles will be influenced by turbulent diffusion. They can be related to the poorly settling
particles and non-settleable particles, respectively.
The flux caused by turbulent diffusion is damped in the higher concentration environment, i.e. at
the bottom of the tank, due to compaction and hindered movement of the sludge particles. On the
other hand the viscosity of the fluid mixture increases with increasing sludge concentration, i.e.
it cannot be assumed that the eddy diflusivity that governs the solid mixing in the tank is
proportional to the viscosity of the fluid mixture, especially not in the high concentration range.
Inclusion of the buoyancy correction term in the equation for the turbulent kinetic energy k leads
to unsatisfactory results, in that the turbulence is reduced to zero. Additionally, stability problems
result from negative values of the kinetic energy k.
Due to the lack of knowledge about the sludge behaviour in turbulent zones and in the high
concentration environments, it became necessary to modify the 'turbulent diffusion' parameter.
Those simulation results, which showed good agreement between the model output of
SettlerCAD (Zhou et a/., 1998) and the measurements, were used to calibrate the solid
distribution. The modification was made in such a way that the diffusion coefficient decreased
with increasing concentration, i.e. for the Schmidt number o;the local concentration was chosen.
In I;ig 16 the steady state computational result of the Watts Tank for Stress Test 1 is used to
demonstrate the calibration of the Schmidt number <rs. The Watts Tank is safe and the sludge
blanket does not reach the outlet of the effluent. The different turbulence in the two sections is
clearly seen. But this steady state does not yield a mass balance. The required concentration at
the first "suction pipe" cannot be reached. With an average concentration of 4.7 g/f the first
suction pipe is drawing off parts from the incoming flow, which is also clearly seen in Fig 16
marked by the circle. This can be ascribed to the two facts: firstly, the 2D model cannot simulate
a rotating suction lift, which the fluid will continuously be taken away at this point. In practice the
suction lift has a revolution speed of one or two hours, for which the sludge has enough time to
accumulate to the required recycle concentration. Secondly, the inflow is too small to achieve
sufficient mixing and to create a thickening zone in this region below the inlet.34
Fig 16: Watts Tank Test 1: Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution
(' in £//! using the modified Schmidt number <T; , as well as the
predicted turbulent viscosity field v, in m2ls35
5.3.2 Watts Test 12
The mesh used has 65 elements in the horizontal direction and 30 elements in the vertical direction
(Fig 17). The predicted flow pattern and the turbulent viscosity field v, of the neutral density case
are shown in Fig 17 and Fig 18, respectively. These are the initial values for the simulation
(Table 3).
Parameter
SST
Loading Conditions
Sludge Settle-ability
Retention Time (h)
Time Step A t (s)
Turbulent Viscosity vt (nr/s)
Schmidt Number asSurface Area (m2)
Influent Flow (m3/h)
Recycle Flow (m/Vh)
Recycle Ratio
Feed Concentration
(g/f)
K <m/h)
K (resp. 77)
DSVI fmf/g)
C < 8 g/C
1 g/f < C < 8 g/f
8 g/C < CWatts
Test 1
659
475.1
397.5
0.84
4.053
7.62
0.3055
94
2.1
10
k-c model
1.0
1.5 xC
2.0 xCWatts
Test 4
659
788.9
397.5
0.51
4.130
7.62
0.3055
94
2.1
10
k-c mode!
1.0
1.5 xC
2.0 xCWatts
Test 12
659
1095.8
Jy7.5
0.36
3.444
7.62
0.3055
94
1.8
10
k-c model
1.0
1.5 xC
2.0 xC
Table 3: Watts Tank: Loading conditions and model parameter--
1
I
\1
1
_ _L
t
+ J_JT
+-- -J -Tf"Hi 11
1
1Ml
11 1
i_ l
UT T1
£—•• ^'TT
~*~ T 1
JT "1
1 ' 1I __ __L I J
Yv 1
11
I111
1 1 Mil
±11111lit tiilL
iL J
1 |
-ill 4-T| 1
-tit" 111Ii
IMillkill 1\\%\V \ \ 1 t \ i
\\W\\\U 1 1•9
1at
i
>5
I37
lug 18: Watts Tank Test 12: Neutral density case
Predicted turbulent viscosity field v, in m2/s
The temporal behaviour before reaching the steady state case is illustrated in Fig 19 and 20.
Already after 100 sec the "density waterfall', which is clearly seen, causes a circulation opposite
to the neutral density case, additionally drawing fluid from the settling section into the inlet
section.
The flow pattern and sludge distribution make it clear that the first section acts as a mixing zone,
absorbing kinetic energy caused by the density waterfall and guiding the inlet flow into the second
section in which the actual sedimentation takes place.
A stable stratification develops with continuously rising sludge level in the second section. In both
sections complete circulations of different intensity arise, this is also reflected in the different
turbulence sizes (Fig 21).
The steady slate case in which potential and kinetic energy have reached equilibrium is shown in
Fig 21. Stress Test 12 causes failure of the Watts Tank. The sludge blanket reaches the outlet for
the clarified water. The height of the thickening zone allows only a small gap below the skirt
baffles for the inflow to reach the settling section. The incoming jet is raised due to the higher
sludge concentration in the settling section.38
mlilmm-I100 sec
i
I200 sec
300 sec
400 sec
500 sec
• v'-v ''ir* V'-^E^.r^*:"''**:::':''"'*!''
10 min
v(T'&'/''\ • • -~I*J2XJJ>?S*^-'~' - ' ' - - - --
Fig 19: Watts Tank Test 12: After 100 see to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/f39
I15 min
20 min
30 min
hour
6 hours
T
Test 12: After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/{40
Fig 21: Watts Tank Test 12: Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/f, as well as
the predicted turbulent viscosity field vt in m2ls
The eomputational result of Test 4 is shown in Fig 22. With 97.5 % this steady state does not
yield a mass balance, but the sludge blanket reaches equilibrium and does not rise to the effluent
outlet.41
Fig 22: Watts Tank Test 4: Steady state case
Predicted Jlow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/C, as well as
the predicted turbulent viscosity field v, in m2/s42
6 CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
The main goal of this part of the project has been to compile a working finite element package for
2D hydrodynamic modelling of SSTs that is capable of simulating the benchmark results available
in the literature. This "real life" application requires the design of "high-performance" solution
tools, which have to fit together perfectly.
The finite clement code produces reasonable results and is in good agreement with the benchmark
results, as well as with the results obtained using SettlerCAD (Table 4). Good results could also
be obtained by using a constant turbulent viscosity, provided that the construction of the tank
allows it, i.e. an inlet region that is small compared to the main section of the tank. The use of the
SUPG approach docs not lead to an improvement, except for the neutral density case. On the
other hand with SUPG the results and the convergence deteriorate with the presence of the
gravity term.
The assumption that the eddy difflisivity, which governs the solids mixing in the tank, is
proportional to the eddy viscosity, cannot be confirmed. Best computational results could be
found by using a constant and small diffusion coefficient, i.e. the sludge is less influenced by
diffusion than assumed by using the Reynolds analogy. Due to the uncertainty about the diffusion
parameters and the sludge behaviour, especially in the high concentration environment, further
investigation is needed to obtain reliable determination of the parameters describing the interaction
between flow and settling of activated sludge.
Although the variation of the results is less an outcome of uncertainties within the numerical
modelling procedure, they nevertheless demonstrate that the two phases, pure water and activated
sludge, should be modelled separately by using a two-phase model in which each phase is
calculated by a separate momentum equation. This highly nonlinear model would lead to a
considerable number of unknowns and would require increased computation time.
The computation time and with it the computational efficiency can be improved with the use of
numerical techniques (Turek, 1998), such as preconditioning, a more robust iterative treatment,
the implementation of a multigrid technique or the choice of a more robust, accurate and efficient
element pair. Furthermore, because of the progressive development of the program, it is
somewhat inefficient in computer time, because numerous operations are repeated several times,
instead of having their results stored once in the computer memory. To save on memory the
matrix should be stored in a special way, for example using compressed sparse row storage. More
efficient streamlining ofthe calculation procedure and routines can also reduce computation time.
Finally, before the program can be released for general use, it is necessary to build up a user-
friendly pre- and postprocessing procedure.43
Parameter
Loading Conditions
Sludge Scttleability
Retention Time (h)
Effluent SS1 (mg/C)
Recycle Concentration (g/t)
Mass Balance (%)
Observed Test Result
Test Result (ESS2 >50mg/f)
Test Result (ESS > 50mg/f)Influent Flow (m3/h)
Recycle Flow (nrVh)
Recycle Ratio
Feed Concentration(g/C)
DSVI (mf/g)
Experiment
SettlerCAD (see Part 1)
FEM - ProgramDarvill
OklTank
Test3
948
750
0.79
3.600
62
1.3
0.0
8.2
101
Safe
Safe
SafeDan-ill
OldTank
Test 3 +
10%
1074
750
0.7
3.600
62
1.4
44
8.8
101.5
Not Tested
Faii
SafeDarvill
NewTank
Test 3 +
10%
1074
750
0.7
3.600
62
2.5
0.0
8.76
100
Not Tested
Safe
SafeWatts
Testl
475.1
397.5
0.84
4.053
94
2.1
0.0
8.2
92.7
Safe
Safe
SafeWatts
Test 4
788.9
397.5
0.51
4.130
94
1.8
20
11.9
97.5
Safe
Safe
SafeWatts
Test 12
1095.8
397.5
0.36
3.444
94
1.8
253
11.6
100
Fail
Fail
Fail
Table 4: Summary and comparison of computational and benchmark results
Suspended Solids concentration
"Effluent Suspended Solids44
REFERENCES
de [ Iaas D. W. (1998) The use of simultaneous chemical precipitation in modified activated sludge
systems exhibiting enhanced biological phosphate removal. PhD thesis, University of Cape
Town, Rondcbosch, Cape, 7701, RSA. (Chapter 6 - Fullscale plant trial).
Barett R., Berry M., Chan T.F., Demmel J., Donato J.M., Dongarra J., Eijkhout V., Pozo R.,
Rominc C. and Van der Vorst H. (1994) Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems:
Building Blocks for Iterative Methods. SI AM
Brooks A.N. and Hughes T.J.R. (1982) Streamline Upwind / Petrov - Galerkin Formulations for
Convection Dominated Flows with Particular Emphasis on the Incompressible
Navier-Stokes Equations. Camp. Math. Appl. Mech. Eng., 32, 199-259.
Cclik I., Rodi W. and Stamou A. (1985) Prediction of IIydrodynamic Characteristics of
Rectangular Settling Tanks. Proc. Int. Symp. Refined Flow Modelling and Turbulence
Measurements, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
Celik I. and Rodi W. (1988) Modelling suspended sediment transport in nonequilibrium situations.
./ Hydraulics Engrg, ASCE, 114(10),l 157-1188.
Chorin A.J. (1968) Numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. Math. Comp., 22,
745-762.
DeVantier B.A. and Earock B.E. (1986) Modelling a rccirculation density-driven turbulent flow.
Int. J. for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 6(4), 241-253.
Ekama G.A., Barnard J.L., Gunthcrt F.W., Krebs P., McCorquodale J.A., Parker D.S. and
Wahlbcrg R.J., (1997) Secondary Settling Tanks: Theory, Modelling, Design and
Operation. IAWQ STR No 6, International Association on Water Quality, London.
Gidaspow D. (1994) Multiphase Flow and Fluidization. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego.
Hill D.E. and Baskharone E.A. (1997) Development of a multiblock pressure-based algorithm
using mixed interpolation for turbulent flows. Int. ./. Num. Meth. Fluids, 25, 615-63 1.
Imam E. McCorquodale J.A. and Bcwtra J.K. (1983) Numerical modelling of sedimentation
tanks../. Hydraulics Engrg., ASCE, 109(12), 1740-1754.
Kelly C.'I". (1995) Iterative methods for linear and nonlinear equations. SIAM Frontiers in
Applied Mathematics.
Krebs P. (1989) Modcllierung von Stromungcn in rechtcckigen Nachklarbccken. Gas-
Wasser-Abwasser/Abwasser 69 (11), 71 8-728.
Lakehal D., Krebs P., Krijgsman .1. and Rodi W. (1999). Computing shear flow and sludge
blanket in secondary elarifiers. J. Hydraulic Engrg., ASCE, 125(3), 253-262.
McCorquodale J.A. and Zhou S. (1993). Effects of hydraulics and solids loading on clarifier
performance../. Hydraulic Res., 31(4), 461-478.
Reddy, B.D. (1998) Introductory Functional Analysis with Applications to Boundary Value
Problems and Finite Elements. Texts in Applied Mathematics 27, Springer Vcrlag.45
Rodi W. (1980) Turbulence models and their application in hydraulics; a state-of-the-art
review. Int. Association for Hydraulic Research, IAHR, Delft, The Netherlands.
Saad Y. and Schultz M.H. (1986) GMRES: A generalized minimal residual method for solving
nonsymmetric linear systems. SIAMJ. Sci. Statist. Compute 7 , 856-869.
Takacs I., Patry G.G. and Nolasco D. (1991) A dynamic model of the clarification - thickening
process. Wat. flew., 25 (10), 1263-1271.
TaylorC. and HughesT.G (1981) Finite Element Programming of the Navier-Stokes Equations.
Pincridge Press Swansea, U.K.
Turek S. (1998) Efficient solvers for incompressible flow problems: An algorithmic approach
in view of computational aspects. Springer Verlag
Van Kan J. (1986) A second-order accurate pressure-correction scheme for viscous
incompressible flow. SIAMJ. Sci. Slat. Comp.. 7, 870-891.
Watts R.W., Svoronos S.A. and Koopman B. (1996) One dimensional modelling of secondary
clarifiers using a concentration feed velocity dependent dispersion coellicient. Water
Research, 30(9), 2112-2124.
Zhou S.. Pfcil R., Strand I-., Ji 7. and Vitasovic C. (1998) SettlcrCAD (formerly Clarity) Release
1.1 - A 2D hydrodynamic model for secondary clarifiers. Reid Crowther Consulting,
Seattle. WA., USA.
Zicnkiewicz O.C. and Taylor R.L. (2000) The Finite Element Method. Volume 3, Fluid
Dynamics, Butterworth-I leincmannA3.1
APPENDIX 3
LIST OF SYMBOLS FOR PART 2
a, p, 0\ 0 Parameters used in temporal discretization [-]
8 Kronecker delta [-]
F Boundary of the spatial computation domain Q [m]
y Streamline upwind parameter [-]
A p Density difTcrence between mixture and pure water " [mVkgJ
A t Change in time [s]
E Turbulent dissipation rate [mVs3]
eo Inlet turbulent dissipation rate [nr/s3]
v Kinematic viscosity jm7s]
vsr Eddy difTusivity of suspended solids in the r (orx) direction (= vt I <jyr) [nr/s]
v liddy diffusivity of suspended solids in the y direction (= vt I o;v.) [nr/s]
vt liddy viscosity [mVsj
p Fluid density [mVkg]
po Density of inflow [m3/kg]
ps Density of dry solids [mVkg]
pr Reference density - density of pure water [nrVkg]
<jk, (Tr Prandtl numbers for k and ^constants [-]
<7sr, asv Schmidt numbers in /• (x) and y direction respectively [-]
Q Spatial computation domain [nr]
C Suspended solids concentration [kg/nr1]
Co Inlet suspended solids concentration [kg/m!]
C/J , C,, C2 Constants used in k-c model [-]
g Acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s2) [m/s2]
H Total water depth in SST [m]
Ho Depth of the influent stream opening [m]
h Characteristic clement length scale of the clement fm]
k Turbulent kinetic energy [nr/s2]
lm Mixing length to calculate the inlet turbulence dissipation rate [m]
A', A.'; Constants in settleability equation by Tacacs [-]
n Constant in settleability equation by Tacacs ( = K) [-]
TV Basis function [-]
nt Outward unit normal vector [-]
p General pressure less the hydrostatic pressure [Pa]Pe
Re
t
U
uo
v;V
wX
x,
yPeclct number
Reynolds number
Time
Mean horizontal velocity in r (circular tank) and
x (rectangular tank) directions
Mean horizontal inlet velocity to the tank
Velocity tensor
Intermediate velocity tensor
Mean vertical velocity in the y direction
Settling velocity of sludge particles
Weighting (unction
Horizontal coordinate
Coordinate tensor
Vertical coordinate
Superscripts and subscripts
o Initial conditions
/", j Indices used in tensor notationA3.2
H
H
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m]
H
[m]
[ml
[m]A3.3
LIST OF FIGURES FOR PART 2
CHAPTER 2 SECONDARY SETTLING TANKS
Fig 1 Secondary Settling Tank 3
Fig 2 Modelling of fluid-solid flow in SSTs 4
CHAPTER 3 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS
Fig 3 Modified settling function of Takacs 7
Fig 4 Density state equation 8
CHAPTER 5 EXAMPLE USE OF NUMERICAL MODEL AND EXPERIMENT
Fig 5 Geometry and boundaries for Darvill Old and New SST,
as well as for the Watts SST
Simulating of the Darvill Old and New Tank
19
Mesh of Darvill Old Tank (85 x 25 ) and New Tank ( 85 x 58) 24
Darvill Old and New Tank Neural density case: Initial conditions 25
Darvill Old Tank Test 3: After 100 sec to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/f 26
Darvill Old lank Test 3: After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/P 27
Darvill Old Tank Test 3: Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/C 28
Darvill Old Tank Test 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/C 28
Fig 12 Darvill New Tank Test 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
After 100 sec to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/C 29
Fig 13 Darvill New Tank Test 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/P 30Section 5.2
Fig
Fig
Fig
Fig
Fig
Fig6
7
8
9
10
11A3.4
Fig 14 Darvill New Tank Test 3 with a 10 % higher influent flow:
Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/tf 31
Section 5.3 Simulating of the Watts Tank
Fig 15 Watts Tank Testl: Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/f,
using a Schmidt number tjs of 1.0,
as well as the predicted turbulent viscosity field vx in m2/s 32
Fig 16 Watts Tank Tcstl: Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/H,
using the modified Schmidt number a;,
as well as the predicted turbulent viscosity field vt in mVs 34
Fig 17 Watts Tank Test 12: Neutral density case
Mesh of 65 x 30 elements and predicted flow pattern 36
Fig 18 Watts Tank Test 12: Neutral density case
Predicted turbulent viscosity field vt in nr/s 37
Fig 19 Watts Tank Test 12: After 100 sec to after 10 min
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/{ 38
Fig 20 Watts Tank Test 12: After 15 min to after 6 hours
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/C 39
Fig 21 Watts Tank Test 12: Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/£,
as well as the predicted turbulent viscosity field vt in nr/s 40
Fig 22 Watts Tank Test 4: Steady state case
Predicted flow pattern and sludge distribution C in g/f,
as well as the predicted turbulent viscosity field v; in nr/s 41
LIST OF TABLES FOR PART 2
CHAPTER 5 EXAMPLE USE OF NUMERICAL MODEL AND EXPERIMENT
Table 1 Summary of the loading conditions used for the simulation of the Darvill Old
and New Tank, as well as for the Watts Tank 22
Table 2 Darvill Old and New Tank: Loading conditions and model parameter 23
Table 3 Watts Tank: Loading conditions and model parameter 35
Table 4 Summary and comparison of computational and benchmark results 43Water Research Commission
PO Box 824. Pretoria, 0001, South Africa
Tel: +27 12 330 0340, Fax: +27 12 331 2565
Web: http://www.wrc.org.za