Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ictx20
Download by:  [216.133.78.226] Date:  14 July 2016, At: 06:08
Clinical Toxicology
ISSN: 1556-3650 (Print) 1556-9519 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www .tandfonline.com/loi/ictx20
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor poisoning:
An evidence-based consensus guideline for out-of-
hospital management
Lewis S. Nelson M.D., Andrew R. Erdman M.D., Lisa L. Booze Pharm.D., Dan iel
J. Cobaugh Pharm.D., Peter A. Chyka Pharm.D., Alan D. Woolf M.P.H. M.D.,
Elizabeth J. Scharman Pharm.D., Paul M. Wax M.D., Anthony S. Manoguerra
Pharm.D., Gwenn Christianson M.S.N., E. Martin Caravati M.P.H. M.D. &
William G. Troutman Pharm.D.
To cite this article:  Lewis S. Nelson M.D., Andrew R. Erdman M.D., Lisa L. Booze Pharm.D.,
Daniel J. Cobaugh Pharm.D., Peter A. Chyka Pharm.D., Alan D. Woolf M.P.H. M.D., Elizabeth J.
Scharman Pharm.D., Paul M. Wax M.D., Anthony S. Manoguerra Pharm.D., Gwenn Christianson
M.S.N., E. Martin Caravati M.P.H. M.D. & William G. Troutman Pharm.D. (2007) Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor poisoning: An evidence-based consensus guideline for ou t-of-
hospital management, Clinical Toxicology, 45:4, 315-332, DOI: 10.1080/155636 50701285289
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15563650701285289
Published online: 07 Oct 2008.
 Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1452
 View related articles 
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Clinical Toxicology  (2007) 45, 315–332 
Copyright © American Association of Poison Control Centers
ISSN: 1556-3650 print / 1556-9519 online
DOI: 10.1080/15563650701285289
LCLTPRACTICE GUIDELINE
Selective serotonin reuptake in hibitor poisoning: an evidence-
based consensus guideline for out-of-hospital management*
Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoningLEWIS S. NELSON, M.D., ANDR EW R. ERDMAN, M.D., LISA L. BOOZE, PHARM.D., DANIEL J. COBAUGH, PHARM.D., 
PETER A. CHYKA, PHARM.D., ALAN D. WOOLF, M. D., M.P.H., ELIZABETH J.  SCHARMAN, PHARM.D., 
PAUL M. WAX, M.D., ANTHONY S. MANOGUERRA, PHARM.D., GW ENN CHRISTIANSON, M.S.N., 
E. MARTIN CARAVATI, M.D., M.P.H., and WILLIAM G. TR OUTMAN, PHARM.D.
American Association of Poison Control Centers, Washington, District of Columbia, USA
A review of US poison center data for 2004 showed over 48,000 exposures to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). A g uideline
that determines the conditions for emergency department referral and prehospital care could potentially optimize patient outcome, avoid
unnecessary emergency department visits, reduce health care cost s, and reduce life disruption for patients and caregivers. An e vidence-
based expert consensus process was used to create the guideline. Relevant articles were abstracted by a trained physician resea rcher. The
first draft of the guideline was created by the lead author. Th e entire panel discussed and refined the guideline before distri bution to
secondary reviewers for comment. The panel then made changes based on the secondary review comments.
The objective of this guideline is to assist poison center pers onnel in the appropriate out-of-hospital triage and initial mana gement of
patients with a suspected ingestion of an SSRI by 1) describing th e process by which an ingestion of an SSRI might be managed, 2)
identifying the key decision elements in managing cases of SSRI ingestion, 3) providing clear and practical recommendations that reflect
the current state of knowledge, and 4) identifying needs for rese arch. This guideline applies to  ingestion of immediate-release  forms of
SSRIs alone. Co-ingestion of additional substances might require  different referral and management recommendations depending on  their
combined toxicities.
This guideline is based on an assessment of current scientific and clinical information. The expert consensus panel recognizes that
specific patient care decisions may be at  variance with this guideline and are the prerogative of the patient and the health pr ofessionals
providing care, considering all of the circumstances involv ed. This guideline does not substitute for clinical judgment.
Recommendations are in chronological order of likely clinical us e. The grade of recommendation is in parentheses. 1) All patien ts
with suicidal intent, intentional abuse, or in cases in which a malicious intent is suspected (e.g., child abuse or neglect) sh ould be
referred to an emergency department. This activity should be guid ed by local poison center procedures. In general, this should occur
regardless of the dose reported (Grade D). 2) Any patient already experiencing any symptoms other than mild effects (mild effec ts
include vomiting, somnolence [lightly sedated and arousable with speaking voice or light touch], mydriasis, or diaphoresis) sho uld be
transported to an emergency department. Transportation via ambulance should be considered based on the condition of the patient  and
the length of time it will take the patient to arrive at the emer gency department (Grade D). 3) Asymptomatic patients or those with mild
effects (defined above) following isolated unintentional acute SSRI ingestions of up to five times an initial adult therapeutic  dose (i.e.,
citalopram 100 mg, escitalopram 50 mg, fluoxetine 100 mg, fluvoxamine 250 mg, paroxetine 100 mg, sertraline 250 mg) can be
observed at home with instructions to call the poison center back  if symptoms develop. For patients already on an SSRI, those w ith
ingestion of up to five times their own single therapeutic dose ca n be observed at home with instructions to call the poison center back if
symptoms develop (Grade D). 4) The poison center should consider  making follow-up calls during the first 8 hours after ingestio n,
following its normal procedure. Consideration should be given to the time of day when home observation will take place. Observa tion
during normal sleep hours might not reliably identify the onset of toxicity. Depending on local poison center policy, patients could be
referred to an emergency department if the observation would take place during normal sleeping hours of the patient or caretake r (Grade D).
5) Do not induce emesis (Grade C). 6) The use of oral activated charcoal can be co nsidered since the likelihood of SSRI-induced  loss of
consciousness or seizures is small. Howeve r, there are no data to suggest a specific clinical benefit. The routine use of out-o f-hospital
oral activated charcoal in patients with unintentional SSRI overdose cannot be advocated at this time (Grade C). 7) Use intrave nous
benzodiazepines for seizures and benzodiazepines and external cooling measures for hyperthermia (>104 °F [>40 °C]) for SSRI-induced
Received 30 October 2006; accepted 30 October 2006.
*Guidelines for the Management of Poisonings. Supported in full by Cooperative Agreement 8 U4BMC00084 between the American
Association of Poison Control Centers and the Health Resources  and Services Administration, Department of Human Services
Address correspondence to American Association of Poison Contro l Centers, 3201 New Mexico Avenue NW, Suite 330, Washington,
D.C. 20016, USA. E-mail: info@aapcc.orgDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 316 L.S. Nelson et al.
serotonin syndrome. This should be done in consultation with and authorized by EMS medical direction, by a written treatment  protocol
or policy, or with direct medical oversight (Grade C).
Keywords Serotonin uptake inhibitors/poisoning; Poison control centers/standards; Practice guidelines
Introduction
Scope of the problem and importance of this guideline
Antidepressant overdoses are among the most common pre-
scription drug overdoses managed by poison centers. This is
in part because of their high prevalence of therapeutic use but
also because of their use by patients at high risk for intentional
ingestion. According to the Toxic Exposure Surveillance
System (TESS) of the Americ an Association of Poison Con-
trol Centers, there were 48,204 human ingestions of selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor an tidepressants (SSRIs) reported
to poison centers in the US in  2004; 31,181 (65%) were eval-
uated in healthcare facilities. Children less than 6 years of age
accounted for 8,187 (17%) of all reported SSRI ingestions.
Major effects occurred in 1,426 SSRI ingestions and 103
ingestions resulted in death; there were known co-ingestants
in all but three deaths (1). Between 2000 and 2005, there
were 44,545 ingestions of SSRIs in children less than 6 years
of age reported to TESS. Major effects were noted in 59 cases
(0.1%) and there was on e reported death (2).
The evaluation and management of possible SSRI poison-
ing has medical, economic, and social costs. It is critical to
decide on a strategy that could be used to determine which
patients need referral to healthcare facilities for medical eval-
uation. Poison centers usuall y recommend emer gency depart-
ment evaluation of any pa tient who becomes severely
symptomatic or intentionally ingests a substance to cause
self-harm. The most important decision for the remainder of
patients exposed to an SSRI (i.e., unintentional and asymp-
tomatic or mildly sy mptomatic) is to de termine who requires
emergency department evaluation. Typical unintentional
exposure scenarios include a child who is found handling an
SSRI medication container and who might have ingested one
or more tablets or an adult or child who already takes an
SSRI and inadvertently doubles or triples their dose. Refer-
ring every patient with a potential or documented SSRI
ingestion to an emergency department is unnecessarily
expensive and labor intensive (3 ), since the therapeutic indi-
ces of the SSRIs are generally very favorable. However, drug
interactions are common and can be serious.
Background
SSRIs represent a group of chemically diverse agents that
share the ability to inhibit the presynaptic uptake of serotonin
within the central nervous sy stem. They are commonly pre-
scribed for the initial treatment of mild to moderate depres-
sion, generalized anxiety disorder, and obsessive-compulsivedisorder and are widely used fo r other diseases of neurologic
origin including neuropathic pain  (4–6). Due to their less trou-
blesome side effect and safety profiles, the SSRIs have essen-
tially replaced the tricyclic antidepressants as first-line therapy
for depression. They are available only by prescription.
Six pure SSRIs are available in the US: citalopram (Celexa),
escitalopram (Lexapro), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine
(Luvox), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft); these
agents are the subject of this guideline. The prolonged-
release formulations of paroxe tine (Paxil CR) and fluoxetine
(Prozac weekly) are not directly considered by this guideline
given their relatively recent re lease and the lack of available
overdose/toxicity data. A number of other agents are also
available that have among their pharmacologic properties the
ability to inhibit serotonin reuptake. These include bupro-
pion, duloxetine, mirtazapine, and venlafaxine. Given their
pharmacologic complexity and distinction from SSRIs, they
are not included in this guideline.
SSRIs are associated with several relatively common
adverse effects. The most freq uently noted are nausea, vomit-
ing, and diarrhea (6,7). Insomnia, anxiety, and hypomania are
common psychological effects and are most typical after
chronic dosing.
Symptoms observed following overdose of an SSRI are
typically mild and manifest pr imarily as central nervous sys-
tem depression (6,7). Seizures  and cardiac electrophysiologic
abnormalities (generally QT c interval prolongation) can
occur and are most widely repo rted following overdoses with
citalopram (8–11). Consequentia l clinical effects can result
uncommonly from any agent of this class due to the develop-
ment of the serotonin syndrome, which manifests as autonomic
instability, altered mental status, seizures, extrapyramidal syn-
drome including muscle rigidity, hyperthermia, and, rarely,
death. However, nearly all re ported cases involve patients
using multiple serotonergic agents (e.g., tricyclic antidepres-
sant, lithium, meperidine) or wh o have large exposures to a
single serotonergic agent. The onset and progression of clini-
cal toxicity, including the serotonin syndrome, is generally
gradual over several hours, although after large overdose or
with certain drug interacti ons it can be abrupt (12).
The FDA has issued a warning on the use of paroxetine
during pregnancy due to the risk of adverse fetal outcomes
such as an increased risk of congenital malformations, partic-
ularly cardiac (13). Whether this is a class effect or a concern
following short-term or one-tim e exposure, early or late in
pregnancy, remains to be dete rmined. Regardless, SSRIs are
still utilized for pregnant and lactating women, despite warn-
ings in labels against such use and the categorization of
SSRIs as FDA Pregnancy Category C or D (14,15).Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 317
Definition of terms
For the purposes of this analys is, age groups are defined as 1)
children less than 6 years of  age and 2) children 6 years of
age or older and adults. The older age group is much more
likely to attempt self-harm and to conceal an ingestion. The
terms “out-of-hospital” or “pre hospital” are defined as the
period before a patient reaches a healthcare facility. An acute
ingestion is defined as any numb er of ingestions that occur
within a period of 8 hours. The following definitions for clin-
ical effects are used throughout  the guideline and are adapted
from those used by TESS. The descriptor “mild” means that
the clinical effects were generally limited to vomiting, som-
nolence (lightly sedated and arousable with speaking voice or
light touch), mydriasis, or diaphoresis. The term “moderate”
includes vital sign abnormalities, particularly mild hyperther-
mia, agitation, or lethargy (sedated but arousable with more than
speaking voice or with irritati ng stimuli). “Severe” includes
clinically significant vital sign  or cardiovascular abnormali-
ties, particularly those that re quire intervention such as life-
threatening hyperthermia, agitat ed delirium, coma (requiring
painful stimuli to arouse or unarousable), or seizures (see
TESS for more complete defini tions). The severity of the
serotonin syndrome can be similarly qualified (12).
Intended users of the guideline
The intended users of this guid eline are personnel in US poi-
son centers. This guideline has been developed for the condi-
tions prevalent in the US. While the toxicities of the SSRIs
are not expected to vary in a clinically significant manner in
other nations, the out-of-hospital conditions could be much
different. This guideline should not be extrapolated to other
settings unless it has been determined that the conditions
assumed in this guideline are present.
Objective of the guideline
The objective of this guideline is to assist poison center
personnel in the appropriate out-of-hospital triage and ini-
tial management of patients wi th a suspected ingestion of
an SSRI by 1) describing the pr ocess by which an ingestion
of an SSRI might be managed, 2) identifying the key deci-
sion elements in managing case s of SSRI ingestion, 3) pro-
viding clear and practical recommendations that reflect the
current state of knowledge, and 4) identifying needs for
research. This guideline applies to ingestion of immediate-
release forms of citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine, or se rtraline alone. Alternative-
release mechanisms, particularly sustained-release prepara-
tions, are not considered. Co-ingestion of additional
substances might, but does not necessarily, require different
referral and management recommendations depending on
the nature of the coingestant(s) and the combined toxicities
of the substances.This guideline is based on an  assessment of current scien-
tific and clinical in formation. The expe rt consensus panel
recognizes that specific patient  care decisions may be at vari-
ance with this guideline and are the prerogative of the patient
and the health professionals providing care, co nsidering all of
the circumstances invo lved. This guidelin e does not substi-
tute for clinical judgment.
Methodology
The methodology used for the pr eparation of this guideline
was developed after reviewing the key elements of practice
guidelines (16,17). An expert consensus panel was estab-
lished to develop the guide line (Appendix 1). The American
Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC), the American
Academy of Clinical Toxicolo gy (AACT), and the American
College of Medical Toxicology (ACMT) appointed members
of their organizations to serve as panel members. To serve on
the expert consensus panel, an individual had to have an
exceptional record of  accomplishment in clinical care and
scientific research in toxicology , board certification as a clin-
ical or medical toxicologist, significant US poison center
experience, and be an opinion leader with broad esteem. Two
specialists in poison information were included as full panel
members to provide the viewpo int of the end-users of the
guideline.
Literature search
The National Library of Medi cine’s PubMed database was
searched (to March 2004) using serotonin uptake inhibitors
(poisoning) or serotonin uptake inhibitors (toxicity) as MeSH
terms, limited to humans. PubM ed was also searched using
citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxet-
ine, or sertraline as textword s (title, abstract, MeSH term,
CAS registry) plus either poison* or overdos* or intox* or
toxic*, limited to humans. This process was repeated in Inter-
national Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970–March 2004,
excluding abstracts of meeting presentations), Science Cita-
tion Index (1977–March 2004), Database of Abstracts of
Reviews of Effects (accessed March 2004), Cochrane Data-
base of Systematic Reviews (accessed March 2004), and
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (accessed
March 2004). A third PubMed search (to March 2004)
located all citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
paroxetine, or sertraline articles that identified patients from
1 through 5 years of age.
Reactions (1980–March 2004),  the citalopram, escitalo-
pram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, or sertraline poi-
soning managements in Poisinde x, and the bibliographies of
recovered articles were revi ewed to identify previously
undiscovered articles. Furthermore, North American Con-
gress of Clinical Toxicology (NACCT) abstracts published in
the Journal of Toxicology Clinical Toxicology (1995–2004)Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 318 L.S. Nelson et al.
were reviewed for original hu man data. The chapter bibliog-
raphies in five major toxicology textbooks were reviewed for
citations of additional articl es with original human data.
Finally, the Toxic Exposure  Surveillance System (TESS)
maintained by the American A ssociation of Poison Control
Centers was searched (2000–2005) for deaths resulting from
citalopram, escitalopram, fluo xetine, fluvoxamine, paroxet-
ine, or sertraline poisoning. These cases were abstracted for
use by the panel.
Criteria used to identify applicable studies
The recovered citations were entered into an EndNote library
and duplicate entries were elimin ated. The abstracts of these
articles were reviewed, looking sp ecifically for those that could
potentially provide 1) estimations of mg/kg or ingested doses
with or without subsequent signs or symptoms, 2) estimations
of time to symptom onset, or 3) information regarding man-
agement techniques that might be suitable for out-of-hospital
use (e.g., gastrointestinal decontamination). Articles excluded
were those that did not meet any of the preceding criteria, did
not add new data (e.g., some reviews, editorials), or that
described inpatient-only procedures (e.g., dialysis).
Data extraction process
All articles that were retrieved from the search were reviewed
by a trained physician abstractor. Each article was examined
for original human data regarding the toxic effects of citalopram,
escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, or sertra-
line or original human data di rectly relevant to the out-of-
hospital management of patients with these drugs in overdose.
Relevant data (e.g., dose of SSRI, resultant effects, time of
onset of effects, therapeutic in terventions or decontamination
measures given, efficacy or results of any interventions, and
overall patient outcome) were compiled into a table and a brief
summary description of each article was written. This evidence
table is available at http://www.aapcc.org/DiscGuidelines/
Guidelines%20Tables/SSRI%20evidence%20table%202005-6-
9.pdf. The completed table of all abstracted articles was then
forwarded to the panel members for review and consideration
in developing the guideline. Attempts were made to locate
significant foreign language ar ticles and have their crucial
information extracted, transl ated, and tabulated. A written
summary of the data was created and distributed by the
abstractor. Copies of all of the articles were made available for
reading by the panel members on a secure AAPCC website.
Criteria used to evaluate st udies and assign levels of 
evidence
The articles were assigned level-of-evidence scores based on
the Grades of Recommendation table developed by the Cen-
tre for Evidence-Based Medicine at Oxford University(Appendix 2). Single case report s were classified along with
case series as level 4.
Guideline writing and review
A guideline draft was prepared by the lead author (listed first).
The draft was submitted to the expert consensus panel for com-
ment. Using a modified Delphi  process, comments from the
expert consensus panel member s were collected, anonymously
copied into a table of comments, and submitted to the lead
author for response. The lead author responded to each com-
ment in the table and, when a ppropriate, the guideline draft was
modified to incorporate changes suggested by the panel. The
revised guideline draft was agai n reviewed by the panel and, if
there was no strong objection by any panelist to any of the
changes made by the lead author, the draft was prepared for the
external review process. External review of the second draft
was conducted by di stributing it electronically to AAPCC,
AACT, and ACMT members and the secondary review panel.
The secondary review panel cons isted of representatives from
the federal government, public health, emergency services,
pediatrics, pharmacy practice , and consumer organizations
(Appendix 3). Comments were submitted via a discussion
thread on the AAPCC website or privately through email com-
munication to AAPCC  staff. All subm itted comments were
stripped of any information that  would identify their sources,
copied into a table of comments, and reviewed by the expert
consensus panel and the lead author. The lead author responded
to each comment in the table and his responses and subsequent
changes in the guideline were reviewed and accepted by the
panel. Following a meeting of th e expert consensus panel, the
final revision of the guideline was prepared.
Review of current practices
Current poison control center practices
To gather information for this guideline, a message was sent in
2004 to all US poison centers requesting the triage guidelines
that they were utilizing for managing patients with SSRI poi-
sonings. Sixteen poison centers responded. One center submit-
ted a triage guideline. According to the submitted guideline,
children under 5 years of age could be observed at home fol-
lowing paroxetine ingestions of up to 180 mg; details on the
disposition of patients exposed to the other SSRIs were not
included. Fifteen poison centers indicated that they did not
have triage guidelines for SSRI ingestion. The reasons why
these centers did not have triage guidelines are unknown, but
this supports the need for the development of this guideline.
Dose
The evaluation of dose in the out-of-hospital environment is
limited to an estimation based on  the patient’s history and theDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 319
assessment of the product and its packaging (when available
for evaluation). The estimated dose of each SSRI for an acute
ingestion is determined by mu ltiplying the number of units
thought to have been ingested by the amount of drug con-
tained in each unit. If precise data for an ingestion are
unknown or unclear (package size, unit size, number of units
ingested), poison centers in th e US typically utilize a method
in which the maximum potential dose is calculated. For
example, if the actual dose in gested cannot be determined,
the number of the SSRI dosage units that are missing can be
multiplied by the dose of the in dividual tablet. When the mg/
kg dose or a child’s weight was not included in an article, the
mg/kg dose was estimated by the use of pediatric growth
charts (18). The 95th percentile  weight was used for a partic-
ular age and sex. When the sex of the child was not stated, the
weight for boys was used. This approach errs on the side of
estimating a lower mg/kg dose . Estimated mg/kg doses are
italicized throughout the guid eline whenever they are pre-
sented.
Time since ingestion
Ascertaining the time since ingest ion is useful in evaluating
the potential for toxicity and de termining the need for health-
care facility referral and the duration of observation there.
Once the time of peak effect has passed, an asymptomatic
patient with an unintentiona l ingestion might not require
referral to a healthcare facility just because the dose exceeded
a critical threshold.
Evaluation of evidence
When reviewing the textbooks and published literature, qual-
itative clinical descriptors ar e frequently included. In other
cases, for brevity of this guid eline, detailed clinical descrip-
tors are converted to qualitativ e terminology (see Definition
of Terms, above).
Review of poisindex
Poisindex, a computerized toxi cology reference used by poi-
son control centers, states th at children 6 years of age or
younger with ingestions of fluo xetine less than 60 mg or 5
mg/kg can be monitored at home. There are no specific state-
ments regarding th e other SSRIs (4).
Review of the AAPCC TESS fatality abstracts
A review of the fatality data for the period of 2000–2005
identified two SSRI-related deat hs that were not suicidal or
questionable in intent and did not involve co-ingestants. The
youngest reported death in wh ich an SSRI was listed as the
only substance was that of a 3-year-old boy given “2 sertra-
line capsules to calm him down.” The child was found facedown in a creek and the postmo rtem examination was consis-
tent with drowning. A 16-year-old with a history of syncope
suffered sudden cardiac death; there was no mention of SSRI
use or overdose in this report . There were also three deaths
that were consistent with the serotonin syndrome.
Review of textbooks
A review of SSRI poisoning chapters in five toxicology text-
books revealed variation in their recommendations. One book
noted that newer antidepressa nts, which include the SSRIs,
“generally have a wide ther apeutic index, with doses in
excess of 10 times the usual th erapeutic dose tolerated with-
out serious toxicity” (19). One textbook did not provide tri-
age guidelines but stated “…b ecause of the wide therapeutic
index of the SSRIs, most patient s will have mild or no symp-
toms after an overdose” (20) . Another made neither global
nor specific triage recommendations (21). Another chapter
said that “patients with well-defined small unintentional
ingestions may be managed at home with close observation,”
although “small” is not defined (6). The final book stated that
“…moderate overdoses (up to 30 times the usual daily dose)
are associated with minor sy mptoms…” although specific
decision-making recommendat ions regarding emergency
department evaluation were not provided (22).
The therapeutic dosing regimens  for adults described in the
individual SSRI prescribing information are displayed in
Table 1. Since research on the use of the SSRIs in children is
ongoing, dosing for children is not included in the prescribing
information. The therapeutic do sing for children listed in
three drug and pediatric reference textbooks is presented in
Table 1 (5,23,24).
Acute ingestions in patients less than 6 years of age
Citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxet-
ine, and sertraline are not FDA- approved for use in this age
group. These drugs might be used by some clinicians, but
their use is controversial give n the possible association with
suicidal thinking or behavior (suicidality) especially during
the first few months of treatment (25). It is unknown whether
suicidality would develop from an acute ingestion, but this
seems unlikely. A minimal toxic dose for these drugs in chil-
dren is not cited in Poisindex except as noted above for fluox-
etine (4). There were no arti cles identified in which single
doses of any SSRI were intentionally given to patients less
than 6 years of age and associated with subsequent toxicity.
Citalopram
There were no level 1–3 articles with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. However, there were three level 4 or 6 articles that
included patients less than 6 years of age with acute citalo-
pram ingestions and from whic h some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted (9,26,27). Unfortunately, most ofDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 320 L.S. Nelson et al.
these articles reported  the ages and doses as ranges or using
summary data, making it impo ssible to associate clinical
effects with dose and age. Since several of the articles did not
specify patient ages, or included patients 6 years of age and
older, it was impossible to know which doses referred to
patients of what age. With thes e issues in mind, an abstract of
a retrospective review of 22 8 citalopram ingestions in
patients of all ages (level 6) reported doses ranging from 40
to 5000 mg, some of which resulted in toxic effects ranging
from mild to severe (9 ). An abstract (level 6) of a prospective
observational study of 42 cases (all ages) of citalopram inges-
tion in which doses ranged from 100 to 2400 mg (2–34.5 mg/
kg) noted that the resulting clin ical effects ranged from none
to severe (27).
Escitalopram
There were no level 1–4 article s with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. There was a single level 6 abstract of a retrospective
review of 33 patients (of al l ages) with acute escitalopram
ingestions. Doses ranged from 30 to 1400 mg, and some of
these patients went on to develop effects ranging from mild
to severe (9).
Fluoxetine
There were no level 1–3 article s with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. However, there were th ree level 4 case series that
included patients less than 6 y ears of age with acute fluoxet-
ine ingestions and from which some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted (28– 30). The first article was a
retrospective review of fluoxeti ne ingestions by 120 patientsless than 6 years of age in which doses ranged from 10 to
400 mg. Only four of these patients developed adverse
effects, all mild (t hree had vomiting, one had sedation), and
the patient with the lowest dose (20 mg) had sedation
(details about the patients’ ages and weights were not
reported) (28). A retrospective review of 37 acute inges-
tions reported doses of 20–600 mg as being associated with
clinical effects ranging from no symptoms to symptoms of
moderate severity (details about the patients’ ages and
weights were not reported) (30). Finally, in a retrospective
review of data reported to  the FDA and TESS, fluoxetine
ingestions as low as 100 mg were reported to be associated
with seizures, and ingestions of as little as 260 mg were
reported to be associated with death; however, direct causal-
ity by fluoxetine could not be assessed in these cases (details
about the patients’ ages and we ights were not reported) (29).
There was also a single level 4 case report in which an inges-
tion of up to 700 mg ( 43 mg/kg ) by a 4-year-old girl resulted
in sequelae includin g agitation, dyskinesia, and a transient
period of unconsciousness within 3 hours of ingestion from
which she recovered by the time she arrived at an emergency
department 1 hour later. Sh e had a significantly elevated
admission serum fluoxetine conc entration that remained ele-
vated when repeated at 40 hours after admission (31).
Fluvoxamine
There were no level 1–3 articles with dose-toxicity information.
However, there were two level 4 case series that included
patients less than 6 years of  age with acute fluvoxamine
ingestions and from which some  dose-toxicity informationTable 1. Summary of therapeutic dosing for SSRIs
Drug Starting daily therapeutic dose Maximu m daily therapeutic dose Dosage forms
Citalopram Adult: 20 mg 60 mg 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
10 mg/5 mL oral solution
Child: not available Not available
Escitalopram Adult: 10 mg 20 mg 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, tablets
5 mg/5 mL oral solution
Child: not available Not available
Fluoxetine Adult: 20 mg 80 mg 10, 20, 40 capsules
10 mg tablets
90 mg weekly capsules
20 mg/5 mL oral solution
Child (6–18 yr): 10 mg 20 mg
Fluvoxamine Adult: 50 mg 300 mg 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Child (8–17 yr): 25 mg 200 mg
Child (<8 yr): not available Not available
Paroxetine Adult: 20 mg 60 mg 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets
10 mg/5 mL oral suspension
Paxil CR controlled-release tablets  12.5, 25, 37.5 mg
Child: 10 mg 60 mg
Sertraline Adult: 50 mg once daily 200 mg 25. 50. 100 mg tablets
20 mg/mL oral concentrate
Child (6–12 yr): 25 mg once daily 200 mg
Child (<6 yr): not available Not availableDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 321
could be extracted. In a review of 78 patients of all ages with
acute fluvoxamine ingestions, the lowest dose associated with
any toxicity was 150 mg (age unknown; abdominal pain,
drowsiness), while the lowest dose associated with severe toxic-
ity (bradycardia and prolonged prothrombin time) was 600 mg
in a 2-year-old child ( 40 mg/kg ). The lowest dose associated
with death was 2500 mg, but the age was un reported (co-
ingestants could have been involved in some cases) (32). There
was also a single level 4 case re port in which a 4-year-old boy
developed hypotension, bradycardia, and seizure after an unver-
ified ingestion of 400 mg ( 20 mg/kg ) (33).
Paroxetine
There were no level 1–3 article s with dose-toxicity informa-
tion for paroxetine. However, there were four level 4 or 6
case series of patients less than 6 years of age with acute par-
oxetine ingestions from which some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted. In two papers that appeared to have
overlapping patient sets, the lowe st dose of paroxetine associ-
ated with any toxicity was 30  mg, which resulted in mild
effects (i.e., drowsiness) (34, 35). An abstract (level 6)
described 149 cases of paroxetin e ingestion by children less
than 6 years of age with doses ranging from 20 to 240 mg.
Twelve children developed mild  effects, but their specific
doses were not reported (36). In a retrospective review of
data reported to the FDA and TESS (level 4), paroxetine
ingestions as low as 530–600 mg  were reported to be associ-
ated with death; however, direct causality could not be
assessed in these cases (details  about the patients’ ages and
weights were not reported) (29).
Sertraline
There was a single level 3b ar ticle that combined 2 years of
retrospective record review with  6 months of prospective data
collection for sertraline. In this paper, which included
patients of all ages reported to gether, the lowest dose of ser-
traline associated with any effects was 200 mg (37). In addi-
tion, there were three level 4 or 6 case series that included
patients less than 6 years of ag e with acute sertraline inges-
tions and from which some dose-toxicity information could
be extracted. An abstract desc ribed 14 sertraline ingestions
by children 5 years of age and younger; doses, when known,
ranged from 12.5 to 250 mg and were associated with minor
effects in only one patient; the exact dose for this patient was
not reported (38). In  a retrospective review of 40 sertraline
overdose patients aged 1–69 years (level 4), the range of
doses was 50–8000 mg and these were associated with effects
ranging from none to severe (3 9). In a retrospective review of
data reported to the FDA and TE SS (level 4), sertraline inges-
tions of 500–1000 mg were associated with seizures and/or
ECG abnormalities, and an ingestion of 1100 mg was associ-
ated with death; however, direct causality could not be
assessed in these cases (29). There were also two level 4 case
reports. In the first, a 22-m onth-old girl developed minor
effects after ingesting 250–300 mg of sertraline (40). In thesecond, a 5-year-old girl developed severe effects consistent
with the serotonin syndrome, including hyperthermia to
39.1°C (102.4 °F), after an ingestion of more than 400 mg (41).
Acute ingestions in patients 6 years of age and older
Other than for paroxetine and sertraline described below,
there were no articles reviewed  in which single doses of an
SSRI (i.e., citalopram, escita lopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxam-
ine) were given to patients 6 years of age and older and asso-
ciated with subsequent toxicity.
Citalopram
There were no level 1–3 articles with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. However, there were several level 4 or 6 articles that
included patients 6 years of age and older with acute citalo-
pram ingestion and from whic h some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted (8,9,11,26,27,42,43). Unfortunately,
most of these articles reported the ages and doses as ranges or
using summary data, making it impossible to associate clinical
effects with dose and age. Since several of the articles did not
specify ages or included patients less than 6 years of age, it was
impossible to know which doses referred to patients of what
age. An abstract (level 6) of a retrospective review of 228 cit-
alopram ingestions in patients of all ages reported doses rang-
ing from 40 to 5000 mg and toxic effects ranging from mild to
severe. Although the outcomes appeared to be excellent (there
was one major and 20 moderate outcomes), the abstract
reported that 17 of 228 patients (of all ages and all doses)
developed seizures (9). An abstr act (level 6) of a prospective
observational study of 42 cases (all ages) of citalopram inges-
tion in which doses ranged from 100 to 2400 mg (2–34.5 mg/kg)
described effects ranging from none to severe (27). Two arti-
cles by the same authors (level 4) reported that ingestions less
than 600 mg resulted only in mild effects, while doses greater
than 600 mg frequently resulted in moderate effects 18–33% of
the time and doses greater than 1700 mg often caused severe
toxicity (42,43). Another article (level 4) reported the develop-
ment of seizures in four patients after ingestions of an
estimated 400–5200 mg (8). One case series (level 4) of antide-
pressant overdoses included 88 patients with a mean age of
approximately 33 years (likely all adults). Seizures occurred in
five patients following doses of 400–3000 mg. The mean QTc
for the group of 88 patients was not significantly prolonged
compared to the patients who overdosed on other antidepres-
sants, although the range of QTc durations was not provided
and comparison was not made with the patients’ baseline QTc
durations. Seven patients developed QTc durations longer than
450 msec, but no dysrhythmias we re noted (10). An additional
paper reported deaths associated with ingestions as low as
about 840 mg. However, the dose estimates were made post-
mortem, and other co-ingestants might have contributed to the
patients’ deaths (11).
There were several level 4 or 6 articles with individual
case information presented in detail. Specifically, there wereDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 322 L.S. Nelson et al.
12 cases reported in 11 articles (42–52). Among them, the
lowest dose of citalopram associated with any toxicity was
400 mg, which was reported to be associated with severe tox-
icity in at least two adults (42,47).
Escitalopram
There were no level 1–4 article s with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. However, there were two level 6 abstracts that included
multiple patients 6 years of age and older with acute escitalo-
pram ingestions and from whic h some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted. The first abstract was a retrospective
review of 33 patients of al l ages with acute escitalopram
ingestions. Doses ranged from 30 to 1400 mg, and some of
the patients went on to develo p effects ranging from mild to
severe (9). The second abstract was a retrospective review of
14 patients, aged 14–44 years, with doses ranging from 100
to 600 mg; seven patients developed effects ranging from
mild to moderate (53). There wa s also an abstract of a single
case report (level 6) reporting ingestion of 100–200 mg by a
38-year-old man resulted in severe toxicity (54).
Fluoxetine
There were no level 1–3 article s with dose-toxicity informa-
tion. However, there were fo ur level 4 case series that
included patients 6 years of ag e and older with acute fluoxet-
ine ingestions and from which some dose-toxicity informa-
tion could be extracted (29,30,55,56). Unfortunately, most of
these articles reported  the ages and doses as ranges or using
summary data, making it impo ssible to associate clinical
effects with dose and age. Since several of the articles did not
specify ages or included patients  less than 6 years of age, it
was impossible to know which doses referred to patients of
what age. One retrospective re view of 37 acute ingestions
reported doses of 20–600 mg as  being associated with effects
ranging from no symptoms at all to symptoms of moderate
severity (30). In a re trospective review of data reported to the
FDA and TESS, fluoxetine ingestions as low as 100 mg were
reported to be associated with seizures and ingestions of as
little as 260 mg were reported  to be associated with death;
however, direct causality by fl uoxetine could not be assessed
in these cases (29). There were also 11 level 4 or 6 articles
with individual case information on acute fluoxetine inges-
tions in patients 6 years of age and older (57–67). Among
them, the lowest dose of fluoxe tine associated with any toxic-
ity was 80 mg in a 32-year-old woman who developed severe
effects but had also ingested other drugs (level 6) (64). The
self-reported ingestion of 680 mg by a 19-year-old woman
(level 4) resulted in a flu-like syndrome of unclear relation to
the overdose (62).
Fluvoxamine
There were no level 1–3 articles with dose-toxicity information.
However, there were three level 4 case series that included
patients 6 years of age and older with acute fluvoxamineingestions from which some dose-toxicity information could
be extracted (32,68,69). In one, specific doses were not given
but, according to the authors, ingestions of up to 2000 mg
were associated with mild effects (69). In another article, a
combination of two retrospective reviews of acute fluvoxam-
ine ingestions (221 and 78 patients), the lowest dose associ-
ated with any toxicity wa s 150 mg (abdominal pain,
drowsiness, tremor), while the lowest dose associated with
severe toxicity in an adult was 750 mg (bundle branch block).
The lowest dose associated wi th death was 2500 mg, but the
patient’s age was not reported (co-ingestants might have been
involved in some cases) (32). There were nine level 4 or 6
articles with individual case in formation on acute fluvoxam-
ine ingestions in patients 6 years of age and older (70–78). In
one report, an 11-year-old boy de veloped severe toxicity after
a single dose of 50 mg but he was also on perphenazine and
benztropine chronically (74). The next lowest dose of fluvox-
amine associated with toxicity was 1500 mg in a 31-year-old
woman who developed severe effects but had a coingestion
of thiocolchicoside, which itself has been associated with sei-
zures (78,79). The lowest reported ingestion associated with
death was 4200 mg (72).
Paroxetine
There were two articles reviewed in which single doses of
paroxetine were given to adults and associated with subse-
quent adverse effects; one was a level 1b study (80), and the
other was a level 2b (81). Be tween these trials, paroxetine
doses of 50–60 mg in adult volunteers resulted in mild
effects.
There were no level 3 articles  with dose-toxicity informa-
tion for paroxetine. However, there were three level 4 or 6
retrospective reviews that incl uded patients 6 years of age
and older with acute paroxetine ingestion and from which
some dose-toxicity information could be extracted. In two
papers that appeared to have overlapping patient sets, the
lowest dose of paroxetine asso ciated with any toxicity was
10 mg in patients with co-ingestants and 200–400 mg in patients
without co-ingestants.  The clinical findings in this group
were mild and consisted of vomiting, mydriasis, drowsiness,
and tachycardia (34,35). In a retrospective review of data
reported to the FDA and TESS, paroxetine ingestions as low
as 530–600 mg were reported to be associated with death;
however, direct causality could not be assessed in these cases
(29). One paper (level 4) provided additional detail about 15
patients with paroxetine overdose, five of whom were hospi-
talized and recovered (12). There were also a number of level
4 or 6 articles with individual case information on acute par-
oxetine ingestions in patients 6 years of age and older. Spe-
cifically, there were 12 case s reported in 11 articles
(59,73,82–90). Among them, the lowest dose of paroxetine
associated with any adverse effe ct was 20 mg in two patients
who developed moderate sequelae  but who were both chroni-
cally taking other serotonergica lly active agents (59,90). The
lowest dose associated with se vere toxicity was 360 mg (82).Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 323
Sertraline
Sertraline is approved for use in children and adolescents for
the treatment of obsessive comp ulsive disorder at dosages of
25 mg once daily for ages 6–12 years and 50 mg once daily
for ages 13–17 years. The typical dosage of sertraline in
adults is 50 mg once daily.
In a randomized crossover stud y (level 1b), single doses of
sertraline were given to adults (50–67 years of age) who then
underwent psychomotor function testing. Single doses of 100
mg were associated with mi ld effects (e.g., drowsiness)
within 4 hours, although they raised the systolic blood pres-
sures of subjects by a mean of 12 mm Hg, which could be
considered a moderate effect (91).
A level 3b article combined retrospective and prospective
dose-toxicity data for sertraline.  In this paper, which included
patients of all ages reported to gether, the lowest dose of ser-
traline associated with any effects was 200 mg (37). While
the collection of data in this report was prospective, the esti-
mation of dose was retrospective and, thus, subject to inaccu-
racy. In addition, there were a few level 4 or 6 retrospective
reviews that included patients  6 years of age and older with
acute sertraline ingestions and from which some dose-toxicity
information could be extracted. In a retrospective review of
40 sertraline overdoses (of all ages), the range of doses was
50–8000 mg, and these were asso ciated with effects ranging
from none to severe (39). An abstract (level 6) of a retrospec-
tive review of sertraline ingestions in 47 children 5 years of
age and older reported that do ses, when known, ranging from
100 to 4500 mg were associated with minor effects in 22
patients (28). In a retrospective review of data reported to the
FDA and TESS, ingestion of 500–1000 mg were associated
with seizures and/or ECG abnormalities, and an ingestion of
1100 mg was associated with death; however, direct causality
could not be assessed in these cases (29). There were also a
number of level 4 or 6 articles with individual case informa-
tion on acute sertraline ingestions in patients 6 years of age
and older. Specifically, there were 10 cases reported in nine
articles (59,92–99). Among them, the lowest dose of sertra-
line associated with any toxici ty was 750 mg ingested by a
42-year-old who had also in gested moclobemide, which
resulted in moderate toxicity (5 9). The lowest dose associated
with severe toxicity was 4000 mg in a 14-year-old girl who
had also ingested naproxen sodium (97).
Onset of effects
The panel members expressed interest in taking into account
the time of onset for toxicity to develop after SSRI ingestions
in order to help make decisi ons about out-of-hospital trans-
portation and management. Theref ore, all articles with toxic-
ity were searched for evidence documenting or estimating
times of onset. Unfortunately, the vast majority of articles
reported times of presentation to healthcare facilities but not
times of symptom onset, which probably occurred earlier.
Thus, in most cases, it was only  possible to establish an upperlimit of time to onset. In only a few reports was an exact time
of onset known and reported. For this reason, a separate time
of onset table was not construc ted. Although it is unknown
whether the time to peak seru m concentration is a suitable
marker for predicting toxicity, this time for each of the SSRIs
discussed in this review is generally 8 hours or less.
There were too few data to separate time of onset by
patient age. Similarly, there we re neither enough data nor any
apparent difference in onset of effects between individual
SSRI agents. Therefore, this summary makes no effort to
divide the data by individual agent or different patient age
groups.
In discussing the onset of ef fects after SSRI ingestion, care
should be taken to distinguish the initial onset of effects from
the onset of serious or major eff ects, time to peak effects, or
time to delayed effects or later deterioration. Furthermore,
decontamination measures migh t have differed between arti-
cles. Additionally, in essentially all of these studies, it was
not clear whether, or what, symptoms were present before the
late-occurring event.
In most cases, the time of onset of initial effects after SSRI
ingestion, when reported, was within a few hours (Table 2).
There was only one case review ed that indicated the occur-
rence of significant clinical e ffects more than 4 hours after
SSRI ingestion, due potentially to a drug interaction, in the
absence of any prior signs or symptoms. This was an abstract
(level 6) of a case report of an elderly woman on St. John’s
wort who developed serotonin syndrome 8 hours after a sin-
gle dose of paroxetine (90). There was a level 3b combined
retrospective and prospective re port of 52 sertraline inges-
tions in which the onset of effe cts was reported as occurring
within ½–10 hours of ingestio n (37). There were published
cases in which significant toxi c effects (e.g., serotonin syn-
drome, cardiac toxicity, or se izures) occurred 4–24 or more
hours after ingestion, but in all such cases at least some signs
or symptoms (albeit mild in some cases) were present earlier
in the patient’s course (37,39,47,51,56,57,61,90,97). In a ret-
rospective review of 44 cases of citalopram ingestion, sei-
zures were noted to occur “with in the first few hours” while
ECG effects like QRS or QTc changes, were noted “later”
(43). There was an abstract (lev el 6) that described a 42-year-
old man who had ingested paroxetine along with haloperidol
and developed polymorphic ventricular tachycardia 31 hours
later (85). However, it was felt that the paroxetine was not the
cause of the effects in this ca se but that its presence delayed
the metabolism of haloperidol, resulting in delayed haloperi-
dol toxicity. There was a case of  flu-like or allergic findings
(rash, myalgia, headache) deve loping around 2 days after an
acute ingestion of fluvoxamine (62).
The rapidity of effect onset after SSRI ingestion was vari-
able. In most cases, effects came on or progressed relatively
slowly over the course of minutes to hours. However, there
was a report of severe effect s developing suddenly and/or
without warning after citalopram  overdose, although the tim-
ing relative to the ingestion time  was not reported (52). A few
patients who developed clinical  effects from SSRI poisoningDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 324 L.S. Nelson et al.
went on to worsen to varying degrees over the course of
hours to days. Usually, the deterioration was progressive but
not catastrophic. In the majority of the cases there were
coingestants and the relative role of each was undetermined
(37,43,51,57,61,86,92,97).
Serotonin syndrome
Serotonin syndrome is a clini cal syndrome that manifests as
autonomic instability, altered mental status, seizures,
extrapyramidal syndrome including muscle rigidity, hyper-
thermia, and, rarely, death. The onset of serotonin syndrome
is usually within 6 hours of ingestion with an escalating
severity of clinical abnormalities. Serotonin syndrome
appears to be due, in large pa rt, to excessive stimulation of
the 5-HT2A subtype of the central nervous system serotonin
receptors. Although serotonin sy ndrome could occur follow-
ing isolated ingestion of a serotonergic agent, including a
therapeutic dose, serotonin syndrome occurs more com-
monly in patients with chroni c ingestion of an SSRI. Drug
interactions are also commonly implicated in serotonin syn-
drome. Although not exclusively related to interactions with
SSRIs, drugs that can interact with SSRIs to cause serotonin
syndrome include monoamine oxidase inhibitors, meperi-
dine, dextromethorphan, lith ium, clonazepam, methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA,  Ecstasy), and the dietary
supplements tryptophan and St. John’s wort (12).
Potential out-of-hospital treatments
Gastrointestinal decontamination
There were a number of diff erent decontamination measures
reported in the reviewed literature, including activated charcoal,ipecac syrup, gastric lavage, and various cathartics. Most of
these measures had too little ev idence to comment on their
efficacy, and others are not likely to be available in an out-of-
hospital setting. Only those decontamination measures that
could reasonably be expected to be available and carried out
in an out-of-hospital setti ng and which had a significant
amount of data are reviewed in this summary. These are acti-
vated charcoal and ipecac syrup.
Activated charcoal
There were no prospective trials reviewed that investigated
the efficacy of activat ed charcoal on SSRI absorption after
overdose. There were also no articles reviewed with con-
trolled data (e.g., case-control or cohort studies) on activated
charcoal efficacy after SSRI overdose. There were numerous
level 4 or 6 case reports, case series, or abstracts in which sin-
gle or multiple doses of activ ated charcoal were given to
patients with SSRI overdose, but it was impossible to deter-
mine the efficacy of activated charcoal from these reports
given the lack of controls, the concurrent use of other thera-
pies, and the fact that activa ted charcoal does not produce
immediate clinical improvement (i.e., outcomes were gener-
ally measured by improved kine tic parameters or the preven-
tion of later clinical sequelae).
There were three pros pective clinical trials (all level 1b) on
the efficacy of activated char coal at binding various SSRIs
but these were all volunteer studies employing therapeutic
SSRI doses (one study each for paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
citalopram) and activated char coal was administered shortly
after ingestion of the SSRI, so their applicability to the over-
dose situation remains unclear. In all three studies, oral acti-
vated charcoal substantiall y reduced SSRI absorption
compared to the control phase as  measured by serial pharma-
cokinetic measurements (80,100,101). Since altered mental
status (drowsiness) is a freque nt complication of SSRI overdose,Table 2. Details of dose and time to onset associated with mo re than mild toxicity following acute SSRI overdose*
DrugTime to peak 
serum concentration†Lowest reported acute dose to 
produce more than mild toxicityLongest reported delay in onset
of toxicity after acute overdose
Citalopram 4 hr Adult: 400 mg <13 hr
Child: NA NA
Escitalopram 5 hr Adult: 100 mg NA
Child: 100 mg NA
Fluoxetine 6–8 hr Adult: NA NA
Child: 100 mg NA
Fluvoxamine 3.8 hr Adult: 750 mg NA
Child: 400 mg NA
Paroxetine 4.9–6.4 hr Adult: 360 mg 6 hr
Child: NA NA
Sertraline 4.5–8.4 hr Adult: 500 mg 3 hr
Child: 400 mg 4 hr
*The table reflects cases that excluded co-i ngestants and in which reasonable validatio n was present. Development of serotonin syndrome resulting from a
drug interaction is also excluded.
†Derived from prescribing informat ion for the individual drugs.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 325
the potential risk fo r aspiration of orally administered acti-
vated charcoal should be considered (102).
Ipecac-induced emesis
There were no controlled tria ls of ipecac syrup for SSRI
overdose. Nor were there any prospective volunteer studies
examining the efficacy of ipec ac in reducing SSRI absorp-
tion, even after therapeutic dos es. There were multiple case
reports and case seri es (level 4) in which ipecac syrup was
administered after SSRI overdos e (37,68,103). In none of
these reports was th e description of the circumstances sur-
rounding the use of ipecac syru p detailed sufficiently to draw
conclusions concerning its efficacy or safety. Since altered
mental status (drowsiness) is a frequent complication of SSRI
overdose, the potential risk for aspiration following ipecac-
induced emesis should be considered.
Other treatment measures
Several different treatment meas ures were reported in the
reviewed literature on SSRI toxicity/overdose. Most of the
treatments had too little evidence available to comment on
their efficacy. Indeed, there were  no prospective or even ret-
rospective controlled data (either  in the out-of-hospital or in-
hospital setting) for any of the treatment measures. Therefore,
only those measures that anecdot ally appeared to give tempo-
ral improvement, based on indi vidual case reports or case
series (level 4 or 6), and that might reasonably be available in
the out-of-hospital setting are mentioned here.
Sodium bicarbonate
Sodium bicarbonate was used in several case reports. In two
cases, intravenous sodium bi carbonate was temporally asso-
ciated with QRS narrowing in patients with cardiac conduc-
tion abnormalities after SSRI poisoning—one citalopram
and one fluoxetine (47,59). An 82-year-old woman who
intentionally ingested cital opram 1.6 g developed a junc-
tional bradycardia that re portedly responded to sodium
bicarbonate (level 4). Howeve r, the link between citalopram
and this dysrhythmia is tenuous (104). In an abstract (level
6), it was used along with multiple other measures in the ini-
tial resuscitation of a patient in cardiac arrest (52). In the
final case (level 4), it might have been associated with
improvement in CNS effects such as seizures, but the patient
had also received other treatments (67). In many cases, the
possibility of tricyclic anti depressant poisoning was not
completely evaluated.
Supportive and symptomatic treatment
There were a number of ge neral supporti ve measures
reported in the SSRI overdos e literature including oxygen,
intubation and ventilation, CPR, IV fluids, benzodiaz-
epines, anticonvulsants, pressors, antidysrhythmics, dextrose,
cooling, treatment of allerg ic reactions, and antibiotics.Since none of these has controlled data to support its effi-
cacy in SSRI toxicity, the anecdotal reports are not pre-
sented here.
Limitations of the published data
As with much of the clinical toxicology literature, there were
no prospective studies that sp ecifically investigated toxic
dose thresholds for SSRIs, and only a small number of retro-
spective articles contained any toxic threshold or dose-effect
information. Even when such information was presented in
an article, there were often questions regarding the accuracy
of the dose estimates due to uncertainties in the histories.
Among the prospective trials  available, the SSRIs were
administered in therapeutic doses, which would be much
smaller than amounts likely to be ingested in an overdose.
Retrospective data with dose -effect information was often
confounded by the presence of  co-ingestants, differences in
decontamination or treatment measures, and concurrent med-
ical conditions that could have  altered the clinical presenta-
tion or outcome. It was difficult , if not impossible, to account
for inter-individual difference s in age, weight, underlying
health condition and medication use, or genetic factors that
might affect an SSRI’s toxico kinetics and toxicodynamics.
Among larger case series, ma ny of the patients remained
asymptomatic and ingested doses and/or effects were typi-
cally reported as ranges, percentages, or means for the cases,
so that individual doses result ing in specific effects could not
be discerned.
Overall, the level 4 and 6 data were extremely difficult to
interpret and summarize. The le vel of clinical detail pre-
sented in the case reports and abstracts varied widely. In
most, the SSRI ingestion was not independently verified or
confirmed by laboratory testin g, nor were co-ingestants ade-
quately evaluated. There is typically poor correlation
between estimated doses and subsequent serum concentra-
tions or toxicity, particularly for children with  unintentional
ingestions of other drugs su ch as acetaminophen for which
quantitative laboratory confirma tion is routin e (105). Poison
center staff members often knowingly record the dose taken
as the worst-case scenario in order to provide a wide margin
of safety.
The unclear time interval from ingestion to onset of toxic-
ity is confounded by a lack of a definition for consequential
toxicity. For instance, after an SSRI overdose the develop-
ment of mild drowsiness in a child could indicate the onset of
toxicity or could represent the approach of nap time.
Complicating matters further was the presence of numer-
ous articles detail ing adverse effe cts occurring with
therapeutic doses, primarily representing the serotonin syn-
drome. Indeed, in some cases, these adverse effects were
moderate to severe in nature (e.g., seizures, hyperthermia)
and were often difficult to distinguish from th e effects seen
with overdoses.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 326 L.S. Nelson et al.
Conclusions
Key decision points for triage
The expert consensus panel ch ose to emphasize the impor-
tance of information that would be needed in order to make a
sound triage decision for a patient who has an SSRI. These
variables include the patient’s intent, the patient’s symptoms,
the product and the dose inge sted, the time since the inges-
tion, and co-ingestants. The expert consensus panel agreed
that in each case, the judgment of the specialist in poison
information, the poison center medical director, or other poi-
son center-affiliated clinicians  might override any specific
recommendation from this guideline.
Patient intent
The panel concluded that all patients with suicidal intent,
intentional abuse, or in cases in which a malicious intent is
suspected (e.g., child abuse or neglect) should be referred to
an emergency department. Patients without these characteris-
tics are candidates for consideration of out-of-hospital man-
agement of their ingestion.
Patient symptoms
There were a number of articles reporting adverse effects
occurring with therapeutic SSRI  dosages, mostly mild to mod-
erate in nature. Furthermore, it is likely that there are many
other such articles that were not identified or recovered and,
therefore, not reviewed for this guideline because of the search
criteria used to identify articles.  In the absence of an estab-
lished toxic dose, the expert consensus panel concluded that
the presence of more than mild clinical effects (mild effects
include vomiting, somnolence [lightly sedated and arousable
with speaking voice or light touch], mydriasis, or diaphoresis),
including those consistent with serotonin syndrome, should be
used as an indication for emergency department referral
regardless of the dose reportedly ingested. Patients who have
unintentional SSRI ingestions and are asymptomatic could stay
at home with poison center follow-up.
Dose
There is little information in the literature to adequately
define a minimum acute toxic dose of any SSRI. Several
reviews that included summary data concluded that the SSRIs
as a class have a wide margin of safety, particularly when
compared to the tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (26,29,106). Since none of these medica-
tions are approved for use in ch ildren less than 6 years of age
and, therefore, do not have r eadily available dosing information
in children, a triage determination based on a dose relative to a
pediatric therapeutic dose is not possible. The panel concluded
that for patients of all ages who use SSRIs therapeuticallyand are asymptomatic or have  only mild effects, doses
greater than five times their personal single therapeutic dose
(not daily dose) merit emerge ncy department referral. For
patients of all ages naïve to SSRIs who are asymptomatic or
have only mild effects without concerning abnormal clinical
findings, doses greater than five times the lowest adult initial
therapeutic dose of any SSRI merit emergency department
referral (i.e., citalopram 100 mg, escitalopram 50 mg, fluox-
etine 100 mg, fluvoxamine 250 mg, paroxetine 100 mg, ser-
traline 250 mg). These doses for children are based on the
fact that for the SSRIs that are indicated for use in older chil-
dren and that there is overlap in the therapeutic dose ranges
of children and adults, suggestin g at least that an adult thera-
peutic dose is safe. The multipli cative factor is based on the
generally accepted safety of the SSRIs even in patients with
large overdoses. The extrapolation to the other SSRIs is
made on the basis of their sim ilar, class-based, toxicological
profiles. This triage dose threshold is an attempt to balance
the concern for adverse clinical effects with the desire to pre-
vent the cost, risk, and inta ngible effects of an unneeded
emergency department visit. Sinc e the onset of clinical effect
is generally gradual in thos e ingesting less than referral
doses, waiting for the developm ent of more than mild symp-
toms to prompt a visit to an  emergency department should be
safe.
Citalopram is regarded as the SSRI with the greatest
potential for causing toxicity. There are reports of adverse
electrocardiographi c effects after non-massive overdose
(107), which could be delayed in onset (51), although there
is little specific dose or onset data on which to base clinical
decisions (9,27). Based on the findings in the literature
review there is no imperative at this time to alter the triage
criteria for citalopram.
Time to onset of toxicity
There is little information in the literature to adequately
define a minimum or a maximum ti me of onset of toxicity for
any specific SSRI for patients less than 6 years of age. Based
on the generally accepted safety of the SSRIs, the expert con-
sensus panel concluded that pa tients who have unintentional
SSRI ingestions of up to five times an initial adult therapeutic
dose (i.e., citalopram 100 mg, escitalopram 50 mg, fluoxetine
100 mg, fluvoxamine 250 mg, pa roxetine 100 mg, sertraline
250 mg) or up to five times their own dose if already on the
SSRI and are asymptomatic or have mild effects (defined
above) could stay at home with poison center follow-up since
the likelihood of delayed toxic ity is small as long as they
remain asymptomatic. Since it is expected that the onset of
toxicity should occur by the time peak serum concentrations
are reached, observation for 8 hours is recommended based
on the pharmacokinetics of th e individual SSRIs. Consider-
ation should be given to the time of day that home observa-
tion will take place, since observation during normal sleep
hours might not be practical or reliable.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 327
Potential out-of-hospital treatments
The expert consensus panel concluded that out-of hospital
gastrointestinal decontamination offered potential benefit,
but the risks and likely benefit to the patient were difficult to
determine. Inducing emesis with ipecac syrup was concluded
to carry the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents if
the patient became sedated and is not supported by sufficient
evidence of benefit to warrant its use. Moreover, ipecac syrup
would likely delay or prevent the adminstration of activated
charcoal, a potentially more effe ctive treatment, and it might
induce a vagal stimulus that could further depress heart rate.
Activated charcoal was determined to be a useful treatment
that could be administered ora lly in the preh ospital setting,
although the effectiveness an d risks of activated charcoal
have not been evaluated in the prehospital management of
SSRI poisoning. Also, the panel agreed that tr ansportation to
an emergency department should  not be delayed in order to
attempt charcoal administration.
Serotonin syndrome
The primary adverse clinical effect associated with chronic
ingestion of SSRIs is serotonin syndrome. There is no ade-
quate support from the literature on which to base triage deci-
sions. Since many consider the serotonin syndrome to be
more likely to develop in pati ents on multiple serotonergic
drugs, it seems prudent, althou gh not strictly evidence-based,
to closely observe for symptoms, either at home or in a hospi-
tal, any patient exposed to an SSRI who is taking a serotoner-
gic agent (e.g., tricyclic anti depressant, monoamine oxidase
inhibitor, dextromethorphan, li thium). Note that serotonin
syndrome has been documented with therapeutic doses of
SSRIs.
Recommendations
1. All patients with suicidal in tent, intentional abuse, or in
cases in which a malicious inte nt is suspected (e.g., child
abuse or neglect) should be referred to an emergency
department. This activity should be guided by local poison
center procedures. In general, this should occur regardless
of the dose reported (Grade D).
2. Any patient already experiencing any symptoms other
than mild effects (mild effects include vomiting, somno-
lence [lightly sedated and ar ousable with speaking voice
or light touch], mydriasis, or diaphoresis) should be trans-
ported to an emergency depa rtment. Transportation via
ambulance should be considered based on the condition of
the patient and the length of time it will take the patient to
arrive at the emergency department (Grade D).
3. Asymptomatic patients or those with mild effects (defined
above) following isolated un intentional acute SSRI inges-
tions of up to five times an  initial adult therapeutic dose
(i.e., citalopram 100 mg, escitalopram 50 mg, fluoxetine100 mg, fluvoxamine 250 mg, paroxetine 100 mg, sertra-
line 250 mg) can be observed at home with instructions to
call the poison center back if symptoms develop. For
patients already on an SSRI, those with ingestion of up to
five times their own single  therapeutic dose can be
observed at home with inst ructions to call the poison
center back if symptoms develop (Grade D).
4. The poison center should co nsider making follow-up calls
during the first 8 hours after ingestion, following its nor-
mal procedure. Consideration should be given to the time
of day when home observation will take place. Observa-
tion during normal sleep hours might not reliably identify
the onset of toxicity. Depend ing on local poison center
policy, patients could be referred to an emergency depart-
ment if the observation would take place during normal
sleeping hours of the patien t or caretaker (Grade D).
5. Do not induce emesis (Grade C).
6. The use of oral activated char coal can be considered since
the likelihood of SSRI-induced loss of consciousness or
seizures is small. However, th ere are no data to suggest a
specific clinical benefit. The routine use of out-of-hospital
oral activated charcoal in pa tients with unintentional SSRI
overdose cannot be advocated at this time (Grade C).
7. Use intravenous benzodiazepines for seizures and benzo-
diazepines and external cooling measures for hyperther-
mia (>104 °F [>40 °C]) for SSRI-ind uced serotonin
syndrome. This should be done in consultation with and
authorized by EMS medical direction, by a written treat-
ment protocol or policy, or with direct medical oversight
(Grade C).
These recommendations are summarized in Appendix 4.
Implications for research
The panel identified the follow ing areas as n eeding additional
research:
1. The acute toxic dose of each SSRI for different patient
populations needs to be determined.
2. The maximal time to the onset of adverse clinical effects
for each SSRI remains unclear and could be determined by
case investigation. Verification of ingestion, exclusion of
alternative explanations, and detailed corroborative his-
tory would be required of such case reports.
3. The prevalence, minimal resp onsible dose, time to onset,
and consequences of the effects of citalopram on cardiac
electrophysiology (as measured both by the electrocardio-
gram and clinically) need clar ification. This could be done
through clinical trials or, mo re likely, by enhanced report-
ing in case reports or case series.
4. Risk factors for the development of the serotonin syn-
drome are not known other than in generalities such as
“massive overdose” or “combinations of serotonergic
drugs.” However, many such ev ents do not result in theDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 328 L.S. Nelson et al.
serotonin syndrome. Clarific ation of the predisposing
causes and risk groups is necessary.
5. The safety and efficacy of activated charcoal in the pre-
vention or mitigation of SSRI-induced adverse effects
should be clarified.
Disclosures
Dr. Erdman was an employee  of AstraZeneca during his
work on this guideline, and Dr. Booze’s husband is employed
by AstraZeneca. There are no other potential conflicts of
interest reported by  the expert consensus panel or project
staff regarding this guideline.
References
1. Watson WA, Litovitz TL, Rodgers  GC, Klein-Schwartz W, Reid N,
Youniss J, Flanagan A, Wruk KM. 2004 annual report of the American
Association of Poison Control Ce nters Toxic Exposure Surveillance
System. Am J Emerg Med 2005; 23:589–666.
2. Toxic Exposure Surveillance System  (TESS). American  Association of
Poison Control Centers 2000–2005.
3. Miller TR, Lestina DC. Costs of po isoning in the United States and sav-
ings from poison control centers: a benefit-cost analysis. Ann Emerg
Med 1997; 29:239–245.
4. Klasco RK, ed. Poisindex system . Greenwood Village (CO): Thomson
Micromedex; edition expires March 2004.
5. Mosby’s Drug Consult 2005. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005.
6. Stork CM. Serotonin re uptake inhibitors and atypical antidepressants.
In: Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE , Lewin NA, Howland MA, Hoff-
man RS, Nelson LS, eds. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 7th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill; 2002. p. 865–874.
7. Whyte IM, Dawson AH, Buckley NA. Relative toxicity of venlafaxine
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibi tors in overdose compared to tri-
cyclic antidepressants. QJM 2003; 96:369–374.
8. Grundemar L, Wohlfart B, Lagerstedt C, Bengtsson F, Eklundh G. Symp-
toms and signs of severe citalopram overdose. Lancet 1997; 349:1602.
9. Ho R, Norman RF, van Veen MM, Anderson IB. A 3-year review of
citalopram and escitalopram ingesti ons. [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxi-
col 2004; 42:746.
10. Kelly CA, Dhaun N, Laing WJ, Strachan FE, Good AM, Bateman DN.
Comparative toxicity of citalopram and the newer antidepressants after
overdose. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004; 42:67–71.
11. Öström, Eriksson A, Thorson J, Sp igset O. Fatal overdose with citalo-
pram. Lancet 1996; 348:339–340.
12. Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005;
352:1112–1120.
13. http://www.fda.gov/medwatch /safety/2005/safety05.htm#Paxil3
14. Gentile S. SSRIs in pregnancy a nd lactation: empha sis on neurodevel-
opmental outcome. CNS Drugs 2005; 19:623–633.
15. Malm H, Klaukka T, Neuvonen PJ. Risks associated with selective seroto-
nin reuptake inhibitors in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2005; 106:1289–1296.
16. Shaneyfelt TM, Mayo-Smith MF, Ro thwangl J. Are guidelines following
guidelines? The methodological quality of clinical practice guidelines in
the peer-reviewed medical litera ture. JAMA 1999 ; 281:1900–1905.
17. Shiffman RN, Shekelle P, Over hage JM, Slutsky J, Grimshaw J,
Deshpande AM. Standardized reporting  of clinical pr actice guidelines:
a proposal from the Conference on Guideline Standardization. Ann
Intern Med 2003; 139:493–498.
18. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Grummer-Strawn LM, Flegal KM, Guo SS,
Wei R, Mei Z, Curtin LR, Roche AF, Johnson CL. CDC GrowthCharts: United States. Advance Data  from Vital and Health Statistics;
No. 314. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health  Statistics, 2000.
19. Benowitz NL. Antidepressants, general (noncyclic). In: Olson KR, ed.
Poisoning & drug overdose. 4th ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2004.
p. 88–90.
20. Brent J. Serotonin reuptake inhibitors, newer antidepressants, and the
serotonin syndrome. In: Ford MD, Delaney KA, Ling LJ, Erickson T,
eds. Clinical Toxicology . Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001. p. 522–531.
21. Pentel PR, Keyler DE, Haddad LM. Tricyclic antidepressants and selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In: Haddad LM, Shannon MW,
Winchester JF, eds. Clinical Manage ment of Poisoning and Drug Over-
dose. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998. p. 437–451.
22. Whyte, IM. Serotonin uptake inhibi tors. In: Dart RC, ed. Medical Toxi-
cology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Li ppincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004.
p. 843–851.
23. Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, eds. Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics 17th ed. Philad elphia: WB Saunders; 2004.
24. Lee C, Robertson J, Shilkofski N. Drug  doses. In: Robertson J, Shilkofski N,
eds. The Harriet Lane Handbook: a Manual for Pediatric House
Officers / the Harriet Lane Service,  Children’s Medical and Surgical
Center of the Johns Hopkins Hospit al. Philadelphia: Elsevier Mosby;
2005.
25. http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/ antidepressants/SSRIPHA200410.htm
26. Isbister GK, Dawson A, Whyte IM . Citalopram overdose, serotonin
toxicity, or neurolep tic malignant syndrome? Can J Psychiatry 2001;
46:657–659.
27. Wijnands-Kleukers APG, Zoelen G van, Dries I de, Muelenbelt J. A
prospective study on intoxications wi th citalopram [abstract]. J Toxicol
Clin Toxicol 2002; 40:274–275.
28. Baker SD, Morgan DL. Fluoxetine exposures: are they safe for chil-
dren? Am J Emerg Med 2004; 22:211–213.
29. Barbey JT, Roose SP. SSRI safety in overdose. J Clin Psychiatry 1998;
59 Suppl 15:42–48.
30. Spiller HA, Morse S, Muir C. Fluoxe tine ingestion: a one year retro-
spective study. Vet Hum Toxicol 1990; 32:153–155.
31. Feierabend RH, Jr. Benign course in a child with a massive fluoxetine
overdose. J Fam Pract 1995; 41:289–291.
32. Garnier R, Azoyan P, Chataigner D,  Taboulet P, Dellattre D, Efthymiou
ML. Acute fluvoxamine  poisoning. J Int Med Res 1993; 21:197–208.
33. Fraser J, South M. Life-threate ning fluvoxamine overdose in a 4-year-
old child. Intensive Care Med 1999; 25:548.
34. Myers LB, Dean BS, Krenzelok EP . Paroxetine (Paxil): overdose
assessment of a new selective sero tonin reuptake inhibitor [abstract].
Vet Hum Toxicol 1994; 36:370.
35. Myers LB, Krenzelok EP. Paroxetin e (Paxil) overdose: a pediatric
focus. Vet Hum Toxicol 1997; 39:86–88.
36. Baker SD, Vincent CB, Morgan DL. Paroxetine exposures: five-year
analysis of unintentional ingestions in the pediatric population reported
to the Texas Poison Center Network.  [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
2003; 41:712.
37. Klein-Schwartz W, Anderson B. Anal ysis of sertraline-only overdoses.
Am J Emerg Med 1996; 14:456–458.
38. Myers LB, Dean BS, Krenzelok EP. A closer look: sertraline (Zoloft)
and pediatric overdoses [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin To xicol 1995; 33:551.
39. Lau GT, Horowitz BZ. Sertraline overdose. Acad Emerg Med 1996;
3:132–136.
40. Catalano G, Cooper DS, Catalano MC, Guttman JM. Pediatric sertraline
overdose. Clin Neuropharmacol 1998; 21:59–61.
41. Pao M, Tipnis T. Serotonin syndr ome after sertraline overdose in a
5-year-old girl. Arch Pediat r Adolesc Med 1997; 151:1064–1067.
42. Personne M, Persson H, Sjöberg E. Citalopram toxicity. Lancet 1997;
350:518–519.
43. Personne M, Sjöberg G, Persson H. Citalopram overdose–review of
cases treated in Swedish hospit als. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1997;
35:237–240.
44. Aydin N, Anac E, Caykoylu A, Ak cay F. Neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome due to citalopram overdose. Can J Psychiat ry 2000; 45:941–942.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 329
45. Catalano G, Catalano MC, Epstei n MA, Tsambiras PE. QTc interval
prolongation associated with cital opram overdose: a case report and lit-
erature review. Clin Neuropharmacol 2001; 24:158–162.
46. Cuenca PJ, Holt KR, Hoefle JD. Seizure secondary to citalopram over-
dose. J Emerg Med 2004; 26:177–181.
47. Engebretsen KM, Harris CR, Wood JE . Cardiotoxicity and late onset
seizures with citalopram overd ose. J Emerg Med 2003; 25:163–166.
48. Lepola U, Leinonen E, Koponen H.  Serum drug levels and electroen-
cephalographic findings after cital opram intoxication. Nord J Psychia-
try 1996; 50:61–62.
49. Rothenhausler HB, Hoberl C, Ehrentrout S, Kapfhammer HP, Weber
MM. Suicide attempt by pure cital opram overdose causing long-lasting
severe sinus bradycardia, hypotens ion and syncope: successful therapy
with a temporary pacemaker. Pharmacopsychiatry 2000; 33:150–152.
50. Snider RD. Case report: left bundle branch block–a rare complication of
citalopram overdose. J S C Med Assoc 2001; 97:380–382.
51. Tarabar AF, Hoffman RS, Nelson LS. Citalopram overdose: late pre-
sentation of torsades de  pointes (TDP) with cardiac arrest [abstract]. J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2003; 41:676.
52. Penfornis C, Hueber-Paysant V, Souplet JP, Curtes JP, Caubet A. Fatal
case of citalopram intoxication [abstract].  Vet Hum Toxicol 1998;
40:178.
53. Lindgren KN, Bangh SA, Ling L, Stre mski E, Mueller C. Escitalopram,
a review of adverse effects in over dose reported to select regional poi-
son center [abstract]. J Toxi col Clin Toxicol 2003; 41:658.
54. Olsen DG, Dart RC, Robinett M. Severe serotonin syndrome from esci-
talopram overdose [abstract]. J T oxicol Clin Toxicol 2004; 42:744–745.
55. Borys DJ, Setzer SC , Ling LJ, Reisdorf JJ, Day LC, Krenzelok EP. The
effects of fluoxetine in the overdose patient. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1990; 28:331–340.
56. Cooper GL. The safety of fluoxetine--an update. Br J Psychiatry Suppl
1988:77–86.
57. Braitberg G, Curry SC. Seizure af ter isolated fluoxetine overdose. Ann
Emerg Med 1995; 26:234–237.
58. Finnegan KT, Gabiola JM. Fluoxetine overdose. Am J Psychiatry 1988;
145:1604.
59. Graudins A, Vossler C, Wang R. Fluoxetine-induced cardiotoxicity
with response to bicarbonate therapy. Am J Emerg Med 1997;
15:501–503.
60. Gross R, Dannon PN, Lepkifker E, Zohar J, Kotler M. Generalized
seizures caused by fluoxetine overdose. Am J Emerg Med 1998;
16:328–329.
61. Grover J, Caravati EM. Right bundle branch block and delayed seizure
associated with citalopram and fluoxe tine ingestion [abstract]. J Toxicol
Clin Toxicol 2001; 39:491.
62. Kim SW, Pentel PR. Flu-like symptoms associated with fluoxetine
overdose: a case report. J Toxico l Clin Toxicol 1989; 27:389–393.
63. Kincaid RL, McMullin MM, Crookham SB, Rieders F. Re port of a flu-
oxetine fatality. J Anal  Toxicol 1990; 14:327–329.
64. Kious T, Wax P, Cobaugh D. Tramadol and fluoxetine induced seroto-
nin syndrome with subsequent severe  hyperpyrexia despite cyprohepta-
dine [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1999; 37:631–632.
6 5 . L h e r m  T ,  L o t t i n  F ,  L a r b i  D ,  B r a y  M ,  L e g a l l  C ,  C a e n  D .  T o r s a d e  d e
pointes après intoxication monomedicamenteuse à la fluoxetine. Presse
Med 2000; 29:306–307.
66. Moore JL, Rodriguez R. Toxicity of fluoxetine in overdose. Am J Psy-
chiatry 1990; 147:1089.
67. Riddle MA, Brown N, Dzubinski D, Jetmalani AN, Law Y, Woolston
JL. Fluoxetine overdose in an adol escent. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 1989; 28:587–588.
68. Henry JA. Overdose and safety with fluvoxamine. Int Clin Psychophar-
macol 1991; 6 Suppl 3:41–45.
69. Martin AJ, Tebbs VM, Ashford JJ. Affective disorders in general prac-
tice. Treatment of 6000 patients wi th fluvoxamine. Pharmatherapeutica
1987; 5:40–49.
70. Amital D, Amital H, Gross R, Ki ndler S, Zohar J. Sinus bradycardia
due to fluvoxamine overdose. Br J Psychiatry 1994; 165:553–554.71. Banerjee AK. Recovery from prolonged cerebral depression after flu-
voxamine overdose. Br Me d J (Clin Res Ed) 1988; 296:1774.
72. Buchberger R, Wagner W. Fluvoxamine: safety profile in extensive
post-marketing surveillance. Ph armacopsychiatry 2002; 35:101–108.
73. Chen Y, Barboteu M, Taboulet P, Le  Gall JR. Convulsions et arrêt cir-
culatoire lors d’une intoxication par la fluvoxamine et la paroxetine.
Therapie 1998; 53:165–167.
74. Gill M, LoVecchio F, Selden B. Se rotonin syndrome in a child after a
single dose of fluvoxamine. Ann Emerg Med 1999; 33:457–459.
75. Hahn I, Blancaflor G, Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Nelson LS. Fluvox-
amine overdose producing status epil epticus [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 2000; 38:573.
76. Langlois RP, Paquette D. Sustai ned bradycardia during fluvoxamine
and buspirone intoxication. Can J Psychiatry 1994; 39:126–127.
77. Lebegue B. Survivable fluvoxamine overdose. Am J Psychiatry 1990;
147:1689.
78. Manet P, Hilpert F, Fouet P, Toledano D. Troubles du rythme ventricu-
laire lors d’une intoxication à la fluvoxamine. Therapie 1993; 48:62–63.
79. De Riu PL, Rosati G, Sotgiu S, Sechi G. Epileptic seizures after treat-
ment with thiocolchicoside. Epilepsia 2001; 42:1084–1086.
80. Greb WH, Buscher G, Dierdorf HD, von Schrader HW, Wolf D. Ability
of charcoal to prevent absorption of  paroxetine. Acta Psychiatr Scand
Suppl 1989; 350:156–157.
81. Lund J, Lomholt B, Fabricius J, Christensen JA, Bechgaard E. Paroxet-
ine: pharmacokinetics, tolerance a nd depletion of bl ood 5-HT in man.
Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh) 1979; 44:289–295.
82. Christensen O, Sorensen HA, Almdal TP. Bivirkninger ved behan-
dling med selektive serotoningenoptagelseshaemmere. Hyponotri-
oemi pa grund af Schwartz-Bartters syndrome. Ugeskr Laeger 1996;
158:6920–6922.
83. Dunbar GC. An interim overview of the safety and tolerability of parox-
etine. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl 1989; 350:135–137.
84. Gorman SE, Rice T, Simmons HF. Paroxetine overdose. Am J Emerg
Med 1993; 11:682.
85. Graeme K, Curry S, Kunkel D. Delayed cardiotoxicity after haloperidol
and paroxetine overdose [abstract ]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1999;
37:635.
86. Johnsen CR, Hoejlyng N. Hyponatrem ia following acute overdose with
paroxetine. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998; 36:333–335.
87. Johnson R, Velez LI, Roth B. Par oxetine as a sole cause of serotonin
syndrome: a massive overdose with documented serum paroxetine lev-
els [abstract]. J Toxicol Cl in Toxicol 2001; 39:491.
88. Robert P, Senard JM, Fabre M, Ca bot C, Cathala B. Syndrome sétonin-
ergique lors d’une intoxication ai guë aux antidépresseurs. Ann Fr
Anesth Reanim 1996; 15:663–665.
89. Velez LI, Shepherd G, Roth BA, Benitez FL. Serotonin syndrome
with elevated paroxetine concentrations. Ann Pharmacother 2004;
38:269–272.
90. Waksman JC, Heard K, Jolliff H, Daly FFS, Bogdan GM, Dart RC.
Serotonin syndrome associated with the use of St. John’s wort (Hyperi-
cum perforatum) and paroxetine. [a bstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
2000; 38:521.
91. Mattila MJ, Saarialho-Kere U, Mat tila M. Acute effects of sertraline,
amitriptyline, and placebo on the ps ychomotor performance of healthy
subjects over 50 years of age. J Cl in Psychiatry 1988; 49 Suppl:52–58.
92. Brendel DH, Bodkin JA, Yang JM. Massive sertraline overdose. Ann
Emerg Med 2000; 36:524–526.
93. Brown DF, Kerr HD. Sertraline overdose. Ann Pharmacother 1994;
28:1307.
94. Caracci G. Unsuccessful suicide at tempt by sertraline overdose. Am J
Psychiatry 1994; 151:147.
95. Kaminski CA, Robbins MS, Weibley RE. Sertraline in toxication in a
child. Ann Emerg Med 1994; 23:1371–1374.
96. Lopez Gaston OD, Wierzbinsky S, Lopez Gaston RS, Resnik S,
Pardomenico S, Jorge M. Sertralina. Efectos adve rsos por superposicion
de manifestaciones de sindromes se rotoninico y neur oléptico maligno.
Medicina (B Aires) 2000; 60:241–244.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 330 L.S. Nelson et al.
97. Meier K, Lam R. 4 gram sertraline (Zoloft®) overdose resulting in
delayed seizures [abstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1998; 36:520–521.
98. Mordel A, Linden CH. Marked si nus tachycardia fo llowing sertraline
overdose [abstract]. J Toxi col Clin Toxicol 1998; 36:521.
99. Vanberkum M, Thiel J, Leikin J, Se govia A. A fatality due to seroto-
nin syndrome [abstract]. J Toxi col Clin Toxicol 1996; 34:539–540.
100. Laine K, Kivisto KT, Pelttari S, Neuvonen PJ. The effect of activated
charcoal on the absorption of flu oxetine, with spec ial reference to
delayed charcoal administration. Pharmacol Toxicol 1996; 79:270–273.
101. Lapatto-Reiniluoto O, Kivisto KT, Neuvonen PJ. Effect of activated char-
coal alone or given after gastric lavage in reducing the absorption of diaz-
epam, ibuprofen and citalopram. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1999; 48:148–153.
102. Isbister GK, Dawson AH, Whyte IM . Feasibility of prehospital treat-
ment with activated charcoal: who could we treat, who should we
treat? Emerg Med J 2003; 20:375–378.103. Phillips S, Brent J, Kulig K, He iligenstein J, Birkett M. Fluoxetine
versus tricyclic antidepressants: a prospective multicenter study of
antidepressant drug overdoses. The Antidepressant Study Group. J
Emerg Med 1997; 15:439–445.
104. Brucculeri M, Kaplan J, Lande L. Reversal of citalopram-induced
junctional bradycardia with intrav enous sodium bicarbonate. Pharma-
cotherapy 2005; 25:119–122.
105. Caravati EM. Unintentional acetaminophen ingestion in children and
the potential for hepatotoxicity. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2000;
38:291–296.
106. Henry JA. Epidemiology and relative  toxicity of antidepressant drugs
in overdose. Drug Saf 1997; 16:374–390.
107. Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A,  Whyte IM. Relative toxicity of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibito rs (SSRIs) in overdose. J Toxicol
Clin Toxicol 2004; 42:277–285.
Appendix 1 
Expert Consensus Panel Members
Lisa L. Booze, Pharm.D.
Certified Specialist in  Poison Information
Maryland Poison Center
University of Maryland School of Pharmacy
Baltimore, Maryland
E. Martin Caravati, M.D., M.P.H., F.A.C.M.T., F.A.C.E.P.
Professor of Surgery (Emergency Medicine)
University of Utah
Medical Director
Utah Poison Center
Salt Lake City, Utah
Gwenn Christianson, R.N., M.S.N.
Certified Specialist in  Poison Information
Indiana Poison Center
Indianapolis, Indiana
Peter A. Chyka, Pharm.D., F.A.A.C.T., D.A.B.A.T.
Professor, Department of Pharmacy
University of Tennessee Health Science Center
Memphis, Tennessee
Daniel C. Keyes, M.D., M.P.H.
Medical Director
Pine Bluff Chemical Demilitarization Facility
Associate Professor, Southwestern Toxicology Training
Program
Dallas, Texas
Anthony S. Manoguerra, Pharm.D., D.A.B.A.T.,
F.A.A.C.T.
Professor of Clinical Pharmacy and Associate Dean
School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
University of California San DiegoFormer Director, California Poison Control System,
San Diego Division
San Diego, California
Lewis S. Nelson, M.D., F.A.C.E.P., F.A.C.M.T., F.A.A.C.T.
Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine
New York University School of Medicine
Associate Medical Director
New York City Pois on Control Center
New York, New York
Kent R. Olson, M.D., F.A.C. E.P., F.A.A.C.T., F.A.C.M.T.
Medical Director
California Poison Control Sy stem, San Francisco Division
Clinical Professor of  Medicine & Pharmacy
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Elizabeth J. Scharman, Pharm.D., D.A.B.A.T., B.C.P.S.,
F.A.A.C.T.
Director, West Virginia Poison Center
Professor, West Virginia Un iversity School of Pharmacy
Department of Clinical Pharmacy
Charleston, West Virginia
Paul M. Wax, M.D., F.A.C.M.T.
Attending Toxicologist
University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
Alan D. Woolf, M.D., M.P.H., F.A.C.M.T.
Director, Program in Environmental Medicine
Children’s Hospital, Boston
Associate Professor of Pediatrics
Harvard Medical School
Boston, MassachusettsDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 Out-of-hospital management of SSRI poisoning 331
Appendix 2 
Grades of Recommendation and Levels of Evidence
Appendix 3 
Secondary Review Panel Organizations
Ambulatory Pediatric Association
American Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine
American Academy of Emergency Medicine
American Academy of Pediatrics
American Association for Health Education
American College of Clinical Pharmacy
American College of Emergency Physicians
American College of Occupa tional and Environmental
Medicine
American Pharmacists Association
American Public Health Association
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists
Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs
Association of Occupational and Environmental 
Clinics
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials
Canadian Association of Poison Control CentresCenters for Disease Control and Prevention – National
Center for Injury Pr evention and Control
Consumer Federation of America
Consumer Product Safety Commission
Department of Transportation
Emergency Medical Services for Children
Emergency Nurses Association
Environmental Protection Agency
Food and Drug Administration
National Association of Chil dren’s Hospitals and Related
Institutions
National Association of Emergency Medical Services
Physicians
National Association of Em ergency Medical Technicians
National Association of School Nurses
National Association of State Emergency Medical Services
Directors
National Safe Kids Campaign
Teratology Society
World Health Organization International Programme on
Chemical SafetyGrade of recommendation Level of evidence Description of study design
A 1a Systematic review (with homogeneity) of randomized clinical trials
1b Individual randomized clinical trials  (with narrow confidence interval)
1c All or none (all patients died before the drug became available, but some now survive on it; 
or when some patients died before the drug became available, but none now die on it.)
B 2a Systematic review (with homogeneity) of cohort studies
2b Individual cohort study (including low quality randomized clinical trial)
2c “Outcomes” research
3a Systemic review (with homogeneity) of case-control studies
3b Individual case-control study
C 4 Case series, single case reports (and poor quality cohort and case control studies)
D 5 Expert opinion without explicit critical appraisal or based on physiology or bench research
Z6 AbstractsDownloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 332 L.S. Nelson et al.
Appendix 4 
Triage Algorithm for SSRI Pois oning in Patients of All Ages
Is suicidal, abuse, or malicious intent suspected? YES → Refer to emergency department.
NO ↓
Is the home situation of concern (e .g., patient lives alone or family/
caregiver seems unreliable)?YES → Refer to emergency department.
NO ↓
Is the patient manifesting more than mild effects (mild effects include 
vomiting, somnolence [lightly sedated and arousable with speaking 
voice or light touch], mydriasis, or diaphoresis)?YES → Refer to emergency department.
NO ↓
Is the patient therapeutically using the SSRI that was unintentionally 
taken in overdose and, if yes, did they take more than 5 times their usual 
single therapeutic dose?YES → Refer to emergency department.
NO ↓
Is the patient therapeutically naïve to the SSRI that was unintentionally 
taken in overdose and, if yes, did they ingest more than the following 
amount of an SSRI (five times an adult initial therapeutic dose)?YES → Refer to emergency department.
Citalopram: 100 mg
Escitalopram: 50 mg
Fluoxetine: 100 mg
Fluvoxamine: 250 mg
Paroxetine: 100 mg
Sertraline: 250 mg
NO ↓
Is the patient taking other medications likely to interact with the SSRI 
and cause serotonin syndrome, such as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor?YES → Refer to emergency department or provide poison 
center-initiated follow-up every 2 hours for 8 hours.
NO ↓
Observe at home. Instruct caller to call poison center back if symptoms 
appear. Consider periodic poison center-initiated follow-up during the 
first 8 hours after ingestion. Refer to an emergency department if more 
than mild symptoms develop. Check for drug interactions if multiple 
substances are involved.Downloaded by [216.133.78.226] at 06:08 14 July 2016 