Citation: Seradj, D.-S.; Beeck, R.;
Haase, A.; Krause, J.; Schick, P .;
Weitschies, W. Inﬂuence of Different
Diets on the Degradation of
Sulfasalazine by Colon Bacteria
Determined Using MimiCol3.
Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ph16081128
Academic Editor: Lu ís Manuel Lopes
Rodrigues Da Silva
Received: 14 July 2023
Revised: 4 August 2023
Accepted: 8 August 2023
Published: 10 August 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
pharmaceuticals
Article
Influence of Different Diets on the Degradation of Sulfasalazine
by Colon Bacteria Determined Using MimiCol3
Dariah-Sohreh Seradj, Regine Beeck, Annika Haase, Julius Krause, Philipp Schick
 and Werner Weitschies *
Center of Drug Absorption and Transport, Department of Biopharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology,
University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 3, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany;
dariah-sohreh.seradj@uni-greifswald.de (D.-S.S.); regine_beeck@web.de (R.B.); haaseann@gmx.de (A.H.);
julius.krause@uni-greifswald.de (J.K.); philipp.schick@uni-greifswald.de (P .S.)
*Correspondence: werner.weitschies@uni-greifswald.de; Tel.: +49-3834-420-4813
Abstract: The microbiome of the colon is characterized by its great diversity. This varies not only intra-
but also interindividually and is inﬂuenced by endogenous and exogenous factors, such as dietary
and lifestyle factors. The aim of this work was to investigate the extent to which the degradation of
the drug sulfasalazine is inﬂuenced by different microbiota. Therefore, the in vitro model MimiCol3
was used, which represents the physiological conditions of the ascending colon. In addition to a
representative physiological volume, the pH value, redox potential and an anaerobic atmosphere are
important to provide the bacteria with the best possible growth conditions. Stool samples were taken
from three healthy subjects, comparing omnivorous, vegetarian and meat-rich diets, and cultured
for 24 h. However, the nutrient medium used for cultivation led to the alignment of the bacterial
composition of the microbiota. The previously observed differences between the diets could not be
maintained. Nevertheless, the similar degradation of sulfasalazine was observed in all microbiota
studied in MimiCol3. This makes MimiCol3a suitable in vitro model for metabolism studies in the
gut microbiome.
Keywords: MimiCol3; dynamic colon model; in vitro metabolization; colonic microbiota; diet;
sulfasalazine
1. Introduction
Due to the variety of different microorganisms, the human intestine represents a
complex ecosystem. The dominant bacterial species and their composition varies in the
different sections of the gastrointestinal tract. In the colon, the bacterial load is highest at
1011–1012colony forming units (CFU)/mL. In contrast, the bacterial density in the stomach
and small intestine is in the range of 101–103and 104–107, respectively [1].
Since 2010, the subﬁeld of pharmacomicrobiomics has focused on the interactions
between variations in the microbiome and drugs. Further advances in enteric physiology
and microbiota are accompanied by an increasing interest in prophylaxis, therapy, diag-
nostics and thus also in the development of drugs and dosage forms [ 2]. Therefore, the
representation of individual sections of the gastrointestinal tract in suitable in vitro models
is inevitable. Due to the interindividual and intraindividual variability of the intestinal mi-
crobiota, the colon represents a particular challenge here. The taxonomic subdivision of the
colon microbiome includes 6–7 phyla, dominated by the phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes .
Most of the colon bacteria live in an obligately anaerobic environment (>95%) [ 3]. Aerobes
in the colon include, among others, Escherichia coli and eukaryotic microorganisms such as
yeasts and fungi. These microorganisms are part of a dynamic system that is shaped by
prevailing life circumstances. They are formed by genetic factors and inﬂuenced by aspects
such as lifestyle, diet and the intake of drugs [4,5].
The main functions of bacteria are the digestion of food components, microbial modu-
lation of toxicity, vitamin synthesis and the imprint of the intestinal immune system [6–8] .
Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph16081128 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceuticalsPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 2 of 21
In addition to the formation of gaseous end products, the bacterial cleavage of indi-
gestible food components also leads to the formation of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) [ 9].
The formation of these SCFAs mostly involves the genera Bacteroides ,Biﬁdobacteria and
Clostridia [10]. This leads to the lowering of the pH in the colon to a range of 5.5–6.5,
making it more difﬁcult for various pathogenic germs to accumulate in this region [ 8].
Nevertheless, certain dysbiotic changes in the composition of the microbiota can also have
negative effects on the human organism. In terms of the complexity and composition of its
microbiome, each individual is unique. There is thought to be a link between metabolic and
inﬂammatory diseases and the microbiome. For example, an imbalance in the dominant
phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes can lead to various diseases such as obesity or intestinal
inﬂammation [ 6]. Therefore, enterotypes are classiﬁed according to the dominant species.
The ﬁrst enterotype is associated with an increased occurrence of Bacteroides . Due to the
saccharolytic potential of this genus, energy production appears to be largely from the
fermentation of carbohydrates and proteins. The second enterotype is dominated by the
genus Prevotella . Here, high levels of carbohydrates and monosaccharides are typically
found. Finally, the Ruminococcus -enriched type is considered the most abundant. All
three types use different means of energy production from the substances available in the
colon [ 11,12]. This is indicative of an ability to adapt to the prevailing living conditions. In
recent years, increasing attention has been focused on the different dietary habits of people.
Thus, different bacterial compositions of the microbiota have been found between vegans,
vegetarians and people who also consume animal-based products.
A decrease in fecal pH has been described with plant-based diets, which is due to the
higher concentration of SCFAs from the cleavage of carbohydrates [ 13,14]. A high-ﬁber diet
leads to the expansion of species diversity and an increase in the phylum of Bacteroidetes ,
especially the genus Prevotella . Studies have reported differences in the number of bacteria
of the genus Bacteroides , which decreases over the course of a prolonged low-meat diet.
In addition, lower levels of Lactobacilli ,Biﬁdobacteria and Enterobacteria have been found
in vegans and vegetarians compared to omnivorous controls [ 13,15,16]. The pronounced
inﬂuence of diet on the microbiome is considered to effect pathological changes [ 12–15,17].
The concept of inﬂuencing the microbiome through the consumption of certain products
is not new and demonstrates the potential, but also the difﬁculties, of using pro- and
prebiotics [18].
As with food, drugs can also interact with the microbiome. These include antibiotics,
whose inﬂuence on the intestinal ﬂora is often considered to be negative [ 19]. By unbal-
ancing the intestinal system, they can promote colonization with pathogenic strains of
bacteria. Other groups of drugs that can inﬂuence the microbiome include laxatives and
proton pump inhibitors [ 20]. On the other hand, these microbes can also inﬂuence the
metabolism of drugs. These drugs can be altered in their structure, bioavailability, effects
and side effects. This can lead to both reactivation/activation and toxiﬁcation [ 20]. In
circumstances where the microbiome has a positive impact, as mentioned above, the drug
is converted to its active form through metabolization. For instance, the anti-inﬂammatory
drug sulfasalazine contains an azo bond that is cleaved by bacterial Azoreductases. This
results in two molecules, sulfapyridine and the active metabolite 5-aminosalicylic acid [ 21].
Azoreductases are mainly secreted by representatives of Enterobacteria ,Clostridia and Bac-
teroides . The catalytic activity of these enzymes is associated with an anaerobic metabolic
environment [ 22]. The reason for the sensitivity to molecular oxygen are the co-substrates
NADH and NADPH, which act as electron donors. Under aerobic conditions, these are in-
creasingly consumed during cellular respiration and are thus less available for the electron
transfer of the cleavage reaction [23,24].
The investigation of the inﬂuence of the microbiota on drugs requires suitable in vitro
models. The physiological and anatomical conditions of the colon are particularly challeng-
ing. One in vitro model, the simulator of the microbial ecosystem of the human intestine
(SHIME) with its ﬁve vessels, represents the entire gastrointestinal tract from the stomach to
the descending colon. In 1993, Molly et al. succeeded in using this model to, as realisticallyPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 3 of 21
as possible, represent parameters such as pH, temperature, transit times and the addition
of enzymes [ 25]. The SHIME can be extended by a mucosal simulator [ 26]. This simulates
the microbial colonization of the mucosa. Another in vitro model of the colon is the TNO
in vitro model of the colon (TIM-2), which is a further development of the TIM-1 system
that previously represented the sections of the stomach and small intestine. The TNO
TIM-2 consists of four glass compartments and can also represent the intestinal peristalsis
by using a ﬂexible membrane [ 27]. Another in vitro model, the MimiCol3, introduced by
Beeck et al., represents only the ascending colon [ 28]. Here, it is possible to use a sim-
pliﬁed setup to represent the physiological conditions. In brief, the model replicates the
physiological conditions of the ascending colon. Continuous nitrogen gassing creates an
anaerobic atmosphere for the added colonic bacteria, ensuring optimum growth conditions.
The construction and use of a shaking water bath allows the contents of the three glass
vessels to be mixed and tempered simultaneously. Critical parameters can be measured
during the experiment using inserted electrodes and the pH value can be controlled using
pumping systems. Therefore, the MimiCol3offers a compromise between the static SHIME
and the highly complex TIM-2, by mimicking the dynamic conditions in the ascending
colon without being overly complex or expensive.
Thus far, the MimiCol3has only been used with one standardized microbiota from
a single healthy volunteer. The aim of the present work was to use samples from three
healthy volunteers following different dietary lifestyles. Using these different microbiota,
the rate and extent to which sulfasalazine metabolism is affected by dietary changes in the
microbiome was investigated.
2. Results
2.1. Cultivation and Characterization of Three Different Standard Microbiota
2.1.1. Biostat®A Plus Process Parameters
Figure 1 shows the process parameters in the Biostat®A plus during the cultivation of
different standard microbiota from the healthy volunteers.
The temperature remained stable during all experiments. Between 4 and 10 h, the
exponential consumption of 1 M NaOH was noted in all three experiments. The consump-
tion did not increase further after 10 h. The redox potential decreased rapidly in all three
experiments within the ﬁrst 4 h. While there were no more notable ﬂuctuations in the
SM omni and the value leveled off at  350 mV , there was an increase between 10 and 12 h in
the SM veget. Thereafter, this remained at a constant level. In the cultivation of the SM meat,
the minimum was reached after 8 h with approximately—400 mV . During the experiment,
a gradual increase in the redox potential could be observed. By the end of the 24 h of
the experiment, the redox potential had increased to almost the same value as when the
experiment was initiated.
2.1.2. Optical Density
During cultivation, bacterial growth was monitored by optical density (OD) mea-
surement. Figure 2 shows the progression of bacterial growth during the cultivation of
the three different standard microbiota over 24 h. A distinct variation in bacterial growth
could be observed during the cultivation process. For the SM omni, a steep increase occurred
within the ﬁrst 4 h, with the maximum OD being reached after 12 h. Subsequently, the
absorption decreased again markedly until 16 h and remained constant towards the end
of the experiment. The course of the SM veget was different. During this experiment, the
maximum OD was reached after 4 h, after which there was a signiﬁcant drop in absorption
until 8 h, followed again by an increase until 12 h. It then remained constant until the end
of the cultivation. In the current study, the SM meat showed completely different bacterial
growth. The cell density had a slow but steady increase up to 20 h, and then slightly
decreased in the last 4 h.
Furthermore, Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the consumption of the base
and bacterial growth. Given that the speciﬁcation for the experiments required that the pHPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 4 of 21
value was maintained at 6.2 ( 0.1) throughout the fermentation, the system counteracted
the drop in pH by adding 1 M NaOH. In all three experiments, an increase in optical density
absorption occurred within the ﬁrst 4 h and the base supply was started. When growing
the SM veget, the highest consumption was 120 mL. For both the SM omni and SM veget, a
plateau was reached after approximately 11 h. The SM meat showed different results. The
ﬁnal volume of base addition was reached after 76 mL, with the difference from the SM omni
and SM veget being the step increase at the beginning of the experiment.
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 22 
 
 completely di ﬀerent bacterial growth. The cell density had a slow but steady increase up 
to 20 h, and then slightly decreased in the last 4 h.  
Furthermore, Figure 1 illustrates the rela tionship between the consumption of the 
base and bacterial growth. Given that the speci ﬁcation for the experiments required that 
the pH value was maintained at 6.2 (±0.1)  throughout the fermentation, the system 
counteracted the drop in pH by adding 1 M NaOH. In all three experiments, an increase 
in optical density absorption occurred within the ﬁrst 4 h and the base supply was started. 
When growing the SM veget, the highest consumption was 120 mL. For both the SM omni and 
SM veget, a plateau was reached after approximately 11 h. The SM meat showed di ﬀerent 
results. The ﬁnal volume of base addition was reached after 76 mL, with the di ﬀerence 
from the SM omni and SM veget being the step increase at the beginning of the experiment. 
 
Figure 1. Process parameters (temperature (grey), pH  (cyan), NaOH consum ption (black), redox 
potential (blue)) and optical density in the Biostat® A plus during the cultivation of three di ﬀerent 
standard microbiota over 24 h (2 L complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.1), 37 °C, n = 1). 
Figure 1. Process parameters (temperature (grey), pH (cyan), NaOH consumption (black), redox
potential (blue)) and optical density in the Biostat®A plus during the cultivation of three different
standard microbiota over 24 h (2 L complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.1), 37C,n= 1).Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 5 of 21
2.1.3. Characterization of the Three Different Standard Microbiota Using Selective Agar
In addition to determining the compositions of anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, the
presence of Enterobacteria ,Lactobacilli ,Biﬁdobacteria ,Clostridia and Bacteroides was also
investigated. For the analysis, the composition of the sample was determined using the
ﬁve bacterial sub-populations. However, no true value of the proportions was determined.
Instead, the CFU of each strain were determined in relation to the entire CFU. In Figure 2,
it can be seen how the concentrations of the ﬁve bacterial species changed over the 24 h
cultivation period in the Biostat®A plus.
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 22 
 
 2.1.3. Characterization of the Three Di ﬀerent Standard Microbiota Using Selective Agar 
In addition to determining the compositions of anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, the 
presence of Enterobacteria , Lactobacilli , Biﬁdobacteria , Clostridia  and Bacteroides  was also 
investigated. For the analysis, the composition of the sample was determined using the 
ﬁve bacterial sub-populations. However, no tr ue value of the proportions was determined. 
Instead, the CFU of each strain were determined in relation to the entire CFU. In Figure 2, 
it can be seen how the concentrations of the ﬁve bacterial species changed over the 24 h 
cultivation period in the Biostat® A plus. 
The initial colonization of SM omni was highest at this stage. This could be seen in the 
presence of Biﬁdobacteria , Clostridia  and Bacteroides . In contrast, SM veget had the lowest 
initial concentration. At time 0 h, the Enterobacteria  represented the smallest share in all 
standard microbiota. However, over the entire course of the experiment, they had the 
most pronounced growth. In general, it can be stated that within the ﬁrst 12 h, there was 
a marked increase in the concentrations of all ﬁve bacterial species. This remained at a 
similar level until the end of the experiment, except for the genus Bacteroides . This bacterial 
sub-population showed enrichme nt only in the second half of the experiment. After the 
end of the fermentation, the results of the products were quite consistent. The initial 
diﬀerences in bacterial concentration and composition were much less noticeable or non-
existent. 
 
Figure 2. Bacterial composition of the complex bacterial culture over the cultivation period of 24 h. 
Representation of individual bacterial strains at th e time points 0, 12 and 24 h and total number of 
CFU (Biostat® A plus, 2 L complex culture medium , 200 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.1), 37 °C, n = 1). 
To determine the anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, the Schaedler agar and TSA media 
were used. To calculate the percentages, the CFU of the anaerobes and aerobes were 
related to the sum of the two species. 
Figure 2. Bacterial composition of the complex bacterial culture over the cultivation period of 24 h.
Representation of individual bacterial strains at the time points 0, 12 and 24 h and total number of
CFU (Biostat®A plus, 2 L complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.1), 37C,n= 1).
The initial colonization of SM omni was highest at this stage. This could be seen in
the presence of Biﬁdobacteria ,Clostridia and Bacteroides . In contrast, SM veget had the lowest
initial concentration. At time 0 h, the Enterobacteria represented the smallest share in all
standard microbiota. However, over the entire course of the experiment, they had the
most pronounced growth. In general, it can be stated that within the ﬁrst 12 h, there was
a marked increase in the concentrations of all ﬁve bacterial species. This remained at a
similar level until the end of the experiment, except for the genus Bacteroides . This bacterial
sub-population showed enrichment only in the second half of the experiment. After the end
of the fermentation, the results of the products were quite consistent. The initial differences
in bacterial concentration and composition were much less noticeable or non-existent.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 6 of 21
To determine the anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, the Schaedler agar and TSA media
were used. To calculate the percentages, the CFU of the anaerobes and aerobes were related
to the sum of the two species.
Figure 3 shows the percentage composition over 24 h in the Biostat®A plus during the
cultivation of the standard microbiota. At time 0 h, anaerobes composed almost 100% of
the SM omni. In the SM veget and SM meat, the proportions were considerably lower at around
60%. After 12 h, there was a reduction in the anaerobic bacterial species in all standard
microbiota. This proportion increased again slightly in the second half of the experiment.
After a cultivation period of 24 h, the differences between the three standard microbiota
were essentially non-existent. The individual standard microbiota was still composed of
50–60% anaerobic bacteria. The highest proportion of anaerobic bacteria was found in
SM omni, which contained approximately 60%.
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22 
 
 Figure 3 shows the percentage composition over 24 h in the Biostat® A plus during 
the cultivation of the standard microbiota. At time 0 h, anaerobes composed almost 100% 
of the SM omni. In the SM veget and SM meat, the proportions were considerably lower at around 
60%. After 12 h, there was a reduction in the anaerobic bacterial species in all standard 
microbiota. This proportion increased again slightly in the second half of the experiment. 
After a cultivation period of 24 h, the di ﬀerences between the three standard microbiota 
were essentially non-existent. The individual standard microbiota was still composed of 
50–60% anaerobic bacteria. The highest proportion of anaerobic bacteria was found in SM
omni, which contained approximately 60%. 
 
Figure 3. Share of anaerobes and aerobes in the complex bacterial culture over the cultivation period 
of 24 h (Biostat® A plus, 2 L complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.1), 37 °C, n = 1). 
2.2. Investigation of Sulfasalazine Degrad ation and Bacterial Growth Using MimiCol3 
2.2.1. Process Parameters 
After the addition of the standard microbiota at time 0 h, the redox potential 
decreased in all vessels. During the media changes at 3, 5 and 7 h, an increased redox 
potential and pH value could be observed. The addition of fresh Schaedler broth resulted 
in an increase in the pH value. At the media change, the temperature decreased by 
approximately 2 °C, even though the new me dium was pre-tempered, and increased again 
shortly afterwards. 
2.2.2. Optical Density 
To screen bacterial growth during the experiment in the MimiCol3, the optical density 
was measured. Figure 4 shows the OD measurements of the standard microbiota used 
during all experiments. After an initial delay,  there was a steep increase in absorption for 
all standard microbiota and the pooled microbiota up to the 3 h sample point. At this point 
in time, the highest measured OD for all standard microbiota was observed. After the ﬁrst 
change in media, a noticeable drop could be noted. The SM veget achieved the highest 
absorption and the fastest increase duri ng the experiments, followed by the SM pooled. The 
renewed bacterial growth after the last two media changes was lowest in SM omni. Similar 
behavior could be seen between the SM pooled and the SM meat.  I t  c a n  b e  s a i d  t h a t  t h e  
ﬂuctuations around the mean value were marked in all bacterial cultures, and these 
increased substantially with the number of media changes. 
Figure 3. Share of anaerobes and aerobes in the complex bacterial culture over the cultivation period
of 24 h (Biostat®A plus, 2 L complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.1), 37C,n= 1).
2.2. Investigation of Sulfasalazine Degradation and Bacterial Growth Using MimiCol3
2.2.1. Process Parameters
After the addition of the standard microbiota at time 0 h, the redox potential decreased
in all vessels. During the media changes at 3, 5 and 7 h, an increased redox potential and
pH value could be observed. The addition of fresh Schaedler broth resulted in an increase
in the pH value. At the media change, the temperature decreased by approximately 2C,
even though the new medium was pre-tempered, and increased again shortly afterwards.
2.2.2. Optical Density
To screen bacterial growth during the experiment in the MimiCol3, the optical density
was measured. Figure 4 shows the OD measurements of the standard microbiota used
during all experiments. After an initial delay, there was a steep increase in absorption
for all standard microbiota and the pooled microbiota up to the 3 h sample point. At
this point in time, the highest measured OD for all standard microbiota was observed.
After the ﬁrst change in media, a noticeable drop could be noted. The SM veget achieved
the highest absorption and the fastest increase during the experiments, followed by the
SM pooled . The renewed bacterial growth after the last two media changes was lowest in
SM omni. Similar behavior could be seen between the SM pooled and the SM meat. It can be
said that the ﬂuctuations around the mean value were marked in all bacterial cultures, and
these increased substantially with the number of media changes.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 7 of 21
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 22 
 
  
Figure 4. Optical density in the MimiCol3 over 9 h (150 mL Schaedler broth, 100 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.25), 
37 °C, n = 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat, n = 3 for SM pooled, (mean +/−SD)). 
2.2.3. Degradation of Sulfasalazine 
In Figure 5, the results of the enzymatic su lfasalazine degradation for each microbiota 
are shown. During the media changes at 3, 5 and 7 h, sulfasalazine was added. 
Degradation of the drug occurred with all st andard microbiota tested in the MimiCol3. 
However, di ﬀerences could be observed between the di ﬀerent standard microbiota. Based 
on the standard deviations shown, there were noticeable di ﬀerences in metabolization, 
particularly before the media changes and the end of the experiment. The metabolization 
o f  s u l f a s a l a z i n e  t e n d e d  t o  b e  l o w e s t  i n  S M omni, where the curves indicated a ﬂattened 
decrease. The maximum drug degradation was 70%. This was seen in SM veget and SM meat 
as well as in SM pooled. 
To be able to make a statement about the metabolization rates of the di ﬀerent 
bacterial cultures, the drug metabolism was determined within a given timeframe. Here, 
variations between the di ﬀerent standard microbiota could be found. While SM meat 
recorded the highest metabolization in the ﬁrst interval, this was observed for SM veget in 
the second interval. In the SM pooled, a decrease in the metaboli zation rate was seen over 
time, whereas SM omni metabolized sulfasalazine at the lowest rate. 
Figure 4. Optical density in the MimiCol3over 9 h (150 mL Schaedler broth, 100 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.25),
37C,n= 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat,n= 3 for SM pooled , (mean +/  SD)).
2.2.3. Degradation of Sulfasalazine
In Figure 5, the results of the enzymatic sulfasalazine degradation for each micro-
biota are shown. During the media changes at 3, 5 and 7 h, sulfasalazine was added.
Degradation of the drug occurred with all standard microbiota tested in the MimiCol3.
However, differences could be observed between the different standard microbiota. Based
on the standard deviations shown, there were noticeable differences in metabolization,
particularly before the media changes and the end of the experiment. The metabolization
of sulfasalazine tended to be lowest in SM omni, where the curves indicated a ﬂattened
decrease. The maximum drug degradation was 70%. This was seen in SM veget and SM meat
as well as in SM pooled .
To be able to make a statement about the metabolization rates of the different bacterial
cultures, the drug metabolism was determined within a given timeframe. Here, variations
between the different standard microbiota could be found. While SM meat recorded the
highest metabolization in the ﬁrst interval, this was observed for SM veget in the second
interval. In the SM pooled , a decrease in the metabolization rate was seen over time, whereas
SM omni metabolized sulfasalazine at the lowest rate.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 8 of 21
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 22 
 
  
Figure 5. Metabolization of sulfasalazine in the MimiCol3 after a media change at 3, 5 and 7 h (150 
mL Schaedler broth, 100 rpm,  pH of 6.2 (±0.25), 37 °C, n = 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat, n = 3 for 
SM pooled , (mean +/ − SD)). 
2.2.4. Determination of the Three Di ﬀerent Standard Microbiota and the Pooled 
Standard Microbiota Using Selective Agar 
As with the cultivation of the standard microbiota in the Biostat® A plus, the 
characterization of the bacterial species was also carried out for the experiments in the 
MimiCol3. For this purpose, the CFU samples of the time points 0.083, 3, 5, 7 and 9 h, as 
well as 5 min after a media change, were ch aracterized. Figure 6 shows the bacterial 
density of the ﬁve investigated bacterial species and the total number of CFU over the 
experimental period. For comparison, the sa m p l e s  f r o m  v e s s e l  1  o f  e a c h  s e r i e s  o f  
experiments were plated out and characterized. Except for the genus Bacteroides , an 
increase in bacterial growth was observed in all standard microbiota between the 
individual media changes. While the bacterial density of the genus Enterobacteria  
decreased over the experimental period of 9 h, it increased in the genus Biﬁdobacteria . 
Smaller di ﬀerences could be noted for the Lactobacilli  and Clostridia . For these bacteria, 
similar densities were reached after the ﬁrst media change. The genus Bacteroides  showed 
a diﬀerent course. Here, signi ﬁcant diﬀerences could be noted in the individual intervals, 
as well as between the di ﬀerent standard microbiota.  
Figure 5. Metabolization of sulfasalazine in the MimiCol3after a media change at 3, 5 and 7 h (150 mL
Schaedler broth, 100 rpm, pH of 6.2 ( 0.25), 37C,n= 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat,n= 3 for
SM pooled , (mean +/  SD)).
2.2.4. Determination of the Three Different Standard Microbiota and the Pooled Standard
Microbiota Using Selective Agar
As with the cultivation of the standard microbiota in the Biostat®A plus, the charac-
terization of the bacterial species was also carried out for the experiments in the MimiCol3.
For this purpose, the CFU samples of the time points 0.083, 3, 5, 7 and 9 h, as well as 5 min
after a media change, were characterized. Figure 6 shows the bacterial density of the ﬁve
investigated bacterial species and the total number of CFU over the experimental period.
For comparison, the samples from vessel 1 of each series of experiments were plated out
and characterized. Except for the genus Bacteroides , an increase in bacterial growth was
observed in all standard microbiota between the individual media changes. While the
bacterial density of the genus Enterobacteria decreased over the experimental period of 9 h,
it increased in the genus Biﬁdobacteria . Smaller differences could be noted for the Lactobacilli
and Clostridia . For these bacteria, similar densities were reached after the ﬁrst media change.
The genus Bacteroides showed a different course. Here, signiﬁcant differences could be
noted in the individual intervals, as well as between the different standard microbiota.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 9 of 21
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 22 
 
  
Figure 6. Bacterial composition of the di ﬀerent bacterial culture in the MimiCol3 and the total 
number of CFU over 9 h (150 mL Schaedler broth, 100 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.25), 37 °C, n = 1). 
3. Discussion 
The focus of the current work was on replicating the production of bacterial colonies 
and drug metabolism. Therefore, three di ﬀerent standard microbiota were investigated. 
Since the diets of humans have an in ﬂuence on the gut microbiome, this was the main 
criterion, amongst others, used for the recruitment of di ﬀerent microbiota [29]. To be able 
to test the di ﬀerent standard microbiota in the MimiCol3, they were cultivated separately 
Figure 6. Bacterial composition of the different bacterial culture in the MimiCol3and the total number
of CFU over 9 h (150 mL Schaedler broth, 100 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.25), 37C,n= 1).
3. Discussion
The focus of the current work was on replicating the production of bacterial colonies
and drug metabolism. Therefore, three different standard microbiota were investigated.
Since the diets of humans have an inﬂuence on the gut microbiome, this was the main
criterion, amongst others, used for the recruitment of different microbiota [ 29]. To be able
to test the different standard microbiota in the MimiCol3, they were cultivated separately
in the batch fermenter over a period of 24 h. Thereafter, the standard microbiota werePharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 10 of 21
characterized with regard to their species composition. To obtain an overview of the
bacterial compositions of the different standard microbiota, CFU samples were plated out
on agar media. To evaluate the cultivation of microbiota over the 24 h period, three samples
were plated at 0, 12 and 24 h. Due to the options available at the time of the present study,
the determination of the bacterial composition was performed using a single plating and the
agar media described in Table 2. The data collected during the sampling process showed
that the cultivation of the individual standard microbiota was successful—especially at
the beginning of the cultivation in the Biostat®A plus, where differences between SM veget
and SM meat could be observed. For example, the high concentration of Enterobacteria in the
SM meat could be linked to the increased consumption of animal proteins [ 16]. Furthermore,
the accumulation of primarily carbohydrate-splitting and thus acid-producing bacterial
species could be observed in the SM veget [14,30]. As can be seen from Figure 2, the bacterial
species Enterobacteria ,Lactobacilli ,Biﬁdobacteria and Clostridia almost reached their maximum
bacterial densities in all standard microbiota after 12 h. Hence, during the second half of
the cultivation period, there was almost no increase in bacterial growth. However, in the
obligate anaerobic species Bacteroides , there was increased growth within the last 12 h. This
was observed in all three of the standard microbiota. Bacteroides is one of the dominant
species in the ascending colon [14].
The complex culture medium used did not contain pure glucose but consisted of
potato starch as a carbohydrate source. The use of potato starch as a carbohydrate source
may have been the possible cause of the delayed growth of Bacteroides . This is because
glucose is believed to be a growth-limiting factor in the batch cultivation of Bacteroides [31],
whereas other bacteria, such as Biﬁdobacteria and Escherichia , can break down starch. Due
to the requirement that starch must be broken down, there is a delay in the availability of
glucose. Therefore, this would explain why the Bacteroides only grew in the second half of
the cultivation [ 32,33]. To optimize the cultivation of Bacteroides , the addition of glucose
to the complex culture medium could be considered in the future. Intestinal bacteria are
divided into proteolytic and saccharolytic types. During the metabolism of proteins by
proteolytic species, an increase in pH occurs in the colon. In contrast, the saccharolytic
types cause a decrease in pH. The reason for this is the formation of SCFAs. Non-digestible
complex carbohydrates are the most important substrate source. In the proximal colon,
these are fermented by bacteria to SCFAs, H 2and CO 2.
When cultivating the three different standard microbiota, a different consumption
rate of 1 M NaOH was observed. This may be attributed to the standard microbiota
having different metabolic activity. The highest consumption rate occurred during the
cultivation of SM veget , as can be seen in Figure 7. The stool donor of this standard microbiota
ate a vegetarian diet. This result may thus be related to the predominantly plant- and
carbohydrate-based diet, with acid generation occurring through saccharolytic splitting [ 14].
Examining the bacterial composition of the SM veget during cultivation, an increase in the
bacterial species Lactobacilli and Biﬁdobacteria could be noted. This was in contrast to
representatives of the proteolytic and saccharolytic types, such as Enterobacteria . Similar
ﬁndings were described in a controlled study by Zimmer et al. In their study, subjects
following a vegan or vegetarian diet also had a lower incidence of Enterobacteria [13]. The
lowering of the pH value due to the increased formation of SCFAs may be the cause of this.
This results in the reduced growth of Enterobacteria and other pathogenic germs [ 34]. An
Italian study from 2015 also analyzed the inﬂuence of diet on the microbiome [ 15]. The
low concentration of lactate-forming bacteria observed in this study was also found in the
initial concentration of the SM veget. This can be explained by the lack of consumption of
fermented foods such as dairy and meat products.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 11 of 21
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 22 
 
  
Figure 7. Comparison of base consumption over the cultivation period of 24 h (Biostat® A plus, 2 L 
complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.1), 37 °C, n = 1). 
The bacterial composition of the SM meat showed the highest initial concentration of 
Enterobacteria . Enterobacteria  belong to the species that undergo both saccharolytic and 
proteolytic nutrition. The donor of SM meat had a predominantly meat-rich diet, which 
explains the increased occurrence of Enterobacteria . The lower base consumption during 
cultivation may have resulted from the formation of ammonia due to the additional 
alkalizing e ﬀect [35]. SM omni belonged to a donor who had an omnivorous dietary lifestyle. 
Considering this, the base consumption during cultivation was between the consumption rates of the other two microbiota. After 24 h of cultivation in the Biostat
® A plus, the initial 
diﬀerences in the bacterial composition between the standard microbiota could hardly be 
detected. The similarity of the fermentation products suggested that the complex culture 
medium had an in ﬂuence on the composition. On the other hand, the initial starting 
concentration of bacteria seemed to have a minor in ﬂuence on the microbiota composition. 
The availability of the same food sources could serve as an explanation in this context. In 
a study by Wu et al., the microbiome was shown to change detectably after a 24 h diet. 
However, this did not transfer to the identity of the enterotype [12]. This supports the 
assumption that the food sources available in ﬂuence the bacterial composition of the 
standard microbiota. Furthermore, in the same study, the consumption of animal protein was detected to have an in ﬂuence on the abundance of Bacteroides . The composition of the 
complex culture medium, with details provided  in Table 1, suggests an alignment with 
SM
veget due to the presence of meat peptone. Moreover, the animal peptone in combination 
with the increased phosphate content could be  the reason for the high proliferation of 
Enterobacteria  in all microbiota [36]. Figure 3 show s a comparison of the proportions of 
anaerobic and aerobic bacterial species over time. In the ﬁrst 12 h of cultivation, a 
decreasing trend of anaerobes could be observed in all three microbiota. This could be 
reconciled with the strong increase in Enterobacteria  and Biﬁdobacteria . In the second half, 
Figure 7. Comparison of base consumption over the cultivation period of 24 h (Biostat®A plus, 2 L
complex culture medium, 200 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.1), 37C,n= 1).
The bacterial composition of the SM meat showed the highest initial concentration of
Enterobacteria .Enterobacteria belong to the species that undergo both saccharolytic and
proteolytic nutrition. The donor of SM meat had a predominantly meat-rich diet, which
explains the increased occurrence of Enterobacteria . The lower base consumption during cul-
tivation may have resulted from the formation of ammonia due to the additional alkalizing
effect [ 35]. SM omni belonged to a donor who had an omnivorous dietary lifestyle. Consider-
ing this, the base consumption during cultivation was between the consumption rates of the
other two microbiota. After 24 h of cultivation in the Biostat®A plus, the initial differences
in the bacterial composition between the standard microbiota could hardly be detected.
The similarity of the fermentation products suggested that the complex culture medium
had an inﬂuence on the composition. On the other hand, the initial starting concentration of
bacteria seemed to have a minor inﬂuence on the microbiota composition. The availability
of the same food sources could serve as an explanation in this context. In a study by Wu
et al., the microbiome was shown to change detectably after a 24 h diet. However, this
did not transfer to the identity of the enterotype [ 12]. This supports the assumption that
the food sources available inﬂuence the bacterial composition of the standard microbiota.
Furthermore, in the same study, the consumption of animal protein was detected to have an
inﬂuence on the abundance of Bacteroides . The composition of the complex culture medium,
with details provided in Table 1, suggests an alignment with SM veget due to the presence of
meat peptone. Moreover, the animal peptone in combination with the increased phosphate
content could be the reason for the high proliferation of Enterobacteria in all microbiota [ 36].
Figure 3 shows a comparison of the proportions of anaerobic and aerobic bacterial speciesPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 12 of 21
over time. In the ﬁrst 12 h of cultivation, a decreasing trend of anaerobes could be observed
in all three microbiota. This could be reconciled with the strong increase in Enterobacteria
and Biﬁdobacteria . In the second half, the percentage of anaerobic bacteria increased, as well
as the concentration of Bacteroides . A strong change in the proportions over time could be
noted in the SM omni. At the beginning, anaerobes constituted the largest proportion, with
almost 99%, which was also shown by the high concentrations of Clostridia and Bacteroides .
Consideration should generally be given to the fact that the fecal samples used were a mo-
mentary sample, which were undergoing phylogenetic ﬂuctuations [ 30]. It needs also to be
mentioned that the feces do not reﬂect a direct proﬁle of the populations living in the colon.
The more abundant anaerobic species attach to the intestinal mucosa, so identiﬁcation via
feces is limited. However, biopsies of colonic mucosa indicate sufﬁcient similarity to feces
to justify such collection of the standard microbiota [ 37–39]. Furthermore, the loss of strictly
anaerobic species during sample preparation cannot be eliminated. The determination of
the bacterial composition of the standard microbiota used can be assumed to be sufﬁcient
for the purposes of the study. In this study, the focus was on the investigation of drug
metabolism in the MimiCol3.
The previously cultivated standard microbiota were subsequently investigated in the
MimiCol3with regard to their inﬂuence on sulfasalazine degradation. The physiological
parameters used represent the conditions in the ascending colon. The media change was
used to simulate the dynamic conditions in the proximal colon. This was used to represent
the ileo-caecal reﬂex, which results in the arrival of new nutrients for the intestinal micro-
biota and the transport of large volumes [ 40,41]. This imitation is reﬂected in the MimiCol3
by the ﬂuctuations in the process parameters, as well as the sudden decrease in bacterial
density. By adding fresh medium, the bacteria can be kept in an exponential growth phase
to achieve the maximum metabolization rate [ 42]. The increase in bacterial density after
each media change can be seen in Figure 6. Continuous gassing with nitrogen is essential
to maintain the anaerobic atmosphere. This is particularly relevant for the oxygen-sensitive
intestinal bacteria and the Azoreductase activity [ 3,23]. A redox potential below  300 mV
was targeted for the anaerobes and could be maintained—indicating reductive, oxygen-free
growth and a metabolic environment [ 27,43]. During the experiments, a pH decrease from
the initially measured pH of 7.4, which is the pH value of the Schaedler broth, to the
speciﬁed value of 6.2 occurred in the vessels between the media changes. The formation of
acidic metabolites, such as SCFAs, leads to a drop in the pH value. When combined with
the detected increase in OD, this suggests the exponential proliferation of the bacteria [ 30].
The characteristic intestinal mucosa, with deep crypts, has a decisive inﬂuence on the accu-
mulation of certain bacterial species, such as representatives of the Bacteroides [14,44]. The
MimiCol3is designed to simulate certain aspects of the ascending colon, such as bacterial
colonization, temperature and pH [ 45]. With the deﬁned test conditions in the MimiCol3, a
compromise between the adequate reproduction of the complex physiological conditions
and an appropriate design of the in vitro tool could be created.
To be able to characterize the metabolization performance of the different standard
microbiota, sulfasalazine degradation was compared at given intervals. The reductive
cleavage of the azo bond of sulfasalazine into the metabolites 5-aminosalicylic acid and
sulfapyridine caused by Azoreductases was quantiﬁed by UV–VIS measurement [ 46]. Only
the decrease in sulfasalazine was detected; metabolites being generated were not evaluated.
As in the Biostat®A plus, bacterial growth was monitored based on the OD. With an
increase in OD, a reduction in the amount of drug present in the vessel could be detected.
By calculating the correlation coefﬁcients, an inverse linear correlation between bacterial
growth and drug content was found for each microbiota. The measured OD absorption data
at comparable time intervals to the Biostat®A plus were higher. This could be explained by
the Schaedler broth used as the medium, since the presence of glucose positively inﬂuenced
the growth of the genera of Biﬁdobacteria and Bacteroides [47]. From Figure 8, differences in
the metabolization rate between the bacterial culture can be noted.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 13 of 21
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 22 
 
  
Figure 8. Metabolization rate constants of sulfasalazine in the MimiCol3 (150 mL Schaedler broth, 
100 rpm, pH 6.2 (±0.25), 37 °C, n = 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat, n = 3 for SM pooled  (mean + SD)). 
The acquired data on the metabolization performance varied widely for each 
standard microbiota. Compared to the other microbiota, SM omni diﬀered most markedly, 
showing the lowest absorption values as well as the lowest metabolization rates. The 
diﬀerences between SM meat and SM pooled were the lowest. In the SM meat, most of the drug 
was metabolized in the ﬁrst interval, with more than 200 µM/h. The same applied to 
SM omni, where only 170 µM/h was metabolized. The metabolization rate of the SM pooled 
decreased slightly over time. For SM veget, the highest drug metabolization was noted in the 
second interval. However, the di ﬀerences between the di ﬀerent standard microbiota were 
less pronounced than expected. From Figure 8, it becomes clear that the metabolic rates 
from the di ﬀerent microbiota were comparable. This can be explained by the fact that the 
compositions of the standard microbiota were found to be quite similar and their 
diﬀerences were lost during cultivation in the Biostat® A plus. Thus, there was already a 
limitation during cultivation that in ﬂuenced the further course of the experiments in the 
MimiCol3. To prevent this loss in the future, di ﬀerent media should be considered when 
cultivating the microbiota. The diversity of the bacterial composition, then, should be 
maintained based on di ﬀerent diets during cultivation. By maintaining this diversity, 
potential in ﬂuences on drug degr adation can be highlig hted more clearly. 
Following the bacterial growth of the in dividual standard microbiota, shown in 
Figure 4, it can be compared with the drug degradation. However, the slightly increased 
bacterial occurrence of the SM veget had a weaker e ﬀect on the degradation of the drug. 
While, in the second interval, the highest metabolic e ﬃciency was achieved, the di ﬀerence 
was already reduced in the third interval. Since the measurement of the OD is only the 
determination of turbidity, the susceptibility to  interference should be considered in the 
Figure 8. Metabolization rate constants of sulfasalazine in the MimiCol3(150 mL Schaedler broth,
100 rpm, pH 6.2 ( 0.25), 37C,n= 4 for SM omni, SM veget and SM meat,n= 3 for SM pooled (mean + SD)).
The acquired data on the metabolization performance varied widely for each standard
microbiota. Compared to the other microbiota, SM omni differed most markedly, showing the
lowest absorption values as well as the lowest metabolization rates. The differences between
SM meat and SM pooled were the lowest. In the SM meat, most of the drug was metabolized
in the ﬁrst interval, with more than 200 M/h. The same applied to SM omni, where only
170M/h was metabolized. The metabolization rate of the SM pooled decreased slightly
over time. For SM veget, the highest drug metabolization was noted in the second interval.
However, the differences between the different standard microbiota were less pronounced
than expected. From Figure 8, it becomes clear that the metabolic rates from the different
microbiota were comparable. This can be explained by the fact that the compositions of the
standard microbiota were found to be quite similar and their differences were lost during
cultivation in the Biostat®A plus. Thus, there was already a limitation during cultivation
that inﬂuenced the further course of the experiments in the MimiCol3. To prevent this loss
in the future, different media should be considered when cultivating the microbiota. The
diversity of the bacterial composition, then, should be maintained based on different diets
during cultivation. By maintaining this diversity, potential inﬂuences on drug degradation
can be highlighted more clearly.
Following the bacterial growth of the individual standard microbiota, shown in
Figure 4 , it can be compared with the drug degradation. However, the slightly increased
bacterial occurrence of the SM veget had a weaker effect on the degradation of the drug.
While, in the second interval, the highest metabolic efﬁciency was achieved, the difference
was already reduced in the third interval. Since the measurement of the OD is only the
determination of turbidity, the susceptibility to interference should be considered in the
evaluation. Although these measurements are indicative of bacterial growth, they should
be viewed critically because they are a dimensionless quantity. To accurately characterizePharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 14 of 21
bacterial growth, CFU samples from the different test days and standard microbiota were
plated out and counted.
The coefﬁcients of variation showed differences in the determination of OD, especially
immediately after the media changes. However, this was different for the degradation of
sulfasalazine. In this case, there was scatter in the OD of the microbiota at the end of a
change interval, which resulted in a difference in the maximum amount of drug degraded.
The differences may be due to the remaining 15 mL of media in the vessel at the time of
the media change. Due to the different residual volumes remaining in the vessel, there
may have been both a difference in bacterial density and a difference in the composition
of the remaining bacteria for the following time intervals, which may have affected the
degradation of the drug. The scatter of the OD and sulfasalazine degradation shown in
Figures 4 and 5 can be explained by this. For this reason, the variable growth and metabolic
activity of the bacteria caused by biological ﬂuctuations/changes must also be considered.
According to the literature, the increased metabolization constant in the ﬁrst interval in
SM meat could be associated with the increased presence of Azoreductase -producing bacteria
of the genera Enterobacteria ,Clostridia and Bacteroides [23,48]. Comparing this with the
evaluated CFU samples in Figure 6, the occurrence of Enterobacteria was highest in the
SM pooled , with SM veget containing the largest proportion during the ﬁrst interval. This
assumption is also not valid for Clostridia . However, it should be mentioned that this
characterization is representative of a single sample and a detailed characterization of the
species by plating on agar media was not possible. As already stated, due consideration
should be given to the fact that there was consistency during the cultivation of different
standard microbiota. No signiﬁcant differences in the standard microbiota could be detected
during the experiments, except for their source of origin. The bacterial growth as well as
drug degradation recorded in the SM pooled represent, as expected, a mixed form of the other
microbiota. The different metabolization rates over the experimental period may also relate
to the correlation between the growth stage and metabolization performance, described by
Maier [ 42]. In the study by Kellow et al., the rate of metabolism of sulfasalazine was used
to characterize the intestinal transit time. During the study by Kellow et al., ﬂooding of
the metabolite sulfapyridine with a plasma concentration of 0.1–0.6 g/mL was detected
within 1 to 6 min after the injection of 2 g sulfasalazine into the cecum [ 49]. This suggests the
bacterial degradation of sulfasalazine. In the MimiCol3, the reduction of sulfasalazine could
be detected approximately 25 min after injection. The slower metabolization may have
been related to the absence of the intestinal epithelium in the vessel, which is associated
with the growth and metabolism of some bacterial species [ 44]. Nevertheless, the data
collected indicated the sufﬁcient presence of Azoreductases and suggested biorelevant drug
metabolism in the MimiCol3. Comparing the metabolization rate data collected in this
study with those from the publication by Beeck et al., these rates are lower overall. The
comparison of the metabolization rates in the single intervals also differed. In the newly
obtained data, the highest conversions were recorded in the ﬁrst interval, while, in the
series by Beeck et al., this was observed in the second interval [28].
During the experiments, it was found that deviations occurred in the third vessel of
the MimiCol3. A reduction in bacterial growth and sulfasalazine degradation occurred,
which was independent of the standard microbiota used. When analyzing the error, a
complication in the base pump control was identiﬁed. The required base volume to
maintain the pH value at 6.2 0.25 could therefore not be continuously supplied. Studies
on the pH dependence of the Azoreductases show the stability of the enzymes over a pH
range of 5–7. However, the optimum activity lies in the physiological range. Considering
this, a deviation in catalytic performance may have occurred in the third vessel. This would
explain the reduced drug degradation. Furthermore, the sensitivity of Enterobacteria to low
pH values is described in the literature [ 34]. Since Enterobacteria areAzoreductase producers,
this could have been another cause of the reduced degradation. Another aspect of the error
in the analysis was deviations in the volume in vessel 3. This was most marked when the
medium was removed. As a result, the bacterial density was reduced. Thus, the reducedPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 15 of 21
bacterial growth had an additional negative effect on the metabolism of sulfasalazine. The
problems described above need to be resolved in the future so that the model can be further
optimized.
Although the number of stool donors was kept very small ( n= 1) in this series
of experiments, differences in the composition of the microbiota depending on the diet
could be identiﬁed at the beginning of the cultivation. However, the diversity of the
individual stool microbiota was already lost during the batch cultivation. Nevertheless,
in the simpliﬁed setup of MimiCol3, signs of different metabolic rates could be detected.
However, the results showed that the complex culture medium used for cultivation played
a crucial role and it was not targeted in this study. The previous dietary habits of the donors
became less important as the diversity was lost during cultivation.
It is important to minimize this loss in order to better investigate the possible effects
of diet on drug metabolism. For this purpose, the use of different cultivation media for
individual microbiota might be considered. Another possibility for individual experiments
would be the use of a freshly generated stool sample in the model. However, this would
impede the repetition of the experiments under similar conditions. The inﬂuence of the
microbiota on drug metabolism cannot be neglected as it can contribute signiﬁcantly to the
success of therapy, which needs to be further investigated.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Materials
Azulﬁdine tablets (Pﬁzer, New York City, NY, USA) containing 500 mg of sulfasalazine
were obtained from the university’s hospital pharmacy. Commercially available sul-
fasalazine, suitable for analytical experiments, was purchased from Fluka®Analytical
(Seelze, Germany). Schaedler broth was purchased from Carl Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany) as
a dry substance and reconstituted according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations. Glycerol
Rotipuran 99.5% was purchased from Caesar & Loretz GmbH (Hilden, Germany) and di-
luted to obtain a concentration of 20%. The individual components of the complex culture
medium were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), VWR International
(Radnor, PA, USA) and Carl Roth. The various agar media and the required supplements
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich/Fluka and Carl Roth, while the components of the
peptone water were acquired from Carl Roth, Fluka and BDH Prolabo/VWR International.
Sterile water for injection (Ph. Eur. 11.2) served as a solvent in all cases.
4.2. Methods
4.2.1. Preparation of Standard Microbiota
The stool samples were taken from healthy volunteers (1 male, 2 females, age 26–29 years ,
body mass index 18–35 kg/m2). The volunteers were recruited based on their different
lifestyles in terms of their dietary choices. Standard microbiota based on an omnivorous
(SM omni), a vegetarian (SM veget ) and a meat-rich (SM meat) diet were compared. Due to time
constraints, it was decided to use n= 1 initially, so that a trend for the inﬂuence of diet on
the degradation of sulfasalazine in MimiCol3could at least be determined. The recruitment
of volunteers and the collection of their feces was approved by the ethics committee of
University Medicine Greifswald (BB 009/22). Written informed consent was obtained from
all volunteers prior to sample collection.
For the generation of each different standard microbiota, 1.00 g fresh feces was sus-
pended in 40 mL peptone water and allowed to rest for 5 min. After sedimentation, the
supernatant was then used for the cultivation of the standard microbiota in the batch
fermenter Biostat®A plus (Sartorius stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany). The following
settings were used in the Biostat®A plus to ensure optimal conditions for the cultivation of
the standard microbiota. The vessel, with a capacity of 2000 mL and an integrated stirring
system that was programmed to 200 rpm to ensure continuous mixing of the medium, was
ﬁlled with the complex culture medium and kept at a temperature of 37C. The details of
the composition can be found in Table 1.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 16 of 21
Table 1. Composition of the complex culture medium (according to Minekus et al. [50]).
Solution CompoundConcentration
g/L
1Dipotassium hydrogen phosphate 2.50
Sodium chloride 4.50
Iron(II)sulfate heptahydrate 0.005
2Calcium chloride dihydrate 0.45
Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate 0.50
3Pectin (apple) 0.60
Xylan (beech) 0.60
Arabinogalactan 0.60
Amylopectin (corn) 0.60
Starch (potato) 5.00
4 L-cysteine 0.40
5Meat peptones 3.00
Casein (cow’s milk) 3.00
Ox bile 0.05
6 Polysorbate 80 2.00
7 Hemin 0.01
The pH of the complex culture medium was set to 6.2 ( 0.1). To obtain anaerobic
conditions during the cultivation, the vessel was ﬂushed with nitrogen 1 h prior to the start
of the process. The cultivation process continued for 24 h, with 5 mL of sample taken every
4 h. This sample was measured for optical density (OD) to monitor the bacterial growth.
Then, 200 L of the sample was diluted with 1800 L distilled water and was analyzed with
UV–VIS spectroscopy (Cary 50 Scan UV Visible Spectrophotometer, Varian Inc., Palo Alto,
CA, USA) at 600 nm in quartz cuvettes (path length = 1 cm). The sample at time 0.083 h
was used as a reference to compare the bacterial growth. After 24 h, the entire medium was
removed from the vessel and processed as follows. First, 25 mL of bacterial culture was
diluted with 25 mL glycerol 20%, stored at  20C for 24 h and then transferred to  80C.
For the following studies of the bacterial composition, CFU samples were prepared
as follows. First, 300 L samples were mixed with 300 L glycerol 20% and vortexed.
Subsequently, these were stored at  20C for 24 h and transferred to  80C until used for
characterization.
4.2.2. Characterization of Standard Microbiota
Different agar plates were prepared for the characterization of CFU samples. Table 2
provides the agar media used for the different bacteria species. The plating was performed
under aseptic conditions. Samples from the time points 0, 12 and 24 h were plated out.
The cryo samples were diluted with sterilized peptone water according to the following
dilution series. The dilution series was performed in steps of ten from 1 to 1 million. For
each dilution, 20 L was plated on each agar medium. The inoculated agar plates were
incubated for two days under aerobic conditions (INB 400, Memmert GmbH, Schwabach,
Germany) at 33C or under anaerobic conditions (Whitley A35 Anaerobic Workstation,
Don Whitley Scientiﬁc, Bingley, UK) at 37C for ﬁve days. The CFU were determined by
counting. The plate sections with the highest concentration and greatest bacterial growth,
ranging from 3 to 90 colonies, were used for counting. CFU/mL was calculated using the
following Equation (1). A sample volume of 20 L was used (‘50’) and the sample was
mixed with glycerol in a ratio of 1:2 (‘2’).
CFU
mL=CFUdilution f actor 502 (1)Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 17 of 21
Table 2. Assignment of different agar media for the detection of bacterial sub-populations.
Agar Media Bacteria Species
Tryptic soy agar (TSA/CASO) Total aerobic
MacConkey agar Enterobacteriaceae
Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) agar Lactobacilli
Modiﬁed reinforced clostridial medium Clostridia
Biﬁdus Selective Medium (BSM) agar Biﬁdobacteria
Modiﬁed Schaedler agar Bacteroides
Schaedler agar Total anaerobes
4.2.3. Experimental Procedure
The subsequent experiments on sulfasalazine degradation were carried out in the
MimiCol3, an in vitro model that reﬂects the conditions of the ascending colon. A more
detailed methodological description can be found in a previous publication from Beeck
et al. [28]. A schematic overview of the MimiCol3is shown in Figure 9.
Pharmaceuticals 2023 , 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 22 
 
 Don Whitley Scienti ﬁc, Bingley, UK) at 37 °C for ﬁve days. The CFU were determined by 
counting. The plate sections with the highest concentration and greatest bacterial growth, 
ranging from 3 to 90 colonies, were used for counting. CFU/mL was calculated using the following Equation (1). A sample volume of 20 µL was used (‘50’) and the sample was 
mixed with glycerol in a ratio of 1:2 (‘2’). 
𝐶𝐹𝑈
𝑚𝐿ൌ 𝐶𝐹𝑈 ൈ 𝑑𝑖𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 ൈ 50 ൈ 2  (1) 
Table 2. Assignment of di ﬀerent agar media for the detectio n of bacterial sub-populations. 
Agar Media Bacteria Species 
Tryptic soy agar (TSA/CASO) Total aerobic 
MacConkey agar Enterobacteriaceae 
Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) agar Lactobacilli 
Modi ﬁed reinforced clostridial medium Clostridia 
Biﬁdus Selective Medium (BSM) agar Biﬁdobacteria 
Modi ﬁed Schaedler agar Bacteroides 
Schaedler agar Total anaerobes 
4.2.3. Experimental Procedure 
The subsequent experiments on sulfasalazine degradation were carried out in the 
MimiCol3, an in vitro model that re ﬂects the conditions of the ascending colon. A more 
detailed methodological description can be fo und in a previous publication from Beeck et 
al. [28]. A schematic overview of the MimiCol3 is shown in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. Schematic representation of the MimiCol3 by Beeck et al. [28]. 
Figure 9. Schematic representation of the MimiCol3by Beeck et al. [28].
In brief, the model consists of three glass vessels with a capacity of 250 mL each. A
pH control of 6.2 ( 0.25) is set for the medium, with an initial pH of 7.4. Due to bacterial
metabolic processes, pH drift over time can occur. Therefore, two programmable peristaltic
pumps are used to keep the pH in the desired range by titrating with 1 M HCl and 1 M
NaOH solution. Once the pH drops below 6.4, the pH control is activated and deactivated
during the media change. To ensure mixing of the medium, the vessels are placed in aPharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 18 of 21
shaking water bath (SW22 model, JULABO GmbH, Seelbach, Germany) at 37C with
the shaking motion set to 100 rpm. To create an anaerobic atmosphere, the vessels are
continuously gassed with nitrogen. For control purposes, a pH and redox electrode are
inserted via the lids of the vessels, as well as a temperature sensor. The measured values
are recorded and controlled using the software MyOpenLab®(version 3.11.0). The data
recording for vessel 1 occurs digitally. The data for vessel 2 and 3 are recorded manually. An
illustration of the evaluated process for the parameters can be obtained from a publication
by Beeck et al. [28].
The experimental conditions were based on those of the MimiCol by Beeck et al. [ 45].
The inocula required for the experimental series were prepared on the day of the experiment
as follows. The samples stored at  80C were thawed in a water bath at 37C for
approximately 20–30 min. The thawed samples were centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 6 min
and the supernatant discarded. The bacterial pellet was resuspended in 10 mL Schaedler
broth and injected into the appropriate vessel at the start of the experiment. For the series
of experiments with the pooled standard microbiota (SM pooled ), the three thawed stool
samples were homogenized in a ﬂask and then divided equally among sampling tubes.
They were centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 6 min, and the bacterial pellet was resuspended in
Schaedler broth before they were injected into the vessels. After gassing with nitrogen for
1 h, the standard microbiota was injected at the beginning of the experiment. The bacteria
were incubated over a period of 3 h. Media changes were performed after 3, 5 and 7 h to
ensure bacterial growth by adding fresh nutrients. The media change was performed in the
ratio 90:10, leaving a residual volume of 15 mL in each vessel. This was followed by the
addition of 135 mL pre-tempered Schaedler broth, which contained 30 mg of powdered
Azulﬁdine®tablets (23.5 mg of sulfasalazine).
Samples of 5 mL were taken at 30 min intervals to determine bacterial growth by OD
and to determine the metabolism of sulfasalazine by UV–VIS spectroscopy. The removed
medium was not replaced at the time of sample collection in this experimental setup. To
determine the drug concentration, 2000 L samples were centrifuged at 14,500 rpm for
6 min (MiniSpin®plus, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). Then, 200 L supernatant
was taken and diluted with 1800 L 0.1 M NaOH and analyzed photometrically at 450 nm
in quartz cuvettes (path length = 1 cm). Due to the bathochromic absorption shift of
sulfasalazine at pH values above pH 10, dilution with 0.1 M NaOH was performed. This
reduced the background noise of the Schaedler broth. Concentrations were calculated using
the calibration curve of a sulfasalazine analytical standard in 0.1 M NaOH, as described
in Section 4.2.4. Metabolization constants were calculated as follows: (i) the concentration
ing/mL was plotted against time in h; (ii) the negative slope of the linear section of the
curve of the last three samples from an interval between media changes was determined as
zero-order kinetics was assumed; and (iii) it was converted into M/h via the molar mass
of sulfasalazine (398.38 g/mol).
To determine the OD, a 200 L sample was diluted with 1800 L distilled water.
Samples were analyzed photometrically as previously described. Here, 200 L samples
from 0.083 h and 1800 L distilled water were measured as a blank sample. To analyze
bacterial growth, CFU samples were taken hourly and after the medium was changed. The
samples were prepared and stored as described in Section 4.2.1.
To obtain representative results, an alternating distribution of the different standard
microbiota among the three vessels was applied in the experiments. The purpose of rotating
the vessels was to minimize any bias in the results caused by the model. This was done
to ensure that the results were as representative as possible. In this way, the same initial
situation was created for all the microbiota investigated. For the series of experiments,
both the individual standard microbiota and a pooled standard microbiota were used.
Table 3 shows the assignments of the microbiota to each vessel of the in vitro model for
each experiment.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 19 of 21
Table 3. Different distributions of the standard microbiota in each of the three vessels of the MimiCol3.
Experiment Vessel 1 Vessel 2 Vessel 3
1 SM omni SM veget SM meat
2 SM meat SM omni SM veget
3 SM veget SM meat SM omni
4 SM pooled SM pooled SM pooled
5 SM omni SM veget SM meat
4.2.4. Preparation of Calibration Curves
A stock solution with a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL of the analytical sulfasalazine stan-
dard was prepared to calculate the sulfasalazine concentration. From this stock solution, 20,
40, 60, 80, 100 and 120 L were diluted to 2 mL with 0.1 M NaOH and measured photomet-
rically at 450 nm. The absorption was plotted against the concentration of sulfasalazine in
g/mL, showing a good linear correlation between 4 and 24 g/mL. Therefore, a coefﬁcient
of determination of R2> 0.998 was considered as an acceptance criterion. A calibration
curve was freshly prepared on each day of the experiment.
5. Conclusions
The study of the biologically relevant metabolism of sulfasalazine by the gut microbiota
was successful in the MimiCol3. To ensure that as many bacteria as possible were available
for the experiments, different diets were considered when recruiting fecal donors. The
focus was on omnivorous, vegetarian and meat-rich diets. However, when the stool
samples were cultured in the Biostat®A plus, the loss of the above-mentioned properties
was observed, and thus a decrease in the diversity of the bacterial microbiota among
themselves, which was also reﬂected in the results of sulfasalazine metabolism. Looking at
the results of sulfasalazine degradation, the degradation of the active ingredient occurred
during all experiments. This is consistent with the exponential growth of bacteria due
to the conditions in the MimiCol3. Despite the simplicity of the model, a reproducible
in vivo study environment for the cultivation of colonic-relevant bacterial species has been
established. Despite the reduction in the desired diversity of the bacterial composition,
differences in drug degradation were observed. The design of the MimiCol3, consisting of
three vessels, allowed experiments to be run in parallel, resulting in a higher yield of results.
It was found that the variability within one day was lower than in experiments carried out
on different days. The in vitro model MimiCol3can be further optimized through a series of
experiments with substances for which metabolism by the colonic microbiome has already
been demonstrated. In the future, it should be possible to make further statements about
the degradation of known active substances, as well as performing initial assessments of
new substances.
Author Contributions: D.-S.S.: Conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, visu-
alization, writing—original draft preparation. R.B.: Conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, writing—review and editing. A.H.: Formal analysis, visualization, data curation,
investigation, writing—review and editing. J.K. writing—review and editing. P .S.: writing—review
and editing. W.W.: Conceptualization, writing—review and editing, supervision, funding acquisition.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was approved by the ethics committee of Univer-
sity Medicine Greifswald (BB 009/22).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
study. Subjects are not identiﬁable in these data; nonetheless, written informed consent has been
obtained from the subjects for the publisher.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available at the University of
Greifswald’s storage system.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 20 of 21
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the scientiﬁc and technical assistants Kathleen Röger
and Thomas Brand for their excellent support in the preparation of the experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. O’Hara, A.M.; Shanahan, F. The Gut Flora as a Forgotten Organ. EMBO Rep. 2006 ,7, 688–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Doestzada, M.; Vila, A.V .; Zhernakova, A.; Koonen, D.P .Y.; Weersma, R.K.; Touw, D.J.; Kuipers, F.; Wijmenga, C.; Fu, J.
Pharmacomicrobiomics: A Novel Route towards Personalized Medicine? Protein Cell 2018 ,9, 432–445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Blaut, M. The Intestinal Microbiome: Fundamentals and Inﬂuence of Diet. Diabetologe 2016 ,12, 386–393. [CrossRef]
4. Baldelli, V .; Scaldaferri, F.; Putignani, L.; Del Chierico, F. The Role of Enterobacteriaceae in Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis in
Inﬂammatory Bowel Diseases. Microorganisms 2021 ,9, 697. [CrossRef]
5. Mitrea, L.; Neme¸ s, S.-A.; Szabo, K.; Teleky, B.-E.; Vodnar, D.-C. Guts Imbalance Imbalances the Brain: A Review of Gut Microbiota
Association with Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders. Front. Med. 2022 ,9, 813204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Stojanov, S.; Berlec, A.; Štrukelj, B. The Inﬂuence of Probiotics on the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes Ratio in the Treatment of Obesity
and Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease. Microorganisms 2020 ,8, 1715. [CrossRef]
7. Koontz, J.M.; Dancy, B.C.R.; Horton, C.L.; Stallings, J.D.; DiVito, V .T.; Lewis, J.A. The Role of the Human Microbiome in Chemical
Toxicity. Int. J. Toxicol. 2019 ,38, 251–264. [CrossRef]
8. Pickard, J.M.; Zeng, M.Y.; Caruso, R.; N úñez, G. Gut Microbiota: Role in Pathogen Colonization, Immune Responses and
Inﬂammatory Disease. Immunol. Rev. 2017 ,279, 70–89. [CrossRef]
9. McNeil, N.I. The Contribution of the Large Intestine to Energy Supplies in Man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1984 ,39, 338–342. [CrossRef]
10. Li, Y.; Faden, H.S.; Zhu, L. The Response of the Gut Microbiota to Dietary Changes in the First Two Years of Life. Front. Pharmacol.
2020 ,11, 334. [CrossRef]
11. Arumugam, M.; Raes, J.; Pelletier, E.; Paslier, D.L.; Batto, J.; Bertalan, M.; Borruel, N.; Casellas, F. Enterotypes of the Human Gut
Microbiome. Nature 2013 ,473, 174–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoffmann, C.; Bittinger, K.; Chen, Y.Y.; Keilbaugh, S.A.; Bewtra, M.; Knights, D.; Walters, W.A.; Knight, R.;
et al. Linking Long-Term Dietary Patterns with Gut Microbial Enterotypes. Science 2011 ,334, 105–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Zimmer, J.; Lange, B.; Frick, J.S.; Sauer, H.; Zimmermann, K.; Schwiertz, A.; Rusch, K.; Klosterhalfen, S.; Enck, P . A Vegan
or Vegetarian Diet Substantially Alters the Human Colonic Faecal Microbiota. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012 ,66, 53–60. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
14. Tomova, A.; Bukovsky, I.; Rembert, E.; Yonas, W.; Alwarith, J.; Barnard, N.D.; Kahleova, H. The Effects of Vegetarian and Vegan
Diets on Gut Microbiota. Front. Nutr. 2019 ,6, 47. [CrossRef]
15. Ferrocino, I.; Di Cagno, R.; De Angelis, M.; Turroni, S.; Vannini, L.; Bancalari, E.; Rantsiou, K.; Cardinali, G.; Neviani, E.; Cocolin,
L. Fecal Microbiota in Healthy Subjects Following Omnivore, Vegetarian and Vegan Diets: Culturable Populations and RRNA
DGGE Proﬁling. PLoS ONE 2015 ,10, e0128669. [CrossRef]
16. Singh, R.K.; Chang, H.W.; Yan, D.; Lee, K.M.; Ucmak, D.; Wong, K.; Abrouk, M.; Farahnik, B.; Nakamura, M.; Zhu, T.H.; et al.
Inﬂuence of Diet on the Gut Microbiome and Implications for Human Health. J. Transl. Med. 2017 ,15, 73. [CrossRef]
17. David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V .; Devlin, A.S.; Varma, Y.;
Fischbach, M.A.; et al. Diet Rapidly and Reproducibly Alters the Human Gut Microbiome. Nature 2014 ,505, 559–563. [CrossRef]
18. Voreades, N.; Kozil, A.; Weir, T.L. Diet and the Development of the Human Intestinal Microbiome. Front. Microbiol. 2014 ,5, 494.
[CrossRef]
19. Palleja, A.; Mikkelsen, K.H.; Forslund, S.K.; Kashani, A.; Allin, K.H.; Nielsen, T.; Hansen, T.H.; Liang, S.; Feng, Q.; Zhang, C.; et al.
Recovery of Gut Microbiota of Healthy Adults Following Antibiotic Exposure. Nat. Microbiol. 2018 ,3, 1255–1265. [CrossRef]
20. Weersma, R.K.; Zhernakova, A.; Fu, J. Interaction between Drugs and the Gut Microbiome. Gut2020 ,69, 1510–1519. [CrossRef]
21. Jourova, L.; Anzenbacher, P .; Anzenbacherova, E. Human Gut Microbiota Plays a Role in the Metabolism of Drugs. Biomed. Pap.
2016 ,160, 317–326. [CrossRef]
22. Chavez-Bravo, E.; Alonso-Calderon, A.I.A.; Sanchez-Calvario, L.; Castaneda-Roldan, E.; Vidal Robles, E.; Salazar-Robles, G.
Characterization of the Degradation Products from the Red Dye 40 by Enterobacteria. J. Pure Appl. Microbiol. 2016 ,10, 2569–2575.
[CrossRef]
23. Saranraj, P .; Stella, D.; Sivasakthivelan, P . Scholars Research Library Separation, Puriﬁcation and Characterization of Dye
Degrading Enzyme Azoreductase from Bacterial Isolates. Cent. Eur. J. Exp. Biol. 2014 ,3, 19–25.
24. Zahran, S.A.; Ali-Tammam, M.; Hashem, A.M.; Aziz, R.K.; Ali, A.E. Azoreductase Activity of Dye-Decolorizing Bacteria Isolated
from the Human Gut Microbiota. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 5508. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Molly, K.; Vande Woestyne, M.; Verstraete, W. Development of a 5-Step Multi-Chamber Reactor as a Simulation of the Human
Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1993 ,39, 254–258. [CrossRef]
26. O’Farrell, C.; Stamatopoulos, K.; Simmons, M.; Batchelor, H. In Vitro Models to Evaluate Ingestible Devices: Present Status and
Current Trends. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2021 ,178, 113924. [CrossRef]
27. Venema, K. The TNO In Vitro Model of the Colon (TIM-2). In The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health ; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; pp. 293–304, ISBN 9783319161044.Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 1128 21 of 21
28. Beeck, R.; Dols, A.; Weitschies, W.; Schneider, F.; Seradj, D.S.; Krause, J.; Schick, P . An Advanced Bioreactor Simulating Dynamic
Physiological Conditions in the Human Ascending Colon: MimiCol3. Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 1049. [CrossRef]
29. Hasan, N.; Yang, H. Factors Affecting the Composition of the Gut Microbiota, and Its Modulation. PeerJ 2019 ,2019 , e7502.
[CrossRef]
30. Cummings, J.H.; Macfarlane, G.T. The Control and Consequences of Bacterial Fermentation in the Human Colon. J. Appl. Bacteriol.
1991 ,70, 443–459. [CrossRef]
31. Frantz, J.C.; McCallum, R.E. Growth Yields and Fermentation Balance of Bacteroides Fragilis Cultured in Glucose-Enriched
Medium. J. Bacteriol. 1979 ,137, 1263–1270. [CrossRef]
32. Rangarajan, A.A.; Chia, H.E.; Azaldegui, C.A.; Olszewski, M.H.; Pereira, G.V .; Koropatkin, N.M.; Biteen, J.S. Ruminococcus
Bromii Enables the Growth of Proximal Bacteroides Thetaiotaomicron by Releasing Glucose during Starch Degradation. Microbiol.
(United Kingd.) 2022 ,168, 001180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Xie, Z.; Ding, L.; Huang, Q.; Fu, X.; Liu, F.; Dhital, S.; Zhang, B. In Vitro Colonic Fermentation Proﬁles and Microbial Responses of
Propionylated High-Amylose Maize Starch by Individual Bacteroides-Dominated Enterotype Inocula. Food Res. Int. 2021 ,144,
110317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Den Besten, G.; Van Eunen, K.; Groen, A.K.; Venema, K.; Reijngoud, D.J.; Bakker, B.M. The Role of Short-Chain Fatty Acids in the
Interplay between Diet, Gut Microbiota, and Host Energy Metabolism. J. Lipid Res. 2013 ,54, 2325–2340. [CrossRef]
35. Dr Schoefer, L. Naturheilkunde Metabolische Endotoxinämie Überfordert Die Leber Metabolische Endotoxinämie. Naturheilkd. J.
2017 ,19, 2–4.
36. Arbor, A.; Arbor, A. Culture Enterobacteria. Microbiology 1974 ,119, 736–747.
37. Palmer, C.; Bik, E.M.; DiGiulio, D.B.; Relman, D.A.; Brown, P .O. Development of the Human Infant Intestinal Microbiota. PLoS
Biol. 2007 ,5, 1556–1573. [CrossRef]
38. Eckburg, P .B.; Bik, E.M.; Bernstein, C.N.; Purdom, E.; Dethlefsen, L.; Sargent, M.; Gill, S.R.; Nelson, K.E.; Relman, D.A. Diversity
of the Human Intestinal Microbial Flora. Science. 2005 ,308, 1635–1638. [CrossRef]
39. Hold, G.L.; Pryde, S.E.; Russell, V .J.; Furrie, E.; Flint, H.J. Assessment of Microbial Diversity in Human Colonic Samples by 16S
RDNA Sequence Analysis. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2002 ,39, 33–39. [CrossRef]
40. Christensen, J. Motility of the Colon. In Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract , 3rd ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
1994; pp. 991–1024.
41. Malbert, C.H. The Ileocolonic Sphincter. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2005 ,17, 41–49. [CrossRef]
42. Maier, R.M. Bacterial Growth , 2nd ed.; Elsevier Inc.: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009; ISBN 9780123705198.
43. Leibniz-Instiut Kultivierung von Anaerobiern. Available online: https://www.dsmz.de/ﬁleadmin/Bereiche/Microbiology/
Dateien/Kultivierungshinweise/Anaerob.pdf (accessed on 21 November 2021).
44. Croucher, S.C.; Houston, A.P .; Bayliss, C.E.; Turner, R.J. Bacterial Populations Associated with Different Regions of the Human
Colon Wall. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1983 ,45, 1025–1033. [CrossRef]
45. Beeck, R.; Glöckl, G.; Krause, J.; Schick, P .; Weitschies, W. Mimicking the Dynamic Colonic Microbiota in Vitro to Gain a Better
Understanding on the in Vivo Metabolism of Xenobiotics: Degradation of Sulfasalazine. Int. J. Pharm. 2021 ,603, 120704.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Sandborn, W.J.; Hanauer, S.B. Systematic Review: The Pharmacokinetic Proﬁles of Oral Mesalazine Formulations and Mesalazine
pro-Drugs Used in the Management of Ulcerative Colitis. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003 ,17, 29–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Degnan, B.A.; Macfarlane, G.T. Transport and Metabolism of Glucose and Arabinose in Biﬁdobacterium Breve. Arch. Microbiol.
1993 ,160, 144–151. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Raﬁi, F.; Franklin, W.; Cerniglia, C.E. Azoreductase Activity of Anaerobic Bacteria Isolated from Human Intestinal Microﬂora.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1990 ,56, 2146–2151. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Kellow, J.E.; Borody, T.J.; Phillips, S.F.; Haddad, A.C.; Brown, M.L. Sulfapyridine Appearance in Plasma after Salicylazosulfapyri-
dine. Another Simple Measure of Intestinal Transit. Gastroenterology 1986 ,91, 396–400. [CrossRef]
50. Minekus, M.; Smeets-Peeters, M.; Bernalier, A.; Marol-Bonnin, S.; Havenaar, R.; Marteau, P .; Alric, M.; Fonty, G.; Huis In’t Veld,
J.H. A Computer-Controlled System to Simulate Conditions of the Large Intestine with Peristaltic Mixing, Water Absorption and
Absorption of Fermentation Products. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1999 ,53, 108–114. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.