International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
302  
Treatment of Textile Industry Wastewater by Sequencing Batch Reactor ( SBR ), 
Modelling and Simulation of Biokinetic Parameters  
 
Yasemin Damar  
 
Asude Ates, Recep Ileri  
 
Departmen t of Environmental Engineering  
Sakarya Universit y 
Sakarya 54187  
Turkey  
 
 
Abstract  
 
In this study; variation of effluent BOD 5’s (S e) with reaction time (t r) in Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) unit for 
textile industry wastewater treatm ent plant and effective parameters on this variation have been researched. 
Determination of appropriate reaction time (t r) is an important value for design and operation of activated sludge 
unit. An appropriate kinetic equation for Sequencing Batch Reactor  (SBR) unit has been researched and 
simulation studies were made according to parameters’ minimum, average and maximum values. In simulation 
studies, it has been observed that effect of parameters (S o, Q, k, V b, Va, Vab) on Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) 
effluent concentration (S e) variation with reaction time (t r). In addition, theoretical variation of effect parameters 
on effluent BOD 5’s (S e) and interaction of these parameters were researched. Ten different values with 
determined ranges were chosen for each parameter. Calculations have been done using our computer program. 
In the result of calculations were obtained theoretical values. Calcu lated values have been plotted and fitted 
graphics by Grapher program. Also, regression coefficient were determined and given suitable equations. This 
method of Sequencing Batch Reactor offers a significant improvement for the treatment of textile wastewat er and 
this theory can be used to help define Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) kinetics with the optimum operational 
characteristics.  
 
Key Words:  Parameter; Simulation; Sequencing batch reactor (SBR); Textile industry; Wastewater treatment  
 
1. Introduction  
 
Textile industries use large amounts of water and chemicals for finishing and dying processes. Dyestuff is a type 
of refractory organic matter, and thus microorganisms find it difficult to use it as a carbon or energy source. 
However, many researchers are still interested in biological treatment processes for the treatment of textile 
wastewater due to the low cost and the absence of chemical waste production (Santhy and Selvapathy, 2006; 
Sirianuntapiboon et al.,  2007). Aerobic granular sludge sequencing bat ch reactors (SBR) are a promising 
technology for treating wastewater (Liu et al.,  2005).  
 
A Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) is an activated sludge biological treatment process. This type of process is 
usually used in small systems. Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) systems are hybrid systems with some 
characteristics of continuous flow PF (plug flow) and CM (complete mixed) systems but they have other 
characteristics that are truly unique. One complete cycle is composed of the fill, react, settle, draw and idle , 
respectively. A Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) differs from the conventional flow true activated sludge process 
in that SBRs do not require separate tanks for aeration and sedimentation. There is no return activated sludge 
system in the SBR system (Drost e, 1997; İleri and Damar, 2005; Teichgraber et al.,  2001; Tchobanoglous, 1991; 
EPA, 2000; Lin, 2001).  
 
An SBR system is a modified AS system used in solving the low -density bio -sludge and bulking sludge problems 
due to the large volume of the clarifier (M etcalf & Eddy, 1991). Biological processes will only achieve near -
optimal performance if they are modeled and monitored using reliable techniques. An adequate model of a 
biological process enhances the understanding of the process and can form the basis fo r better process design, 
control, and operation. In addition, efficient process monitoring and early fault detection methods allow corrective 
action to be taken well before a dangerous situation occurs. In biological wastewater treatment plants, most 
chang es are slow when theprocess is recovering from a ‘bad’ state to a ‘normal’ state (Chang Kyoo Yoo,  Kris 
Villez, In -Beum Lee, Christian Rose´n, Peter A. Vanrolleghem, 2007 ). © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
303  
When a problem occurs in such a process, it may give rise to subtle changes that gradually grow until they 
become a serious operational problem. In recently developed industrial biological plants, many variables are 
measured in various operating units and an abundance of data is recorded. However, such data sets are highly 
correlated and are subject to considerable noise. In the absence of an appropriate processing method, only limited 
information can be extracted. In such situations, the operator may not u nderstand the process sufficiently to 
maintain stable operation. If properly treated, however, this process data can provide a wealth of information that 
can assist plant operators in understanding the process status and enable them to take appropriate act ion when an 
abnormality is detected (Chang Kyoo Yoo,  Kris Villez, In -Beum Lee, Christian Rose´n, Peter A. Vanrolleghem, 
2007 ). 
 
Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) processes have demonstrated their efficiency and flexibility in the treatment of 
wastewaters with  high concentrations of nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorous) and toxic compounds from domestic 
and industrial sources. A SBR has a unique cyclic batch operation, usually with five well -defined phases: fill, 
react, settle, draw, and idle. Most of the advantage s of SBR processes can be attributed to their single -tank design 
and their ability to adjust the durations of the different phases, which endows these processes with a flexibility 
that allows them to meet many different treatment objectives. However, SBR p rocesses are highly nonlinear, 
time-varying, and subject to significant disturbances such as hydraulic changes, composition variations, and 
equipment failures. Small changes in concentrations or flows may have large effects on the biological reaction 
kinet ics, leading to batch -to-batch variations in effluent quality and microorganism growth. Such influent 
variations cause SBR processes to evolve over time as the microorganisms adapt to the changing operating 
conditions. These factors lead to changes in the microbial community and multiple operation modes within a 
bioreactor.  
 
Moreover, compared to data from continuous wastewater treatment processes, SBR operation data have the added 
dimension of Batch number, which, when combined with the measured variables a nd sample times, gives a three -
way matrix (batches_ variables_time). Batch processes generally exhibit some batch -to-batch variation in the 
trajectories of the process variables. However, treatment performance, the key indicator of process performance, 
is often only examined off -line in a laboratory. This lack of real -time on -line monitoring of treatment performance 
means that situations can arise where operators are aware of problems in the treatment performance, but cannot 
determine the underlying causes of the problems or predict when they will occur.  
 
Therefore, the monitoring and supervision of SBR processes are crucial to the detection and timely correction of 
faults. Prompt fault identification and correction is particularly necessary in biological pro cesses because such 
processes may take days, weeks, or even months to recover from an abnormal state (Lennox et al., 2001; Nomikos 
and MacGregor, 1994).  SBR is convenient for organics and nutrient removal. Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) 
that is enforced i n the world for municipal and industrial wastewater treatment in the recent years was developed 
(Droste , 1997; Lin, 2001; Lee and Lin, 2000). The Sequencing Batch Reactor technology is applied in about 1.3% 
of the wastewater treatment plants in Germany (Teichgraber et al.,  2001). In Turkey, the textile industry 
comprises nearly 35% of total export and textile factories are known to vary in their treatment performance and 
efficiency. Also studies on these issues are still lacking (Aktan and Salih, 2006).  Stable N removal via nitrite 
could be obtained through the control of the aeration time in a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) treating domestic 
wastewater. Aeration was stopped as soon as nitritation finished (i.e., complete oxidation of NH 4 ), as indicated by  
a bending point on the pH profile. An external carbon source (glucose) was added to enable denitrification in the 
following anoxic period. Clearly, the use of an external carbon source rather than the COD contained in 
wastewater for denitrification consid erably undermines the overall benefits of the nitrite pathway (Romain L., 
Marcos M., Zhiguo Y., 2008).   
 
Mathematical modeling has proven very useful to study complex processes, such as the aerobic granular sludge 
systems. Biological processes in the gran ules are determined by concentration gradients of oxygen and diverse 
substrates. The computational model used in this study is based on previously developed models. The SBR and 
granular sludge descriptions are principally which described heterotrophic orga nisms storing acetate (without 
phosphate accumulation) in a feast -famine regime in combination with autotrophic organisms for nitrogen 
removal (M.K. de Kreuk,  C. Picioreanu,  M. Hosseini,  J.B. Xavier,  M.C.M. van Loosdrecht, 2007).  
Conventional biologic al wastewater treatment plants do not easily degrade the dyes and polyvinyl alcohols 
(PVOH) in textile effluents. Results are reported on the possible advantages of anaerobic/aerobic cometabolism in 
sequenced redox reactors.  International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
304  
A six phase anaerobic/aerobic s equencing laboratory scale batch reactor was developed to treat a synthetic textile 
effluent (Shaw et al.,  2002) . The SBR system could also be used to treat high nitrogen containing wastewater 
because such systems facilitate nitrogen removal by nitrificati on–denitrification. However, the operation with 
aerobic -SBR still has some problems such as the low settleability of bio -sludge, high excess sludge production 
under high organic loading or hydraulic loading and less increase in the removal efficiency due t o the limitation 
of the increasing of bio -sludge (Lee and Lin, 2000).  Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) systems have been proven to 
offer substantial benefits to alternative conventional flow systems for the biological treatment of both domestic 
and industri al wastewater. The SBR is a wastewater treatment system anomaly, because operationally it is 
extremely flexible in its ability to meet many different treatment objectives while physically it is very simple 
(Sheng -Bing et al.,  2007).  
 
A sequencing batch rea ctor (SBR) has certain advantages over conventional activated sludge processes (ASP) for 
the treatment of complex wastewater. The SBR showed relatively more efficient performance over conventional 
suspended growth systems (Mohan et al.,  2005). The major el ements of design that accomplish population 
dynamics control to prevent filamentous sludge bulking, cycle time, oxygen supply, biological nitrification, 
denitrification, phosphorous removal and solids -liquid separation need to be set in such away that suff iciently, 
optimal conditions are provided to permit the reactions and processes to take place (Novak et al.,  1997).  SBR  
operation is divided in two major phases: aerobic and anoxic, to achieve total pollutants removal within minimum 
time. The nitrogen removal efficiency decreased gradually with increasing ammonium -loading rates at constant 
COD loading. Therefore, appropria te control of the carbon source concentration can stimulate the SND 
(simultaneous nitrification –denitrification) in a traditional SBR to optimize biological nutrient removal (Chiua et 
al., 2007). The substrate removal kinetic of aerobic granules would be s ize-dependent. Smaller aerobic granules 
exhibited higher metabolic activity in terms of the substrate removal rate in SBR (Li and Liu, 2005).  
 
The sequencing batch reactor (SBR) system can be applied for treatment of TWW containing vat dyes with high 
efficiency. The dye adsorption ability of bio -sludge was about the same, whether it acclimatized with the STWW 
with or without direct dyes. This may be because the direct dyes did not induce the dye adsorption ability of the 
bio-sludge. On successive dye adsorp tions, the dye adsorption ability of bio -sludge gradually decreased with each 
subsequent replacement, but the deteriorated bio -sludge recovered adsorption ability when washed with 
surfactants, such as SDS, Tween 80 and Triton X -100 solutions. This is simil ar to the results from a previous 
study on heavy metal adsorption on biosludge, where the adsorption ability of bio -sludge was increased with an 
increase in sludge age (solids retention time (SRT). Biosludge from domestic wastewater treatment systems can 
be used as an adsorbent of direct dyes, as well as organic matter, due to the high adsorption ability of bio -sludge 
(Sirianuntapiboon et al.,  2007).  Our objective is to look at the treatment of textile industry wastewater by 
sequencing batch reactor (SBR),  kinetics theory and simulation of parameters.  
 
2. Materials and methods  
 
2.1. Laboratory Scaled Plant  
 
A laboratory scaled plant was built in order to treat textile industry wastewater in a Sequencing Batch Bioreactor 
(SBR).  The l aboratory scaled plant was built by minimizing a Sequencing Batch Bioreactor unit which is a part of 
treatment plant where textile industry wastewater is treated.  Active sludge (8.586 L) was taken from real scaled 
plant and a raw wastewater example (0.954 L) was used in the attempts.  The flow scheme of the laboratory scaled 
plant is given in Fig. 1.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Flow scheme of l aboratory scaled p lant 
  
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
305  
In this laboratory scaled plant experiment studies, treatment plant influent wastewater and active treatment sludge 
were used. These were taken from a treatment plant where synthetic textile industr y wastewater was treated.  
Measurements of influent and effluent wastewater were carried out according to standard methods (APHA, 1995).    
 
2.2. Stud y area  
 
Also in this study, one packaged biological treatment plant such as sequencing batch reactor (SBR), has been used 
for treatment of textile wastewater. Flow rates of industrial and domestic wastewater are 940 -2000 m3d-1 and 40 -
100 m3d-1, respectively. There are three parallel bioreactors. Total and active volumes of each bioreactor are 1000 
m3 and 160 m3, respectively. Flow chart of textile wastewater treatment plant has been shown in Fig. 2. Raw 
textile wastewater characteristics are su ch as BOD 5=300 -3000 mgL-1, COD=500 -5000 mgL-1, SS=10 -50 mgL-1, 
Sulphur=2 mgL-1, pH=4 -12, T=40 0C.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2. Theory  
 
The substrate concentration remaining at the end of the period is a variable function of the volume and the kinetic 
expression for subst rate removal that applies during the fill -period. The mass balance during the fill period is 
(Droste, 1997).  
In – Out + Generation = Accumulation  
SVdtdVr SQsf o        0   
                                                     (1) 
Sk rsf     
                                                                     (2) 
Using Eq. (2) for r sf , Eq. (1) becomes.  
       -  dtdSVdtdVSVSkSQo 
 
The equation can be further simplified by recognizing that 
Q dt  /  dV . Using this diving by 
V  and rearranging 
the equation,  
oSVQS SVQ
dtdS   k      
                                                        (3) 
VQ / 
 is 
t / 1 . At the beginning of the fill period the reactor contains a volume 
aV  and 
QVta /    ; at the end of 
the fill period 
QVtb /      . The differential equation to be solved is.  
tSSktS
dtdSo       
                                                             (4) 
The equation is solve d using an integrating factor. The solution of the equation is.  
  C         1-   1 -   1 -  

 

 


dtk
tdtk
t odtk
te dt etSeS
 
 
Fig. 2.  Flow chart of wastewater treatment plant for textile  
industry  
 International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
306  
where C is integrating constant.  
tk tk oetCdte etSS  - k  t   -         
 
Performing the integration,  
tketC
tkS  o    S 
                                                    
(5) 
Using the initial condition 
QVta /    and 
eSS   . 




QVk
a ao
ea
eVQC
VkQSS  
        
 







QVk
o
eaa
ekSSQVC  
      
 
Making the substitution for C the final equation becomes.  







t
QVak
eoetkStkSS   
o a  1 S   QV     
                                         (6) 
The substrate concentration at the end of the fill period can be found by using,  
fb
f SSQVt             ve   
 







QV
QVk
bo
ea
bfb a
eVQ
kSSQV
VkQS   
o          S  
   or  







QVk
bo
e
ba
bo
fab
ekVSQSVV
VkQSS             
                                            (7) 
For most of the substrate removal expression a numerical solution is required to solve the differential equation 
describing substrate removal during the fill period (Droste, 1997). Calculating the amount of removal during the 
react period is straightforwar d. The equation for substrate removal is integrated directly as in the case for PF. 
Using Eq. (2),  
SkdtdS    
   
r e
ft S
SdtkSdS
0   
 or 
rtk
f e eSS    
                                                                       (8) 
where,   
fS  is the substrate concentration at the end of the fill period.  
         
eS  is the substrate concentration at the end of react period.  
00
SSSEe
AL EXPERIMENT
                                                                (9) 
If (7) and (8) numbered equations is put into the (9) numbered equation, the new equation for efficiency (E) of the 
treatment is obtained according to this study.  
 








   
) ).( .(... 1.1.) (
0. ) .(
RABRAB
tk QVk
e
BAtk
QVk
BMODEL e eSSVVe eVkQE  (10) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
307  
Furthermore, in order to make comparison, by using the equation at the bottom, E EXPERIMENTAL  values are obtained. 
As in the (10) numbered equation the parameters which effects E MODEL are like that E=f (Q, k, V A, V B, V AB, tR, So, 
Se).  
One complete c ycle is composed of the fill, react, settle, draw and idle periods (Droste, 1997; Irvine and 
Ketchum, 1988 ). 
i d s r f c tttttt           
                                                             (11) 
where, the subscripts c, f, r, s, d  and i indicate cycle, fill, react, settle, draw and idle, respectively.  
In a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) system the fill time ( tf) for an individual reactor depends on the available 
volume in the reactor. The available volume is the total volume of the reactor less the porti on occupied but the 
settled sludge remaining in the reactor after the previous cycle. In equation form (Droste, 1997): 
bV   abV
                                                                                        
(12) 
QV
QVtb ab
f     
                                                                                   
(13) 
where, Q is the influent flow rate during the fill period.  

 is the unoccupied fraction of the total volume of the batch reactor at the beginning of the fill period.  
bV
 is the volume of a batch reactor when t is empty.  
abV
 is the available volume at the beginning of the fill period.   
 
3. Results and discussion  
 
3.1. Experimental results  
 
3.1.1. Laboratory Scaled Plant  
 
Reaction period (t R)= 1.5 h and settlement period (t S)=1.5 h are found from laboratory scaled plant studies and the 
studies continued working in laboratory scaled and real scaled plants on these values.  In samples taken from real 
scaled plant at diffe rent times (S 01=1950 mgCODL-1 and S 02=958 mgCODL-1) COD, turbidity and color 
parameters and removal efficiencies were  examined (Damar, 2009).  Characte ristic of the wastewater used in 
laboratory scaled pilot plant is given in Table 1.  
 
Table 1.  Characteristics of wastewater used in laboratory scaled plant  
 
 
 
In wastewater with 1950 mgCODL-1 influent concentration (I. Attempt), comparison of COD removal and 
treatment efficiency during reaction period (t R) is given i n Fig. 3. COD value measured in the system at t=0 
moment is 1950 mgL-1 and t F=0.5 h.  As reaction began during filling time (t F), tR=1.5 h and  t F=0.5 h and at the 
end of 2 h period 80% removal was realized in the system.    
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
308  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In wastewater with 958 mgCODL-1 influent concentration (II.  Attempt), comparison of COD removal and 
treatment efficiency during reaction period (t R) is given in Fig. 4.  COD value measured in the system at t=0 
moment is 958 mgL-1 and t F=0.5 h.  As reaction began during filling time (t F), tR=1.5 h and  t F=0.5 h and at the end 
of 2 h period 70% removal was realized in the system.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.2. Study Area  
 
Raw textile wastewater characteristics are such as BOD 5=300 -3000 mgL-1, COD=500 -5000 mgL-1, SS=10 -50 
mgL-1, Sulphur=0.04 -2 mgL-1, pH=4 -12, T=40 0C. Effluent concentrations from sequencing batch reactor (SBR) 
are determined BOD 5= 25-55 mgL-1, COD=151 -230 mgL-1, SS= 4 mgL-1, Sulphur= 0.021 mgL-1, pH=7.5.  
 
3.2. Simulation of parameters  
 
An appropriate kinetic equation for Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) unit has been researched and simulation 
studies were made according  to parameters’ minimum, average and maximum values. In simulation studies, it has 
been observed that effect of parameters (S o, Q, k, V b, V a, V ab) on Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) effluent 
concentration (S e) variation with reaction time (t r). Effluent con centrations (S e) have been determined using 
variable aeration times (t r) applying equations (7) and (8) with choosing different values. Obtained values have 
been plotted. Average So, Q, k, V b, V a and V ab parameters have been chosen from real treatment system and 
literature. Values of simulation p arameters have been taken such as avarage when using one of the parameters’ 
minimum, average and maximum values  in equation (7) .  
05001000150020002500
0 0.52 0.75 1 1.25 1.5 1.75 20102030405060708090100 Effluent Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD), mgL-1 
Reaction Time (t R), h Treatment Efficiency (E), %  
Fig. 3. In wastewater with 1950 mgCODL-1 influent  
concentration (I. Attempt), comparison of COD removal 
and treatment efficiency during reaction period (t R)  
 
020040060080010001200
0 0.52 0.75 1 1.25 1.5 1.75 20102030405060708090100
 Effluent Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD), mgL-1 
Reaction Time (t R), h Treatment Efficiency (E), %  
Fig. 4. In wastewater with 958 mgCODL-1 influent  
concentration (II.  Attempt), comparison of COD removal 
and treatment efficiency during reaction period (t R) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
309  
For example, simulation values we re formed for So min=300 mgL-1,  S o ave=1650 mgL-1,  S o max=3000 mgL-1, 
whereas constant values where formed Q  ave=55 m3h-1, k ave=0,275 h-1, V b ave=900 m3, V a ave=450 m3, V ab ave =125 
m3. Calculations have been done using our computer program. In the resu lt of calculations were obtained 
theoretical values.    
The combination of anaerobic and aerobic periods in the operation cycle of a Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) 
was chosen to study biological colour removal from simulated textile effluents containing reactive. 90% colour 
removal was obtained for the violet dye in a 24 -h cycle with a Sludge Retention Time (SRT) of 15 days and an 
aerated reaction phase of 10 h  (Lourenço et al., 2001 ). 
 
An anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor with a sludge age of 8 days and anaerobic+aerobic+settling times 
of 18+5+1h, was used to decolorize an azo -reactive dye wastewater ( Panswad et al., 2001 ). 
3.2.1. Effect of influent substrate concentration (S o) 
So values such as S o min=300 mgL-1, S o ave=1650 mgL-1 and S o max=3000  mgL-1 were chosen. The values of 
parameter used in the model for textile industry has been given in Table 2. Effect of influent concentration (S o) on 
variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 5. When influent concentration 
(So) decreased the effluent concentration (S e) decreased.  
 
Table 2.  The values of parameter used in the model for textile industry  
 
 
  
 
 
3.2.2 Effect of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) 
 
Q values such as Q  min=10 m3h-1, Q  ave=55 m3h-1 and Q  max=100 m3h-1 were chosen. Effect of flow rate (Q) on 
variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 6. When flow rate (Q) 
decreased the effluent concentration (S e) decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
050100150200250300350
00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 44.5 55.5 6Se(mgL-1)
t r(h)So min=300 mgL -¹
So ort=1650 mgL -¹
So max=3000 mgL -¹
 
 Fig. 5. Effect of influent concentration (S o) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) 
 
 Fig. 5. Effect of influent concentration (S o) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) 
 International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
310  
  
 
 
3.2.3. Effect of reaction constant (k)  
 
k values such as k  min=0,05 h-1, k ave=0,275 h-1and k  max=0,5 h-1 were chosen. Effect of reaction constant (k) on 
variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 7. When reaction constant (k) 
increased the effluent concentration (S e) decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.4. Eff ect of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) 
 
Vb values such as V b min=800 m3, V b ave=900 m3, V b max=1000 m3 were chosen. Effect of volume of a batch reactor 
when is empty (Vb) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 8. When 
volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) increased the effluent concentration (S e) a few decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 050100150200250
00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 44.5 55.5 6Se(mgL-1)
t r (h)Q min=10 m³/h
Q ort=55 m³/h
Q max=100 m³/hQ     Se 
 
 
 Fig. 6.  Effect of flow rate (Q) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e)  
 
 
 Fig. 7.  Effect of reaction constant (k) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
311  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.5. Effect of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) 
 
Va values such as V a min=300 m3, V a ave=450 m3, V a max=600 m3 were chosen. Effect of volume of a batch reactor 
when is initially (Va) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 9. 
When volume of a batch reactor when is initially (Va) decreased the effluen t concentration (S e) a few decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.6. Effect of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) 
 
Vab values such as V ab min=50 m3, V ab ave=125 m3, V ab max =200 m3 were chosen. Effect of available volume at the 
beginning of the fill period (Vab) on variation of react time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in 
Fig. 10. When available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) decreased the effluent concentration (S e) 
decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 8.  Effect of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) on variation of react time (t r) with 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 
 
 
 Fig. 9.  Effect of volume of a batch reactor when is initially (Va) on variation of react time (t r) with 
effluent concentration (S e) 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
312  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Relationship of parameters  
 
Theoretical variation of effect parameters (S o, Q, k, V b, V a, V ab) on effluent BOD 5’s (S e) and interaction of these 
parameters were researched using equations (7) and (8). Ten different values with determined ranges were chosen 
for each parameter. Calculations have been done using our computer program. In the result of calculations were 
obtained theoretical values. Calculated values have been plotted and fitted graphics by Grapher program. Also, 
regression coefficient were determined and given suitable equations.  
 
3.3.1. Relationship of influent concentration (S o) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
Relationship of influent concentration (S o) and effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 11. Relationship 
of influent concentration (S o) and effluent concentration (S e) was increased -linear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.2. Relationship of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
Relationship of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) and effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 
12. Relationship of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) and effluent concentration (S e) was increased -
nonlinear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 10.  Effect of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) on variation of react 
time (t r) with effluent concentration (S e)  
 
effluent concentration (Se) 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11. Relationship of influent concentration (S o) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
313  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.3. Relationship of reaction constant (k) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
Relationship of reaction constant (k) and effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in Fig. 13. Relationship of 
reaction constant (k) and effluent concentration (S e) was decreased -nonlinear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.4. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) and effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in 
Fig. 14. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) and effluent concentration (S e) was 
decreased -linear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 12. Relationship of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 
 
Fig. 13. Relationship of reaction constant (k) and effluent concentration (S e)  International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
314  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.5. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) and effluent concentration (S e) has been shown in 
Fig. 15. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) and effluent concentration (S e) was 
increased -linear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.6. Relationship of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) and effluent concentration 
(Se) 
 
Relationship of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) and effluent concentration (S e) has been 
shown in Fig. 16. Relationship of  available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) and effluent 
concentration (S e) was increased -linear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 14. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is empty (Vb) and effluent concentration (S e) 
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 
 
Fig. 15. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) and effluent concentration 
(Se) 
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
315  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4. Comparison of the theory with experimental results  
 
Comparison of experimental with theoretical effluent concentration accordin g to different aeration times for 
textile industry has been given Table 3.  As seen as  in Table 2, average effluent concentration (S e) has been 
obtained 43 mg BOD 5/l during 1.5 hours of aeration time and of 1.5 hours of sedimentation time for sequencing 
batch reactor (SBR). Kinetics of treatment for sequencing batch reactor (SBR) are a quick event most of which 
takes places within the first one hour. Kinetics are as slow event after one hour. These results have been obtained 
from both experimen tal with theoretical studies.  Comparison of experimental with theoretical effluent 
concentration according to different aeration times for textile industry has been shown in Fig. 17. In addition, 
results of experimental and theoretical studies are close to  each other.   
 
Table 3 . Comparison of experimental with theoretical effluent concentration according to different aeration times 
for textile industry  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 16. Relationship of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) and effluent 
concentration (S e) 
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
316  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Conclusions  
 
The fraction of aerobic granules in the reactors seems to be related to the settling time the settling time of SBR 
may represent the magnitude of hydraulic selection pressure exerted on microbial community (Qin et al.,  2004). 
For aerobic granules with a si ze smaller than 0.4  mm, no diffusion limitation of substrate and dissolved oxygen 
occurred. However, when aerobic granules grew to a size larger than 0.5  mm, dissolved oxygen became a major 
limiting factor of metabolic activity of aerobic granule over subs trate. These imply that the optimal size of aerobic 
granule would be less than 0.5  mm in the sense of mass transfer.  It was revealed that the substrate removal rate 
was inversely related to the size of aerobic granules, the substrate removal rate by aerob ic granules with a size of 
0.5 mm was almost three times of that by aerobic granules with a size of 1  mm ( Li and Liu,  2005).  
 
In this study; variation of effluent BOD 5’s (S e) with reaction time (t r) in Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) unit for 
textile indus try wastewater treatment plant and effective parameters on this variation have been researched. 
According to obtained graphics from the results of simulation studies for chosen equation parameters, S o, Q, k and 
Vab were effective but V b and V a were a few e ffective.  
 
In addition, theoretical variation of effect parameters (S o, Q, k, V b, V a, V ab) on effluent BOD 5’s (S e) and 
interaction of these parameters were determined. Relationship of influent concentration (S o) and effluent 
concentration (S e) was increased -linear. Relationship of influent flow rate during the fill period (Q) and effluent 
concentration (S e) was increased -nonlinear. Relationship of reaction constant (k) and effluent concentration (S e) 
was decreased -nonlinear. Relationship of volume of a batch  reactor when is empty (Vb) and effluent concentration 
(Se) was decreased -linear. Relationship of volume of a batch reactor when is initially  (Va) and effluent 
concentration (S e) was increased -linear. Relationship of available volume at the beginning of the fill period (Vab) 
and effluent concentration (S e) was increased -linear.  
 
As a conclusion, the optimum treatment efficiency has been taken under 1.5 hours of aeration time and of 1.5 
hours of sedimentation time. Fil l, draw and idle times have been taken such as 1 hour. Total time for one cycle is 
4 hours. The treatment system has been operated 6 cycles per day. Volume of wastewater 160 m3 has been treated 
in an each cycle. Treated wastewater is totally 960 m3d-1 for each tank. Average effluent concentration (S e) has 
been experimentally determined 43 mg BOD 5/L during 1.5 hours of aeration time and of 1.5 hours of 
sedimentation time for sequencing batch reactor. Average effluent concentration (S e) has been theoretically  
determined 41.5 mg BOD 5/L at the same conditions for sequencing batch reactor.  It has been observed that results 
of experimental and theoretical studies are close to each other.   
 
This method of Sequencing Batch Reactor offers a significant improvement f or the treatment of textile wastewater 
and this theory can be used to help define Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) kinetics with the optimum operational 
characteristics.  
 
 
 Fig. 17.  Comparison of experimental with theoretical effluent concentration according to different 
aeration times for textile industry  
 
effluent concentration (S e) 
 © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA                                                                                                www.ijastnet .com     
317  
References  
 
Aktan, S., Salih, B.A., 2006. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for the detection of a bacterial community 
in activated sludge from textile factories. Environmental Technology 27 , 63-69.  
Chang Kyoo Yoo,  Kris Villez, In -Beum Lee, Christian Rose´n, Peter A. Vanrolleghem, 2007. Multi -Model 
Statistical Process Monitoring and Diagnosis of a Sequencing Batch Reactor, Biotechnology and 
bioengineering Vol. 96, No. 4, March 1.  
Chiua, Y., Leeb L., Changb, C., Chaoc, A.C., 2007. Control of carbon and ammonium ratio for simultaneous 
nitrification and denitrification in a sequencing batch bioreactor, Review. International Biodeterioration 
& Biodegradation  59, 1 –7. 
Droste, R.L., 1997. Theory and Practice of Water and Wastewater Treatment, Wiley&Sons, New York.  
EPA, 2000. Wastewater Techn ology Fact Sheet,  Package Plants, Washington, DC, USA.  
Irvine, R.L., Ketchum, L.H., 1988. Sequencing batch reactors for biological wastewater treatment. Critical 
Reviews in Environmental Control 18, 255 –294. 
İleri, R., Damar, Y., 2005. Experimental and theoretical studies of treatment of industrial     wastewaters by a 
sequencing batch reactor. Fresenius Environmental Bulletin  14, No:7, 550 -558.  
Kulac, S., 1997. The Study of Optimum Conditions in Batch Biolo gical Treatment Plant, M.Sc.Thesis, 
Department of Chemistry, Sakarya University, Turkey.  
Lee, C.C. Lin, S.D., 2000. Handbook of Environmental Engineering Calculations, McGraw Hill, Newyork, USA.  
Lennox B, Montague GA, Hiden HG, Kornfeld G, Goulding PR. 2 001. Process monitoring of an industrial fed -
batch fermentation. Biotechnol. Bioeng 74(2):125 –135. 
Li, Y., Liu Y. , 2005. Diffusion of substrate and oxygen in aerobic granule. Biochemical Engineering Journal 27 , 
45–52. 
Lin, S.D., 2001. Water and Wastewater Calculations Manuel, McGraw Hill, New York, USA.  
Liu Y., Wang, Z.,  Tay, J., 2005. A unified theory for upscaling aerobic granular sludge sequencing batch 
reactors. Research review paper, Biotechnology Advances  23, 335 –344. 
Lourenço,  N.D., Novais, J.M.,  Pinheiro, H.M., 2001. Effect of some operational parameters on textile dye 
biodegradation in a sequential batch reactor. Journal of Biotechnology 89, 163 –174. 
Metcalf and Eddy, 1991. Wastewater Engineering, McGraw Hill, New York.  
M.K. de Kreuk,  C. Picioreanu,  M. Hosseini,  J.B. Xavier,  M.C.M. van Loosdrecht, 2007.  Kinetic Model of a 
Granular Sludge SBR: Influences on Nutrient Removal Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 97, No. 
4, July 1.  
Mohan S. V., Rao,N.C., Prasad, K. K., Madhavi, B.T.V., Sharma, P.N., 2005. Treatment of complex chemical 
wastewater in a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) with an aerobic suspended growth configuration. Process 
Biochemistry 40 , 1501 –1508.  
Nomikos P, MacGregor JF. 1994. Monitoring batch processes  using multiway principal component analysis. 
AIChE J 40(8):1361 –1375 . 
Novak, L., Goronzy, M.C., Wanner, J., 1997. Dynamic mathematical modelling of sequencing batch reactor with 
aerated and mixed filling period. Water Science Technology  35, 105-112. 
Panswad, T., Iamsamer, K., Anotai, J., 2001. Decolorization of azo -reactive dye by polyphosphate and glycogen -
accumulating organisms in an anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor. Bioresource Technology 76, 
151-159. 
Qin, L., Liu, Yu., Tay, J., 2004. Ef fect of settling time on aerobic granulation in sequencing batch reactor. 
Biochemical Engineering Journal , 21, 47 –52. 
Rittmann, B.E., McCarty P.L., 2001. Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, McGraw Hill , 
New York , 316 –317. 
Romain L.,  Marcos M., Zhiguo Y., 2008. Achieving the Nitrite Pathway Using Aeration Phase Length Control 
and Step -Feed in an SBR Removing Nutrients From Abattoir Wastewater, Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, Vol. 100, No. 6, August 15.  
 International Journal of Applied Science and Technology                                                  Vol. 2  No. 3; March 2012  
318  
Santhy K., Selvapathy,P., 200 6. Removal of reactive dyes from wastewater by adsorption on coir pith activated 
carbon. Bioresource Technology 97,  1329 –1336.  
Sheng -Bing H., Gang X., Hai -nan K., Xin L., 2007. Improving the performance of sequencing batch reactor 
(SBR) by the addition of zeolite powder. Journal of Hazardous Materials 142,  493–499..  
Shaw, C.B., Carliell, C.M., Wheatley, A.D., 2002. Anaerobic/aerobic treatment of coloured textile effluents using 
sequencing batch reactors, Wat. Res. 36, 1993 –2001.  
Sirianuntapiboon S., Srisornsak P., 2007. Removal of disperse dyes from textile wastewater using bio -sludge. 
Bioresource Technology 98 , 1057 –1066.  
Sirianuntapiboona  S., Sadahirob O., Saleea P., 2007.  Some properties of a granular activated carbon -sequencing 
batch reactor (GAC -SBR) system for treatment of textile wastewater containing direct dyes. Journal of 
Environmental Management 85 , 162 –170. 
Tchobanoglous, G., 1991. Wastewater Engineering: Treatmen t, Disposal, Reuse, Metcalf&Eddy, Inc., New York.  
Teichgraber, B., Screff, D., Ekkerlein, C., Wilderer, P.A., 2001. Sequencing batch reactor technology in 
Germany -in overview. Water Sci. and Tech.  43, 323-330. 
 
Notation  
 
C Integrating constant  
Q The influent flow rate during the fill period (m3 h-1) 
V Volume ( m3) 
Va  The volume of a batch reactor when is initially (m3) 
bV
 The volume of a batch reactor when is empty (m3) 
abV
 The available volume at the beginning of the fill period (m3)  
S The substrate concentration (mg L-1) 
fS
 The substrate concentration at the end of the fill period (mg L-1) 
eS
 The substrate concentration at the end of react period (mg L-1) 
So The substrate concentration at the beginning of cycle period (mg L-1) 
t Time (h) 
tc In a sequencing batch reactor system the cycle time (h)  
td In a sequencing batch reactor system the draw time (h)  
tf In a sequencing batch reactor system the fill time (h)  
ti In a sequencing batch reactor system the idle time (h)  
tr In a sequencing batch reactor system the react time (h)  
ts In a sequencing batch reactor system the settle time (h)  

 The unoccupied fraction of the total volume of the batch reactor at the  
 beginning of the fill period  
rSf  The rate of substrate remo val during the fill period (mg L-1h-1) 
k reaction constant (h-1) 
 
 
 