UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS) SEQUENCING BATCH RE ACTORS: PRINCIPLES, 
DESIGN/OPERATION AND CASE STUDIES 
 
S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundaravadivel, and D. S. Chaudhary 
Faculty of Engineering and In formation Technology, School of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering and Information Technology, Univ ersity of Technology  Sydney, Australia  
 
Keywords : Activated sludge process, return  activated sludge, sludge settling, 
wastewater treatment,    
Contents 
 
1. Background 2. The SBR technology for wastewater treatment 3. Physical description of the SBR system 3.1 FILL Phase 
3.2 REACT Phase 3.3 SETTLE Phase  
3.4 DRAW or DECANT Phase 3.5 IDLE Phase 4. Components and configuration of SBR system 5. Control of biological reacti ons through operating strategies 
6. Design of SBR reactor 7. Costs of SBR 8. Case studies 8.1 Quakers Hill STP 8.2 SBR for Nutrient Removal at Ba thhurst Sewage Treatment Plant  
8.3 St Marys Sewage Treatment plant 8.4 A Small Cheese-Making Dairy in France  8.5 A Full-scale Sequencing Batch Reactor Sy stem for Swine Wastewater Treatment, 
Lo and Liao (2007) 
8.6 Sequencing Batch Reactor for Biological Tr eatment of Grey Water, Lamin et al. 
(2007) 
8.7 SBR Processes in Wastewater  Plants, Larrea et al (2007) 
9. Conclusion 
Glossary 
Bibliography 
Biographical Sketches 
 
Summary 
 
Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) is a fill-an d-draw activated sludge treatment system. 
Although the processes involved in SBR are identical to the c onventional activated 
sludge process, SBR is compact and time or iented system, and all the processes are 
carried out sequentially in the same tank. S BR system is the upgraded version of the 
conventional activated sludge process, and is  capable of removing nutrients from the 
wastewater. This paper reviews the fundament als of the SBR proce ss, design concept, 
operational and maintenance aspects, and case studies. UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  1. Background 
 
Activated sludge process, oxidation ponds, aer ated lagoons and oxidation ditches are the 
commonly adopted suspended growth biologi cal treatment systems. Compared to the 
pond and lagoon systems, activated sludge syst ems also lend themselves for a number 
of design and operational control measures to  improve performance and achieve desired 
treated wastewater quality. However, the flexibility in design and process control for 
these systems comes at the cost of high external energy inputs and skilled operation 
requirements.   Conventional activated sludge process (ASP) is not designed to remove nitrogen. 
Further, due to its short detention time, the sludge produced is  not well digested 
warranting an additional sludge digestion tr eatment.  Since the 1970s, a modification of 
the conventional activated sludge process ha s made the emergence of the sequencing 
batch reactor (SBR) process. Conventional ASP systems are space oriented. Wastewater 
flow moves from one tank into the next on a continuous basis and virtually all tanks 
have a predetermined liquid volume. The SB R, on the other hand, is a time-oriented 
system, with flow, energy input, and tank volume varying according to some pre-
determined, periodic operating strategy. Hence, SBR is best defined as a time-oriented, 
batch process, falling under the broad cate gory of an unsteady-state activated sludge 
system (Irvine et al., 1979).  Current interest in sequencing batch treatm ent of wastewater w ould appear to be a 
return to the original notion of the activated  sludge process. The first notable, but short-
lived, resurgence of interest in  batch biological treatment occurred in the early 1950s 
when Porges (1955) and his co-workers first studied batch operati on of ASP system for 
treating dairy wastewaters. The second resurg ence occurred in the 1970s  with the efforts 
of Irvine and his co-workers i nvestigating the suitability of  batch biological processes 
(Dennis et al., 1979; Irvine et al., 1977; Irvine and Ri chter, 1976). Around the same 
period, interest in the batch operated biolog ical treatment systems surfaced also in 
Australia (Goronszy, 1979). The system deve loped in Australia was based on the 
original Pasveer oxidation ditch concept, wh ere a single reaction ve ssel took the form of 
an endless loop of shallow ditch in which inflow, aeration, settlement and discharge followed a specific cycle.   Interest in the SBR has endured and work has extended to the use of SBR for nutrient 
removal (Demoulin et al., 1997; Keller et al., 2000), and for the treatment of industrial 
and hazardous wastes (Hersbrun, 1984; Ng, 1987; Ng and Chin, 1986).   In this paper, a review on the principles, design, and operation with some case studies of 
SBR system is provided.  
2. The SBR Technology for Wastewater Treatment  
  
In its most basic form, the SBR system is simply a set of tanks that operate on a fill-and-draw basis. The tanks may be an earthen or  oxidation ditch, a rectangular basin, or any 
other concrete/ metal type structure. Each tank in the SBR system is filled during a discrete period of time and then operated as a batch reactor. After desired treatment, the UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  mixed liquor is allowed to settled and the cl arified supernatant is drawn from the tank. 
The essential difference between the S BR and the conventional continuous flow 
activated sludge system is that SBR carries out functions such as equalization, aeration 
and sedimentation in a time rather in a space sequence.  
 One advantage of the time orientation of the SBR is flexibility of operation. The total 
time in the SBR is used to establish the size of  the system and can be related to the total 
volume of a conventional con tinuous-flow facility. As a result, the fraction of time 
devoted to a specific function in the SBR is equivalent to  some corresponding tank in a 
space oriented system. Therefore, the relati ve tank volumes dedicated to, say, aeration 
and sedimentation in the SBR can be redi stributed easily by adjusting the mechanism 
which controls the time (and, therefore, sh are the total volume) planned for either 
function. In conventional ASP, th e relative tank volume is fi xed and cannot be shared or 
redistributed as easily as in SBR. 
 Because of the flexibility associated with wo rking in time rather th an in space, the SBR 
can be operated either as a labor-intensive, low-energy, high sludge yield systems or as 
an energy-intensive, low-labor, low sludge yielding system for essentially the same 
physical plant. Labor, energy and sludge yield can also be trad ed off with initial capital 
costs. The operational flexibility also allo ws designers to use the SBR to meet many 
different treatment objectives, including one  objective at the time of construction (e.g. 
BOD and suspended solids reduction) a nd another at a later time (e.g. 
nitrification/denitrification in additio n to BOD and suspended solids removal). 
 
3. Physical Description of the SBR System 
 
 
 
Figure 1. SBR reactor during one complete cycle 
 
An SBR system may be designed as consisti ng of a single or multiple reactor tanks 
operating in parallel. Each operating cycle of  a SBR reactor comprises five distinctive 
phases, referred to as: FILL, REACT, S ETTLE, DRAW and IDLE phases. Figure 1 
illustrates a SBR reactor operation for one cycle (batch) of wastewater treatment. UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  Overall control of the system is accomplished with level sensors and a timing device or 
microprocessor. A detailed discussion of each  of the phases of the SBR is provided in 
the following sections: 
 
3.1 FILL Phase 
 
FILL provides for the addition of influent to  the reactor. During FILL, the influent 
wastewater is added to the biomass (i.e. mi xed liquor suspended solids) which remained 
in the tank from the previous cycle. Depe nding upon the treatment objective, the fill 
may be static, mixed or aerated. Static FILL (no mixing or aeration) results in minimum 
energy input and high substrate concentr ation at the end of this phase.  
 
Mixed FILL (mixing without aeration) results in  denitrification, if ni trates are present, a 
subsequent reduction of BOD and energy input, and in the anoxic or anaerobic 
conditions required for biologi cal phosphorus removal.  
 Aerated FILL (mixing and aeration) results in  starting of aerobic reactions leading to a 
reduction of cycle time, and holds substrat e at lower concentra tions, which may be 
important if biodegradable constituents pr esent in wastewater are toxic at high 
concentrations.   Studies recommend static FILL with neither aeration nor mechanical mixing, as this 
helps promote high fermentation rates with allow flocculent bacteria to outcompete 
filamentous species, hence prevent sludge  bulking (Chudoba et al., 1973; Schroeder, 
1982).  
3.2 REACT Phase  
 
With the reactor full, the REACT phase begi ns. In general, vigorous aeration is the 
feature of this phase. However, as in FILL, the REACT phase may required to be 
carried out in high dissolved oxygen concen trations (aerated REACT), or in low 
dissolved oxygen concentra tions (mixed REACT). The time allocated for REACT 
should be sufficient to achieve the desired le vel of effluent quality. The time dedicated 
to REACT phase can vary from a low of zero to more than 50% of the total cycle time. 
If only organics removal is desired, the aer ation period can be as short as 15 minutes. 
However, longer aeration periods in the orde r of 4 hours or more, are normally required 
for long term stability of the process and ni trification. Where deni trification following 
nitrification is required, aeration during the REACT period is interrupted. Anoxic 
conditions would then prevail over a peri od of hours followed by a short period of 
aeration. This will strip away the nitroge n gas bubbles and aid in sedimentation. 
 
3.3 SETTLE Phase  
 
The SETTLE phase allows for separation of bi osolids from the treated effluent without 
any inflow or outflow, in the SBR reactor th at may have a volume more than ten times 
that of a secondary clarifier used for c onventional continuous-flow activated sludge 
plant. The major advantage of SBR is its use as a clarifier, which allows for truly quiescent sedimentation conditions. Because al l of the biomass remains in the tank until UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  some fraction must be wasted, there is no  need for underflow hardware normally found 
in conventional clarifiers. In contrast, the conventional ASP systems, continuously 
remove mixed liquor and passes through the clar ifier only to return  a major portion of 
the sludge to the aeration tank. Thus in conv entional systems, quies cent conditions are 
assumed in design, but not achieved in opera tion as a result of secondary currents. 
 
3.4 DRAW or DECANT Phase  
 
This is the withdrawal phase to discharge the clarified effl uent from the reactor. There 
are several withdrawal mechanisms available. It may be as simple as a pipe fixed at 
some predetermined depth with the flow re gulated by an automatic  valve or a pump. 
Alternatively, an adjustable or floating weir at or just beneath th e liquid surface can be 
used. As with the fixed pipe  arrangement, discharge from the weir can be regulated by 
an automatic valve or a pump. In any cas e the withdrawal mechanism should be 
designed and operated in a manner that preven ts floating matter from being discharged.  
 
The time dedicated for DRAW phase can range from 5% to more than 30% of the total 
cycle time. The time for DR AW should not be overly ex tended because of possible 
problems with rising sludge. One hour is the usual time period allowed for this phase of 
the operation.   
3.5 IDLE Phase  
 
IDLE is the phase between discharging the trea ted effluent and before filling the reactor 
again. This time can be effectively used to waste sludge. The frequency of sludge 
wasting is determined by the net solids incr ease in the reactor for each cycle, and the 
mixing and aeration equipment capacity. Afte r sludge wasting, aera tion and/or mixing 
can be provided, depending upon the overall system objectives. Alternatively, IDLE can 
be eliminated altogether. In instances wher e operation of SBR does not include an IDLE 
period, as noted earlier, sludge wasting may be achieved by solid wasting from the mixed liquor during the REACT phase.  
4. Components and Configuration of SBR System  
 
The principal components of an SBR system are the reactor tank, in let, outlet,  mixing 
and aeration arrangement, and operations contro ller. There is a considerable diversity in 
reactor tank configuration of SBR sy stems. Goronszy (1979) described two 
configurations, the first being shallow Pasv eer ditches or race-track channels with 
trapezoidal configuration (Fi gure 2) (Ng and Droste, 1989). 
 The width of the channel is generally sel ected for ease of construction. The choice of 
depth of channel is influenced by the t ype of aerators to be used. Float mounted 
horizontal rotors has been used for ae ration and mixing. The decant mechanism 
consisted of a cast iron bell mouth connected by a 200 mm diameter, flexible armoured-
hose to the outlet chamber. A floating scum  protector was provided for the bell mouth 
to prevent floating materials from being di scharged with the effluent. The primary 
disadvantage of the race-track configuration is its relatively large land area requirement.  
 UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of a race-track configuration (Adopted from Ng & Droste, 
1989) 
 
The second configuration is simple recta ngular shape tanks (Figure 3). A minimum 
length-to-width ratio of 3:1 is often recommended to prevent both short-circuiting and disruption of sludge during S ETTLE and DECANT phases. However, this is important 
primarily for the system where FILL is continuous, but DECANT is intermittent. In systems where both FILL and DECANT are intermittent, the length-to-width ratio 
would not assume much importance (Ng and Droste, 1989).  
 
 
Figure 3. A rectangular c onfiguration of SBR adopted in NSW, Australia 
 The number of SBRs in parallel is determin ed mainly the design influent flow rates. 
Theoretically, there is no limit to the number or size of tanks in a system. An SBR 
system with just one tank would be quite unusual for common applications. Single tank 
SBR systems are possible when upstream influent  storage is envisaged and also in cases 
of day schools, amusement parks and indus tries operating 8 to 16 hours a day, where no 
wastewater is generated during the remaining hours. In these cases, a second tank would be unnecessary since FILL would end either  naturally or by stopping discharge from 
storage facility. Clearly, REACT, SETTLE  and DRAW phases would have to be 
completed before the wastewater flow resumes.  Where waste streams are larg er and of a continuous natu re without large diurnal 
fluctuations, multi-tank systems would be more appropriate. Multi-tank SBR systems 
are common for most municipal and industr ial wastewater treatment, and where the 
FILL phase is not intended to be  overlapping with DRAW phase.  UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  Schroeder (1982) had suggested a three-tank sy stem would perhaps be the best because 
the minimum FILL and DECANT times were not  so short as to present design or 
operating problems. Ketchum Jr. et al. (1979)  described such a three-tank system for 
domestic wastewater, which included primar y clarification before SBR treatment and 
anaerobic digestion of primary sludge  and excess SBR biomass (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of a three-ta nk SBR system for domestic wastewater 
treatment (adopted from Ketchum et al., 1979) 
 
 - - -  
 
TO ACCESS ALL THE 21 PAGES  OF THIS CHAPTER,  
Visit: http://www.eolss.net/Eolss-sampleAllChapter.aspx  
 
 
Bibliography  
 
Calvin Finch, B. L., Fry, E., et al., San Antonio Water System: Grey Water Literature Search, Texas, 
Texas Onsite Wastewater Treatment Research Council,  2003. [This report describes the use of SBR to 
treat greywater] 
Chudoba, J., Ottova, V. and Madera, V. (1973). Control of activated sludge filamentous bulking: effect of 
hydraulic regime or degree of mixing in aeration tank. Water Research, 8: 1163. [This paper details the 
effect of hydraulic mixing in SBR systems] 
Demoulin, G., Goronszy, M. C., Wutscher, K., and Frosthuber, E. (1997). Co-current 
nitrification/denitrification and biological P-removal in  cyclic activated sludge plants by redox controlled 
cycle operation. Water Science and Technology, 35(1), 215-224.[the paper describes the use of SBR for 
nutrient removal] UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  Dennis, R. W. and Irvine, R. L. (1979). Effect of fill : react ratio on sequencing batch biological reactors. 
Journal Water Pollution Control Federation, 51(2), 255- 263. [the paper describes the performance of SBR 
in various operation modes] 
Erikson, E., Auffarth, K., Mogens, H., Ledin, A., Characteristics of grey wastewater, Urban Water, 4 
(2002) 85–104. [this paper describes the characteristic s of grey water and the factors that affect its 
compositions] 
Goronszy, M. C. (1979). Intermittent operation of extended aeration process for small systems. Journal 
Water Pollution Control Federation, 51(2), 274-287. [the paper describes the use of SBR in Australia] 
Hersbrun, P. A. (1984). Treatment of hazardous wa ste in a sequencing batch reactor. Proceedings of 39th 
Annual Industrial Waste Co nference, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA, pp 385-393. [the 
paper describes the use of SBR for treatme nt of industrial and hazardous wastes] 
Irvine, R. L. and Richter, R. O. (1976). Computer  simulation and design of sequencing batch reactors. 
Proceedings of the 31st Industrial Waste Conference, Purdue Univ ersity, West Lafaye tte, Indiana, USA, 
p.182. [this paper describes the development and operation of SBR] 
Irvine, R. L., Fox, T. P., and Richter, R. O. (1977). Investigations of fill and ba tch periods of sequencing 
batch reactors. Water Research, 11 , 713-717. [this paper describes the development and operation of 
SBR] 
Irvine, R. L., Miller, G., and Bhamrah, A. S. (1979) . Sequencing batch treatment of wastewater in rural 
areas. Journal Water Pollution Control Federation, 51(2 ), 244-254. [this paper describes the development 
and operation of SBR] Keller, J., Watts, S., Batty e-Smith, W., and Chong. R. (2000). Full-scale demonstration of biological 
nutrient removal in a single tank SBR process. Proceedings of the 2
nd International symposium of 
International Water Association (IWA) on Sequencing  Batch Reactor Technology , 10-12, July, Narbonne, 
France, pp 380-388. [this paper describes the use of SBR for nutrient removal] Ketchum, Jr. L. H. (2000). Desi gn and physical features of SBR reactors.  Proceedings of the 2
nd 
International symposium of International Water Association (IWA) on Sequencing Batch Reactor 
Technology, 10-12, July, Narbonne, France, pp 7-14 [this paper describes the operating of SBR systems]  Ketchum, Jr. L. H., Irvine, R. L., and Liao, P. C. (1979). First cost analysis of sequencing batch 
biological reactors. Journal Water Pollution Control Federation 51(2), 298-304. [this paper gives details 
of the economic cost  of SBR systems] 
Ketchum, Jr. L. H., Liao, P. C., and Irvine, R. L. (1978). Economic evaluation of sequencing batch 
biological reactors. Proceedings of 33
rd Industrial Waste Conf erence, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, pp 357-426. [this paper gives details of the economic cost of SBR systems] 
Larrea, L., Albizuri, J., Irizar, I., and Hernandez, J.M., Design and operation of SBR processes for small 
plants based on simulations, Water Science & Technology Vol 55 No 7 pp 163–171  IWA Publishing 
2007. [this paper describes an experimental study in a SBR pilot plant conducted in Alava in North Spain] 
Lo, K.V.; Liao, P.H.; Van Kleek, R.J. A full-scale se quencing batch reactor treatment of diluted swine 
wastewater. Canadian Agricultural Engineering 1991, 33 (1), 193–195. [this paper describes a full-scale 
SBR system used to treat swine farm wastew ater in Aldergrove, British Columbia, Canada] 
Ng, W. J. and Chin, K. K. (1986) . Biological treatment for pig farm  wastewater. Proceedings of the 
Regional Symposium on Management of Industrial wastes in the Asia & Pacific, ENSEARCH, 
Kualalumpur, Malaysia, 17-18 November, pp 123-127. [the paper describes the use of SBR for treatment 
of industrial and hazardous wastes] 
Ng, W. J. and Droste, R. L. (1989). Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) treat ment of wastewaters. 
Environmental Sanitation Review No.28, Environmenta l Sanitation Information Center, Asian Institute of 
Technology, Bangkok, p.6. [this provides a comprehensive review on SBR process to treat wastewater] Ng, W. J. (1987). Treatability of te xtile finishing effluent – SBR met hod. Internal report, Environmental 
Engineering Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore. [the paper describes the use of 
SBR for treatment of effluent form the textile industry] 
Porges, N. (1955). Waste treatment by optimal aeration – theory and practice in dairy waste disposal. UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Sequencing Batch Reactors: Pr inciples, Design/Operation 
and Case Studies  - S. Vigneswaran, M. Sundara vadivel, D. S. Chaudhary 
 
 
  Journal Mild & Food Technology, 18, 34-38. [the paper describes the development of SBR] 
Schroeder, E. D. (1982). Design of sequencing batch reactor activ ated sludge processes. In Civil 
Engineering for practicing and design engineers 2: 33-34. [this chapter gives design guidance for SBR] 
STP Visit Reports (1999, 2000, 2003). University of Technology, Sydney (UTS), City Campus, 
Broadway, Sydney, Australia. [this report details the performance of the St. Marys sewage treatment plant in Sydney, Australia] 
Torrijos M, Vuitton V and Moletta R (2000) The SBR process: an efficient and economic solution for the 
treatment of wastewater at small cheese-making dair ies in the Jura mountains, Proceedings of the 2
nd 
International symposium of International Water Association (IWA) on Sequencing Batch Reactor 
Technology, 10-12, July, Narbonne, France, pp 400-408. [this paper describes the use of SBR to treat 
wastewater from cheese making factories]  
Biographical Sketches 
 
Dr S. Vigneswaran  has been working on water and wastewater treatment and reuse related research since 
1976. During the last twenty years, he has made significant contributions in physico-chemical water 
treatment related processes such as filtration, fl occulation, membrane-filtration and adsorption. His 
research activities both on new processes development and mathematical modeling are well documented 
in reputed international journals such as Water Research, American Institute of Chemical Engineers 
Journal, Chemical Engineering Science, Journal of American Society of Civil Engineers, and Journal of 
Membrane Science. He has also been involved in a number of consulting activities in this field in 
Australia, Indonesia, France, Korea, and Thailand through various national and international agencies. He 
has authored two books in this field at the invitation of CRC press, USA, and has published more than 
230 papers in journals and conference's proceedings. Currently a Professor of the Environmental 
Engineering Group at the University of Technology, Sydney, he was the founding Head of and the 
founding Co-ordinator of the University Key Research Strength Program in Water and Waste 
Management. He is coordinating the Urban Water Cycle and Water and Environmental Management of 
the newly established Research Institutes on Water and Environmental Resources Management and 
Nano-scale Technology respectively.  
 
M. Sundaravadivel is Senior Planner at the Strategic Water Management Unit, NSW Department of 
Commerce, Sydney, Australia. Prior to this, he wa s working as researcher at the University of 
Technology Sydney (UTS) and as an Environmental Engineer with the Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. He obtained a PhD from Macquire 
University, Sydney, Australia in Environmental Management. He also holds a Bachelors Degree in Civil Engineering and a Masters Degree in Environmental Engineering. He has been working in the field of 
environmental management and industrial pollution control since 1989, particularly in the area of 
environmental audit, waste minimiza tion and cleaner production in agro -based industries. He has also 
been an engineering consultant for planning, design and development of wastewater collection and 
treatment systems for many large cities of India.  
 D. S. Chaudhary is currently working as a Senior Engineer at Maunsel Australia in Sydney. Prior to this, 
he was working as researcher at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS). He obtained his PhD from 
University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia. He holds a Bachelors Degree in Civil Engineering from Institute of Engineering (IOE), Tribhuvan Univ ersity, Nepal, and Masters Degree in Environmental 
Engineering from Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Bangkok. He has been working in the planning and design of water and wastewater coll ection and treatment systems since 1991.  
 