PEDIATRIC PHARMACOTHERAPY 
A Monthly Newsletter for Health Care Professionals from the 
University of Virginia Children’s Hospital 
Volume 1 2  Number 3 March  2006 
Serotoni n Syndrome: Pediatric and Neonatal Considerations 
Marcia L. Buck, Pharm.D., FCCP 
oxicity resulting from excessive serotonin 
activity, referred to as serotonin syndrome, 
was first described by Oates and Sjoerdsma in 1960.  Since that time, over  100 cases have been 
reported .
1   Over the past decade, the diagnosis 
of serotonin syndrome has become more 
frequent, as the use of drugs which raise serum 
serotonin concentrations has increased .1,2  The 
syndrome may result from normal therapeutic use of d rugs which increase serotonin concentrations, 
but is more commonly associated with drug overdose or interactions between two drug therapies.  This issue of Pediatric 
Pharmacotherapy  will provide a brief review of 
serotonin syndrome, as well as some example s 
from the pediatric literature. 
Mechanism 
Serotonin (5 -hydroxytryptamine or 5 -HT) is 
produced in presynaptic neurons from L -
tryptophan.  The concentration of serotonin 
available at postsynaptic receptors is regulated 
through feedback loops which govern  reuptake 
and metabolism.  Serotonin receptors are divided 
into seven types, 5 -HT 1 through 5 -HT 7,each of 
which contains several subtypes.  Sero to nergic 
receptors are found throughout the central nervous system where they are involved in regulation of the sleep -wake cycle, behavior, 
appetite, temperature, and muscle tone.  In the periphery, serotonin neurotransmission is 
involved with the regulation of gastrointestinal motility and vascular tone. 
1-3 
Serotonin syndrome results from excessive 
stimulation or agonism at postsynaptic serotonin 
receptors.  While the specific receptor subtypes 
associated with serotonin syndrome have not been determined, it has been suggested that excessive serotonin binding at 5 -HT 
2A  receptors 
may be the predominant cause of sympt oms. 1-3  
Clinical Presentation 
Serotonin syndrome is characterized by a wide 
range of clinical symptoms  related to the triad of 
autonomic hyperactivity, neuromuscular hyperactivity , and altered mental status. 
1-3Onset is typically rapid .   In a recent r eview of 41 cases 
documented since 1995, 61.5% of patients present ed within 6 hours of drug initiation, 
dosage change, or overdose. 
1 
Mild cases may present with mydriasis, 
diaphoresis, tachycardia, shivering,  clonus, 
hyperreflexia, and tremor . A fever  may or may 
not be present.  Clonus, hyperreflexia , and 
tremor are typically more prominent in the lower 
extremities.  Moderate cases may present with the symptoms previously described, as well as hypertension, hyperthermia (a core temperature up to 40 º C) , horizontal ocular clonus, nausea, 
vomiting, hyperactive bowel sounds , and 
diarrhea .  Patients often have changes in mental 
status, including agitation, hypervigilance, and pressured speech. 
1-3 
Severe cases may present with profound 
hypertension and ta chycardia, and proceed 
rapidly to shock.  Patients may exhibit severe 
agitation or delirium, seizures, muscular rigidity, and hypertonicity.  Core temperatures may exceed 40 º C, and may be accompanied by 
metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, elevated amin otr ans ferase s and creatinine, renal failure , 
and disseminated intravascular coagulation .
1-3 
At this time, serotonin syndrome remains a 
clinical diagnosis.  There are no confirmatory laboratory tests.  A careful medication history, as well as the exclusion of  other potential causes, 
such as a nticholinergic poisoning, malignant 
hyperthermia, and neuroleptic malignant syndrome , is necessary to establish the 
diagnosis .
1-6  The diagnostic criteria suggested by 
Sternbac h may be useful in  establish ing  the 
diagnosis: 
1. The patient has had recent exposure to 
or a change in a serotonergic agent. 
2. At least three symptoms consistent with serotonergic excess are present .
3. Other causes have been ruled out .
7TA wide array of drugs (Table 1) can increase 
serum serotonin concentr ations, through both 
direct and indirect mechanisms, such as inhibition of metabolism through monoamine oxidase or cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4. 
1-6
Table 1. Drugs Associated with Serotonin 
Syndrom e
Drugs that increase serotonin synthesis 
L-tryptophan 
Do pamine/serotonin receptor agonists 
Buspirone 
Lithium Sumatriptan 
Dopamine agonists 
Amantadine 
Bromocriptine Bupropion Levodopa 
Increase seroto nin release 
Amphetamines 
Lithium Reserpine 
Drugs that decrease serotonin metabolism 
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) in hibitors 
 Clorgiline 
   Isocarboxazid    Linezolid 
 Moclobemide 
   Phenelzine 
Selegiline 
   Tran yl cypromine 
Inhibition of CYP3A4   Ritonavir 
Inhibit serotonin reuptake 
Tricyclic antidepressants 
Amitriptyline Clomipramine *
Desipramine Doxepin 
 Duloxetine 
Imipramine *
Nortriptyline Protriptyline 
   Trazodone Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor s (SSRI) *
Citalopram Escitalopram Fluvoxamine Fluoxetine Paroxetine Sertraline 
Other antidepressants    Nefazodone St. John’s wort 
Venlafaxine *
Opioids/opiates 
   Dextromethorpha n*
   Fentanyl    Meperidine *
   Methadone    Pentazocine    Tramadol *
Others 
Brompheniramine Chlorpheniramine Sibutramine 
______________________________________ * definite as sociation  between drug and 
development of serotonin syndrome  as 
demonstrated by case reports 
The potential for serotonin syndrome is increased 
when a new drug  from the list  is introduced, the 
dose is increased  (intentionally or inadvertently) , 
or an inter acting or potentiating drug is ad ded.  
In a review of 469 patients admitted after SSRI overdose, 14% developed serotonin syndrome. 
8
Drug interactions are another frequent underlying 
source of serotonin excess.  A retrospective study of patients receiving  meperidine in an emergency 
department over a 2 month period revealed that 26 out of 262 patients  (10% ) were taking one or 
more serotonergic drugs at the time , placing them 
at risk for serotonin syndrome .
4The majority 
were receiving antidepressants.  Whil e no 
patients experienced serotonin syndrome in the period evaluated, the authors highlighted the importance of a careful medication history and questioned the routine use of meperidine in the emergency setting. 
Management 
Management of patients with sero tonin synd rome 
is primarily supportive.  Muscular rigidity is 
often treated with benzodiazepines, although severe cases may require mechanical ventilation 
and neuromuscular paralysis to control hyperthermia and excessive clonus .  
Nondepolarizing neuromuscu lar blocking agents 
are recommended .  Depolarizing neuromuscular 
blockers , such as succinylcholine , may increase 
the risk of arrhythmia from the hyperkalemia associated with rhabdomyolysis.  Antipyretics are not useful in the management of hyperthermia ass ociated with serotonin syndrome. 
1-5 
Removal of the causative agent is generally 
recommended, unless the case is mild and further treatment outweighs potential risks.  Administration of a 5 -HT 
2A  antagonist, such as 
cyproheptadine,  is often recommended for 
moderate to severe cases. 1-4  In their 2005 review, Mason and colleagues found that 22% of 
serotonin syndrome cases reported since 1995 were treated with cyproheptadine. 
2An initial 
dose of 12 mg (given orally or through a 
nasogastric tube) has been recom mended for 
adults, followed by additional doses of 2 mg at 2 hour intervals until symptom resolution.  This may be followed by a maintenance dose of 4 to 8 
mg every 6 hours until the potential cause is believed to have been eliminated.  The dosing of 
cypro heptadine in children is less well 
established, but a dose of  0.25 mg/kg/day up to a 
maximum of 12 mg/day h as been successful in 
reversing symptoms .
5,9 
In addition, antipsychotic agents with 5 -HT 2a 
antagonist activity , such as chlorpromazine , may 
be use d.  In adults, doses of 50 to 100 mg may be 
given intramuscularly  every 6 to 8 hours as 
needed .  More recently, olanzapine, an a typical 
antipsychotic , ha s been used in this setting. In 
most cases, symptoms resolve within 24 hours after initiation of suppo rtive care.  Patients 
receiving serotonergic drugs with longer half -
lives or active metabolites may exhibit symptoms for a longer period of time. 
1-3 
Pediatric Case Examples 
Several pediatric cases of serotonin syndrome 
have been reported in the medical li terature .  The 
majority have involved the use of SSRIs.  In 
1994, Kaminski and colleagues reported serotonin syndrome after an accidental sertraline overdose by a 9 year old boy. 
10   Upon arrival to 
the Emergency Department, he exhibited 
tachycardia, hypert ension , hyperthermia, 
hallucinations, and tremors.  Symptoms persisted 
upon transfer to the intensive care unit, with a heart rate over 200 beats/min and a temperature of 42.2 º C rectally.  He was given activated 
charcoal and treated with physostigmine, lo razepam, acetaminophen, and chloral hydrate.  
The serum sertraline concentration approximately 9 hours after ingestion was 68 ng/mL (in adults, normal therapeutic doses of 50 
to 100 mg/day produce ma ximum concentrations 
of 30 to 55 ng/mL)  The patient’s s ymptoms 
progressed, and he eventually developed rhabdomyolysis with elevated renal and liver transaminases.   With continued supportive care, 
he returned to baseline status within 4 days, and 
was discharged with a mild tremor.    
Pao and Tipnis  reported a similar case of 
sertraline -induced serotonin syndrome in a 5 year 
old girl in 1997. 
11   The patient ingested at least 
eight 50 mg tablets.  Shortly after ingestion, she complained of feeling “jittery” and having a fast heartbeat.  On admission  to the hosp ital , she was 
afebrile, diaphoretic, tachycardic, hypertensive, and tachypneic.  Her pupils were dilated.  
Symptoms began to resolve ov er the next day, 
and she was discharged after 48 hours.  The next day, however, she began to experience increased irritab ility, agitation, and tachycardia, and she 
was readmitted.  A serum sertraline concentration obtained at that time (72 hours after ingestion) was 99 ng/mL.  She was discharged 7 days later with resolution of most of her symptoms, but she 
did not experience  a full recovery until 
approximately one month after the ingestion.  
Three additional cases were reported in 1999.  
The first of these involved an 11 year old boy who was being treated for attention -deficit 
disorder .
12 After failing traditional  thera pies, he 
had been  placed on  fluvoxamine 50 mg once 
daily.  With in an hour of taking the first dose, the 
patient ex perienced agitation and tremors.  On 
arrival to the Emergency Department, he was hyperthermic, with jaw myoclonus, dilated pupils , and markedl y fluctuating heart rate and 
blood pressures.  He was initially treated with benzodiazepines, but eventually required 
intubat ion and mechanical ventilation in order to 
allow for p harmacologic neuromuscular blockade 
with rocuronium .  He remained paralyzed f or 24 
hours, but then made a rapid recovery.  Within 
48 hours, his examination was normal. 
Another case involved a 12 year old boy 
receiving sertraline who developed serotonin syndrome after being given erythromycin for an infection. 
13 Within 4 days of s tarting 
erythromycin, he developed agitation and anxiety.  Over the next 10 days, he progressed to paresthesias, tremulousness, and confusion.  Once the diagnosis was made , both sertraline and 
erythromycin were discontinued .  The pa tient 
recover ed over the  next 72 ho urs.  
The third report in 1999 described another 
accidental ingestion of sertraline. 
9 The patient, a 
24 month old girl, ingested ten 50 mg tablets.  She  was taken to the hospital within an hour of 
the ingestion, where she was asymptomatic.  S he 
was given activated charcoal , which produced 
numerous pill fragments,  and was discharged 
when stable .  Twelve hours after the ingestion, 
she was taken back to the Emergency Department with agitation and tremors.  The temperature on arrival was 38.4 º C.  She had 
dilated pupils, was hyperactive, hyperreflexic, and ataxic. She was treated with 1 mg cyproheptadine (0.08 mg/kg) orally.  Within 40 
minutes, symptoms resolved.  She was given a prescription for 1 mg cyproheptadine every 8 hours  (0.23 mg/kg/day)  f or 48 hours, and she 
remained asymptomatic. In 2004, Thomas and colleagues reported a case 
of serotonin syndrome in a 4 year old girl receiving fluoxetine who was subsequent ly 
started on linez olid. 
14   She had been receiving 
fluoxetine at a dose of 5 mg da ily for a week for 
acute stress disorder following a burn injury .  
After 11 days of fluoxetine therapy, linezolid (140 mg orally every 12 hours) was added to her treatment  for presumed infection .  Two days 
later, she was given fentanyl  (200 mcg orally) as 
a pre -medication  for wound debridement .  She 
was noted to be agitated and have mydriasis, with eye deviation, after the procedure.  She also developed myoclonic movement in the arms and legs. The diagnosis of serotonin syndrome was 
made  at that time, but t he role of the potential 
drug interaction was not recognized .  F luoxetine 
was discontinued and diphenhydramine  (25 mg) 
was given.  Symptoms began to resolve until another dose of linezolid was administered.  The 
interaction was identified , and the linezoli d 
discontinued.  Symptoms resolved over the next 
2 days.  
Summary 
Serotonin synd rome has become more prevalent 
as the use of drugs affecting serotonin concentrations has increased.  As in adults, the 
increased use of SSRIs and other newer antidepressants  in pediatric patients places them 
at risk for this adverse drug effect.  While most 
cases of serotonin syndrome are mild and require minimal supportive care, some patients may develop severe cardiovascular compromise.  Prompt recognition of symptoms, alon g with a 
complete drug history, can aid in a more rapid 
response and reduce the likelihood of serious 
complications. 
References 
1. Gillman PK. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, opioids 
analgesics and serotonin toxicity. Br J Anaesth 2005;95:434 -
41. 2. Boyer E W, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J 
Med 2005;352:1112 -20. 
3. Mason PJ, Morris VA, Balcezak TJ. Serotonin syndrome: 
presentation of two cases and review of the literature. Medicine 2000;79:201 -9. 
4. Weiner AL. Meperidine as a potential cause of s erotonin 
syndrome in the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med 1999;6:156 -8. 
5. Spirko BA, Wiley JF. Serotonin syndrome: a new pediatric intoxication. Ped iatr  Emerg Care 1999;15:440 -3. 
6. Arnold DH. The central serotonin syndrome: paradigm for psychotherape utic misadventure. Ped Rev 2002;23:427 -32. 
7. Sternbach H. The serotonin syndrome. Am J Psychiatry 1991;148:705 -13. 
8. Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A, et al. Relative toxicity 
of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in overdose. J Toxicol Clin T oxicol 2004;42:277 -85. 
9. Horowitz BZ, Mullins ME. Cyproheptadine for serotonin syndrome in an accidental pediatric sertraline ingestion. Pediatr Emerg Care 1999;15:325 -7. 10. Kaminski CA, Robbbins MS, Weibley RE. Sertraline 
intoxication in a child. An n E merg Med 1994;23:1371 -4. 
11. Pao M, Tipnis T. Serotonin syndrome after sertraline overdose in a 5 -year -old girl [letter] . Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med 1997;151:1064 -7. 
12. Gill M, LoVecchio F, Selden B. Serotonin syndrome  in a 
child after a single dose of flu voxamine . Ann Emerg Med 
1999;34:457 -9. 
13. Lee DO, Lee CD. Serotonin syndrome in a child associated with erythromycin and sertraline. Pharmacotherapy 1999;19:894 -6. 
14 . Thomas CR, Rosenberg M, Blythe V, et al. Serotonin 
syndrome and linezolid [letter] , J A m Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 2004;43:790. 
Formulary Update 
The following actions were taken by the 
Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee at their meeting on 2/24 /0 6:    
1. A combination of ipratropium and albuterol 
for nebulization (Duoneb 
®) was added to both the 
Inpatient and Outpatient Formularies. 
2.  Liposomal lidocaine 4% topical cream (LMX -
4®) was also added to the Inpatient and 
Outpatient Formularies.  It has the advantage of a 
faster onset of action than EMLA (30 minutes versus 60 minutes).  Th is product is available in 
a kit with five 5 gram tubes and 10 Tegaderm 
™
dressings.  This product will replace EMLA after 
a 3  to 6 mo nth conversion period. 
3.  Daptomycin (Cubicin ®) was added to the 
Inpatient Formulary with restriction to Antimicrobial Category A.  It is a cyclic lipopeptide antibacterial agent with activity against gram positive organisms. 
4. The restriction on the use of dexmedetomidine 
(Precedex 
®) was amended to include use in the 
PICU.  Previous restrictions to patients in the NNICU and patients undergoing awake craniotomy or complex  spinal procedures wer e 
retained. 
5. The 2005 annual report on the Adverse Drug 
Reaction Reporting System was presented.  For 
more information on the results, contact the Drug Information Center at 4 -8084. 
Contributing Editor:Marcia L. Buck, Pharm.D. 
Editorial Board:  Kristi  N. Hofer, Pharm.D. 
                    Michelle W. McCarthy, Pharm.D. If you have comments or suggestions for f uture 
issues, please contact us at Box 800674, UVA 
Health System, Charlottesville, VA  22908 or by e -mail to mlb3u@virginia.edu 
. This 
newsletter is also available at www.healthsystem.virginia.edu/internet/pediatr 
ics/pharma -news/home.cfm 