 
review article 
The 
 new england journal  
of 
 medicine 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17, 2005 
1112 
current concepts 
The Serotonin Syndrome 
Edward W. Boyer, M.D., Ph.D., and Michael Shannon, M.D., M.P.H. 
From the Division of Medical Toxicology,
Department of Emergency Medicine,University of Massachusetts, Worcester(E.W.B.); and the Program in Medical Tox-icology, Division of Emergency Medicine,Children’s Hospital, Boston (E.W.B., M.S.).Address reprint requests to Dr. Boyer atIC Smith Bldg., Children’s Hospital, 300Longwood A ve., Boston, MA 02115, or at
edward.boyer@tch.harvard. edu.
This article (10.1056/NEJMra041867) was
updated on October 21, 2009 at NEJM.org.
N Engl J Med 2005;352:1112-20. 
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
he serotonin syndrome is a potentially life-threatening ad- 
verse drug reaction that results from therapeutic drug use, intentional self-poi-
soning, or inadvertent interactions between drugs. Three features of the sero-
tonin syndrome are critical to an understanding of the disorder. First, the serotoninsyndrome is not an idiopathic drug reaction; it is a predictable consequence of excessserotonergic agonism of central nervous system (CNS) receptors and peripheral sero-tonergic receptors. 
1,2 
 Second, excess serotonin produces a spectrum of clinical find-
ings. 
3 
 Third, clinical manifestations of the serotonin syndrome range from barely per-
ceptible to lethal. The death of an 18-year-old patient named Libby Zion in New YorkCity more than 20 years ago, which resulted from coadminstration of meperidine andphenelzine, remains the most widely recognized and dramatic example of this prevent-able condition. 
4 
The serotonin syndrome is often described as a clinical triad of mental-status changes,
autonomic hyperactivity, and neuromuscular abnormalities, but not all of these findingsare consistently present in all patients with the disorder (Fig. 1). 
5,6 
 Signs of excess sero-
tonin range from tremor and diarrhea in mild cases to delirium, neuromuscular rigidity,and hyperthermia in life-threatening cases. The difficulty for clinicians is that mild symp-toms may be easily overlooked, and an inadvertent increase in the dose of the causative
agent or the addition of a drug with proserotonergic effects may provoke a dramaticclinical deterioration.
The incidence of the serotonin syndrome is thought to mirror the increasing number
of proserotonergic agents being used in clinical practice. 
7 
 In 2002, the Toxic Exposure
Surveillance System, which receives case descriptions from office-based practices, in-patient settings, and emergency departments, reported 26,733 incidences of exposureto selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) that caused significant toxic effects in7349 persons and resulted in 93 deaths. 
8,9 
 The assessment of the serotonin syndrome
in therapeutic drug dosing has relied on post-marketing surveillance studies, one ofwhich identified an incidence of 0.4 case per 1000 patient-months for patients whowere taking nefazodone. 
10 
 Performing a rigorous epidemiologic assessment of the se-
rotonin syndrome, however, is difficult, since more than 85 percent of physicians areunaware of the serotonin syndrome as a clinical diagnosis. 
10 
 The syndrome occurs in
approximately 14 to 16 percent of persons who overdose on SSRIs. 
8 
Although the serotonin syndrome has occurred in a broad range of clinical environ-
ments, several barriers limit the ability of clinicians to diagnose the condition. First, thesyndrome may be missed because of its protean manifestations. Clinicians and patientsmay dismiss symptoms such as tremor with diarrhea or hypertension as inconsequen-tial or unrelated to drug therapy; anxiety and akathisia may be misattributed to the pa-tient’s mental state. 
5,10 
 Second, a strict application of the diagnostic criteria proposedt
definition and epidemiology 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17, 2005 
current concepts 
1113 
by Sternbach potentially rules out what are now rec-
ognized as mild, early, or subacute cases of the dis-
order. 
1,11 
 Third, clinicians cannot diagnose a con-
dition of which they are unaware, even though theserotonin syndrome is not rare and has been iden-tified in patients of all ages, including the elderly,children, and newborn infants. 
10,12-14 
A striking number of drugs and drug combina-
tions have been associated with the serotonin syn-drome (Table 1). These include monoamine oxidaseinhibitors (MAOIs), tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs,
opiate analgesics, over-the-counter cough medi-
cines, antibiotics, weight-reduction agents, anti-emetics, antimigraine agents, drugs of abuse, and
herbal products; the withdrawal of medications hasalso been associated with the syndrome. 
1,4,12,15-23 
A single therapeutic dose of an SSRI has caused the
serotonin syndrome. 
12 
 Moreover, the addition of
drugs that inhibit cytochrome isoforms CYP2D6and CYP3A4 to therapeutic SSRI regimens has beenassociated with the condition. 
16,24,25 
 Administra-
tion of serotonergic agents within five weeks afterthe discontinuation of fluoxetine therapy has pro-duced a drug interaction culminating in the seroto-nin syndrome, presumably the result of the demeth-ylation of fluoxetine to norfluoxetine, a serotonergicmetabolite with a longer serum half-life than its par-ent compound. 
13 
 Specific drugs, such as MAOIs
that are irreversible or nonselective or that inhibitmonoamine oxidase subtype A, are strongly asso-ciated with severe cases of the syndrome, especiallywhen these agents are used in combination withmeperidine, dextromethorphan, SSRIs, or meth-ylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, or “ecsta-sy”). 
4,8,15,26,27 
The serotonin syndrome encompasses a range of
clinical findings. Patients with mild cases may beafebrile but have tachycardia, with a physical exam-ination that is notable for autonomic findings suchas shivering, diaphoresis, or mydriasis (Fig. 2). Theneurologic examination may reveal intermittenttremor or myoclonus, as well as hyperreflexia.
A representative example of a moderate case of
the serotonin syndrome involves such vital-sign ab-normalities as tachycardia, hypertension, and hy-perthermia. A core temperature as high as 40°C is
common in moderate intoxication. Common fea-tures of the physical examination are mydriasis, hy-peractive bowel sounds, diaphoresis, and normalskin color. Interestingly, the hyperreflexia and clo-
nus seen in moderate cases may be considerablygreater in the lower extremities than in the upperextremities; patellar deep-tendon reflexes oftendemonstrate clonus for several seconds after a sin-
gle tap of the tendon, whereas the brachioradialisreflex is only slightly increased. Patients may exhibithorizontal ocular clonus. Changes in mental statusinclude mild agitation or hypervigilance, as well asslightly pressured speech. Patients may easily star-tle or adopt a peculiar head-turning behavior char-acterized by repetitive rotation of the head with theneck held in moderate extension.
In contrast, a patient with a severe case of the se-
rotonin syndrome may have severe hypertensionand tachycardia that may abruptly deteriorate intofrank shock. Such patients may have agitated delir-ium as well as muscular rigidity and hypertonicity.Again, the increase in muscle tone is considerablygreater in the lower extremities. The muscle hyper-activity may produce a core temperature of morethan 41.1°C in life-threatening cases. Laboratory ab-norm alities that occur in severe cases include met-
abolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, elevated levels ofserum aminotransferase and creatinine, seizures,renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coag-ulopathy. Many of these abnormalities arise, howev-er, as a consequence of poorly treated hyperthermia.
manifestations 
Figure 1. Spectrum of Clinical Findings. 
Manifestations of the serotonin syndrome range from mild to life-threaten-
ing. The vertical arrows suggest the approximate point at which clinical find-ings initially appear in the spectrum of the disease, but all findings may not be consistently present in a single patient with the serotonin syndrome. Severe signs may mask other clinical findings. For example, muscular hypertonicity can overwhelm tremor and hyperreflexia.
 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17 
,  
2005 
The 
 new england journal  
of 
 medicine 
1114 
To better delineate the signs and symptoms that
define the serotonin syndrome, the clinical findingsin 2222 consecutive cases of self-poisoning withserotonergic drugs were rigorously assessed on thebasis of information from a detailed toxicology reg-istry. 
2 
 These findings were then compared with the
“gold standard,” the assignment of a diagnosis ofthe serotonin syndrome by a medical toxicologist. 
2 
The clinical findings that had a statistically signifi-
cant association with the diagnosis of the syndromewere primarily neuromuscular, including hyper-
reflexia, inducible clonus, myoclonus, ocular clo-
nus, spontaneous clonus, peripheral hypertonici-ty, and shivering. 
2 
 Autonomic derangements were
tachycardia on admission, mydriasis, diaphoresis,
and the presence of bowel sounds and diarrhea. 
2 
Abnormalities in mental status that were signifi-
cantly associated with the serotonin syndrome wereagitation and delirium. 
2 
 Hyperthermia that was
caused by muscular hypertonicity, defined in thisstudy as a temperature of more than 38°C, was not
as strongly associated with the diagnosis of the se-rotonin syndrome but occurred in severely intoxi-cated patients. 
2 
The onset of symptoms is usually rapid, with
clinical findings often occurring within minutes af-ter a change in medication or self-poisoning. 
28 
 Ap-
proximately 60 percent of patients with the sero-tonin syndrome present within six hours afterinitial use of medication, an overdose, or a changein dosing. 
28 
 Patients with mild manifestations may
present with subacute or chronic symptoms, where-
as severe cases may progress rapidly to death. Theserotonin syndrome is not believed to resolve spon-taneously as long as precipitating agents continue
to be administered.
Serotonin is produced by the decarboxylation and
hydroxylation of  
l 
-tryptophan. Its quantity and
actions are tightly regulated by a combination ofreuptake mechanisms, feedback loops, and me-tabolizing enzymes (Fig. 3). Serotonin receptorsare divided into seven 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)families (5-HT 
1 
 to 5-HT 
7 
), several of which have
multiple members (e.g., 5-HT 
1a 
, 5-HT 
1b 
, 5-HT 
1c 
,
5-HT 
1d 
, 5-HT 
1e 
, and 5-HT 
1f 
). Further structural
and op erational diversity is achieved by allelic poly-
morphisms, splice variants, receptor isoforms, andthe formation of receptor heterodimers. 
29 
Serotonergic neurons in the CNS are found pri-
marily in the midline raphe nuclei, located in thebrain stem from the midbrain to the medulla. 
30 
The rostral end of this system assists in the regula-
tion of wakefulness, affective behavior, food intake,thermoregulation, migraine, emesis, and sexual be-havior. 
30 
 The neurons of the raphe in the lower pons
and medulla participate in the regulation of nocice-ption and motor tone. 
30 
 In the periphery, the sero-
tonin system assists in the regulation of vasculartone and gastrointestinal motility. 
30 
No single receptor appears to be responsible for
the development of the serotonin syndrome, al-though several lines of evidence converge to sug-
gest that agonism of 5-HT 
2a 
 receptors contributes
substantially to the condition. 
31-35 
 Additional sub-
types of serotonin receptors, such as 5-HT 
1a 
, may
contribute through a pharmacodynamic interactionin which increased synaptic concentrations of sero-tonin agonist saturate all receptor subtypes. Nora-pathophysiology
and molecular mechanisms 
Table 1. Drugs and Drug Interactions Associated with the Serotonin
Syndrome.
Drugs associated with the serotonin syndrome 
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors: sertraline, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, 
paroxetine, and citalopram
Antidepressant drugs: trazodone, nefazodone, buspirone, clomipramine, 
and venlafaxine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: phenelzine, moclobemide, clorgiline, 
and isocarboxazid
Anticonvulsants: valproateAnalgesics: meperidine, fentanyl, tramadol, and pentazocineAntiemetic agents: ondansetron, granisetron, and metoclopramideAntimigraine drugs: sumatriptanBariatric medications: sibutramineAntibiotics: linezolide (a monoamine oxidase inhibitor) and ritonavir 
(through inhibition of cytochrome P-450 enzyme isoform 3A4)
Over-the-counter cough and cold remedies: dextromethorphanDrugs of abuse: methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, or “ecstasy”),
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 5-methoxydiisopropyltryptamine (“foxy 
methoxy”), Syrian rue (contains harmine and harmaline, both
monoamine oxidase inhibitors)
Dietary supplements and herbal products: tryptophan,  
Hypericum perforatum 
 
(St. John’s wort), Panax ginseng (ginseng)
Other: lithium 
Drug interactions associated with severe serotonin syndrome 
Zoloft, Prozac, Sarafem, Luvox, Paxil, Celexa, Desyrel, Serzone, Buspar, Anaf-
ranil, Effexor, Nardil, Manerix, Marplan, Depakote, Demerol, Duragesic, Sublimaze, Ultram, Talwin, Zofran, Kytril, Reglan, Imitrex, Meridia, Redux, Pondimin, Zyvox, Norvir, Parnate, Tofranil, Remeron
Phenelzine and meperidine
Tranylcypromine and imipraminePhenelzine and selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitorsParoxetine and buspirone Linezolide and citalopramMoclobemide and selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitorsTramadol, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17, 2005 
current concepts 
1115 
drenergic CNS hyperactivity may play a critical role,
since the degree to which CNS norepinephrine con-centrations are increased in the serotonin syndromemay correlate with the clinical outcome. 
33,35,36 
 Oth-
er neurotransmitters, including  
N 
-methyl- 
d 
-aspar-
tate (NMDA) receptor antagonists and  
g 
-aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), may affect the development ofthe syndrome, but the role of these agents is lessclear. 
33,37 
 Dopaminergic receptors have been impli-
cated, but this association may arise from pharma-codynamic interactions, direct interactions betweenserotonin and dopamine receptors, other mecha-nisms, or a misdiagnosis of the serotonin syndromeas the neuroleptic malignant syndrome. 
26,33,38,39 
No laboratory tests confirm the diagnosis of the se-
rotonin syndrome. Instead, the presence of tremor,clonus, or akathisia without additional extrapyra-midal signs should lead clinicians to consider the
diagnosis, which must be inferred from the pa-tient’s history and physical examination. When ob-taining the patient’s history, clinicians should in-
quire about the use of prescription and over-the-
counter drugs, illicit substances, and dietary sup-
plements, since all of these agents have been impli-
cated in the development of the serotonin syn-drome. The evolution of symptoms and their rateof change should also be reviewed. Physical exam-
ination should include a focused assessment of
deep-tendon reflexes, clonu s, and muscle rigidity,
in addition to an evaluati on of the size and reactiv-
ity of the pupils, the dry ness of the oral mucosa,
the intensity of bowel sounds, skin color, and the
presence or absence of dia phoresis.
Although several diagnostic criteria have been
developed, we prefer the decision rules described inFigure 4. 
2,11,14,40 
 These rules, when compared with
the original diagnostic criteria, are simpler, moresensitive (84 percent vs. 75 percent), and more spe-cific (97 percent vs. 96 percent) for diagnosing theserotonin syndrome. 
1,2 
 Clonus (inducible, sponta-
neous, and ocular) is the most important finding inestablishing the diagnosis of the serotonin syn-drome. 
2,27,41 
 Clinicians should always be awarediagnosis 
Figure 2. Findings in a Patient with Moderately Severe Serotonin Syndrome. 
Hyperkinetic neuromuscular findings of tremor or clonus and hyperreflexia should lead the clinician to consider the 
diagnosis of the serotonin syndrome. 
 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17 
,  
2005 
The 
 new england journal  
of 
 medicine 
1116 
that hyperthermia and hypertonicity occur in life-
threatening cases, but muscle rigidity may mask thehighly distinguishing findings of clonus and hyper-reflexia and therefore cloud the diagnosis. 
2,42 
The differential diagnosis includes anticholin-
ergic poisoning, malignant hyperthermia, and theneuroleptic malignant syndrome, each of which canbe readily distinguished from the serotonin syn-drome on clinical grounds and on the basis of themedication history (Table 2). Patients with the anti-cholinergic syndrome have normal reflexes andshow the “toxidrome” of mydriasis; agitated delir-
ium; dry oral mucosa; hot, dry, erythematous skin;urinary retention; and an absence of bowel sounds.Hyperactive bowel sounds — along with neuromus-
cular abnormalities, diaphoresis, and normal skin
color — distinguish the serotonin syndrome fromthe anticholinergic toxidrome. 
2 
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic
disorder characterized by increasing concentrationsof end-tidal carbon dioxide, hypertonicity, hyper-thermia, and metabolic acidosis. The disorder oc-curs within minutes after exposure to inhalationalanesthetic agents. 
43 
 On physical examination, the
skin is often mottled, with cyanotic areas contrast-ing with patches of bright red flushing. 
43 
 The rigor
mortis–like rigidity of skeletal muscles and hypore-flexia that are seen in malignant hyperthermia fur-
ther distinguish this condition from the serotoninsyndrome. 
43 
The neuroleptic malignant syndrome is an idio-
pathic reaction to dopamine antagonists, a condi-tion that is defined by a slow onset, bradykinesia orakinesia, “lead pipe” muscular rigidity, hyperther-mia, fluctuating consciousness, and autonomic in-stability. 
44 
 Signs and symptoms of the neuroleptic
malignant syndrome typically evolve during severaldays, in contrast to the rapid onset and hyperkinesiaof the serotonin syndrome. Knowledge of the pre-cipitating drug also helps in distinguishing betweensyndromes: dopamine antagonists producebradykinesia, whereas serotonin agonists produce
hyperkinesia. 
45 
Management of the serotonin syndrome involves
the removal of the precipitating drugs, the provisionof supportive care, the control of agitation, the ad-ministration of 5-HT 
2a 
 antagonists, the control of
autonomic instability, and the control of hyperther-mia. 
45 
 Many cases of the serotonin syndrome typi-
cally resolve within 24 hours after the initiation oftherapy and the discontinuation of serotonergicdrugs, but symptoms may persist in patients takingdrugs with long elimination half-lives, active metab-management 
Figure 3. Serotonin Biosynthesis and Metabolism. 
Serotonin is produced in presynaptic neurons by hydroxylation and decarbox-
ylation of  
l 
-tryptophan. Serotonin is then incorporated into vesicles, where it 
resides until it is needed for neurotransmission. After axonal stimulation, se-rotonin is released into the intrasynaptic space; presynaptic serotonin recep-tors function as a feedback loop to inhibit exocytosis of vesicles (shown in red). Serotonin then binds to postsynaptic receptors to effect neurotransmission. A reuptake mechanism returns serotonin to the cytoplasm of the presynaptic neuron, where it is reintroduced into vesicles. Serotonin is then metabolized by monoamine oxidase subtype A to hydroxyindoleacetic acid. 
 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17, 2005 
current concepts 
1117 
olites, or a protracted duration of action. Support-
ive care, comprising the administration of intrave-nous fluids and correction of vital signs, remains amainstay of therapy. However, an abrupt deteriora-tion in the condition of a patient who has been con-servatively treated indicates the need for an imme-diate, aggressive response. 
1,2,45 
The intensity of therapy depends on the severity
of illness. Mild cases (e.g., with hyperreflexia andtremor but no fever) can usually be managed withsupportive care, removal of the precipitating drugs,
and treatment with benzodiazepines. Moderately
ill patients should have all cardiorespiratory andthermal abnormalities aggressively corrected andmay benefit from the administration of 5-HT 
2a 
antagonists. Hyperthermic patients (those whosetemperature is more than 41.1°C) are severely ill
and should receive the above therapies as well asimmediate sedation, neuromuscular paralysis, andorotrac heal intubation.
Control of agitation with benzodiazepines is es-
sential in the management of the serotonin syn-drome, regardless of its severity. Benzodiazepinessuch as diazepam improve survival in animal mod-els and blunt the hyperadrenergic component of thesyndrome. 
37,45 
 Physical restraints are ill-advised
and may contribute to mortality by enforcing iso-
metric muscle contractions that are associated with
severe lactic acidosis and hyperthermia. 
46 
 If physi-
cal restraints are used, they must be rapidly replacedwith chemical sedation.
Pharmacologically directed therapy involves the 
Figure 4. Algorithm for Diagnosis. 
The neuromuscular features of clonus and hyperreflexia are highly diagnostic for the serotonin syndrome, and their 
occurrence in the setting of serotonergic drug use establishes the diagnosis. Clinicians should be aware that muscle rigidity can overwhelm other neuromuscular findings and mask the diagnosis. Criteria adapted from Dunkley. 
2
Has a serotonergic agent been
administered in the past five weeks?
Not serotonin syndrome
Tremor and hyperreflexia
Spontaneous clonus
Not serotonin
syndromeSerotonin
syndromeOcular clonus and either agitation
or diaphoresis
Inducible clonus and either agitation
or diaphoresisMuscle rigidity,
temperature >38°C, and either ocular
clonus or inducible clonus
YES
 NO
YES
 NO
Are any of the following symptoms present? 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17 
,  
2005 
The 
 new england journal  
of 
 medicine 
1118 Table 2. Manifestations of Severe Serotonin Syndrome and Related Clinical Conditions.
ConditionMedication 
HistoryTime Needed for
Condition to Develop Vital Signs Pupils Mucosa SkinBowel
SoundsNeuromuscular 
Tone ReflexesMental
Status Serotonin
syndromeProseroto-
nergic drug <12 hr Hypertension, tachy-
cardia, tachypnea, hyperthermia (>41.1 ° C)Mydriasis Sialorrhea Diaphoresis Hyperactive Increased, pre-
dominantly in lower ex-tremitiesHyperreflexia, 
clonus (un-less masked by increased muscle tone)Agitation, 
coma
Anticholinergic
“toxidrome”Anticholin-
ergic agent<12 hr Hypertension (mild), 
tachycardia, tac-hypnea, hyper-
thermia (typically 
38.8 ° C or less)Mydriasis Dry Erythema, hot 
and dry to touchDecreased 
or absentNormal Normal Agitated 
delirium
Neuroleptic
malignantsyndromeDopamine 
antagonist1–3 days Hypertension, tachy-
cardia, tachypnea, hyperthermia (>41.1 ° C)Normal Sialorrhea Pallor, dia-
phoresisNormal or 
decreased“Lead-pipe” rigid-
ity present in all muscle groupsBradyreflexia Stupor, alert 
mutism, coma
Malignant
hyperthermiaInhalational 
anesthesia30 min to 24 hr after 
administration of inhalational anes-thesia or succinyl-cholineHypertension, tachy-
cardia, tachypnea, hyperthermia (can be as high as 46.0 ° C)Normal Normal Mottled ap-
pearance, diaphoresisDecreased Rigor mortis–like 
rigidityHyporeflexia Agitation 
administration of 5-HT 
2a 
 antagonists. 
7,45 
 Cypro-
heptadine is the recommended therapy for the se-rotonin syndrome, although its efficacy has not beenrigorously established. 
7,45 
 Treatment of the seroto-
nin syndrome in adults may require 12 to 32 mg ofthe drug during a 24-hour period, a dose that binds85 to 95 percent of serotonin receptors. 
47 
 Clinicians
should consider an initial dose of 12 mg of cypro-heptadine and then 2 mg every two hours if symp-toms continue. Maintenance dosing involves theadministration of 8 mg of cyproheptadine every six
hours. Cyproheptadine is available only in oral
form, but tablets may be crushed and administered
by nasogastric tube. Atypical antipsychotic agentswith 5-HT 
2a 
–antagonist activity may be beneficial
in treating the serotonin syndrome. The sublingualadministration of 10 mg of olanzapine has beenused successfully, but its efficacy has not been rig-orously determined. 
48 
 Clinicians desiring a
parenteral agent should consider the intramuscu-lar administration of 50 to 100 mg of chlorprom-azine. 
45 
 Even though chlorpromazine is an outdat-
ed therapy that has been replaced in psychiatricpractice by newer agents, its use may nonethelessbe considered in severe cases. 
45 
Control of autonomic instability involves stabi-
lization of fluctuating pulse and blood pressure. Hy-potension arising from MAOI interactions should
be treated with low doses of direct-acting sympath-omimetic amines (e.g., norepinephrine, phenyle-phrine, and epinephrine). Direct agonists do notrequire intracellular metabolism to generate a va-soactive amine, but their concentration in the syn-apse is regulated by catecholamine-O-methyltransferase. Indirect agents such as dopamine aremetabolized to epinephrine and norepinephrine.
Under normal conditions, monoamine oxidase lim-its the intracellular concentration of these metabo-
lites. When inhibited, however, monoamine oxidasecannot control the amount of epinephrine andnorepinephrine produced, and an exaggerated he-modynamic response may ensue. Patients inwhom hypertension and tachycardia develop, ei-ther as a result of pressor therapy or from poison-
ing itself, should be treated with short-actingagents such as nitroprusside and esmolol.
Control of hyperthermia involves eliminating ex-
cessive muscle activity. Although benzodiazepines
have a beneficial effect in moderate cases, in severe-ly ill patients with hyperthermia (a temperature ofmore than 41.1°C) immediate paralysis should beinduced with nondepolarizing agents such as ve- 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17, 2005 
current concepts 
1119 
curonium, followed by orotracheal intubation and
ventilation. Clinicians should avoid succinylcholinebecause of the risk of arrhythmia from hyperkale-mia associated with rhabdomyolysis. Recent casereports have shown that premature termination ofneuromuscular paralysis was associated with a re-crudescence of hyperthermia. 
49 
 There is no role for
antipyretic agents in the management of the sero-tonin syndrome; the increase in body temperatureis due to muscular activity, not an alteration in thehypothalamic temperature set point.
Potential pitfalls for clinicians include misdiag-
nosis of the serotonin syndrome, a failure to com-prehend its rapidity of progression, and adverse ef-fects of pharmacologically directed therapy. Thediagnosis may be clouded by the presence of severemuscle rigidity that obscures myoclonus and hyper-reflexia. If the correct diagnosis is not obvious, a
prudent course is to withhold antagonist therapyand provide aggressive supportive care, sedationwith benzodiazepines, and, if necessary, intubationand paralysis. 
7 
 Because of the speed with which
the condition of patients declines, physicians shouldanticipate the need for aggressive therapy beforeclinic al indications are reached.
Therapies such as propranolol, bromocriptine,
and dantrolene are not recommended. 
7,45 
 Propran-
olol, a 5-HT 
1a 
 antagonist with a long duration of ac-
tion, may cause hypotension and shock in patients
with autonomic instability. Furthermore, propra-nolol can abolish tachycardia that can be used todetermine the duration and effectiveness of thera-py. 
2 
 Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, and
dant rolene are not useful therapies; case reports
citing their use probably involved a misdiagnosisof another condition as the serotonin syn-drome. 
7,35,45 
 Bromocriptine has been implicated
in the development of the serotonin syndrome, andits use in pa tients in whom the neuroleptic malig-
nant syndrome is misdiagnosed may worsen se-rotonergic signs. 
27,50 
 According to one report, the
administration of bromocriptine and dantrolene toa patient with the serotonin syndrome caused anabrupt increase in temperature, culminating in
death. 
39 
 This finding is supported by the observa-
tion that dantrolene has no effect on survival in
animal models. 
34,35 
Antagonist therapy with the use of cyprohepta-
dine and chlorpromazine may have unintended ef-fects. The dosage of cyproheptadine used to treat theserotonin syndrome may cause sedation, but thiseffect is a goal of therapy and should not deter cli-nicians from using the drug. Chlorpromazine is anoutmoded drug that has been associated with se-vere orthostatic hypotension and has been thoughtto aggravate hyperthermia. Patients who requireacute parenteral therapy for the serotonin syndromeare often hypertensive and are not ambulatory, so
that the risk of orthostatic hypotension is mini-
mized. Hyperthermia in response to neuroleptic
administration is an idiopathic response; the nor-mal outcome is hypothermia. Nonetheless, chlor-promazine should not be administered to a patientwith hypotension or the neuroleptic malignant syn-drome, since the drug could potentially exacerbate
clinical findings.
The serotonin syndrome can be avoided by a com-
bination of pharmacogenomic research, the educa-tion of physicians, modifications in prescribingpractices, and the use of technological advances.
The application of pharmacogenomic principlescan potentially protect patients at risk for the syn-
drome before the administration of serotonergicagents. Once toxicity occurs, consultation with amedical toxicologist, a clinical pharmacology ser-
vice, or a poison-control center can identify prosero-tonergic agents and drug interactions, assist clini-
cians in anticipating adverse effects, and providevaluable clinical decision-making experience. Theavoidance of multidrug regimens is critical to theprevention of the serotonin syndrome. If multiple
agents are required, however, computer-based or-dering systems and the use of personal digital as-
sistants can detect drug interactions and decreasereliance on memory in drug ordering. Post-market-ing surveillance linked to physician education hasbeen proposed to improve awareness of the seroto-nin syndrome. 
10 
Supported in part by a grant from the National Institute on Drug
Abuse (DA-14929, to Dr. Boyer).prevention 
references 
1. 
Sternbach H. The serotonin syndrome.
Am J Psychiatry 1991;148:705-13. 
2. 
Dunkley EJ, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D,
Dawson AH, Whyte IM. The Hunter Seroto-nin Toxicity Criteria: simple and accurate di-
agnostic decision rules for serotonin toxici-ty. QJM 2003;96:635-42. 
3. 
Oates JA, Sjoerdsma A. Neurologic ef-fects of tryptophan in patients receiving a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Neurology1960; 10:1076-8. 
4. 
Asch DA, Parker RM. The Libby Zion 
n engl j med  
352;11 
www.nejm.org march  
17 
,  
2005 
1120 
current concepts 
case: one step forward or two steps back-
ward? N Engl J Med 1988;318:771-5.
5. Sampson E, Warner JP. Serotonin syn-
drome: potentially fatal but difficult to rec-ognize. Br J Gen Pract 1999;49:867-8.
6. Martin T. Serotonin syndrome. Ann
Emerg Med 1996;28:520-6.
7. Graudins A, Stearman A, Chan B.
Treatment of the serotonin syndrome withcyproheptadine. J Emerg Med 1998;16:615-9.
8. Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A, Whyte
IM. Relative toxicity of selective serotoninreuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in overdose.J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42:277-85.
9. Watson WA, Litovitz TL, Rodgers GC Jr,
et al. 2002 Annual report of the AmericanAssociation of Poison Control Centers ToxicExposure Surveillance System. Am J EmergMed 2003;21:353-421.
10. Mackay FJ, Dunn NR, Mann RD. Antide-
pressants and the serotonin syndrome ingeneral practice. Br J Gen Pract 1999;49:871-4.
11. Hegerl U, Bottlender R, Gallinat J, Kuss
HJ, Ackenheil M, Moller HJ. The serotoninsyndrome scale: first results on validity. EurArch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1998;248:96-103.
12. Gill M, LoVecchio F, Selden B. Serotonin
syndrome in a child after a single dose of flu-voxamine. Ann Emerg Med 1999;33:457-9.
13. Isbister GK, Dawson A, Whyte IM, Prior
FH, Clancy C, Smith AJ. Neonatal paroxe-tine withdrawal syndrome or actually sero-tonin syndrome? Arch Dis Child Fetal Neo-natal Ed 2001;85:F147-F148.
14. Laine K, Heikkinen T, Ekblad U, Kero P.
Effects of exposure to selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors during pregnancy on sero-tonergic symptoms in newborns and cordblood monoamine and prolactin concentra-tions. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003;60:720-6.
15. Parrott AC. Recreational Ecstasy/MDMA,
the serotonin syndrome, and serotonergicneurotoxicity. Pharmacol Biochem Behav2002 ;71:837-44.
16. Lee DO, Lee CD. Serotonin syndrome in
a child associated with erythromycin andsertraline. Pharmacotherapy 1999;19:894-6.
17. Gardner MD, Lynd LD. Sumatriptan
contraindications and the serotonin syn-drome. Ann Pharmacother 1998;32:33-8.
18. Giese SY, Neborsky R. Serotonin syn-
drome: potential consequences of Meridiacombined with demerol or fentanyl. PlastReconstr Surg 2001;107:293-4.
19. DeSilva KE, Le Flore DB, Marston BJ,
Rimland D. Serotonin syndrome in HIV-infected individuals receiving antiretroviraltherapy and fluoxetine. AIDS 2001;15:1281-5.
20. Callaway JC, Grob CS. Ayahuasca prepa-rations and serotonin reuptake inhibitors:
a potential combination for severe adversereactions. J Psychoactive Drugs 1998;30:367-9.
21. Izzo AA, Ernst E. Interactions between
herbal medicines and prescribed drugs:a systematic review. Drugs 2001;61:2163-75.
22. Lange-Asschenfeldt C, Weigmann H,
Hiemke C, Mann K. Serotonin syndrome asa result of fluoxetine in a patient with trama-dol abuse: plasma level-correlated symp-tomatology. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2002;22:440-1.
23. Turkel SB, Nadala JG, Wincor MZ. Pos-
sible serotonin syndrome in associationwith 5-HT(3) antagonist agents. Psychoso-matics 2001;42:258-60.
24. Kaneda Y, Kawamura I, Fujii A, Ohmori
T. Serotonin syndrome — ‘potential’ role ofthe CYP2D6 genetic polymorphism inAsians. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2002;5:105-6.
25. Mitchell PB. Drug interactions of clini-
cal significance with selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors. Drug Saf 1997;17:390-406.
26. Demirkiran M, Jankivic J, Dean JM. Ec-
stasy intoxication: an overlap between sero-tonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignantsyndrome. Clin Neuropharmacol 1996;19:157-64.
27. Gillman PK. Ecstasy, serotonin syn-
drome and the treatment of hyperpyrexia.Med J Aust 1997;167:109-11.
28. Mason PJ, Morris VA, Balcezak TJ. Sero-
tonin syndrome: presentation of 2 cases andreview of the literature. Medicine (Balti-more) 2000;79:201-9.
29. Hoyer D, Clarke DE, Fozard JR, et al. In-
ternational Union of Pharmacology classifi-cation of receptors for 5-hydroxytryptamine(serotonin). Pharmacol Rev 1994;46:157-203.
30. Saper CB. Brain stem modulation of
sensation, movement, and consciousness.In: Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, eds.Principles of neural science. 4th ed. NewYork: McGraw-Hill, 2000:896.
31. Van Oekelen D, Megens A, Meert T,
Luyten WH, Leysen JE. Functional study ofrat 5-HT2A receptors using antisense oligo-nucleotides. J Neurochem 2003;85:1087-100.
32. Isbister GK. Serotonin syndrome, my-
driasis, and cyproheptadine. Ann Pharma-cother 20 01;35:1672-3.
33. Nisijima K, Shioda K, Yoshino T, Takano
K, Kato S. Memantine, an NMDA antago-nist, prevents the development of hyperther-mia in an animal model for serotonin syn-drome. Pharmacopsychiatry 2004;37:57-62.
34. Isbister GK, Whyte IM. Serotonin toxic-
ity and malignant hyperthermia: role of5-HT2 receptors. Br J Anaesth 2002;88:603-
4.
35. Nisijima K, Yoshino T, Yui K, Katoh S.
Potent serotonin (5-HT 2A) receptor antago-
nists completely prevent the development ofhyperthermia in an animal model of the5-HT syndrome. Brain Res 2001;890:23-31.
36. Done CJ, Sharp T. Biochemical evidence
for the regulation of central noradrenergicactivity by 5-HT1A and 5-HT2 receptors: mi-crodialysis studies in the awake and anaes-thetized rat. Neuropharmacology 1994;33:411-21.
37. Nisijima K, Shioda K, Yoshino T, Ta-
kano K, Kato S. Diazepam and chlormethia-zole attenuate the development of hyper-thermia in an animal model of the serotoninsyndrome. Neurochem Int 2003;43:155-64.
38. Fink M. Toxic serotonin syndrome or
neuroleptic malignant syndrome? Pharma-copsychiatry 1996;29:159-61.
39. Kline SS, Mauro LS, Scala-Barnett DM,
Zick D. Serotonin syndrome versus neuro-leptic malignant syndrome as a cause ofdeath. Clin Pharm 1989;8:510-4.
40. Kaneda Y, Ohmori T, Fujii A. The seroto-
nin syndrome: investigation using the Japa-nese version of the Serotonin SyndromeScale. Psychiatry Res 2001;105:135-42.
41. Baloh RW , Dietz J, Spooner JW . Myoclo-
nus and ocular oscillations induced byL-tryptophan. Ann Neurol 1982;11:95-7.
42. Whyte I, Dawson A. Redefining the se-
rotonin syndrome. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol2002;40:668-9. abstract.
43. Ali SZ, Taguchi A, Rosenberg H. Malig-
nant hyperthermia. Best Pract Res Clin An-esthesiol 2003;17:519-33.
44. Guze BH, Baxter LR Jr. Neuroleptic ma-
lignant syndrome. N Engl J Med 1985;313:163-6.
45. Gillman PK. The serotonin syndrome
and its treatment. J Psychopharmacol 1999;13:100-9.
46. Hick JL, Smith SW , Lynch MT. Metabol-
ic acidosis in restraint-associated cardiac ar-rest: a case series. Acad Emerg Med 1999;6:239-45.
47. Kapur S, Zipursky RB, Jones C, Wilson
AA, DaSilva JD, Houle S. Cyproheptadine:a potent in vivo serotonin antagonist. AmJ Psychiatry 1997;154:884.
48. Boddy R, Ali R, Dowsett R. Use of sub-
lingual olanzapine in serotonin syndrome.J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42:725. abstract.
49. Olsen D, Dart R, Robinett M. Severe se-
rotonin syndrome from escitalopram over-dose. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42:744-5.abstract.
50. Snider SR, Hutt C, Stein B, Fahn S. In-
crease in brain serotonin produced by bro-mocriptine. Neurosci Lett 1975;1:237-41.
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.Reproduced withpermission ofthecopyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 