 
 
 
Safety Assessment of p-Phenylenediamine,  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate   
as Used in Cosmetics 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Status:    Draft Amended Report for Panel Review  
Release Date:   November 9, 2023  
Panel Meeting Date:   December 4 -5, 2023  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
The Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety members are: Chair, Wilma F. Bergfeld, M.D., F.A.C.P.; Donald V. Belsito, 
M.D.; David E. Cohe n, M.D.; Curtis D. Klaassen, Ph.D.; Allan E. Rettie, Ph.D.; David Ross, Ph.D.; Thomas J. Slaga, Ph.D.; 
Paul W. Snyder, D.V.M., Ph.D.; and Susan C. Tilton, Ph.D .  The Cosmetic Ingredient Review  (CIR) Executive Director is 
Bart Heldreth, Ph.D. , and the Senior Directo r is Monice Fiume.   This safety assessment was prepared by Christina Burnett, 
M.S., Senior Scientific Analyst/Writer.  
 
 
 
© Cosmetic Ingredient Review
 
1620 L Street, NW, Suite 1200  ♢ Washington, DC 20036 -4702 ♢ ph 202.331.065 1 
cirinfo@cir -safety.org   RE-REVIEW  FLOW CHART 
INGREDIENT/FAMILY__p- Phenylenediamine ingredients                                                             _____  
MEETING   _______ December  2023                   _____________________________________________  
Public Comment  CIR Expert Panel  Re-Review  Rpt Status  
     announce                                                        OR   
 
     
    
            PRIORITY LIST    
     
  
 
 
 
            DAR                             YES                       NO  
 
 
 
 
   
            Table         IDA           TA R     
 
 
 
                                                            Yes  
 
 
  
                No  
 
 
 
 
 
 IDA Notice  
 
 
Draft TAR                                  IDA     
  
 
 
  
   
     Table   
  Tentative 
Amended Report   
   
 
60 day Public comment period           Draft FAR      
             
   
 
    Table                     Different Conclusion   
               
                 PUBLISH  Final Amended 
Report     
 
DRAFT  AMENDED 
REPORT   
Dec 2023    
 DRAFT TENTATIVE  
AMENDED REPORT  
DRAFT FINAL 
AMENDED REPORT  Issue  
TAR 
Issue 
FAR 
 
Table  
Table  
Table  
New Data; or 
request  
Are new data cause to reopen?  
> 15 years 
since last 
review  
Are new ingredients 
appropriate for 
inclusion/re -open? 
RE-REVIEW 
SUMMARY 
Final Report (2007); 
not published  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote__________________________________________________________________________________________ 
1620 L St NW, Suite 1200, Washington, DC  20036  
(Main) 202- 331-0651 
(email) cirinfo@cir -safety.org    (website)  http://www.cir- safety.org Commitment & Credibility  since 1976  
Memorandum 
To
:  Expert Panel  for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety  Members and Liaisons  
From:   Christina L. Burnett, M.S., Senior Scientific Analyst/Writer , CIR  
Date:   November 9 , 2023 
Subject:  Safety Assessment of p -Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  as Used in 
Cosmetics  
E
nclosed is the Draft Amended Report on the Safety of p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine 
Sulfate as Used in Cosmetics.  (It is identified as report_ Phenylenediamine _122023 in the pdf document).   In 1985, the Panel 
published a safety assessment on p-Phenylenediamine with the conclusion that follows:  
“p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some persons may be sensitized under intended conditions of use.  For 
those persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concludes that p-Phenylenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the 
current concentration  of use.”  (1985 -originalreport_Phenylenediamine_122023) 
This conclusion was reaffirmed in a re- review that was published by the Panel in 2006 ( 2006-rereview_Phenylenediamine_  
122023) .  In 2007, the Panel issued a Final Amended Report that included the dihy drochloride and sulfate salts  
(2007- amendedreport_Phenylenediamine_122023 ).  Because more than 15 years have passed since the Panel last reviewed this 
report and many new references have been published on these ingredients, this amended safety assessment o n 
p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate is being presented to the Panel as a Draft
Amended Report.
According to the 2023 VCRP survey data, p-P henylenediamine is reported to be used in 200 formulations .  The majority of these 
uses are in hair coloring preparations; however, uses have been reported for eye makeup preparations.  Only 1 use was reporte d for 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl , in a hair coloring shampoo , and no uses were reported for the sulfate salt.  The frequencies of use for
p-Phenylenediamine have greatly decreased since the initial amended report was finalized; in 2007, p-Phenylenediamine was
reported to have 1497 uses, all in hair coloring formulations.  No uses were reported at that time for the related salts.  The results
of the concentration of use survey conducted by the Council in 2022  (data_  Phenylenediamine_122023) indicate p-Phenylene -
diamine has a maximum concentration of use range of 0.98 - 3% in hair dyes, with a maximum on- head concentr ation after
dilution of 1%.  No concentrations of use were reported for the related salts.  In the 2007 amended report, the maximum
concentration of use range for p-Phenylenediamine was 2 - 4% in hair dyes; the hydrochloride salt and the sulfate salt were each
reported to be used at 6% in hair dyes.
T
his Draft Amended Report contains two margin of safety calculations performed by the SCCS.  One is a conventional 
calculation, the other uses a toxicokinetic -based approach.  Does the Panel agree with the calcu lations presented , or should a 
calculation be prepared by the Panel or CIR staff?  
A
dditional supporting documents for this report package include a flow chart (flow_ Phenylenediamine _122023 ), report history 
(history_ Phenylenediamine _122023), a search strategy ( search_ Phenylenediamine _122023 ), a data profile 
(dataprofile_ Phenylenediamine _122023), and  the minutes from all the meetings at which p-Phenylenediamine and its salts  were 
discussed  during the original review ( originalminutes _Phenylenediamine _122023). 
I
f no further data are needed, the Panel should formulate an updated Discussion and issue a Tentative Amended Report.  Howeve r, 
if additional data are required, the Panel should be prepared to identify those needs and issue an Insufficient Data Announcement.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine and Its Salts  History  
 
1985 – The CIR’s Final Report on the Safety Assessment of p-Phenylenediamine was published in the  
Journal of the American College of Toxicology .  The Panel recognized that p -Phenylenediamine is a known 
sensitizer and some persons may be sensitized under intended conditions for use.  For those persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concluded that p-Phenylenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the 
current concentratio n of use.  
 2006  – Re-review of p-Phenylenediamine published in the International Journal of Toxicology .  The Panel 
reaffirmed the original conclusion in March 2004.    
 June 2006 - The Panel reviewed an expanded grouping of Phenylenediamine ingredients.  The Panel 
rejected the large grouping and called for the ingredients to be divided into smaller groupings.   Discussion 
was tabled so that the Phenylenediamines could be reorganized into 5 subs ections.  
 
June 2007 – The Panel discussed the status of the Phenylenediamine ingredients following a presentation 
by Industry.  The Panel determined that the large grouping of Phenylenediamine ingredients should be 
broken out into individual reports.   
 September 2007  – The Panel reviewed the grouping of p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, 
and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate for the first time.  The Panel issued a Tentative Amended Report with the 
conclusion that these 3 ingredients are safe as cosmetic ingredients in the practices of use and 
concentrations described in the safety assessment.  
 
December 2007  – The Panel issued a Final Amended Report with the conclusion that p-Phenylenediamine, 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate are safe as hair dyes in the practices of use and 
concentration described in the safety assessment.  
 
2022 -2023  – Review of the available published literature since 2007 was conducted in accordance to CIR 
Procedures regarding re -review of ingredients after ~15 years.   Because the document was not published in 
the International Journal of Toxicology  after the Panel finalized the Amended Report in 2007, the 
document is being presented to the Panel as a Draft Amended Report and is incorporating the data from 
that repo rt along with newly available data.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote1 
 p-Phneylenediamine and Salts   Data Profile* – December 2023  – Christina Burnett  
    Toxicokinetics Acute Tox  Repeated 
Dose Tox  DART  Genotox Carci  Dermal 
Irritation  Dermal 
Sensitization   Ocular 
Irritation  Clinical 
Studies  
 
Reported Use  
Method of Mfg 
Impurities  
log P /log K ow 
Dermal 
Penetration  
ADME  
Dermal 
Oral Inhalation Dermal Oral Inhalation 
Dermal 
Oral 
In Vit ro 
In Vivo  
Dermal 
Oral 
Other  
In Vitro  
Animal 
Human 
In Vitro  
Animal Human 
Phototoxicity 
In Vitro  
Animal 
Retrospective/ 
Multicenter  
Case Reports  
p-Phenylenediamine;  
CAS No. 106 -50-3 X 
O O X X X 
O X 
O X 
O X
O X X
O X
O  X 
O X 
O X 
O X 
O X 
O X X  X 
O O  X 
O X 
O O  X 
O X 
O X 
O 
p-Phenylendiamine HCl;  
CAS No. 624 -18-0 X 
O  X  X X O    O    X 
O X 
O X X 
O X            
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate;  
CAS No 50994 -40-6 O   X                X           
 
* “X” indicates that new data were available in  a category for the ingredient ; “O” indicates data that were previously reported.  
 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote   Last updated October  2023  
 p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p -Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
 
Ingredient  CAS #  PubMed  FDA  HPVIS  
 NIOSH  EU NTIS  NTP  FEMA  ECHA  ECETOC  SIDS  SCCS  AICIS  FAO  WHO  Web  
p-Phenylenediamine  106-50-3 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl 624-18-0 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  16245 -77-5 
50994 -40-6 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 
 
 
 
Search Strategy  (from 2000 on) 
PubMed 
((“p-phenylenediamine”) OR (106 -50-3[EC/RN Number]) – 1604  hits 
 Limited with “reproduction” – 19 hits, 4 relevant  
 Limited with “acute toxicity” – 39 hits, 15 relevant  
((“phenylenediamine  HCl”) OR (624 -18-0[EC/RN Number]) – 522 hits 
((“phenylenediamine  sulfate ”) OR (16245- 77-5[EC/RN Number])  OR (50994- 40-6[EC/RN Number] ) – 62 3 hits  
  
ECHA  
Dossier available for p -Phenylenediamine (CAS No. 106 -50-3) and p- Phenylenediamine Sulfate (CAS No. 16245 -77-5; listed as benzene -1,4-diammonium sulphate)  
No dossier available for p -Phenylenediamine HCl (CAS No. 624 -18-0; listed as benzene -1,4-diamine dihydrochlori de 
 
LINKS  
  
Search Engines  
 Pubmed  (- http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) 
 appropriate qualifiers are used as necessary  
search results are reviewed to identify relevant doc uments  
  
Pertinent Websites  
 wINCI -  http://webdictionary.personalcarecouncil.org    
 FDA databases http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi- bin/ECFR?page=browse  
 FDA search databases:  http://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/FDABasicsforIndustry/ucm234631.htm ;,  
 Substances Added to Food (formerly, EAFUS ):  https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives -petitions/substances -added -food-formerly-eafus  
 GRAS listing:  http://www.fda.gov/food/ingredientspackaginglabeling/gras/default.htm  
 SCOGS database:  http://www.fda.gov/food/i ngredientspackaginglabeling/gras/scogs/ucm2006852.htm  
 Indirect Food Additives:  http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/fdcc/?set=IndirectAdditives   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote   Last updated October  2023  
  Drug Approvals and Data base:  http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/default.htm   
 FDA Orange Book:  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm129662.htm   
  (inactive ingredients approved for drugs:  http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/   
 HPVIS (EPA High -Production Volume Info Systems) - https://iaspub.epa.gov/oppthpv/public_search.html_page   
 NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health) - http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/   
 NTIS (National Technical Information Service) - http://www.ntis.gov/  
o technical reports search page:  https://ntrl.ntis.gov/NTRL/   
 NTP (National Toxicology Program ) - http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/   
 Office of Dietary Supplements https://ods.od.nih.gov/  
 FEMA (Flavor & Extract Manufacturers Association) GRAS:  https://www.femaflavor.org/fema -gras  
 ECHA (European Chemicals Agency – REACH dossiers) – http://echa.europa.eu/information -on-chemicals;jsessionid=A978100B4E4CC39C78C93A851EB3E3C7.live1  
 ECETOC (European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals) - http://www.ecetoc.org   
 European Medicines Agency  (EMA) - http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/   
 OECD SIDS (Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development Screening Info Data Sets) - http://webnet.oecd. org/hpv/ui/Search.aspx   
 SCCS (Scientific Committee for Consumer Safety) opinions:  http://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/consumer_safety/opini ons/index_en.htm   
 AICIS  (Australian Industrial Chemical s Introduction  Scheme) - https://www.industrialchemicals.gov.au/   
 International Programme on Chemical Safety http://www.inchem.org/   
 FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) - http://www.fao.org/food/food -safety -quality/scientific -advice/jecfa/jecfa- additives/en/ 
 WHO (World Health Organization) technical reports - http://www.who.int/biologicals/technical_report_series/en/  
 www.google.com   - a general Google search should be performed for additional background information, to identify references that are available,  and for other general 
information  
 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
DECEMBER 1983  PANEL MEETING  – FIRST PUBLIC REVIEW OF P -PHENYLEN EDIAMINE  
Full Panel  
The Expert Panel discussed the carcinogenicity, mutagenicity and teratogenicity data for this ingredient and found them to be 
negative.  Dr. Schroeter stated the toxicity of this compound is minimal, but clinically it does produce sensitization.  
At the behest of industry, Dr. McEwen provided the Panel with copies of a proposed safety conclusion, wh ich read as follows:  
“The CIR Expert Panel notes that PPD (or 2 -NPPD and 4 -NOPD [another report discussed at the same meeting]) is a 
sensitizer; however, available data on this ingredient as used in hair coloring products indicates that the warnings and 
directions for use mandated by section 601 of the US Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, give reasonable protection from adverse 
dermatologic effects for consumers.  With the data on other potential hazards considered also, the Panel concludes that PPD ( or 
2-NPPD and 4- NOPD) is safe as currently used in cosmetic products.”  
To support this conclusion, Dr. McEwen provided the Panel with copies of the North American Contact Dermatitis Group’s 
“Prospective Study of Cosmetic Reactions: 1977 -1980,” as well as cosmetic adv erse reaction data received by FDA directly 
from consumers.  Both of these demonstrated that hair dye -related contact dermatitis was relatively low.  He also provided the 
Panel with human repeat insult patch test data on 206 patients, supporting industry’s  contention that the sensitization risk from 
hair dyes is slight.  Dr. Bergfeld disputed these studies on the basis of the test population used.  Dr. Boutwell suggested t he 
conclusion be amended to reflect the fact that the ingredient is safe for nonsensitized individuals, but is nevertheless a sensitizer for some persons.  
Mr. Eiermann provided the correct wording for the exemption of coal tar hair dyes from the principal adulteration and color 
additive provisions (Sections 601 and 706) of the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 when their label bears a cautionary statement and patch test instructions.  The correct wording is already present in the 2 -NPPD/4 -NOPD document. 
Upon motion by Dr. Berndt, seconded by Dr. Schroeter, the following conclusion w as unanimously approved:  
“p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some persons may be sensitized under intended conditions of use.  For those 
persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concludes that p -Phenylenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the current 
concentration of use.”  
Dr. Bergfeld suggested that determinations as to whether the material tested was an irritant or a sensitizer be stated in the 
results of patch tests (Table 11).  
Subject to this and other minor revisions, the document wi ll be announced as a Tentative Report.  
 
[NO FURTHER MINUTES FROM PUBLIC DISCUSSIONS ON P -PHENYLENEDIAMINE PRIOR TO THE 1985 
PUBLICATION ARE AVAILABLE.]  
MARCH 15 -16
 , 2004 PA NEL MEETING – RE-REV IEW OF PHENYLENEDIAM INE 
Team Minutes Not Available 
Full Panel  
A CIR Final Report with the following conclusion was published in 1985: p- Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some 
persons may be sensitized under intended conditions of use.  For those persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concludes tha t 
p-Pheny lenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the current concentrations of use.  
Dr. Belsito stated that many new studies on p-Phenylenediamine appear in the published literature, and that these data do not 
warrant a change in the Panel’s conclusion on t his ingredient.  However, he noted that p-Phenylenediamine is increasingly 
appearing in henna tattoos, and that individuals who are p-Phenylenediamine -sensitive are not aware of this.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
Dr. Belsito said that when the Panel reaffirms its Final conclusion on p-Phenylenediamine, which indicates that it is safe as a 
hair dye for those persons not sensitized, it should also be noted that its leave -on use in temporary henna tattoos is considered 
unsafe based on the sensitization risk.  
Dr. McEwen said that the use o f p-Phenylenediamine in henna tattoos is a concern.  He added that the manner in which this 
concern should be addressed needs to be considered, because, under the current law, these are not cosmetic products that woul d 
be allowed in the United States.  
Dr. Belsito said that there must be some way in which the Panel may alert the public as to the presence of p-Phenylenediamine 
in henna tattoos.   He recalled one of his patients (allergic to p-Phenylenediamine) who received a henna tattoo and developed a 
sever e allergic reaction on the upper back that resulted in keloidal scarring.  
Dr. McEwen recommended a separate statement, apart from the Panel’s re- review.  
Dr. Katz said that the use of p-Phenylenediamine in henna for tattoos is not a legal use in this country; neither p -
Phenylenediamine nor henna is approved for tattoo use.   Dr. Katz added that FDA’s website has information for consumers 
indicating that p-Phenylenediamine is found in some cases of black henna to make the color of the henna black, and 
emphasi zed that FDA can only reach a certain group of consumers.  
Dr. Katz said that FDA tries to get the word out that the use of p-Phenylenediamine and henna in tattoos is not a legal or 
legitimate use of either dye.  She said that it would also be useful for consumers or any organization that gathers information 
from consumers with problems or reactions to report any adverse reactions to FDA.  She added that the more reports that FDA receives, the more likely that FDA potentially will be able to look into the is sue to determine exactly what can be done with 
regard to enforcement.  
Dr. Katz also encouraged the dermatologists on the Panel to get the word out to colleagues to report patients with an allergi c 
reaction, due to use of the color, to FDA.  
Regarding the P anel’s issuance of a letter to address a particular concern, Ms. Weintraub wanted to know whether this type of 
letter has ever been accompanied by a press release that could be posted at the CTFA or CIR website.  
Ms. Weintraub expressed concern that a letter would not be disseminated widely and noted that there should be some type of 
proactive action.  
Dr. Andersen said that CIR has never used a press release vehicle.  However, when the Panel decided to terminate its review o f 
Methyl Methacrylate and support FDA’s position (as captured on FDA’s website), the Panel’s discussion was captured on 
CIR’s website.  
Similarly, Dr. Andersen said that FDA’s position on the use of p-Phenylenediamine in henna in tattoos has the Panel’s support 
and that the Panel also supports the reporting of adverse events to FDA. 
Ms. Weintraub remarked that a very specific, limited population would visit the CIR or CTFA website, and that some type of 
action that would be more proactive is preferred.  
Dr. Andersen wanted to know which other  websites should be used.  
Dr. McEwen recommended that the warning regarding the use of p-Phenylenediamine in tattoos be posted at CFA’s website 
and that CIR should be cited.  
Ms. Weintraub said that she would solicit input from Dr. Andersen, Dr. McEwen and the Panel in generating the statement.  
The Panel unanimously concluded that the Final Report on p-Phenylenediamine should not be reopened.  
Dr. Marks recommended that the discussion section of the re -review contain the Panel’s revised patch test instructio ns for hair 
dyes as well as the revised hair dye epidemiology statement.  
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
JUNE 12 -13, 2006 MEETING – 1ST REVIEW OF PHENYLENEDIAMINE HAIR DYE GRO UP 
Discussion on 4,6 -Bis(2 -Hydroxyethoxy) -m-Phenylenediamine HCl; N,N' -Bis(2 -Hydroxyethyl) -2-Nitro -p-
Phenylenediamine; 2 -Chloro -5-Nitro -N-Hydroxyethyl p -Phenylenediamine; N,N -Diethyl -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; 
N,N-Dimethyl -N-Hydroxyethyl -3-Nitro -p-Phenylenediamine; N,N -Dimethyl -p-Phenylenediamine; 2,6 -Dimethyl -p-
Phenyle nediamine; 2,6 -Dimethyl -p-Phenylenediamine HCl; N,N -Dimethyl -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; 4 -Ethoxy -m-
Phenylenediamine Sulfate; 4 -Fluoro -6-Methyl -m-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; Hydroxyethyl -p-Phenylenediamine 
Sulfate; Hydroxypropyl Bis(N -Hydroxyethyl -p-Phenylen ediamine) HCl; N -Methoxyethyl -p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 2 -
Methoxy -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; N -Methyl -3-Nitro -p-Phenylenediamine; 4 -Nitro -o-Phenylenediamine 
Dihydrochloride; 2 -Nitro -p-Phenylenediamine Dihydrochloride; 4 -Nitro -o-Phenylenediamine HCl; 4 -Nitro -m-
Phenylenediamine Sulfate; 4 -Nitro -o-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; 2 -Nitro -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate; PEG -3 2,2' -Di-p-
Phenylenediamine; p -Phenylenediamine HCl; and p -Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
 
Belsito Team – June 12, 2006 
Dr. Belsito recommended the preparation of a table (i.e., checklist table) that includes a listing of the studies a on each 
ingredient that are included in the safety assessment, considering that the safety assessment involves a large group of 
ingredients.  The table will not be part of the report, but actually, a handout that will allow the Panel to easily determine the 
availability of data on each ingredient.  The organization of the table will incorporate the Hair Coloring Technical Committe e’s 
suggestions for ingredient groupings that are  outlined in the memorandum (dated 2/9/06) that was received from industry.  
 Dr. Klaassen acknowledged that data used in the development of SCCNFP opinions on Phenylenediamines  are also included in 
the CIR draft report, but that a statement to this effect does not need to precede each summary of data (see page 55)  referenced 
in an SCCNFP report.  
 
Dr. Belsito’s Team agreed that the next report draft should reflect the ingredient groupings that are recommended in the 
memorandum from industry.  
 Dr. Andersen suggested that the draft report should not be divided into separate reports, based on industry’s recommendations  
for ingredient groupings, but, rather, that the existing draft report should be reorganized to include subheadings for each 
ingredient group that is included in the memorandum.  
 Dr. Belsito’s Team agreed that the draft report on Phenylenediamines should be tabled, pending reorganization of the report into the various in gredient groups.  It was also agreed that a checklist table (includes a listing of the studies a on each 
ingredient that are included in the safety assessment) will be provided to the Panel prior to the next review of the draft re port. 
 
Marks Team – June 1 2, 2006 
It was agreed that the draft report needs to be reorganized, based on the memo from Dr. John Bailey recommending that the ingredients (and studies associated with each) should be organized into five separate groups.  Chemical structures should be 
included at the beginning of each section, followed by use frequency and use concentration data, toxicity data, etc.  
 Dr. Bergfeld noted that PEG- 3, 2, 2' -Di-p-Phenylenediamine is very toxic to the skin.  She also said that the Panel needs to 
consider deleting some of the case reports that are repetitive.  
 It was noted that hair dye regulations should appear at the end of the report, rather than at the end of each section.  
 
Drs. Bergfeld and Shank noted that the data from Eastman Kodak Co. Do not contain the  test concentrations or animal models.  
 Regarding page 54 of the draft report, it was noted that actual test concentrations are not included and that the animal stra ins 
tested are not indicated.  
 It was noted that a CIR final report on N,N -Bis (2 -Hydroxyethyl) -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate was published in 1992 and, thus, 
that data on this ingredient should be diluted from the table on ingredient use frequencies and use concentrations in the dra ft 
report.  
 Dr. Marks said that it should be noted in the report Introduction that N,N -Bis (2 -Hydroxyethyl) -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate 
has been reviewed by the Panel.  
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
Dr. Bergfeld said that CTFA should be asked to provide a list of Phenylenediamine ingredients that may be included in the 
International Cosmetic Ingredien t Dictionary and Handbook under different naming conventions.  
 
Dr. Andersen stated that p -Phenylenediamine should be added to the draft report because the CIR final report on this ingredient 
will become the master document.  
 Dr. Marks’ Team agreed that the draft report on Phenylenediamines should be tabled pending reorganization of the report into 
a document that is more manageable.    
 
Full Panel  – June 13, 2006 
Dr. Belsito stated that, prior to this Panel meeting, a memorand um from Dr. John Bailey suggesting that the report be 
reorganized was received.  The recommendation involves dividing the current report into the following five individual reports : 
(1) Addendum to the CIR report on p- Phenylenediamine, to include the two sa lts (2) Addendum to the CIR report on 2 -Nitro -
p-Phenylenediamine and 4 -Nitro -o-Phenylenediamine, to include their salts, (3) A report on the remaining direct dyes (all 
contain a nitro group), (4) A report on the remaining m -Phenylenediamine dyes, and (5) A report on the remaining p-
Phenylenediamine dyes.  
Dr. Belsito said that his Team considers this to be a logical request, in terms of looking at groups where data on one chemic al 
would allow the Panel to better understand potential toxicologic risks that ma y be associated with other chemicals.  He added 
that his Team is not in favor of dividing the current report into five separate reports, because data on p- Phenylenediamine and 
p-Phenylenediamine salts, and, also, the o- and m -Phenylenediamines, would be im portant in terms of evaluating the safety of 
ingredients in some of the other groups.  
Dr. Belsito said that his Team recommends that the Draft Report on the Phenylenediamines be tabled, pending reorganization 
of the report into five sections (one per ingredient group).  The development of a table indicating the types of data that are available on each hair dye in the five ingredient groups was also recommended.  This table will be provided as a handout to assist the Panel in determining the availability of data on each ingredient.  
The Panel voted unanimously in favor of tabling the Draft Report on Phenylenediamines, pending reorganization of the report into five sections (one per ingredient group).        
Dr. Slaga confirmed that each of the five sections in  the report will be complete, from beginning to end.  He then noted that 4 -
Nitro -m-Phenylenediamine Sulfate is included in Group 3, and wanted to know why it is not included in Group 2.  
Dr. Belsito wanted to know why 4- Nitro -m-Pyhenylenediamine is not included in Group 4.  
Dr. McEwen said that the ingredients are listed on the basis of their chemistry and how they are being used.  He noted that t he 
way in which the meta- Phenylenediamines are being used is different from that of the ortho- Phenylenediamines.  
Dr. McEwen asked for clarification that all of the information on p- Phenylenediamine that exists now will be incorporated into 
the first section of the Draft Report (i.e., Group 1 ingredients), and noted that the same applies to the Nitro -Phenylenediamines 
relative to Group 2.  He added that when the revised Draft Report is completed, this document will supercede previous CIR 
reports.  This means that, at that point in time, it will no longer be necessary to consult previous CIR reports on 
Phenylenediamines for information.  
Dr. Andersen said that the concept of including all of the data on Phenylenediamines from previous CIR reports on these 
ingredients in a single document would create a useful reference document.  
Dr. Marks wanted to make certain that N,N -Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) -p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate will be included in the revised 
document, because this ingredient is included in over 400 cosmetic products.  
Dr. Belsito said that the International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook should be consulted to make sure that 
Phenylenediamines are not missing from the Draft Report.  
Dr. McEwen said that CIR’s cumulative list of safety assessments should also be checked to make sure that all of the 
Phenylenediamines on this list are included in the Draft Repor t as well.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
Dr. Andersen said that it is not expected that the revised Draft Report will be ready for consideration at the August Panel 
meeting.  
Dr. Bergfeld announced that the Draft Report on Phenylenediamines is being tabled.  
 
JUNE 2007  M EETING  – 2ND REVIEW OF PHENYLENE DIAMINE HAIR DYE GRO UP 
Team Minutes Not Available 
Full Panel – June 5, 2007 
Dr. Bergfeld stated that a presentation on Phenylenediamine hair dyes was given on the preceding day.  She noted that the 
presentation focused on reclassificati on of the dyes by type and use.  Drs. Bergfeld and Andersen agreed that the presentation 
was very enlightening.     
Dr. Andersen provided a sense of how the Panel should proceed based on the information that was presented.  He noted that there are groups o f Phenylenediamine hair dyes that can be combined with their salts and reviews could be conducted as the 
groups are formed.  In many cases, these groups will also include other Phenylenediamines for which data will be available, a s 
submitted to the Europea n authorities for their hair dye reviews.  
Dr. Andersen said that there are also Phenylenediamine hair dyes that are not in current use or suspected not to be in current use.  Regarding these, the idea was that there would be very little productivity in co nducting reviews because data will not be 
provided.  
Dr. Andersen said that the other point that was made is that there is likely little ability to extrapolate the toxicity of on e 
Phenylenediamine with different side groups to other Phenylenediamines with d ramatically different side groups.  This fact 
alone argues that separate reports need to be prepared.  Thus, Dr. Andersen noted that this pattern will be followed as CIR moves forward with reviews on Phenylenediamines.  He added that these reviews will be developed for the Panel’s 
consideration as soon as possible, and that at least one report will be included on the agenda for the September 24 -25, 2007 
Panel meeting.  
Dr. Bergfeld said that given the comments and new epidemiology studies that will become available and the Panel’s position statements, this information needs to be organized in a way that would facilitate the Panel’s review.   With this done, it wo uld 
be possible for the Panel to continually access this information easily for future reviews on hair dyes.  
SEPTEMBER 2007 MEETING –
  1ST REVIEW OF P -PHENYLENEDIAMINE AND ITS SALTS  
Team Minutes Not Available 
Full Panel  
Tentative Amended Final Report - safe conclusion, unanimous:  The CIR Expert Panel concluded that p- Phenylenediamine, p -
Phenylenediam ine HCl, and p -Phenylenediamine Sulfate are safe as cosmetic ingredients in the practices of use and 
concentrations described in this safety assessment.  
Dr. Marks: In 1985, the Panel issued a safe report on p- Phenylenediamine.  In 2004, this safety assessm ent was not reopened 
and the Panel reconfirmed that safe conclusion.  Now, we are in a position to add salts procedurally.  
Dr. Belsito: We discussed in our group how to handle, when we are integrating this report, information that we have gotten that sort of updates what was in the old report.  Specifically, the information that we were given as to how p -Phenylenediamine can 
be manufactured and how that differs from what previously was in the report.  
Our Team felt that the old manufacturing information tha t we had should simply be deleted from the new report.  The updated 
methods of manufacture, i.e., the 3 specific ways that p -Phenylenediamine can be manufactured (presented to us yesterday), 
should replace the old information in the text.  We should then go on to point out that it is the assumption of the Panel that 
cosmetic grade p -Phenylenediamine is made by the benzene nitration, without chlorination, which results in a final product that 
does not contain chlorinated compounds such as chloro- and dichlor o- anilines or aminobiphenyls.  
Dr. Marks:  The conclusion that is in the published final report needs to be changed so that it conforms to the current forma t.          
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
The boilerplate relating to ingredients reviewed in a safety assessment that are not cur rently being used that was discussed 
during the Panel’s deliberations on the safety of the PPG Methyl Ethers needs to be included in the discussion section of thi s 
report, considering that it is the Panel’s understanding that p- Phenylenediamine HCl and p -Phenylenediamine Sulfate are not 
being used in cosmetics.  
There was a concern relating to 4 -aminobiphenyl.  Dr. Shank will elaborate.  
Dr. Shank: The following statement should be included in the Discussion: 4- Aminobiphenyl, a known urinary bladder 
carcinoge n, has been found in research grade 1,4 -phenylenediamine. [The reference for this is Turesky et al. 2003].  Cosmetic 
grade p- Phenylenediamine should not contain 4- aminobiphenyl.  
The following correction should be made in the second paragraph of the discuss ion.  Currently, the second sentence reads as 
follows: Phototoxicity and photosensitization data are not available.  But, in fact, we do have such data.  
The sentence should be revised as follows: Phototoxicity and photosensitization data are limited, but s uggest that sensitization 
is about the same with or without UV light. [Dr. Shank noted that the studies that he is referring to are on pages 116 and 11 7. - 
He must mean pages 118 and 119.]  
Dr. Belsito: Statements regarding the hair dye epidemiology boiler plate should be removed from the discussion.  
Dr. Marks: There are a couple of articles reporting cases of depigmentation after exposure to p -Phenylenediamine.  We would 
suggest that we group those articles together and, in the Discussion, they should be ad dressed by saying: Clinically, this has to 
be a very uncommon or rare event and not a significant safety concern.   
 
Dr. Belsito: We did the same thing and actually went  a bit further in the discussion:   It was not clear whether this was vitiligo 
induced by an allergic reaction, true chemical leukoderma, or post- inflammatory, and the nature of this reaction requires further 
study.  
Dr. Belsito: As you said also, it is a v ery rare event.   
Dr. Bergfeld confirmed that all of the skin depigmentation case reports will be grouped under a Skin Depigmentation 
subheading in the section on Case Reports.               
 Dr. Snyder: CTFA will be providing the Panel with a memo with data regarding the DuPont method of manufacture since they 
are the sole source.  He wanted to make sure that it is in the record that the Panel is supposed to receive this.  
Dr. Shank: Is DuPont the sole source for U.S. - made cosmetics or fo all dyes?  
Dr. Jul ie Skare: Dupont is the current global supplier of p- Phenylenediamine.  
Dr. Bergfeld: We will put a reminder here to get that from you so that we have a reference source in house.  
DECEMBER 2007 MEETIN G  –2ND REVIEW OF P- PHENYLE NEDIAMINE AND ITS SALTS  
Team Minutes Not Available  
Full Panel  
Final Report - unanimous  
 Dr. Belsito: The same change in the hair dye epidemiology statement.  
 Dr. Andersen: In listening to the various discussions yesterday, I think that there is an ongoing concern about the data from  the 
FDA Center for Toxicologic Research that looked at actual hair dye products and found 4 -aminobiphenyl in the products.  We 
need to have discussion elements that address the potential concern.  
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine   
Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety Meeting Minutes  
Subsequently, I understand that you learned from DuPont, t he major supplier of p -Phenylenediamine, that the product that is 
sold to cosmetics companies is 99% pure p -Phenylenediamine, which, in that same Turesky study from NCTR, had no 4- ABP 
as part of it.  All of this needs to be presented in the study.  
 
I would  argue along with the Panel’s expression of an expectation that the industry is using the 99% grade product.  Just in case 
there is someone out there who doesn’t get it, this is the Panel’s expectation and it is OK because we have the data.  
 Dr. Bailey: The editorial changes that were talked about yesterday will be incorporated into the text, as it will be released after 
the Panel votes.  
 Dr. Andersen: The other issue that we need to address is what we heard from industry yesterday, which is that there may be 
some further editorial comments, as technical experts from industry look at this document.  
 I don’t see that as a problem as long as the conclusion does not change.  So, the actual issuance of this may not be until af ter 
the 1st of the year.  I will certainly alert the Panel if there is anything substantive.   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote 
 
 
Safety Assessment of p-Phenylenediamine,  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate   
as Used in Cosmetics 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Status:    Draft Amended Report for Panel Review  
Release Date:   November 9, 2023  
Panel Meeting Date:   December 4 -5, 2023  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
The Expert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety members are: Chair, Wilma F. Bergfeld, M.D., F.A.C.P.; Donald V. Belsito, 
M.D.; David E. Cohe n, M.D.; Curtis D. Klaassen, Ph.D.; Allan E. Rettie, Ph.D.; David Ross, Ph.D.; Thomas J. Slaga, Ph.D.; 
Paul W. Snyder, D.V.M., Ph.D.; and Susan C. Tilton, Ph.D .  The Cosmetic Ingredient Review  (CIR) Executive Director is 
Bart Heldreth, Ph.D. , and the Senior Directo r is Monice Fiume.   This safety assessment was prepared by Christina Burnett, 
M.S., Senior Scientific Analyst/Writer.  
 
 
 
© Cosmetic Ingredient Review
 
1620 L Street, NW, Suite 1200  ♢ Washington, DC 20036 -4702 ♢ ph 202.331.065 1 
cirinfo@cir -safety.org   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteABBREVIATIONS  
ADME   absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion  
ALT  alanine aminotransferase  
AST   aspartate aminotransferase  
AUC   area under the curve  
Cmax  peak concentration  
CHL   Chinese hamster lung  
CHO   Chinese hamster ovary  
CI  confidence interval  
CIR  Cosmetic Ingredient Review   
Council   Personal Care Products Council  
CPK   creatine phosphokinase  
CPPD   N-phenyl- N’-cyclohexy l-p-phenylenediamine 
CPSC   Consumer Product Safety Com mission  
CYP   cytochrome P450  
DAPPD   N,N-diacetyl -p-phenylenediamine  
Dictionary    web-based International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook (wINCI) 
DMSO   dimethyl sulfoxide  
dpm  disintegration per min  
EC 3  estimated concentrations of an SI of 3  
ECHA   European Chemicals Agency  
ED 10  threshold value for 10%  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration 
FD&C   Food, Drug and Cosmetic  
GIRDCA   Gruppo Italiano Ricerca Dermatiti da Contatto e Ambientali  
HPLC  high-performance liquid chromatography  
HRIPT   human repea ted insult patch test 
IARC   International Agency for Research on Cancer  
IC50  inhibitory concentration of 50%  
ICDRG   International Contact Dermatitis Research Group  
IPPD   N-isopropyl -N’-phenyl- p-phenylenediamine  
IVDK   Information Network of Departments of Dermatology  
LDH  lactate dehydrogenase  
LLNA  local lymph node assay  
LOAEL  lowest- observed- adverse- effect level  
MAPPD   monoacetyl -p-phenylenediamine  
MTT   3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol -2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl -2H-tetrazolium bromide  
NACDG   North American Contact Dermatitis Group  
NAT   N-acetyltransferase  
NCI  National Cancer Institute  
NIOSH   National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  
NOEL   no-observed -effect level  
NOAEL   no-observed -adverse- effect level  
OECD   Organisation for Economic Co- operation and D evelopment  
OR  odds ratio  
OSHA   Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Panel   Ex pert Panel for Cosmetic Ingredient Safety  
PEL  permissible exposure limit  
pet.  petrolatum  
REACH   Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals  
REL   recommended exposure limit 
ROS   reactive oxygen species  
SCCNFP   Scientific Committee on Cosmetic and Non -Food Products  
SCCP   Scientific Committee on Consumer Products  
SCCS   Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety  
SED  systemic exposure dose  
SGOT   serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 
SGPT   serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase 
SI  stimulation index  
Tmax  time-to-peak concentration  
TC 50  50% toxic concentration  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTG  test guideline  
TRUE   thin-layer rapid -use epicutaneous  
TWA   time-weighted average  
VCRP   Voluntary Cosmetic Registration Program  
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteINTRODUCTION  
This assessment reviews the safety of p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate 
as used in cosmetic formulations.  According to the web- based International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook  
(wINCI; Dictionary ; see Table 1), these ingredients function as hair colorants in cosmetic products .1   
The Expert Panel for Cosmetic Safety (Panel) first  reviewed  the safety of p-Phenylenediamine individually in a report  
published in 1985, with the conclusion  “p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some persons may be sensitized under 
intended conditions of use.  For those persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concludes that p -Phenylenediamine is safe as a 
hair dye ingredient at the current concentrations of use. ”2  This con clusion was reaffirmed in a re- review that was published 
in 2006.3   
Subsequently, th e p-Phenylenediamine report was reopened to add p -Phenylenediamine HCl and p-Phenylenediamine  
Sulfate.  The amended report  was finalized in 2007 , with the conclusion that these ingredients are safe as hair dyes in the 
practices of use and concentration as described in the safety assessment.4  Excerpts from the summaries of the 1985 and 2007 
reports  are disseminated throughout the text of this re -review document, as appropriate, and are identified by italicized text .   
This safety assessment includes relevant published and unpublished data that are available for each endpoint that is 
evaluated.  Published data are identified by conducting an extensive search of the world’s literature; this se arch was last 
performed October 2023 .  A listing of the search engines and websites that are used and the sources that are typically 
explored, as well as the endpoints that the Panel  typically evaluates, is provided on the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) 
website ( https://www.cir -safety.org/supplementaldoc/preliminary -search -engines -and-websites ; https://www.cir -
safety.org/supplementaldoc/cir -report -format -outline ).  Unpublished data are provided by the cosmetics industry, as well as 
by other interested parties.  
Some  ch emical and toxicological data on p -Phenylenediamine and the hydro chloride and sulfate salts  included in this 
safety assessment were obtained from robust summaries of data submitted to the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA)  by 
companies as part of the Regi stration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) chemical 
registration process.5,6  Additionally, data were obtained from opinions produced  by the Scientific Committee on Cosmetic 
and Non -Food Products (SCCNFP), Scientific Committee on Consumer Products (SCCP), and Scientific Committee on 
Consumer Safety (SCCS) of the European Commissi on.7-9  These data summaries  are available on the databases for ECHA 
and the European Commission, respectively, and when deemed appropriate, information from the summaries has been 
included in this report.  
CHEMISTRY  
Definition  and Structure  
The definitions and structures of p-Phenyle nediamine (CAS No. 106-50-3), p-Phenylenediamine HCl (CAS No. 624- 18-
0) and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  (CAS No. 16245 -77-5; 50994 -40-6) are provided  in Table 1.1   
 
Figure 1.  p-Phenylenediamine 
 
In the permanent hair dyeing process, p-Phenylenediamine acts as the primary intermediate or precursor  in formulation 
with a coupling agent (e.g. , resorcinol) in an alkaline medium (ammonia) prior to mixing with a hydrogen peroxide 
solut ion.10,11  Under the alkaline conditions in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, p-Phenylenediamine is oxidized to produce 
quinone diimine, reacts with the coupling agent to form the leuco dye.  This is then converted into the indoaniline dye withi n 
the hair strand.   
Chemical Properties  
Aromatic amines, such as p- Phenylenediamine, are nonpolar bases that are readily converted to highly water -soluble 
hydrochloride salts.2  Whereas the salts of aromatic amines are relatively stable, free aromatic amines are usually quite 
unstable to light, heat, and oxygen and oxidize to colored quinoneimines, quinones, and various polymerized products.  When used in hair dyes, the amines are usually mixed with hydrogen peroxide immediately before use, producing the oxidation products.  The oxidation products then react with sulfhydryl groups present in the hair to form permanent bonds.  
p-Phenylenediamines  and their oxidation products  are highly reactive substances that would be expected to react with 
tissue  nucleophiles, causing various biological effects.  Aromatic amines can undergo both N-hydroxylation and ring 
epoxidation.   N-Hydroxylation and epoxidation are steps in the metabolic activation of aromatic  hydrocarbons to mutagens 
and carcinogens. Phenylenediamine compounds  are also potent antioxidants.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine occurs in the for m of white to light purple monoclinic crystals.  It is soluble in water, alcohol, 
ether, benzene, chloroform, and acetone and is insoluble in caustic soda.  The compound reacts with oxidizing materials.  On 
exposure to  air, p-Phenylenediamine oxidizes to form a purple or black color.  Brown and black colors can  also develop 
when the compound is exposed to 5 % iron (III) chloride and 3% hydrogen peroxide solutions, respectively.  Quinoneimine 
compounds resulting from the oxidation of p-Phenylenediamine  may hy drolyze in aqueous media to yield p -benzoquinone 
and ammonia. P-Phenylenediamine  is combustible and, when heated, emits highly toxic fumes of  nitrogen compounds. 
Degradation following exposure to activated sludge microorganisms  has also been reported. 
Chem ical properties for p-Phenylenediamine and the related  hydrochloride  and sulfate salts are summarized in Table 2.  
The estimated and experimental log P ow values for p-Phenylenediamine  are -0.31 and -0.86, respectively.  
Method of Manufacture  
p-Phenylenediamine  is prepared by reducing p- dinitrobenzene with iron and hydrochloric acid, or by reducing 
p-nitroaniline with the one of the following: iron and hydrochloric  acid; iron, ammonium polysulfide and hydrogen; or iron 
and ferrous chloride.2  The resulting material can be purified by crystal lization.   
Additional data indicate that p- Phenylenediamine is manufactured using the following methods: reduction of 
p-nitroaniline, aniline diazotizati on, and direct nitration of benzene without chlorinating.4  The th ird method does not lend 
itself to and has not been shown to contain chlorinated compounds such as chloro - and dichloroanilines or aminobiphenyls.  
Impurities  
p-Phenylenediamine produced in the US has a purity of > 99% for use in hair dyes via the process of direct nitration of 
benzene without chlorinating.4  This proces s does not lend itself to the formation of aminobiphenyl compounds, and not by 
the aniline diazotization process.  
p-P henylenediamine  
According to the SCCP, the purity of p-Phenylenediamine (determined by high- performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC))  is > 99%.7  Impurities  of p-Phenylenediamine (reported as specification limits) include  o-aminophenol (< 500 ppm), 
o-phenylenediamine (< 200 ppm), m-phenylenediamine (< 200 ppm), and aniline (< 50 ppm).  Content analysis of 4 batches 
of p-Phenylenediamine reported the impurity content as 19 0 – 400 µg/g o-aminophenol, < 10 – 120 µg/g o-phenylene -
diamine, 6 5 – 140 µg/g m-phenylenediamine, and 50 – 100 µg/g aniline.  Solvent content was reported to be < 100 ppm.  
Heavy metal content was < 5 ppm each for mercury, arsenic, and antimony, < 10 ppm cadmium, and < 20 ppm lead.  
p-P henylenediamine HCl  
According to the SCCP , the relative purity of p-Phenylenediam ine HCl (determined by HPLC)  is > 99%.7  
USE  
Cosmetic  
The safety of the cosmetic ingredients addressed in this assessment is evaluated based on data received from the US 
Food and Drug Administration ( FDA) and the cosmetics industry on the expected use of these ingredients in cosmetics, and 
does not cover their use in airbrush delivery systems.  Data are submitted by the cosmetic industry via the FDA Voluntary 
Cosmetic Registration Program (VCRP) database (frequency of use) and in response to a survey conducted by the Personal 
Care Products Council (Council) (maximum use concentrations).  The data are provided by cosmetic product categories, 
based on 21CFR Part 720.  For most cosmetic product categories,  21CFR Part 720 does not indicate type of application and, 
therefore, airbrush application is not considered.  Airbrush delivery systems are within the purview of the US Consumer 
Product Safety Commission (CPSC), while ingredients, as used in airbrush delivery systems, are within the jurisdiction of the 
FDA.  Airbrush delivery system  use for cosmetic application has not been evaluated by the CPSC, nor has the use of 
cosmetic ingredients in airbrush technology been evaluated by the FDA.  Moreover, no consume r habits and practices data or 
particle size data are publicly available to evaluate the exposure associated with this use type, thereby preempting the abil ity 
to evaluate risk or safety.   
According to the 2023 VCRP survey data, p-Phenylenediamine  is reported to be used in 200 formulations  (Table 3 ).12  
The majority of these uses are in hair coloring preparations; however, 7 uses have been reported for eye makeup preparations.   
With regard to the reported use in eye makeup preparations, the US Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) 
mandates that color additives must be approved by FDA for their intended use before they are used.  p-Phenylenediamine is 
an unapproved color additive in cosmetics products, and thereby, such use is not permitted.  This use is not within the  
purview of this Panel.    
Only 1 use was reported in a hair coloring shampoo for p-Phenylenediamine HCl and no uses were reported for the 
sulfate salt.  The frequenc ies of use  for p-Phenylenediamine have greatly decreased since the initial amended report was 
finalized; in 2007, p-Phenylenediamine was reported to have 1497 uses, all in hair coloring formulations.4  No uses were 
reported at that time for the related salts.   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteThe results of the concentration of use survey conducted by the Council in 2022 indicate p-Phenylenediamine has a 
maximum concentration of use range of 0.98 - 3% in hair dyes, with a maximum on- head concentration after dilution of 
1%.13  No concentrations of use were reported for related salts.  In the 2007 amended report, the maximum concentration of 
uses range for p-Phenylenediamine was 2 - 4% in hair dyes; the  hydrochloride  salt and the sulfate salt were each reported to 
be used at a maximum concentration of 6% in hair dyes.4  
Although products containing this ingredient may be marketed for use with airbrush delivery systems, this information 
is not available from the VCRP or the Council survey. Without information regarding the frequency and  concentrations of 
use of this ingredient (and without consumer habits and practices data or particle size data related to this use technology),  the 
data are insufficient to evaluate the exposure resulting from cosmetics applied via airbrush delivery syste ms. 
This ingredient is  considered a coal tar hair dye for which regulations require caution statements and instructions 
regarding patch tests in order to be exempt from certain adulteration and color additive provisions of the FD&C  Act.  In 
order to be exempt, the following caution statement must be displayed on all coal tar hair dye products:  
Caution – this product contains ingredients which may cause skin irritation on certain individuals and a preliminary test 
according to accompanying directions should be made.  This product must not be used for dyeing the eyelashes or 
eyebrows; to do so may cause blindness.  
Product labels shall also bear patch test instructions for determining whether the product causes skin irritation.  
However, whether or not patch testing prior to use is appropriate is not universally agreed upon.  The Panel recommends that 
an open patch test be applied and evaluated by the beautician and/or consumer for sensitization 48 h after application of the  
test material and prior to the use of  a hair dye formulation.  Conversely, a report in Europe suggests that self -testing has 
severe limitations, and may even cause morbidity in consumers.14,15  Hair dye products marketed and sold in the US, though, 
must follow the labeling requirements established by the FD&C  Act. 
Under European regulations for cosmetic ingredients, p -Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and 
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate are listed in Annex III  with the restrictions  that these ingredients may be used at only up to 6% 
(free base) in oxidizing hair dyes, these ingredients should not be used on eyebrows, and these ingredients are for 
professional use only.16  Annex III has been amended with the restriction that p-Phenylenediamine and its hydro chloride and 
sulfate salts may be used in products intended for coloring eyelashes after mixing under oxidative conditions and the 
maximum concentration applied to eyelashes must not exceed 2% (free base); application is for professional use only.17  
Based on a toxicokinetic -based approach margin of safety  calculation, exposure time, and exposure type (mainly to a 
non-mutagenic, detoxified metabolite ), the SCCS ex pressed no concern regarding systemic toxicity to use of 
p-Phenylenediamine in oxidat ive hair dyes at on -head concentrations of up to 2.0%.8  Further, t he SCCS has determined that 
no conclusion with regard to carcinogenicity of p-Phenylenediamine as used in oxidative hair dye formulations can be drawn.  
However, based on toxicokinetic and genotoxicity  data, the SCCS decided it was unlikely that p -Phenylenediamine as used in 
hair dye formulations would pose a carcinogenic risk for consumers.  Additionally, the SCCS found that p-Phenylenediamine 
in hair dyes remains a considerable concern  for consumer safety.   
Non-Cosmetic  
In addition to its cosmetic use in permanent hair coloring formulations, p -Phenylenediamine is used as a photographic 
developing agent, a dye developer for furs, an industrial chemical intermediate, an intermediate in t he preparation of 
antioxidants and rubber accelerators, and as an antioxidant for rubber in sewer pipe joints.2  p-Phenylenediamine  is also 
used in x -ray film fluids, printer’s ink, clothing, shoes, leather processing, lithographic processing, photochemical 
measurements, rubber vulcanization, printing of cellulosic textile mater ials, dye stuff manufacture, and production of poly -
paraphenylene terephthalamide . 
Chemical and biochemical applications of p -Phenylenediamine include use as an indicator and reagent for nitrogen, as 
a chromogenic spray reagent for thin- layer chromatography, and as a hydrogen donor for peroxidase assay systems.2  
p-Phenylenediamine is also used for removing nitrogen and sulfur oxides from waste gases and for the calorimetric 
determination of hydrogen sulfide in air, thiocyanate in biological fluids, and inorganic phosphorus in serum.  Other 
applications include use as a substrate to measure the activity of oxidative enzymes , and as a staining agent for biological 
materials . 
The hydrochloride salt of p- Phenylenediamine is used as an analytical reagent in the testing of blood, hydrogen sulfide,  
amyl alcohol, and milk and as a color and pigment  intermediate in fur and textile dyeing.2  It is also used in the  manufacture 
of rubber and plastics.  Derivatives of p- Phenylenediamine  are important antioxidants in synthetic  and natural rubbers, 
petroleum products, cellulose ethers,  and alfalfa meal. 
TOXICOKINETIC  STUDIES 
p-Phenylenediamine is absorbed and excreted by both animals and humans.2  Radioactivity was foun d in the blood of 
rabbits after the intravenous and dermal administration of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine.  Radioactivity was distributed 
throughout the body and in the blood after the intravenous and topical administration of p -Phenylenediamine to mice.  In 
dogs, p -Phenylenediamine was found in the blood after topical and intravenous administration and was excreted in the urine 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteafter topical and subcutaneous administration .  Radiolabeled [14C]p-Phenylenediamine was applied topically to humans and 
radioactivity was found in the urine.  When a hair dye containing [14C]p-Phenylenediamine was used on monkeys and by 
humans, radioactivity was detected in the hair and in the urine.  Radiolabeled [14C]p-Phenylenediamine was administered to 
rabbits by subconjunctival inj ection,  intravitreal injection, eyedrops, and subcutaneous injection into the  head. Rapid 
clearance of radioactivity from the site of administration was observed.   Radiol abeled p- Phenylenediamine was administered 
intraperitoneally to rats , and radioactivity was distributed throughout  the body and excreted in the urine, feces, and bile. 
N,N’ -diacetyl -p-phenylenediamine  (DAPPD) , p-aminoacetanilide, and unchanged p- Phenylenediamine were identified as 
urinary metabolites.  
Dermal Penetration  
In V itro  
p-Phenylenediamine  
The percutaneous  absorption of a homologous series of hair dyes ( p-Phenylenediamine included) was studied using  
human epidermis from  abdominal skin.18  Circular pieces of s kin were clamped between two halves of a diffusion cell and 
aqueous solutions  of the hair dyes were applied.  The volume applied (0.5 ml)  completely covered the 1.13 cm2 of exposed 
skin in  each cell.  Permeability constants were determined by  dividing the steady -state absorption rate by the initial  vehicle 
concentration of the applied compound.   Octanol/water partition coefficients were determined by  shaking the test compound 
in a mixture containing 5 ml of  water and 5 ml of octanol.  At the end of 24 h, the ratio  of the amount of dye in each solvent 
was determined.   An octanol/water partition coefficient of 0.5 and a  permeability constant of 2.4 x 10-4 cm/h were reported 
for p-Phenylenediamine.   
The percutaneous absorption potential over 48 h of  [14C]p-Phenylenediamine  was evaluated under 5 different dosing 
conditions.9  Franz static cells with human skin were utilized.  Receptor fluid was Dulbecco ’s phosphate buffered saline 
containing antioxidant.  The 5 dosing conditions were as follows:  
• 100 mg/cm2 of 1.3% p-Phenylenediamine and other dyes in the presence of developer, but absence of hair  
• 100 mg/cm2 of 1.3% p-Phenylenediamine and other dyes in the presence of developer and hair  
• 100 mg/cm2 of 2.7% p-Phenylenediamine, but no other dyes, developer, or hair  
• 20 mg/cm2 of 2.7% p-Phenylenediamine, but no other dyes, developer, or hair  
• 100 mg/cm2 of 1.3% p-Phenylenediamine, but no other dyes, developer, or hair  
The first dosing condition included 30 cells, the remaining 4 had 15 cells each.  The human hair (5 mg/cm2) in the second 
dosing condition was placed on the skin surface before addition of the formulation.  
The skin penetration was between 0.1 and 0.2% of the applied dose.  This corresponded to a cumulative mass absorbed 
of about 1.9 – 2.4 μg/cm2 for the complete dye formulations.  The amount of r adioactive material found in the skin itself 
ranged from 0.65 to 6.72 µg/cm2 (0.04 -0.5%).  The maximum cumulative absorption of p-Phenylenediamine for all 
formulations occurred 4 h post- application.   Permeation was concentration - and dose -related.  The pr esence of hair on the 
surface did not significantly affect the permeation process.  A greater amount of p-Phenylenediamine was found on or in the 
skin (but not in the receptor fluid) when it was applied in the presence of developer and other dyes and in the presence of 
hair.  The recovery rate was determined to be between 83.6 and 104%.9  
p-P henylenediamine HCl  
The percutaneous absorption of a commercial [14C]p-Phenylenediamine HCl -containing oxidative hair dye was 
investigated using human and pig ear skin.19  To a hair dye formulation containing 3. 68% cold p -Phenylenediamine HCl , 
0.3% of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine HCl was directly added resulting in an isotopic formulation containing 3.98% 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl with a specific activity of 1 mCi/g .  The developer was 6% hydrogen peroxide .  After mixing an 
equal part of formulation and developer, the  specific activity of the formulation applied was 999 disintegration per min 
(dpm)/µg.  The test material (20 mg/ cm2) was applied to the human and pig ear skin samples in static diffusion cells (2 cm2) 
for 0.5 h.  The receptor fluid was Dulbecco modified phosphate buffered saline solution.  At the end of the exposure time, the  
skin was washed,  and the diffusion was allowed to continue for 24 h prior to radioactivity analysis.  
For the human skin,  the total absorbed amount was 2.4 ± 1.6% (10.6 ± 6.7 µg eq/cm2) of the applied dose .  The majority 
of the radioactivity was recovered in the surface excess (98.8 ± 5.9%), with 1.28 ± 0.59%, 1.29 ± 0.54%, and 1.14 ± 1.15% 
recovered in the stratum corneum, epidermis/dermis, and receptor fluid, respectively.  For the pig ear skin, the total absorbed 
amount was 3.4 ± 1.7% (14.6 ± 6.9 µg eq/cm2).  Again, the majority of the radioactivity was recovered in the surface exces s 
(92.4 ± 3.0%), with 1.69 ± 0.72%, 3.05 ± 1.49%, and 0.33 ± 0.19% recovered in the stratum corneum, epidermis/dermis, and 
receptor fluid, respectively.19   
Human  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl  
The percutaneous absorption of a commercial [14C]p-Phenylenediamine HCl-containing oxidative hair dye was 
investigated in 8 male volunteers.19  The tested material was prepared as an isotopic dilution of 1.6 MBq 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote[14C]p-Phenylenediamine HCl with 40 ml of a commercial dark shade oxidative hair dye formulation containing 3.98% cold 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl and 2.0% m-aminophenol.  The actual content of p-Phenylenediamine HC l in the hair dye 
formulation after isotopic dilution and prior to mixing with the developer (6% hydrogen peroxide) was about 4%.  The 
specific activity of the formulation applied was a mean total of 7.14 ± 0.26 x 107 dpm, corresponding to a mean value of 1.31 
± 0.05 g eq [14C]p-Phenylenediamine HCl per volunteer, ranging from 1.22 to 1.36 g eq [14C]p-Phenylenediam ine HCl.  
The hair of the volunteers was cut to a standard length, dyed (30 min development) , washed, dried, clipped, and 
collected.  The hair, washing water, materials used in the study (gloves, paper towels, caps, etc.), and a 24 -h scalp wash were 
collect ed for determination of radioactivity.  Blood, urine, and feces were analyzed up to 120 h after hair dyeing.  The 
recovery rate was 95.7 ± 1.5% of the applied radioactivity .  The washing water, cut hair, materials used in the study, and the 
scalp wash cont ained a total of 95.16 ± 1.46% of the applied radioactivity.  Absorbed radioactivity was determined to be 0.50 
± 0.24% in the urine and 0.04 ± 0.04% in the feces, which corresponds  to a mean of 7.0 ± 3.4 mg eq of 
[14C]p-Phenylenediamine absorbed.  Most of the radioactivity was eliminated within 24 h of application.  The peak 
concentration ( Cmax) of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine  HCl in the plasma was 0.087 µg eq/ml, the  time-to-peak concentration T max 
was approximately 2 h, and the mean the area under the curve (AUC )0–12 h was 0.67 µg eq h/ml.19 
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion (ADME)  
In V itro  
p-Phenylenediamine  
The capacity for N-acetylation of p-Phenylenediamine  in human skin samples was investigated .20  p-Phenylenediamine 
was acetylated to monoacetyl -p-phenylenediamine (MAPPD), which in turn was acetylated to DAPPD. This was  determined 
using cytosolic fractions from human skin (n = 9) and cultured normal human epidermal keratinocytes (n = 7).  
In a biotransformation study using  reconstructed human epidermis and human hepatocytes , [14C]p-Phenylenediamine 
was converted to MAPPD and DAPPD derivatives.21  At higher concentrations of  [14C]p-Phenylenediamine (250 to 1000 
µM), the epidermis and the hepatocytes produced more of the MAPPD.  However, concentrations below 250 µM favored the 
formation of the DAPPD metabolite.   When compared to the epidermis, the capacity of human he patocytes for generation of 
MAPPD and DAPPD was 3 -fold and 8-fold greater, respectively.   There was no evidence that [14C]p-Phenylenediamine was 
transformed to N-hydroxylated derivatives in the epidermis or hepatocytes.   
Intact human hepatocytes, human liver microsomes, and heterologously expressed human cytochrome P450s (CYPs) 
were utilized to determine whether  [14C]p-Phenylenediamine is metabolized by hepatic CYPs to form an N -hydroxylamine.22  
Cryopreserved human hepatocytes were obtained from 4 male donors.   [14C]p-Phenylenediamine was N-acetylated by hu man 
hepatocytes to form N-acetylated metabolites.  However, there was no evidence for the formation of mono -oxygenated 
metabolites or for enzyme -mediated covalent binding of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine to microsomal protein.  Unlike [14C]p-
Phenylenediamine, 2 -aminofluorene underwent CYP mediated metabolism to 4 different hydroxylated metabolites.   
Animal  
Dermal  
p-P henylenediamine HCl  
The metabolic profile in plasma of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine  HCl was investigated following a single occlusive dermal 
application at 49.9 mg/kg bw in 3 male and 3 female Sprague- Dawley rats for 4  h.7  The solvent was 40% ethanol.  The levels 
of radioactivity in the plasma collected at the end of the exposure period were 1412 and 7401 ng eq/g for males and females, 
respectively.  The observed radi oactivity corresponded to DAPPD only.    
Oral  
p-P henylenediamine  
The absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of p-Phenylenediamine was studied using male and female 
Fischer 344 rats and male and female B6C3F 1 mice.23  The test material was dissolved in a solution of (1:1) ethanol and 
polyoxyethylated castor oil ; water was added to yield a final solvent ratio of 1:1:8.  Radiolabeled test material was diluted, as  
needed, with nonlabelled p-Phenylenediamine to administer 15 µCi/kg at each dose level.  The doses administered orally 
were 60 and 600 µmol/kg in 1 m l/kg of the dosing solution.  Each mean value relating to the distribution or excretion of p-
Phenylenediam ine-derived radioactivity was obtained with 3 animals  each at time points from 15 min to 3 d after 
administration . 
In rats and mice (both sexes of each species), p-Phenylenediamine was readily absorbed, distributed to all major tissues 
examined, and metabo lized to several metabolites (metabolites not described).  These metabolites were rapidly cleared from 
the body mainly through the urine, and, to a lesser extent, through the feces.  Absorption was described as rapid, and, in most 
cases, excretion in urine  was more than 90% complete within the first 24 h.  Male mice had higher test material -derived 
radioactivity concentrations in the liver, whereas  females had higher concentrations in muscle.  When residual concentrations 
of test material -derived radioactivity in the tissues of mice and rats were compared, the values were found to be in the same 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoterange, except for the kidney and muscle.  The kidney contained lower concentrations in both sexes of mice, and the muscle 
contained lower concentrations in male mice .23 
p-P henylenediamine HCl  
Plasma pharmacokinetics of total radioactivity was investigated following single oral gavage administration of 
[14C]p- radioactivity versus tim e profiles showed a fast absorption phase ( Tmax = 0.5 h) with a C max of 7.12 µg/ml for males  
and 6.88 µg/ml for females.  A regular decrease in radioactivity levels was observed until the end of the end of the 24-h 
period.  The respective plasma AUC 0-t was 24.85 µg eqh/ml and 27.30 µg eqh/ml for males  and females , respectively.  The mean 
recovery of administered radioactivity in 24 h for males and females, respectively, was as follows:  74.4 and 81.0% in urine, 
19.3 and 13.8% in feces, 3.1  and 4.8% in cage wash, and 7.0 and 4.7% in carcasses.   Total recovery was 103.8% in males and 
104.4% in females.  
In another 24 h study of  the plasma pharmacokinetics and mass balance, total radioactivity was measured  following a 
single oral administration of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine  HCl in water (dose = 4 mg/kg) to male and female Sprague -Dawley 
rats.7  Following oral gavage, the mean plasma radioactivity levels after 0.5 h increased rapidly to C max values of 4.10 µg/ml  
and 3.73 µg/ml  for males and females, respectively.  A regular decrease in radioactively levels  was observed during the 
remaining time, with  0.015 µg/ml and 0.022 µg/ml for males and females, respectively , observed at 24 h .  The mean r ecovery 
of radioacti vity in the 24 -h period for males and females, respectively, was as follows:  57.0 and 60.1% in urine, 23.7  and 
19.3% in feces, 7.3 and 8.3% in cage wash, and 3.7 and 4.2% in carcasses .  Total recovery was 91.8% in males and 92.0% in 
females.  
In a an oral study, p-Phenylenediamine  HCl (60 mg, with 10 ml of water) was administered to  male and female rabbits  
(number and strain not reported).24 Following administration, p-Phenylenediamine and its metabolites were measured in the 
serum.  Serum concentrations varied from 0.018 to 0.213 µg/ml for p -Phenylenediamine, 0.030 to 0.111 µg/ml for MAPPD , 
and 0.85 to 3.02 µg/ml for DAPPD .  The levels of metabolites peaked during the first 0.5 -h collection interval.   Maximum 
absorption of p-Phenylenediamine (2.20 µg/ml) occurred at 1.5 h post -administration.  Within 24 h after oral dosing, 86% of 
administered p-Phenylenediamine was found in the urine, 10% was found in the feces, and 4% wa s found in the blood.  The 
major metabolite was DAPPD  and the minor metabolite was N -acetyl -p-phenylenediamine.   
Othe Exposure Routes  
p-P henylenediamine  
In the study of  p-Phenylenediamine in male and female Fischer 344 rats and male and female B6C3F 1 mice  described 
above, the test material was also administered in travenously at a dose of 600 µmol/kg in the tail  vein.23  The test material 
preparation and animal analysis w ere performed in a similar  manner.  The authors of the studies noted that excretion was not 
greatly affected by the route of administration.  
The excretion and distribution of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine in male rats ( number and strain not specified) were deter mined 
for a 72 -h period after a single 10 mg/kg intraperitoneal  dose.5 The vehicle was Tween 20 and 1.15% saline (20:80).  This 
study was performed in accordance with Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development ( OECD ) test guideline  
(TG) 417.  Approximately 50% of the dose was excreted in the urine and 35% in the feces . Approximately 3  – 4% of the dose 
remained in the animal  after 72 h.   
Human  
Dermal  
p-P henylenediamine  
In a metabolism study conducted on 5 female volunteers who were long- time us ers of oxidative hair dyeing products, of 
the urine  (following enzymatic hydrolysis)  of each subject was analyzed.25  The p-Phenylenediamine content of the products 
habitually used by the subjects ranged from 0.54 to 2.52%.  The study utilized the same formulations the subjects regularly use with unlabeled p-Phenylenediamine.  The dying procedure was performed by a professional hairdresser according to the 
instructions provided by the manufacturer of the formulation.  Prior to application, the subjects provided a urine sample to serve as an analytical blank.  Several metabolites of p -Phenylenediamine were hydrolyzed to free p-Phenylenediamine. The 
author s monitored the excretion of metabolites 24 or 48 h after application of the dye. The major metabolite that was 
determined using this approach was DAPPD.  Approximately 80% of the p-Phenylenediamine recovered after flash 
hydrolysis was from the hydrolysis of DAPPD . The excretion of the p-Phenylenediamine derivatives began shortly after the 
dyeing procedure was terminated.  Approximately 85% of the amount that could be recovered during 48 h was recovered during the first 24 h.  
Urinary  [
14C]metabolites  and N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) genotype were profiled in 8 male  subjects after treatment 
with a dark -shade oxidative hair  dye containing  [14C]p-Phenylenediamine.26  The oxidative  dye (70 ml; corresponding to a 
mean of 1.31 ± 0.05 geq. [14C]p-Phenylenediamine per subject) was applied  to the hair for 30  min.  Application was followed 
by rinsing and washing with water and shampoo. The  radioactivity of the  formulation applied to the hair amounted to a mean 
total of  7.14 ± 0.26 x 107 dpm per subject. Urine fractions were  collected from th e subjects for 120 h following hair dye  
treatment at 4 -h intervals for up to 14 h, followed by  collection at 12 -h intervals.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteGenotyping identified 3 subjects as slow acetylators, and 5  subjects were classified as intermediate NAT2 acetylators.   
The subjects excreted a mean total of 0.43 ± 0.24% of the  applied carbon -14 radiolabel in the urine within 24 h after 
treatment,  and MAPPD and DAPPD (considered major urinary  metabolites, present in all urine samples; accounted for 80  to 
95% of the total urina ry radioactivity ) were two of the  metabolites that were identified.  Another metabolite,  possibly a 
glucuronic acid conjugate, was i dentified (in 6/8  urine samples, amounting to 5 to 13% of total urinary  radioactivity ).  All of 
the metabolites appeared to have been related to  [14C]p-Phenylenediamine.   High molecular weight dye  intermediates  or 
corresponding metabolites were not found.  
Regarding the metabolite profile for the subjects, there were  no significant differences between the NAT2 intermediate 
and the NAT2 slow acetylator subgroups.  The urine of the  NAT2 slow acetylators contained MAPPD at a mean  
concentration of 42.2 ± 10.2% and DAPPD at a mean  concentration of 54.1 ± 7.6% of the total urinary  radioactivity.  The 
corresponding mean values for the  intermediate acetylators were 46.0 ± 8.9% and 45.7 ± 9.9%,  respectively.  The results of 
this study suggest that the  human acetylation rate of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine after  topical application is independent of the 
NAT2 genotype  status, most likely due to metabolism by epidermal NAT 1 prior to systemic absorption .26  
In urine samples from 5 volunteers (2 males, 3 females) who had used a commercial  hair dye containing 1.1 to 1.6 g of 
p-Phenylenediamine , the major metabolite was DAPPD.24  This metabolite  was excreted in the urine for 42 h after hair 
dyeing.  The average amount of metabolite excreted was 0.14 µg/ml per person . 
In a human systemic exposure study , a group of 16 volunteers received a single application of an oxidative  hair coloring  
product by professional  hairdressers.8  The dye applied contained on- head concentrations of [14C]p-Phenylenediamine  
(1.0%),  resorcinol (0.5%) , and m-aminophenol (0.5%).  The exposure time was 30 min.   At the end of the exposure time,  the 
dye was rinsed off, and the  hair was shampooed, dried, and clipped.  Skin tape stripping was performed on a  representative 
area of exposed scalp surface.  Urine was collected quantitatively for 48 h  post-exposure, blood samples were taken at pre-
test and at 2, 4, 6, 10, 24 and 48 h.  A protective cap was worn for 48 h to collect residues in scalp skin scales.  The urine and 
plasma was analyzed  for p-Phenylenediamine , MAPPD, DAPPD, trimers, and respective potential  N-mono - and N,N’-
diacetylated metabolites of the dye trimers.   
The overall mass balance obtained in this study was 96.21 ± 1.57%.  The bulk of radioactivity was recovered in washing 
water and hair, which contained means of 64.6  and 30.2% of the applied radioactivity, res pectively.  Urinary excretion of 
[14C]p-Phenylenediamine equivalents represented 0.88 ± 0.46% of the applied radioactivity.  In all plasma samples,  p-
Phenylenediamine and MAPPD levels were below respective lower limits of quantification (< 500 pg/m l and <  1000 pg/m l, 
respectively) , whereas significant amounts of DAPPD  were found in the plasma from 2 to 48 h.  Plasma kinetic mean data 
yielded a C max of 97.4  ± 61.5 ng/m l, a T max of 2 h, and a n AUC 0-∞ of 966 ± 575 ng * h /ml, respectively.   Some kinetic data 
indicate considerable differences between individuals (up to 11 -fold). 
Scalp stratum corneum residues collected by skin stripping contained mainly p-Phenylenediamine .  Only DAPPD was 
found in the plasma; p-Phenylenediamine o r MAPPD  were not  detected (0.5 and  1.0 ng/m l lower limits of quantification, 
respectively).  Hair dye reaction  products, i.e. , trimers  or mono - or diacetylated metabolites  of trimers , were not detected in 
most plasma samples.  A few samples  occasionally contained traces of trimers or  mono- or diacetylated trimers slightly 
above their lower limits of quantification (0.1 – 0.32 ng/m l), suggesting negligible systemic exposure to these compounds.  
Urine samples mainly contained DAPPD  (>99% of the substances found);  some samples also contained ve ry low levels of p-
Phenylenediamine  (mean <0.3%) or MAPPD (mean <0.2%).  Hair dye reaction products were  generally not detectable in 
urine samples.  In a few samples, traces of trimers  and mono- acetylated trimers were detected in the 0  – 12 h urine samples . 
When comparing human systemic exposure levels of reaction products with that of DAPPD,  exposure to reaction products  
was 3 to 4 orders of magnitude lower.   Some kinetic data indicate considerable differences between individuals (up to 16-
fold).8 
In a study performed in the same manner as described above, 16 volunteers received an oxidative hair dye containing 
rad
iolabeled 2% p -Phenylenediamine , as well as resorcinol (1.0%) and m-aminophenol  (1.0%).8  The overall mass balance 
obtained in this study was 94.30 ± 3.01%.  The bulk of  radioactivity was recovered in washing water and hair, which 
contained a mean of  61.5 and 31.7% of the applied radioactivity, respectively.   Urinary excretion represented 0.72 ± 0.25% of 
the applied radioactivity.  Plasma kinetic mean data yielded a C max of 132.6 ± 52 ng/m l, a T max of 2 h, and an AUC 0-∞ of 1415 
± 592 ng  * hr/m l, respectively.  
TOXICOLOGICA L STU DIES  
Acute Toxicity  Studies  
No signs of toxicity were observed when dry p -Phenylenediamine or a 10% alcoholic solution of p- Phenylenediamine 
was applied to a 25 cm2 area of the skin of rabbits.2  The dermal  LD 50 for rabbits of a hair dye composite containing 1.2% p -
Phenylenediamine was greater than 10 g/kg.  Edema and focal necrosis were observed in rats following skin applications of 
1 to 5 mg p- Phenylenediamine ; similar reactions were reported for subcutaneous administration of 1 to 5% p -
Phenylenediamine HCl in 0.9% sodium chloride .  Acute oral toxicities of p -Phenylenediamine and p -Phenylenediamine HCl 
and formulations containing these ingredients have been studied in rats, rabbits, cats, and dogs.  The acute o ral LD 50 of p-
Phenylenediamine for rats ranged from 80 to 98 mg/kg; p- Phenylenediamine was classified as moderately toxic .  The acute 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteintraperitoneal LD 50 of an aqueous p-Phenylenediamine solution for rats was 37  mg/kg.  The subcutaneous minimum lethal 
doses of p-Phenylenediamine were 170 mg/kg for  rats, 200 mg /kg for rabbits, and 100 mg/kg for dogs .  Intraperitoneal 
administration  of p-Phenylenediamine  to rats and cats and subcutaneous administration of p-Phenylenediamine  to rats,  
rabbits,  and guinea pigs resulted in edema of the head and neck.  
Acute toxicity studies  on p-Phenylenediamine are summarized in Table 4.  In dermal rabbit studies, the LD 50 of 
p-Phenylenediamine was > 7940 mg/kg and mortalities were observed in another  study at the maximum dose tested of 5000 
mg/kg.5  In oral studies, mice that receive d up to 70 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine had a statistically significant increase in 
serum creatine phosphokinase ( CPK ) and aldolase after 24 and 72 h and rhabdomyolysis  was observed after 24 h.5  The 
minimal non- lethal oral dose of p-Phenylenediamine was 75 mg/kg in rats that received up to 100 mg/kg p-Phenylene -
diamine.5,7  Dogs that received up to 100 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine orally had marked edema of the face, extremities, and 
external genitals, painful muscle rigor accompanied with massive necrosis of the skeletal muscles, and increases in serum 
CPK a nd serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase ( SGOT ).5  The calculated LC 50 for p-Phenylenediamine in rats in a 4 -h 
inhalation study was 0.92 mg/l in a study that tested the material at up to 1.8 mg/l.  
Repeated Dose  Toxicity  Studies  
Subchronic and chronic dermal admini stration of hair dye products containing up to 4% p -Phenylenediamine was not 
toxic to mice  ,rats, or  rabbits.2  Chronic topical administration of 10% p- Phenylenediamine solutions  was not toxic to mice 
or rabbits. Oral doses of 20 mg/kg/d p -Phenylenediamine for 12 to 13 d in rabbits increased blood concentrations of α-, β-, 
and γ-globulins and decreased serum concentrations of albumin and total protein.   A decreased albumin:globulin (A:G) ratio 
was also observed.   P-Phenylenediamine administered to rabbits daily in oral doses of 10 mg/kg for 90 d increased serum 
globulin concentration and total protein content and caused a decrease in the A:G ratio; no change in serum albumin concentration was noted. Dietary p -Phenylenediamine HCl at concentrations of 3160 ppm to rats and 4640 ppm to mice for 7 
wk and 1250 ppm to mice  and rats for 103 wk did not result in any signs of toxicity.  
Repeated dose toxicity studies  on p-Phenylenediamine are summarized in Table 5.  In guinea pigs, activity of β -
glucuronidase , acid phosphatase , glutathione -transferase , and glutathione peroxidase were significantly elevated , and  lipid 
peroxidation and histamine were  increased significantly  in a 30 -d dermal study of a 1% solution of p-Phenylenediamine in 
ethanol.
5  The lowest -observed -adverse- effect level ( LOAEL ) was 1 mg/kg bw/d in a dermal rat study of p-Phenylenediamine 
tested at up to 3 mg/kg bw/d. Effects observed included hemolytic anemia and increased sequestration of damaged erythrocytes within splenic si nuses. Mild erythema was the only adverse effects observed in a 4-mo dermal study of a hair 
dye formulation that contained p-Phenylenediamine.  
In oral studies, the no -observed- adverse- effect level (NOAEL) for p-Phenylenediamine  was < 5 mg/kg bw/d in a 14 -d 
study in rats when tested at up to 40 mg/kg/d.
9  Observed effects included increased lactate dehydrogenase and CPK levels at 
5 mg/kg or greater, increased mean absolute and relative liver weights in 40 mg/kg males, and increased mean relative thyroid weights in 10 mg/kg or greater females.   The no -observed -effect level (NOEL) in a 7 wk dietary study was 681 ppm 
for females and 1000 ppm for males exposed to up to 3160 ppm p-Phenylenediamine, based on decreased weight gains (no 
other effects were described).
5  A dose -dependent retardation of growth was observed in rats fed 0.05% - 0.4% p-Phenylene -
diamine for 12 wk.27  Other effects noted were increased liver -to-body weight and kidney -to-body weight ratios and near total 
mortalities in the 0.4% dose group.  In a 90-d oral study in rats, the NOEL was 4 mg/kg/d and the NOAEL was 16 mg/kg/d 
when p-Phenylenediamine was administered at up to 16 mg/kg/d.5,9  Mean  absolute and body -weight -related liver weights 
were significantly increased for 8 and 16 mg/kg/d males and absolute and body -weight- related kidney weights were increased 
for 8 and 16 mg/kg females.  In a 13 -wk oral neurotoxicity study in  male and female rats that received up to 16 mg/kg bw/d p-
Phenylenediamine in sterile water, the NOEL was determined to be 8 mg/kg bw/d and the NOAEL was determined to be 16 
mg/kg bw/d.9  At 16 mg/kg bw/d, increased incidence of wet chin in both sexes and in wet inguen and/or wet perineum was 
observed in females ; these effects were considered to be pharmacological responses .  Neuropathology evaluations did not 
reveal abnormalities within the nervous system of skeletal muscle.  
DEVELOPMENTAL A ND REPRODUCTIVE TOXICITY  STUDIES  
Oral administration of 40 mg/kg p- Phenylenediam ine to pregnant rats resulted in the deaths of 2 of 10 rats and 
decreased body weight.2 No other signs of toxicity were observed at the 40 mg/kg dose or at a 30  mg/kg dose.  Hair dyes 
containing 1 to 4 % p-Phenylenediamine were applied to the skin of pregnant rats at a dose of 2 ml/kg/d after being mixed 
with an equal volume  of hydrogen peroxide  on gestation days 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, and 19 .  No adverse effects on reproduction 
were observed, and the hair dyes were not teratogenic.  A hair dye containing 3% p -Phenylenediamine was mixed with 
hydrogen peroxide, and 0.05 ml of the mi xture was applied 2 times per week  to female mice prior to mating and throughout 
gestation.  There  were no adverse effects on reproduction.  The dye was not teratogenic, although  there may have been a 
retarding effect on fetal ossification.  The same hair dye containing 3% p -Phenylenediamine  was applied dermally at a dose 
of 2.0 ml/kg two times  a week to female rabbits from prior to mating through gestation.  The dye was  mixed with hydrogen 
peroxide immediately before use.  There were no adverse effects on rabbit reproduction, and the dye was not teratogenic.  
Treated rabbits had a fetal survival rate of 85.4% while the fetal survival rate was  93.8% in the control  rabbits.  The 
surviving fetuses were of normal weight and length.   Reproduction was unaffected,  and teratogenicity was not observed after 
the dermal application  of 0.5 ml of hair dyes containing 2% to 4% p- Phenylenediamine 2 times  a week to 3 generations of 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotemice. The dyes were mixed with hydrogen peroxide before use.  A hair dye containing 2.20% p -Phenylenediamine  was 
applied to the skin of male rats in a dose of 0.5 ml two times a week for 10 weeks after being mixed with an equal  volume of 
hydrogen peroxide. The rats were mated,  and their male offspring were  also mated.  No adverse effects on reproduction were 
observed.  
Developmental and reproductive toxicity studies on p-Phenylenediamine are summarized in Table 6.  No adverse 
effects on rep roduction or litter parameters were observed in a rat multigeneration dermal study with p-Phenylenediamine at 
up to 4% in oxidative formulation.28  In a 90 -d dermal study in male rats with up to 3 mg/kg/d p-Phenylenediamine  in water , 
a statistically significant decrease in absolute testes weigh and total sperm count with abnormal testi cular tissue morphology 
and a statistically significant increase in the percentage of abnormal sperm morphology were observed in the 2 and 3 mg/kg/d 
dose groups.29  In an oral reproductive study in female mice, the meiotic capacity of oocytes and fertilization potential was 
affected by p-Phenylene diamine in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at up to 50 mg/kg.30  The maternal NOEL was 5 mg/kg/d and 
the developmental NOAEL was 10 mg/kg/d in an oral developmental toxicity study of female rats that received up to 20 
mg/kg/d p-Phenylenediamine in water on gestation days 6 through 19.5  Dams experienced slightly transient l ower mean 
gestation body weight gain in the 10 and 20 mg/kg/d dose groups, and an equivocal increase in the incidence of early 
resorptions and lower fetal weight and mean gravid uterus weight were observed in the 20 mg/kg/d dose group.  The test material w as considered non -embryo -fetotoxic.   
GENOTOXICITY  
p-Phenylenediamine, with and without hydrogen peroxide, was negative in Ames tests without metabolic activation; 
both positive and negative results with metabolic activation have been reported .2  Different research groups have used 
different solvents, chemicals for induction, metabolic activation systems, and slight modifications to the Ames test procedure, with any or all of these potentially explaining the observed differences in results.  Several oxidation products of p -Phenylene-
diamine were positive in the Ames test.
  
The urine of rats that received p -Phenylenediamine intraperitoneally 3 times /wk for 8 wk was not mutagenic in the 
Ames test.2  The urine of rats that received p -Phenylenediamine -resorcinol conjugates topically was mutagenic with 
metabolic activation and was not mutagenic without metabolic activation.  Women collected their urine bef ore and after 
using hair dyes containing 0.46 – 2.55% p- Phenylenediamine; in the Ames test with metabolic activation their urine was not 
more mutagenic after hair dye application.  
p-Phenylenediamine was not mutagenic in the rat micronucleus test after oral  administration of two 500 mg/kg doses.2  
Oral administration of 200 mg/kg p- Phenylenediamine to male mice depressed testicular DNA synthesis.  P-
Phenylenediamine was not active at intraperitoneal doses of 5 – 20 mg/kg/d for 5 d in the mouse sperm -head abnormality 
test. P-Phenylenediamine was negative in a rat hepatocyte primary  culture/ DNA repair test.  Positive results were obtained 
for p -Phenylenediamine in the mouse lymphoma forward mutation assay.  p-Phenylenediamine, in doses of 1.85 – 3.2 µg/5.2 
x 104 cells, was positive in a test measuring the survival of rat embryo cells.  
In vitro genotoxicity studies on p -Phenylenediamine and p-Phenylenediamine HCl are summarized in Table 7.  
P-Phenylene diamine was mutagenic or weakly mutagenic in multiple Ames tests when tested with metabolic activation  at up 
to 100,000 µg/plate , but these results were often not seen when tested without metabolic activation.5,31-34  p-Phenylene -
diamine HCl  at up to 666 6 µg/plate  was mutagenic in Ames tests ( performed  under oxidative conditions  in a couple of 
studies ), but had mixed results when tested with or without metabolic activation or when other components (like resorcinol) 
were tested in addition.35-39  Mixed results were observed in additional bacterial strain  genotoxicity  studie s with up 5 mg/ml 
p-Phenylenediamine.5,40,41  In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, p-Phenylenediamine was not mutagenic in a mitotic recombination 
when tested at up to 0.1%, with and without metabolic activation, but it was mutagenic in a gene mutation assay when tested at up to 0.3 mM.
5  Assays in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells indicated a dose- related in chromosomal aberrations when 
up to 87 µg/ml p -Phenylenediamine was tested without metabolic activity.31,32   Genotoxicity to p-Phenylene diamine was also 
observed in a sister chromatid exchange assay in CHO cells with 0.4 mM and in a micronucleus test in Chinese hamster lung (CHL) cells without metabolic activation at up to 50 µg/ml.
5  Mutagenicity to p -Phenylenediamine HCl was reported in 
forward mutation assays  with L5178 mouse lymphoma cells when tested at up to 400 µg/ml with metabolic activation and at 
up to 10 µg/ml without metabolic activation ;42,43 however, no mutagenicity to p -Phenylene diamine HCl was reported in the 
same cell lines in a gene mutation assay  at the hprt locus at up to 1000 µg/ml with metabolic activation and at up to 80 µg/ml 
without metabolic activation.36  p-Phenylenediamine was not genotoxic in an unscheduled DNA synthesis assay in rat 
hepatocytes at up to 1  µmol/ml  without metabolic activation , but increased expression of mutant p53 and COX -2 proteins 
was observed in a single cell gel/comet assay with SV -40 immortalized human uroepithelial cells at up to 40 µg/ml.5  
Genotoxicity was observed in a micronucleus test in human lymphocytes with p-Phenylenediamine HCl with metabolic 
activation at up to 2000 µg/ml  with and at up to 125 µg/ml without  metabolic activation.36 
In vivo genotoxicity studies on p-Phenylenediamine and p-Phenylenediamine HCl are also summarized in Table 7.  
P-Phenylenediamine was not genotoxic in micronucleus tests in mice (intraperitoneal administration at up to 32.4 mg/kg) or 
rats (oral administration at up to 3 00 mg/kg ),5,7 and p-Phenylenediamine HCl was not genotoxic in a micronucleus test in rats 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote(at up to 100 mg/kg).44  No genotoxicity was reported in rats to p-Phenylenediamine in an unscheduled DNA synthesis assay 
or a comet assay at up to 100 mg/kg, in each  respective test.5,7 
DNA Binding  
p-P henylenediamine  HCl 
A single dose of  p-Phenylenediamine  HCl (600 µmol/kg; 500 µCi/ml/kg) was administered to male and female Fischer 
344 rats and male and female B6C3F 1.23  The route o f exposure was not reported.  The animals were killed at 1 6-h post-
administration and  livers were removed; DNA was isolated and purified.   Protein from the livers was isolated, purified, 
hydrolyzed,  and then analyzed for possible covalently bound p-Phenylenediamine -derived radioactivity.  There was no  
evidence of covalent binding of p-Phenylenediamine or  metabolites with hepatic DNA at the level of detection (1  pmol/mg  
DNA).  Protein -bound p-Phenylenediamine  radioactivity was observed in the livers of rats and mice (males and females, both 
species).  The authors noted that  covalent binding to protein does not necessarily imply  toxicity, and that the covalently 
bound material may have  eventually  been eliminated during normal protein turnover.  
CARCINOGENICITY  S TUDIES  
In a bioassay performed by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), p-Phenylenediamine  HCl in the feed of rats and mice 
at concentrations of 625 and 1250 ppm for  103 wk was not carcinogenic.2  There was no evidence of a carcinogenic effect 
after the oral administration of 0.06 to 30 mg/kg/d  p-Phenylenediamine  for 8 mo to  small numbers of rats.  P-
Phenylenediamine  was not carcinogenic in assays in which 5% and 10 % solutions were applied topically twice a week in 
doses of 0.02 ml to mice  for their lifetime and to female rabbits for 85 wk.   Three hair dyes containing 1.5%  p-
Phenylenediamine  were mixed with hydrogen peroxide  before use, and 0.05 ml was applied topically to mice weekly or every 
2 wk for 18 mo; carcinogenic activity was not observed.  No evidence of a  carcinogenic effect was found after the topical 
administration of 0.5 ml weekly for 2 y r to mice of 2 hair dyes containing 1.5%  p-Phenylenediamine  and mixed with  
hydrogen peroxide immediately before use.  No carcinogenic effects were observed  when 4 hair dye composite formulations 
containing 1 to 4% p-Phenylenediamine  were mixed with hydrogen peroxide and 0.025 ml of the dyes were applied  topically 
weekly for 21 to 23 mo to mice.  Three hair dye formulations  containing 2 to 4% p -Phenylenediamine  were mixed with an 
equal volume of hydrogen  peroxide and applied topic ally to a parental generation of rats from the time of  their weaning to 
the weaning of their young.  The second generation received  topical applications of 0.5 ml two times a w eek for 2 y r.  An 
increase in pituitary  adenomas was observed in the rats receiv ing the 4% formulation;  these adenomas have a high 
background incidence in rats.  
In a discussion of the results from the NCI bioassay on p -Phenylenediamine HCl, it was noted that this dye induced an 
elevated incidence of bladder tumors (mainly transitional  cell papillomas and carcinomas) in female rats, but that this 
finding was not statistically significant.   Furthermore, this dye was associated with an elevated incidence of kidney tumors 
(tubular cell adenomas and transitional cell carcinomas of the pelvis) in male and female rats that was not statistically 
significant. In light of these data, the author stat ed that the rarity of spontaneous bladder and kidney tumors among 
historical control rats indicated that the low, but elevated, incidence of these tumor types may be treatment -related.  It was 
also noted that p- Phenylenediamine HCl was associated with an e levated incidence of liver tumors in female mice that was 
not statistically significant, but that this finding was possibly a treatment -related tumor response.  Further analysis of the 
NCI bioassay , it was determined to be unreasonable to conclude that p-Phenylenediamine HCl has been definitely shown to 
be noncarcinogenic  in view of the study results and failure to achieve a maximum tolerated dose in male mice.  
An expert opinion on the carcinogenic potential of p -Phenylenediamine noted that the data from animal studies do not 
provide any evidence of carcinogenic potential .  There is very low systemic exposure to the dye or its metabolites after 
application of hair dye products in humans, and data show that p- Phenylenediamine cannot be converted to reactive N -
hydroxyarylamine metabolites that are implicated in bladder carcinogenesis.  
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), based on evaluation of data on p-Phenylenediamine HCl, has 
classified p-Phenylenediamine as a Group 3 chemical, not classif iable as to its carcinogenicity to humans.45  This finding was 
based on no adequate human data and inadequate animal data.  
Carcinogenicity and tumor promotion studies of p-Phenylenediamine  and p-Phenylenediamine HCl are summarized in 
Table 8.  No papillomas or carcinomas were reported in mice that received dermal applications of 5% p-Phenylenediamine 
twice weekly for 20 wk.5  No tumors were observed in rats that received 20 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine subdermally for 4 
mo, but were observed in 2 out of 5 rats that received 12.5 mg/kg for 8 mo.   No treatment related gross lesions were observed 
in rats that received up to 4% p-Phenylenedia mine in oxidative formulation dermally in a multigeneration study that lasted 24 
mo.28 A statistically significant incidence of mammary gland tumors were observed in female rats that received topical 
applications of  5% p-Phenylenediamine HCl for 18 mo.35   
In oral studies, no carcinogenicity was observed in rats that received up to 0.1% p -Phenylenediamine in dietary feed for 
up to 80 wk,5,27 in mice that received 30 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine HCl via gavage in a multigeneration study that lasted up 
to 137 wk.5,7  No carcinogenicity was observed in mice that received p-Phenylenediamine or p-Phenylenediamine  HCl 
intraperitoneally at up to approximately 30 mg/kg for up to 8 wk.5,9,46  A statistically significant incidence of uterine tumors 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteand malignant and benign soft tissue tumors were observed in female rats that received subcutaneous injection s of 5% p-
Phenylenediamine HCl for 18 mo.35  In tumor promotion studies, p-Phenylenediamine did not significantly increase γ-
glutamyl transpeptidase positive foci that were observed 3 wk after N-nitrosodiethylamine initiation  in rats that received up to 
1000 ppm of the test material in dietary feed, and  a 40 mg/kg single dose of p-Phenylenediamine HCl did not cause a 
statistically significant increase in the number of glutathione 5 -transferase positive foci when compared to controls  in a 5 wk 
intragastric study .47,48 
OTHER RELEVANT STUDIES  
Hematological Effects  
p-P henylenediamine  
In a study investigating methemoglobin formation by p -Phenylenediamine, 3.23 x  10-4 mol/kg of the hair dye 
intermediate was suspended in 0.5 ml of peanut oil and injected intraperitoneally into male  rats.2  Methemoglobin as a 
percentage of total hemoglobin was 3.7 ± 1.0 % at 1 h, 1.4 ± 0.6 % at 4 h, 3.8 ± 1.4% at 7 h, and 3.6 ± 1.5 % at 10 h after 
injection.  In vitro  determinations of methemoglobin were also made.  Rat erythrocytes were isolated and incubated with 10-3 
p-Phenylenediamine dissolved in DMSO .  Methemoglobin as a percent of total hemoglobin was 2.0 ±  1.8 at 1 min, 1.2 ± 0.5 
at 5 min, 1.8 ± 0.1 at 10 min, 1.8 ± 0.1 at 20 min, 2.4 ± 0.7 at 30 min, 0.5 ± 0.5 at 1 h, 3.9 ± 0.9 at  1.5 h, and 3.9 ± 0.9 at  2 h 
of incubation.  No methemoglobin formation  was observed in e rythrocytes incubated with the DMSO  vehicle.  Additional 
studies demonstrated that p- aminophenol induced methemoglobin formation.  The authors concluded that, when incubated 
together with p -aminophenol in isolated rat erythrocytes, p -Phenylenediamine had a  strong inhibitory effect on 
methemoglobin formation . 
In another  study , a suspension of p- Phenylenediamine in propylene glycol was  given by intraperitoneal injection to 
male rats at a dose of  100 µmol/kg (in a volume of 2 ml).2  The percentage of  methemoglobin formed in the blood was 12.9 ± 
4.2 at 5 h after the injection.  Methemoglobin formation was also  studied in vitro by incubating 0.1 µmol  of rat hemoglobin 
with 0.5 µmol of p -Phenylenediamine at 37°C for 5 h.   Methemoglobin formation in vitro was 12.8 ± 0.4%,  whereas the 
control methemoglobin concentration was 4.2 ± 1.0%.  
A group of 10 pregnant rats received 40 mg/kg p- Phenylenediamine orally on days 8,  9, and 10 of gestation.2  Two rats 
died after the third dose. A second group of 10 pregnant rats received 30 mg/kg p- Phenylenediamine orally on days 6 
through 15 of gestation; t here were 20 control rats.  The animals were bled 4 to 5 h after the final dose of p -Phenylene-
diamine, and methemoglobin concentrations were measured as a percentage of total hemoglobin.  All the control animals 
had methemoglobin concentrations of less than 0.1%.  One rat in the 40 mg/kg group and one in the 30 mg/kg group had 
methemoglobin concentrations of 0.1 and 0.4%, respectively.  All other treated rats had methemoglobin concentrations of less than 0.1%.  
Three  groups of 2 female  Beagle dogs each were bled 2 d before dosing and 6 and  24 h a fter gastric intubation of 
aqueous p- Phenylenediamine solutions in doses of 1.0, 3.0, and 10.0 mg/kg.
2  Methemoglobin concentrations in the blood 
were  measured.  In an additional trial of the same experiment, 2 more female Beagle dogs received 10 mg/kg p -Phenylene -
diamine orally.  All methemoglobin values were within the normal range.  
Effects on Pigmentation  
p-P henylenediamine  
p-Phenylenediamine has been observed to inhibit melanin formation in vitro.2 The hair dye intermediate combine s with 
ortho -quinones, which prevents  the oxidation of dopa  quinone to melanin.  In cultures of both white and black pig skin, 
10 mM p -Phenylenediamine caused “marked degeneration,” a “more rapid”  pyknosis, and inhibition of both arginine and 
tyrosine uptake  into skin protein.  Incorporation of  tyrosine into the melanin of skin was also inhibited.  
Immune Response  
p-P henylenediamine  
Massive peribronchial infiltrates of eosinophils were observed in guinea pigs 72 h post-intrapulmonary  administration  
of 1% p- Phenylenediamine  solution .2  The injected lu ng showed eosinophil infiltrates in response to the anti gen; no 
eosinophilia developed in the blood, and no infiltrates of  eosinophils were detected in the noninjected lung. When isolated rat 
mast cells were exposed to a 0.9% saline solution with  100 µg/ml p -Phenylenediamine , it did not induce release of histam ine 
or 5-hydroxytryptamine .  p-Phenylenediamine at concentrations of 20 to 300 ng/ml had no effect  on the degranulation  of rat 
peritoneal mast cells .  Histochemical staining methods revealed that  Langerhans cells  in isolated guinea pig and human  
epidermis  selectively absorbed p -Phenylenediamine . 2   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCytotoxicity  
p-P henylenediamine  
Interference with mitosis was observed in intestinal cells of  mice given a 0.05 mg intraperitoneal injection of 
p-Phenylenediamine .2  Glutathione depletion, lipid peroxidation and cell lysis were  observed in isolated rat hepatocytes 
treated with 1.0 mM p-Phenylenediamine . 
The potency of p-Phenylenediamine in causing cytotoxic effects was studied in CHO cells.31,32  A 50% toxic 
concentration  (TC 50) of 29 ± 4 ppm was reported.  
In a (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol -2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl -2H-tetrazolium bromide  (MTT ) assay, rat skin fibroblast cells were 
treated with  5 – 200 µM p-Phenylenediamine for 24 h.49  Cell viability was significantly  (p < 0.001) decreased in a dose -
dependent manner.  The  inhibitory concentration of 50% ( IC50) was 100 µM.    
In a nonspecific cytotoxicity test of p-Phenylenediamine, Hartley guinea pig lymph node cells were treated with 1, 10, 
or 50 ppm of the test material for 96 h.50  Notable toxicity to the lymphocytes was observed at 10 ppm and greater.  
p-P henylenediamine HC l 
Cytotoxicity testing of p-Phenylenediamine HC l (in < 0.5%  aceto ne or < 0.5% DMS O) was  conducted in parallel with 
the testing of this dye in the  C3H /10T1/2  clone 8 mouse embryo cell transformation assay at 2 different  laboratories.51  The 
dose ranges tested at the 2 laboratories  were 0.8 to 100 µ g/ml and 0.5 to 5.0 µg/ml, respectively.   The methodology for 
determining cytotoxicity was based on  the fraction of cells surviving after a 24 -h treatment of  10-4 cells (number of cells used 
in transformation assay).   p-Phenylenediamine HC l was toxic at the highest dose tested,  100 µg/ml.  
Oxidative Stress  
p-P henylenediamine  
Rat skin fibroblast cells were treated with p-Phenylenediamine  (50, 100, or 150 µM) for 6, 12, or 18 h to evaluate 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels.49  The cells were then incubated with dichloro -dihydro- fluorescein diacetate 1.6 µM)  
for 30 min before fluorescence intensity was measured.   p-Phenylenediamine at all concentrations and incubation times 
significantly  increased the level of ROS in the fibroblast cells.  
Myotoxicity 
p-P henylenediamine  
Rabbits that received p -Phenylenediamine at oral doses of 20 mg/kg for 12 to 13 d and 10 mg/kg for 90 d had marked 
alterations in myocardial parenchyma.2  These changes included edema, swelling of muscle fibers, cytoplasmic 
homogenization, and loss of cross -striation . 
The metabolic effect of p-Phenylenediamine in rhabdomyolysis disease was studied with mus musculus  mouse C2C12 
muscle cells (154 µM) and in groups of 3 Wistar rats  (10, 20, 40, or 60 mg/kg bw in DMSO via single gavage  dosing ).52  
Mass isotopomer distribution analysis and computational  modeling approaches were used  to measure m etabolic profile of 
C2C12  cells treated by p-Phenylenediamine .  After 24 h treatment, p-Phenylenediamin e induced  cell cycle arrest in S phase 
and apoptosis (40% or early apoptotic cells) in C2C12 cells.  After incubating C2C12 cells with [1,2-13C2]-glucose for 24 h 
and then measuring the distribution of 13C isotopologues in key  metabolites of glucose metabolic network , a computational 
fluxomic analysis showed that p-Phenylenediamine  inhibit s glycolysis, non- oxidative pentose phosphate pathway , glycogen 
turnover, and the ATPa se reaction resulting  in decrease d ATP synthesis.   The rats treated with 10 or 20 mg/kg p -Phenylene -
diamine  showed depressed activity and myoglobinuria 10 h after treatment .  After 24, 48, and 72 h , treatment with 
p-Phenylene diamine  at 40 and  60 mg/kg showed an increase of aspartate amin otransferase ( AST ), alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT ), lactate  dehydrogenase (LDH) , and creatine kinase.  Blood packed cell volume and hemoglobin levels, as well as 
organs weight at 48 and 72 h, were also measured; n o statistically  significant differences were observed in these parameters 
under any condition.  The authors concluded  that p-Phenylenediamine induced some pathologic signs involved in 
rhabdomyolysis .  
Hepatotoxicity  
p-P henylenediamine  
No hepatic toxicity was observed in male rats giv en a single 100 µmol/kg intraperitoneal injection of p -Phenylene -
diamine in propylene glycol .2 
Neurotoxicity  
p-P henylenediamine  
In an acute neurotoxicity, groups of 24 Crl:CD rats (12 males, 12 females) were dosed by gavage with p -Phenylene-
diamine in sterile water at single doses of 20, 40, and 80 mg/kg.4  The control group was dosed orally with the vehicle only.  
Fema les had significant dose -related effects on body weight gain and males had similar effects, but only at the 2 higher 
doses.  In the functional observational battery assessments, females had statistically significant dose -related signs of general 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotemalaise.  Males had similar responses, but they were not statistically significantly different from the controls.  Decreased 
motor activity (dose -related) was demonstrated; however, in the absence of other signs of neurological impairment, the 
motor activity response was interpreted as being indicative of general malaise at the doses of p- Phenylenediamine that were 
tested.  
DERMAL I RRITATION AND SENSI TIZATION  
Primary skin irritation by 2.5 to 100% p- Phenylenediamine varied from none to slight in experiments with rabbi ts, 
guinea pigs, mice, miniature piglets, piglets, dogs, and baboons.2  A hair dye containing 1.2% p- Phenylenediamine produced 
slight to moderate erythema and moderate edema in the skin of rabbits.  Another hair dye containing 1.8% p- Phenylene-
diamine was mildly irritating to the skin of rabbits.  The primary irritation index for 50% p -Phenylenediamine applied to the 
skin of 6 human volunteers for 24 h under occlusive conditions was 0.8 of a maximum possible total of 8.   
p-Phenylenediamine is a strong  sensitizer in guinea pigs using a variety of test methods; induction routines and 
challenge patches with 0.001 to 10% p -Phenylenediamine sensitized 56 to 100% of guinea pigs tested.2  However, in 
formulation,  2% p -Phenylenediamine was not a sensitizer in 12 guinea pigs.  In a clinical study with  24 subjects , all were 
sensitized after five 48 -h induction patches of 10% p-P henylenediamine.  The subjects had been challenged with a non-
irritating concentration of p -Phenylenediamine (no further details).  A maximization  test using 2 % p- Phenylenediamine  for 
induction sensitized 15 of 34 (44%) male subjects.  A 10% aqueous solution of a dye formulation containing 2% 
p-Phenylenediamine was used for nine 24- h induction patches; at challenge, significant  dermatitis was observed in 7 of 22 
(31.8 %) of the volunteers.  Human r epeated  insult patch tests (HRIPTs) were cond ucted on 206 subjects with four hair dyes 
containing up to 2.144% p- Phenylenediamine ; the hair dyes did not cause irritation or sensitization.   A p-Phenylenediamine 
photopatch was conducted on 1 subject; p- Phenylenediamine was not phototoxic.  
Additional g uinea pig studies reported sensitization to p- Phenylenediamine, with challenge concentrations as low as 
0.01%.4  Human patch testing indicated p- Phenylenediamine was sensitizing.  
Dermal irritation and sensitization studies are summarized in Table 9.  p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate was predicted to be 
not irritating in human reconstructed epidermis when tested neat.6  p-Phenylenediamine was not irritating or mildly irritating 
in several gui nea pig studies when tested at up to 30%.5  In rabbit studies  at up to 100% , mild irritation was observed to 
p-Phenylene diamine, but it was not corrosive.5,7  p-Phenylenediamine was sensitizing in several local lymph node assays 
(LLNAs) in mice and guinea pigs, with an estimated concentration of a stimulation index  (SI) of 3 (EC 3) determined to be 
0.06% in a study of up to 1.25% p-Phenylenediamine.5,7,53  It was also sensitizing in numerous guinea pig studies when 
induced at concentrations of 0.1 – 1% and challenged at concentrations of up to 30%.5,54  p-Phenylenediamine was sensitizing 
in predictive studies in human subjects when tested at up to 1% in pet .55 
Cross-Sensitization  
Animal  
p-Phenylenediamine  
In a sensitization study, guinea pigs were sensitized to 0.05% p -Phenylenediamine  in pet.2 Through cross -reaction, 95 
to 100% of the treated guinea pigs were also sensitized to N -phenyl -N’-cyclohexyl -p-phenylenediamine (CPPD; 0.5% pet.), 
N-dimethyl -3-butyl- N’-phenyl -p-phenylenediamine (0.5% pet.), and N -isopropyl- N’-phenyl -p-phenylenediamine (IPPD).  
The cross- sensitization potential of p-Phenylenediamine was studies  in female Hartley guinea pigs in a modified 
lymphocyte transformation test.50  The guinea pigs were divided into experimental (n =9) and control (n=5) groups and  
treated with p-Phenylenediamine or distilled water via a maximization test procedure.  On day 1, the animals received 
injections of 0.1 ml of 0.1% p -Phenylenediamine in distilled water, 0.1  ml Freund’s complete adjuvant, and 0.1 ml p-
Phenylene diamine emulsified in the adjuvant at 0.1%.  After 7 d, 0.5 ml of 5% p-Phenylenediamine in distilled water was 
applied with a 2 x 4 cm2 occluded patch to the injection sites for 48 h.  The control group did not receive the test material in 
this procedure.  After 21 d , the experimental and control groups were challenged with 0.025 ml of 1% p-Phenylene diamine, 
1% p-aminophenol, and 5% m-phenylenediamine in distilled water using Finn chambers for 24 h.  Sensitization was assessed 
24 h after the patches were removed.  Af ter dermal testing, the animals were killed and the lymph node cells were harvested 
from peripheral lymph nodes.  The cells were incubated with p-Phenylenediamine (0, 1, or 5 ppm), p-aminophenol (0, 1, or 5 
ppm), or m -phenylenediamine (0, 5, or 25 ppm), wi th and without suspensions of epidermal cells, prior to treatment with 3H-
thymidine for 24 h (total culture initiation was 120 h). The positive control for lymphocyte initiation was 
phytohemagglutinin. The level of 3H-thymidine incorporation was determined in a liquid scintillation counter.  
In the in vivo challenge, all the guinea pigs sensitized to p -Phenylenediamine reacted positively when challenged with 
p-Phenylenediamine.  The pigmentation of p-aminophenol and m-phenylenediamine interfered with erythem a determination, 
thus reactions could not be read.  The control animals did not react.  In the in vitro challenge, a statistically significant 
increase (p < 0.01)  in blastogenesis in the lymph node cells from p-Phenylenediamine -sensitized animals was observed.  
These responses were not observed in the control lymphocytes. in a dose -dependent manner when p-Phenylenediamine was 
added to the cultures without epidermal cells.  Blastogenesis from p-Phenylenediamine -sensitized animals  was also increased 
in a statistically significant (p < 0.01) dose -dependent manner when p-aminophenol or m-phenylenediamine was added to the 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotecultures without epidermal cells, with the response to p-aminophenol being greater than m-phenylenediamine.  These 
responses were not observed in the control lymphocytes.   The amount of blastogenesis stimulated by p-Phenylenediamine, p-
aminophenol, or m-phenylenediamine was a little higher in the presence of epidermal cells, but the difference was not 
statistically significant.  The authors concl uded that there is cross -sensitization between p-Phenylenediamine and p-
aminophenol or m-phenylenediamine.50 
OCULAR IRRITATION ST U DIES  
Animal  
p-Phenylenediamine  
Mild conjunctival inflammation that did not persist for more than 24 h was observed after the instillation of a 2.5% 
aqueous p- Phenylenediamine solution into rabbit eyes.2  In another study,  the maximum irritation score was 17.0 out of a 
possible 110 after 100% p -Phenylenediamine was placed in rabbit eyes.  A hair dye composite formulation containing 1.2% 
p-Phenylenediamine and one containing 1.8% p- Phenylenediamine were instilled into the conjunctival sacs of the eyes of 
rabbits producing, at 1-d post-instillation, a score of 33.0 for unwashed eyes and 23.0 for washed eyes for t he low 
concentration and a score of 30 for unwashed eyes at the higher concentration; irritation was minimal after 7 d.  
Ocular irritation studies are summarized in Table 10.  Keratitis and corneal opacities were observed in rats that received 
up to 15% p-Phenylenediamine in formulation daily for up to 3 mo.5  No ocular irritation was observed in guinea pigs with 
2.5% p-Phenylenediamine.  In rabbits, p-Phenylenediamine was moderately irritating when tested neat and was weakly 
irritating at lower test concentrations.5,7  
CLINICAL STUDIES  
A variety of patch tests with p-Phenylenediamine  have  been performed on subjects from a variety  of populations .2  
Many of these reports are of diagnostic patch tests performed on clinical subjects suffering from skin disease  with varying 
degrees of positivity rates.  Case reports of dermal allergy  included hair dye consumers and beauticians.  Edema of the 
eyelids, conjunctivitis, and tearing, in addition to more severe reactions to the eyes, have been observed after application of 
p-Phenylenediamine hair dyes to the eyebrows and eyelashes.   
A literature review of 13 relevant articles on allergic contact dermatitis a nd irritant contact dermatitis was performed on 
material published from 1980 to January 2022, with focus on skin of color patients .56  One of the most common allergens 
associated with positive patch tests that was different in a statistically significant manner (p < 0.05) between skin of color 
patients  (primarily Black and Indian)  and white patients was p-Phenylenediamin e. 
A retrospective data analysis  study to determine risk factors for p-Phenylenediamine sensitization  was performed by the 
Information Network of Departments of Dermatology (IVDK) of Ger many from 2008 to 2013.57  Of 271  positive patients ( n 
= 4314 ; 6.3%) surveyed , hair dyeing (odds ratio (OR) 6.0; 95% confidence interval (CI) 3.9 – 9.4), henna tattoos (OR 2.4; 
95% CI 1.5- 3.7), and occupation as a hairdresser (OR 2.1; 95% CI 1.3- 3.2) increased the risk of p -Phenylenediamine 
sensitization, but too few pat ients performed the hair dye pretests to perform a detailed analysis to determine the risk from 
this route of exposure.  p-Phenylenediamine sensitization acquired via henna tattoos was more intense and resulted in 
stronger patch test  reactions and more con comitant reactions to chemically related  compounds . 
Clinical Reports  
In a study of patients with known sensitivity to p-Phenylenediamine, 15 patients received serial dilutions of 1% p-
Phenylenediamine  in pet. (1 – 10,000 ppm) on the upper back with Finn chamber  for 48 h .58 An additional 3 concentrations 
(50, 100, and 500 ppm ) were also applied to the retroauricular area and lateral aspects of the upper arms.  Fourteen out of the 
15 patients reacted to 1 or more of the test samples.  The threshold value for 10% of tested persons (ED 10) was 38 ppm.  
There were no statistically significant differences in sensitivity of the 3 regions tested.   
In another provocative test, a group of 7 patients with a known sensitivity to p-Phenylenediamine was tested with 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine in pet. for 15, 30, and 120 min.59  Another 9 patients with sensitivity were tested with 0.01 – 1% 
p-Phenylene diamine for 15, 30, and 120 min.  The patches were 8 mm Finn chambers.  At 120 min, 11/16 patients reacted to 
1% p-Phenylenediamine and 2/9  reacted to 0.01%.  At 15 min, 6/16 reacted to 1% and 0/9 reacted to 0.01%.  Most of the 
reactions were 1+ and 2+.  
In a study of patients with severe allergic reactions to permanent hair dyes, 2 patients were tested with 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine in pet., 2 pa tients were tested with titrated p-Phenylenediamine in pet. at 0.01 to 1%, and the remaining 
5 patients were tested with < 1% of the test material.60  The patches were applied with Finn chambers on back skin under 
occlusion for 48 h and reactions were read on days 2 and 3.  Eight out of 9 patients responded strongly to the test material.   In 
the initial  2 patients with 1% p-Phenylenediamine, severe bullous reactions occurred.  Severe reactions were observed with 
0.1 and 0.5% p-Phenylenediamine, but 50% of patients did not react to the test material at 0.01%.  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMulticenter and Retrospective Studies  
The resu lts of numerous multicenter and retrospective studies over the last 40 years are summarized in Table 11.  
Sensitization to p-Phenylenediamine has been observed around the globe, with sensitization rates varying greatly, 
independent of region or span of time .61-96  Using the US as an example, one retrospective study from 2001 to 2005 reported a 
positivity rate of 4.5%, while another reported a rate of 5.2% from 200 6 to 2010, and a third reported a rate o f 35.8% from 
2001 to 2016.68,78  Greece has reported a positivity rate as high as 52.5% (2010 to 2019) and India has reported a rate of 
67.5% (dates not reported).87,90  In contrast, a German multicenter study reported a positivity rat e of only 1.5% in 1994 to 
1995.67 
Case Reports  with Hair Dye Products  
Numerous cases of adverse reactions to hair dye products containing p -Phenylenediamine have been reported in the 
published literature , and several are summarized in Table 12.97-106  In addition to reports of dermal reactions that have be en 
summarized, case and cohort studies  of acute p-Phenylenediamine intoxication through accidental or intentional oral 
ingestion of the dye have been reported; please note, these case reports are not included in the table because they are not 
relevant to t he cosmetic use of p-Phenylenediamine .107-115 
Case Reports Related to Tattooing  
Numerous c ase reports of reactions following application of dark (black) henna tattoos/temporary tattoos  containing p-
Phenylenediamine are summarized in Table 13.116-134  Most of these cases have occurred outside of the US.  The US FDA has 
determined that uses of  p-Phenylenediamine other than as a hair dye are  unapproved, including use in dark (black) henna 
tattoo products.135  In 2001, the FDA established a reporting hotline prompted by an escalation of reported severe allergic 
reactions to p-Phenylenediamine -adulterated temporary tattoos. Over a 12-yr period between 2002 and 2014, a total of 70 
cases of adverse reactions to temporary tattoos (n = 6) and black henna tattoos (n = 64) were reported in the US.  In 2008, the 
American Academy of Dermatolo gy endorsed a ban on the practice of applying p-Phenylenediamine -adulterated henna 
tattoos due to the potential for allergic contact dermatitis to result from application.136   
Case Reports of Skin Depigmentation  
Phenols, such as p-Phenylenediamine, may act as amino acid tyrosine analogs that can disrupt melanocyte function.137 
The incidence of chemical leukoderma has been increasing in developing countries, such as India, and has been noted to be induced by certain domestic consumer products, such as hair dye.
138  A prospective study of 864 cases found hair dye 
associated with 27.4% of the leukoderma cases.  p-Phenylenediamine was noted to be a common contributory chemical agent 
in this condition.  
In a case report , a 50-yr-old female presented with depigmentation on both feet, corresponding to sites where alta 
(scarlet -red solution used by some Indian women as a cosmetic to color feet) had been applied.139  Itching and scaling were 
also reported.   Patch testing (48 -h patch) with 1% p-Phenylenediamine (in plastibase) resulted in a + reaction and 
depigmentation at the application site.  
In another  case report , a 55-yr-old female applied a hair dye containing 16% p-Phenylenediamine for 3 h.140  Itching and 
burning over the entire scalp were reported after 8 to 10 applications of  this type.  Within 24 h, exudation and edema over the 
scalp, which subsided with time, were observed. Depigmentation of the scalp was noted 3 to 4 w k later. At 1.5 y r after the 
onset of depigmentation (hair dye not used for 1.5 y r), depigmentation was not ed over the scalp, back of neck, and forehead.  
A 50 -yr-old male presented with severe itching and depigmentation of beard area and temporal region of scalp that 
began approximately 10 mo prior.141  The p atient connected the reaction to hair dye he had been using for 2 yr.  Patch test ing 
with a hairdressing series yielded a positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine and 4 -aminophenol.   
In 50 patients with lichen planus pigmentosus and Fitzpatrick skin types IV and V, closed patch tests with the Indian 
standard series and the patients’ cosmetic products were performed.142  Photo- patch testing was also performed with the 
Scandinavian photo- patch series.  A total of 28 patch tests were positive, with p-Phenylenediamine positive in 5 patients.  
Four of the patients also tested positive to commercial hair dyes, with 3 of these patients also testing positive to nickel sulfate, colophony, and neomycin sulfate.  p-Phenylenediamine did not cause any positive reactions i n the photo- patch test.  
Clinical Reports of Cross -Sensitization  
Allergic sensitivity to p -Phenylenediamine has been associated with cross sensitization to numerous other chemicals.
2  
These chemicals include azo and aniline dyes; procaine; benzocaine; p -aminobenzoic acid and its esters; N- isopropyl -N’-
phenyl -1,4-phenylenediamine;  CPPD ; p-aminosalicylic acid; hydrodiuril; carbutamide; pyrogallol; sulfonamides; 
hydroquinone; hydrochlorothiazide; p- hydroxybenzoic acid esters; benzidine; phenylhydrazine; and p -toluenediamine.  
Eyelash and eyebrow products may contain potential allergens.143  These may include p -Phenylenediamine and cross -
reactors p-toluenediamine sulfate and 2 -chloro -p-phenylenediamine.  
In a retrospective study of p -Phenylenediamine sensitization by the North American Contact Dermatitis Group 
(NACDG ), the most common co -reactions were benzocaine (11.3%, 349/3095), IPPD (6.7%, 33/493), disperse dyes (6.5%, 
159/2459) , and black rubber mix (5.1%, 126/2459) .70 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteThe rate of cross -reactivity between parabens, p-Phenylenediamine, and benzocaine was evaluated in a population of 
patients patch -tested in a hospital -based dermatitis clinic.144  A retrospective analysis of 4368 patients with eczematous skin 
disease consecutively patch -tested between July of 1989 and June of 2005  was conducted.  The test materials were placed on 
the patient’s upper back and remained for 2 d.  Reactions were scored after 48 and 96 h according to ICDRG guidelines. The 
positive reactions in the group of 4368 patients were reported as follows: 253 (5. 7%) to p -Phenylenediamine, 37 (0.8%) to 
benzocaine, and 34 (0.7%) to the paraben mix.  Of the 253 patients with positive patch test reactions to p-Phenylenediamine, 
23 (9%) also had positive reactions to benzocaine and 6 (2.37%) had positive reactions to parabens. The results of this study indicated that the rate of cross -reactions to parabens in p-Phenylenediamine - and benzocaine -positive patients combined was 
2.0%.  The authors concluded that this cross -reaction rate is significant in the tested population, but still falls within the 
previously reported rates of sensitivity to parabens in the general population (0 to 3.5%).  
A retrospective analysis of clinical data collected in a contact allergy surveillance network (IVDK ) between January of 
1992 and June of 2004 was performed to determine whether aniline should be regarded as a potential cause of contact 
allergy .
145  During this period,  25 of 1 119 patients patch tested with aniline (1% in water or petrolatum) had positive 
(allergic) reactions. Of the 25 patients, 24 were diagnosed with contact allergy to p -Phenylenediamine (1% in pet .) and/or 
p-aminoazobenzene or another para -amino compound.   The researchers found it unlikely that aniline was an independent 
sensitizer, but it may elicit allergic reactions in subjects pre -sensitized to para- substituted amino compounds.  
A retrospective study of patients with suspected hair dye allergy in the United Kingdom between 1997 and 2007 found 
68 out of 175 patients positive to p-Phenylenediamine, 48 positive to p -toluenediamine, 10 positive to resorcinol, and 13 
positive to pyrogallol.146  In this group of patients, 80 had been tested with 2 -nitro -p-phenylenediamine, 3 -aminophenol, 
4-aminophenol, and 1,4 -hydroquinone, which yielded 14, 9, 13, and 1 positive reactions, respectively.  Of the 108 reactions 
to hair dye ingredients other than p-Phenylenediamine, only 18 occur red in the absence of a reaction to p-Phenylenediamine.   
In 221 patients with allergic reactions to p-Phenylenediamine reported between 2007 and 2012 in London, 16.6% (n = 
33) exhibited cross -reactions with one or more related allergens in the European ba seline series.147  Of the patients allergic to 
p-Phenylenediamine, 5.1% reacted to Disperse Yellow 3, 8.1% reacted to IPPD, and 5.6% reacted to caine mix.  Cross -
reactions were observed in 16% with a grade of 1+, 14.5% with a grade of 2+, 28.6% with a grade of 3+, based on the 
ICDRG criteria, when p-Phenylenediamine was tested 1% pet.  When tested at 0.01 to 0.001% p-Phenylenediamine, cross -
reactions were observed in 50% of patients with p-Phenylenediamine allergy.  
Patch test results of patients (n = 1319) between November 2008 and June 2013 in a Vancouver Patch Test Clinic found 
95 patients were positive to p -Phenylenediamine.148  Of those 95 patients, 74 (78%) had at least 1 other positive reaction, 
with the most common co- or cross -reactants reported as nickel (31%), ammonium persulfate (23%), cobalt (II) chloride 
hexahydrate (20%), p-toluenediamine sulfate (19%), 4 -aminophenol (18%), fragrance mix 1 (15%), toluenediamine base 
(12%), fragrance mix 2 (9%), myroxylon pereirae resin (9%), and glyceryl thioglycolate (9%).  
In a prospective patch test study in 20 patients with known sensiti vity to p-Phenylenediamine and in 19 controls , 11 
patients (55%) were positive to more than one allergen in the hairdressing series  (only 2 control subjects were positive).149  
Reactions were observed to p-toluenediamine sulfate (15%), 3 -aminophenol (10%) and nickel -sulfate hexahydra te (10%).   
In a retrospective study of patients with suspected allergic contact dermatitis to hair dyes from 2010 to 2019 in Greece, 
199 (55%) out of 362 patients were positive to at least p-Phenylenediamine, p-toluenediamine, or p-aminophenol, and 163 
(45%) were negative to all 3 allergens.90  Further, 45  (12% of total population) patients were positive to both p-
Phenylenediamine and p-toluenediamine, 5 (1%) to both p-Phenylenediamine and p-aminophenol, and 1 (0.003%) to both 
p-toluenediamine and p -aminophenol.  Positive reactions to all 3 allergens were found in 86 (24%) patients.  With non -hair 
dye allergens, all 24 patients positive to caine mix were also positive to p-Phenylenediamine, 4 out of 11 patients positive to 
methyl chloroisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone were also positive to p-Phenylenediamine, and 23 out of 28 patients 
positive to p-Phenylenediamine -black rubber mix were also positive to p-Phenylenediamine.  
Occupational Exposure  
The results of occupational exposure studies, mainly involving hairdressers, are summarized in Table 14.70,93,150-156  The 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) lists the permissible exposure limit (PEL) for 8 -h work shifts for 
p-Phenylenediamine as 0.1 mg/m3.157,158  The N ational Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) lists the 
recommended exposure limit (REL) for up to 10 h time -weighted average (TWA) for p-Phenylenediamine as 0.1 mg/m3. 
MARGIN OF SAFETY  
The SCCS calculated conventional and toxicokinetic -based margin of safety values for p -Phenylenediamine.8   In the 
conventional calculation, the margin of safety for 2% p-Phenylenediamine  under oxidative conditi ons was determined  to be 
200. (The maximum use concentration reported to the Panel is 0.98%  - 3% in hair dyes, with a maximum on- head 
concentration after dilution of 1%).13  This calculation is based on the NOAEL  of 8 mg/kg bw/d (from a 90- d oral rat study in 
which the SCCS determined the original NOAEL to be a NOEL ) and a systemic exposure dose (SED) of 0.04 mg/kg bw 
(skin area surface of 580 cm2 x absorption through skin of 4.47 µg/cm2 x 0.001 (unit conversion)/typical human bw of 60 kg).    
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteIn the toxicokinetic -based approach, the margin of safety was calculated to be 23.3.  This calculation used AUC 0-ꝏ 
values from rat and human plasma concentration as systemic exposure doses.  These values (for rats, 33,038 equivalents (ng -
eq/g)*h, and for humans,  1415 (ng -eq/g)*h) were based on data from a 6.45 mg/kg bw kinetic rat study and from 2% on- head 
application  of p-Phenylenediamine in humans, respectively.  T he NOAEL of 8 mg/kg bw/d was also utilized . While these 
results are below the threshold of 25 for toxicokinetic based margins of safety, the SCCS found the calculated value to be 
borderline and had no conce rn regarding systemic toxicity due to the intermittent exposure to p-Phenylenediamine  in 
oxidative hair dyes and the fact that human systemic exposure through hair dyeing is mainly to the de -toxified metabolite , 
DAPPD . 
HAIR DYE EPIDEMIOLOG Y   
Hair dyes may be broadly grouped into oxidative (permanent) and direct (temporary or semi -permanent) dyes.  The 
oxidative dyes consist of precursors mixed with developers to produce color, while direct hair dyes consist of preformed 
colors.  p-Phenylenediamine and its salts are  reported to be used in oxidative hair dye formulations.  While the safety of 
individual hair dye ingredients is not addressed in epidemiology studies that seek to determine links, if any, between hair dye 
use and disease, such studies do provide broad information.  The Panel determined that the available hair dye epidemiology 
data do not provide sufficient evidence for a causal relationship between personal hair dye use and cancer.  A detailed 
summary of the available hair dye epidemiology data is available at https://www.cir -safety.org/cir -findings .  
SUMMARY 
p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate are reported to function as hair 
colorants in cosmetic products, according to the Dictionary .  These ingredients act as primary intermediates or precursors in 
oxidative (permanent) hair dyes.  The Panel first  reviewed the safety o f p-Phenylenediamine  individually , in a report 
published in 1985 with the conclusion “p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and that some persons may be sensitized 
under intended conditions of use.  For those persons not sensitized, the Panel concludes that p-Phenylenediamine is safe as a 
hair dye ingredient at the current concentration of use.”  This conclusion was reaffirmed in a re- review that was published in 
2006.  
Subsequently , the p-Phenylenediamine report was reopened to add p -Phenylenediamine HCl and p-Phenylenediamine 
Sulfate .  The amended  report was finalized in 2007 with the conclusion that these ingredients are safe as hair dyes in the 
practices of use and concentration as described in the safety assessment.  
According to the 2023 VCRP survey d ata, p-Phenylenediamine is reported to be used in 200 formulations.  The 
majority of these uses are in hair coloring preparations; however, 7 uses have been reported for eye makeup preparations.  
Only 1 use was reported in a hair coloring shampoo for p-Phenylenediamine HCl and no uses were reported for the sulfate 
salt.  The frequencies of use for p -Phenylenediamine have greatly decreased since the initial amended report was finalized; in 
2007, p-Phenylenediamine was reported to have 1497 uses, all in hair coloring formulations.  No uses were reported at that 
time for the related salts.   
The results of the concentration of use survey conducted by the Council in 2022 indicate p-Phenylenediamine has a 
maximum concentration of use range of 0.98% - 3% in hair dyes, with a maximum on -head concentration after dilution of 
1%.  No concentrations of use were reported for related salts.  In the 2007 amended report, the maximum concentration of uses range for p-Phenylenediamine was 2% - 4% in hair dyes; the  hydrochloride  salt and the sulfate salt were each reported to 
be used at 6% in hair dyes . 
Under European regulations for cosmetic ingredients, p -Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylene -
diamine Sulfate are listed in Annex III with the restrictions that these ingredients may be used at only up to 6% (free base)  in 
oxidizing hair dyes, these ingredients should not be used on eyebrows, and these ingredients are for professional use only.  Annex III has been amended with the restriction that p-Phenylenediamine and its  hydrochloride  and sulfate salts may be used 
in products intended for coloring eyelashes when after mixing under oxidative conditions and the maximum concentration applied to eyel ashes must not exceed 2% (free base); application is for professional use only.    
The SCCS expressed no concern regarding systemic toxicity to use of p-Phenylenediamine in oxidative hair dyes at on -
head concentrations of up to 2%.  Further, the SCCS could not conclude on the carcinogenicity of p-Phenylenediamine, but 
decided it was unlikely that p- Phenylenediamine as used in hair dyes would pose a carcinogenic risk for consumers, based on 
toxicokinetic and genotoxicity data.  
The in vitro percutaneous absorption of radiolabeled p-Phenylenediamine in human skin under 5 different dosing 
conditions was between 0.1 and 0.2% of the applied dose (1.9 - 2.4 μg/cm
2 for the complete dye formulations ).  For 
p-Phenylene diamine HCl, the total absorbed amount of radiolabeled was 2.4% (10.6 μg eq/cm2) in an in vitro study with 
human skin.  An in vivo human study of 8 male subjects determined the absorbed amount of radiolabeled p-Phenylene -
diamine HCl in an oxidative hair dye to be 7.0 mg eq/cm2, with 0.5% of the applied dose  found in the urine, 0.04% found in 
the feces, and 95.16% recovered in the washing water, cut hair, application materials, and scalp.   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteIn human skin samples, p -Phenylenediamine is acetylated to MAPPD, which is then acetylated to DAPPD.  In oral rat 
studies, p-Phenylenediamine and p -Phenylenediamine HCl were readily absorbed, distributed to major tissues, and 
metabolized into several metabolites that were rapidly cleared from the body, mainly in urine.  The major metabolite detected  
in rab bits following oral administration of p-Phenylenediamine HCl was DAPPD.  Within 24 h of dosing in the rabbits, 86% 
of the administered test material was found in the urine, 10% was found in the feces, and 4% was found in the blood.  In 
human subjects, radi olabeled p-Phenylenediamine  in hair dye formulations applied topically was found in the urine  as the 
metabolites MAPPD and DAPPD.  
In rabbit acute dermal studies, the LD 50 of p-Phenylenediamine was > 7940 mg/kg and mortalities were observed in 
another study at the maximum dose tested of 5000 mg/kg.   In oral studies, mice that received up to 70 mg/kg p-Phenylene -
diamine had a significant increase in serum CPK and aldolase after 24 and 72 h and rhabdomyolysis was observed after 24 h. 
The minimal and maximum n on-lethal oral doses of p-Phenylenediamine were 75 mg/kg and 50 mg/kg, respectively, in rats 
that received up to 100 mg/kg p -Phenylenediamine.  Dogs that received up to 100 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine orally had 
marked edema of the face, extremities, and external genitals, painful muscle rigor accompanied with massive necrosis of the skeletal muscles, and increases in serum CPK and SGOT.  The calculated LC
50 for p-Phenylenediamine in rats was 0.92 mg/l 
in a study that tested the material at up to 1.8 mg/l.  
In guinea pigs, activity of β -glucuronidase, acid phosphatase, glutathione -transferase, and glutathione peroxidase were 
significantly elevated, and lipid peroxidation and histamine were increased significantly in a 30 -d dermal study of a 1% 
solution of p-Phen ylenediamine in ethanol.  The LOAEL was 1 mg/kg bw/d in a dermal rat study of p-Phenylenediamine 
tested at up to 3 mg/kg bw/d. Effects observed included hemolytic anemia and increased sequestration of damaged 
erythrocytes within splenic sinuses. Mild eryth ema was the only adverse effects observed in a 4 -mo dermal study of a hair 
dye formulation that contained p-Phenylenediamine.  
In oral studies, the NOAEL for p -Phenylenediamine  was < 5 mg/kg bw/d in a 14- d study in rats when tested at up to 40 
mg/kg/d.  Obs erved effects included increased lactate dehydrogenase and CPK levels at 5 mg/kg or greater, increased mean 
absolute and relative liver weights in 40 mg/kg males, and increased mean relative thyroid weights in 10 mg/kg or greater 
females.  The NOEL in a 7 wk dietary study was 681 ppm for females and 1000 ppm for males exposed to up to 3160 ppm 
p-Phenylenediamine, based on decreased weight gains (no other effects were described).  A dose -dependent retardation of 
growth was observed in rats fed 0.05 - 0.4% p-Phenylenediamine for 12 wk. Other effects noted were increased liver -to-body 
weight and kidney -to-body weight ratios and near total mortalities in the 0.4% dose group.   In a 90 -d oral study in rats, the 
NOEL was 4 mg/kg/d and the NOAEL was 16 mg/kg/d when p-Phenylenediamine was administered at up to 16 mg/kg/d.  
Mean absolute and body  weight -related liver weights were significantly increased for 8 and 16 mg/kg/d males and absolute 
and body- weight- related kidney weights were increased for 8 and 16 mg/kg females.  
No adverse effects on reproduction or litter parameters were observed in a rat multigeneration dermal study with 
p-Phenylenediamine at up to 4% in oxidative formulation.  In a 90- d dermal study in male rats with up to 3 mg/kg/d 
p-Phenylenediamine in water, significant decreases in absolute testes weigh and total sperm count with abnormal testicular 
tissue morphology, and a significant increase in the percentage of abnormal sperm morphology were observed in the 2 and 3 
mg/kg/d dose groups.  The maternal NOEL was 5 mg/kg/d and the developmental NOAEL was 10 mg/kg/d in an oral 
developmental toxicity study of female rats that received up to 20 mg/kg/d p-Phenylenediamine in water on gestation days 6 
through 19.  Dams experienced slightly transient lower mean gestation body weight gain in the 10 and 20 mg/kg/d dose 
groups, and an equivocal increase in the incidence of early resorptions and lower fetal weight and mean gravid uterus weight 
were observed in the 20 mg/kg/d dose group.  The test material was co nsidered non -embryo -fetotoxic.  In an oral 
reproductive study in female mice, the meiotic capacity of oocytes and fertilization potential was affected by p-Phenylene -
diamine in DMSO at up to 50 mg/kg.  
p-Phenylenediamine was mutagenic or weakly mutagenic in  multiple Ames tests when tested with metabolic activation 
and at as much as 100,000 µg/plate, but these results were not always repeated when tested without metabolic activation.   
p-Phenylenediamine HCl at up to 6666 µg/plate was mutagenic in Ames tests w hen tested under oxidative conditions in a 
couple of studies but had mixed results when tested with or without metabolic activation or when other components (like resorcinol) were tested in addition.   Mixed results were observed in additional bacterial str ain genotoxicity studies with up 5 
mg/ml p-Phenylenediamine.   In S. cerevisiae , p-Phenylenediamine was not mutagenic in a mitotic recombination when tested 
at up to 0.1%, with and without metabolic activation, but it was mutagenic in a gene mutation assay when tested at up to 0.3 
mM.  Assays in CHO cells indicated a dose -related in chromosomal aberrations when up to 87 µg/ml p -Phenylenediamine 
was tested without metabolic activity.   Genotoxicity to p-Phenylenediamine was also observed in a sister chromatid exchange 
assay in CHO cells with 0.4 mM and in a micronucleus test in CHL cells without metabolic activation at up to 50 µg/ml.  
Mutagenicity to p-Phenylenediamine HCl was reported in forward mutation assays with L5178 mouse lymphoma cells when 
tested at u p to 400 µg/ml with metabolic activation and at up to 10 µg/ml without metabolic activation; however, no 
mutagenicity to p-Phenylenediamine HCl was reported in the same cell lines in a gene mutation assay at the hprt locus at up 
to 1000 µg/ml with metabolic activation and at up to 80 µg/ml without metabolic activation.  p-Phenylenediamine was not 
genotoxic in an unscheduled DNA synthesis assay in rat hepatocytes at up to 1µmol/ml, but increased expression of mutant 
p53 and COX -2 proteins was observed in a s ingle cell gel/comet assay with SV -40 immortalized human uroepithelial cells at 
up to 40 µg/ml.  Genotoxicity was observed in a micronucleus test in human lymphocytes with p -Phenylenediamine HCl with 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotemetabolic activation in 1600 µg/ml in one test, and with  (up to 2000 µg/ml) and without (p to 125 µg/ml) metabolic 
activation in another test.  
In in vivo genotoxicity studies, p-Phenylenediamine was not genotoxic in micronucleus tests in mice (at up to 32.4 
mg/kg) or rats (at up to 300 mg/kg), and p-Phenylenedi amine HCl was not genotoxic in a micronucleus test in rats (at up to 
100 mg/kg).  No genotoxicity was reported in rats to p-Phenylenediamine in an unscheduled DNA synthesis assay or a comet 
assay at up to 100 mg/kg, in each respective test.   There was no evidence of covalent binding of p-Phenylenediamine or its 
metabolites with hepatic DNA when rats received a single 600 µmol/kg dose (route of exposure not reported).  
IARC, based on evaluation of data on p-Phenylenediamine HCl, has classified p-Phenylenediamine as a Group 3 
chemical, not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans.  This finding was based on no adequate human data and 
inadequate animal data.  
No papillomas or carcinomas were reported in mice that received dermal applications  of 5% p -Phenylenediamine twice 
weekly for 20 wk.  No tumors were observed in rats that received 20 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine subdermally for 4 mo, but 
were observed in 2 out of 5 rats that received 12.5 mg/kg for 8 mo.  No treatment related gross lesions w ere observed in rats 
that received up to 4% p-Phenylenediamine in oxidative formulation dermally in a multigeneration study that lasted 24 mo.  
A statistically significant incidence of mammary gland tumors were observed in female rats that received topical  applications  
of 5% p -Phenylenediamine HCl for 18 mo.   In oral studies, no carcinogenicity was observed in rats that received up to 0.1% 
p-Phenylenediamine in dietary feed for up to 80 wk, or in mice that received 30 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine HCl via gavage  
in a multigeneration study that lasted up to 137 wk. No carcinogenicity was observed in mice that received p-
Phenylenediamine or p -Phenylenediamine HCl intraperitoneally at up to approximately 30 mg/kg for up to 8 wk.  A 
statistically significant incidenc e of uterine tumors and malignant and benign soft tissue tumors were observed in female rats 
that received subcutaneous injections of 5% p-Phenylenediamine HCl for 18 mo.  In tumor promotion studies, p -
Phenylenediamine did not significantly increase γ -glutamyl transpeptidase positive foci that were observed 3 wk after N-
nitrosodiethyl -amine initiation in rats that received up to 1000 ppm of the test material in dietary feed, and a 40 mg/kg single 
dose of p -Phenylenediamine HCl did not cause a statistically significant increase in the number of glutathione 5 -transferase 
positive foci when compared to controls in a 5 wk intragastric study.  
Cytotoxic effects have been reported for p-Phenylenediamine in CHO cells, rat skin fibroblast, and guinea pig lymph 
node c ells.  p-Phenylenediamine HCl was cytotoxic to mouse embryo cells at 100 µg/ml. p-Phenylenediamine increased the 
level of ROS in rat skin fibroblast cells.  In mouse muscle cells and in rats in vivo, p-Phenylenediamine at up to 60 mg/kg in a 
single gavage dose induced pathologic signs involved with rhabdomyolysis .  The NOEL was 8 mg/kg bw/d and the NOAEL 
was 16 mg/kg bw/d in a 13 -wk oral neurotoxicity study of rats that received p-Phenylenediamine at up to 16 mg/kg bw/d.   
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate was predicted to be not irritating in human reconstructed epidermis when tested neat.  
P-Phenylenediamine was not irritating or mildly irritating in several guinea pig studies when tested at up to 30%.  In rabbit 
studies, mild irr itation was observed to p-Phenylenediamine, but it was not corrosive.   p-Phenylenediamine was sensitizing in 
numerous guinea pig studies when induced at concentrations of up to 1% and challenged at concentrations of up to 30%.   It 
was also sensitizing in s everal LLNAs in mice and guinea pigs, with an EC 3 value determined to be 0.06% in a study of up to 
1.25% p-Phenylenediamine.   p-Phenylenediamine was sensitizing in predictive and provocative studies in human subjects 
when tested at up to 1% in pet .  Cross -sensitization was observed between p-Phenylenediamine and p-aminophenol or 
m-phenylenediamine in a modified lymphocyte transformation test in guinea pigs.  
Keratitis and corneal opacities were observed in rats that received up to 15% p-Phenylenediamine in f ormulation daily 
for up to 3 mo.  No ocular irritation was observed in guinea pigs that received 2.5% p-Phenylenediamine.  In rabbits, 
p-Phenylenediamine was moderately irritating when tested neat and weakly irritating at lower test concentrations.  
Sensitization to p- Phenylenediamine has been observed around the globe, with sensitization rates varying greatly, 
independent of region or span of time.   Using the US as an example, one retrospective study from 2001 to 2005 reported a 
positivity rate of 4.5%, whi le another reported a rate of 5.2% from 2006 to 2010, and a third reported a rate of 35.8% from 
2001 to 2016.  Greece has reported a positively rate as high as 52.5% (2010 to 2019) and India has reported a rate of 67.5% 
(dates not reported).   In contrast, a German multicenter study reported a positivity rate of only 1.5% in 1994 to 1995.  
Additionally, numerous cases of adverse reactions to products containing p-Phenylenediamine have been reported in the 
published literature.  p-Phenylenediamine intoxication  through accidental or intentional oral ingestion of the dye has also 
been reported.  Reactions to dark (black) henna tattoos/temporary tattoos containing p-Phenylenediamine have also been 
reported in large numbers, with most cases occurring outside of the  US.  Use of p-Phenylenediamine in dark (black) henna 
tattoos is not approved by the FDA.  Skin depigmentation has been reported in numerous cases where patients were exposed 
to p-Phenylenediamine in hair dye products.  C linical reports of c ross- sensitization reactions between p- Phenylenediamine 
and other hair dye ingredients, benzocaine, black rubber mix, and other chemicals have been documented.   
The rate of sensitization of hairdressers has been studied.  The OSHA PEL for 8 -h work shifts and the NIOSH REL for 
10-h TWA  for exposure to p-Phenylenediamine are both 0.1 mg/m3. 
A conventional calculation by the SCCS for 2% p-Phenylenediamine under oxidative conditions determined the margin 
of safety to be 200.  This calculation was based on the NOAE L of 8 mg/kg bw/d (from a 90- d oral rat study) and a SED of 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote0.04 mg/kg bw.  In a toxicokinetic based approach performed by the SCCS, the margin of safety was calculated to be 23.3.  
This calculation used AUC 0-ꝏ values from rat and human plasma concentration as systemic exposure doses.  These values 
were  based on data from a 6.45 mg/kg bw kinetic rat study and from 2% on- head application of p-Phenylenediamine in 
humans, respectively.  The NOAEL of 8 mg/kg bw/d was also utilized.  
The Panel determined that  the available hair dye epidemiology data do not provide sufficient evidence for a causal 
relationship between personal hair dye use and cancer.   
PREVIOUS (1 985) DISCUSSION  
p-Phenylenediamine  may or may not cause mutations depending on the test system and  test conditions.2  In the Ames 
test, different researchers used different  solvents for the p-Phenylenediamine , different chemicals for induction, different 
metabolic activation systems, and slight modifications of the test procedure; any or all of these may explain the observed 
differences in results.  Most researchers reported  that p-Phenylenediamine  was not teratogenic or carcinogenic.  
Application of hair dyes containing p-Phenylenediamine  to the eyebrows and eyelashes can result in lost or 
permanently damaged vision.  p-Phenylenediamine  is a sensitizer for guinea pigs and for  human beings.  Phototoxicity and 
photosensitization data are not available.  Hair dyes containing p-Phenylenediamine  are exempt from the principal 
adulteration provision and from the color additive provisions in sections 601 and 706 of the Federal Food, D rug and 
Cosmetic Act of 1938 when cautionary statements and patch test instructions are conspicuously displayed on the labels.  Prophetic patch testing of hair dye formulations with open patches is less predictive of skin reactions than patch testing wi th 
closed patches; false negative reactions may occur.  Some persons may be sensitized even under the proper conditions of use.
2 
PREVIOUS (2 007) DISCUSSION  
The Expert Panel recognizes that p- Phenylenediamine and its salts are used mostly in hair dyes and colors at 
concentrations of 6%, but that uses have been reported in tints and lighteners with color, with no available data on concentration.
4  The Panel expects that use concentrations in these product categories will be no higher than for hair dyes 
and c olors. 
4-Aminobiphenyl, a known urinary bladder carcinogen, and 2- aminobiphenyl (carcinogenic, induces hemangio-
sarcomas) have been detected in batches of chemical research grade p -Phenylenediamine (purity of 97%).  The Expert Panel 
states that cosmetic gr ade p -Phenylenediamine should not contain 4 -aminobiphenyl or 2 -aminobiphenyl, noting that the 
major U.S. manufacturer of p -Phenylenediamine produces this chemical (purity of> 99% p- Phenylenediamine) for use in 
hair dyes via the process of direct nitration of benzene without chlorinating, which does not yield aminobiphenyl compounds, and not by the reduction of p- nitroaniline.  Thus, it is the expectation of the Expert Panel that 99% pure p -Phenylenediamine 
(free of aminobiphenyls) is being used  by the cosmetics industry.  
p-Phenylenediamine may cause mutations, depending on the  test system and test conditions.  In the Ames test, different 
researchers used different solvents for the p -Phenylenediamine, different chemicals for induction,  different metabolic 
activation systems, and slight  modifications of the test procedure; any or all of these may  explain the observed differences in 
results.  The available  studies do not suggest that p- Phenylenediamine is  carcinogenic or teratogenic.  
In considering hair dye epidemiology data, the CIR Expert  Panel concluded that the available epidemiology studies are  
insufficient to conclude there is a causal relationship between hair dye use and cancer and other endpoints, based on lack of 
strength of the associations and inconsi stency of  findings.  Use of direct hair dyes, while not the focus in all  investigations, 
appears to have little evidence of any  association with adverse events as reported in epidemiology  studies.  
The application of hair dyes containing p -Phenylenediamine  to the eyebrows and eyelashes can result in lost or  
permanently damaged vision. p -Phenylenediamine is a sensitizer for guinea pigs and for human beings.   Phototoxicity and 
photosensitization data are limited, but  suggest that sensitization is approximately the same with or  without light.  Hair dyes 
containing p -Phenylenediamine are  exempt from the principal adulteration provision and from the color additive provisions 
in sections 601 and 706 of the  Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 wh en cautionary statements and patch test 
instructions are  conspicuously displayed on the labels.  While some persons  may be sensitized under proper conditions of 
use, the Expert  Panel expects that following this procedure will identify prospective individua ls who would have an  
irritation/sensitization reaction and allow them to avoid  significant exposures.  
Articles reporting cases of depigmentation after exposure to  p-Phenylenediamine have been identified in the published 
literature and the Expert Panel not ed that, clinically, this has  to be a very uncommon or rare event and is not a significant  
safety concern.  It was not clear whether the reaction observed  in the reports was vitiligo induced by an allergic reaction, 
true chemical leukoderma, or post -inflam matory,  and the nature of the reaction requires further study.   Additionally, it was 
noted that the 48 -hour patch test for  evaluating the skin irritation potential of hair dyes is  sufficient for evaluating the skin 
depigmentation potential of  p-Phenylenedi amine.  
The FDA has determined that uses of p- Phenylenediamine  other than as a hair dye are unapproved.  The Panel  
expressed particular concern over the practice of combining p- Phenylenediamine with henna (so- called dark or black  henna) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotefor use in temporary tattoos p -Phenylenediamine  is a known sensitizer, highly inappropriate for such use as  evidenced by 
reports of severe adverse skin reactions to dark  henna temporary tattoos.  
The Panel urged users to report adverse reactions to the  FDA.4 
DISCUSSION  
To be developed.  
CONCLUSION  
To be determined.  
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLES  
Table 1.  Definitions, reported functions, and idealized structures of the ingredients in this safety assessment.1, CIR Staff  
Ingredient & CAS No.                 Definition  Function(s)  
p-Phenylenediamine  
106-50-3 p-Phenylenediamine is the aromatic amine that conforms to the structure  in 
Figure 1.  hair colorant  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl 
624-18-0 p-Phenylenediamine HCl is the aromatic amine salt that conforms to the 
structure: 
 hair colorant  
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
16245- 77-5 
50994- 40-6 p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate is the aromatic amine salt that conforms to the 
structure: 
 hair colorant  
 
  
 
 
Table 2.  Chemical properties    
Property  Value  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine  
Physical Form  white to light purple powder  7 
Molecular Weight ( g/mol)  108.14  7 
Density ( g/ml @ 22ºC)   0.726  5 
Vapor p ressure (mm Hg  @ 20ºC) 7.5 x 10-5 5 
Melting Point (ºC)  139 - 141 
142 7 
5 
Boiling  Point (ºC)  267 
274 7 
5 
Water Solubility (g/ l @ 20ºC & pH  9.55 - 9.61) 31 5 
Other Solubility (@ 22ºC ) ethanol: < 10% w/v  
DMSO: < 20% w/v  7 
7 
log P ow  -0.31 (estimated)  
-0.84  7 
5 
Disassociation constant (pKa) (@  20ºC) 6.22 (estimated)  5 
UV Abso rption (λ max) (nm)  281.9  7 
p-Phenylene diamine  HCl 
Physical Form  White to gray or pink -beige powder  4 
Molecular Weight ( g/mol)  181.07  7 
Melting Point (ºC) 140.7  4 
Water Solubility (g/100 ml @ 22ºC for 24 h)  > 10; < 20 4 
Other Solubility (g/100 ml @ 22ºC for 24 h)  ethanol: < 10  
DMSO: < 1  4 
log P ow -0.3 (estimated)  
-0.84 4 
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
Physical Form  off-white powder  6 
Density ( g/ml @ 20ºC)   1.573  6 
Vapor pressure (mmHg  @ 25ºC) 3.1 x 10-6 6 
Water Solubility (g/ l @ 30ºC) 3.71 6 
log Pow (@ 25ºC & pH 3.28) 0.856  6 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 3.  Frequency (2023/2006) and concentration (2022/2007) of use according to likely duration and exposure and by product catego ry 
 p-Phenylenediamine  p-Phenylenediamine HCl  p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
 # of Uses  Max Conc of Use (%) # of Uses  Max Conc of Use (%) # of Uses Max Conc of Use (%) 
 202312 20064 202213 20074 202312 20064 202213 20074 202312 20064 202213 20074 
Totals  200 1497  0.98-3≠ 2-4† 1 NR NR 6‡ NR NR NR 6‡ 
summarized by likely duration and exposure*         
Duration of Use              
Leave -On 7 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Rinse -Off 193 1497  0.98-3 NR 1 NR NR 6 NR NR NR 6 
Diluted for (Bath) Use  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Exposure Type**              
Eye Area  7 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Incidental Ingestion  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Incidental Inhalation -Spray  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Incidental Inhalation -Powder  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Dermal Contact  7 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Deodorant (underarm)  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Hair - Non-Coloring  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Hair-Coloring  193 1497  0.98-3≠ 2-4† 1 NR NR 6† NR NR NR 6† 
Nail NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Mucous Membrane  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Baby Products  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
as reported by product category              
Eye Mak eup Preparations              
Eyeliner  1 NR NR NR         
Other Eye Makeup Preparations  6 NR NR NR         
Hair Coloring Preparations              
Hair Dyes and Colors (all types 
requiring caution statements and 
patch tests)  189 1478  0.98-3≠ 2-4† NR NR NR 6‡ NR NR NR 6‡ 
Hair Tints  1 16 NR NR         
Hair Shampoos (coloring)  3 NR NR NR 1 NR NR NR     
Hair Lighteners with Color  NR 3 NR NR         
NR – not reported  
≠ After dilution, maximum on -head use concentration 1%.  
† 1-2% after dilution.  
‡ 3% after dilution. 
*Because each ingredient may be used in cosmetics with multiple exposure types, the sum of all exposure types may not equal the sum of total uses.  
**Likely duration and exposure is derived based on product category (see Use Categorization https://www.cir-safety.org/cir- findings ) 
 
 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 4.  Acute toxicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Concentration/Dose  Protocol  LD 50/LC 50/Results  Reference  
DERMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine in 
oxidative hair dye  not reported  Groups of 4 to 8 New 
Zealand rabbits, sex not 
reported at least 5000 mg/kg bw Dermal exposure to test material (10 ml), no 
further details provided  Mortality observed at 5000 mg/kg bw, no further 
details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine 
applied as 40% aq. solution none  New Zealand White 
rabbits, 1 female at low 
dose, 1 female and 1 
male at high dose  5010 or 7940 mg/kg  Dermal exposure to test material for 24 h, no 
further details provided  LD 50 > 7940 mg/kg, no mortalities reported; no 
further details provided  5 
ORAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  water  Groups of 5 mice, strain 
and sex not reported 0, 35, or 70 mg/kg bw  Single oral dose; animals observed for 
clinical symptoms, with serial sacrifices for 
histopathology ; no further details provided  A significant increase in serum CPK and 
aldolase was evident after 24 and 72 h; 
histopathology of animals sacrificed after 24 h 
showed rhabdomyolysis with areas of fresh 
necrosis ; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
99.8% pure  sterile water  Female Sprague -Dawley 
Crl:OFA(SD) rats ; 
number per group varied 
with dose 25, 50. 75, or 100 mg/kg  In accordance with OECD TG 420; 5 rats in 
25 mg/kg dose group, 1 rat each in 50 and 
100 mg/kg dose group, and 2 in 75 mg/kg dose group; rats received test material via 
gavage; obs erved up to 14 d after dosing; all 
animals underwent necropsy  Minimal  = 75 mg/kg;  1 rat in 100 mg/kg group 
died within 90 min of dosing and 1 rat in 75 
mg/g died within 175 min; t reatment-related 
clinical signs  included marked subdued behavior 
and unsteady gai t observed in the 50, 75, and 
100 mg/kg dose groups; orange traces in the bedding, probably due to colored urine, observed 
(in which dose groups not stated) on day 0; no macroscopic findings observed in any animal  5,7 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  water  14 dogs; details not 
provided  50, 80, or 100 mg/kg bw  Single oral dose; animals observed for 
clinical symptoms, with serial sacrifices for histopathology; no further details provided  Marked edema of the face, extremities, and 
external genitals, and painful muscle rigor 
observed; excessive increase in serum CPK 
observed in most animals, and animals in 80 
mg/kg dose group had greatest  increase; SGOT 
varied with the animals, and serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) did not increase 
significantly ; histolo gy of skeletal muscles 
showed massive necrosis, most pronounced in 
80 mg/kg dose group; no further details provided  5 
INHALATION  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
99.5% pure  air Groups of 10 male 
Crl:CD rats  0.07, 0.30, 0.54, 0.94, or 1.8 mg/l  Nose only inhalation study;  rats exposed for 
4 h; observed for 14 d for clinical symptoms  Calculated LC 50 = 0.92 mg/l; deaths in at least 
half the animals observed at 0.94 and 1.8 mg/ml 
concentration groups, all deaths occurred within 
48 h; at concentrations greater than 0.07 mg/l, 
rats had red nasal discharge; cyanosis observed at 1.8 mg/l; during observation period, rats at all 
concentrations had red ocular discharge or 
brown- stained fur; dose- dependent decrease in 
body weight for 3 d followed by weight gain  5 
 
 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 5.  Repeated dose toxicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Study Duration  Dose/Concentration  Protocol  Results  Reference  
DERMAL  
1% solution of p-
Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  25% 
ethanol groups of 12 
male guinea 
pigs, strain not 
reported 30 d 4 mg/kg  Dermal exposure  with daily treatment for 30 d , 
open patch to clipped skin; skin enzymatic 
activities measured; concurrent vehicle control; 
no further details provided  No mortalities observed; activity of β-
glucuroni dase and acid phosphatase were 
significantly increased by test material over the 
control; activity of glutathione- transferase and 
glutathione peroxidase were significantly 
elevated; lipid peroxidation  was increased 
significantly; significant increase observed in 
histamine 5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  double 
distilled 
water groups of 5 male 
Sprague -Dawley 
rats 90 d 0, 1, 2, or 3 mg/kg bw/d  Dermal study  with daily treatment for 90 d ; test 
material applied to 1.5 cm2 dorsal, clipped skin 
daily; open patch; body weights observed every 
30 d until study end; hematological examination, enumeration of lymphocytes and 
abnormal/atypical cells in peripheral circulation, 
and assessment of spleen performed ; no further 
details provided   LOAEL = 1  mg/kg bw/d; hemolytic anemia due 
to intravascular hemolysis and increased sequestration of damaged erythrocytes within splenic sinuses observed; sequestration events lead to increased deposition of the heme 
proteins which cause histopathological changes to the spleen; no other endpoints were described  5 
p-Phenylenediamine 
in a hair dye 
formulation none  30 male guinea 
pigs, strain not reported 4 mo  not reported  Test material applied weekly according to dye 
instructions, alternating right and left flank; feed 
consumption and clinical signs recorded 
weekly; blood examinations made every 4 wk; 
animals killed after 4 mo; microscopic 
examination of heart, large blood vessels, lung 
spleen, liver, and adrenal; no further details 
provided  Mild erythema observed in 3 guinea pigs; no 
other pathological, blood, or mic roscopic 
changes observed  5 
ORAL  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  deionized 
water groups of 10 
male and 10 
female Crl: CD (SD) BR (VAF 
plus) rats  14 d 0, 5, 10, 20, or 40 mg/kg/d  Range -finding study  in accordance with OECD 
TG 408; rats received test material (10 ml/kg 
bw) daily via gavage; no further details 
provided  NOAEL < 5 mg/kg bw/d; no treatment -related 
effects noted on mortality, clinical signs of 
toxicity, body weight gains, feed consumption, hematological parameters, or macroscopic 
observatio ns at necropsy; increased lactate 
dehydrogenase and CPK levels observed in both 
sexes at 5 mg/kg or greater; increased mean absolute and relative liver weights in 40 mg/kg 
males; increased mean relative thyroid weights in 10 mg/kg or greater females; minimal 
myodegeneration noted in skeletal muscle of 
three 40 mg/kg females  9 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  dietary feed  groups of 5 male 
and 5 female 
Fischer 344 rats  7 wk  0, 681, 1000, 1470, 2150, or 
3160 ppm  Short -term oral toxicity study ; no further details 
provided  NOEL for females = 681 ppm, NOEL for males 
= 1000 ppm; decreased weight gain for females 
was > 1000 ppm and for males was > 2150 
ppm; no other effects were described  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine ; 
purity not reported  dietary feed  groups of 10  - 11 
F344 rats per sex  12 wk  0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, or 0.4%  Subchronic oral toxicity study; rats killed after 
12 wk; main organs weighed and examined 
macroscopically and histologically  Dose -dependent growth retardation observed in 
both sexes, especially in the 0.4% group; liver -
to-body weight and kidney -to-body weight 
ratios in 0.4% group higher when compared to 
control; 9 males and 1 female in the 0.4% group 
died before study end  27 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 5.  Repeated dose toxicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Study Duration  Dose/Concentration  Protocol  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  deionized 
water groups of 15 
male and 15 
female Crl: CD (SD) BR rats  90 d 0, 2, 4, 8, or 16 mg/kg/d  Subchronic oral toxicity study in accordance 
with OECD TG 408; rats received test material (10 ml/kg bw) daily via gavage; rats examined  
daily for mortality  and clinical signs of toxicity; 
feed consumption and body weight recorded weekly ; ophthalmoscopic examination was 
performed at pre -study  and at week 13  in 
control and high- dose rats; urine and blood 
samples were collected  at weeks 4 and 13  from 
all rats; all rats killed after 13 wk and 
necropsied; macroscopic and microscopic 
examinations performed  NOEL = 4 mg/kg/d , NOAEL = 16 mg/kg/d ; no 
treatment- related mortalities or clinical signs of 
toxicity observed; no adverse effects on feed 
consumption, body weights, or body weight gain observed; no treatment -related 
ophthalmologic, hematology, blood chemistry,  
or urinalysis changes observed; mean absolute and body -weight- related liver weights 
significantly increased for  8 and 16 mg/kg/d 
males; absolute and body weight -related 
kidney weights were increased for 8 and 16 mg/kg/d females ; no associated 
histopathological changes  noted; no treatment-
related macroscopic or microscopic findings 
recorded; minimal myodegeneration on skeletal 
muscle in 1 male and 1 female of the 16 
mg/kg/d group  5,9 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  Sterile 
water Groups of 10 
male and 10 female ccl:CD 
BR rats  13 wk  0, 4, 8, or 16 mg/kg bw/d  Oral neurotoxicity study; performed in similar 
manner as above with the addition of 
neurotoxicity evaluations performed before and after 4, 8, and 13 wk of dosing according to a 
test battery  that included motor activity and 
functional battery assessments  NOEL = 8 mg/kg bw/d, NOAEL = 16 mg/kg 
bw/d; no treatment -related mortalities or clinical 
signs of toxicity observed; feed consumption 
and body weight gains in treated groups 
comparable with controls; no ocular effects 
observed; at 16 mg/kg bw/d, increased incidence of wet chin in both sexes and wet 
inguen and/or wet perineum was observed in 
females; neuropathology evaluations did not reveal abnormalities within the nervous system 
of skeletal muscle; effects observed at 16 mg/kg 
bw/d considered to be pharmacological 
responses  9 
 
  
 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote 
Table 6.  Developmental and r eproductive toxicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Dose/Concentration  Procedure  Results  Reference 
DERMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  not reported  groups of 40 
Sprague -Dawley 
rats of each sex  2, 3, or 4% in 
formulation and mixed 
with 6% hydrogen 
peroxide  Multigeneration reproduction study; test materials (0.5 ml) 
applied topically twice weekly throughout growth, mating, 
gestation and lactation phases of F 0 parents to the weaning of 
the F 1a and F 2b litters ; rats in the F 0 generation received test 
material until 100 d old; test site was 1 in. in diameter; open 
patch; no further details provided  No adverse effects on reproduction; no adverse 
effects on fertility of males or females, on 
gestation, lactation, or weaning indices; average 
number weaned per litter and mean body 
weights of weanlings comparable among treated 
and control groups  28 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  double distilled 
water groups of 10 
Sprague -Dawley 
male rats  0, 1, 2, or 3 mg/kg/d  Rats (~130 g)  painted on clipped dorsal side with test 
material for 90  d; open patches; body weights recorded at 
pre-dosing and prior to necropsy; weight  of both testes and 
epididymis recorded  at necropsy; histological examination 
performed on testes; no further details provided  Significant body weight decrease  (p < 0.05)   in 3 
mg/kg group; in 2 and 3 mg/ kg dose group, a 
significant decrease (p < 0.05, 0.01, 
respectively) in absolute testes weight, but not in 
relative testes weight; no differences observed in epididymal weight between control and treated 
group; also in the 2 and 3 mg/kg dose group, 
significant decrease in total sperm count (p < 
0.05 for both) and a significant increase (p < 
0.05, 0.01, respectively) in the percentage of abnormal sperm morphology  also observed; 
elevation of lipid peroxidation product in the 
testicular tissue (p < 0.01) indicated potential 
oxidative stress ; morphological abnormality in 
testicular tissue observed in groups treated with 
2 and 3 mg/kg  29 
ORAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  DMSO with 
water groups of 5 
female ICR mice  0, 25, or 50 mg/kg  Reproductive toxicity study; mice received test material via 
gavage for 10 d; ovaries and oocytes were analyzed after 
exposure period was complete; additional control and treated 
female mice (number not reported) were mated with 
untreated males after the dosing period and fertilized eggs 
were analyzed  Test material affecte d meiotic capacity of 
oocytes and fertilization potential; damage to the spindle/chromosome structure was observed; 
development and maturation of the oocytes was 
impaired; the test material also compromised the dynamics of cortical granules and ovastacin; 
sperm receptors on the egg membrane were also 
impaired in treated oocytes, leading to fertilization failure; treated oocytes exhibited 
abnormal mitochondrial function, which resulted 
to degeneration, apoptosis, and increased ROS 
levels 30 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 6.  Developmental and r eproductive toxicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Dose/Concentration  Procedure  Results  Reference 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
99.8% pure  sterile water  groups of 25 
mated female 
Sprague -Dawley 
rats 0, 5, 10 or 20 mg/kg/d  Developmental toxicity study in accordance with OECD TG 
414; rats received the test material via gavage once daily on gestation days 6 -19; clinical condition, body weights, and 
feed consumption monitored in dams during dosing period; 
dams underwent caesarean examination on gestation day 20 
and litter parameters were recorded  Maternal NOEL = 5 mg/kg/d; developmental 
NOAEL = 10 mg/kg/d; test materi al was 
considered non- embryo -fetotoxic; in dams; no 
unscheduled deaths or clinical signs of toxicity; 
slightly transient lower mean gestation body 
weight gain noted in the 10 and 20 mg/kg/d dose 
groups during first 3 d of treatment; no effect on maternal f eed consumption in any dose group 
and no treatment- related macroscopic findings at 
necropsy; no differences in pre- or post -
implantation data between treated and control 
groups except for equivocal increase incidence 
of early resorptions  in the high dose group; mean 
live litter sizes comparable between treatment and control groups; mean fetal weight and mean 
gravid uterus weight slightly lower in high dose 
dams than in other groups (not statistically significant); fetal sex ratio comparable between 
groups; no malformed fetuses observed; 
incidences of fetuses with morphological 
anomalies or variations did not suggest any 
treatment- related adverse effects  5 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 7.  Genotoxicity studies  
Test Article  Concentration/Dose  Vehicle  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
IN VITRO  
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported   up to 1 µmol/plate  not reported  Salmonella typhimurium 
strain TA98  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Mutagenic with metabolic activation  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  1 or 5 µmol/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium strain 
TA98  Ames test, with metabolic activation 
only Mutagenic with metabolic activation  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported   up to 0.46 mM  not reported  S. typhimurium strain 
TA98  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Mutagenic with metabolic activation, not 
mutagenic without metabolic activation  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  0.8 - 80 mM  not reported  S. typhimurium strain 
TA98, TA100, YG1024, 
TG1029  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Not mutagenic; cytotoxic above 52.8 mM  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 1500 mM  not reported  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA98 and YG1024  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Not mutagenic  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  25-250 µg/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA98 and TA1538  Ames test, with metabolic activation  Mutagenic with metabolic activation  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; 97% 
pure 67 - 1076 µg/plate  DMSO   S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98 and TA100  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Mutagenic to strain TA98 with metabolic 
activation  34 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 1000 µg/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium strains 
TA98, TA100, TA1535, 
TA1537  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Not mutagenic  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 1000 µg/ml of agar  not reported  S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98, TA100, TA1535, 
TA1537, TA1538, G46, C3076, D3052 and 
Escherichia coli strains 
WP2 and WP2uvrA - Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Mutagenic for strains TA98 and TA1538 
with metabolic activation, not mutagenic for 
the remaining strains with or without metabolic activation  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 2000 µg/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium strain 
TA98  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Mutagenic with metabolic activation, not 
mutagenic without metabolic activation; 
cytotoxic at 2000 µg/plate  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 3000 µg/plate  DMSO  S.  typhimurium strains 
TA98 and TA100  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Mutagenic in strain TA98 with metabolic 
activation; not mutagenic in strain TA100  32 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 3000 µg/plate  DMSO  S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98, TA98NR, TA100, 
TA100NR  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Weakly m utagenic to strain TA98NR  with 
metabolic activation  and strain TA100NR 
without metabolic activation when compared 
to the control  31 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 5000 µg/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium strains 
TA102 and TA2638 and 
E. coli strains WP2/pKM101 and 
WP2uvrA/pM101  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Mutagenic without metabolic activation in 
TA102 and in both E. coli strains; not 
mutagenic with metabolic activation in all strains tested  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 10,000 µg/plate  DMSO  S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98 and TA100  Ames test and preincubation protocols, 
with and without metabolic activation  Not mutagenic  33 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  50,000 -100,000 µg/plate  not reported  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA153 8 Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation  Mutagenic with metabolic activation ; not 
mutagenic without metabolic activation  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 5 mg/ml  DMSO  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA1535/p SK1002  Umu post -treatment assay, with and 
without metabolic activation  Mutagenic with metabolic activation  40 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 190.4 µg/ml  distilled water  E. coli strains B, Bb, 
CR63, and K12 (λh)  Bacteriophage T4D assay  Not mutagenic  41 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 7.  Genotoxicity studies  
Test Article  Concentration/Dose  Vehicle  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  not reported  acetone  E. coli  strain 
B/r.WP2(lambda)_  Microscreen assay, with and without 
metabolic activation  Mutagenic without metabolic activation; the 
induction of lambda prophage results from 
depression of the bacterial SOS system, which becomes activated when DNA is 
damaged; no further details provided  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 0.1%  not reported  S. cerevisiae  strain D3  Mitotic recombination assay, with and 
without metabolic activation  Not mutagenic; cytotoxic at 0.1%  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  up to 0.3 mM  not reported  S. cerevisiae , strain not 
reported  Gene mutation  assay, with and without 
metabolic activation  Mutagenic with and without metabolic 
activation; test material exhibited dose-
dependent mutagenic activity  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 87 µg/ml  DMSO  CHO cells  Chromosome aberrations assay, 
without metabolic activation  Dose -related increase in chromosomal 
aberrations observed, with 2 7% aberrant cells 
noted at the highest concentration tested  32 
p-Phenylenediamine ; purity 
not reported  up to 87 µg/ml  DMSO  CHO cells  Chromosome aberrations assay, 
without metabolic activation  Dose -related increase in chromosomal  
aberrations , with 2 8% aberrant cells noted at 
the highest concentration tested  31 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  0.4 mM  not reported  CHO cells  Sister chromatid exchange assay in 
accordance with OECD TG 479, with 
and without metabolic activation  Genotoxic, no further details provided  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  3.1 - 50 µg/ml  not reported  CHL cells  Micronucleus test, with and without 
metabolic activation  Genotoxic without metabolic activation; at 
50 µg/ml, more than 10% of cells showed 
micronuclei  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; purity 
not reported  0.0005 - 1 µmol/ml  DMSO  rat hepatocytes  Unscheduled DNA synthesis assay, 
without metabolic activation  Not genotoxic without metabolic activation  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; 
“highest purity available” 0, 2, 5, 10, 20, or 40 
µg/ml  not reported  SV-40 immortalized 
human uroepithelial cell 
line  Single cell gel/comet assay; no further 
details provided  Increased expression of mutant p53 and 
COX- 2 proteins; dose -depende nt reduction in 
cell viability; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
purity not reported  up to 1000 µg/plate 
without hydrogen 
peroxide; up to 25 
µg/plate with hydrogen peroxide  sterile water when 
tested without 
hydrogen peroxide; 
2% ammonia hydroxide when 
tested with 
hydrogen peroxide  S. typhimurium strain 
TA98  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Weakly mutagenic with metabolic activation 
without hydrogen peroxide; mutagenic with metabolic activation with hydrogen peroxide; 
not m utagenic without metabolic activation 
with or without oxidation  35 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
99.3% pure  up to 5000 µg/plate  purified water  S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98, TA100, TA1535, TA1537, and TA102  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation; pre- incubation study with 
only strain TA98, with metabolic activation Statistically significant (p < 0.01) increase in 
number of revertants in strain TA100 at 1000 µg/plate without metabolic activation, however, no dose response relationship; 
statistically significant increase in number of 
revertants in strain TA98 at 1000 µg/plate (p < 0.01) and at 5000 µg/plate (p < 0.005); in 
pre-incubation, statistically significant, dose-
related increase in number of revertants  36 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
96.1% pure  up to 6666 µg/plate  distilled water  S. typhimurium  strains 
TA98, TA100, TA1535, 
TA1537, TA1538 and E. 
coli strain WP2 urA  Ames test, with and without metabolic 
activation Mutagenic in at least one S. typhimurium  
strain with metabolic activation; not possible to determine whether test substance was 
mutagenic in E.coli  strain  39 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 7.  Genotoxicity studies  
Test Article  Concentration/Dose  Vehicle  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl 
before and after treat ment 
with hydrogen peroxide; 
oxidized mixture of p -
Phenylenediamine HCl with m-phenylenediamine HCl or 
o-phenylenediamine HCl  up to 10 µg/plate  DMSO  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA98  Ames suspension assay, with and 
without metabolic activation; test performed on test materials before and after treatment with hydrogen peroxide Mutagenicity of p-Phenylenediamine HCl 
alone slightly enhanced by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of metabolic activation; hydrogen peroxide -oxidized 
mixtures classified as potent mutagens with metabolic activation  37 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl 
(55 mM), resorcinol (66 
mM), and hydrogen 
peroxide (3%)  up to 5.5 µmol/plate  DMSO  S. typhimurium  strain 
TA97, TA98 , TA100  Ames test , with and without  metabolic 
activation Oxidative mixture not mutagenic; however, 
same oxidative mixture without resorcinol was mutagenic  38 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
purity not reported  Up to 6.5 µg/ml without 
metabolic activation; up 
to 250 µg/ml with 
metabolic activation  distilled water  L5178 mouse lymphoma 
cells  Forward mutation assay, with and 
without metabolic activation  Dose -related increase in mutagenicity in 2 
out of 3 trials, with and without metabolic activation 42 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl ; 
purity not reported  up to 10 µg/ml without 
metabolic activation; up 
to 400 µg/ml with 
metabolic activation  distilled water  L5178Y mouse 
lymphoma cells  Forward mutation assay , with a nd 
without metabolic activation  Significant increases in mutant frequency, 
with and without metabolic activation; 
responses were usually larger without 
metabolic activation and occurred at less than 1/10 the concentrations required with 
metabolic activatio n 43 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
99.3% pure  up to 80 µg/ml without 
metabolic activation; up to 1000 µg/ml with 
metabolic activation  purified water  L5178Y mouse 
lymphoma cells  Gene mutation assay at the hprt locus 
in accordance with OECD TG 476  Not mutagenic  36 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
99.3% pure  test 1: 3.73, 30, 80 µg/ml 
without metabolic 
activation and 500, 900, 
1600 µg/ml with metabolic activation  
test 2: 50, 100, 125 µg/ml without metabolic activation and 400, 1400, 
2000 µg/ml with 
metabolic activation  purified water  human lymphocytes  Micronucleus test in accor dance with 
OECD TG 487; test 1 had 24 h 
stimulation, 20 h treatment and 28 h 
recovery without metabolic activation and 24 h stimulation, 3 h treatment and 
35 h recovery with metabolic 
activation; test 2 had 48 h stimulation, 20 h treatment and 28 h recover y 
without metabolic activation and 48 h stimulation, 3 h treatment and 45 h 
recovery with metabolic activation  Genotoxic; test material induced micronuclei 
in test 1 with metabolic activation and in test 
2 with and without metabolic activation  36 
IN VIVO   
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  0, 10.8, 21.6, or 32.4 
mg/kg  not reported  groups of 4 male and 
female mice, no further 
details provided  Micronucleus test; mice received test 
material intraperitoneally; no further 
details provided  Not genotoxic; test material did not induce 
chromosomal abnormalities; no further 
details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  10 mg/kg  not reported  rat, no further details 
provided  Micronucleus test; rats received 2 oral 
doses of 10 mg/kg test material; no 
further details provided  Not genotoxic; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 99.8% 
pure 25, 50, or 100 mg/kg bw  deionized water  groups of Wistar rats, 5 
rats per sex  Micronucleus test in rat bone marrow 
cells in accordance with OECD TG 474; rats received a single oral dose of 
test material and were killed 24 h later  Not genotoxic; increases in micronucleated 
bone marrow cells within range of historical controls and were not considered biologically 
relevant  7 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 7.  Genotoxicity studies  
Test Article  Concentration/Dose  Vehicle  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not repor ted 0 or 300 mg/kg bw  not reported  groups of 5 male and 5 
female Sprague-Dawley 
rats Micronucleus test in accordance with 
OECD TG 474; rats received 2 equal doses of 300 mg/kg bw test material 24 h apart via gavage; rats killed 6 h 
after last do se; no further details 
provided  Not genotoxic; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 99.8% 
pure 50 or 100 mg/kg bw  deionized water  groups of 3 male Wistar 
Hanlbm: WIST (SPF) rats Unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat 
hepatocytes in accordance with OECD TG 486; rats  received single oral dose 
of test material and were killed 2 or 16 
h after dosing  Not genotoxic; no increased mean net nuclear 
grain count observed in the hepatocytes when compared to the negative controls  7 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  0, 25, 50, or 100 mg/kg 
bw/d 0.9% physiological 
saline groups of 3 -5 male 
Sprague -Dawley Crl:CD 
(SD) IGS rats  Comet assay in accordance with OECD 
TG 489; rats received test material via oral gavage; rats dosed 3 times 24 and 21 h apart; 3 h after final treatment; rats 
were killed and liver and stomach were 
sampled  Not genotoxic; no increases in DNA damage 
observed in liver and stomach  5 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl; 
purity not reported  0, 25, 50, or 100 mg/kg  distilled water  groups of 5 male CD -1 
mice  Micronucleus test;  mice received single 
intraperitoneal dose of test material; 
mice then killed and bone marrow 
smears prepared; polychromatic 
erythrocytes scored for incidence of 
micronuclei  Not genotoxic; test material did not induce 
micronuclei 44 
  
 
   
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 8.  Carcinogenicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Study Duration  Dose/Concentration  Protocol  Results  Reference  
DERMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  acetone  30 female Sutter 
mice  20 wk  5% One drop of test material was applied to the 
backs of mice twice weekly; at study end, 
the surviving mice were studied for papillomas or carcinomas; concurrent 
vehicle control group used; no further details 
provided  No papillomas or carcinomas reported; 
mortality observed in 19 of 30 mice by 20 wk; no further details provided  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine ; 
purity not reported  not reported  4-5 rats per 
group; no further details provided  up to 8 mo  12.5 or 20 mg/kg  Rats received 12.5 mg/kg test material 
subdermally daily for 8 mo or 20 mg/kg for 4 mo; no further details provided In the 12.5 mg/kg dose group, tumors were 
observed 2 of 5 rats in the month 7; no 
tumors observed in the 20 mg/kg dose group; 
no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  not reported  groups of 40 
Sprague -Dawley 
rats of each sex  24 mo  2%, 3%, or 4% in 
formulation and mixed with 6% hydrogen peroxide  See Multigeneration Study in Table 6; 
weanling rats from each group of F 1a litters 
received test materials as the F 0 generation; 
5 rats per sex per group were killed at 12 
mo, the rest at 24 mo; all animals were 
necropsied and tissues underwent 
histological examination  No treatment -related gross lesions observed 
in any animals necropsied; comparison of tumor indices among the treated and control 
groups showed significant variations among tumors occurring most frequently with this 
strain of rat; pituitary adenomas also 
increased significantly (p < 0.05) in females of 1 treated group; however, no pituitary 
carcinomas occur red in this group and none 
of the increases in pituitary tumors reported in this study were found to be consistently 
significant at p < 0.01  28 
p-Phenylenediamine 
HCl; purity not 
reported 2% ammonium 
hydroxide   10 male and 10 
female Wistar rats 
per group 18 mo  5%  Test material and 6% hydrogen peroxide  
(1:1 ratio)  applied topically  (0.5 ml ) to 
shaved back skin once per wk; another 
group received the test materials by subcutaneous injection  (0.1 ml) in the hip; control group received vehicle only  In female rats, a statistically significant 
incidence (> 50%, p < 0.05) of mammary 
gland tumors was observed in treated rats, mammary gland tumors not observed in 
males; 1 female also had a soft tissue tumor 
(fibromatosis); 40% of male rats observed 
with tumors of the liver, kidney, adrenal gland, thyroid gland, urinary bladder, and 
lung, results in males were not statistically 
significant  35 
ORAL  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  dietary feed  male Sprague -
Dawley rats; 
number not 
reported 9 mo  not reported  Rats received test material daily in feed for 
9 mo; no further details provided Not carcinogenic; no further details provided  5 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 8.  Carcinogenicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Study Duration  Dose/Concentration  Protocol  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported   dietary feed  Groups of 63 to 
66 F344 rats of 
each sex  80 wk  0.05 or 0.1%  Animals fed test material in diet ad lib itum 
for 80 wk; control group of 24- 25 rats of 
each sex received regular diet; body weights 
and feed  consumption recorded weekly; 
animals surviving until study end underwent 
hematological analysis; macroscopic and histological examinations performed  Not carcinogenic; body weights of 0.1% 
female rats less than controls, but no differences noted at 0.05% in females or in 
either male dose group; highest incidence of neoplastic lesions in both sexes was that of 
pheochromocytomas of the adrenal gland 
with incidence of 27.8% in the 0.1% males, 
22.9% in the 0.05% males, and 31.6% 
control males (females had lower  incidences 
in all groups than males); other neoplastic 
lesions included hyperplasia of the 
forestomach in males, a fibroadenoma of the 
mammary gland in a female, a fibroma of the 
skin in a male, lymphomas in females, and ductal hyperplasia of the pancreas  in a 
female ; incidences of these lesions were not 
significantly different in among the  groups; 
other effects observed, which  included 
hemorrhage of the pituitary gland, fatty 
degeneration of the liver, fibrosis of the pancreas, and pneumonia , were not 
significantly different in different groups; n o 
marked changes of the thyroid gland 
observed in any rats  27 
p-Phenylenediamine 
HCl; purity not 
reported not reported  groups of 22 
female pregnant NMRI mice  daily treatment on 
days 10- 19 of 
gestation; observed 
for 137 wk  0 and 30 mg/kg  Mice treated via gavage during days 10 -19 
of gestation; select mice killed at 27 and 51 wk, total observation time 1 37 wk; F
1 
generation observed for carcinogenicity; no further details provided  Not carcinogenic; no adverse effects o body 
weights or survival observed in parental or F 1 
animals; tumor incidence in treated animals comparable to controls  5,7 
PARENTERAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
> 99% pure  soybean  oil 51 male and 55 
female NMRI 
mice per dose 
group  daily treatment on 
days 5 -9 of life 
followed by 130 wk observation  30 mg/kg  Mice received an intraperitoneal injection of 
test material once daily on days 5 -9 of life; 
10 mice from treated group were killed 26 
and 52 wk after treatment began; remainder 
of mice died or were killed in moribund 
state; necropsy and histological examination performed; vehicle controls (49 male and 43 female) received 10 mg/kg/d soybean oil 
and positive controls (42 males and 27 
females) received 300 mg/kg/d urethane  Not carcinogenic; no treatment -related 
effects on body weight or survival observed; 
tumors observed in 30.1% of treated animals, with most common tumor types being benign 
lymphoma and alveolar adenoma; tumor 
incidence in vehicle control mice was 18.2%, 
positive control was 82.1%  5,9 
p-Phenylenediamine 
HCl; purity not reported tricaprylin  Lab A: 10 or 20 
Strain A mice per 
sex per group and 
54 male and 54 
female controls  
Lab B: 30 male Strain A mice   8 wk  Lab A: 12.5 or 25 mg/kg  
Lab B; 6.4, 16, or 32 mg/kg Mice received intraperitoneal injections 3 
times/wk Not carcinogenic; in Lab A and Lab B, the 
percentage of mice with tumors  and the 
number of survivors were not significantly different from the vehicle control groups; 
results for Lab A female mice were equivocal, however, number of tumors per 
mouse was significantly different (p < 0.05) 
only at 25 mg/kg when compared to vehicle control  46 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 8.  Carcinogenicity studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Animals/Group  Study Duration  Dose/Concentration  Protocol  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine 
HCl; purity not 
reported  2% ammonium 
hydroxide and 
1.8% sodium 
chloride  10 male and 10 
female Wistar rats 
per group 18 mo  5%  Test material and 6% hydrogen peroxide 
(1:1 mixture) injected subcutaneously (0.1 ml) every other wk; control group received vehicle only  In female rats, a statistically  significant 
incidence (> 50%, p < 0.05) of mammary gland tumors was observed in treated rats, 
mammary gland tumors not observed in males; female rats also had significant 
incidence of uterine tumors and malignant 
and benign soft tissue tumors (43% and 57% , 
respectively, p < 0.05), two of the of soft 
tissue tumors were at injection site; one male 
rat observed with both malignant tumors of 
the lung and thyroid gland  35 
TUMOR PROMOTION  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
99.5% pure  dietary feed  groups of 25 male 
F344/DuCrj rats  6 wk  110, 330, or 1000 ppm  Study of the modifying effects of the test 
material on liver carcinogenesis; rats 
received test material 2 wk after administration of single intraperitoneal dose 
of N-nitrosodiethylamine; positive control 
was 3’ -methyl-4-dimethylaminobenzene 
(600 ppm) in f eed; partial hepatectomy in all 
rats occurred after 1 wk of dosing  Test material did not significantly increase γ -
glutamyl transpeptidase positive foci that 
were observed 3 wk after N-nitrosodiethyl-amine initiation; slight decrease in body 
weight observed  in all rats that received test 
material at all dose levels; significant 
increases in relative liver weight reported in 
1000 ppm dose group; positive control yielded expected results  48 
p-Phenylenediamine 
HCl; purity not reported saline  14 male Fischer 
344 rats received 
test material, 
additional 18 rats 
received vehicle 
alone 5 wk  40 mg/kg single dose  Medium -term bioassay system assessed 
tumor promotion based on induction of 
glutathione 5 -transferase ( placental form ) 
positive liver cell foci in rats; single dose intragastrically 12 h after partial hepatectomy; animals fed a basal diet for 2 
wk, after which they were placed on a diet containing 0.015% 2-acetylaminofluorene 
for 2 wk; 3 wk  after partial hepatectomy, all 
animals received carbon tetrachloride; after week 5, survivor s were killed and livers 
were excised and prepared for the 
immunohistochemical examination of glutathione 5 -transferase positive foci.  p-Phenylenediamine HC l did not cause a 
significant increase in the number of 
glutathione 5 -transferase positive foci  when 
compared to controls  47 
    
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 9.  Dermal irritation and sensitization studies     
Test Article  Vehicle  Concentration/Dose  Test Population  Procedure  Results  Reference  
IRRITATION  
IN VITRO  
p-Phenylenediamine 
Sulfate; purity not 
reported  no vehicle  tested neat  human reconstructed epidermis  EpiSkin™ reconstructed human epidermis 
model in accordance with OECD TG 439  Predicted to be not irritating  6 
ANIMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  25% ethanol  0.9%  guinea pigs, details not 
provided  dermally administered at 0.1 ml; no further 
details provided  Pathomorphological lesions observed, 
but later disappeared; significant lipid 
peroxidation activity of skin 
homogenate observed, but superoxide 
dismutase not affected by treatment; 
histamine content increased initially, but reduced during recovery; no further 
details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  distilled water  0.5 and 1%  5 and 10 male albino guinea 
pigs Primary  irritation test ; 0.5% solution 
applied to abraded, shaved skin of 5 animals, 1% solution applied to intact, 
shaved skin of 10 animals  Slightly irritating to abraded skin at 
0.5%; moderately irritating to intact skin 
at 1%  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
100% pure  13% guinea pig fat in 50/50 
acetone/dimethoxy ethane 5 and 10%  10 male albino guinea pigs  Primary  irritation test ; applied to shaved, 
intact shoulder skin ; observations were 
made at 24 and 48  h after treatment  Not irritating  5 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  dimethyl phthalate  2.5 and 25%  10 male Dunkin -Hartley guinea 
pigs Primary  irritation test ; applied to shaved, 
intact shoulder skin ; observations were 
made at 24 and 48 h after treatment  Mild skin irritant; no irritat ion observed 
at 2.5%; mild to no irritation observed at 
25%; range -finding test determined test 
material was a moderate skin irritant at 
70% (no further details provided)  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  13% guinea pig fat in 50/50 
acetone/dimethoxy ethane 10 and 25%  10 male albino guinea pigs  Primary  irritation test ; applied to shaved, 
intact shoulder skin ; observations were 
made at 24 and 48  h after treatment  Not irritating  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  acetone , 50% aq. solution of 
Carbowax 1500, or 
petrolatum 1% in acetone  
1 and 15% in Carbowax, 
2% and 30% in pet  guinea pigs, details not 
provided  details not provided  Dermatitis observed at 2% in petrolatum 
that may be allergy response; at 30% in 
petrolatum, inflammatory response was difficult to determine as allergy or 
primary irritation; allergic reaction observed at 1% and 15% in Carbowax 
1500; similar effect noted at 1% in 
acetone; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  distilled water  3 and 30% 10 male albino guinea pigs ; 
range -finding study conducted 
with 3 male albino guinea pigs  Primary  irritation test ; 0.05 m l applied to 
shaved, intact shoulder skin; o bservations 
made at 24 and 48 h after treatment  Not irritating  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine ; 
purity not reported  acetone:dimethy l phthalate 
(1:9)  3 and 30% 10 male Dunkin -Hartley guinea 
pigs 0.5 ml applied to shaved shoulder skin and 
lightly rubbed in; observations were made 
at 24 and 48  h after treatment  Not irritating; no edema or erythema 
observed  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; 
purity not reported  not reported  2.5% solution 
containing 0.05% sodium sulfite rabbits; details not provided  Draize irritation study; test material 
applied to abraded or intact rabbit skin under gauze patch; no further details 
provided  Mildly irritating; primary irritation 
index = 0.3 out of a maximum of 8; no further details provided  7 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 9.  Dermal irritation and sensitization studies     
Test Article  Vehicle  Concentration/Dose  Test Population  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  not reported  5% and in 4 
formulations at 
unknown concentrations rabbits; details not provided  details not provided  Test material at 5% considered a weak 
irritant; no irritation observed in the 4 formulations containing p-Phenylenediamine; no further details 
provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  petrolatum, oil (type not 
specified), or water  2.5 and 25% in 
petrolatum, 10% in 
oil, and 50% in water  rabbits; details not provided  irritation study; no further details provided  Irritation indices ranged from 1.4 to 3.4; 
2.5% was slightly irritating while 10% to 50% was moderately irritating; 
irritation reversible; no further details 
provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
99.97% pure  no vehicle  neat 6 albino rabbits; sex not 
reported irritation study; test material applied to 
shaved back of rabbits and occluded; observations made at 4, 24, and 48 h after 
application  Not corrosive  5 
SENSITIZATION  
ANIMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
97% pure  acetone:olive oil (4:1)  0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 
and 1%  groups of 4 female CBA/Ca 
mice  LLNA; 4 independent analyses performed 
in parallel in each of 2 independent 
laboratories  Sensitizing responses occurred at 
concentration of 0.25% or greater; EC 3 
values ranged from 0.06 - 0.20%  53 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
100% pure  acetone:olive oil (4: 1) 0, 0.05, 0.25, and 
1.25% (w/v) groups of 5 female CB/J mice  LLNA  Sensitizing; SI were 2.6, 10.4, and 16.1 
for 0.05, 0.25, and 1.25%, respectively; EC
3 value was 0.06%; controls yielded 
expected results  5,7 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  acetone:olive oil or 
dimethylformamide 0, 0.5, 1, and 2% groups of 3 CBA/Ca mice; sex 
not reported  LLNA  Sensitizing; SI were 3.45, 5.27, and 4.77 
for 0.5, 1, and 2%, respectively; no 
further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  dimethylacetamide:acetone:  
ethanol (4:4:3)  0, 0.5, 1, 2, and 5% groups of 3 Dunkin -Hartley -
Pirbright guinea pigs; sex not reported LLNA ; cultures maintained for 24 and 48 
h, 48 h cultures in the presence or absence of human recombinant IL -2 Sensitizing; SI  after 48 h were 1.03, 
0.91, 1.32 and 2.04 for 0.5, 1, 2, and 5%, respectively; SI after 48  h and with 
human recombinant IL -2 were 0.94, 
0.97, 7.40, and 9.75 for 0.5, 1, 2, and 5%, respectively; no further details 
provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  acetone:olive oil (4:1)  0, 2.5, 5, and 10% groups of 4 CBA/Ca mice; sex 
not reported  LLNA; 4 independent laboratories 
performed analyses in parallel  Sensitizing; SI for 2.5% ranged from 
6.5-21.0; SI for 5.0% ranged from 16.5 
to 26.0; SI for 10% ranged from  23.3 to 
75.3; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  not reported  0, 2.5, 5, and 10% groups of 4 mice; no further 
details provided  LLNA  Sensitizing; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  not reported  0, 2.5, 5, and 10% groups of 3 mice; no further 
details provided  LLNA  Sensitizing; no further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine;  
99% pure  induction: physiological 
saline 
challenge: physiological saline (intradermal) and pet. 
(epidermal) induction: 0.1%  
challenge: 1%  Pirbright white, Dunkin -Hartley 
and Himalayan spotted guinea pigs, 5 males and 5 females per strain Guinea pig optimization test; guinea pigs 
received 10 intracutaneous applications of the test material over 3 wk induction, Freund’s complete adjuvant (1:1) 
incorporated in the second week of 
induction; after 2 -
wk rest, guinea pigs were 
challenged separately via intradermal and 
occlusive epidermal treatments  All animals in all strains had positive 
reactions to the test material  54 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 9.  Dermal irritation and sensitization studies     
Test Article  Vehicle  Concentration/Dose  Test Population  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  induction: distilled water 
(epidermal) and saline 
(intradermal) 
challenge: distilled water  intradermal 
induction: 0.1%  
dermal induction: 0.5% challenge: 1%  5 male albino guinea pigs / 
group  Guinea pig sensitization study; for 
induction, 5 guinea pigs received the test material dermally on abraded skin and 5 guinea pigs received the test material as 
intradermal injections over a 2 -wk period; 
after a 2 _wk rest period , animals received 
1% challenge on intact skin; sites scored 
after 24 h  Sensitizing  in 4/5 animals induced 
intradermally; none of the animals 
induced dermally were sensitized  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  induction: propylene glycol  
challenge: 100% alcohol  induction: 1%  
challenge: 5%  10 male albino guinea pigs, 
additional group of 10 
unexposed animals were control  Guinea pig sensitization study; animals 
received 1 intradermal injection of 1% solution for induction; after 3 -wk rest, 
animals challenged with 5% solution to 
intact and abraded skin; 10 untreated animals served as controls; sites scored 
after 24 h  Sensitizing; 8/10 animals had either 
moderate erythema, strong erythema, or 
erythema with edema  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  dimethyl phthalate  induction: 1%  
challenge:2.5 and 25% groups of 10 male Dunkin -
Hartley guinea pigs  Intracutaneous sensitization study; 
induction phase consisted of 4 sacral intradermal injections (1 injection/wk); 
after 2 -wk rest, animals challenged by 
applying test material on separate shaved 
intact sites, responses scored 24 and 48 h 
post-application ; additional group of 
previously unexposed animals also 
received the same challenge  Mild sensitizer;  at challenge, 4/10 
animals had sensitization response to 
25% test material, 3/10 animals that 
were not induced had mild erythema to 25% test material  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  acetone:dimethyl phthalate 
(1:9)  induction: 1%  
challenge: 3 and 30%  10 male Dunkin -Hartley guinea 
pigs Intracutaneous sensitization study , as 
above, except an unexposed group was not 
used Sensitizing; moderate erythema to 
erythema and edema observed during induction with some animals exhibiting 
blanching and necrotic centers; during 
challenge, animals exhibited mild 
erythema and erythema with edema at 
the 30% concentration sites, 10/10 animals had significant sensitization 
score increases during challenge phase  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  induction: saline  
challenge: distilled water  induction: 1%  
challenge: 3 and 30%  groups of 10 male Dunkin -
Hartley guinea pigs  Intracutaneous sensitization study, as 
above . Mild sensitizer ; at challenge, 4/10 
animals had  sensitization response to 
30% test material, no sensitization was observed in the animals that were not 
induced  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
100% pure  induction: dimethyl phthalate  
challenge: 13% guinea pig fat in 50/50 acetone/dimethyl ethane induction: 1%  
challenge: 5 and 10%  10 male albino guinea pigs; a 
group of 5 additional animals for non- induced control Intracutaneous sensitization study , as 
above.  Moderate sensitizer; 6/10 guinea pigs 
had moderate to strong sensitization response (erythema) to 10% test material at  
48 h reading; no sensitization 
was observed in the animals that were 
not induced at 48 h  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  induction: dimethyl phthalate  
challenge: 13% guinea pig fat 
in 50/50 acetone/dimethyl 
ethane  induction: 1%  
challenge: 10 and 25% 10 male albino guinea pigs; a 
group of 5 additional animals for non- induced control Intracutaneous sensitization study , as 
above.  Sensitizing; 8/10 guinea pigs had mild 
erythema at 48 h reading; no reactions observed in negative controls  5 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 9.  Dermal irritation and sensitization studies     
Test Article  Vehicle  Concentration/Dose  Test Population  Procedure  Results  Reference  
p-Phenylenediamine; 
purity not reported  induction: dimethyl phthalate  
challenge: 13% guinea pig fat 
in 50/50 acetone/dimethyl ethane induction: 1%  
challenge: 10 and 25% 10 male albino guinea pigs, 
additional group of 10 unexposed animals were control
 Intracu taneous sensitization study , as 
above.   Additionally, after  challenge, 
sutures were implanted in the 10 sensitized 
guinea pigs and were rechallenged 4 wk 
later 7/10 animals sensitized in initial 
challenge and 6/10 animals sensitized at rechallenge 4 wk after implantation of sutures; no sensitization observed in 
control animals  5 
p-Pheny lenediamine; 
100% pure  induction: dimethyl phthalate  
challenge: 13% guinea pig fat 
in 50/50 acetone/ dimethyl 
ethane induction: 1%  
challenge:1% 10 male albino guinea pigs; a 
group of 5 additional animals 
for non- induced control Intracutaneous sensitization  study  (Terhaar 
procedure) ; induction phase consisted of 
injecting 1% test material in whole rabbit 
blood in rear foot pad; after 2 -wk rest, 
animals challenged by applying 1 % test 
material on shaved intact sites, responses 
scored 3 and 24 h post -application; 
additional group of 5 previously unexposed 
animals also received the same challenge  Mild sensitizer; 2/10 guinea pigs had 
moderate sensitization response 
(erythema) to 1% test material at 24 h 
reading; no sensitization was observed in the animals that were not induced at 
24 h 5 
HUMAN  
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  pet. 1% 98 healthy subjects  HRIPT; patches applied on upper out arm 
for 5 min 3 times a wk for 3 wk; challenge left in place for 48 h and read 30 min and 
48 h after removal; occluded patches were 
2 cm2 1 subject was determined to be pre -
sensitized to test material, 3 subjects 
were sensitized, 2 subjects had irritant 
reactions 55 
p-Phenylenediamine ; 
purity not reported  formulation  0.96% (on head 
0.48%) in Group 1; 3% in Group 2; 0% 
in Group 3 (controls)  Group 1 had 1107 subjects; 
Group 2 had 548 subjects; Group 3 had 516 subjects  6 mo in -use study; all panelists pre -
screened for p- Phenylenediamine allergy 
with a 48 -h patch test at 1% in pet.; 
subjects divided into 3 groups, Group  1 
used hair dye containing 0.96% p-
Phenylenediamine 5 min/d for first 4 d and 
then 5 min/d once/wk; Group 2 used hair 
dye containing 3% p- Phenylenediamine 
30-40 min once/mo for a total of 6 
exposures; Group 3 were unexposed; at study end and after a 3 - to 4-wk rest, all 
panelists retested with 1% p-
Phenylenediamine pet. in a 48-h patch test 
along with an open test In pre -screen, 69 of 2545 subjects had a 
positive reaction to the test material at 
1% and were excluded from the study; 
following the 1% occluded patch test at 
study end, 7.2, 1.3, and 0.4% of subjects 
from Group 1, Group 2, and Group 3, 
respectively, had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine; almost all 
reactions observed were grade 1; in the 
open test for all groups, 1/ 3 subjects that 
tested positive in the occluded test were 
positive in the open test.  The authors 
noted that reduction in the exposure 
duration from 48 h to 5 min decreased the rate of sensitization from 54% to 
3%.  However, infrequent but longer 
duration and higher concentration of 
exposure to p -Phenylenediamine was 
significantly less likely to induce sensitization compared to more frequent, shorter duration, and lower 
concentration exposure.  55 
   
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 10.  Ocular irritation studies  
Test Article  Vehicle  Concentration/Dose  Test Population  Procedure  Results  Reference  
ANIMAL  
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  in formulation  5, 10 or 15%  groups of 10 rats; no 
further details provided  test material instilled into 1 eye once daily 
for up to 3 mo; no further details provided  Keratitis and corneal opacities observed; no 
further details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  not reported  2.5% w/v  guinea pigs; no further 
details provided  ocular irritation study; observations made 
0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 24 h after 
treatment; no further details provided  Not irritating  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  not reported  2.5% solution containing 
0.05% sodium sulfite  3 rabbits; details not 
provided  test material instilled in rabbit eye and then 
rinsed with water after 10 s  Minimal conjunctival irritation observed in 
only 1 animal  7 
p-Phenylenediamine; pur ity 
not reported  not reported  5% and in 4 formulations 
at unknown 
concentrations  rabbits; details not 
provided  details not provided  Test material at 5% considered a weak irritant; 
no irritation observed in the 4 formulations containing p-Phenylenediamine; no further 
details provided  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; 99.5% 
pure no vehicle  neat 2 male albino rabbits  ocular irritation study in accordance with 
OECD TG 405; 10 mg place in right 
conjunctival sac of each rabbit; afer  20 s, 1 
treated eye was washed with tap water for 1 min; the treated eye of the other rabbit was not washed; observations made 1 and 
4 h and 1, 2, 3, 7, and 14 d after treatment  Moderately irritating; in unwashed treated eye, 
generalized slight corneal cloudiness, moderate iritis, and moderate conjunctivitis observed; in 
washed treated eye, generalized slight corneal 
cloudiness, moderate iritis, and mild conjunctivitis observed; both treated eyes were 
normal within 14 d  5 
p-Phenylenediamine; purity 
not reported  not reported  not reported  rabbits; no further 
details provided  ocular irritation study; dry powder and 
saturated solution used; no further details provided  Dry test material produced immediate signs of 
discomfort, lacrimation, blepharospasm, and vascular conjunctival inflammatory reaction resembling conjunctivitis, with promptly 
increasing palpebral edema; no persistent 
effects observed in cornea or conjunctival membrane, even after repeated applications; saturated solution had no immediate sensory 
reactions, but vascular conjunctival reaction 
was observed immediately after instillation, 
increased for a few min, and then rapidly 
cleared  5 
 
 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 11.  Multicenter and retrospective studies      
# Patients  Clinical Testing Type  Location  Years  Results  Reference  
Multicenter Studies  
1138  Multicenter study of patients with suspected allergic contact dermatitis; 1% p-
Phenylenediamine in petrolatum tested using Finn chambers or A1 test patches 
for 48 or 72 h  North America  January 1, 1984 to  
May 1, 1985 79 allergic reactions and 2 irritant reactions reported; relevance 
value of 59% assigned to p- Phenylenediamine 64 
3515  Multicenter study of patients tested at NACDG clinics using standardized patch 
testing technique with 52 allergens that included 1% p-Phenylenediamine  North America  July 1, 1992 to  
June 30, 1994  6.3% (527) patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediam ine 63 
3111  Multicenter study of patients tested at NACDG clinic using standardized patch 
testing technique with 49 allergens that included 1% p-Phenylenediamine pe t. North America  July 1, 1994 to  
June 30, 1996  6.8% of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine  61 
5831  Multicenter study of patients tested at NACDG clinic using standardized patch 
testing techniq ue with 50 allergens that included 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet.  North America  July 1, 1998 to  
December 31, 2000  4.9% of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine  62 
36,491  Multicenter study of patients tested at IVDK with standard series, including 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine pet.  Germany and Austria  1990 to 1995  5.0% (crude rate, 4.8% standardized for age and sex) had 
positive reactions to p-Phenylenediamine  65 
1141  Population -based nested, case -control study; patch tests with 25 standard 
allergens as recommended by the ICDRG and the German Contact Dermatitis 
Group that included 1% p-Phenylenediamine  Germany  between 1994 and 
1995  1.5% of patients overall had positive reaction to p-Phenylene -
diamine 67 
2034  Multicenter study of female consumers at IVDK in whom hair cosmetics were 
suspected as cause of contact dermatitis; German Contact Dermatitis Research 
Group hairdressers series patch test including 1% p -Phenylenediamine pet.  Germany, Austria, and 
Switzerland  January 2013 to  
December 2020 31.6% (580 reactions) of consumers had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine 93 
Retrospective Studies  
54,917  Retrospective study of individuals tested to 1.0% p-Phenylenediamine pet. by 
the NACDG  North America  1994 to 2018  5.6% (3095) of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylene -
diamine; over half (55.3%) of reactions were ++ or +++ at 
final reading and 60.9% were relevant  70 
36,064  Retrospective study of patients with suspected allergic contact dermatitis that 
returned for delayed readings b etween days 7 and 10 or beyond; patch testing 
was performed by the Mayo Clinic and included 1% p -Phenylenediamine  United State s  October 1997 to 
December 2006 Out of 251 positive reactions, only 1 patient was negative on 
day 5 of testing but positive at or  after day 7; most reactions 
(241) resolved before day 5  74 
38,775  Retrospective study of NACDG patch test data associated with hair care 
products; screening series patches of 65 -70 allergens including 1% p -
Phenylene diamine pet.  North America  2001 to 2016  35.8% (1524) of patients had reaction to p-Phenylenediamine  68 
3088  Retrospective study of patients  patch test ed with Mayo clinic standard series; 
results compared to patch testing results from 2001 to 2005; p -
Phenylenediamine was tested at 1% in pet.  United States  2006 to 2010  5.2% of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine; 
in 2001 to 2005, 4.5% of 3832 patients were positive 78 
2313  Retrospective study of patients patch tested with the standard series at 
Massachusetts General Hospital, including 1% p -Phenylenediamine pet.; results 
were compared to testing performed by same hospital between 1998 to 2006 
and 1990 to 2006  United States  January 2007 to  
December 2016 4.0% of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine; 
the rate of positivity was 3.1% in patients tested both between  
1998 to 2006 (n = 627) and 1990 to 2006 (n = 1237)  81 
2568  Retrospective study of patch test reactions with the Mayo clinic standard series 
allergens and compared to results to earlier NACDG reports; 1% p -
Phenylenediamine pet.  North America  2011 to 2015  4.4% (114 reactions) of patients had positive patch test 
reactions to p -Phenylenediamine; reactions for 2011 to 2012 
were 6.3% of 4223 patients tested; for 2012 -2014, 7.0% of 
4853 patients tested  76 
149 Retrospective study of black patients with allergic contact dermatitis; testing 
was performed with the Mayo clinic standard, extended standard, or hairdresser 
series, including 1% p -Phenylenediamine pet.  United States  January 2011 to  
December 2020 6.1% (9 reactions) of patients had positive patch test reactions 
to p-Phenylenediamine 75 
60 Retrospective study of patients with frontal fibrosing alopecia and lichen 
planopilaris to determine connection with allergic contact dermatitis; patients 
tested with the North American baseline and cosmetic and hairdressers series, 
including p-Phenylenediamine (concentration and vehicle not described)  United States  2015 to 2022  10% (6 reac tions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine  95 
2686  Retrospective study of patients patch tested with Mayo clinic standard series; p-
Phenylenediamine was tested at 1% in pet.  United States  2017 to 2021  5.2% (141 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine  77 
4107  Retrospective study of patients with allergic contact dermatitis using NACDG 
screening series and supplemental allergens as needed, p-Phenylenediamine 
tested at 1%  in pet.  North America  January 2019 to  
December 2020 5.6% (231 reactions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine 69 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 11.  Multicenter and retrospective studies      
# Patients  Clinical Testing Type  Location  Years  Results  Reference  
500 children  Retrospective study to determine whether the site of primary dermatitis in 
children could predict an allergic contact dermatitis diagnosis; age group 
ranged from 0- 15 y; British Contact Dermatitis standard series including 1% p -
Phenylenediamine in petrolat um; Finn chambers for 48 h  Leeds, United 
Kingdom  between 1995  
and 2004  8% (11 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine; allergy found only in children over 5 y r; 
henna tattoos most common source of p -Phenylenediamine 
allergy in children aged 5 -10 yr and hair dye in older children  71 
156 Retrospective study with extended British standard series in addition to 
supplementary series and patients’ own products where relevant; 48 h occluded 
tests with polyethylene plastic chambers; 1.0% p-Phenylene diamine pet.  London, UK  October 2016 to  
April 2018  8.3% (13 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine 96 
826 Study of late patch test reactions of at least 10 d after application; ICDRG test 
guidelines using Finn chambers; 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet.  Finland  January 2002 to  
February 2006  3.1% (26 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine, with late reactions observed in 6 patients 
(0.75% of 826)  79 
200 Retrospective study on patients with rosacea that underwent patch testing with 
the standard series of the Spanish Contact Dermatitis and Skin Allergy research group and additional series as needed; testing performed with Finn chambers for 48 h and included p-Phenylenediamine (concentration and vehicle not 
reported)  Valencia, Spain;  May 1991 to  
May 2019  5.5% (11) of patients had positive reactions to p-Phenylene -
diamine 66 
9341  Retrospective study of patients with contact allergy; testing performed with 
standard series of the Spanish Research Group on Contact Dermatitis and Skin 
Allergies and included 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet.  Spain  2004 to 2014  4.1% (386 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine 80 
501 Retrospective study of patients with suspected allergic contact dermatitis to hair 
dyes; patients tested with European baseline series and an extended 
hairdressing series, p-Phenylenediamine was tested at 1%  Greece  2010 to 2019  52.5% (189 reactions) of pa tients had positive test reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine; 126/226 customers and 63/136 
hairdressers had positive reactions  90 
251 children 
and 
adolescents Retrospective study of children < 18 years of age with suspicion of allergic 
contact dermatitis; patch tests performed with the extended European baseline 
series and/or additional series including hairdresser serries or cosmetic series; 
1% p-Phenylenediamine pet. only tested if allergic contact dermatitis was 
suspected to be from black henna tattoos or hair dye; 0.5% pet. was used in 4 
patients with severe reactions (open test technique in 2)  Turkey  1996 to 2017  8.4% (21 reactions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine; reactions observed only in adolescents 
(ages 10 – 18 yr), reactions were reported to hair dye (n  = 16), 
black henna (n  = 3) 72 
1309  Retrospective study of patch test results of patients with suspected contact 
allergies; European baseline series, included 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet.  Turkey  2013 to 2019  3.7% (48 reactions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine  83 
191 children  Retrospective study of pediatric patients diagnosed with allergic contact 
dermatitis; European baseline patch test series including p -Phenylenediamine 
(concentration and vehicle not reported)  Turkey  2015 to 2019  2.61% (5 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine 94 
152 Retrospective study of patients with clinically suspected allergic contact 
dermatitis; patients tested with thin -layer rapid -use epicutaneous (TRUE) patch 
tests including p -Phenylenediamine (no further detail provided on testing)  Saudi Arabia  January 2012 to  
February 2015  22.9% (17 reactions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine 91 
101 Retrospective study of patients with dermatitis on photo -exposed body areas 
suspected of being chronic actinic dermatitis; patch testing using Indian standard series containing 1% p -Phenylenediamine pet done in all patients and 
photo- patch test using Scandinavian photo -patch antigen series performed in 86 
patients  India  2010 to 2014  5% (5 reactions) of patients had positive patch test reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine 89 
106 Retrospective study of patients with pigmented cosmetic dermatitis and allergic 
contact dermatitis; patients patch tested with Indian cosmetic and fragrance series, relevant allergens from Indian standard series, extended hairdressing 
series in cases of suspected contact dermatitis to dyes or had positive patch test 
to p-Phenylenediamine, and patients’ cosmetic products used prior to onset of 
dermatitis; 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet. tested  New Delhi, India  January 2015 to  
October 2017  25% (27 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine, this ingredient was predominately 
associated with allergic contact dermatitis (p < 0.001) and not 
pigmented cosmetic dermatitis  88 
152 Retrospective study of patients with chronic palmoplantar vesicular dermatitis; 
testing performed with Indian Standard Battery (included 1% p -
Phenylenediamine) and patients’ own materials; ICDRG test guidelines used to 
grade sites  India  dates not reported  9.2% (14 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine 86 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 11.  Multicenter and retrospective studies      
# Patients  Clinical Testing Type  Location  Years  Results  Reference  
80 Retrospective study of 80 consecutive patients with suspected hair dye allergy; 
testing performed with Indian standard patch test series and included 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine pet.; ICDRG test guidelines used to grade sites  India  dates not reported  67.5% (54 reactions) of patients had positive reaction to 
p-Phenylenediamine, another 3 patients had irritant reactions  87 
438 Retrospective analysis of contact dermatitis patients; testing performed with 
European baseline series or Shoe series, both including p-Phenylenediamine 
(no detail provided on concentration or vehicle)  Sri Lanka  2012 to 2018  12.3% (54 reactions) of patients had positive reactions to 
p-Phenylenediamine 92 
2842  Retrospective study to study incidence of patch test reactions to hair cosmetic 
allergens; baseline patch series with modification of the European and 
International baseline series in addition to the hairdressing series; testing 
performed with Finn chambers for 48 h and included 1.0% p -Phenylenediamine 
pet. Thailand  2009 to 2018  6.4% (182) of patients had positive reactions to p-Phenylene -
diamine 85 
4903  Retrospective study of patients with suspected allergic contact dermatitis; patch 
testing with modified European standard series and other allergens, including 
1% p-Phenylenediamine pet.  Singapore  November 2007  to 
October 2017  13.4% (399) of patients had positive reactions to p-Phenylene -
diamine 84 
5865  Retrospective study of pati ents patch tested with the Japanese baseline series, 
including p-Phenylenediamine  Japan  April 2015 to  
March 2019  8.9% of patients had positive reactions to p-Phenylenediamine  82 
2402  Retrospective study for the development of the New Zealand baseline patch test 
series from 4 patch test clinics; 1% p -Phenylenediamine pet. was included in 
the series  New Zealand  2008 to 2020  4.9% of patients had positive reaction to p-Phenylenediamine  73 
 
 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote 
Table 12. Case reports related to hair dye use  
Patient(s)  Presentation  Patch Test Results  Reference  
8 Arabic men Beard dermatitis following use of hair dye to facial hair; lesions 
were pruritic, erythematous, popular eruptions in the jaw area after 
each dye application, onset ranged from 24 - to 48- h after dye 
application  Patch tests were positive for p-Phenylenediam ine 97 
38-yr-old male  Swelling of the neck with no pain or itching 3 d after dying beard; 
no allergies or previous history of present symptoms; “band-like” 
maculopapular rash with edema observed across mid neck over laryngeal prominence and 1 in below beard line; beard dye 
contained p-Phenylenediamine  Patient not tested  102 
29-yr-old female  Cough along with pruritic eruptions on the scalp and neck several 
hours after using 2 kinds of hair dye on the same day, cough 
worsened with dyspnea appearing after 4 d; patient had a 2 yr 
history of hair dye -induced dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, and asth ma  Open test and scratch test were performed using 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine pet., hair dye 1 (containing 
p-toluenediamine), and hair dye 2 (containing 
p-Phenylenediamine),  no wheals or erythema were 
observed after 15 min; subsequently, scratch test 
material were removed while the open test materials 
were allowed to dry; a closed patch with 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine was also performed; after 5 h, 
pruritus appears at the sites of the open and closed tests; after 16 h, patient developed hoarseness, pharyngeal symptoms, and dyspnea; on day 2 and 
day 3, open test was strongly positive for p -Phenylene-
diamine and dye 1 color solution and the 16- h closed 
patch test was strongly positive to p -Phenylene-
diamine; the 15 -min scratch test yield positive 
reactions at 16 h, day 2 , and da y 3 to the color 
solutions of hair dyes 1 and 2  98 
50-yr-old male   Swelling of both eyelids 8 h after use of hair dye; face and lips 
also became swollen  and itchy, exudative lesion developed on the 
scalp  Positive reaction (+++) to hair dye and to p-Phenylene -
diamine in Indian standard series and cosmetics and 
fragrance series  100 
27-yr-old female  Severe edema involving upper and lower eyelids of both eyes, 
forehead, and scalp; initially diagnosed with angioedema; 
thorough systemic examination revealed no other focus of allergic activity and patient had no other history of atopic event of allergic 
reactions; patient had used hair dye for first time ever 2 d before 
reaction; 2 y r prior patient had a black henna tattoo without 
reaction  Positive reaction (papules and vesicles on 
erythematous test area) to p -Phenylenediamine in 
European standard series  101 
8 children aged 12 
to 15 yr  Edema and eczema of varying degree to the ears, forehead, eyes, 
neck, and/or face following hair dye use; 6/8 report previous exposure with reaction to black henna tattoo; 5/8 required 
hospitalization  All patients had ++ or +++ reactions to 1% 
p-Phenylenediamine in petrolatum except one that was 
++ at 0.1%; simultaneous positive patch reactions 
observed to IPPD and local anesthetics  103 
61-yr-old male  Pruritic eruptions on upper back; several months prior, patient had 
recurring pruritic sensation of scalp and pruritic eruptions  on the 
calp and upper back fol lowing use of hair dye; patient had used 
the hair dye for 12 yr  Patient was + to 1% p-Phenylenediamine pet for up to 
38 d after patch test initiated  105 
74-yr-old fe male  Erythematous, scaly and pruritic rash of scalp with associated hair 
loss and erythematous popular rash on lumbar area for 14 mo; 18 
mo prior, patient underwent radiotherapy for ductal carcinoma of 
the breast, symptoms started after 2nd treatment session; patient 
had dyed hair for 20 yr prior without incidence  Patch  test was +++ to p-Phenylenediamine, ++ to 
methylchloroisothiazolinone, and + to carba mix and 
gold  106 
 
 
 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 13. Case reports related to tattoo use  
Patient (s) Presentation  Patch Test Results  Reference  
26-yr-old female  Hypertrophic allergic contact dermatitis following application 
of black hair dye to skin  0.5% p-Phenylenediamine pet. using Finn chambers; 
scored on days 2 and 3; papulovesicular reaction observed  131 
3 female patients 
aged 32, 23, and 25 
yr Blisterin g eruption s on dorsum of hands, forearms, and /or feet 
within a week or 2  after application of black hair dye to skin  1% p-Phenylenediamine pet. in standard and hairdressers 
series; positive reactions ranging from 1+ to 2+ on day 2 to 
2+ to 3+ on day 4   132 
4 patients aged 7, 8, 
20, and 25 yr  old Contact dermatitis on skin painted with black henna  1% p-Phenylenediamine pet. with Finn Chambers for 48 h; 
scored at 48 and 72 h; 3 out of 4 patients positive for 
p-Phenylenediamine  116 
3 patients aged 10 
(female), 17 (male), 
and 8 (female) yr Allergic contact dermatitis at site of henna dye application (arm 
and neck)  3+ reaction to p-Phenylenediamine   133 
4 patients aged 31, 
32, 33, and 43 yr old Itching, erythema, and swelling at the site of black henna tattoo 
application, 2 - to 10- d post -application; microscopic 
examination revealed spongiotic dermatitis with dense 
lymphohistiocytic infiltrates  Strongly positive reactions to p-Phenylenediamine  in pet. 
at 72 h  121 
37-yr-old female  Pruritic dermatitis on left upper arm and lower back within 24 
to 48 h of application of black henna tattoo  1% p-Phenylenediamine in pet . using Finn chambers; after 
7 h, test sites became severely pruritic; after 24 h, 3+ 
reaction was observed at both test sites; by 1  wk, reaction 
persisted and remained strongly positive; no reactions in 10 
control patients  126 
10 patients aged 18 
to 28 yr  old Inflamed skin eruptions after receiving temporary paint -on 
tattoos 6 patients patch tested with 48 -h IQ chamber; all had 
moderately to strongly positive reactions to p -Phenylene-
diamine after  72 h 120 
6 patients (3 male, 3 
female) ranging in 
age from 11 to 18  yr Allergic contact dermatitis following skin painting with black 
henna  2+ to 3+ reactions to p-Phenylenediamine   125 
11-yr-old male  Burning sensation an d marked redness at site of tattoo 
application in right brachium that evolved into pronounced redness and scaling after 10 d; visible residual hypopigmentation observed 4 wk after tattoo application; 
patient had received a temporary tattoo 1 yr prior  Positi ve patch results to 0.5% p-Phenylenediamine  123 
15-yr-old male  Erythematous and edematous reaction, including pruritis and 
pain, on left arm that occurred within 48 h of applying a black henna tattoo; cutaneous examination showed well-demarcated, 
indurated, erythematous papulovesicular eruption within the 
borders of the tattoo on the flexural site of the left arm  3+ reaction to p-Phenylenediamine in  European standard 
series hat was evaluated after 48, 72, and 96 h; negative reaction to pure henna  124 
22-yr-old male  Itchy, slightly painful, and bullous, keloidal eruption at the site 
of a henna tattoo on left forearm  3+ reaction to p-Phenylenediamine after  patch test with 
henna powder , p-Phenylenediamine, and European 
standard series; patch with pure henna powder and in 
alcohol solution and with other allergens negative  128 
11-yr-old male  Sharply demarcated, livedoid -colored, pruritic scorpion -shaped 
plaque containing many vesicles, bullae, and yellowish crust on left forearm, with satellite papules and papulovesicles around 
lesion, the trunk, and the face; reaction occurred within 24 h of 
receiving a black henna tattoo; patient had previously received a temporary tattoo on right shoulder and developed a mild 
eczematous reaction within 2 wk of application   Potent reaction to p-Phenylenediamine  at 48 and 96 h 
following European standard series patch test  117 
 
 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable 14.  Occupational exposure  studies  
Occupation  Study methods  Study results  Reference  
302 hairdressers, 43 
males and 259 females  Multicenter study to evaluate the frequency and source of 
contact sensitization in hairdressers with dermatitis; patients 
tested with  Gruppo Italiano Ricerca Dermatiti da Contatto e 
Ambientali ( GIRDCA ) standard series using Finn chambers; 
p-Phenylenediamine was tested at 1% in pet. and the 
hydrochloride  salt was tested at 0.5% in pet. Frequency of 16.6% (50 reactions) recorded for 
p-Phenylenediamine and 7.6% (23 reactions) recorded for 
the hydrochloride  salt; cross -reactions to benzocaine, 
diaminodiphenylmethane, and para-derivatives 150 
128 hairdressers, 125 
males and 3 females  Hairdressers exposed to oxidative hair dyes under controlled 
conditions for 6 work days ; subjects colored hairdresser 
training heads (manikins) with 2% [14C]p-Phenylenediamine 
for 6 h/d; gloves were worn during the application and rinsing of the dye to the heads; urine and blood analysis performed on all subjects  Adverse events not reported in any subjects; h air + scalp 
accounted for 53.46 ± 4.06% of the applied radioactivity ; 
concentration of dye in the plasma was below the limit of 
quantification ( < 10 ng p-Phenylenediamine eq/ml); total 
urinary  excretion of radio label ranged from a total of  < 2 
to 18 µ g p-Phenylenediamine eq, and was similar in 
subjects exposed during the different phases of hair 
dyeing; mean mass balance of radiolabel for the 6  d study 
was 102.50 ± 2.20% ; overall mean total systemic exposure 
of ha irdressers to oxidative hair dyes during a work day 
that included 6 hair dyeing processes was estimated to be 
< 0.36 µg p-Phenylenediamine eq/kg b w/work d  151 
355 female hairdressers  Study of the occurrence and cause of hairdressers’ 
occupational skin and respiratory diseases; 130 with work -
related skin and respiratory symptoms underwent physical examinations, lung function tests, prick and patch testing, and 
nasal and lung provocation tests; 48 -h patch testing with the 
European standard series and the hairdresser series  2 out of 54 subjects that underwent patch testing were 
positive to p -Phenylenediamine 153 
33 hairdressers , 13 
males and 20 females  Hand rinse study to assess skin exposure to permanent hair dye 
compound in hairdressers; samples collected from each hand 
before the start of hair dyeing, after application of the dye, and 
after cutting newly -dyed hair; 16 hairdressers did not use 
gloves during application of the dye and none wore gloves for cutting hair; samples analyzed for pertinent aromatic amines 
and resorcinol using HPLC; 10 of 54 hair dyes contained p-Phenylenediamine After the application step, p-Phenylenediamine found in 
samples from 4 hairdressers, 3 of which had used gloves 
during application of the dye; after the cutting step, 
p-Phenylenediamine was found in the samples from 5 
hairdressers; hairdressers’ skin is found to be exposed to 
allergenic compounds during hair dyeing, with exposure 
occurring during application, cutting, and background; exposure loading for p-Phenylenediami ne was 22 - 989 
nmol/hand  154 
324 hairdressers  Investigation of the characteristics and incidence of contact 
dermatitis among hairdressers in northeastern Italy between 1996 and 2016; patch testing with European baseline series, Trivenento extended series, and hairdress er series using Finn 
chambers, in cluded 1% p-Phenylenediamine; 9660 matched 
controls  66 out of 324 (20.4%) hairdressers positive to 
p-Phenylenediamine, 322 out of 9660 (3.3% controls 
positive 155 
54,917 patients  Retrospective study of individuals tested to 1.0% p-Phenylene -
diamine pet. by the NACDG between 1994 to 2018  Out of 3095 positive reactions, 8.3% (237) were 
occupationally related, with the most common of these 
(72.8%) occurring in hairdressers/cosmetologists  70 
72 hairdressers  A cross -sectional study of professional exposure to 
p-Phenylenediamine  (median exposure = 6 yr) in henna mixed 
dye, which ranged in concentration from 10% (in formulation) 
to 97% (pure form)  p-Phenyulenediamine; subjects were from 
6 salons in Sudan; patients were evaluated for presence of 
renal impairment (serum creatinine > mg/dl) and other markers 
of kidney damage  Renal impairment, proteinuria, and hematuria were 
observed in 14, 26.4, and 41.1% of the hairdressers, respectively; hypertension, skin changes, and 
bronc hospasm were found in 19.4, 38.9, and 22% of 
hairdressers, respectively; using the high concentration 
(pure form) , p-Phenylenediamine significantly increased 
the risk of having elevated serum creatinine ((OR 5.9; p = 0.02) and proteinuria (OR 9.8; p = 0.002) compared to the 
ingredient in formulation  156 
787 hairdressers  Multicenter study of female hairdressers at IVDK between 
2013 to 2020; German Contact Dermatitis Research Group 
hairdressers series patch test including 1% p -Phenylene-
diamine pet.  156 out of 787 (19.7%) hairdressers positive to 
p-Phenylenediamine  93 
46 farmers, 21 males 
and 25 females  Study to determine if dermatitis in farmers was secondary to 
an occupational allergen; patients tested with European 
standard, fragrance, antimicrobial and preservative, and an 
agricultural series using Finn chambers; p -Phenylenediamine 
tested at 1%; a p -Phenylenediamine rubber mix was tested at 
0.6%  2 reactions observed to p-Phenylenediamine and 2 
reactions observed to p -Phenylenediamine rubber mix (4 
farmers total); all initially presented with hand dermatitis  152 
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteREFERENCES  
1.    Nikitakis J, Kowcz A.  Web-Based International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook .   
https://incipedia.personalcarecouncil.org/winci/ .  Washington, DC:  Personal Care Products Council.  Last Updated 
2023.  Accessed 01/13/2023.  Last updated in 2023.  
 
2
.    Elder RL (ed.).  Final Report on the Safety Assessment of p-Phenylenediamine. J Am Coll Toxicol . 1985;4(3):203- 266. 
 
3.    Andersen FA (ed).  Annual Review of Cosmetic Ingredi ent Safety Assessments - 2004/2005: p -Phenylenediamine. Int J 
Toxicol . 2006;25(Suppl 2):50 -54. 
 4.    Johnson WJ, Bergfeld WF, Belsito DV, et al.  Amended Final Report of the Safety Assessment of  p-Phenylenediamine, 
p-Phenylenediamine HCl, and p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate.  .   Washington, DC. 2007.  https://www.cir -
safety.org/ingredients .  Available from CIR.  .  
 
5.    European Chemicals Agency (ECHA).  p -Phenylenediamine. https://echa.europa.eu/registration - dossier/- /registered -
dossier/14562/ . 2023.  Accessed:  05/22/2023.   
 6.    European Chemicals Agency (ECHA).  Benzene -1,4-diammonium sulphate. https://echa.europa.eu/registration -dos
 sier/-
/registered -dossier/19189/ .  2023.  Accessed:  08/03/2023.   
 7.    Scientific Committee on Consumer Products (SCCP).  Opinion on p- Phenylenedi amine: COLIPA No. A7.   2006.   
SCCP/0989/06.  https://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/04_sccp/docs/sccp_o_069.pdf .  Accessed  
07/17/2023.   
 
8
.    Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety (SCCS).  Opinion on p -Phenylenediamine.  COLIPA No. A7.   2012.   
SCCS/1443/11.  https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_commit tees/consumer_safety/docs/sccs_o_094.pdf .  Accessed  
07/19/2023.   
 
9
.    Scientific Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non -Food Products (SCCNFP).  Opinion of the Scientific Committee on 
Cosmetic Products and Non -Food Products Intended for Consumers Concerning p -Phenylenediamine. COLIPA No. 
A7.  2002.   SCCNFP/0129/99.  https://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/sccp/documents/out156_en.pdf .  
Accessed  07/19/202 3.   
 10
.    George NM, Potlapati A.  Hair colouring: What a dermatologist should know? Int J Res Dermatol . 2021;7(3):496- 502. 
 
11.    Handa S, Mahajan R, De D.  Contact dermatitis to hair dye: An update. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol . 
2012;78(5):583-5 90. 
 12.    U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Food Safety & Applied Nutrition (CFSAN).  Voluntary Cosmetic 
Registration Program - Frequency of Use of Cosmetic Ingredients.  College Park, MD. 2023.  Obtained under the 
Freedom of Information Act f rom CFSAN; requested as "Frequency of Use Data" January 4, 2023; received 
February 2, 2023.  
 
13.    Personal Care Products Council.  2022.  Updated Concentration of Use by FDA Product Category: p- Phenylenediamine 
and its salts.  Unpublished data submitted by the Personal Care Products Council on May 9, 2022.  
 14.    Goossens A.  Self- testing for contact sensitization to hair dyes. Contact Dermatitis . 2012;66(6):299.  
 15.    Thyssen JP, Sosted H, Uter W, et al.  Self- testing for contact sensitization to hair  dyes - scientific considerations and 
clinical concerns of an industry -led screening programme. Contact Dermatitis . 2012;66(6):300.  
 16.    EUR -Lex.  Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on 
cosmetic  products (recast). (Text with EEA relevance).   https://eur -l
ex.europa.eu/legal -
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32009R1223&qid=1682529291932 .  Last Update d 12 /17/2022.  Accessed 
04/26/2023.   
 1
7.    EUR -Lex.  Commission Regulation (EU) No 1197/2013 of 25 November 2013 amending Annex III to Regulation (EC) 
No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on cosmetic products. (Text with EEA releva nce).   
https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32013R1197&qid=1678993076675 .  Last 
Updated 11/26/2013.  Accessed 03/16/2023.   
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote18.    Bronaugh RL, Congdon ER.  Percutaneous absorption of hair dyes: Correlation with partition coefficients. J Invest 
Dermatol . 1984;83(2):124 -127. 
 
19.    Hueber- Becker F, Nohynek GJ, Meuling WJA, Benech- Kieffer F, Toutain H.  Human systemic exposure t o a [14C]-
para -phenylenediamine -containing oxidative hair dye and correlation with in vitro percutaneous absorption in 
human or pig skin. Food Chem Toxicol . 2004;42(8):1227 -1236.  
 
20.    Kawakubo Y, Merk HF, Masaoudi TA, Sieben S, Blomeke B.  N -Acetylation  of paraphenylenediamine in human skin 
and keratinocytes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther . 2000;292(1):150 -155. 
 21.    Nohynek GJ, Duche D, Garrigues A, Meunier P -A, Toutain H, Leclaire J.  Under the skin: Biotransformation of para -
aminophenol and para -phenylenediam ine in reconstructed human epidermis and human hepatocytes. Toxicol Lett . 
2005;158(3):196- 212. 
 
22.    Stanley LA, Skare JA, Doyle E, Powrie R, D'Angelo D, Elcombe CR.  Lack of evidence for metabolism of p-
phenylenediamine by human hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes. Toxicology . 2005;10(2- 3):147- 157. 
 23.    Ioannou YM, Matthews HB.  p -Phenylenediamine dihydrochloride: Comparative disposition in male and female rats 
and mice. J Toxicol Environ Health . 1985;16(2):299 -313. 
 24.    Wang L -H, Tsai S -J.  Simultaneo us determination of oxidative hair dye p -phenylenediamine and its metabolites in 
human and rabbit biological fluids. Anal Biochem.  2003;312(2):201- 207. 
 25.    Goetz N, Lasserre P, Bore P, Kalopissis G.  Percutaneous absorption of p -phenylene diamine durin g an actual hair 
dyeing procedure. Int J Cosmet Sci . 1988;10(2):63 -73. 
 26.    Nohynek GJ, Skare JA, Meuling WJ, Hein DW, de Bie AT, Toutain H.  Urinary acetylated metabolites and N -
acetyltransferase- 2 genotype in human subjects treated with a para -phenyle nediamine -containing oxidative hair dye. 
Food Chem Toxicol.  2004;42(11):1885- 1891.  
 
27.    Imaida K, Ishihara Y, Nishio O, Nakanishi K, Ito N.  Carcinogenicity and toxicity tests on p -phenylenediamine in F344 
rats. Toxicol Lett . 1983;16(3 -4):259- 269. 
 
28.    Burnett CM, Goldenthal EI.  Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicity studies in Sprague- Dawley rats exposed 
topically to oxidative hair -colouring formulations containing p- phenylenediamine and other aromatic amines. Food 
Chem Toxicol . 1988;26(5):467- 474. 
 29.    Bharali MK, Dutta K.  Testicular toxicity of paraphenylenediamine after subchronic topical application in rat. Int J 
Environ Health Res . 2011;22(3):270- 278. 
 30.    Wang X, Zhao X, Chen Y, Wang Q, Yang H, Xia F.  Para -phenylenediamine deteriorates oocyte quality by impairing 
mitochondrial function. Environ Toxicol . 2022;37(7):1803- 1813.  
 31.    Chung KT, Murdock CA, Zhou Y, et al.  Effects of the nitro -group on the mutagenicity and toxicity of some 
benzamines. Envrion Mol Mutagen.  1996;27(1):67 -74. 
 32.    Chung KT, Murdock CA, Stevens SE, et al.  Mutagenicity and toxicity studies of p- phenylenediamine and its 
derivatives. Toxicol Lett . 1995;81(1):23 -32. 
 33.    Gentile JM, Gentile GJ, Plewa MJ.  Mutagenicity of selected aniline derivatives to Salmonella following plant 
activation and mammalian hepatic activation. Mutat Res . 1987;188(3):185- 196. 
 
34.    Assmann N, Emmrich M, Kampf G, Kaiser M.  Genotoxic activity of important nitrobenzenes and nitroanilines in the 
Ames test and their str ucture -activity relationship. Mutat Res . 1997;395(2- 3):139- 144. 
 35.    Rojanapo W, Kupradinum P, Tepsuwan A, Chutimatewin S, Tanyakaset M.  Carcinogenicity of an oxidation product of 
p-phenylenediamine. Carcinogenesis . 1986;7(12):1997- 2002.  
 36.    Garrig ue J-L, Ballantyne M, Kumaravel T, et al.  In vitro genotoxicity of para -phenylenediamine and its N -monoacetyl 
or N,N’ -diacetyl metabolites. Mutat Res . 2006;608(1):58- 71. 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote37.    Watanabe T, Hirayama T, Fukui S.  The mutagenic effect of p -phenylenediamine on the oxidation of o - or m-
phenylenediamine with hydrogen peroxide in the Salmonella test. Mutat Res . 1990;245(1):15 -22. 
 
38.    Bracher M, Faller C, Grotsch W, Marshall R, Spengler J.  Studies on the potential mutagenicity of p -phenylenediamine 
in oxidative hair dye mixtures. Mutat Res . 1990;241(3):313- 323. 
 39.    Dunkel VC, Zeiger E, Brusick D, et al.  Reproducibility of m icrobial mutagenicity assays: II. Testing of carcinogens 
and noncarcinogens in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli. Envrion Mutagen.  1985;7(Suppl 5):1- 248. 
 40.    Yasunaga K, Kiyonari A, Nakagawa M, Yoshikawa K.  Different results of the Salmonella umu test between three 
isomers of phenylenediamine (PDA) derivatives. Drug Chem Toxicol . 2006;29(2):203- 213. 
 
41.    Kvelland I.  An investigaton of the mutagenic activity of four hair dyes in bacteriophage T4D. Hereditas . 
1984;100(2):295- 298. 
 42.    Mitchell AD, Rudd CJ, WJ C.  Evaluation of the L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutagenesis assay: Intralaboratory 
results for sixty -three coded chemicals tested at SRI International. Envrion Mol Mutagen.  1988;12(Suppl 13):37-
101. 
 
43.    Myhr BC, Caspary WJ.  Evaluation of the L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutagenesis assay: Intralaboraory results for 
sixty -three coded chemicals tested at Litton Bionetics, Inc. Envrion Mol Muta gen. 1988;12(Suppl 13):103- 194. 
 44.    Soler -Niedziela L, Shi X, Nath J, Ong T.  Studies on three structurlly related phenylenediamines with the mouse 
micronucleus assay system. Mutat Res . 1991;259(1):43 -48. 
 45.    International Agency for Research on Ca ncer (IARC).  Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: An updating of IARC 
monographs volumes 1 to 42.   Lyon, France 1987.  
https://p ublications.iarc.fr/_publications/media/download/3283/b2fe295e10e63fd88e772d2ab60ae9a1e3ddd446.pdf .  
Accessed  10/30/2023.   
 
4
6.    Maronpot RR, Shimkin MB, Witschi HP, Smith LH, Cline JM.  Strain A mouse pulmonary tumor test results for 
chemicals previou sly tested in the National Cancer Institute carcinogenicity tests. J Natl Cancer Inst . 
1986;76(6):1101 -1112.  
 
47.    Sakai H, Tsukamoto T, Yamamoto M, et al.  Distinctions of carcinogens from mutagens by induction of liver cell foci 
in a model for detection of initiation activity. Cancer Lett . 2002;188(1 -2):33 -38. 
 48.    Hagiwara A, Tamano S, Shibata M -A, Arai M, Tsuda H.  Lack of modifying effects of p-phenylenediamine on 
induction of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase -positive foci in a medium -term bioassay syste m using F344 rats. Toxicol Lett . 
1990;52(3):261- 268. 
 49.    Seydi E, Fatahi M, Naserzadeh P, Pourahmad J.  The effects of para- phenylenediamine (PPD) on the skin fibroblast 
cells. Xenobiotica.  2019;49(10):1143 -1148.  
 50.    Li Q, Inagaki H, Minami M.  Eva luation of cross -sensitization among dye -intermediate agents using a modified 
lymphocyte transformation test. Arch Toxicol . 1996;70(7):414- 419. 
 51.    Dunkel VC, Schechtman LM, Tu AS, Sivak A, RA L, TP C.  Interlaboratory evaluation of the C3H/10T1/2 cell  
transformation assay. Envrion Mol Mutagen . 1988;12(1):21 -31. 
 52.    de Mas IM, Marin S, Pachon G, et al.  Unveiling the metabolic changes on muscle cell metabolism underlying p-
phenylenediamine toxicity. Front Mol Biosci . 2017;4:8.  
 53.    Warbrick EV, D earman RJ, Lea LJ, Basketter DA, Kimber I.  Local lymph node assay responses to 
paraphenylenediamine: Intra - and inter -laboratory evaluations. J Appl Toxicol.  1999;19(4):255- 260. 
 54.    Maurer T, Weirich EG, Hess R.  Predictive contact allergenicity influence of the animal strain used. Toxicology . 
1984;31(3 -4):217- 222. 
 55.    Basketter DA, Jefferies D, Safford BJ, et al.  The impact of exposure variable on the induction of skin sensitization. 
Contact Dermatitis . 2006;55(3):178- 185. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote 
56.    Burli A, Vashi NA, Li BS, Maibach HI.  Allergic contact dermatitis and patch testing in skin of color patients. 
Dermatitis . 2023;34(2):85- 89. 
 57.    Schubert S, Lessmann H, Schnuch A, Uter W, Geier J.  Factors associated with p -phenylenediamine sensitization: Data 
from the Information Network of Departments of Dermatology, 2008 -2013. Contact Dermatitis . 2018;78(3):199 -
207. 
 
58.    Sosted H, Menn e T, Johansen JD.  Patch test dose -response study of p -phenylenediamine: Thresholds and anatomical 
regional differences. Contact Dermatitis . 2006;54(3):145 -149. 
 59.    McFadden JP, Wakelin SH, Holloway DB, Basketter DA.  The effect of patch duration on the elicitation of para-
phenylenediamine contact allergy. Contact Dermatitis . 1998;39(2):79 -81. 
 60.    Kneilling M, Caroli U, Grimmel C, et al.  Para -phenylenediamine -specific lymphocyte activation test: A sensitive in 
vitro  assay to detect para- phenylenedi amine sensitization in patients with severe allergic reactions. Exp Dermatol . 
2010;19(5):435- 441. 
 
61.    Marks JG, Belsito DV, DeLeo VA, et al.  North American Contact Dermatitis Group patch test results for the detection 
of delayed -type hypersensitivity to topical allergens. J Am Acad Dermatol . 1998;38(6):911 -918. 
 62.    Marks JG, Belsito DV, DeLeo VA, et al.  North American Contact Dermatitis Group patch -test result, 1998 to 2000. 
Am J Contact Dermat . 2003;14(2):59- 62. 
 63.    Marks JG, Belsito DV, DeLe o VA, et al.  North American Contact Dermatitis Group standard tray patch test results 
(1992 to 1994). Am J Contact Dermat . 1995;6(3):160- 165. 
 64.    Storrs FJ, Rosenthal LE, Adams RM, et al.  Prevalence and relevance of allergic reactions in patients pat ch tested in 
North America - 1984 to 1985. J Am Acad Dermatol . 1989;20(6):1038- 1045.  
 65.    Schnuch A, Geier J, Uter W, et al.  National rates and regional differences in sensitization to allergens of the stand ard 
series.  Population -adjusted frequencies of sensitization (PAFS) in 40,000 patients from a multicenter study (IVDK). 
Contact Dermatitis . 1997;37(5):200- 209. 
 
66.    Magdaleno -Tapial J, Lopez -Marti C, Garcia- Legaz -Martinez M, et al.  Contact allergy in patients with rosacea. Actas 
Dermosifiliogr . 2022;113(6):550- 554. 
 67.    Schafer T, Bohler E, Ruhdorfer S, et al.  Epidemiology of contact allergy in adults. Allergy . 2001;56(12):1192 -1196.  
 68.    Warshaw EM, Ruggiero JL, DeKoven JG, et al.  Contact dermatitis associated with hair care products: A retrospective 
analysis of the North American Contact Dermatitis Group data, 2001 -2016. Dermatitis . 2022;33(1):91 -102. 
 69.    DeKoven JG, Warshaw E M, Reeder MJ, et al.  North American Contact Dermatitis Group patch test results: 2019 -
2020. Dermatitis . 2023;34(2):90- 104. 
 70.    Warshaw EM, Peterson MY, Atwater AR, et al.  Patch testing to paraphenylenediamine: The North American Contact 
Dermatitis Gr oup experience (1994- 2018). Dermatitis . 2023;Online ahead of print.  
 71.    Clayton TH, Wilkinson SM, Rawcliffe C, Pollock B, SM C.  Allergic contact dermatitis in children: Should pattern of 
dermatitis determine referral? A retrospective study of 500 children tested between 1995 and 2004 in one U.K. 
centre. Br J Dermatol . 2006;154(1):114 -117. 
 72.    Yilmaz Z, Ozkaya E.  Patch -test results in terms of the recently recommended allergens in children and adolescents: A 
retrospective cohort study over 22 years  from Turkey. Contact Dermatitis . 2021;Online ahead of print.:1- 13. 
 73.    Seine AJ, Baird EA, Chan L, et al.  A baseline patch test series for New Zealand. Australas J Dermatol . 
2021;62(4):489- 495. 
 74.    Davis MDP, Bhate K, Rohlinger AL, Farmer SA, Richardson DM, Weaver AL.  Delayed patch test reading after 5 
days: The Mayo Clinic experience. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2008;59(2):225- 233. 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote75.    Ajayi A, Hall M, Yiannias JA, et al.  Trends in patch testing of black patients: The Mayo Clinic decade experience 
(January 1, 2011 to December 31, 2020). Dermatitis . 2023;34(2):113 -119. 
 
76.    Veverka KK, Hall MR, Yiannias JA, et al.  Trends in patch testing with the Mayo Clinic standard series, 2011 -2015. 
Dermatitis . 2018;29(6):310 -315. 
 77.    Zawawi S, Yang YW, Ca ntwell HM, et al.  Trends in patch testing with the Mayo Clinic standard series, 2017 -2021. 
Dermatitis . 2023;34(5):405 -412. 
 78.    Wentworth AB, Yiannias JA, Keeling JH, et al.  Trends in patch -test results and allergen changes in the standard series: 
A Mayo Clinic 5 -year retrospective review (January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2010). J Am Acad Dermatol.  
2014;70(2):269- 275. 
 79.    Aalto -Korte K, Alanko K, Kuuliala O, Jolanki R.  Late reactions in patch tests: A 4 -year review from a clinic of 
occupational dermatology. Contact Dermatitis . 2007;56(2):81- 86. 
 80.    Sanchez -Perez J, Descalzo -Gallego MA, Silvestre JF, et al.  Is p -phenylenediamine still a prevalent contact allergen in 
Spain? Actas Dermosifiliogr (Engl Ed) . 2020;111(1):47 -52. 
 81.    Tam I, Schalock PC, Gonzalez E, Yu J.  Patch testing results from the Massachusetts General Hospital Contact 
Dermatitis Clinic, 2007 -2016. Dermatitis . 2020;31(3):202- 208. 
 82.    Ito A, Suzuki K, Matsunaga K, et al.  Patch testing with the Japanese baseline series 2015: A 4 -year experience. 
Contact Dermatitis . 2022;86(3):189- 195. 
 83.    Boyvat A, Yildizhan IK.  Patch test results of the European baseline series among 1309 patients in Turkey between 
2013 and 2019. Contact Dermatitis . 2021;84(1):15 -23. 
 84.    Wee C, Tan CH, Zhao X, Yew YW, Goon A.  Pattern of contact sensitization in patients with and without atopic 
dermatitis in an Asian dermatology center. Contact Dermatitis . 2022;86(5):398 -403. 
 85.    Boonchai W, Winayanuwattikun W, Limphoka P, Su kakul T.  Contact allergy to hair cosmetic allergens in Thailand. 
Contact Dermatitis . 2019;81(6):426- 431. 
 86.    Gupta S, Pruthi S, Kumar A, Mahendra A.  Common contact allergens in patients with chronic vesicular dermatitis of 
palms and soles: A retrospective study. Indian Dermatol Online J . 2019;10(4):396- 400. 
 87.    Gupta M, Mahajan VK, Mehta KS, Chauhan PS.  Hair dye dermatitis and p -phenylenediamine contact sensitivity: A 
preliminary report. Indian Dermatol Online J . 2015;6(4):241 -246. 
 88.    Sharma  VK, Bhatia R, Yadav CP.  Clinical profile and allergens in pigmented cosmetic dermatitis and allergic contact 
dermatitis to cosmetics in India. Dermatitis . 2018;29(5):264- 269. 
 89.    Sharma VK, Bhari N, Wadhwani AR, R B.  Photo -patch and patch tests in patients with dermatitis over the photo -
exposed areas: A study of 101 cases from a tertiary care centre in India. Aust J Dermatol . 2018;59(1):e1- e5. 
 90.    Gregoriou S, Mastraftsi S, Hatzidimitriou E, et al.  Occupational and non -occupational allergic contact dermatitis to 
hair dyes in Greece. A 10 -year retrospective study. Contact Dermatitis . 2020;83(4):277 -285. 
 91.    Shakoor Z, Al -Mutairi AS, Al -Shenaifi AM, Al -Abdulsalam AM, Al -Shirah BZ, Al -Harbi SA.  Screening for skin -
sensitizing allergens among pat ients with clinically suspected allergic contact dermatitis. Saudi Med J . 
2017;38(9):922- 927. 
 92.    Keragala BSDP, Herath HMMTB, Keragala TS, Malavi MAMH, Rodrigo C, Gunasekera CN.  A seven -year 
retrospective analysis of patch test data in a cohort of patients with contact dermatitis in Sri Lanka. BMC Dermatol . 
2019;19(1):10.  
 93.    Uter W, Hallman S, Gefeller O, et al.  Contact allergy to ingredients of hair cosmetics in female hairdressers and fem ale 
consumers - An update based on IVDK data 2013 -2020. Contact Dermatitis . 2023;89(3):161 -170. 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote94.    Kaksi SA, Kahraman FC, Akdeniz N, Ozen T.  Results of the patch tests with European baseline series in children: Five 
years of experience from a single center in Turkey and a review of the literature. J Cosmet Dermatol . 
2023;22(3):1071 -1076.  
 
95.    Truel JS, Wang CX, Schlessinger DI, Sheinbein DM, Mann CM.  Cetrimonium bromide patch test positivity is found 
with a high frequency in a cohort of patients with frontal fibrosing alopecia. Dermatitis . 2023. Online ahead of print.  
 96.    Watts TJ, Watts S, Thursfield D, Haque R.  A patch testing initiative for the investigation of allergic contact dermat itis 
in a UK allergy practice: A retrospective study. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract . 2019;7(1):89 -95. 
 97.    Hsu T -S, Davis MDP, el -Azhary R, Corbett JF, Gibson LE.  Beard dermatitis due to para -phenylendiamine use in 
Arabic men. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2001;44(5):867- 869. 
 
98.    Sowa -Osako J, Fukai K, Tsuruta D.  Anaphylactoid reaction during patch testing for hai r dye: A risk of skin testing. 
Contact Dermatitis . 2021;84(2):123- 124. 
 99.    Brown JH, McGeown MG, Conway B, Hill CM.  Chronic renal failure associated with topical application of 
paraphenylenediamine. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) . 1987;294(6565):155.  
 100.    Sahoo B, Handa S, Penchallaiah K, Kumar B.  Contact anaphylaxis due to hair dye. Contact Dermatitis . 
2000;43(4):244.  
 101.    Demirci GT, Altunay IK, Atis G, Kucukunal A.  Allergic contact dermatitis mimicking angioedema due to 
paraphenylenediamine hypers ensitivity: A case report. Cutan Ocul Toxicol . 2012;31(3):250 -252. 
 102.    DePaul S, DelBuono N, Khalid MM.  Contact dermatitis from p -phenylenediamine in beard dye. Vis J Emerg Med . 
2021;22:100939.  
 103.    Sosted H, Johansen JD, Andersen KE, Menne T.  Severe allergic hair dye reaction in 8 children. Contact Dermatitis . 
2006;54(2):87 -91. 
 104.    Farsani TT, Jalian HR, Young LC.  Chemical leukoderma from hair dye containing para -phenylenediamine. 
Derm atitis . 2012;23(4):181 -182. 
 105.    Oiso N, Kawada A, Matsunaga K, Uchida S.  A long -lasting allergic patch test reaction to p -phenylenediamine. J Am 
Acad Dermatol . 2014;70(5):AB67.  
 106.    Harris A, Jain S, Murrell D.  Allergic contact dermatitis to hai r dye induced by radiotherapy treatment for ductal 
carcinoma in situ of the breast. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2015;72(5):AB77.  
 107.    Shalaby SA, Elmasry MK, Abd -Elrahman AE, Abd -Elkarim MA, Abd -Elhaleem ZA.  Clinical profile of acute 
paraphenylenediamine intoxication in Egypt. Toxicol Ind Health . 2010;26(2):81- 87. 
 108.    Naqvi R, Akhtar F, Farooq U, Ashraf S, Rizvi SAH.  From diamonds to black stone; myth to reality: Acute kidney 
injury with paraphenylene diamine poisoning. Nephrology (Carlton) . 2015;20(12):887 -891. 
 109.    Chaudhary SC, Sawlani KK, Singh K.  Paraphenylenediamine poisoning. Niger J Clin Pract . 2013;16(2):258- 259. 
 110.    Shigidi M, Mohammed O, Ibrahim M, Taha E.  Clinical presentation, treatment and outcome of paraphenylene -
diam ine induced acute kidney injury following hair dye poisoning: A cohort study. Pan Afr Med J . 2014;19:163.  
 111.    Bhagavathula AS, Bandari DK, Khan M, Shehab A.  A systematic review and meta- analysis of the prevalence and 
complications of paraphenylenedia mine -containing hair dye poisoning in developing countries. Indian J Pharmacol . 
2019;51(5):302- 315. 
 
112.    Jain PK, Sharma AK, Agarwal N, et al.  A prospective clinical study of myocarditis in cases of acute ingestion of 
paraphenylene diamine (hair dye) poisoning in Northern India. J Assoc Physicians India.  2013;61(9):633- 636. 
 113.    Abdelraheem M, Ali E -T, Hussien R, Zijlstra E.  Paraphenylene diamine hair dye poisoning in an adolescent. Toxicol 
Ind Health . 2011;27(10):911- 913. 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote114.    Abdelraheem MB,  El-Tigani MAA, Hasan EG, Ali MAM, Mohamed IA, AE N.  Acute renal failure owing to 
paraphenylene diamine hair dye poisoning in Sudanese children. Ann Trop Paediatr . 2009;29(3):191 -196. 
 
115.    Abidi K, Himdi B, Cherradi N, et al.  Myocardial lysis in a fetus induced by maternal paraphenylenediamine 
poisoning following an intentional ingestion to induce abortion. Hum Exp Toxicol . 2008;27(5):435 -438. 
 116.    Le Coz CJ, Lefebvre C, Keller F, Grosshans E.  Allergic contact dermatitis caused by skin paining (psuedotattooing) 
with black henna, a mixture of henna and p-phenylenediamine and its derivatives. Arch Dermatol . 
2000;136(12):1515 -1517.  
 
117.    Turan H, Okur M, Kaya E, Gun E, Aliagaoglu C.  Allergic contact dermatitis to para -phenylenediamine in a tattoo: A 
case report. Cutan Ocul Toxicol . 2013;32(2):185 -187. 
 
118.    Rogers C, King D, Chadha L, Kothandapani JSG.  'Black Henna Tattoo': Art or allergen? BMJ Case Rep . 
2016;bcr2015212232.  
 119.    Choovichian V, Chatapat L, Piyaphanee W.  A bubble turtle: Bullous contact dermatitis after a black henna tattoo in a 
backpacker in Thailand. J Travel Med . 2015;22(4):287 -288. 
 120.    Chung WH, Chang YC, Yang LJ, et al.  Clinicopathologic features of skin reactions to temporary tattoos and analysis 
of possible caus es. Arch Dermatol . 2002;138(1):88 -92. 
 121.    Lauchli S, Lautenschlager S.  Contact dermatitis after temporary henna tattoos - an increasing phenomenon. Swiss 
Med Wkly.  2001;131(13- 14):199- 202. 
 122.    Arranz J, Llabres C, Bennassar MA.  Contact dermatitis after temporary tattoo at Sharm El Sheik. J Travel Med . 
2011;18(1):67 -68. 
 123.    Tomljanovic -Veselski M, Zilih -Ostojic C.  Contact dermatitis to temporary tattoo. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat . 
2006;14(3):160 -162. 
 124.    Uzuner N, Olmez D, Babayigit A, Vayvada O.  Contact dermatitis with henna tattoo. Indian Pediatr . 2009;46(5):423-
424. 
 125.    Wolf R, Wolf D, Matz H, Orion E.  Cutaneous reactions to temporary tattoos. Dermatol Online J . 2003;9(1):3.  
 126.    Brancaccio RR, Brown LH, Chang YT, Fogelman JP, Mafong EA, Cohen DE.  Identification and quantification of 
para-phenylenediamine in a temporary black henna tattoo. Am J Contact Dermat.  2002;13(1):15- 18. 
 127.    Davies EE, Grabczynska  S.  Para -phenylenediamine allergy from a henna tattoo. Arch Dis Child . 2007;92(3):243.  
 
128.    Gunasti S, Aksungur VL.  Severe inflammatory and keloidal, allergic reaction due to para -phenylenediamine in 
temporary tattoos. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Lepr ol. 2010;76(2):165 -167. 
 129.    Ong GYK.  Temporary tattoo associated with type IV delayed hypersensitivity dermatitis in a child - a case report and 
call for parental caution in Singapore. Ann Acad med Singap . 2010;39(9):738 -739. 
 130.    Sidwell RU, Fra ncis ND, Basarab T, Morar N.  Vesicular erythema multiforme -like reaction to para -
phenylenediamine in a henna tattoo. Pediatr Dermatol . 2008;25(2):201 -204. 
 131.    Santucci B, Cristaudo A, Cannistraci C, Amantea A, Picardo M.  Hypertrophic allergic contact dermatitis from hair 
dye. Contact Dermatitis . 1994;31(3):169- 171. 
 
132.    Wakelin SH, Creamer D, Rycroft RJG, White IR, McFadden JP.  Contact dermatitis from paraphenylenediamine used 
as a skin paint. Contact Dermatitis . 1998;39(2):92 -93. 
 133.    Nikke ls AF, Henry F, Pierard GE.  Allergic reactions to decorative skin paintings. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol . 
2001;15(2):140- 142. 
 134.    Guo C, Sato R, Rothman I.  Painful skn lesions on the hands following black henna application. Cutis . 2015;96(3):E5-
6. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote 
135.    Goldenberg A, Jacob SE.  Paraphenylenediamine in black henna temporary tattoos: 12- year Food and Drug 
Administration data on incidence, symptoms, and outcomes. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2015;72(4):724 -726. 
 136.    American Academy of Dermatology Association (AAD).  2008.  Position statement on temporary black henna tattoos 
containing paraphenylenediamine (PPD).  (Approved by the Board Directors: April 26, 2008; revised: August 7, 
2021).   
 137.    Harris JE.  Chemical -induced vitiligo. Dermatol Clin . 2017;35(2):151- 161. 
 
138.    Ghosh S, Mukhopadhyay S.  Chemical leucoderma: A clinico -aetiological study of 864 cases in the perspective of a 
developing country. Br J Dermatol . 2009;160(1):40 -47. 
 
139.    Bajaj AK, Pandey RK, Misra K, Chatterji AK, Tiwari A,  Basu S.  Contact depigmentation caused by an azo dye in 
alta. Contact Dermatitis . 1998;38(4):189- 193. 
 140.    Bajaj AK, Gupta SC, Chatterjee AK, Singh KG, Basu S, Kant A.  Hair dye depigmentation. Contact Dermatitis . 
1996;35(1):56 -57. 
 141.    Trattner A , David M.  Hair- dye-induced contact vitiligo treated by phototherapy. Contact Dermatitis . 2007;56(2):115-
116. 
 142.    Sharma VK, Gupta V, Pahadiya P, Vedi KK, Arava S, Ramam M.  Dermoscopy and patch testing in patients with 
lichen planus pigmentosus on f ace: A cross -sectional observational study in fifty Indian patients. . Indian J 
Dermatol Venereol Leprol . 2017;83(6):656- 662. 
 143.    Murphy CM, Brown KK.  Emerging allergens in eyelash and eyebrow cosmetics. Dermatitis . 2023;34(4):349- 350. 
 144.    Turchin I, Moreau L, Warshaw E, Sasseville D.  Cross- reactions among parabens, para -phenylenediamine, and 
benzocaine: A retrospective analysis of patch testing. Dermatitis . 2006;17(4):192 -195. 
 145.    Uter W, Stropp G, Schnuch A, Lessmann H.  Aniline - A 'hist orical' contact allergen? Current data from the IVDK and 
review of the literature. Am Occup Hyg . 2007;51(2):219- 226. 
 146.    Basketter DA, English J.  Cross -reactions among hair dye allergens. Cutan Ocul Toxicol . 2009;28(3):104 -106. 
 147.    Thomas BR, White IR, McFadden JP, Banerjee P.  Positive relationship -intensity of response to p-phenylenediamine 
on patch testing and cross -reactions with related allergens. Contact Dermatitis . 2014;71(2):98 -101. 
 148.    Dhadwal G, de Gannes G.  Impact of co/cross -reactants on available alternative hair dyes in p -phenylenediamine 
allergic patients. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2014;70(5):AB68.  
 149.    Park MY, Kim WJ, Kim HS, Kim BS, Kim MB, Ko HC.  Results of hairdressing series patch test in patients with 
allergic contact dermatitis to para -phenylenediamine: Are there any safe alternatives? Acta Dermatovenerol Croat . 
2017;25(4):307- 309. 
 150.    Guerra L, Tosti A, Bardazzi F, et al.  Contact dermatitis in hairdressers: The Italian experience. Contact Dermatitis . 
1992;26(2):101- 107. 
 151.    Hueber -Becker F, Nohynek GJ, Dufour EK, et al.  Occupational exposure of hairdressers to [
14C]-para -
pheny lenediamine -containing oxidative hair dyes: A mass balance study. Food Chem Toxicol . 2007;45(1):160- 169. 
 
152.    Rademaker M.  Occupational contact dermatitis among New Zealand farmers. Aust J Dermatol . 1998;39(3):164- 167. 
 
153.    Leino T, Tammilehto L, Hytonen M, Sala E, Paakkulainen H, Kanerva L.  Occupational skin and respiratory diseases 
among hairdressers. Scand J Work Environ Health . 1998;24(5):398 -406. 
 154.    Lind M -L, Boman A, Sollenberg J, Johnsson S, Hagelthorn G, Meding B.  Occupational dermal exposure to 
permanent hair dyes among hairdressers. Ann Occup Hyg . 2005;49(6):473- 480. 
 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote155.    Piapan L, Mauro M, Martinuzzo C, Filon FL.  Characteristics and incidence of contact dermatitis among hairdressers 
in north -eastern Italy. Contact Dermatitis . 2020;83(6):458- 465. 
 
156.    Hamdouk M.  The association between prolonged occupational exposure to paraphenylenediamine (hair -dye) and 
renal impairment. Arab J Nephrol Transplant . 2011;4(1):21- 25. 
 157.    National Institute for Occupational Safety and H ealth (NIOSH).  NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards: p -
Phenylene diamine. https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0495.html . 2023.  Accessed:  07/27/2023.   
 158.    Occupational Safety and Health Ad ministration (OSHA).  p -Phenylenediamine.  United States Department of Labor. 
https://www.osha.gov/chemicaldata/43 . 2023.  Accessed:  07/27/2023.   
  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteJOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF TOXICOLOGY 
Volume 4, Number 3, 1985 
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., Publishers 
6 
Final Report on 
the Safety Assessment 
of p-Phenylenediamine 
p-Phenylenediamine is a cosmetic hair dye intermediate used in permanent 
hair coloring products at concentrations of up to 5 percent (diluted 1:l with an 
oxidizing agent prior to application). The extensive animal toxicity test data on 
p-Phenylenediamine and permanent cosmetic hair dyes containing this com- 
pound show that the degree of toxicity varies with concentration, test system 
and animal species. Animal data support a conclusion that this compound is 
neither a teratogen nor a carcinogen. Epidemiological data also support that 
hair dyes containing this ingredient are not carcinogenic. p-Phenylenediamine 
is a sensitizer and some persons may be sensitized under intended conditions 
of use. 
For those persons not sensitized, it is concluded that p-Phenylenediamine 
is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the current concentrations of use. 
INTRODUCTION 
P-P henylenediamine is reviewed in this report; it is used only in permanent 
hair dyes. 2-Nitro-p-phenylenediamine and 4-nitro-o-phenylenedi- 
amine are reviewed separately; these compounds are used in permanent and 
semipermanent hair dyes. All three compounds and other hair dye ingredients 
may be combined in hair dye products. 
CHEMISTRY 
Definition and Structure 
p-Phenylenediamine (PPDA) (CAS No. 106-50-3) is the aromatic amine that 
203 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote204 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
conforms to the formula”): 
Other names for PPDA include: 1,4phenylenediamine; 1,4-benzenediamine; 
p-benzenediamine; 4-aminoaniline; p-aminoaniline; 1,4-diaminobenzene; para- 
diaminobenzene; PPD; BASF Ursol D; Benzofur D; Developer PF; Durafur Black 
R; Fouramine D; Fourrine 1; Fourrine D; Fur Black 41867; Fur Brown 41866; 
Furro D; Fur Yellow; Futramine D; Nako H; Orsin; Pelagol D; Pelagol DR; Pelagol 
Grey D; Peltol D; Renal PF; Santoflex LC; Tertral D; Ursol D; Zoba Black D; Ro- 
dol D; C.I. 76060; C.I. Developer 13; and C.I. Oxidation Base lo.“-‘) 
Method of Manufacture and Impurities 
PPDA has been produced commercially in the US for more than 50 years.(4,8) 
It is prepared by reducing p-dinitrobenzene with iron and hydrochloric acid, or 
by reducing p-nitroaniline with either (1) iron and hydrochloric acid, (2) iron, 
ammonium polysulfide, and hydrogen, or (3) iron and ferrous chloride.‘3*4*7,g) 
The compound can be purified by crystallization.(3) 
PPDA is commercially available as the free base, which is slowly oxidized by 
air, and as the sulfate and hydrochloride salts, which are more stable.““) 
One technical grade of PPDA that is available in the US has the following 
specifications(4,11): 
Purity 
Moisture content 
o-Phenylenediamine 
Iron 99.2 percent minimum 
0.1 percent maximum 
0.1 percent maximum 
50 mg/kg maximum 
In Japan, PPDA is available as a commercial grade with a minimum purity of 
99.5 percent, a minimum melting point of 139”C, and l-amino-4-nitrobenzene 
and 4-aminophenol as impurities. In the United Kingdom, PPDA has a minimum 
purity of 99 percent, and contains traces of 1-amino-Cnitrobenzene and 4,4’-di- 
aminoazobenzene (DAAB). (4) (In a 60-week feeding study in mice, DAAB was 
not carcinogenic.(‘2)) Although there is no indication that these particular prod- 
ucts are available in the US, imports of PPDA have been reported.r4,13) 
US production and imports of PPDA have been estimated to total 36.5 to 48 
million pounds per year. (13) The cosmetic ingredient safety analysis summary of 
PPDA provided to the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) by CTFA”‘) states the 
major US manufacturer of PPDA produces 5 to 10 million pounds per year by 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 205 
catalytic reduction of p-nitroaniline and that 90 percent of the production is used 
internally by the company. Approximately 90,000 pounds are used annually in 
the manufacture of hair dyes. 
Chemical and Physical Properties 
Aromatic amines, such as PPDA, are nonpolar bases that are readily con- 
verted to highly water-soluble hydrochloride salts. Whereas the salts of aromatic 
amines are relatively stable, c4) free aromatic amines are usually quite unstable to 
light, heat, and oxygen and oxidize to colored quinoneimines, quinones, and 
various polymerized products. (14) When used in hair dyes, the amines are usu- 
ally mixed with hydrogen peroxide immediately before use, producing the oxida- 
tion products. The oxidation products then react with sulfhydryl groups present 
in the hair to form permanent bonds.(14) 
Radomski(‘4) suggested that phenylenediamines and their oxidation prod- 
ucts are highly reactive substances that would be expected to react with tissue 
nucleophiles, causing various biological effects. Several other authors have noted 
that aromatic amines can undergo both N-hydroxylation and ring epoxidation. 
N-hydroxylation and epoxidation are steps in the metabolic activation of aro- 
matic hydrocarbons to mutagens and carcinogens. (15-17) Phenylenediamine com- 
pounds are also potent antioxidants. 
Data on the chemical and physical properties of PPDA are presented in Table 
1. PPDA occurs in the form of white to light purple monoclinic crystals. It is solu- 
TABLE 1. Chemical and Physical Properties 
Reference 
Formula 
Molecular weight 
Boiling point 
Melting point 
Solubility 
Volatility 
(technical 
product) 
Vapor density 
Flash point 
(closed cup) 
Octanollwater 
partition co- 
efficient (log 
P&water) 
UV light 
absorption C&M% 
108.15 
267°C 
139T 
140ac 
141 oc 
145-147T 
Water: 3.8 
percent at 
24T 
<l mm at 
21T 
3.72 
1 S5.5T 
-0.25 
X max:246 nm 
(E: - 788), 
315 nm (E: - 
184) 25 
25 
2-5,7,13,19,20,22,25,27 
2,20 
4,25,27,31 
22 
3,5,7,13,19 
20 
4,32 
5 
3,5,19,22 
13,33 
4,25,27 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote206 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
ble in water, alcohol, ether, benzene, chloroform, and acetone and is insoluble 
in caustic soda. The compound reacts with oxidizing materials. On exposure to 
air, PPDA oxidizes to form a purple or black color. Brown and black colors can 
also develop when the compound is exposed to 5 percent FeC13 and 3 percent 
H202 solutions, respectively. Quinoneimine compounds resulting from the oxi- 
dation of PPDA may hydrolyze in aqueous media to yield p-benzoquinone and 
ammonia. PPDA is combustible and, when heated, emits highly toxic fumes of 
nitrogen compounds. Degradation following exposure to activated sludge micro- 
organisms has also been reported.(2-5,7*1g-25) 
In addition to the UV absorption data presented in Table 1, data on the infra- 
red,(26) mass, (27) and fluorescence(28) spectra of PPDA have been published. 
Reaction Products from the Oxidation of PPDA 
The oxidation of PPDA (Fig. 1A) by molecular oxygen results initially in the 
formation of p-benzoquinone diimine (Fig. 1 B). The diimine may react to give 
either a polymer of the diimine (Fig. 1C) or Bandrowski’s base (Fig. 1 D). p-Benzo- 
quinone diimine may also undergo hydrolysis to form monoimine (Fig. 1 E), and 
then undergo further hydrolysis to p-benzoquinone (Fig. 1 F) and its decomposi- 
tion products (humic acid). Nitroaniline and 4,4’-diaminoazobenzene (DAAB) 
have also been identified as minor oxidation products. Other reaction products 
may be formed under certain conditions.(2g,30) 
The hydrolysis of p-benzoquinone diimine (Fig. 1 B) to p-benzoquinone (Fig. 
Diinunine 
P Polymer 
((:I 
NH2 
/ 
0 \ I 
NH2 qj222++ H24) 
NH 0 0 
\ 
(F) (A) (B) (E) 
'Humic 
acid' 
H NDN+NJ3NH2 
2 
NH2 
(D) 
FIG. 1. Major products from the autooxidation of p-Phenylenediamine.(z9~30~ 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 207 
1 F) is only significant at a pH of less than 3 in the presence of a strong oxidizing 
agent, such as potassium ferricyanide, potassium dichromate, or ferric chloride. 
At a pH of greater than 9, the formation of p-benzoquinone (Fig. 1 F) again is sig- 
nificant, but only if the PPDA solution is at a concentration of less than 0.001 per- 
cent. Polymerization of p-benzoquinone diimine (Fig. 1 B) occurs at a pH greater 
than 9 when a PPDA solution (> 10m3 percent) is added to a solution of a strong 
chemical oxidant. The major reaction product under “most relevant conditions” 
(pH of 3 to 10 and PPDA concentrations of > 1 Om3 percent) is Bandrowski’s base 
(Fig. 1 D).(30) 
Oxidative Hair Coloring Chemistry 
In oxidative (permanent) hair coloring systems, the colored material is pro- 
duced inside the hair fiber by oxidation of colorless intermediates.(30) To accom- 
plish the color-forming reaction, three classes of chemical reactants are required: 
(1) the primary intermediates, (2) the oxidant, and (3) the couplers. Frequently 
employed intermediates are aromatic o- or p-diamines or aminophenols (Table 
2) (34) The major primary intermediate used in the US for permanent hair dyes is 
PPDA.C35) Primary intermediates are capable of undergoing oxidation to form 
color benzoquinone imines, the “essential reactive species” in the color-forming 
reaction. The second necessary component is the oxidant. Hydrogen peroxide is 
the most frequently used oxidant, although various acids of solid organic hydro- 
gen peroxide adducts are used depending on the hair dye product. Hydrogen 
peroxide is widely employed because it is a relatively unreactive oxidant and 
causes a slow oxidation of the primary intermediate in the dye bath. The third 
component necessary for color development is the coupler (Table 3). By virtue of 
their strong electron-donating groups, couplers react with the electrophilic qui- 
none imines to produce leuko-indo dyes. When mixtures of couplers are used, 
the amount of each dye formed depends on (1) the relative concentration of the 
couplers in the dye bath, (2) the rate of coupler diffusion into the hair fiber, and 
(3) the relative reactivities of the couplers at the prevailing pH (Table 4).(34) 
Some of the important color-forming reactions of PPDA are presented in Fig- 
ure 2, and the chemistry of these reactions is summarized in Figure 3. The initial 
reaction involves oxidation of PPDA by the oxidant, or by oxygen formed by de- 
composition of the oxidant inside the hair fiber, to give p-benzoquinone diimine. 
Hair and skin act as catalysts in the oxidation process. p-Benzoquinone diimine 
in the form of its conjugate acid then reacts with the coupler and/or unoxidized 
TABLE 2. Colors Produced by Primary Intermediates(36.3’) 
Compound Color on Hair 
p-Phenylenediamine 
p-Toluylenediamine 
p-Aminodiphenylamine 
p-Aminophenol 
2-Amino-5-hydroxytoluene 
5-Amino-2-hydroxytoluene 
o-Aminophenol Dark brown 
Light reddish brown 
Dark gray-black 
Light auburn 
Golden blond 
Reddish blond 
Deep gold 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote208 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
TABLE 3. Colors Produced by PPDA in the Presence of Various 
Couplers’36.37’ 
Coupler Co/or in Hair 
None 
m-Phenylenediamine 
2,CDiaminoanisole 
m-Aminophenol 
4-Methyl-3-aminophenol 
m-Methoxyphenol 
6-Methyl-3-aminophenol 
2,5-Xylenol 
Resorcinol 
Hydroquinone 
Catechol Dark Brown 
Bluish purple 
Purple-blue 
Light brown 
Light brown 
Magenta 
Magenta 
Bluish purple 
Greenish brown 
Light gray-brown 
Gray-brown 
TABLE 4. Reactivity of Commonly Used Couplers Toward 
p-Benzoquinone Diimine at 30°C and pH 9.5’“‘) 
Coupler 
Resorcinol 
m-Aminophenol 
2,4-Diaminoanisole 
1 -Naphthol 
p-Phenylenediamine Experimental Second Order k* 
1.5 x 105 
5.5 x 104 
6.0 x 10’ 
7.4 x 105 
34.7 
*For d[dye]/dt = k[diimine] [coupler]. 
PPDA to yield a leuko-indo dye. Reaction occurs by electrophilic attack on the 
most nucleophilic site of the benzene ring of the coupler. If the reactive site on 
the coupler bears a methoxy group, the indo dye is formed nonoxidatively by 
elimination of methyl alcohol from the coupled intermediate. Some of these indo 
dyes are the final colored product in the hair, whereas others undergo further re- 
action to form polymeric indo compounds.(30*34-38) 
Resorcinols react with p-benzoquinone diimine to give a green trinuclear 
dye and/or a brown polymeric indoaniline (Fig. 2).(34,3g) m-Diamines couple with 
p-benzoquinone to yield blue 2-aminoindamines. Except for the methoxy deriva- 
tives, 2-aminoindamines have poor color stability and undergo intramolecular 
cyclization to red 2,8-diaminophenazines. p-Benzoquinone diimine couples 
with m-aminophenols at the position para to the hydroxy group to give magenta 
2-aminoindoanilines, or, if this position is blocked, coupling occurs para to the 
amino group to yield magenta 2-hydroxyindamines. PPDA can also react with 
2-aminoindoaniline to give a brown triangular dye. The magenta dyes are rela- 
tively unstable and fade to a brown species. Coupling of phenols with p-benzo- 
quinone diimine yields purple indoanilines, whereas reaction of p-benzoqui- 
none with p-diamines gives the brown dye, Bandrowski’s base.(34) 
Although the initial oxidation product of PPDA is usuallyp-benzoquinone di- 
imine (with possible involvement of a free radical intermediate), the nature of the 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 209 
TRINUCLEAR 
INDOANILINE 
(Green) AMINOINDOANILINES 
(Magenta) 
POLYMERIC INDOANILINE 
(Brown) TRINUCLEAR DYES 
(Brown) 
+ Resorcinol + m-Aminophenols 
BANDROWSKI'S 
BASE ) p-Diamine (Brown) 
II 
AMINOINDAMINES INDOANILINES 
(Blue or Blue-Violet) (Purple or Blue-Violet) 
FIG. 2. Color-forming reactions in oxidative color development.(36.37) 
2 
H2N DNH oxpNH +d$zH 
H NaH;nl 
2 p:i* ~N/cy~y~~~NH2 
2 
*when R = H 
FIG. 3. The chemistry of oxidative coupling reactions.(36,3’) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote210 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
final products of the reaction is dependent on (1) the concentration of the di- 
imine, (2) the nature of the oxidizing agent, (3) the pH of the reaction environ- 
ment, (4) the presence of coupling agents, and (5) the presence of catalysts or cat- 
alytic surfaces. The oxidation of PPDA by hydrogen peroxide to form p-benzo- 
quinone diimine is relatively slow and even incomplete after 24 hours, whereas 
the reaction of the coupler with p-benzoquinone diimine is so rapid as to prevent 
any appreciable buildup of the quinone-imine intermediate, and to prevent com- 
pletely the formation of Bandrowski’s base in the dye solution (although the base 
may well form in the hair). The half-life of p-benzoquinone diimine is in the order 
of a few milliseconds, and its concentration under hair dyeing conditions never 
reaches a detectable level.(30.36.37) 
Corbett(34) suggested that fading of highly colored indo dyes to light brown 
shades involves addition of aromatic moieties to the dinuclear indo dye. Associ- 
ated with fading is hydrolytic degradation to mixtures of p-diamines and hydroxy- 
benzoquinones, which, in turn, can form further colored species by their subse- 
quent interactions. High humidity has an accelerating effect on both this type of 
fading and on the intramolecular cyclization of aminoindamines, which results in 
fading to red shades. 
Analytical Methods 
The Association of Official Analytical Chemists has published both a gravi- 
metric method and an iodometric titration method for the determination of 
PPDA in hair dyes. t40) Calorimetric methods have been used to analyze aromatic 
amines, including PPDA, by their reaction with 2,6-xylenol,(41’ sodium chlo- 
rite,(42) ruthenium trichloridetriphenylphosphine, (43) thiotrithiazyl chloride,(44) 
or peroxydisuIfate,(45) or by their coupling with diazotized sulphanilic acid and 
other compounds. (46) A spot test for the detection of PPDA in hair dyes uses a va- 
nillin-isopropyl alcohol reagent. (47*4*) An acid-impregnated paper tape technique 
has also been reported.(49) 
Additional methods for the separation and/or determination of PPDA or 
PPDA derivatives and complexes include high-pressure liquid chromatogra- 
phy, (50-52) gas and gas-liquid chromatography,(53-57) column chromatography on 
an anion-exchange resin, (W ligand-exchange chromatography,(59) gel-permea- 
tion chromatography, (60) thin-layer chromatography, (54.61-66) thin-layer chroma- 
tography and electrophoresis,(67-71) paper chromatography,(72-74) chronopoten- 
tiometry,(75) polarography, (76.77) titrimetric techniques,(78r79) spectrophotom- 
etry,(*0+‘2) atomic absorption spectrophotometry,(83) nuclear magnetic resonance 
and mass spectrometry,(s4) and thermogravimetric techniques.(s5) 
COSMETIC USE 
PPDA is used as a dye intermediate; on application to the hair with concomi- 
tant oxidation, PPDA produces a permanent color.(30*35) Data submitted to the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1981 by cosmetic firms participating in 
the voluntary cosmetic registration program indicated that PPDA was used in a 
total of 500 hair coloring formulations (Table 5). Seven hair tint products on the 
market contained PPDA at concentrations of 10.1 percent, and 493 hair dye and 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 211 
TABLE 5. Product Formulation Data’B6r 
Total No. 
Containing 
Product Category* Ingredient 
Hair dyes and colors 493 
(all types requiring caution 
statement and patch test) 
Hair tints 7 No. Product Formulations within Each 
Concentration Range @ercentJ 
>I-5 >O.l-1 10.7 
57 210 226 
7 
1981 TOTALS 500 57 210 233 
*Preset product categories and concentration ranges in accordance with federal filing regula- 
tions (21 CFR 720.4). 
color formulations contained the ingredient at levels of ~0.1 percent (226 prod- 
ucts), >O.l to 1 percent (210 products), and > 1 to 5 percent (57 products).(86) 
Wall(*‘) reported that typical PPDA levels in color shampoos and toners may 
range from 0.2 to 3.75 percent and 0.05 to 0.1 percent, respectively. The highest 
level of PPDA in hair color products is in black shades (normally 3.5 to 4 
percent). (lo) Since most hair dye formulations are proprietary, exact concentra- 
tions are not available.(4) 
Voluntary filing of product formulation data with FDA by cosmetic manufac- 
turers and formulators conforms to the prescribed format of preset concentration 
ranges and product categories as described in Title 21, Part 720.4 of the Code of 
Federal Regulations (21 CFR 720.4). Because data are only submitted within the 
framework of preset concentration ranges, opportunity exists for overestimation 
of the actual concentration of an ingredient in a particular product. An entry at 
the lowest end of a concentration range is considered the same as one entered at 
the highest end of that range, thus introducing the possibility of a two- to ten-fold 
error in the assumed ingredient concentration. 
Permanent hair dye preparations are usually packaged in two containers, 
one holding the intermediate mixture and the other the oxidizing agent.‘35) Upon 
product use, the intermediate is diluted and oxidized by mixing with equal parts 
of the oxidant, usually 6 percent hydrogen peroxide. This process may bleach the 
natural hair pigment. (M) The hair dye base usually consists of an ammonium ole- 
ate soap with small amounts of detergent. Free ammonia is present to promote 
the oxidative color reaction and to give an “on-head” pH of approximately 9.5.(30) 
Other materials may be present in the dye preparation; these include reducing 
agents to control the rate of reaction and various ingredients to aid in penetra- 
tion, sequestering, foaming, and adhesion.(89) 
In permanent hair dyes containing PPDA, the reactive ingredients of the for- 
mulation penetrate the cortex of the hair where the colored compounds are 
formed. Color development is complete in 15 to 30 minutes. The dyeing is per- 
manent; the oxidative dye formed with PPDA is fixed in the hair cortex and is not 
removed by shampooing. (35) Subsequent dyeing is necessitated primarily by the 
need to color new hair growth rather than by the fading of the previously colored 
hair. However, some off-shade fading eventually does occur, as evidenced by the 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote212 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
development of a red tinge. This fading is attributed to slow chemical changes in 
the indo dyes. (30*90) 
Permanent hair coloring formulations containing PPDA are applied to or may 
come in contact with hair, skin (particularly at the scalp), eyes, and nails. Indi- 
viduals dyeing their hair may use such formulations once every few weeks, 
whereas hairdressers may come in contact with products containing PPDA sev- 
eral times a day. Forty percent of women in the US are estimated to be regular 
users of hair dyes. r30) Under normal use conditions, skin contact with the hair 
dye is restricted to 30 minutes with a solution containing less than 3 percent 
PPDA.(30*36,37) Users are exposed to unreacted PPDA and couplers, as well as to 
reactive intermediates, particularly quinone-imine and the various indo 
dyes.(36,37) However, exposure to quinone-imine and the brown dye, Bandrow- 
ski’s base, may be limited. Whereas the oxidation of PPDA by hydrogen peroxide 
to form p-benzoquinone diimine is relatively slow and even incomplete after 24 
hours, the reaction of the various couplers with the diimine is so rapid as to pre- 
vent any appreciable buildup of the quinone-imine intermediate and to prevent 
completely the formation of Bandrowski’s base in the dye solution (although it 
may form in the hair). The half-life of p-benzoquinone diimine is in the order of a 
few milliseconds, and its concentration under use conditions “never reaches a 
detectable level.“~30~36~37) 
Most permanent hair dyes on the market contain coal tar hair dyes. These 
dyes are no longer produced from coal but come from petrolatum. Although the 
term “coal tar” is archaic, it is still used in legal documents.‘91*9z) Coal tar hair dyes 
are exempt from the principal adulteration provision and from the color additive 
provisions in sections 601 and 706 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 
1938, when the label bears a caution statement and patch test instructions for de- 
termining whether the product causes skin irritation. The following caution state- 
ment should be displayed conspicuously on the labels of coal tar hair dyes: 
Caution-This product contains ingredients that may cause skin irritation on certain 
individuals, and a preliminary test according to accompanying directions should be 
made. This product must not be used for dyeing the eyelashes or eyebrows; to do so may 
cause blindness. 
Patch test instructions call for a 24-hour patch with the intermediates and hydro- 
gen peroxide mixed in the same manner as in use. (30) The irritation test is to be 
performed prior to each and every application of the dye. In actual practice, 
many beauty parlors do a 24-hour patch test prior to the initial hair dyeing pro- 
cedure but omit the test on subsequent applications.(93) 
NONCOSMETIC USE 
In addition to its cosmetic use as a dye intermediate in permanent hair color- 
ing formulations, PPDA is used as a photographic developing agent, a laboratory 
reagent, a dye developer for furs, an industrial chemical intermediate, an inter- 
mediate in the preparation of antioxidants and rubber accelerators, and as an 
antioxidant for rubber in sewer pipe joints. The compound is also used in x-ray 
film fluids, printer’s ink, clothing, shoes, leather processing, lithographic process- 
ing, photochemical measurements, rubber vulcanization, printing of cellulosic 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 213 
textile materials, dye stuff manufacture, and production of polyparaphenylene 
terephthalamide, a fiber used in tire cords.(3~4~6,7.‘3,19*20~33*94-98) 
In dye manufacturing, PPDA is used as an intermediate in the production of a 
number of colors having commercial significance.(4~24~99~‘oo) These include C.I. 
Direct Orange 27, Disperse Yellow 9, Solvent Orange 53, Sulphur Brown 23, 
Leuco Sulphur Brown 23, C.I. Disperse Black 2, C.I. Direct Green 28, C.I. Acid 
Violet 3, C.I. Direct Black 9, C.I. Direct Black 2, C.I. Direct Black 80, and C.I. 
Direct Black 19. The compound is also an intermediate in the production of dyes 
derived from 4-aminoacetanilide, 4-aminoformanilide, 4-nitro-aniline, and 
4aminooxanilic acid.(4v24) 
Chemical and biochemical applications of PPDA include use as an indicator 
and reagent for nitrogen, (96) as a chromogenic spray reagent for thin-layer chro- 
matography,(“‘) and as a hydrogen donor for peroxidase assay systems.(102-106) 
PPDA is also used for removing nitrogen and sulfur oxides from waste 
gases (lo7-111) and for the calorimetric determination of hydrogen sulfide in 
air,(1*2,113) thiocyanate in biological fluids,(114) and inorganic phosphorus in 
serum. (115) Other applications include use as a substrate to measure the activity 
of oxidative enzymes (11+12’) and as a staining agent for biological mate- 
rials (128-143) 
The hydrochloride salt of PPDA is used as an analytical reagent in the testing 
of blood, hydrogen sulfide, amyl alcohol, and milk and as a color and pigment 
intermediate in fur and textile dyeing. It is also used in the manufacture of rubber 
and plastics. (4.7.99) Derivatives of PPDA are important antioxidants in synthetic 
and natural rubbers, petroleum products, cellulose ethers, and alfalfa meal.(4.9) 
GENERAL BIOLOGY 
Numerous studies of the biological effects of PPDA have been published. 
PPDA added to ATP-free maintenance media at concentrations of 10 to 50 pg/ml 
stimulated respiratory syncytial viral growth in Hep-2 cuItures.(‘44) Inhibition of 
growth occurred in Xanthomonas oryzae and Xanthomonas citi following expo- 
sure to 0.1 M PPDA,(145) and concentrations of 1000 ppm PPDA completely in- 
hibited spore germination in Clathridium corticola.t146) PPDA-hydrochloride 
demonstrated schistosomicidal activity when given orally to mice infected with 
Schistosoma mansoni. (14’) The hair dye intermediate also possessed insecticidal 
and tuberculostatic properties.(147,148) 
In studies with mice, a “total dosage” of 67.6 mg/kg PPDA was given by intra- 
muscular injection during either a lo- or 20-day period. The activity of various 
enzymes was measured 48 hours following the last injection. When compared to 
control animals, mice given PPDA for 10 days had a 33 percent increase in he- 
patic catalase activity, a 32 to 36 percent decrease in hepatic succinic dehydroge- 
nase activity, and a 23 to 32 percent decrease in hepatic cytochrome oxidase ac- 
tivity; no changes were noted in blood catalase activity or in the blood peroxi- 
dase index. In animals exposed to PPDA for 20 days, a 38 percent increase in 
hepatic catalase activity was observed as compared to control values; no changes 
were noted in the hepatic activities of succinic dehydrogenase or cytochrome ox- 
idase, in the activity of blood catalase, or in the blood peroxidase index.(149) 
Inhibition of catalase activity was observed in beef liver exposed in vitro to 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote214 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
lo-‘M (approximately 20 percent inhibition) to lo-*M (approximately 90 percent 
inhibition) PPDA. Studies with the meta, ortho, and para isomers of phenylenedi- 
amine indicated inhibition of catalase activity increases in vitro, with increasing 
instability of the compound toward oxidation. No inhibition of hepatic catalase 
activity was noted in mice given injections of the para isomer (dose unspecified). 
The lack of action in vivo may be due to “rapid degradation” of PPDA in the or- 
ganism.(150) 
A test suspension of PPDA in propylene glycol was administered by intraperi- 
toneal injection to male rats in a dose of 100 pmollkg (in a volume of 2 ml). Blood 
activities of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase remained 
“essentially unchanged” from control values.(151) 
Appiani et al.(152’ reported that the narcotic effect of pentobarbital in rats was 
potentiated by pretreatment of the animals with PPDA. Microsomes from rats 
pretreated with PPDA also metabolized both evipan and strychnine in vitro at 
lower rates than did microsomes from control animals. According to the re- 
searchers, the increased drug sensitivity of individuals exposed to PPDA may 
have been due to a partial inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes. 
PPDA and other trypsin inhibitors were given to starved rats by gastric intu- 
bation to determine their effect on release of pancreatic enzymes. Secretory stim- 
ulation of the pancreas by 0.01 M PPDA was not significantly different than that 
of the saline control. The author concluded that there was “no strict parallelism” 
between pancreas-stimulating activity and trypsin-inhibitory strength.(L53) 
Administration of PPDA-hydrochloride in 0.9 percent sodium chloride as a 
slow intravenous perfusion (10 mg/lOO g or 20 mg/lOO g) or as a rapid intra- 
venous injection (5 mg/lOO g) induced an irreversible cardiovascular collapse in 
rats.(154-156) The cardiovascular collapse was accompanied by a significant in- 
crease in blood catechol amine concentrations, (154) but the cause of the collapse 
could not be explained by a liberation of endogenous amines from mastocytes or 
by consumption of kininogens .(155) PPDA-hydrochloride (20 mg/lOO g) given by 
intravenous perfusion had no effect on the elevation of blood pressure induced 
in rats by adrenalin or noradrenalin(154J56) and had no direct medullary excita- 
tory action.(156) 
Skeletal muscle lesions were induced in rats (weighing approximately 150 to 
200 g) by means of a single, subcutaneous injection of PPDA-hydrochloride (3 
mg) in aqueous solution (unspecified concentration).(157-159) Lesions occurred 1 
to 24 hours after injection and were characterized by both necrosis and edema. 
In the diaphragm, lesions were accompanied by various myo- and neuromyopa- 
thies.‘15s) Serum concentrations of creatine phosphokinase and lactic dehydroge- 
nase remained unchanged following the single subcutaneous injection.(157) Two 
subcutaneous injections of the PPDA solution separated by an interval of 12 
hours caused an increase in the serum concentration of creatine phosphokinase, 
but no significant change in the concentration of lactic dehydrogenase was ob- 
served. Zones of lysed myocardial cells were also observed 24 hours after the two 
doses.(15’) In other studies, necrotic lesions and edema occurred at the site of in- 
jection following subcutaneous administration of 1, 2, or 5 percent PPDA-hydro- 
chloride in 0.9 percent sodium chloride. The edema was attributed to an in- 
crease in vascular permeability and was accompanied by release from tissues of 
histamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine. (160) Edema and focal necrosis have been ob- 
served in rats following skin application of 1 to 5 mg PPDA.(156) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 215 
Rabbits given PPDA in oral doses of 20 mglkg per day for 12 to 13 days had 
increased blood concentrations of alpha-, beta-, and gamma-globulin and de- 
creased serum concentrations of albumin and total protein. A decreased albu- 
min:globulin (A:G) ratio was also observed. PPDA administered to rabbits daily 
in oral doses of 10 mglkg for 90 days increased serum globulin concentration and 
total protein content and caused a decrease in the A:G ratio; no change in serum 
albumin concentration was noted. The authors suggested that changes in the se- 
rum protein concentration may be related to alterations in vascular permea- 
bility.‘161) 
Rabbits that received PPDA at doses of 20 mglkg for 12 to 13 days and 10 
mglkg for 90 days had marked alterations in myocardial parenchyma. These 
changes included edema, swelling of muscular fibers, cytoplasmic homogeniza- 
tion, and disappearance of cross-striation.(‘62) 
Some aromatic amino compounds are effective inducers of methemoglobin- 
emia, (33,163) and “humans are particularly sensitive” to compounds that induce 
this condition (33) A suspension of PPDA in propylene glycol was given by intra- 
peritoneal injection to male rats at a dose of 100 pmollkg (in a volume of 2 ml). 
The percentage of methemoglobin formed in the blood was 12.9 f 4.2 5 hours 
after the injection. Methemoglobin formation was also studied in vitro by incu- 
bating 0.1 pmol of rat hemoglobin with 0.5 pmol of PPDA at 37°C for 5 hours. 
Methemoglobin formation in vitro was 12.8 + 0.4 percent, whereas the control 
methemoglobin concentration was 4.2 f 1 .O percent.(15’) 
In another study investigating methemoglobin formation by PPDA, 3.23 x 
10m4 mollkg of the hair dye intermediate was suspended in 0.5 ml of peanut oil 
and injected intraperitoneally into male rats. Methemoglobin as a percentage of 
total hemoglobin was 3.7 f 1 .O at 1 hour, 1.4 f 0.6 at 4 hours, 3.8 f 1.4 at 7 
hours, and 3.6 f 1.5 at 10 hours after injection. In vitro determinations of methe- 
moblogin were also made. Rat erythrocytes were isolated and incubated with 
10s3M PPDA dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide. Methemoglobin as a percent of to- 
tal hemoglobin was 2.0 f 1.8 at 1 minute, 1.2 + 0.5 at 5 minutes, 1.8 f 0.1 at 
10 minutes, 1.8 f 0.1 at 20 minutes, 2.4 f 0.7 at 30 minutes, 0.5 f 0.5 at 60 
minutes, 3.9 f 0.9 at 90 minutes, and 3.9 f 0.9 at 120 minutes of incubation. 
No methemoglobin formation was observed in erythrocytes incubated with the 
dimethyl sulfoxide vehicle. Additional studies demonstrated that p-aminophenol 
induced methemoglobin formation. When incubated together with p-aminophe- 
no1 in isolated rat erythrocytes, PPDA had a strong inhibitory effect on methemo- 
globin formation.(‘64) 
Three groups of 2 female beagles each were bled 2 days before dosing and 6 
and 24 hours after gastric intubation of aqueous PPDA solutions in doses of 1 .O, 
3.0, and 10.0 mg/kg. Methemoglobin concentrations in the blood were mea- 
sured. In an additional trial of the same experiment, 2 more female beagles re- 
ceived 10 mglkg PPDA orally. All methemoglobin values were within the normal 
range.(165) 
A group of 10 pregnant rats received 40 mg/kg PPDA orally on Days 8, 9, and 
10 of gestation. Two rats died after the third dose. A second group of 10 pregnant 
rats received 30 mglkg PPDA orally on Days 6 through 15 of gestation. There 
were 20 control rats. The animals were bled 4 to 5 hours after the final dose of 
PPDA, and methemoglobin concentrations were measured as a percent of total 
hemoglobin. All the control animals had methemoglobin concentrations of less 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote216 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
than 0.1 percent. One rat in the 40 mg/kg group and one in the 30 mglkg group 
had methemoglobin concentrations of 0.1 and 0.4 percent, respectively. All 
other treated rats had methemoglobin concentrations of less than 0.1 per- 
cent. (166) 
Massive peribronchial infiltrates of eosinophils were observed in guinea pigs 
72 hours after intrapulmonary injection of an aqueous solution containing 1 per- 
cent PPDA. Antigen-induced infiltrates of eosinophils were limited to the injected 
lung; no eosinophilia developed in the blood, and no infiltrates of eosinophils 
were detected in the noninjected lung, which served as the control. The author 
noted that although anaphylactic sensitivity to PPDA is known, the hair dye inter- 
mediate generally induces a delayed sensitivity that is not associated with eosino- 
philia.‘16’) 
Using histochemical staining techniques, Shelley and Juhlin(‘6s) discovered a 
selective uptake of PPDA by Langerhans cells in isolated guinea pig and human 
epidermis. It was postulated that Langerhans cells were the site of hapten binding 
and antigen formation as well as the central target cells in immune contact der- 
matitis reactions involving PPDA. 
Several researchers have proposed that the oxidation products of PPDA were 
involved in the production of allergic sensitization reactions. It has been sug- 
gested that quinonoid intermediates, such as quinonediamine, may link with skin 
proteins to form antigens.(35*16g*170) H apten-amino acid adducts may be the pri- 
mary sensitizers in allergic contact sensitization, although the visible allergic re- 
action would require hapten-protein conjugation.(“‘) There was, however, no 
direct experimental evidence that the allergic behavior of p-phenylenediamines 
required the binding of quinonoid oxidation products to epidermal proteins. Evi- 
dence presented by Reynolds et aI. suggested that p-phenylenediamines dif- 
fered from many contact allergens; they did not form stable isolatable adducts 
with epidermal amino acids. In their studies on guinea pig skin epidermis in vivo, 
binding between highly reactive PPDA oxidation products and skin protein was 
demonstrated; however, binding was relatively labile and a hapten-amino acid 
adduct could not be isolated. Therefore, “if the antigen in p-phenylenediamine 
hypersensitivity is an epidermal protein conjugate, it is formed by a much less sta- 
ble linkage than has hitherto been thought necessary.“(“*) 
Lerner and Fitzpatrick(173’ observed that PPDA inhibits melanin formation in 
vitro. The hair dye intermediate combined with ortho-quinones, thereby pre- 
venting the oxidation of dopa-quinone to melanin.(173.174) Brotherton(‘74) found 
that incubation of 10 mM PPDA with cultures of both white and black pig skin 
caused “marked degeneration,” a “more rapid” pyknosis, and inhibition of both 
arginine and tyrosine uptake into skin protein. Incorporation of tyrosine into the 
melanin of skin was also inhibited. Brotherton(‘74) suggested that PPDA was an 
inhibitor of tyrosinase, an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of tyrosine to dopa 
and the oxidation of dopa into melanin. Inhibition by PPDA of melanin forma- 
tion in vivo has not been reported.(‘73) 
A concentration of lo-‘M PPDA stimulated the hexose,monophosphate gly- 
colytic pathway in isolated guinea pig brain tissue and inhibited glycolysis by the 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. Addition of the hair dye intermediate to the 
cerebral cortex slices as an electron acceptor caused an increase in ‘*CO2 from 
[l-‘4C]glucose when compared with that from [6-14C]glucose.(*7’5) Cilento and 
Zinner(176) suggested that in studies of electron transport in which p-phenylene- 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 217 
diamines are used as mediators betweeri the respiratory chain and the substrate, 
the substrate oxidation may, in part, bypass the respiration-phosphorylation 
chain. Thus, a lowering of the P:O ratio would be expected as a result of increas- 
ing concentrations of PPDA. 
Studies by Loew et al.(16) suggested that the mutagenic activities of amino- 
substituted anilines, such as PPDA, were correlated with various”electronic para- 
meters” reflecting potential for N-hydroxylation and stability of aryl nitrenium 
ions (RNH’). Aromatic amines are known substrates of cytochrome P-450 and 
can undergo N-hydroxylation as well as ring epoxidations and hydroxylations. 
Transfer of an electrophilic oxygen atom to the substrate from cytochrome P-450 
occurs in all these reactions. The ultimate form of aromatic amine that interacts 
with target macromolecules is postulatad to be an aryl nitrenium ion. Whereas 
phenols formed by ring hydroxylation are usually metabolic deactiviation prod- 
ucts, ring epoxidation is a step in the metabolic activation of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons to mutagens. PPDA may have a relatively high potential for epoxi- 
dation. 
Clayson and Garner(15) observed that N-hydroxylation was a prerequisite for 
carcinogenicity of aromatic amines. Evidence reviewed by these authors suggests 
that “aromatic amine carcinogenesis is the result of bioactivation to the ultimate 
carcinogenic form and then dissociation of the reactive species to give a posi- 
tively charged ion” (Fig. 4). The resulting electrophilic metabolite may subse- 
quently react covalently with nucleophilic sites on critical macromolecules, such 
as DNA.“‘) 
Endogenous prostaglandin biosynthesis in homogenates of rat brain was in- 
hibited 58 to 67 percent by 2 x 10V4M PPDA.““) 
No hepatic toxicity was observed in male rats given a single intraperitoneal 
injection of PPDA in propylene glycol at a dose of 100 pmollkg (in a volume of 2 
ml) (151) 
Glutathione depletion, lipid peroxidation and cell lysis were observed in iso- 
lated rat hepatocytes treated with 1.0 mM PPDA.(“Q 
PPDA added to rat peritoneal mast cell cultures at concentrations of 20 to 
300 ng/ml had no effect on degranulation.(156) 
A 0.9 percent sodium chloride solution containing 100 &ml PPDA failed to 
induce release of histamine or 5-hydroxytryptamine when incorporated into iso- 
lated rat mastocytes. (179) 
Interference with mitosis was observed in intestinal cells of mice given a 0.05 
mg intraperitoneal injection of PPDA.‘*80~181) 
R 
Ar NHR -> Ar / 
Ar = aryl 
R = H, acyl, or alkyl 
/" X = ester group 
Ar N+ <- 
FIG. 4. Scheme for metabolic activation of aromatic amines.“5) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote218 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
Cultures of the skin and of the heart muscle of chicks “ceased to develop” 
when exposed to 2.5 mM PPDA.(181,182) 
Numerous studies were conducted during the late 1800s and early 1900s to 
determine the biological effects of PPDA. (13~1a3-1s7) For a summary of the biologi- 
cal literature on PPDA during the late 1800s and early 19OOs, the reader is re- 
ferred to reviews by Hanzlik”84) and von Oettingen.(‘88) 
ABSORPTION, DISTRIBUTION, METABOLISM, AND EXCRETION 
Approxmately 15 pg of PPDA hydrochloride (3H) diluted in normal saline was 
administered intravenously to a rabbit. Blood was drawn over an g-hour period, 
clearance of the blood was fitted to a biexponential curve, and the curve indi- 
cated a biphasic clearance of the radioactivity from the blood with half-life values 
of 24 minutes and 43.5 hours. In another experiment, approximately 30 pg was 
applied to a shaved area on the abdomen of a rabbit. After 20 minutes, only 0.05 
percent of the applied radioactivity could be detected in the blood.(‘8g) 
The tissue distribution of radioactivity was studied after intravenous and per- 
cutaneous administration of labeled PPDA to mice. PPDA hydrochloride (3H) 
was diluted with saline and approximately 3 pg was administered intravenously. 
Mice were killed over a 12-day period, and tissue (liver, heart, kidney, stomach, 
intestine, adrenals, testes, muscle, bone marrow, bone, brain, skin, thyroid, eyes, 
spleen, and lungs) and blood samples were taken. Greater than 85 percent of the 
radioactivity was cleared from the blood within the first day. No target organ was 
apparent. The maximum concentration of radioactivity was located in the stom- 
ach and kidney at 1 hour, in the skin at 1 day, in the spleen at 2 days, in the mus- 
cle at 3 days, and in the bone marrow at 5 days. On the seventh day, less than 0.5 
percent of the injected radioactivity was retained in any of the tissues 
examined.(‘89) 
Approximately 3 pg of PPDA hydrochloride (3H) was applied to two shaved 
areas on mice, and the applications were repeated 20 minutes later. Mice were 
killed over a 3-day period, and tissue (same tissues as after intravenous adminis- 
tration) and blood samples were taken. The percutaneous absorption of radioac- 
tivity was rapid. Despite its rapid clearance from the blood (concluded from the 
previous experiment), there was a steady rise in concentration of radioactivity in 
blood over the first 24 hours. The maximum concentrations of radioactivity at 3.5 
hours were found in the brain, at 24 hours in the brain, liver, and stomach, and 
on the second day in the liver, stomach, and adrenals.“*g) 
PPDA dihydrochloride was applied in gels and fluids, such as those used in 
human hair dyeing, to the skin of dogs, and absorption was calculated from the 
concentrations of PPDA observed in the blood or the amounts excreted in the 
urine. Correction factors were determined by observing concentrations in blood 
and urine after intravenous infusion or subcutaneous injection of known 
amounts of PPDA dihydrochloride. Male dogs were trained to lie on their backs 
for 3 hours with their legs held loosely after application of PPDA dihydrochloride 
preparations to their abdominal skin. After the 3 hours had elapsed, the dogs 
were washed with soap and water and were rinsed. In the first series of experi- 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 219 
ments, a gel containing 2.5 g of PPDA dihydrochloride (1.5 g PPDA) in a mixture 
of 25 ml of oleic acid, isopropanol, ammonia, higher alcohol sulfates (mainly 
lauryl sulfate), sodium ethylenediamine tetraacetate, sodium sulfite and perfume, 
and 25 ml of water or 6 percent hydrogen peroxide, adjusted to pH 9.5, was 
used. The gel with water was applied to the skin and covered with aluminum foil 
or left uncovered and spread from time to time with a spatula. The gel with hy- 
drogen peroxide was applied and left uncovered. PPDA was measured in the 
blood after application of the gel with water, and it was determined that absorp- 
tion was favored in the covered application. The blood concentrations at 3 hours 
were 0.15 and 0.5 &ml for the uncovered and covered gel with water applica- 
tions, respectively. The gel was washed off the skin after 3 hours, and the PPDA 
concentrations in the blood slowly dropped over the next 3 hours. Absorption 
was stimulated by a continuous intravenous infusion of PPDA dihydrochloride 
into anesthetized dogs. The amounts of PPDA that must have been absorbed to 
result in various blood concentrations of PPDA were calculated. The intravenous 
infusion with constant velocity did not perfectly simulate the absorption of PPDA 
through the skin. It was calculated that 11 mglkg of PPDA was absorbed when 
the gel with water was applied under cover to the skin. In the gel with water ap- 
plication without cover, a total of 16 mg of PPDA was absorbed. No PPDA was 
found in the blood when gel with H202 was used for skin application. Since intra- 
venous infusions of 0.001 mglkg per minute of PPDA yielded detectable blood 
concentrations, the absorption must have been less than 2 mg. In a second series 
of experiments, a fluid containing 0.6 percent PPDA in 30 ml of detergent, a 
phosphoric acid ester of a higher alcohol, sodium hydroxide, and perfume, 10 ml 
of isopropanol, and 10 ml of water, adjusted to pH 9.5, was applied to the skin of 
dogs. PPDA absorption was calculated from urinary excretion. The absorption 
was estimated by determining the amount excreted after the subcutaneous injec- 
tion of known quantities. Generally, PPDA measured in the urine was propor- 
tional to the subcutaneous dose. Even though the concentration of PPDA in the 
fluid was lower than in the gel, the total amount of PPDA absorbed was approxi- 
mately the same from the fluid as from the uncovered gel with water application. 
Absorption was less if resorcinol and 2,4diaminophenol were added to the fluid 
preparation. Bandrowski’s base, an oxidation trimer of PPDA, was absorbed 
through the skin and was detected in the urine, although not in the blood.(‘gO) 
PPDA (“C) as the free base was applied in a dose of 4 pg/cm* to the forearm 
of 6 human subjects. Within 5 days 12.7 f 6.98 percent of the radioactivity was 
recovered in the urine. PPDA (‘“C) was applied as the dihydrochloride to the 
same subjects, and 14.8 f 5.5 percent of the radioactivity was recovered in the 
urine. Metabolic transformation was not evaluated in this study. Additionally, 
these values would be expected to be higher if they were corrected by adjusting 
for amounts found in urine after intravenous injection of known amounts of 
PPDA. (8*) 
PPDA (“C) was added to a commercially available hair dye, and the manu- 
facturer’s instructions were used to dye the hair of rhesus monkeys and humans. 
Three monkeys were anesthetized, and the dye lotion (2.5 g of the dye solution 
and 2.5 g of 6 percent hydrogen peroxide) was worked into their dry scalp hair 
for approximately 3 minutes and left on for an additional 20 minutes, and then 
the hair was rinsed, towel-dried, and shaved. Urine was collected from the mon- 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote220 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
keys at 6, 12, and 24 hours, and then at 24-hour intervals for 7 days. The same 
dye mixture (approximately 110 g) was applied to the dry hair of 5 humans. It was 
worked in for 5 to 8 minutes and left on for an additional 20 minutes. The hair 
was rinsed, towel-dried and shaved. The subjects collected urine for the time 
periods 0 to 4, 4 to 8, 8 to 12, and 12 to 24 hours, and then at 24hour time 
periods up to 144 hours. Radioactivity determinations were made on the hair and 
urine. The 3 monkeys excreted in their urine ranges of 0.083 to 0.190 percent 
and the 5 humans excreted in their urine ranges of 0.072 to 0.207 percent of the 
applied radioactivity during the 7 days following hair dye use. Ranges of 12.9 to 
14.5 percent of the applied radioactivity were measured in the hair of the mon- 
keys, and ranges of 14.1 to 26.5 percent of the applied radioactivity were mea- 
sured in the hair of humans.(lgl) Hair dyes are normally used once every 6 
weeks, and maximum exposure to PPDA would occur in users of black oxidation 
hair dyes. These users would apply approximately 100 g of a dye composition 
containing up to 2 g of PPDA on each occasion. If approximately 0.2 percent of 
the applied PPDA was absorbed percutaneously, a 50 kg person would absorb 80 
&kg at each hair dye application.(‘O) 
PPDA has a low octanol/water coefficient; therefore, there may be little po- 
tential for bioaccumulation. However, no data exist either to support or disprove 
this. PPDA has the potential to be converted, either metabolically or chemically, 
to compounds, such as quinones, hydroxylated or acetylated derivatives, and 
azo and azoxy derivatives, that may be of toxicological significance for humans 
and other organisms.(13) 
PPDA (“C) was administered intraperitoneally in doses of 1.5 mglkg to male 
rats, and the radioactivity was followed over time. The highest concentration of 
radioactivity was found 1 hour after administration in tissues other than the intes- 
tines, and this was followed by a rapid decrease in concentration. Large amounts 
of radioactivity were found in the intestinal tract and in the urine. Only very small 
amounts of radioactivity were found in the tissues after 48 hours. Sixty-nine per- 
cent of the administered radioactivity was excreted in the urine, 29 percent was 
excreted in the feces, and 26 percent was in the bile within 24 hours. The male 
rats rapidly excreted PPDA after its intraperitoneal administration. N,N’-diacetyl- 
PPDA, p-aminoacetanilide, and unchanged PPDA were identified as urinary 
metabolites. Thirty percent of the radioactivity in the urine was accounted for by 
N,N’-diacetyl-PPDA.(19*) 
PPDA-hydrochloride (3H) was administered to rabbits by subconjunctival in- 
jection, intravitreal injection, local drops, and subcutaneous injection into the 
head. The aqueous fluid from the anterior chamber of the eye was examined for 
radioactivity. There was rapid clearance from the site of administration. Detect- 
able amounts of radioactivity were found in the aqueous fluid 15 to 30 minutes 
after administration. The peak concentration was reached within a half-hour for 
subconjunctival injection and local drops and within 1 hour for subcutaneous 
and intravitreal injection. With the exception of application by subcutaneous in- 
jection, the concentration of radioactivity in the aqueous chamber fluid was less 
than 5 percent of the peak concentration after 4 days. Thirty percent of the peak 
concentration of radioactivity in the aqueous chamber fluid was found 4 days 
after subcutaneous injection. The half-life of clearance of PPDA from the aque- 
ous chamber fluid after subcutaneous injection was 3.8 + 0.5 days.(lg3) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYiENEDlAMlNE 221 
ANIMAL TOXICOLOGY 
Oral Studies 
Acute Toxicity 
The acute oral toxicities of PPDA and hair dye formulations containing PPDA 
have been studied in rats,‘1g4-‘g6) rabbits, cats,(lB4) and dogsc’65) (Table 6). The 
animals received the material by single-dose gavage and were observed for 14 
days. The LD,, value for rats was 80 mg/kg in one study(lg4) and 98 mglkg in an- 
other study. (lg6) In the Hodge and Sterner’19’) classification of single-dose oral 
toxicity for rats, PPDA would be classified as moderately toxic. 
Subchronic and Chronic Toxicity 
Subchronic and chronic oral toxicity of PPDA dihydrochloride has been 
studied in rats and in mice by the National Cancer Institute.(99’ PPDA dihydro- 
chloride was fed to rats and mice at dietary concentrations ranging from 68 to 
3160 ppm and 100 to 4640 ppm, respectively, for 7 weeks, and the animals were 
observed for another week. There were 10 animals at each of 11 doses and there 
were 10 controls. All the animals survived and no signs of toxicity were observed. 
The compound was administered in the feed at concentrations of 625 and 1250 
ppm to groups of 100 rats and groups of 100 mice for 103 weeks. The rats were 
observed for 2 weeks and the mice for 1 week following the feeding experiment. 
Forty animals of each species were controls. No body weight depression or other 
signs of toxicity were observed in the treated animals. (See Carcinogenesis Sec- 
tion for further information on these experiments.) 
An aqueous solution of PPDA was administered orally in a dose of 40 mglkg 
to 10 pregnant rats on Days 8, 9, and 10 of gestation and in a dose of 30 mglkg to 
10 pregnant rats on Days 6 through 15 of gestation. There were 20 control rats. A 
decrease in the body weight of the rats given 40 mg/kg PPDA was observed on 
Days 9 and 10. Two rats given 40 mglkg died after the third dose. No other differ- 
ences were observed between control and treated rats.(166) 
Dermal Studies 
Acute Toxicity 
The acute dermal toxicity of PPDA and PPDA-containing products to rabbits 
has been studied. The dry, basic form of PPDA and a 10 percent alcoholic solu- 
tion of PPDA applied to an approximately 25 cm* area of shaved, washed, and 
dried skin of 3 rabbits resulted in no demonstrable signs of systemic toxicity.(‘84) 
A hair dye composite formulation containing 1.2 percent PPDA was applied 
in a dose of 10 g/kg to the skin on the backs of 2 male and 2 female rabbits. The 
hair on the backs of the rabbits had been clipped, and the application sites were 
approximately 10 percent of the body surface. After application of the compos- 
ite, the exposure site was wrapped with impervious plastic sheeting for 24 hours. 
The animals were observed for 14 days following the treatment. The percutane- 
ous LD,, of the formulation was greater than 10 g/kg.(lg8) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 6. Acute Oral Toxicity of PPDA 
Material Doses of 
Tested PPDA No. and Species 
of Animals LDm Comments Refer- 
e”Ce 
PPDA in oil-in-water - 10 rats at each 80 mgfkg - 
emulsion dose 
PPDA as base and hydro- 0.1-0.45 g/kg 7 rabbits - Minimum fatal dose was 0.170 g/kg. Increase in 
chloride in water pulse and respiration and decrease in temperature. 
Facial, tongue, and neck edemas and dysphea 
observed in 4 rabbits receiving from 0.2 to 0.22 
g/kg. These 4 rabbits eventually died, although 
there was recovery from the edema and other 
symptoms. High-dose rabbits died before edema 
developed 
PPDA as base and hydro- 0.1 g/kg 1 cat 
chloride in water 
PPDA in water containing - 2-10 rats at 
0.05 percent Na,SO, and each dose 
adjusted to pH 7.0 
PPDA in water 1 .O, 3.0, and 2 female beagles 
10.0 mg/kg at each dose - 
98 mg/kg Increase in pulse and respiration and decrease in 
temperature 
- 
- The 10.0 mg/kg dose dogs showed lacrimation at 2 
hours and redness and swelling of conjunctiva at 
3 to 6 hours. The eyes were slightly cleared at 24 
hours. At 3 hours, the 3.0 mg/kg dose dogs showed 
slight redness and lacrimation and the 1 .O mg/kg 
dose dogs showed lacrimation. The lower-dose 
groups were normal at 24 hours 
PPDA in water 10.0 mg/kg 2 female beagles At 2 to 6 hours, the dogs developed red and swol- 
len conjunctiva and ocular discharge. At 24 hours 
the dogs had half-closed eyes and red and swol- 
len conjunctiva 
Hair dye composite con- - 2 male and 2 41.3 ml/kg for - 
taining 1.156 percent female rats at male rats and 
PPDA each dose 38.3 ml/kg for 
female rats 194 
184 
184 
196 
165 
165 -r 
n 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 223 
Subchronic and Chronic Toxicity 
Long-term dermal toxicities of PPDA and hair dye formulations containing 
PPDA have been studied in mice,(199-202) in rabbits, (202-204) and in rats(205) (Table 
7). PPDA, in a concentration of 10 percent in acetone and applied dermally in a 
dose of 0.02 ml twice a week to mice for their lifetime or to rabbits for 85 weeks, 
was not toxic. Hair dye composite formulations containing up to 4 percent PPDA 
were mixed 1:l with hydrogen peroxide and were applied topically 2 times a 
week in a dose of 1 mg/kg for 13 weeks to rabbits or once a week in a dose of 
0.025 ml for 2 years to mice or twice a week in a dose of 0.5 ml for 2 years to FlA 
rats (and to the Fn parents from the time of their weaning to the weaning of the 
FrA); no toxic signs were observed. 
Primary Skin Irritation 
PPDA and hair dye formulations containing PPDA have been tested for pri- 
mary skin irritation in a variety of animal species: these include rabbits,(‘84,196,198~ 
206-209) guinea pigs, mice, miniature pigs, piglets, dogs and baboons(207) (Table 8). 
In one experiment with an aqueous slurry of 50 percent PPDA, the primary irrita- 
tion index (PII) (scale = 0 to 8) for mice was 0.8, for guinea pigs was 0.5, for rab- 
bits was 2.0, for miniature pigs was 0.4, for piglets was 1.8, for dogs was 0.5, and 
for baboons was 0. In other experiments the PII of PPDA for rabbits varied from 
0.3 (a 2.5 percent aqueous solution) to 3.4 (0.05 g/ml in olive oil). The PII for rab- 
bits of a hair dye containing 1.8 percent PPDA was 1.25. 
Skin Sensitization 
Experiments have been conducted with PPDA and with hair coloring formu- 
lations containing PPDA (208-217) (Table 9). PPDA was a strong sensitizer in guinea 
pigs using a variety of test methods; induction routines and challenge patches 
with 0.001 to 10 percent PPDA sensitized 56 to 100 percent of guinea pigs on 
test. A hair-coloring formulation containing 2 percent PPDA did not sensitize any 
of 12 guinea pigs. The results of Herve-Bazin et al. t208) indicated that 80 percent 
of treated guinea pigs were sensitized to 0.05 percent PPDA in petrolatum. Cross- 
reactions were also observed: 95 to 100 percent of the treated guinea pigs were 
also sensitized to 0.5 percent in petrolatum of each of the amine antiozonants, 
N-phenyl-N’-cyclohexyparaphenylenediamine (CPPD), N-dimethyl-1,3-butyl-N’- 
phenylpara-phenylenediamine, and N-isopropyl-N’-phenylpara-phenylenedi- 
amine (IPPD). Results of a study with PPDA in the guinea pig lymphocyte trans- 
formation test correlated well with sensitivity.(218) Maguirec219) reported that a 
hair dye with 28 percent PPDA derivatives was a strong guinea pig skin sensitizer. 
Sensitization may be transferred from a sensitized guinea pig to a nonsensi- 
tized guinea pig by the transfer of intact, sonicated, or disrupted cells,(220) by the 
transfer of lymph nodal or splenic cells,(22’) or by arteriovenous cross-transfusion 
or parabiosis. (222) 
Eye Irritation 
The rabbit ocular irritation of PPDA and products containing PPDA has been 
investigated in several studies. Lloyd et al.(196) placed 0.1 ml of a 2.5 percent 
aqueous PPDA solution containing 0.05 percent Na2S0, and adjusted to pH 7.0 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 7. Subchronic and Chronic Dermal Toxicity of PPDA 
9 
Concentration No. and Species 
Material (percent) of Length of of Refer- 
Tested PPDA Method Study Animals Results ence 
PPDA in 
acetone 
PPDA 
in acetone 
4 hair dye 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 
composite or 4.0 in.the 
formulations hair dyes 
3 hair dye 
experimental 
formulations 5, 10 
5, 10 
1.50 in the 
hair dyes Application of 0.02 ml 
PPDA 2 times a week 
to a 1 cm diameter 
regularly shaved area 
of interscapular skin 
Application of 0.02 ml 
PPDA 2 times a week 
to the inside left ear 
Mixed 1:l with H102. 
1 mg/kg applied.2 
times a week to 2 
clipped, alternated, 
sites on the back. 
Sites on % of the ani- 
mals were abraded 
once a week. Rabbits 
were restrained for 1 
hour following dye 
application and then 
were shampooed, 
rinsed and dried 
Mixed 1:l with H,OI. 
0.05 ml applied 
weekly or fortnightly 
to shaved mid- 
scapular skin Lifetime Female mice; 50 
per dose and 
100 controls 
85 weeks Female rabbits; 
5 per dose and 
5 controls 
13 weeks Groups of 12 
rabbits, 3 eon- 
trol groups 
18 months Groups of 100 
mice, 250 
control mice Average lifespan unaffected. Normal behavior 202 
and no significant changes in body weight or 
food intake. No treatment-related ulceration 
or dermatitis was observed 
No observed differences in food intake, 202 
weight, behavior, or overall appearance. 
Survival rate unrelated to treatment. 
No definite signs of toxicity. No differences 
in blood and urine parameters. No local 
skin changes 
No evidence of compound-induced toxicity. 
l3o& weight gawt.was norm& Blood and 
urine parameters and organ weights were 
not significantly different from controls. 
No gross abnormalities observed at nec- 
ropsy. No microscopic lesions due to hair 
dye administration 203 
No overt signs of systemic toxicity. Survival 
time and body weights comparable. Liver 
weights in the range of normal values. All 
blood parameters within normal limits. 
Microscopic examination showed skin and 
appendages normal. Moderate alopecia in 
about half of the mice receiving the hair 
dyes weekly 199 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote2 hair dye 
formulations 
Hair dye 
composite 
formulation 
4 hair dye 
composite 
formulations 
3 hair dye 
composite 
formulations 1.50 
1.2 
1 .a, 2.0, 3.0, 
or 4.0 in the 
hair dyes 
2.0, 3.0, or 
4.0 in the 
hair dyes Mixed 1:l with H,O,. 
0.05 ml applied 
weekly to clipped 
intrascapular region 
and dried with a hair 
dryer without heat 
Repeated treatment 
group received 1 g/kg 
daily 5 times a week 
for 65 applications on 
shaved abdomen. The 
skin of 4 rabbits in this 
group and control 
group was abraded. 
The as used group re- 
ceived 10 g/applica- 
tion massaged into 
their back fur 10 
minutes, allowed to 
remain an additional 
20 minutes, then 
rinsed and dried, 
once every 2 weeks 
for 7 exposures 
Mixed 1:l with H1O,. 
0.025 ml applied 
once/week to a 
clipped intrascapular 
region. 20 mice from 
each group killed and 
necropsied at 7 and at 
9 months 
Mixed 1:l with H102. 
Applied topically to 
Fo generation from 2 years 28 male and 28 
female mice in 
each group, 76 
male and 17 
female mice in 
control group 
13-14 weeks 5 male and 5 
female rabbits 
in treated and 
control groups 
21-23 months Groups of 50 
male and 50 
female mice, 3 
control groups 
2 years 60 male and 60 
female rats per 
group, 3 con- No skin irritation observed. No significant 
differences in body weight gains. Survival 
rate of all mice was erratic 
Accumulation of dye on shaved animals re- 
sulted in fissures, scab formation, and des- 
quamation; no observations on unshaved 
group. Mild to marked acanthosis and mild 
to moderate dermal fibroplasia in exposed 
skin of 7 rabbits in repeated test group. No 
differences between intact and abraded skin. 
Moderate acanthosi; and very mild dermal 
fibroplasia in exposed skin of 2 animals in 
as used group. Hematological analyses, 
clinical blood chemistry, and urinalyses 
normal. Gross pathology revealed equiv- 
ocal kidney lesions in test groups, was not 
confirmed histopathologically 
No differences observed in mean absolute 
and relative liver and kidney weights, and 
survival rates 
Dry skin noted in first few weeks of study in 
15-20 percent of female rats and slightly 
decreased mean values for total erythrocytes, 205 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 7. (Continued) 
Material 
Jested Concentration No. and Species 
(percent) of Length of of Refer- 
PPDA Method Study Animals Results ence 
time of their weaning trol groups hemoglobin, and hematocrit observed in 
to the weaning of FIA. (from FIA male rats receiving hair dye containing 3 
FtA received 0.2 ml of generation) percent PPDA. No other differences ob- 
the hair dye increased served in general behavior, appearance, 
by 0.1 ml weekly to biochemistry, and urinalyses 
0.5 ml, 2 times a week 
on the clipped neck 
and back. 10 rats from 
each group killed and 
necropsied at 12 
months 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 8. Primarv Skin Irritation bv PPDA 
Concentration 
(percent) of PPDA 
and Vehicle Method No. and Species 
of Animal Results Refer- 
ence 
50 percent, aqueous 
slurry 
Dry, basic com- 
pound 
10 percent alcoholic 
solution 
0.5 g/ml, water; 
2.5 percent, 
petrolatum; 
25 percent, 
petrolatum; 
0.05 g/ml, olive oil 
2.5 percent, aqueous 
solution containing 
0.5 percent Na$O, 
and adjusted to 
pH 7.0 
5 percent, ethanol 
Hair dye, 1.2 
percent 
Hair dye, 1.8 
percent 1 24-hour occluded patch application to clipped, in- 
tact and abraded skin. Erythema and edema reactions 
are evaluated (O-4) at 24 and 72 hours, and values 
are added and averaged to yield a primary irritation 
index (PII scale = O-8). Dog and baboon PII are 
estimates; no abraded sites 
Shaved, washed, and dried a 25 cm’ area of skin. 
Rubbed PPDA into it 
Shaved, washed, and dried a 25 cm’ area of skin. 
Applied PPDA 
0.5 ml of the water or olive oil or 0.5 of the petrolatum 
applied to intact and abraded skin. Erythema and 
edema reactions are evaluated (O-4) at 24 and 72 
hours, and values are added and averaged to yield a 
PII (scale - O-8) 
1 24-hour occluded patch application to clipped intact 
and abraded skin. Erythema and edema reactions are 
evaluated (O-4) at 24 and 72 hours and values are 
added and averaged to yield a PII (scale = O-8) 
1 24-hour occluded patch application to clipped skin. 
The skin of half the animals was abraded. Erythema 
and edema reactions are evaluated (O-4) at 24 and 72 
hours and values are added and averaged to yield a 
PII (scale = O-8) 
Approximately 10 percent of the body surface clipped 
(the backs). Applied 10 g/kg, wrapped in impervious 
plastic sheeting for 24 hours 
Applied 0.1 ml daily for 3 days to intact shaved skin. 
Graded at 24 hours. PII (scale = O-8) determined 
on day greatest irritation observed 6 each of mice, guinea 
pigs, rabbits, minia- 
ture pigs, piglets, 
dogs and baboons 
3 rabbits No effects observed 
3 rabbits Mild erythema observed 
6 rabbits per 
treatment PII = 3.2 
PII = 1.4 
3 rabbits 
8 rabbits 
2 male and 2 female 
rabbits 
9 rabbits PIIS for mice, guinea pigs, rabbits, 207 
miniature pigs, piglets, dogs, and 
baboons were 0.8, 0.5, 2.0, 0.4, 
1.8, 0.5, and 0, respectively. 
Rabbit and piglet showed flare-up 
skin reactions 2 to 3 weeks after 
application 
184 
184 
208 
PII - 2.3 
PII = 3.4 
Very slight edema at the abraded 196 
sites of 2 rabbits. In 1, the reac- 
tion ameliorated in 72 hours. PII 
= 0.3 
PII = 0.88 209 
Slight to moderate erythema and 
moderate edema observed 198 
PII = 1.25. Mildly irritating 206 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 9. Skin Sensitization M 
0 
Material 
Jested Concentratron 
(percent) of PPDA Method No. of 
Guinea Pim Results Refer- 
ence 
PPDA in 70% 
ethanol 2 
PPDA in olive oil 
for injection in- 
duction, in petro- 
latum for dermal 
induction and 
challenge 
PPDA in petro- 
latum 
PPDA in propylene 
glycol for intra- 
dermal induction, 
in 70% ethanol 
for topical induc- 
tion, and in 95% 
ethanol for chal- 
lenge Injection induction with 
0.5, dermal induction 
with 1, challenge with 
0.05 and 0.5 
Induction with 2, chal- 
lenge with 0.1, 0.5, 
1, and 2 
lntradermal induction 
with 0.005, topical in- 
duction with 0.05 or 
0.1 for larger animals, 
challenge with 0.5, 1, 
and 5 24-hr occluded patch of 0.5 ml on back read 
1,7,24, and 48 hours later. Induction, intra- 
dermal injection of 0.1 ml Freund’s complete 
adjuvant diluted to 50% in saline on Days 0 
and 9, occluded patch of 0.5 ml on Days 0, 
2,4,7,9,11,16,18, and 21 to clipped back. 
Tenth patch removed Day 23. Challenge, 
Day 35, 48-hour occluded patch of 0.5 ml 
to another back site. Reactions read at 0, 
7,24, and 48 hours, erythema scored scale 
of 0 to 4. Histological examination, chal- 
lenge sites with macroscopic reactions 
Induction, intradermal injeotion of PPDA and 
complete Freund’s adjuvant. 1 week later, 
cutaneous application. Challenge 1 week 
later by cutaneous application. Control 
animals challenged only 20 
20 per 
treatment 
Induction, 4 24-hour occlusive patches of 
0.5 g on alternate days on clipped flank. 
After 14 days, challenge on opposite flank 
in occlusive chamber. Reactions scored 24, 
48, and 72 hours, erythema scored scale 
of o-3 10 at each 
of 4 chal- 
lenge con- 
centra- 
tions 
Guinea pig maximization testoL4) 2 groups of 
(scale = O-3) 25 females 20/20 reacted. Mean erythema 210 
score was 2.16. 2/3 had aller- 
gic type inflammatory reac- 
tions with intense spongiosis 
and massive lymphocyte exo- 
cytosis. One showed necrosis 
with erosion, weeping, and a 
squamous crust 
0.05 and 0.5% of PPDA sensi- 
tized 80 and 100% of the 
animals, respectively. 0.5% 
PPDA irritating to 20% of the 
nonsensitized controls 208 
0.5, 1, and 2% sensitized all 213 
animals. Mean erythema 
scores were 2.2, 2.1, and 8 
1.5, respectively. 0.1% sensi- 2 
tized 4/10. Mean score was rl 
0.5 E 
14125 and 16/25 positive re- 214 2 
actions. Mean scores were 513 
0.65 and 0.71, respectively i 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuotePPDA (99%) in 
physiological 
saline for induc- 
tion and intra- 
dermal challenge, 
in petrolatum 
for epidermal 
challenge 
PPDA in water 
PPDA in water 
PPDA in dimethyl Induction with 10, chal- 
formamide lenge with 1 
PPDA 
PPDA lntradermal induction 
and challenge with 0.1, 
epidermal challenge 
with 1 
lntradermal induction 
with 0.1, topical induc- 
tion with 5, challenge 
with 1 
Primary irritation with 
0.001, 0.01, 0.1. Induc- 
tion and challenge with 
0.001 
Induction injection with 
2.5, challenge injection 
with 1 .O, challenge ap- 
plication with 5.0 
lntradermal induction 
with 0.25, topical 
induction with 0.5, 
challenge with 0.5 Induction, 3 intradermal injections of 0.1 ml 
in a week and 3 intradermal injections of 
0.1 ml of 1:l Freund’s adjuvant:saline with 
PPDA 2 weeks. After 14 days, challenge, 
intradermal injection of 0.1 ml into fresh 
flank site and 24-hour occluded patch 14 
days later at a different site. Challenge 
reactions read 24-hours after injection or 
patch removal 
Guinea pig maximization test’“” 
(scale - O-3) 
Primary irritant effect determined after intra- 
dermal injection. Induction, intradermal 
injection over 10 days with 0.1 ml. 17 days 
later, challenge, intradermal injection of 
0.1 ml. Reactions read 48 hours later, 
biopsies were performed 
Induction, 0.1 ml applied to outer ears for 3 
days; 4 days later, challenge, 0.2 ml applied 
to depilated flank. Erythema scored 24 hours 
later. Controls were challenged noninduced 
animals 20 on test, No primary irritation reactions. 216 
18 con- 16/20 positive sensitization 
trols reactions. High correlation 
between microscopic and 
macroscopic reactions 
8 818 positive (pink) reactions 217 
4 simultaneous induction injections at sites 
overlaying axillary and inguinal lymph 
nodes. Challenge by intradermal injection 
and open topical application on opposite 
shaved flanks 14 days later. Reactions 
graded at 24 hours 
Guinea pig maximization testr2r4r 
(scale = O-3) 10 All the guinea pigs were sen- 
sitized; a strong sensitizer 212 
10 90% of the guinea pigs were 212 
sensitized; a strong sensitizer. 
Mean of all positive challenge 
scores was 2.45 20 20/20 and 13/20 positive sen- 215 
sitization reactions after 
intradermal and epidermal 
challenges, respectively 
10 All animals were sensitized. 
Mean erythema + edema 
score was 2.9 209 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 9. (Continued) 
Material 
Jested 
PPDA 
Hair coloring 
formulation Concentration No. of Refer- 
(percent) of PPDA Method Guinea Pigs Results ence 
Induction injection of Single intradermal injection of PPDA and 10 All the guinea pigs were sen- 212 
0.25, challenge patch Freund’s complete adjuvant in nuchal 
of 1.0 sitized; a strong sensitizer. 
region. Challenged 12-14 days later with 6 Mean of all positive challenge 
hour occluded chamber application on a scores was 2.1 
shaved flank. Reactions graded 18 and 42 
hours later (scale - O-3) 
2 Material diluted to 1% in propylene glycol. 12 female No positive reactions were ob- 211 
9 0.1 ml topical inductions on the shaved served; not a contact sensi- 
back over 3 weeks. Challenge 2 weeks tizer 
later at the original and an untreated site. 
Observed at 24 and 48 hours 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFpPHENYLENEDlAMlNE 231 
in one eye of each of 3 rabbits. Ten seconds later the eyes were irrigated with 50 
ml of lukewarm water. The researchers observed mild conjunctival inflammation 
that did not persist for more than 24 hours. 
Morikawa et al.(zo9) used the method and scoring system of Draize et al. to 
determine the irritation of 100 percent PPDA in rabbit eyes. The maximum irrita- 
tion score reported was 17.0 of a possible 110. 
A hair dye composite formulation containing 1.2 percent PPDA was tested 
for ocular irritation with 10 rabbits. One-tenth milliliter of the dye was instilled 
into the conjunctival sac of one eye of each animal. The hair dye was rinsed from 
the eyes of 5 animals with 40 ml water 4 seconds after instillation. The maximum 
possible irritation score was 110. For the unwashed eyes, the average irritation 
score at 1 hour was 33.0, at 24 hours was 34.0, at 48 hours was 24.0, at 72 hours 
was 14.0, at 96 hours was 9.0, and at 7 days after instillation was 2.4. For the 
washed eyes at the same times after instillation the scores were 23.0, 20.0, 10.0, 
7.0, 4.0, and 0, respectively. (z23) A similar study was conducted with a hair dye 
containing 1.8 percent PPDA. One-tenth milliliter was instilled into the conjunc- 
tival sac of one eye of 6 rabbits. The maximum possible irritation score was 110. 
The average scores were 30 for 1 day, 29 for 2 days, 19 for 3 days, 15 for 4 days, 
and 6 for 7 days after instillation. The hair dye was moderately irritating to the 
eyes of rabbits. (224) 
Other Studies 
The rat acute intraperitoneal LD,, of an aqueous PPDA solution was 37 mg/ 
kg.(194) The intraperitoneal administration of 190 mglkg of PPDA hydrochloride 
to rats and 120 mg/kg to cats resulted in edema of the head and neck.(186) 
Hanzlik(L84) reported that the minimum fatal dose of PPDA base and hydro- 
chloride in water administered subcutaneously to 10 rats and 3 rabbits was 170 
mg/kg and 200 mg/kg, respectively. Edema of the head and neck was observed in 
some of the rabbits. In another study, the subcutaneous administration of 350 mg 
of PPDA hydrochloride to guinea pigs and doses of 120 to 150 mg to rats resulted 
in edema of the head and neck.(lS7) 
The minimum fatal dose of PPDA base and hydrochloride administered intra- 
venously to 3 dogs was 170 mg/kg.(lE4) 
SPECIAL STUDIES 
Animal Reproduction and Teratology 
PPDA in aqueous solution was administered by gavage in doses of 5, 10, 15, 
20, and 30 mg/kg per day on Days 6 through 15 of gestation to groups of 25 preg- 
nant rats. A control group given only water and a pair-fed control group (paired 
to 30 mg/kg per day group) were also included in the experiment. The rats were 
killed on Day 20. Feed consumption was significantly reduced during the dosing 
period for the 20 and 30 mg/kg per day groups. There were significant decreases 
in feed consumption for several days during the dosing period for the 15 mg/kg 
per day group. Rats in the 20 and 30 mg/kg per day groups and the pair-fed con- 
trols had significantly reduced weight gains over the dosing period, but these re- 
sults were not significant when compared to the controls over the 20 days. Two 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote232 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
pregnant rats in the 30 mg/kg per day group died. There were no other maternal 
deaths. No significant differences in the numbers of corpora lutea, implantation 
sites, live fetuses or resorptions, or in fetal weights and male:female ratios were 
observed. There were no biologically meaningful or statistically significant in- 
creases in the numbers of litters or fetuses with soft tissue or skeletal malforma- 
tions in any of the treatment groups.‘225) 
An aqueous PPDA solution was administered subcutaneously in a dose of 28 
mg/kg to three groups of 25 mice on Days 5 to 7, 8 to 10, or 11 to 14 of gestation. 
There were 25 control mice. Small increases over the controls in average resorp- 
tion numbers and percent fetal skeletal variations were observed in the treated 
groups; the researchers claimed that these increases were within the range of 
values found for historical controls. They concluded that there was no evidence 
PPDA had an embryotoxic or teratogenic effect.(226) 
A 0.2 percent aqueous solution of PPDA was administered intraperitoneally 
to groups of 20 male rats three times a week for 8 weeks at doses of 2, 6, and 20 
mglkg. Forty control rats were injected with sterile water. After the 8 weeks, each 
male was mated weekly with 2 females for 4 weeks. Seventeen days after separa- 
tion from the males, the females were killed, their uteri were examined, and the 
number of dead and live fetuses and implantation and absorption sites were 
counted. No evidence of an increase in postimplantation fetal loss was ob- 
served. (194.227) 
Hair dye products containing 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, or 4.0 percent PPDA were ap- 
plied topically in doses of 2 ml/kg to groups of 20 pregnant rats on Days 1, 4, 7, 
10, 13, 16, and 19 of gestation. The rats were shaved 1 day prior to each applica- 
tion, and the dyes were mixed with an equal volume of 6 percent hydrogen per- 
oxide just before their use. There were three negative control groups. The rats 
were killed on Day 20 of gestation. No biologically significant soft tissue or skele- 
tal changes were observed in the embryos. The mean numbers of corpora lutea, 
implantation sites, live fetuses, resorptions per pregnancy, or litters with resorp- 
tions were not significantly affected by the dye treatments. The litter sex ratios 
and pregnant rat weight changes and feed consumption were similar for un- 
treated controls and dye-treated groups.(*03) 
A hair dye formulation containing 3 percent PPDA was mixed 1 :l with 6 per- 
cent hydrogen peroxide and applied to the clipped backs of 50 female mice two 
times a week for 4 weeks prior to mating and through the mating and gestation 
periods. There was evidence of mating in 34 treated mice, and 26 became preg- 
nant. Each mouse received 0.05 ml of the dye and hydrogen peroxide mixture at 
each application. There was evidence of mating in 30 control mice, and 23 be- 
came pregnant. No overt signs of maternal toxicity were observed. One treated 
animal died prior to gestation; it had a discolored liver and an enlarged spleen. 
The maternal weight gains and pregnancy and mortality rates of the treated mice 
were comparable to the controls. The mean numbers of implantations, live fe- 
tuses, and resorptions and fetal sex ratios, and numbers of skeletal and soft tissue 
malformations were similar in treated and control mice. Slightly lower fetal 
weights were observed in the treated mice, but the mean crown-rump distances 
were comparable to the controls. The researchers concluded that there was no 
evidence of a teratogenic effect. However, there may have been a retarding ef- 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 233 
feet on the ossification process, particularly of the bones of the feet and of the 
cervical and caudal vertebral centra.(22s) 
The same hair dye formulation (3 percent PPDA) was mixed 1:l with 6 per- 
cent hydrogen peroxide and applied to the clipped backs of 34 female rabbits 
two times a week for 4 weeks prior to mating and through the mating and gesta- 
tion periods. All 34 rabbits were mated, 26 became pregnant, and 3 died during 
the gestation period. The rabbits received 4.0 ml/kg applications of the mixture of 
hair dye with hydrogen peroxide. Of the 34 control rabbits, 32 were mated, 21 
became pregnant, and 6 died during gestation. No overt signs of maternal toxic- 
ity were observed. No adverse effects on pregnancy rates and maternal survival 
and body weights were found. Focal alopecia was noted at slightly higher inci- 
dences in treated rabbits during the first two thirds of gestation; in the last third of 
gestation, the incidence of alopecia in control and treated rabbits was similar. 
The mean numbers of corpora lutea, implantations, live fetuses and resorptions, 
implantation efficiency, and number of doses with two or more resorptions were 
comparable in control and treated rabbits. There was no evidence of a terato- 
genie effect. There may have been some evidence of embryotoxicity; the percent 
of live fetuses was less in the treated rabbits (85.4 percent in the treated rabbits 
and 93.8 percent in the control rabbits), and the fetal sex ratio (male:female ratio 
of 0.7) was unusually low. However, there was no adverse effect on the weight or 
length of the fetuses that survived to Day 30 of gestation.(229) 
Hair dye formulations containing 2, 3, and 4 percent PPDA were mixed 1 :l 
with 6 percent hydrogen peroxide and applied two times a week to the clipped 
backs and necks of groups of 40 male and 40 female mice (the Fu generation). 
The initial dose level was 0.2 ml of the dye per application and this was increased 
by 0.1 ml/application weekly to a dose of 0.5 ml/application. Treatment was con- 
tinuous through growth, mating, gestation, and lactation to the weaning of the 
FIB, FOB, and F3c litters of the respective generations. There were three control 
groups. The dye-treated groups were comparable to the control groups in gen- 
eral behavior and appearance, feed consumption, body weight gain, and sur- 
vival. Treated rats had a few skin reactions throughout the study; these included 
mild scabbing, fissuring, loss of elasticity, and leathery texture. The treated Fu, Ft, 
and F2 parents did not differ from the controls in fertility, gestation survival, and 
live birth indices. Litter size and body weights of the young were similar. No 
treatment-related gross or microscopic lesions were observed in the F1 B parental 
rats or FOB weanling rats killed and necropsied during the study. No treatment- 
related gross lesions were observed in the rats that died during the study.(230) 
A dye product containing 2.20 percent PPDA was applied topically to 25 
male rats two times a week for 10 weeks. The dye product was applied in a dose 
of 0.5 ml to two alternating shaved back sites. The dye was mixed with an equal 
volume of 6 percent hydrogen peroxide before use. There was a control group of 
25 rats. After the 10 weeks, each male rat (PO) was mated to 1 female each week 
for 3 weeks. Each of 100 male offspring from these matings (Fl males) was mated 
to 1 female per week for 3 weeks. These female rats were killed at between 14 
and 16 days of gestation. There were no significant effects on dye-treated PO male 
body weight gains. There were no differences in PO male percent fertility or total 
and average live pups per F1 litter. There was no indication of reduced fertility in 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote234 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
the F1 males. The numbers of implantations, dead fetuses, and resorptions were 
similar for the treated and control groups.r231) 
Mutagenesis and Carcinogenesis 
Short-Term Tests 
Bacterial Mutagenesis 
Many studies have been conducted on PPDA using the Ames test and modifi- 
cations of the Ames test (Table 10). All PPDA and PPDA and hydrogen peroxide 
mixtures were negative in the Ames test in the absence of metabolic activation 
(Table 10). Both positive and negative results were reported for PPDA and PPDA 
and hydrogen peroxide mixtures with metabolic activation. Crebelli et al.(232) re- 
ported that purified PPDA was negative and commercial PPDA was positive in 
the Ames test with metabolic activation. They suggested that the positive result 
may have been due to impurities in the commercial PPDA. 
Other researchers have disagreed with this conclusion. Burnett et al.(247) re- 
ported fresh and aged aqueous solutions of PPDA, and fresh DMSO solutions of 
PPDA were nonmutagenic in the Ames test. Aged DMSO solutions of PPDA 
(used up to 4 hours after dilution) were mutagenic. Even after aging, PPDA in ace- 
tone or ethanol and DMSO solutions of PPDA containing 15 percent water were 
nonmutagenic. Nishi and Nishioka (248) determined that DMSO solutions of 
PPDA kept in the dark were not mutagenic in the Ames test but that the same so- 
lutions exposed to fluorescent light for 10 minutes to 4 hours were mutagenic. A 
sample of the light-exposed PPDA was analyzed by thin-layer chromatography, 
and the amount of Bandrowski’s base in the sample increased with exposure time 
and the mutagenicity paralleled the concentration of the base; Bandrowski’s base 
may have been responsible for the observed mutagenicity. 
Five oxidation products of PPDA were tested for mutagenicity in the Ames 
test, and all were more mutagenic than PPDA. Bandrowski’s base and p-nitroani- 
line were positive in strain TA1538 with metabolic activation; 4,4-azodianiline 
and p-dinitrobenzene were positive in strains TA1538 and TAlOO with metabolic 
activation; and 2-(4’aminoaniline)-5-hydroxy-1,4-quinonediimine was positive in 
strain TA1538 without metabolic activation. A solution of PPDA oxidized with 
hydrogen peroxide in the presence of m-amines, such as 2,4-toluenediamine and 
2,4-diaminoanisole, was more mutagenic than a solution of PPDA alone.r25’) 
An aqueous solution of PPDA was administered intraperitoneally to groups 
of 20 male rats in doses of 2, 6, and 20 mg/kg three times a week for 8 weeks. 
Their urine was tested in 10 percent DMSO in the Ames test with strain TA1.538. 
Compared to the DMSO vehicle their urine was not mutagenic.(227) Crebelli et 
al.(232) performed the Ames test with strain TA98 with and without metabolic acti- 
vation on urine concentrates from rats treated topically with PPDAlresorcinol 
conjugates. The urine concentrates induced mutations only with metabolic acti- 
vation. The urine concentrates of untreated rats did not induce mutations. Fifteen 
women collected their urine before and after using hair dyes containing 0.46 to 
2.55 percent PPDA. The urine was tested in DMSO in the Ames test in strain 
TA1538 with metabolic activation. The urine was not more mutagenic after hair 
dye application than before hair dye application.(10,252) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 235 
Nishioka(Z53) examined PPDA in the Escherichia co/i DNA repair test. He 
found that PPDA inhibited E. co/i growth. 
Mutagenicity in Drosophila melanogaster 
Blijleven(*54e*55) used the induction by PPDA of sex-linked recessive lethal 
mutations in Drosophila melanogaster as a measure of the mutagenicity of PPDA. 
In Blijleven’s original study, (254) 5 1 and 15.5 mM PPDA in DMSO and sucrose so- 
lution was fed to adult males for 3 days. The treated males were individually 
mated to 3 females in a 3-day brood period and then were mated with two 
groups of 3 females in two consecutive 2-day brood periods. The first brood rep- 
resented mainly treated sperm, and the second and third broods represented 
treated spermatids (and sperm) and treated spermatocytes (and spermatids), re- 
spectively. Mutation induction was detected as a lack of certain male progeny in 
the second generation after the treated generation. The results of this study indi- 
cated a weak mutagenic activity of PPDA with peak mutagenic activity in sperma- 
tids and spermatocytes. However, concern was expressed about the purity of the 
PPDA used in this experiment, and BlijlevenC255) repeated the experiment with 
the same PPDA and with a new sample of PPDA (base) of higher purity dissolved 
in water. The original PPDA was fed to the flies at a concentration of 15.5 mM 
and the new PPDA at concentrations of 2.5, 5, 10, and 15.5 mM. The original 
PPDA sample caused a significant mutation frequency increase when compared 
to the control mutation frequency. When all the data were pooled and compared 
to the controls, no significant differences were observed in mutation induction. 
The same experiment was performed after the injection of 2.5, 5, or 10 mM high 
purity PPDA (base) into adult males. The toxicity of the compound was a prob- 
lem, and there was a high degree of sterility in the treated males. When the injec- 
tion data were pooled and compared to the pooled control data, the differences 
were not significant. Blijleven concluded that PPDA was not mutagenic to D. me- 
lanogaster and that the impurities in the original sample of PPDA may have ac- 
counted for the observed mutagenic effects. 
Micronucleus Test in Rats and Mice 
A suspension of PPDA in 0.5 percent gum tragacanth containing 0.05 per- 
cent sodium sulfite was administered orally to 10 rats in two 500 mg/kg doses 24 
hours apart. Six hours later the animals were killed, the femurs were dissected 
out, and bone marrow smears were prepared. The smears were examined micro- 
scopically, and the number of micronucleated cells per 2000 polychromatic er- 
ythrocytes per animal was determined. These values were compared with the 
values obtained from rats treated only with the vehicle. No clear evidence of mu- 
tagenic potential for PPDA was found. 
mouse micronucleus test.(257) (256) PPDA was reported to be inactive in a 
Inhibition of Mouse Testicular DNA Synthesis 
Seiler(25B) administered PPDA orally in a dose of 200 mg/kg to 3 or 4 male 
mice and then determined the amount of labeled thymidine incorporated into 
testicular DNA. PPDA depressed almost all testicular DNA synthesis, suggesting 
that it was genetically active. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 10. Ames Test: Salmonella/Mammalian-Microsome Mutagenicity Test 
Material Tested Method Results Reference 
PPDA, PPDA and HIOl 
mixture 
Purified PPDA in water, 
2 commercial samples 
of analytical PPDA in 
in water, PPDA and 
resorcinol in 50 per- 
cent NH,OH and with 
H,Oz 
PPDA in DMSO 
PPDA hydrochloride 
PPDA in DMSO 
PPDA in DMSO 
PPDA Ames et al.r*? Spot test t- 1 mg) with and with- 
out S-9 (9OOOg supernatant of rat liver homog- 
enate. Rats induced with polychlorinated bi- 
phenyl mix (Aroclor 1254)). Strains TAlOO, TA97, 
TA1538, and TA98 
Ames et al.(z33r: Plate incorporation with and with- 
out S-9. Strain TA98. Microtiter fluctuation test 
with microsomal activation, method of Gatehouse 
and Delow(235J 
Ames et al.r233’, slightly modified by Nagao et al.r1’6’: 
Liver S-9 from rats induced with polychlorinated 
biphenyl (Kanechlor 500). Preincubation of PPDA 
and bacteria with and without S-9 at 37°C (for 20 
minutes) followed by plate incorporation. Strains 
TAlOOandTA98 
Ames et al.r233): Plate incorporation with S-9 from 
uninduced and induced rats and mice. Strains 
TA1535, TAlOO, TA1537, TA1538, and TA98 
Ames et al.r1331: Plate incorporation with liver S-9 
from uninduced rats and mice and animals in- 
duced with B-naphtholfavone. Strain TA1538 
Ames et al.(233), slightly modified: Plate incorpora- 
tion with and without liver S-9 from rats induced 
with phenobarbital. Strain TA1538 
Ames et al.(133’, slightly modified by Nagao et 
al.(*3s): Strains TAlOO and TA98 PPDA alone had no mutagenic activity. PPDA and H202 
mixture gave a very strong mutagenic response with 
TA1538 when S-9 was present 234 
Purified PPDA (O-2 mg/plate) produced no significant 
increase in number of revertants. Both commercial 
samples of PPDA (O-2 mg/plate) and the PPDA/resor- 
cinol/H,O, mixture (O-1 .O mg/plate) increased the 
number of mutants in the presence of S-9. These results 
were confirmed in the microtiter fluctuation 232 
PPDA (0.5-2 pmollplate) was significantly mutagenic to 
TA98 in the presence of S-9 237 
PPDA (0.1-6.6 mglplate) was not mutagenic without ac- 
tivation but was mutagenic in TA1535, TAl 00, TA1538, 
and TA98 with induced mouse and rat liver S-9. With 
uninduced rat liver S-9, there was no mutagenic activ- 
ity with TA1535 and reduced activity with TA1538 
and TA98 238 
No mutagenic activity with uninduced S-9. Slight muta- 
genie activity with induced rat and mouse liver S-9 239 
PPDA (50 and 100 &plate) was significantly mutagenic 
in the presence of S-9 240 
PPDA was mutagenic only in TA98 in the presence of S-9 241 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuotePPDA in water, PPDA 
in 2 percent NH,OH, 
PPDA in 2 percent 
NH,OH and with 
Hz01 
PPDA, PPDA and H202 
PPDA in buffer, PPDA 
and H,O1 
PPDA in buffer, PPDA 
and HZOZ 
PPDA in DMSO 
PPDA in water, PPDA 
in DMSO 
PPDA in DMSO 
3 liquid hair dyes and 
2 hair dye powders 
containing PPDA 
25 hair dye prepara- 
tions containing PPDA Ames et al.rz33’: Plate incorporation with and with- 
out S-9 from noninduced and induced rats. Strains 
TA1535, TAlOO, TA1537, TA1538, and TA98 
Ames et al.r*33’: Plate incorporation with and with- 
out S-9. Strains TA1535 and TA1538 
Ames et al.(z33): With and without S-9. Strain 
TA98 
Ames et al.(*33), slightly modified by Nagao et al.c*a6r: 
Plate incorporation or spot test with and without 
S-9. Strain TA98 
Ames et al.rz33): Preincubation for 37OC for 1 hour 
with and without S-9 followed by plate incorpo- 
ration. Liver S-9 was from rats, hamsters and mice 
induced with polychlorinated biphenyls, 3-methyl- 
cholanthrene, and phenobarbital or uninduced. 
Strain TA98 
Ames et al.(1331: With S-9, fresh and aged (used O-4 
hours after dilution) DMSO solutions. Strains 
TA1538 and TA98 
Ames et al.(233): With S-9, exposed to Toshiba 
fluorescent lamps (15W X 2) at 10 cm for O-4 
hours. Strain TA98 
Ames et al.(1331: With and without S-9 
Ames et al.(*33): 25 dyes tested without S-9 with 
strains TA1535, TAl 00, TA1537, TA1538 and 
TA98, and 20 dyes tested with mouse liver S-9 
with strain TA98 PPDA (S-1000 cg/plate) was not mutagenic without in- 
duced rat liver S-9; PPDA was slightly mutagenic to 
TA1538 and TA98 with induced rat liver S-9. PPDA 
(250-1000 &plate) was not mutagenic to TA1538 and 
TA98 with S-9 from noninduced rat liver; slight increase 
in revertant colony number with PPDA and NH,OH and 
no activity with PPDA, NH,OH and Hz02 in TA98 in 
the presence of S-9 from induced rat liver 
PPDA alone was slightly mutagenic with TA1538 in the 
presence of S-9. PPDA and H102 mix was mutagenic 
with TA1538 in the presence of S-9 
PPDA in buffer and PPDA and H,O, (15-l 50 &plate of 
PPDA) were bacteriostatic without S-9. PPDA in buffer 
and PPDA and H,O, (50 and 150 &plate of PPDA) 
were mutagenic in the presence of S-9 
PPDA in buffer and PPDA and H,O1 (0.003-1346.153 
&plate of PPDA) had no mutagenic activity without S-9. 
PPDA in buffer and PPDA and H,O1 (13.461 and 134.615 
&plate of PPDA) were mutagenic in the presence of S-9 
PPDA was not mutagenic with all hamster S-9 and with 
S-9 from rats and mice induced with polychlorinated 
biphenyls and 3-methylcholanthrene 
All aqueous solutions and the fresh DMSO solution of 
PPDA were nonmutagenic with S-9. Aged DMSO solu- 
tions were mutagenic with S-9 
PPDA solution kept in the dark was not mutagenic with 
S-9. All solutions illuminated 10 minutes to 4 hours 
were mutagenic with S-9 
One liquid induced base-pair substitutions without S-9. 
All the others induced frameshift mutations with S-9 
7 dyes were mutagenic with TA1538 and TA98 without 
S-9 and 13 were mutagenic; 2 suspect as mutagenic 
with S-9 with TA98 242 
243 
244 
245 
246 
247 
248 
249 
250 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote238 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
Induction of Mouse Sperm-Head Abnormalities 
The mouse sperm-head abnormality test reflects the effects of chemical inter- 
ference in spermatozoa differentiation. This test is useful in identifying com- 
pounds that may cause transmissible genetic damage in whole animals. Groups 
of 5 hybrid male mice were given five daily intraperitoneal injections of PPDA in 
saline. PPDA was administered to the mice at doses of 5, 10, and 20 mglkg per 
day. Doses of 50 and 100 mg/kg per day were toxic. Five weeks later the mice 
were killed and sperm smears were made. Two hundred fifty sperm-heads were 
classified as of normal or abnormal morphology. PPDA was not active in this 
test (259,260) 
Hepatocyte Primary Culture/DNA Repair Test 
The hepatocyte primary culture/DNA repair test measures DNA damage after 
exposure to chemicals by determining the amount of DNA synthesis in nonrepli- 
eating male rat hepatocytes. Tritiated thymidine is incorporated by the cells dur- 
ing repair synthesis. PPDA dihydrochloride was toxic to the hepatocytes at a con- 
centration of 0.1 mglml and was negative in the DNA repair test at concentra- 
tions of 0.005, 0.01, and 0.05 mg/ml.(261) 
Mouse Lymphoma Forward Mutation Assay 
The National Toxicology Program(262) reported that PPDA dihydrochloride 
was positive in the in vitro L5178Y mouse lymphoma forward mutation assay 
with and without metabolic activation. This assay measures genetic damage at 
the thymidine kinase locus after exposure of mouse lymphoma cells to chemi- 
cals. 
Survival of Rat Embryo Cells 
Rauscher leukemia virus-infected rat embryo cells were treated with PPDA 
(1.85 to 3.2 pg PPDA15.2 x lo4 cells) for 72 hours, and cell survival was deter- 
mined 6 days later. This assay measures the acquisition of attachment indepen- 
dence, which is manifested by increased cell survival rates. PPDA was positive in 
this test. Viable cell counts were greater after PPDA treatment than after treat- 
ment with solvent (unspecified) alone.(263) 
Animal Carcinogenesis 
PPDA has been tested for carcinogenicity by oral and topical administration 
to animals. NCl(g9) administered PPDA dihydrochloride in the feed at concentra- 
tions of 625 and 1250 ppm to groups of 50 rats and mice of each sex for 103 
weeks. The controls were groups of 20 animals of each species and sex. At the 
conclusion of the experiment, all animals were killed and necropsied. Both 
dosed and control rats had a variety of neoplasms, but these tumors were distrib- 
uted almost equally between dosed and control rats. For each sex the tumor inci- 
dence was very low and was within the range normally encountered in aging 
rats. A variety of tumors, all previously reported to occur spontaneously in mice, 
were found in both the control and dosed mice. Some neoplasms did occur only, 
or in greater frequency, in the dosed groups, but none was considered com- 
pound-related. The researchers concluded that PPDA dihydrochloride was not 
carcinogenic to rats or to mice under the conditions of the bioassay. Griesemer 
and Cueto(264) applied the IARCt4) approach for evaluating evidence of carcino- 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 239 
genicity to this NCI study and concluded that there was no evidence of carcino- 
genicity in these experiments. 
In several studies reported 20 years earlier by Saruta et al.,(‘*‘) the oral ad- 
ministration of PPDA did not cause the production of any malignant tumors in 
rats. In the first experiment PPDA was administered daily for 8 months, in doses 
of 0.06 and 0.3 mg, to groups of 5 rats of each sex. PPDA was administered daily 
for 8 months to 5 rats in a dose of 10 mg, and these rats were compared to 5 con- 
trols in the second experiment. In the third experiment a 30 mg dose of PPDA 
was administered daily to 4 rats; 3 of these rats died before the experiment 
ended. 
The lifetime percutaneous application of PPDA was studied in mice.(202) Five 
and ten percent solutions of PPDA in acetone were applied in a 0.02 ml volume 
two times a week to the shaved intrascapular skin of groups of 50 mice. There 
were 100 untreated control mice. Tumors were observed both in the controls 
and in the treated mice, but there was no significant increase in tumor incidence 
in the treated mice. The same investigators applied the PPDA solutions to the in- 
side of the ears of groups of 5 female rabbits two times a week. Five control rab- 
bits were included in the study. The experiment was terminated at 85 weeks, but 
at 80 weeks there were only 2 surviving rabbits in the control group, 4 surviving 
rabbits in the 5 percent PPDA-treated group, and 1 surviving rabbit in the 10 per- 
cent PPDA-treated group. No neoplasms were observed. 
Three hair dye formulations containing 1.5 percent PPDA were mixed with 
equal volumes of 6 percent hydrogen peroxide just prior to use, and 0.05 ml of 
each was applied topically to the shaved midscapular skin of groups of 100 mice 
weekly or fortnightly for 18 months. (lgg) There were 250 control mice. No evi- 
dence of carcinogenic activity by the hair dyes was observed. 
Two hair dye formulations containing 1.5 percent PPDA were mixed with an 
equal volume of 6 percent hydrogen peroxide just before use, and 0.05 ml was 
applied topically to the clipped intrascapular skin of groups of 28 male and 28 fe- 
male mice weekly for 2 years. (201) There were 76 male and 17 female control 
mice. Male and female mice in all groups developed both benign and malignant 
neoplasms. There was no evidence for carcinogenicity by these two hair dye 
formulations. 
Hair dye composite formulations containing 1, 2, 3, and 4 percent PPDA 
were mixed 1:l with hydrogen peroxide, and 0.025 ml of the dyes was applied 
topically to the clipped intrascapular areas of groups of 50 male and 50 female 
mice once weekly for 21 to 23 months. At 7 and 9 months, 10 male and 10 fe- 
male mice from each group were killed and necropsied. Gross and microscopic 
examinations were made on all mice that died during or were killed at the termi- 
nation of the experiment. There were three control groups. The incidences of tu- 
mors in control and treated groups were similar. Carcinogenic effects were not 
induced by the hair dye formulations.(200) 
Three hair dye composite formulations containing 2, 3, and 4 percent PPDA 
were applied topically to rats (the Fo generation) from the time of their weaning 
to the weaning of their young (the F~A generation). The hair dyes were mixed 1 :I 
with hydrogen peroxide and were applied topically two times a week for 2 years 
to the clipped backs and necks of groups of 60 male and 60 female rats of the FtA 
generation. The rats received an initial application of 0.2 ml, and this was in- 
creased by 0.1 ml weekly to 0.5 ml. Ten rats from each group were killed and 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote240 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
necropsied at 12 months, and all other rats were necropsied at their deaths or at 
the termination of the experiment. There were three control groups. No com- 
pound-related gross lesions were observed. The stratum corneum of the skin and 
of the hair shafts of the treated rats was colored by the dye. The female rats 
treated with the composite that contained 4 percent PPDA had an increase in pi- 
tuitary adenomas when compared statistically with all three control groups (ade- 
nomaslnumber females examined were 34/50, 36/51, and 35/50 for the three 
control groups and 45/51 for the treated group). However, pituitary adenomas 
have a high background incidence in rats, and they appeared in a nonsignificant 
pattern in all the other groups. Other lesions were seen in all the groups in low 
incidences.t205) 
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY 
Dermal Studies 
A 50 percent aqueous slurry of PPDA was applied to the skin of 6 subjects for 
24 hours under occlusive conditions. Skin reaction was assessed at 24 and 72 
hours for erythema (0 to 4) and edema (0 to 4). Erythema and edema values were 
added and averaged for the two skin readings to yield a PII. The PII for the PPDA 
on human skin was 0.8 (maximum possible total of 8).(“‘) 
PPDA scored highly in predictive studies. Five 48-hour induction patches, 
containing 1 ml of 10 percent PPDA in petrolatum, with 24-hour rest periods be- 
tween the patches, were applied to the forearms or calves of 24 “mostly black” 
volunteers from a prison. The challenge application was a 48-hour occluded 
patch, containing 0.4 ml of 0.5 percent PPDA in petrolatum, on the back. All 24 
of the subjects were sensitized to PPDA in this maximization procedure.(265) In a 
second study, 10 48- or 72-hour induction occluded patches, containing 0.5 g of 
a 0.01, 0.1, or 1 .O percent solution of PPDA in petrolatum, were applied to the 
skin of male subjects. This was followed by a 2-week rest period. The challenge 
was a 72-hour patch with a nonirritant concentration. The 0.01 percent PPDA in- 
duction application was followed by a 0.01 percent challenge patch. Seven of 97, 
or 7.2 percent of the men, responded positively to the challenge. The 0.1 percent 
PPDA induction application was followed by a 1 .O percent challenge patch, and 
11 of 98, or 11.2 percent of the men, responded positively. The 1 .O percent 
PPDA induction application was followed by a 1.0 percent challenge applica- 
tion. Forty-seven of 88, or 53.4 percent of the men, responded positively. There 
appeared to be an increase in the incidence of sensitization with higher concen- 
trations of PPDA used in induction applications.(266) Epstein and TaylorC267) used 
a 2 percent aqueous solution of PPDA for induction applications and challenge 
patches in a maximization test (265) with 34 male volunteers from a correctional fa- 
cility as subjects. Fifteen of the 34, or 44 percent of the subjects, were sensitized 
to PPDA. 
Twenty-five panelists began a study with a dye composition containing 2 per- 
cent PPDA. Three panelists quit the study before the final challenge application. 
Semiocclusive patches containing 0.3 ml of the test material were placed on the 
arms. There was an initial l-hour challenge patch with 100 percent of the dye fol- 
lowed by 9 24-hour induction patches with a 10 percent (v/v) aqueous solution 
of the dye over a 22-day period. The final challenge patch was a l-hour patch 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 241 
with 100 percent of the dye on both the original site and a new site. Reactions 
were scored on a scale of 0 to 7. At the initial challenge there were 20 negative 
reactions (scores of 0 to 1) and 5 reactions of slight dermatitis (scores of 2 to 3). 
Nineteen of the panelists had negative reactions during the induction period, and 
6 had reactions of slight dermatitis. There were 8 reactions of no dermatitis, 7 re- 
actions of slight dermatitis, and 7 reactions of significant dermatitis (4 to 7) at the 
final challenge patching.r26*) 
A repeated insult patch test was conducted with a hair dye containing 0.4 
percent PPDA and 0.039 percent 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine (4NOPD).‘269’ 
(4NOPD has also been reviewed by the Expert Panel.) Two hundred six subjects 
were enrolled in and completed the study. The dye was mixed with an equal vol- 
ume of oxidizer, and each nonocclusive patch contained 0.1 ml/cm2 of the dye 
and oxidizer mixture. Ten 48- to 72-hour consecutive patch applications were 
made on the backs of the subjects, and reactions were read after removal of each 
patch. These induction patches were followed by an 1 l-day rest period. A 48- 
hour nonocclusive challenge patch was applied to a previously unexposed site 
on the back of each subject, and the reaction was read at removal and at 15 min- 
utes and at 24 hours later. There were 41 doubtful reactions (very mild erythema, 
barely exceeding that of untreated skin) during induction. There were no positive 
reactions at any induction or challenge reading. The researchers stated that their 
data provided no evidence to indicate that the hair dye and oxidizer test product 
caused either irritation or sensitization. A repeated insult patch test was con- 
ducted with a hair dye containing 0.49 percent PPDA and 0.027 percent 4NOPD 
on the same 206 subjects and following the same procedure.(270) There were no 
positive reactions at any induction or challenge reading. The researchers stated 
that their data provided no evidence that the hair dye and oxidizer test product 
caused either irritation or sensitization. A repeated insult patch test was con- 
ducted with a hair dye containing 0.596 percent PPDA and 0.049 percent 
4NOPD on the same 206 subjects and following the same procedure.(271) There 
were no positive reactions at any induction or challenge reading. The researchers 
stated that their data provided no evidence to indicate that the hair dye and oxi- 
dizer test product caused either irritation or sensitization. A repeated insult patch 
test was conducted with a hair dye containing 2.144 percent PPDA on the same 
206 subjects and following the same procedure. (272) There were no positive reac- 
tions at any induction or challenge reading. The researchers stated that their data 
provided no evidence that the hair dye and oxidizer test product caused either ir- 
ritation or sensitization. 
A variety of patch tests with PPDA have been performed on subjects from a 
variety of populations (Table 11). Many of these reports are of diagnostic patch 
tests performed on clinical subjects suffering from skin disease. The patch tests 
were performed with 1 or 2 percent PPDA in petrolatum, and 1 .l to 84.6 percent 
of the patients were positive for PPDA. PPDA is a sensitizer for human beings. 
Patch and photopatch tests with 2 percent PPDA in petrolatum were per- 
formed on the back of a 52-year-old man. The photopatch site was irradiated for 
15 minutes at a distance of 15 cm, 24 hours after application. The sites were 
scored at 24 and 48 hours after radiation. The light source was a black light 
(Toshiba FLZOBLB) emitting wavelengths from 300 to 420 nm and consisting 
mainly of long-wave UV peaking at 360 nm. The papulovesicular reactions ob- 
served at the patch and photopatch sites were approximately equal.(273) 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 11. Results of Patch Tests with PPDA kt N 
Material 
Tested Concen- 
tration 
(percent) Method No. and Population 
of Subjects Results Refer- 
ence 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 1 Patch tests 
PPDA in 2 Patch tests 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 2 Patch tests 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 2 
petrolatum 
PPDA 1 
PPDA in 1 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 1 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 1 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 2 
petrolatum Patch tests on the hand 
Al-test patches 
Al-test patches. Reactions 
read 48 and 96 hours 
after patch application 
Patch tests 4,825 patients (from Europe) 
Al-test patches on the 
back. Results read at 48 
and 72 hours 
Japanese-made patches 
on the back. Results 
read at 48 and 72 hours 108 patients with contact dermatitis of the feet 
correlated clinically with shoe contact fsur- 
vey spans 4% years and is from Italy) 
540 patients, the majority with contact der- 
matitis. Reactions were scored on a 1 + to 
4 + scale (from the NY Univ. Skin and Cancer 
Unit during 1968 to 1970) 
229 patients suspected of having contact der- 
matitis due to shoes or rubber. Reactions 
were scored on a 1 + to 4+ scale (from the 
NY Univ. Skin and Cancer Unit during 
1968 to 1970) 
250 hospital patients and 250 private patients 
(survey spans 3 years and is from France) 
281 housewives with contact dermatitis of the 
hands; 1000 people doing domestic work 
only (this includes the 281 women) (patients 
from 5 European clinics) 
2806 patients, from contact dermatitis sec- 
tions of hospitals or an occupational derma- 
titis center (from Spain during 1977) 
155 hospital patients, mainly outpatients 
(from Japan) 
196 hospital patients, mainly outpatients (sur- 
vey from Sept. 1973 to Aug. 1975; from 
Japan) 24.8 percent (41) of the subjects were 
positive to PPDA 
13.5 percent reacted to PPDA. There 
were 12,24,26, and 11 patients with 
1+, 2+, 3+, and 4+ reactions, 
respectively 
7.0 percent reacted to PPDA. There 
were 1,3,12, and 0 patients with 1 +, 
2 +, 3 +, and 4+ reactions, re- 
spectively 
6.8 percent (34) of the subjects gave 
positive responses to PPDA. Com- 
parison of hospital and private 
patients showed little difference 
5 percent of both populations gave 
positive results to PPDA 
9.90 percent (278) of the subjects 
were positive for PPDA. Of the 278, 
14.02, 10.43, and 8.63 percent were 
masons, metallurgists, and house- 
wives 
4.9 percent (237) of the patients 
reacted positively to PPDA 
22.58 percent (35) of the subjects 
were positive for PPDA 
28.57 percent (55) of the subjects 
were positive for PPDA 274 
94 
94 
275 
276 
277 
278 
279 
279 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuotePPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
water 
PPDA 
PPDA 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 1 Patch tests on the back. 
Readings after 48 and 
72 hours 
1 Patch tests 
1 Patch tests 
1 Patches applied, removed 
at Day 2. Reactions read 
at Day 2 and Day 4 
2 Patch tests on thigh or 
back 
- Patch tests on back re- 
moved at Day 2 and 
read at Days 2 and 7. 
(Other chemicals tested 
simultaneously). Posi- 
tives were reapplied on 
Day 7 and removed and 
read on Day 9 
2 Occluded patches ap- 
plied to the back. 
Patches removed at 48 
hours and read at 48 
and 96 hours 
1 Closed patch test for 
nonsensitized subjects 
and open patch test for 
sensitized subjects 
1 Patch tests 
1 Patch tests 
1 Patch tests 53 denture-wearing patients with “burning 
mouth syndrome” (from Denmark) 
13 eczema patients allergic to a brown 
stocking dye (from Finland) 
362 eczema patients (survey from Mar. 1 to 
Sept. 30, 1979; from Finland) 
225 men and 175 women with hand eczema 
(from Belgium) 
5558 patients (survey spans 1 to 2 years and 
is from 6 clinics in Scandinavia) 
35 patients (from Canada) 
536 patients (tested in 1976, from Brazil) 
32 hairdressers who had never suffered from 
contact allergic dermatitis due to PPDA and 
7 hairdressers who had strongly positive 
reactions to PPDA (from Japan) 
2363 tested (1978-1979; from USA) 
2094 tested (1979-1980; from USA) 
184 men and 116 women suspected of having 
contact dermatitis (from Brussels) 1 positive reaction to PPDA. (ery- 
thema and infiltration with papules 
or vesicles) 
11 patients were positive for PPDA 
2.5 percent (9) of the subjects were 
positive for PPDA 
9.3 percent (21) of the men and 14 
or 8 percent of the women reacted 
positively to PPDA 
4.5 percent of the subjects reacted 
positively to PPDA 
17 percent (6) positive test reactions 
on Day 2 and 5 or 14 percent 
positive test reactions on Day 9 
1 .l percent of the subjects reacted 
positively to PPDA 
O/32 and 6/7 positive reactions for 
the nonsensitized and sensitized 
hairdressers, respectively 
7 percent (157) positive reactions for 
PPDA 
6 percent (136) positive reactions for 
PPDA 
13.0 percent (24) of the men and 4.3 
percent (5) of the women were posi- 
tive for PPDA. 9.7 percent of all the 
subjects were positive for PPDA 280 
281 
281 
282 
283 
284 
285 
209 .: P z 2 > E z 3 4 : < 9 
z F 
Z 
i 
5 
3 
z 
286 
286 
287 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 11. (Continued) 
Material 
Tested Concen- 
tration 
(percent) Method No. and Population 
of Subjects Results Refer- 
ence 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 
PPDA in 
petrolatum 1 Al-test patches. Patches 
removed after 48 hours 
and reactions recorded 
at 48,72, and/or96 hours 
1 Al-test patches. Patches 
removed after 48 hours 
and reactions recorded 
at 48,72, and/or 96 hours 
1 Patch tests 
1 Patch tests on the back for 
48 hours. Read at 48 and 
96 hours 
1 Patch test on the upper 
back for 48 hours. Read 
at 48 and/or 72 hours I 200 patients from private and outpatient 
clinics (tests from Jan. 1, 1971 to June 30, 
1972; from North America) 
3041 patients from private and outpatient 
clinics (tests from July 1, 1972 to June 30, 
1974; from North America) 
66 hairdressers with eczema (1973-1981; 
from Canada) 
200 hospital clinic patients with eczematous 
dermatitis (1977-l 979; from Canada) 
149 patients from private practices and 
clinics with cosmetic-related contact derma- 
titis (1977-1980; from USA) 8 percent (98) of the patients reacted 
positively to PPDA 288 
6.1 percent of the patients reacted 
positively to PPDA 289 
45 percent (30) were positive for 
30 percent of the patients were PPDA 
positive for PPDA 290 
291 
16 percent (24) were positive for 
PPDA 292 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 245 
PPDA-sensitive subjects were exposed to open and closed patches of a com- 
mercially available hair dye containing PPDA and mixed with hydrogen peroxide 
and two experimental hair dyes containing PPDA and mixed with 5 and 15 ml of 
hydrogen peroxide. Two of 13 subjects with open patches and all of 12 subjects 
with closed patches reacted positively to the commercially available hair dye 
treated with hydrogen peroxide. Four of six subjects with open patches reacted 
positively to one experimental hair dye developed with 5 ml of hydrogen perox- 
ide, and all of 12 subjects with closed patches and 4 of 7 subjects with open 
patches reacted positively to the same experimental hair dye developed with 15 
ml of hydrogen peroxide. The use of a second experimental hair dye developed 
with 5 ml of hydrogen peroxide resulted in 4 positives out of 6 subjects with open 
patches and 12 positives out of 12 subjects with closed patches. The researchers 
suggested that, even after developing a hair dye with hydrogen peroxide, avail- 
able PPDA and intermediaries are left and can produce reactions in sensitive in- 
dividuals.(267) 
Marzulli et al.tss) described a clinical case in which a beautician developed 
generalized urticaria when working with hair dyes; PPDA caused a wheal- and 
flare-response on the skin of his back. Vesiculation, oozing, crusting, and marked 
edema of the skin of the face, neck, ears, and scalp resulted after another man 
dyed his own hair; his eyes were swollen shut. A patch test to PPDA was posi- 
tive.(2g3) The skin around the eyes is swollen frequently in hair dye dermatitis. 
Immediate hypersensitivity may sometimes be a component of contact derma- 
titis.@*) 
Dermatitis covering the whole scalp, neck, chest, and both ears was ob- 
served in a man who had dyed his hair 1 week previously. Patch tests were posi- 
tive for 2 percent PPDA in petrolatum for his own hair and for the hair dye. In- 
complete oxidation might have been more likely to occur when the dye was not 
applied by an expert hairdresser. (zg4) Three case studies have been reported in 
which men suffered from eczema on their arms. In two studies, the men had pos- 
itive patch tests to 1 percent PPDA in petrolatum and to their wives’ dyed 
hair (2g5p2g6) In the third study, the man’s eczema flared up whenever his partner 
had’just dyed her hair. Patch tests to 1 percent PPDA in petrolatum and to the 
hair dye were positive, and a patch test to his partner’s hair dyed 1 week previ- 
ously was negative. More recently dyed hair might have resulted in a positive re- 
action.““) A study was conducted with 20 subjects who had suffered allergic 
contact dermatitis from PPDA and had strongly positive patch tests to PPDA. The 
subjects were patch tested with hair containing PPDA dyed 24 hours previously. 
The patches were repeated 3 weeks later. There were no reactions at the end of 
48 hours or 3 weeks. The results of this study conflict with the patch test results of 
most of the case studies.‘35*2g8) 
Cross reactivity has been observed between PPDA and PPDA dihydrochlo- 
ride. Eleven men and 11 women who were sensitive to 1 percent PPDA in petro- 
latum were patch tested with 1 percent PPDA dihydrochloride in petrolatum. 
Only 3 of the men and 6 of the women were sensitive to PPDA dihydrochloride. 
NO subjects who were negative to PPDA were positive to PPDA dihydrochlo- 
ride. (2gg) 
Allergic sensitivity to PPDA has been associated with cross sensitization to 
azo and aniline dyes; to the local anesthetics, procaine and benzocaine; to 
p-aminobenzoic acid, its esters, and sunscreens containing them; to IPPD, used 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote246 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
in rubber tires; to CPPD; to p-aminosalicylic acid; to hydrodiuril; to carbutamide; 
to pyrogallol; to sulfonamides; to hydroquinone; to hydrochlorothiazide; to 
p-hydroxybenzoic acid esters; to benzidine; to phenylhydrazine; and to the hair 
dye, p-toluenediamine. These potential sensitizations have far-reaching implica- 
tions (94,208.209,267.293.300-303) 
A hair dye company in New York City performed preliminary patch tests on 
approximately 3500 prospective models (total number of individual hair dye ap- 
plications was 116,647) with hair dye composites containing up to the maximum 
amount of PPDA used in the product line (3.5 percent) over the period 1975 to 
1983. (Virtually all of the dyes contained PPDA.) Two hundred five positive reac- 
tions were observed in 163 women. Most of the women who reported reactions 
had later applications of hair dyes. Only 8 reactions on 4 women were identified 
as allergic responses to the products.(304) 
Other Studies 
The use of PPDA-containing hair dyes on the hair has been accompanied by 
edema of the eyelids and conjunctiva and tearing. Infrequently, there is limita- 
tion of eye movements, loss of the cornea1 epithelium, and cellular infiltration of 
the stroma. The cornea usually recovers rapidly. More severe reactions occurred 
after the application of PPDA-containing hair dyes to the eyebrows and eye- 
lashes. Generally, rapid onset of pain and burning of the eyes was accompanied 
by redness and swelling of the lids and edema and hyperemia of the conjunctiva. 
In some persons, the cornea1 epithelium was eroded and accompanied by iritis 
and iridocyclitis. Vision has occasionally been lost or permanently damaged by 
severe cornea1 ulceration.(31) A woman who had dyed her eyebrows and eye- 
lashes with a product containing PPDA developed conjunctivitis within 3 days of 
application and then developed cornea1 ulcers in both eyes. Treatment included 
removal of eyelashes and eyebrows. Two and one-half months following product 
application, the woman was “feeling better,” and six and one-half months follow- 
ing application she was able to see “fairly well.“(30s) 
The threshold limit value (TLV) for PPDA set by the American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists(1g,306) is 0.1 mg/m3 and agrees with the rec- 
ommended British industry standard. This value is considered low enough to 
minimize the number of people who become sensitized but not to prevent 
asthma in humans already sensitive to PPDA. NIOSH reported that 25 mg/m3 of 
PPDA is the concentration immediately dangerous to life or health.(22) 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
A number of published studies assess whether occupational exposure to and 
use of hair dyes increases the risk of cancer. These studies do not distinguish 
which of the specific hair dye ingredients were involved in the human exposure. 
There is some controversy over whether occupational exposure to hair dyes in- 
creases the risk for bladder cancer,(307-3’0) and lung cancer(311.312) or use of hair 
dyes increases the risk for bladder cancer in men or women(313) and breast can- 
cer in women(314-31g) (Table 12). 
Clemmesen(320) discussed the difficulties implicit in epidemiological studies 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFpPHENYLENEDlAMlNE 247 
and reviewed many of the papers that investigated the relationship of the risk of 
cancer to occupational exposure to or use of hair dyes. According to Clemmesen 
most researchers used samples too small to allow conclusions, and analyses of 
duration and intensity of exposure, lag time, and the influence of lifestyle factors 
such as tobacco were deficient in many cases. Clemmesen believes there was no 
evidence of any carcinogenic effect from hair dyes on the organs investigated 
among the occupations and users examined. 
SUMMARY 
PPDA is an aromatic amine that has been used in permanent hair dyes for 
over 100 years. It is mixed with hydrogen peroxide immediately before use, and 
the resulting oxidation products react with sulfhydryl groups present in hair to 
form permanent bonds. Data submitted to FDA in 1981 indicated that PPDA was 
used in a total of 500 hair-coloring products at concentrations up to 5 percent. 
Coal tar hair dye products, including those containing PPDA, are exempt 
from the principal adulteration provision and the color additive provisions in sec- 
tions 601 and 706 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 when the 
label bears a caution statement and patch test instructions for determining 
whether the product causes skin irritation. The following caution statement 
should be displayed conspicuously on the label of coal tar hair dyes: 
Caution-This product contains ingredients which may cause skin irritation on certain 
individuals, and a preliminary test according to accompanying directions should be made. 
This product must not be used for dyeing the eyelashes or eyebrows; to do so may cause 
blindness. 
PPDA has a variety of biological effects; it is absorbed and excreted by both 
animals and humans. Radioactivity was found in the blood of rabbits after the in- 
travenous and dermal administration of radioactive PPDA (“C). Radioactivity was 
distributed throughout the body and in the blood after the intravenous and topi- 
cal administration of PPDA to mice. In dogs PPDA was found in the blood after its 
topical and intravenous administration and was excreted in the urine after its top- 
ical and subcutaneous administration. PPDA (“C) was applied topically to hu- 
mans and radioactivity was found in the urine. When a hair dye containing PPDA 
(“C) was used on monkeys and by humans, radioactivity was detected in the hair 
and in the urine. PPDA (“C) was administered to rabbits by subconjunctival in- 
jection, intravitreal injection, eyedrops, and subcutaneous injection into the 
head. Rapid clearance of radioactivity from the site of administration was ob- 
served. 
PPDA has a low octanol/water coefficient and, thus,, may have little poten- 
tial for bioaccumulation. However, PPDA may be converted, either biologically 
or chemically, to compounds of toxicological concern. Labeled PPDA was ad- 
ministered intraperitoneally, to rats and radioactivity was distributed throughout 
the body and excreted in the urine, feces, and bile. N,N’-diacetyl-PPDA 
p-aminoacetanilide, and unchanged PPDA were identified as urinary metabol 
lites. 
The acute oral LD,, of PPDA for rats ranged from 80 to 98 mg/kg; PPDA is 
classified as moderately toxic. Dietary PPDA at concentrations of 3160 ppm to 
rats and 4640 ppm to mice for 7 weeks and 1250 ppm to rats and mice for 103 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 12. A Summary of Reports on Cancers Associated with Exposure to Hair Dyes 
Population Studied 
Occupational Exposure to l-fair Dyes Comments Refer- 
ence 
1030 bladder papilloma and carcinoma patients were interviewed 
for occupational history in Leeds, England, from 1959 to 1967. 
383 male and 57 female bladder tumor patients were matched for 
sex, age decade, habitat, and smoking habits with 340 male and 
50 female surgical controls and 312 male and 39 female patients 
with cancer at other sites 
461 persons of ages 20-89 with transitional or squamous-cell carci- 
noma of the lower urinary tract (94 percent had a bladder tumor) 
interviewed for occupational history in an l&month period in an 
area of eastern MA. 356 male and 105 female persons with a 
bladder cancer were matched for sex, age, and/or smoking with 
374 male and 111 female controls 
702 patients with presumptive or confirmed diagnosis of bladder 
tumors. 493 bladder cancer patients (265 male whites, 69 male 
blacks, 112 female whites, and 47 female blacks) and 527 patient 
controls were interviewed for occupational history from 1958 to 
1964 in New Orleans, LA. 
300 male and 70 female bladder cancer patients from 1957 to 1961 
in New York City were matched by sex and age with the same 
number of control patients. All the subjects were interviewed 
about their occupations There were consistently nonsignificant differences found for male hair- 
dressers (predominant occupation). There were 4, 1, and 0 hair- 
dressers among 383 bladder tumor patients, 340 surgical controls, 
and 312 cancer controls, respectively. Men employed as hairdressers 
for less than 20 years were less likely to have bladder tumors than 
those employed for longer than 20 years; male hairdressers with 
bladder tumors had lower mean ages at diagnosis compared to the 
whole interviewed series. The population of males with bladder tu- 
mors contained more hairdressers than expected; 5 were observed, 
1.8 and 1.5 were expected in 1961 and 1951, respectively (based on 
census data) 
Cigarette smoking was not responsible for an indirect association of 
bladder cancer risk and occupation. Of the persons with bladder 
cancer, 4 were male barbers and 1 was a female hairdresser. 7.2 and 
0.9 were expected, respectively. The researchers stated that the data 
do not support a suggestion of increased bladder risk for barbers, but 
that the number of observations was too low and therefore, inade- 
quate to exclude the possibility of increased risk. No excess risk was 
found for female hairdressers 307 
308 
There was no clear correlation between bladder cancer and occupation 
or industry. For male whites with bladder cancer, 4 were barbers at 
the time or had been barbers as a final occupation. 1.45 were ex- 
pected. The researchers had doubts about the validity of their analyt- 
ical method and did not conclude that being a barber increased risk 
to bladder cancer. Further interviews with 7 male barbers and 2 
female hairdressers with bladder cancer indicated wide differences 
in their occupation, starting ages, years in occupation, and age at 
diagnosis of bladder cancer 
There were 4 hairdressers in the male bladder cancer group, 3 of whom 
had been hairdressers for more than 5 years. There were no hair- 
dressers in the male control group. There was one beautician in the 
female bladder cancer group. The researchers drew no definite 
conclusions 309 
310 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteThe death certificates of 3460 adult (2 14 years of age) females 
who died of cancer and 1000 females who died from some other 
cause in Alameda County, CA from 1958 to 1962 were examined. 
Cancer cases and controls were matched for age and sex 
Examined hospital records from Los Angeles County for 1972 to 
1975. 22792 white women with cancer, 20 to 64 years old, were 
admitted and 9524 of the women reported occupations 
Use 
107 bladder cancer patients and 107 controls were matched by 
age (* 5 years) and sex. Male controls were patients with benign 
prostatic hypertrophy, female controls had been seen with prob- 
lems of stress incontinence (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) 
Surveyed 120,557 married, female, registered US nurses, from 
10 states. 38,459 (31.9 percent) had used permanent hair dyes i 
and 3548 (2.9 percent) had had cancer 
191 female breast cancer patients matched for age (within 3 years), 
marital status, and social class with 561 inpatient, outpatient, or 
general practice controls (Oxford, England, 1975-l 976) 24 of the 3460 females who died of cancer and 4 of the 1000 controls 
were beauticians. The risk of cancer death for beauticians was ele- 
vated but not significantly. Six of the 24 beauticians who died of 
cancer and 170 of the 3436 females of other occupations who died 
of cancer had lung cancer. The small numbers inject uncertainty, but 
the researchers suggested that the risk of lung cancer may be sub- 
stantially increased among beauticians 
Of the 22792 women, 135 were beauticians, and 20 of the beauticians 
had lung cancer. 32, 22, and 15 percent of the beauticians had breast, 
genital, and lung cancer, respectively. Only the lung cancer incidence 
was significant compared to the expected frequencies for age and sex 
calculated from the census data 
of Hair Dyes 
No statistically significant difference was found between cancer and 
control groups in reported exposure to hair dyes 
Statistically significant associations with hair dye use were found only 
for cancers of the cervix uteri and vagina and vulva. Women who 
had used hair dye 2 21 years prior to diagnosis of breast cancer 
had significantly greater risk for all sites-mostly due to the excess 
number of observed to expected cases of breast cancer. However, 
those who used hair dyes 16 to 20 years prior to diagnosis of breast 
cancer had an almost equal deficit of observed to expected breast 
cancers. Adjustments for smoking did not change the results. The 
researchers concluded that there was no evidence of increased risk 
of cancer during the initial 20 years 
There were no significant differences in the use of hair dyes by breast 
cancer patients and controls. The frequency of applications and 
brands used by hair dye users in both groups were approximately 
the same. There were no significant differences when the analysis 
was restricted to women who had used hair dyes 14 or >9 years 
prior to breast cancer diagnosis. 311 
312 
313 
314 
315 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTABLE 12. (Continued) 
Population Studied Comments Refer- 
ence 
118 breast cancer patients of ages 20 to 84 (from 3 upstate New 
York counties). 233 controls selected by “random digit dialing’ of 
the telephone. Cancer patients and controls matched by age 
and county 
Reviewed case histories of 100 breast cancer patients. Compared 
these to a study of women of the same age who did not have 
breast cancer (New York) 
129 breast cancer patients and 193 female controls without breast 
cancer selected from a breast cancer screening center in New York 
City from 1964 to 1976 
401 breast cancer patients and 625 age-matched controls without 
breast cancer from a cancer referral center in New York City 
from 1979 to 1981 No significant differences observed between breast cancer patients and 316 
controls in exposure to hair dyes. Hair dye use was marginally sig- 
nificantly associated with breast cancer in women 40-49 years old. 
Previous benign breast disease and hair dye exposure significantly 
increased a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer. A significant 
dose-response relationship between number of hair dye exposures 
and breast cancer was observed for women who did not have gray 
hair and used hair dyes to change their natural hair color 
87/100 of the breast cancer patients were regular users of permanent 317 
hair coloring and had used hair dyes for more than 5 years. 26 percent 
of the women without breast cancer were regular users of permanent 
hair dyes over prolonged periods 
There were no significant differences between the cancer patients and 318 
controls in use of hair dyes prior to breast cancer diagnosis. However, 
there was a difference in the integral (frequency x duration) use of 
dyes for the 2 groups. The association between integral use and 
breast cancer was clearest when hair dye was used for at least 10 
years prior to cancer diagnosis. The association of integral use and 
breast cancer occurred primarily among women 50 to 79 years old 
There were no significant differences between the breast cancer patients 319 
and controls with regard to hair dye use: frequency, duration, type, 
shade, or application time. Important confounders of hair dye use 
included religion and smoking status 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 251 
weeks did not result in any signs of toxicity. Oral administration of 40 mglkg 
PPDA to pregnant rats resulted in the deaths of 2 of 10 rats and decreased body 
weight. No other signs of toxicity were observed at the 40 mg/kg dose or at a 30 
mg/kg dose. 
No signs of toxicity were observed when dry PPDA or a 10 percent alcoholic 
solution of PPDA was applied to a 25 cm* area of the skin of rabbits. The percuta- 
neous LD,, for rabbits of a hair dye composite containing 1.2 percent PPDA was 
greater than 10 g/kg. Chronic topical administration of 10 percent PPDA solu- 
tions was not toxic to mice and rabbits. Subchronic and chronic dermal adminis- 
tration of hair dye products containing up to 4 percent PPDA was not toxic to 
mice, rabbits, and rats. 
Primary skin irritation by 2.5 to 100 percent PPDA varied from none to slight 
in experiments with rabbits, guinea pigs, mice, miniature piglets, piglets, dogs, 
and baboons. A hair dye containing 1.2 percent PPDA produced slight to moder- 
ate erythema and moderate edema in the skin of rabbits. Another hair dye con- 
taining 1.8 percent PPDA was mildly irritating to the skin of rabbits. PPDA is a 
guinea pig sensitizer at induction concentrations as low as 0.001 percent. A hair- 
coloring formulation containing 2 percent PPDA was not a guinea pig sensitizer. 
Mild conjunctival inflammation that did not persist for more than 24 hours 
was observed after the instillation of a 2.5 percent aqueous PPDA solution into 
rabbit eyes. The maximum irritation score was 17.0 out of a possible 110 after 
100 percent PPDA was placed in rabbit eyes. A hair dye composite formulation 
containing 1.2 percent PPDA and one containing 1.8 percent PPDA were in- 
stilled into the conjunctival sacs of the eyes of rabbits. The former was rinsed 
from the eyes of half of the animals 4 seconds after instillation. The average irrita- 
tion scores of the composite containing 1.2 percent PPDA at 1 day postinstillation 
was 33.0 for unwashed eyes and 23.0 for washed eyes. At 7 days postinstillation, 
the average irritation scores were 2.4 for unwashed eyes and 0.0 for washed 
eyes. The average irritation score of the hair dye containing 1.8 percent PPDA at 
1 day postinstillation was 30 and at 7 days postinstillation was 6. 
The acute intraperitoneal LD,, of an aqueous PPDA solution for rats was 37 
mg/kg. The subcutaneous minimum lethal doses of PPDA were 170 mg/kg for 
rats, 200 mglkg for rabbits, and 100 mg/kg for dogs. lntraperitoneal administra- 
tion of PPDA to rats and cats and subcutaneous administration of PPDA to rats, 
rabbits, and guinea pigs resulted in edema of the head and neck. 
Doses of 5 to 30 mg/kg per day of PPDA by gavage to pregnant rats did not af- 
fect reproduction, and PPDA was not teratogenic. Subcutaneous administration 
of 28 mg/kg per day PPDA to pregnant mice did not result in embryotoxic or tera- 
togenic effects. No evidence of an increase in postimplantation fetal loss oc- 
curred when male rats received 2 to 20 mg/kg PPDA intraperitoneally three times 
a week for 8 weeks and then were mated. 
Hair dyes containing 1.0 to 4.0 percent PPDA were applied to the skin of 
pregnant rats at a dose of 2 ml/kg per day after being mixed with an equal volume 
of hydrogen peroxide. No adverse effects on reproduction were observed, and 
the hair dyes were not teratogenic. A hair dye containing 3 percent PPDA was 
mixed with hydrogen peroxide, and 0.05 ml of the mixture was applied dermally 
two times a week to female mice prior to mating and throughout gestation. There 
were no adverse effects on reproduction. The dye was not teratogenic, although 
there may have been a retarding effect on fetal ossification. The same hair dye 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote252 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
containing 3 percent PPDA was applied dermally at a dose of 2.0 ml/kg two times 
a week to female rabbits from prior to mating through gestation. The dye was 
mixed with hydrogen peroxide immediately before use. There were no adverse 
effects on rabbit reproduction, and the dye was not teratogenic. The percent of 
live fetuses was 85.4 percent in the treated rabbits and 93.8 percent in the control 
rabbits. The surviving fetuses were of normal weight and length. Reproduction 
was unaffected, and teratogenicity was not observed after the dermal application 
of 0.5 ml of hair dyes containing 2 to 4 percent PPDA two times a week to three 
generations of mice. The dyes were mixed with hydrogen peroxide before use. A 
hair dye containing 2.20 percent PPDA was applied to the skin of male rats in a 
dose of 0.5 ml two times a week for 10 weeks after being mixed with an equal 
volume of hydrogen peroxide. The rats were mated and their male offspring were 
also mated. No adverse effects on reproduction were observed. 
PPDA and PPDA and hydrogen peroxide mixtures were negative in the Ames 
Salmone//a/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test without metabolic activa- 
tion. Both positive and negative results with metabolic activation have been re- 
ported. Different reseachers have used different solvents for the PPDA, different 
chemicals for induction, different S-9s, and slight modifications to the Ames test 
procedure. Any or all of these may explain the observed differences in results. 
Several oxidation products of PPDA were positive in the Ames test. 
The urine of rats that received PPDA intraperitoneally three times a week for 
8 weeks was not mutagenic in the Ames test. The urine of rats that received 
PPDAlresorcinol conjugates topically was mutagenic with metabolic activation 
and was not mutagenic without metabolic activation. Women collected their 
urine before and after using hair dyes containing 0.46 to 2.55 percent PPDA; in 
the Ames test with metabolic activation their urine was not more mutagenic after 
hair dye application. 
The mutagenic potential of PPDA has been investigated in a variety of other 
short-term tests. Purified PPDA was not mutagenic to D. melanogaster, although 
an impure sample was mutagenic. PPDA was not mutagenic in the rat micronu- 
cleus test after oral administration of two 500 mg/kg doses. PPDA was inactive in 
the mouse micronucleus test. Oral administration of 200 mglkg PPDA to male 
mice depressed testicular DNA synthesis. PPDA was not active at intraperitoneal 
doses of 5 to 20 mglkg per day for 5 days in the mouse sperm-head abnormality 
test. PPDA was negative in a rat hepatocyte primary culture/DNA repair test. Pos- 
itive results were obtained for PPDA in the mouse lymphoma forward mutation 
assay. PPDA, in doses of 1.85 to 3.2 ~815.2 x 1 O4 cells, was positive in a test 
measuring the survival of rat embryo cells. 
PPDA in the feed of rats and mice at concentrations of 625 and 1250 ppm for 
103 weeks was not carcinogenic. There was no evidence of a carcinogenic effect 
after the oral administration of 0.06 to 30 mg/kg per day PPDA for 8 months to 
small numbers of rats. PPDA was not carcinogenic in assays in which 5 and 10 
percent solutions were applied topically twice a week in doses of 0.02 ml to mice 
for their lifetime and to female rabbits for 85 weeks. 
Three hair dyes containing 1.5 percent PPDA were mixed with hydrogen per- 
oxide before use, and 0.05 ml was applied topically to mice weekly or every 2 
weeks for 18 months; carcinogenic activity was not observed. No evidence of a 
carcinogenic effect was found after the topical administration of 0.5 ml weekly 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 2.53 
for 2 years to mice of two hair dyes containing 1.5 percent PPDA and mixed with 
hydrogen peroxide immediately before use. No carcinogenic effects were ob- 
served when four hair dye composite formulations containing 1 to 4 percent 
PPDA were mixed with hydrogen peroxide and 0.025 ml of the dyes were ap- 
plied topically weekly for 21 to 23 months to mice. Three hair dye formulations 
containing 2 to 4 percent PPDA were mixed with an equal volume of hydrogen 
peroxide and applied topically to a parental generation of rats from the time of 
their weaning to the weaning of their young. The second generation received 
topical applications of 0.5 ml two times a week for 2 years. An increase in pitui- 
tary adenomas was observed in the rats receiving the 4 percent formulation; 
these adenomas have a high background incidence in rats. 
The primary irritation index for 50 percent PPDA applied to the skin of 6 hu- 
man volunteers for 24 hours under occlusive conditions was 0.8 of a maximum 
possible total of 8. All of 24 subjects were sensitized after five 48-hour induction 
patches of 10 percent PPDA. Ten 48- or 72-hour occluded patches with 0.01 per- 
cent PPDA resulted in sensitization in 7 of 97 (7.2 percent) human volunteers, 
with 0.10 percent PPDA resulted in sensitization in 11 of 98 (11.2 percent), and 
with 1 percent PPDA resulted in sensitization in 47 of 88 (53.4 percent). A maxi- 
mization test using 2 percent PPDA for induction sensitized 15 of 34 (44 percent) 
volunteers. A 10 percent aqueous solution of a dye composition containing 2 
percent PPDA was used for nine 24hour induction patches; at challenge, signifi- 
cant dermatitis was observed in 7 of 22 (31.8 percent) of the volunteers. Re- 
peated insult patch tests were conducted on 206 subjects with four hair dyes con- 
taining up to 2.144 percent PPDA and 0.049 percent 4NOPD; the hair dyes did 
not cause irritation or sensitization. 
A variety of patch tests with PPDA has been performed on subjects from a va- 
riety of populations. Many of these reports are of diagnostic patch tests per- 
formed on clinical subjects suffering from skin disease; positive reactions varied 
from 1 .l to 84.6 percent. A PPDA photopatch test was conducted on 1 subject; 
PPDA was not phototoxic. 
Positive reactions to patches with two hair dyes after mixing them with hy- 
drogen peroxide varied from 15.4 to 100 percent. A beautician developed gener- 
alized urticaria when working with hair dyes. 
Dermatitis was observed in a man who had dyed his own hair; patch tests 
were positive for PPDA, the hair dye, and his own hair. Two men had positive 
patch tests to PPDA and their wives’ dyed hair. A third man’s eczema flared up 
when his wife had just dyed her hair; patch tests to PPDA and the hair dye were 
positive and to hair dyed a week previously was negative. Twenty subjects with 
strongly positive reactions to PPDA were patch tested with hair dyed with a 
PPDA-containing formulation; there were no positives. 
Edema of the face, neck, ears, and scalp has occurred after hair dye use. 
Edema of the eyelids and conjunctiva and tearing have been observed and more 
severe reactions have occurred after the application of PPDA-containing hair 
dyes to the eyebrows and eyelashes. Vision can be lost or permanently damaged. 
A variety of epidemiological studies assess whether occupational exposure to 
and use of hair dyes increases the risk of cancer. These studies have not pro- 
duced evidence of any carcinogenic effect from hair dyes on the organs investi- 
gated among the occupations and users examined. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote254 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
DISCUSSION 
PPDA may or may not cause mutations depending on the test system and test 
conditions. In the Ames test, different researchers used different solvents for the 
PPDA, different chemicals for induction, different metabolic activation systems, 
and slight modifications of the test procedure; any or all of these may explain the 
observed differences in results. Most researchers reported that PPDA was not 
teratogenic or carcinogenic. 
Application of hair dyes containing PPDA to the eyebrows and eyelashes can 
result in lost or permanently damaged vision. PPDA is a sensitizer for guinea pigs 
and for human beings. Phototoxicity and photosensitization data are not avail- 
able. Hair dyes containing PPDA are exempt from the principal adulteration pro- 
vision and from the color additive provisions in sections 601 and 706 of the Fed- 
eral Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 when cautionary statements and patch 
test instructions are conspicuously displayed on the labels. Prophetic patch test- 
ing of hair dye formulations with open patches is less predictive of skin reactions 
than patch testing with closed patches; false negative reactions may occur. Some 
persons may be sensitized even under the proper conditions of use. 
CONCLUSION 
p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some persons may be sensi- 
tized under intended conditions of use. For those persons not sensitized, the Ex- 
pert Panel concludes that p-Phenylenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at 
the current concentrations of use. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Karen Brandt, Scientific Analyst and writer, prepared the literature review 
and technical analysis used by the Expert Panel in developing this report. 
REFERENCES 
1. ESTRIN, N.F., CROSLEY, P.A., and HAYNES, CR. teds.). (1982). CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary, 
3rd ed. Washington, DC: The Cosmetic Toiletry and Fragrance Assoc., p. 232. 
2. GREENBERG, L.A., and LESTER, D. (1954). Handbook of Cosmetic Materials. New York: Interscience, p. 
258. 
3. HAWLEY, G.G. ted.). (1971). The Condensed Chemical Dictionary, 8th ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, p. 680. 
4. INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC). (1978). IARC Monographs on the Car- 
cinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man. Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds-Hair Dyes, 
Colouring Agents and Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals, Vol. 16, pp. 26-27, 125-42. Lyon, France. 
5. SAX, N.I. ted.). (1979). Dangerous Properties of industrial Materials, 5th ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, p. 902. 
6. THE SOCIETY OF DYERS AND COLOURISTS. (1971). Co/our Index, 3rd ed. Yorkshire, UK, Vol. 3, p. 
3262. 
7. WINDHOLZ, M. (ed.). (1976). The Merk Index, 9th ed. Rahway, NJ: Merck & Co., p, 948. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFpPHENYLENEDlAMlNE 255 
8. U.S. TARIFF COMMISSION. (1919). Report on dyes and related coal-tar chemical 1918. Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office. 
9. THIRTLE, J.R. (1968). Phenylenediamines and toluenediamines. In: Kirk, R.E., and Othmer, D.F. teds.). 
Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 15, pp. 216-24. 
10. COSMETIC, TOILETRY AND FRAGRANCE ASSOCIATION (CTFA). (October 28, 1982). Summary of cos- 
metic ingredient safety analysis of p-phenylenediamine.’ 
11. E.I. Du PONT De NEMOURS AND CO. (1973). Sales Specification: p-Phenylenediamine Technical. Wil- 
mington, DE: Dyes and Chemicals Division. 
12. DELLA PORTA, G., and DRAGANI, T.A. (1981). Lack of carcinogenicity in mice of 4,4’-diaminobenzani- 
lide and 4,4’diaminoazobenzene, two intermediates used in the manufacture of azo dyes. Cancer Lett. 
14, 329-36. 
13. FEDERAL REGISTER. (January 8, 1982). Phenylenediamines: Response to Interagency Testing Committee. 
47(5), 973-83. 
14. RADOMSKI, J.L. (1979). The primary aromatic amines: Their biological properties and structure-activity 
relationships. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 19, 129-57. 
15. CLAYSON, D.B., and GARNER, R.C. (1976). Carcinogenic aromatic amines and related compounds. In: 
Searle, C.E. fed.). Chemical Carcinogens. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, ACS Monograph 
173, pp. 366-461. 
16. LOEW, G.H., SUDHINDRA, B.S., WALKER, J.M., SIGMAN, C.C., and JOHNSON, H.L. (1979). Correla- 
tion of calculated electronic parameters of fifteen aniline derivatives with their mutagenic potencies. J. En- 
viron. Pathol. Toxicol. 2(4), 1069-78. 
17. THURAISINGHAM, R.A., and NILAR, H.M. (1980). A theoretical study of the carcinogenic nature of 
some aromatic amines. J. Theor. Biol. 86, 577-80. 
18. FURIA, T.E. (ed.). (1972). CRC Handbook of Food Additives, 2nd ed. Cleveland, OH: CRC Press, Vol. 1, p. 
196. 
19. AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS (ACGIH). (1980). Docu- 
mentation of the Threshold Limit Values, 4th ed. Cincinnati, OH: ACGIH. 
20. BEARD, R.R., and NOE, J.T. (1981). Aromatic Nitro and Amino Compounds. In: Clayton, G.D., and Clay 
ton, F.E. (eds.). Patty’s industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 2A: 
2476-7. 
21. GLABISZ, U., and TOMASZEWSKA, M. (1977). Studies of the decomposition of aromatic amines with 
ozone in dilute aqueous solutions. Przem. Chem. 56(8), 426-8. 
22. MACKISON, F.W., STRICOFF, R.S., and PARTRIDGE, L.J. (eds.). (September 1978). N/OSH/OSHA Pocket 
Guide to Chemical Hazards. DHEW (NIOSH) Publication No. 78-210, pp. 152-3. 
23. PITTER, P., and RADKOVA, H. (1974). Relation between the structure and biodegradability of organic 
compounds. IV. Biodegradability of phenylenediamines and nitroanilines. Slo. Vys. Sk. Chem. Technol. 
Praze, Technol. Vooly. F19, 99-109. 
24. THE SOCIETY OF DYERS AND COLOURISTS. (1971). Co/our Index, 3rd ed. Yorkshire, UK, Vol. 4, pp. 
4644, 4822. 
25. WEAST, R.C. (ed.). (1978). CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 59th ed. West Palm Beach, FL: CRC 
Press, p. C-l 56. 
26. POMMEZ, P., LAFAIX, M., and DELORME, P. (1967). Far infrared absorption study of low-frequency oscil- 
lations in a series of para-disubstituted benzene derivatives. I. Spectra and assignment of frequencies ob- 
served. 1. Chim. Phys. 64, 1450-60. 
27. GRASSELLI, J.G. (ed.). (1973). CRCAtlas ofSpectra/ Data and Physical Constants for Organic Compounds. 
Cleveland, OH: Chemical Rubber Co., p. B-223. 
28. INOUE, H., ASAUMI, E., HINOHARA, T., SEKIGUCHI, S. and MATSUI, K. (1970). Fluorescent whitening 
agents. III. Fluorescence of aminostilbenes. Kogyo Kagaku Zasshi 73, 187-94. 
29. CORBETT, J.F. (1972). Autoxidation of p-phenylenediamine. J. Sot. Cosmet. Chem. 23, 683-93. 
30. CORBETT, J.F., and MENKART, J. (1973). Hair coloring. Cutis 12, 190-7. 
31. GRANT, W.M. (1974). Toxicology of the Eye, 2nd ed. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, pp. 817-8. 
32. E.J. Du PONT De NEMOURS AND CO. (1977). US Dept. of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Ad- 
ministration, Material Safety Data Sheet, Wilmington, DE. 
*Available upon request: Administrator, Cosmetic Ingredient Review, 1110 Vermont Ave., NW, Suite 810, 
Washington, DC 20005. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote256 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
33. FEDERAL REGISTER. (May 28, 1980). Sixth report of the interagency testing committee to the administra- 
tor, Environmental Protection Agency; receipt of the report and request for comments regarding priority 
list of chemicals. 45(104), 35897-910. 
34. CORBETT, J.F. (1973). The role of meta difunctional benzene derivatives in oxidative hair dyeing. I. Reac- 
tion with p-diamines. J. Sot. Cosmet. Chem. 24, 103-34. 
35. REISS, F., and FISHER, A.A. (1974). Is hair dyed with para-phenylenediamine allergenic? Arch. Dermatol. 
109(2), 221-2. 
36. BURNETT, C.M., and CORBETT, J.F. (1977). The chemistry and toxicology of hair dyes. In: Drill, V.A., and 
Lazar, P. (eds.). Cutaneous Toxicity. New York: Academic Press, pp. 203-21. 
37. CORBETT, J.F. (1976). Hair dyes-Their chemistry and toxicology. Cosmet. Toilet. 91, 21-8. 
38. BROWN, K.C., and CORBETT, J.F. (1979). The role of meta difunctional benzene derivatives in oxidative 
hair dyeing. II. Reactions with p-aminophenols. J. Sot. Cosmet. Chem. 30(4), 191-211. 
39. SHAH, M.J., TOLGYESI, W.S., and BRITT, A.D. (1972). Cooxidation of p-phenylenediamine and resor- 
cinol in hair dyes. J. Sot. Cosmet. Chem. 23, 853-61. 
40. HORWITZ, W. (ed.). (1970). Official Methods ofAnalysis of the Association of OfficiaJAna/ytical Chemists, 
1 lth ed. Washington, DC: Assoc. Official Analytical Chemists, p. 614. 
41. CORBETT, J.F. (1975). Application of oxidative coupling reactions to the assay of p-phenylenediamines 
and phenols. Anal. Chem. 47, 308-l 3. 
42. POPA, G., RADULESCU-JERCAN, E., and ALBERT, F.M. (1966). Photometric determination of some aro- 
matic amines. Rev. Roumaine Chim. 11, 1449-52. 
43. HASHMI, M.H., IFTIKHAR, A.A., RASHID, A. and QURESHI, T. (1969). Spectrophotometric determina- 
tion of o- and p-phenylenediamine. Mikrochim. Acta 1, 100-7. 
44. LEVIN, V., NIPPOLDT, B.W., and REBERTUS, R.L. (1967). Spectrophotometric determination of primary 
aromatic amines with thiotrithiazyl chloride application to determination of toluene-2,4-diisocyanate in 
air. Anal. Chem. 39, 581-4. 
45. GUPTA, R.C., and SRIVASTAVA, S.P. (1971). Oxidation of aromatic amines by peroxodisulphate ion. II. 
Identification of aromatic amines on the basis of absorption maxima of coloured oxidation products. Z. 
Anal. Chem. 257, 275-77. 
46. LEGRADI, L. (1967). Detection of coexisting isomeric phenylenediamines, aminophenols, and dihydric 
phenols. Mikrochim. Acta 4, 608-25. 
47. FREGERT, S. (1972). Chemical determination of p-phenylenediamine in hair dyes. Hautarzt 23(9), 393-4. 
48. LANGE, F.W. (1966). Fast method for detection of p-phenylenediamine in hair dyes. Seifen-Ole-Fette- 
Wachse 92, 751-3. 
49. PINCHES, M.A., and WALKER, R.F. (1980). Determination of atmospheric contaminants using a continu- 
ous paper-tape personal monitor. I. Analysis of aromatic amines. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 23(4), 335-52. 
50. GRAFFEO, A.P., and RIGGIN, R.M. (1978). The application of electrochemical detection to the HPLC 
analysis of nonvolatile pollutants. Proc. 4th Joint. Conf. Sens. Environ. Pollut., pp. 637-9. 
51. SUGDEN, K., COX, G.B., and LOSCOMBE, C.R. (1978). Chromatographic behavior of basic amino com- 
pounds on silica and ODS-silica using aqueous methanol mobile phases. J. Chromatogr. 149, 377-90. 
52. TURCHETTO, L., GAMBERO, P., PAPETTI, P., TERRACCIANO, M., and QUERCIA, V. (1980). Applica- 
tions of HPLC for the identification of some amines, phenols, and aminophenols in samples of cream and 
shampoo hair-dyeing products. Boll. Chim. Farm. 119(l), 23-30. 
53. CHOUDHARY, G. (1980). Gas-liquid chromatographic determination of toxic diamines in permanent 
hair dyes. J. Chromatogr. 193(2), 277-84. 
54. GOLDSTEIN, S., KOPF, A.A., and FEINLAND, R. (April 21/23, 1968). Analysis of Oxidation Dyes in Hair 
Colorants by Thin-Layer and Gas Chromatography. Proc. Joint Conf. Cosmet. Sci., pp. 19-38. Washing- 
ton, DC: Toilet Goods Assoc. 
55. KNIGHT, ].A. (1971). Gas chromatographic analysis of gamma-irradiated aniline for aminoaromatic prod- 
ucts. J. Chromatogr. 56, 201-8. 
56. PINTER, I., and KRAMER, M. (1967). Gas chromatographic detection and determination of some aromatic 
diamines in hair dyes. Parfeum. Kosmet. 48, 126-8. 
57. WALLE, T. (1968). Quantitative gas-chromatographic determination of primary amines in submicrogram 
quantities after condensation with 2,5-hexanedione. Acta Pharm. Suecica 5, 353-66. 
58. FUNASAKA, W., HANAI, T., FUJIMURA, K., and ANDO, T. (1972). Non-aqueous solvent chromatogra- 
phy. II. Separation of benzene derivatives in the anion-exchange and n-butyl alcohol system. J. Chromat. 
72, 187-91. 
59. FUNASAKA, W., FUJIMURA, K., and KURIYAMA, S. (1969). Ligand-exchange chromatography. I. Separa- 
tion of phenylenediamine isomers by ligand-exchange chromatography. Bunseki Kagaku 18, 19-24. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 257 
60. PROTIVOVA, J., and POSPISIL, J. (1974). Antioxidants and stabilizers. XLVII. Behaviour of amine antioxi- 
dants and antiozonants and model compounds in gel permeation chromatography. J. Chromatogr. 88, 
99-107. 
61. KOTTEMANN, C.M. (1966). Two-dimensional thin-layer chromatographic procedure for the identifica- 
tion of dye intermediates in arylamine oxidation hair dyes. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 49, 954-9. 
62. LEGATOWA, B. (1973). Determination of aromatic amines and aminophenols in hair dyes. Rocz. Panstw. 
Zakl. Hig. 24, 393-402. 
63. LEPRI, L., DESIDERI, P.G., and COAS, V. (1976). Separation and identification of coloring agents in the 
oxidation-type hair dyes by ion-exchange thin-layer chromatography. Ann. Chim. 66(7-8), 451-600. 
64. THIELEMANN, H. (1978). Thin-layer chromatographic detection limits with respect to semiquantitative 
determination of several coupling-capable aromatic amines, amino acids, and aminophenols on prepared 
films and silica gel G layers with fast dye salts as spray reagents. Sci. Pharm. 46(3), 231-3. 
65. WISNESKI, H.H. (1977). Analysis of hair dyes. In: Senzel, A.J. (ed.). Newburger’s Manual of Cosmetic 
Analysis, 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem., pp. 93-103. 
66. ZELAZNA, K., and LEGATOWA, B. (1971). Identification of basic dyes in emulsion hair dyes by thin-layer 
chromatography. Rocz. Panstw. Zakl. Hig. 22, 427-30. 
67. BASSL, A., HECKEMANN, H.J., and BAUMANN, E. (1967). Thin-layer chromatography of primary aro- 
matic amines. I. J. Prakt. Chem. 36, 265-73. 
68. COZZI, D., DESIDERI, P.G., LEPRI, L., and COAS, V. (1969). Thin-layer chromatographic and electropho- 
retie behaviour of primary aromatic amines on weak ion exchangers. J. Chromatogr. 43, 463-72. 
69. DRPST, R.H., and REITH, J.F. (1967). Identification of toxic substances by means of Feldstein’s extraction 
method, thin-layer chromatography, and UV spectrometry. I. Basic substances. Pharm. Weekbl. 102, 
1379-87. 
70. LEPRI, L., DESIDERI, P.G., and COAS, V. (1974). Chromatographic and electrophoretic behaviour of pri- 
mary aromatic amines on anion-exchange thin layers. J. Chromatogr. 90, 331-9. 
71. SRIVASTAVA, S.P., and DUA, V.K. (1975). TLC (thin-layer chromatography) separation of closely related 
amines. Fresenius Z. Analyt. Chem. 276, 382. 
72. GALATIK, J. (1972). Chromatographic determination of free p-phenylenediamine in the presence of pyro- 
catechol in furs dyed with oxidizing dyes. Kozarstvi 22, 21-3. 
73. MATRKA, M., and KROUPA, J. (1971). Analyse von Farbstoffen und von bei der Farbstofferzeugung anfal- 
lenden Zwischenprodukten. XIV. Sichtbarmachung aromatischer diamine in der papierchromatographie 
mit Hilfe von Bromdampfen. Collec. Czech. Chem. Commun. 36, 2366-71. 
74. REIO, L. (1970). Third supplement for the paper chromatographic separation and identification of phenol 
derivatives and related compounds of biochemical interest using a ‘reference system.’ J. Chromatogr. 47, 
60-85. 
75. BAMBERGER, R.L., and STROHL, J.H. (1969). Quantitative analysis of p-nitrophenol, hydroquinone, and 
p-phenylenediamine using thin-layer chronopotentiometry. Anal. Chem. 41, 1450-52. 
76. BEILIS, I. (1965). Quantitative polarographic determination of microconcentrations of p-phenylenedi- 
amine and benzidine. Lab. Delo (Russian) 10, 584-5. 
77. USVYATSOV, A.A., MEDVEDEVA, I.M., SLAVNOVA, A.S., and GENKINA, E.V. (1975). Polarographic 
study of some derivatives of diphenylamine on a platinum electrode. Nov. Polyarogr. Tezisy. Dokl. Vses. 
Soveshch. Polyarogr. 6, 190. 
78. IGNACZAK, M., and DZIEGIEC, J. (1975). Use of ceric perchlorate in the determination of p-quinone, 
p-aminophenol, p-phenylenediamine, p-aminobenzoic acid, and sulfanilic acid. Chem. Anal. (Warsaw) 
20,229-32. 
79. RATNIKOVA, T.V., KLOCHKOV, V.I., KHARCHEVNIKOV, V.M., DEVIKINA, L.I., and LIPILIN, V.N. 
(1974). Analysis of some ingredients of rubbers. Zh. Prikl. Khim. (Leningrad) 47, 850-54. 
80. IORDANOVA, I. (1978). Quantitative determination of oxidative dyes in the hygienic evaluation of hair 
coloring cosmetic agents. Khig. Zdraveopaz. 21(l), 83-7. 
81. JENIK, J. (1979). Analysis of industrial emissions. I. Spectrophotometric determination of organic amino 
compounds in industrial emissions. Sb. Ved. Pr. Vys. Sk. Chemickotechnol. Pardubice 40, 133-41. 
82. VON MALLINCKRO, G., and HERRMANN, A. (1969). A group reaction for the detection of p-nitrophe- 
nols, p-aminophenols and p-phenylenediamines in urine. Z. Klin. Chem. Klin. Biochem. 7(l), 34-7. 
83. MlTSUl, T., and FUJIMURA, Y. (1974). Indirect determination of primary amines by atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry. Bunseki Kagaku 23, 1309-14. 
84. HUTZINGER, 0. (1969). Electron acceptor complexes for chromagenic detection and mass spectrometric 
identification of phenol and aniline derivatives, related fungicides, and metabolites. Anal, Chem. 41, 
1662-5. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote258 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
85. LORANT, B. (1977). Thermogravimetric determination of basic and intermediary substances in cosmetics. 
Seifen. Oele. Fette. Wachse. 103(14), 393-6. 
86. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA). (December 22, 1981). Cosmetic product formulation 
data: (a) Ingredients used in each product category and (b) Number of brand name products in each prod- 
uct code. Two computer printouts. Washington, DC. 
87. WALL, F.E. (1972). Bleaches, hair colorings, and dye removers. In: Balsam, M.S., and Sagarin, E. (eds.). 
Cosmetics: Science and Technology, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley-Interscience, Vol. 2, pp. 313, 317. 
88. MARZULLI, F.N., GREEN, S., and MAIBACH, H.I. (1978). Hair dye toxicity-A review. 1. Environ. Pathol. 
Toxicol. 1, 509-30. 
89. SPOOR, H.J. (1977). Permanent hair colorants: oxidation peroxide dyes. I. Chemical technology. Cutis 
19(4), 424, 428, 430. 
90. SCHWARTZ, I., KRAVITZ, J., and D’ANGELO, A. (1979). Laboratory evaluation of some oxidation hair 
color intermediates. Cosmet. Toilet. 94(4), 47-50. 
91. CONSUMER REPORTS. (August 1979). Are hair dyes safe? Consumer Reports, pp. 456-60. 
92. MENKART, J., and LANMAN, B.M. (1977). Cancer and hair dyes. NY State J. Med. 77, 439. 
93. FISHER, A.A. (1974). Sensitivity Testing. In: Balsam, M.S., and Sagarin, E. (eds.). Cosmetics: Science and 
Technology, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley-Interscience, Vol. 3, p. 286. 
94. BAER, R.L., RAMSEY, D.L., and BIONDI, E. (1973). The most common contact allergens: 1968-1970. 
Arch. Dermatol. 108, 74-8. 
95. CUNDELL, A.M., and MULCOCK, A.P. (1976). The biodeterioration of natural rubber pipe-joint rings in 
sewer mains. Proc. 3rd Int. Biodegration Symp., pp. 659-64. 
96. GRANT, J. (1969). Ha&h’s Chemical Dictionary, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., pp. 510-l. 
97. KERSEY, P., and STEVENSON, C.J. (1980). Linchenoid eruption due to colour developer. A new occupa- 
tional hazard of automatic self-photographing machines. Contact Dermatitis 6(7), 503-4. 
98. SCHORR, W.F. (1974). Contact dermatitis. OtTice diagnosis and management. Minn. Med. 57(10), 831-7. 
99. NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE (NCI). (1978). Bioassay ofp-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride for pos- 
sible carcinogenicity. PB 290124. Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service. 
100. THE SOCIETY OF DYERS AND COLOURISTS. (1956). Co/our Index, 2nd ed. Yorkshire, U.K., Vol. 4. 
101. ADAMOVIC, V.M. (1966). Aromatic amines as spray reagents in the thin-layer chromatography of chlori- 
nated organic pesticides. J. Chromatogr. 23(2), 274-9. 
102. AWASTHI, Y.C., MORRIS, H.H., SCHOCHET, S.S., POWELL, G.F., SCHMALSTIEG, F.C., and SROVA- 
STAVA, S.K. (1977). Studies in neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis: Leukocyte peroxidase deficiency in a pa- 
tient with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis (Jansky-Bielschowsky type). J. Lab. Clin. Med. 89(4), 770-80. 
103. PILZ, H., GOEBEL, H.H., and (YBRIEN, J.S. (1976). Isoelectric enzyme patterns of leukocyte peroxidase in 
normal controls and patients with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinoses. Neuropaediatrie 7(3), 261-70. 
104. PILZ, H., O’BRIEN, J.S., and HEIPERTZ, R. (1976). Human leukocyte peroxidase: activity of a soluble and 
membrane-bound enzyme form in normal persons and patients with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Me- 
tabolism 25(S), 561-70. 
105. PILZ, H., O’BRIEN, J.S., and HEIPERTZ, R. (1976). Human saliva peroxidase: microanalytical isoelectric 
fractionation and properties in normal persons and in cases with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Clin. Bio- 
them. 9(2), 85-8. 
106. PILZ, H., SCHWENDEMANN, G., and GOEBEL, H.H. (1978). Diagnostic significanceof myeloperoxidase 
assay in neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinoses (Batten-Vogt syndrome). Neurology 28(9 Part l), 924-7. 
107. ITO, H., and TATSUMI, S. (July 31, 1976). Simultaneous removal of sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides 
from flue gas. Japan Kokai Pat. No. 76 87473. Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. 
108. ITO, H., NIWA, H., and MITSUTA, S. (September 9, 1978). Removal of nitrogen oxides from waste gases. 
Japan Pat. No. 78 32795. Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd. 
109. KOHLER, J.J., GAUTNEY, J., KIM, Y.K., and MCCULLOUGH, J.F. (May 2, 1978). Removal and recovery of 
sulfur oxides from gas streams with melamine. US Pat. No. 970008. Tennessee Valley Authority. 
110. MATSUMOTO, K., and UKAWA, N. (August 23, 1979). Simultaneous removal of nitrogen oxides and sul- 
fur dioxide from boiles flue gas. Japan Kokai Pat. No. 79107467. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. 
111. UKAWA, N., and OKINO, S. (August 23, 1979). Removal of nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide from waste 
gas. Japan Kokai Pat. No. 79107468. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. 
112. FEDOROVA, V.A. (1971). Photometric determination of hydrogen sulfide in mine air. Bezop. Tr. Prom-sti. 
15(4), 34-5. 
113. STAN, T., ANTONESCU, V., STEFANESCU, E., and FERARU, E. (1979). A new spectrophotometric 
method for the determination of hydrogen sulfide in the air. Farmacia (Bucharest) 27(2), 85-9. 
114. PETTIGREW, A.R., and FELL, G.S. (1972). Simplified calorimetric determination of thiocyanate in biologi- 
cal fluids, and its application to investigation of the toxic amblyopias. Clin. Chem. 18(g), 996-TBBB. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 259 
115. PAREKH, A.C., and JUNG, D.H. (1970). Serum inorganic phosphorus determination usingp-phenylenedi- 
amine as a reducing agent. Clin. Chim. Acta 27(3), 373-7. 
116. ANDERSON, J.R., STRUMEYER, O.H., and PRAMER, D. (1968). Purification and Properties of peroxidase 
from Nitrosomonas europaea. 1. Bacterial. 96(l), 93-7. 
117. CABR~LLAT, H., and FONTAINIERE, B. (1980). Paraphenylenediamine-pyrocatechol: an alternative sub- 
strate to diaminobenzidine for the demonstration of endogenous peroxidase of mammalian leukocytes. 
Histochem. J. 12(4), 488-91. 
118. DIMMITT, S.K. (1975). The effect of biologic amines on peroxidase activity (p-phenylenediamine as CO- 
substrate in detecting leukocyte peroxidase deficiency: Batten’s disease). J. Am. Med. Women ASSOC. 
30(12), 473-83. 
119. HOHBADEL, P.C., McNEELY, M.D., and SUNDERMAN, F.W. (1975). Automated biochromatic analysis 
of serum ceruloplasmin. Ann. Clin. Lab. Sci. S(l), 65-70. 
120. JENSEN, G.E., CLAUSEN, J., MELCHIOR, J.C., and KONAT, G. (1977). Clinical, social and biochemical 
studies on Batten’s syndrome, alias Spielmeyer-Vogot or Stengel’s Syndrome. Eur. Neurol. 15(4), 203-l 1. 
121. KELLEHER, C.A., and MASON, J. (1979). The effect of tetrathromolybdate upon sheep ceruloplasmin 
amine oxidase activity in vitro: the influence of substrate on apparent sensitivity to inhibition. Res. Vet. 
Sci. 26(l), 124-5. 
122. LAMAND, M., LAB, C., TRESSOL, J.C., and MASON, J. (1980). Biochemical parameters useful for the di- 
agnosis of mild molybdenosis in sheep. Ann. Rech. Vet. 11(2), 141-5. 
123. LINDER, M.C., and MOOR, J.R. (1977). Plasma ceruloplasmin. Evidence for its presence in and uptake by 
heart and other organs of the rat. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 499(3), 329-36. 
124. MacDONALD, D.J., NICOL, K.M., BELFIELD, A., SHAH, M.M., and MACK, S.D. (1980). Enzyme-linked 
immunoassay for placental lactogen in human serum. Clin. Chem. 26(6), 745-9. 
125. MARCOLLETT, M., MORIN, J., and LECHER, P. (1980). Comparison between two chromagenic substrates 
for revealing an immunoperoxidase reaction of human metaphase chromosomes. Stain Technol. 55(l), 
35-8. 
126. PEISACH, J., and LEVINE, W.G. (1965). A comparison of the enzymic activities of pig ceruloplasmin and 
Rhus vernicifera lactase. J. Biol. Chem. 240(6), 2284-9. 
127. PETTERSSON, G. (1970). Electronic characteristics of substrates for ceruloplasmin. Acta Chem. Stand. 
24(S), 1838-9. 
128. COLMAN, O.D., and STOCKERT, J.C. (1979). Electron microscopy of synaptonemal complexes in semi- 
thin sections. Z. Naturforsch. 34(3-4), 299-300. 
129. ESPONDA, P., and STOCKERT, J.C. (1978). Localization of the synaptonemal complex under the light mi- 
croscope. Chromosoma 68(l), 83-90. 
130. HUFF, J.C., WESTON, W.L., and WANDA, K.D. (1982). Enhancement of specific immunofluorescent 
findings with use of a para-phenylenediamine mounting buffer. J. Invest. Dermatol. 78(5), 489-50. 
131. INGJER, F. (1979). Correlation of individual skeletal muscle fibers from “semithin” sections stained with p- 
phenylenediamine and histochemical sections incubated for myofibrillar ATP-ase. Histochemistry 60(l), 
107-11. 
132. JUHLIN, L., and SHELLEY, W.B. (1977). New staining techniques for the Langerhans cell. Acta Derm. 
Venereol. 57(4), 289-96. 
133. KORNELIUSSEN, H., DAHL, H.A., and PAULSEN, J.E. (1978). Histochemical definition of muscle fiber 
types in the trunk musculature of a teleost fish. Histochemistry 55(l), l-l 6. 
134. KRAUHS, J.M., and SALINAS, N.L. (1980). Ultrastructural study of unencapsulated vertebrate mechano- 
receptor terminals facilitated by double staining and resectioning of thick plastic sections. J. Neurosci. 
Methods 3(2), 175-82. 
135. LEDINGHAM, J.M., and SIMPSON, F.O. (1970). Intensification of osmium staining by p-phenylenedi- 
amine: paraffin and epon embedding; lipid granules in renal medulla. Stain Technol. 45(6), 255-60. 
136. LEDINGHAM, J.M., and SIMPSON, F.O. (1972). The use ofp-phenylenediamine in the block to enhance 
osmium staining for electron microscopy. Stain Technol. 47(5), 239-43. 
137. MACBETH, R.A., BAZIN, S., and ALLAIN, J.C. (1975). Observations of the staining of ceruloplasmin fol- 
lowing disc-electrophoresis utilizing polyacrylamide gels. Clin. Biochem. 8(l), 52-9. 
138. SHEIBANI, K., LUCAS, F.V., TUBBS, R.R., SAVAGE, R.A., and HOELTGE, G.A. (1981). Alternatechroma- 
gens as substitutes for benzidine for myeloperoxidase cytochemistry. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. X(3), 367-70. 
139. SHEPARD, N., and MITCHELL, N. (1977). The use of ruthenium and p-phenylenediamine to stain carti- 
lage simultaneously for light and electron microscopy. J. Histochem. Cytochem. X(10), 1163-8. 
140. SNIPES, R.L. (1977). Identification of lipids for intestinal absorption studies in resin-embedded tissue. Mi- 
crosc. Acta 79(2), 127-30. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote260 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
141. STOCKERT, J.C. (1977). Osmium tetroxidelp-phenylenediamine staining of nucleoli and Balbiani rings in 
Chironomus salivary glands. Histochemistry 53(l), 43-56. 
142. SZENT-GYORCYI, A. (1980). The living state and cancer. Int. J. Quantum. Chem. 7, 217-22. 
143. VAGANOVA, M.E., and SEKAMOVA, S.M. (1980). Identification of the types of muscle fibers in cryostatic 
sections by using p-phenylenediamine. Arkh. Patol. 42(2), 75-7. 
144. HORNSLETH, A. (1966). Effect of inhibitors and respiratory factors on the growth of respiratory syncytial 
RS virus in Hep-2 cell cultures. Acta Pathol. Microbial. Stand. 68(2), 293-304. 
145. MONDAL, R., and MUKHERJEE, N. (1975). Sensitivity of two plant pathogenic bacteria to some inorganic 
and organic compounds. Phytopathol. Z. 83(l), 87-90. 
146. THIND, T.S., SAKSENA, S.B., and AGRAWAL, S.C. (1979). Effect of some phenolic compounds on germi- 
nation of spores of Clathridium corticola. Indian Phytopathol. 32(2), 273-4. 
147. NABIH, I,, and HELMY, E. (1965). p-phenylenediamine as a schistosomicidal agent and its condensation 
with acetoacetic ester. J. Pharm. Sci. 54(1 l), 1698-700. 
148. BLOCK, H. VON, BRUBACHER, C., ERLENMEYER, H., and SUTER, E. (1947). Uber den Stoffwechsel von 
Tuberkelbazillen. Systematische untersuchungen uber die wirkung primarer aromatischer amine auf das 
wachstum von Tuberkelbazillen. Helv. Chim. Acta 30, 539-43. 
149. KADLUBOWSKI, R. (1971). Activity of certain oxidoreductases in the organism poisoned experimentally 
with p-phenylenediamine. Folia Med. Lodz. (Polish) 14, 167-83. 
150. CERIOTTI, G., SPANDRIO, L., and AGRADI, A. (1966). Anticatalase activity of phenylenediamines in vi- 
tro and in vivo. Enzymologia 30(S), 290-8. 
151. WATANABE, T., ISHIHARA, N., and IKEDA, M. (1976). Toxicity of and biological monitoring for 1,3-di- 
amino-2,4,6,-trinitrobenzene and other nitro-amino derivatives of benzene and chlorobenzene. Int. Arch. 
Occup. Environ. Health 37(3), 157-68. 
152. APPIANI, L., LAVENEZIANA, D., and CHIESARA, E. (1965). Inhibition of microsomal drug-metabolizing 
enzymes by p-phenylenediamine. Boll. Sot. Ital. Biol. Sper. 41(23), 1352-6. 
153. GERATZ, J.D. (1969). Secretory stimulation of the rat pancreas by p-aminobenzamidine. Am. J. Physiol. 
216(4), 812-7. 
154. CESSION-FOSSION, A., and LECOMTE, J. (1971). Orthosympathetic reactions in the rat treated with 
p-phenylenediamine. C.R. Sot. Biol. 164(1 l), 2404-6. 
155. LECOMTE, J. (1971). Cardiovascular collapse induced by p-phenylenediamine in the rat. C.R. Sot. Biol. 
164(11), 2401-3. 
156. LECOMTE, J., BAECKELAND, E., and CESSION-FOSSION, A. (1972). Pharmacological properties of 
p-phenylenediamine in the normal rat. Bull. Sot. Roy. Sci. Liege 41(5-6), 302-18. 
157. MASCRES, C., and JASMIN, G. (1974). Serum enzyme activity following skeletal muscle lesions induced 
by p-phenylenediamine in rats. Rev. Can. Biol. 33(3), 175-83. 
158. MASCRES, C., and JASMIN, G. (1974). Pathogenic study of muscular lesions induced by p-phenylenedi- 
amine. Union Med. Can. 103(4), 672-7. 
159. MASCRES, C., and JASMIN, G. (1975). Changes in the muscle fiber induced by p-phenylenediamine in 
the rat. Pathol. Biol. 23(3), 193-9. 
160. LECOMTE, J., and CESSION-FOSSION, A. (1971). Increase in vascular permeability induced byp-phenyl- 
enediamine. C.R. Sot. Biol. 165(l), 210-3. 
161. MIKHLIN, L.M., and MARCHENKO, Y.G. (1972). Changes in the concentration of total proteins and pro- 
tein fractions in blood serum of rabbit during oral administration of Ursol D in acute and chronic experi- 
ments. Zdravookhranenie 15(2), 35-6. 
162. MIKHLIN, L.M., and FUIOR, I.F. (1976). Morphological changes in rabbit myocardium under the effect of 
urosol D. Zdravookhranenie 19(3), 29-31. 
163. DE BRUIN, A. (1978). Anomalies in hemaglobin-methemoglobinemia. In: Biochemical Toxicology of En- 
vironmental Agents. New York: ElsevierlNorth-Holland, p. 1259. 
164. LIN, I., and WU, Y. (1973). Mechanism of methemoglobin formation induced by aminoazo compounds. 
Biochem. Pharmacol. 22(15), 1883-91. 
165. CTFA. (July 22, 1980; Aug. 7, 1980). Submission of data by CTFA (2-1 l-98). Re, T.A., and D’Aleo, C. Met- 
hemoglobin levels in beagle dogs following oral administration of p-phenylenediamine. Final report; ad- 
dendum.* 
166. CTFA. (April 16, 1981). Submission of data by CTFA. (2-1 l-98). Loehr, R., and Re, T.A.: Methemoglobin 
levels in pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats following oral administration of p-phenylenediamine. Final 
report.* 
167. SAMTER, M. (1970). Early eosinophilia induced in guinea pigs by intrapulmonary injection of antigenic 
determinants and antigens. J. Allergy 45, 234-47. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENTOFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 261 
168. SHELLEY, w.B., and JUHLIN, L. (1977). Selective uptake of contact allergens by the Langerhans cell. 
Arch. Dermatol. 113(2), 187-92. 
169. BLOHM, S.C., and RAJKA, G. (1970). Allergenicity of paraphenylenediamine. Acta Derm. Venereal. 58, 
49-52. 
170. MAYER, R.L. (1955). Group sensitization of compounds of quinone structure and its biochemical basis; 
role of these substances in cancer. In: Kalbos, P. (ed.). Progress in Allergy, Boston, MA: Little, Brown, Vol 
IV, p. 79. 
171, JAN~EN, LA., BERRENS, L., and VAN DELDEN, J. (1964). Contact sensitivity to simple chemicals: The 
role of intermediates in the process of sensitization. Naturwissenschaften 51, 387. 
172. REYNOLDS, R.C., ASTILL, B.D., and FASSETT, D.W. (1970). Interaction of N,N-disubstituted p-phenyl- 
enediamines with guinea-pig epidermis in vivo. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 8(6), 635-46. 
173. LERNER, A.B., and FITZPATRICK. (1950). Biochemistry of melanin formation. Physiol. Rev. 38(91), 
91-126. 
174. BROTHERTON, J. (1969). Uptake of amino acids into pig skin in organ culture, and the effect of inhibitors 
of respiration, protein biosynthesis, and tyrosinase. J. Invest. Dermatol. 52(l), 78-88. 
175. O’NEILL, J.J., SIMON, S.H., and SHREEVE, W.W. (1965). Alternate glycolytic pathways in brain. A com- 
parison between the action of artificial electron acceptors and electrical stimulation. J. Neurochem. 12 
(9-l 0), 797-802. 
176. CILENTO, G., and ZINNER, K. (1967). Oxygen activation. Ill. The role of monoprotonated p-phenylenedi- 
amines. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 143(l), 93-6. 
177. SCHAEFER, A., KOMLOS, M., and SEREGI, A. (1978). Effects of biogenic amines and psychotropic drugs 
on endogenous prostaglandin biosynthesis in the rat brain homogenates. Biochem. Pharmacol. 27(2), 
213-8. 
178. ANUNDI, I., HOEGBERG, J., and STEAD, A.H. (1979). Glutathione depletion in isolated hepatocytes: its 
relation to lipid peroxidation and cell damage. Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol. 45(l), 45-51. 
179. LECOMTE, J., and BAECKELAND, E. (1971). p-Phenylenediamine is not a histamine releaser in vitro. C.R. 
Sot. Biol. 165(l), 208-10. 
180. PARMENTIER, R. (1949). Antimitotic action in mice of some phenols and aromatic amines. Compt. Rend. 
Sot. Biol. 143, 585-6. 
181. SARUTA, N., YAMAGUCHI, S., and NAKATOMI, Y. (1958). Sarcoma produced bysubdermal administra- 
tion of paraphenylenediamine. Kyushu J. Med. Sci. 9, 94-101. 
182. MATOLTSY, A.G. (1953). The action of PP-D on living cells. J. Invest. Dermatol. 21, 447. 
183. DEWEY, K.E. (1925). The action of paraphenylenediamine. Arch Intern. Med. 36, 724-34. 
184. HANZLIK, P.J. (1923). The pharmacology of some phenylenediamines. J. lndust. Hyg. 4, 386-409, 448, 
462. 
185. JOHNSTON, A.R. (1928). The toxic effects of amines. J. Infect. Dis. 42, 473-484. 
186. TAINTER, M.L., and HANZLIK, P.J. (1924). The mechanisms of edema production by paraphenylenedi- 
amine. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 24, 179-211. 
187. TAINTER, M.L., JAMES, M., and VANDEVENTER, W. (1929). Comparative edemic actions of ottho-, 
meta-, and para- phenylenediamines in different species. Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. 36, 152-62. 
188. VON OETTINGEN, W.F. (1941). The aromatic amino and nitro compounds, their toxicity and potential 
dangers. A review of the literature. Public Health Bulletin No. 271, pp. 39-44. US Public Health Service. 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
189. REHANI, M.M., JAIN, I.S., and SHARMA, S.K. (1981). Distribution kinetics of 3H-labeled p-phenylenedi- 
amine-a hair dye. Indian J. Med. Res. 74, 129-34. 
190. KIESE, M., RACHOR, M., and RAUSCHER, E. (1968). The absorption of some phenylenediamines through 
the skin of dogs. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 12, 495-507. 
191. MAIBACH, H.I., and WOLFRAM, L.J. (1981). Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes. J. sot. Cosmet. 
Chem. 32, 223-9. 
192. NAKAO, M., and TAKEDA, Y. (1979). Distribution, excretion, and metabolism ofp-phenylenediamine in 
rats. Yakugaku Zasshi 99, 1149-53. 
193. RANl, M.M., JAIN, I.S., JAIN, G.C., KAUL, R.L., and SHARMA, R.R. (1979). Aqueous chamber kinetics of 
the ‘H-labeled hair dye, Bull. Postgrad. Inst. Med. Educ. Res. Chandigarh 13(4), 21 1-5. 
194. BURNETT, C., LOEHR, R., and CORBETT, J. (1977). Dominant lethal mutagenicity study on hair dyes. J. 
Toxicol. Environ. Health 2(3), 657-62. 
195. CTFA. (June 1969). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l t-99). CtR safety data test summary response form, 
acute oral toxicity of hair dye containing PPDA in rats.* 
196. LLOYD, G.K., LIGGETT, M.P., KYNOCH, S.R., and DAVIES, R.E. (1977). Assessment ofthe acute toxicity 
and potential irritancy of hair dye constituents. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 15(6), 607-10. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCOSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
197. HODGE, H.C, and STERNER, J.H. (1949). Tabulation of toxicity classes. Am. Indust. Hyg. A. Quart. 10, 
93-6. 
198. CTFA. (June 1969). Submission of data by CTFA (2-1 l-100). CIR safety data test summary response form 
acute dermal toxicity and primary skin irritation of hair dye containing PPDA in rabbits.* 
199. BURNETT, C., LANMAN, B., GIOVACCHINI, R., WOLCOTT, G., and SCALA, R. (1975). Long-term toxic- 
ity studies on oxidation hair dyes. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13(3), 353-7. 
200. BURNETT, C., JACOBS, M.M., SEPPALA, A., and SHUBIK, P. (1980). Evaluation of the toxicity and carci- 
nogenicity of hair dyes. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 6, 247-57. 
201. GILES, A.L., JR., CHUNG, C.W., and KOMMINENI, C. (1976). Dermal carcinogenicity study by mouse- 
skin painting with 2,4toluenediamine alone or in representative hair dye formulations. J. Toxicol. Envi- 
ron. Health 1, 433-40. 
202. STENBACK, F.G., ROWLAND, J.C., and RUSSELL, L.A. (1977). Non-carcinogenicity of hair dyes: Lifetime 
percutaneous applications in mice and rabbits. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 15(6), 601-6. 
203. BURNETT, C., GOLDENTHAL, E.I., HARRIS, S.B., WAZETER, F.X., STRAUSBURG, J., KAPP, R., and 
VOELKER, R. (1976). Teratology and percutaneous studies on hair dyes. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 1, 
1027-40. 
204. CTFA. (February 1969). Submission of data by CTFA (2-1 l-61). CIR safety data test summary response 
form, dermal subacute studies of hair dye containing PPDA in rabbits.* 
205. INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (IRDC). (February 6, 1979). Sub- 
mission of data by CTFA (2-l l-38). Lifetime toxicitylcarcinogenesis study in rats.* 
206. CTFA. (September 16, 1971). Submission of data by CTFA (2-1 l-28). CIR safety data test summary re- 
sponse form, repeat patch test with hair dye formulation containing PPDA in rabbits.* 
207. DAVIES, R.E., HARPER, K.H., and KYNOCH, S.R. (1972). Inter-species variation in dermal reactivity. J. 
Sot. Cosmet. Chem. 23(7), 371-81. 
208. HERVE-BAZIN, B., GRADISKI, D., DUPRAT, P., MARIGNAC, B., FOUSSEREAU, J., CAVELIER, C., and 
BIEBER, P. (1977). Occupational eczema from N-isopropyl-N’-phenylparaphenylenediamine (IPPD) and 
N-dimethyl-1,3-butyl-N’-phenylparaphenylenediamine (DMPPD) in tyres. Contact Dermatitis 3, l-15. 
209. MORIKAWA, F., FUJII, S., TEJIMA, M., SUGIYAMA, H., and UZUKA, M. (1976). Safety evaluation of hair 
cosmetics. In: Toda, K., et al. (eds.). Biology and Disease of the Hair. Baltimore, MD: University Park 
Press, pp. 641-57. 
210. BRULOS, M.F., GUILLOT, J.P., MARTINI, M.C., and COTTE, J. (1977). The influence of perfumes on the 
sensitizing potential of cosmetic bases. I. A technique for evaluating sensitizing potential. J. Sot. Cosmet. 
Chem. 28, 357-65. 
211. CTFA. (1982). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-70). CIR safety data test summary response form, guinea 
pig skin sensitization with hair-coloring product containing PPDA.* 
212. GOODWIN, B.F.J., CREVEL, R.W.R., and JOHNSON, A.W. (1981). A comparison of three guinea-pig 
sensitization procedures for the detection of 19 reported human contact sensitizers. Contact Dermatitis 7, 
248-58. 
213. KLENIEWSKA, D., and MAIBACH, H. (1980). Allergenicity of aminobenzene compounds: Structure-func- 
tion relationships. Dermatosen Beruf Umwelt 28(l), 11-3. 
214. MAGNUSSON, B., and KLIGMAN, A.M. (1970). Allergic Contact Dermatitis in the Guinea Pig. Identifica- 
tions of Contact Allergens. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas. 
215. MAURER, T., THOMANN, P., WEIRICH, E.G., and HESS, R. (1979). Predictive evaluation in animals of 
the contact allergenic potential of medically important substances. II. Comparison of different methods of 
cutaneous sensitization with “weak” allergens. Contact Dermatitis 5(l), l-10. 
216. RAJKA, G., and BLOHM, SC. (1970). The allergenicity of paraphenylenediamine. II. Acta Derm. Vene- 
reol. 50(l), 51-4. 
217. STEVENS, M.A. (1967). Use of the albino guinea pig to detect the skin-sensitizing ability of chemicals, Br. 
J. Indust. Med. 24(3), 189-202. 
218. MILNER, J.E. (1971). In vitro lymphocyte responses in contact hypersensitivity. It. J. Invest. Dermatol. 56, 
349-52. 
219. MAGUIRE, H.C., JR. (1973). The bioassay of contact allergens in the guinea pig. J. kc. Cosmet. Chem. 
24(3), 151-62. 
228. KIND, P.D., BOCOBO, F.C., CURTIS, A.C., and BULALA, P. (1965). Cellular passive transfer of contact 
hypersensitivity to paraphenylenediamine and to 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene in guinea pigs. J. Invest. Der- 
matol. 44, 7-l 1. 
221. MACHER, E., and ATZPODIEN, I. (1968). Double sensitization of guinea pigs usingdinitrochlorobenzene 
and p-phenylenediamine and the passive transfer of both hypersensitivities. Arch. Klin. Exp. Dermatol. 
232(2), 195-204. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF pPHENYLENEDlAMlNE 
222. WAHLgERG, J.E. (1979). Transfer of paraphenylenediamine delayed-type hypersensitivity: a Comparative 
investigation in the guinea pig, using arteriovenous cross-transfusion and parabiosis. I. Invest. Dermatol. 
72, 52-4. 
223. CTFA. (June 1969). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-101). CIR safety data test summary response form, 
rabbit eye irritation study with hair dye containing PPDA.” 
224. CTFA. (September 20, 1971). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-27). ClR safety data test summary re- 
sponse form, rabbit eye irritation study with hair dye product containing PPDA.’ 
225. RE, T.A., LOEHR, R.F., RODWELL, D.E., D’ALEO, C.J., and BURNETT, C.M. (1981). The absenceoftera- 
togenic hazard potential of p-phenylenediamine in Sprague-Dawley rats. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 1, 421-5. 
226. HUNTINGDON RESEARCH CEidTER. (November 16, 1978). Submission of data by CTFA (2-T l-43). ln- 
vestigation of embryotoxic effects on mouse, p-phenylenediamine.* 
227. BURNETT, C., LOEHR, R., and CORBETT, J. (February 13-l 7, 1977). Dominant lethal mutagenicity study 
on hair dyes. 8th Annual Meeting Environ. Mutagen SOC. 
228. BIODYNAMICS. (September 7, 1977). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-35). Project No. 76-1667. A 
modified segment II teratology study of hair dyes in mice.* 
229. BIODYNAMICS. (1982). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-36). Project No. 76-1666. A modified segment 
II teratology study of hair dyes in rabbits.* 
230. IRDC. (November 2, 1977). Submission of data by CTFA (2-l l-37). Multigeneration reproduction study in 
rats.* 
231. BURNETT, C., LOEHR, R., and CORBETT, J. (1981). Heritable translocation study on two hair dye formu- 
lations. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 1, 325-8. 
232. CREBELLI, R., CONTI, L., CARERE, A., and ZITO, R. (1981). Mutagenicity of commercial p-phenylenedi- 
amine and of an oxidation mixture of p-phenylenediamine and resorcinol in Salmonella typhimurium 
TA98. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19(l), 79-84. 
233. AMES, B.N., MCCANN, J., and YAMASAKI, E. (1975). Methods for detecting carcinogens and mutagens 
with the Salmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test. Mutat. Res. 31, 347-64. 
234. AMES, B.N., KAMMEN, H.O., and YAMASAKI, E. (1975). Hair dyes are mutagenic: identification of a vari- 
ety of mutagenic ingredients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 2423-7. 
235. GATEHOUSE, D.G., and DELOW, G.F. (1979). The development of a “microtiter” fluctuation test for the 
detection of indirect mutagens and its use in the evaluation of mixed enzyme induction of the liver. Mu- 
tat. Res. 60, 239-52. 
236. NAGAO, M., YAHAGI, T., HONDA, M., SEINO, Y., KAWACHI, T., and SUGIMURA, T. (1977). Comuta- 
genie actions of norharman derivatives with 4-dimethylaminoazobenzene and related compounds. Can- 
cer Lett. 3, 339-46. 
237. DEGAWA, M., SHOJI, Y., MASUKO, K., and HASHIMOTO, Y. (1979). Mutagenicity of metabolites of car- 
cinogenic aminoazo dyes. Cancer Lett. B(l), 71-6. 
238. DUNKEL, V.C., and SIMMON, V.F. (1980). Mutagenic activity of chemicals previously tested for carcino- 
genicity in the National Cancer Institute bioassay program. IARC Sci. Publ. 27, 283-302. 
239. DYBING, E., and THORGEIRSSON, S.S. (1977). Metabolic activation of 2,4-diaminoanisole, a hair dye 
component. 1. Role of cytochrome P-450 metabolism in mutagenicity in vitro. Biochem. Pharmacol. 26, 
729-34. 
240. GARNER, R.C., and NUTMAN, C.A. (1977). Testing of some azo dyes and their reduction products for 
mutagenicity using Salmonella typhimurium TA1538. Mutat. Res. 44, 9-19. 
241. MORI, Y., NIWA, T., HORI, T., and TOYOSHI, K. (1980). Mutagenicity of 3’-methyl-N,N-dimethyl-4- 
amino azobenzene metabolites and related compounds. Carcinogenesis l(2), 121-8. 
242. SHAHIN, M.M., ANDRILLON, P., GOETZ, N., BORE, P., BUGAUT, A., and KALOPISSIS, G. (1979). Stud- 
ies on the mutagenicity of p-phenylenediamine in Saalmonella typhimurium: presence of PCBs in rat-liver 
microsomal fraction induced by Aroclor. Mutat. Res. 68, 327-36. 
243. VENITT, S., and SEARLE, C.E. (1976). Mutagenicity and possible carcinogenicity of hair colourants and 
constituents. In: fnternational Agency for Research on Cancer, /ARC Scientific Publications No. 13. Lyon, 
France: INSERM Symposia Series, Vol. 52, pp. 263-72. 
244. YOSHIKAWA, K., UCHINO, H., and KURATA, H. (1976). Studies on mutagenicity of hair dye. Eisei Shi- 
kensho Hokoku 94, 28-32. 
245. YOSHIKAWA, K., UCHINO, H., TATENO, N., and KURATA, H. (1977). Mutagenic activities of samples 
prepared with raw materials of hair dye. Eisei Shikensho Hokoku 95, 15-24. 
246. YOSHIKAWA, K., NOHMI, T., HARADA, R., ISHIDATE, M., JR., and INOKAWA, Y. (1979). Differential 
mutagenicities of triamino benzenes against Salmonella typhimurium TA98 in the presence of S-9 frac- 
tions from polychlorinated biphenyls, phenobarbital or 3-methylcholanthrene-pretreated rats, hamsters, 
and mice. J. Toxicol. Sci. 4(4), 317-26. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote264 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
247. BURNETT, C., FUCHS, C., CORBETT, J., and MENKART, J. (1982). The effect of dimethylsulfoxide on the 
mutagenicity of the hair dye p-phenylenediamine. Mutat. Res. 103, 1-4. 
248. NISHI, K., and NISHIOKA, H. (1982). Light induces mutagenicity of hair dyep-phenylenediamine. Mutat. 
Res. 104, 347-50. 
249. BAJAJ, M.H., and NOTANI, N.K. (1978). Mutagenicity of six Indian hair dyes tested in Sa/mone//a typhi- 
murium strains. Mutat. Res. 53(2), 149-50. 
250. HAVOVA, R., SOSKOVA, L., and HAVA, P. (1978). Mutagenic action of some hair dyes manufactured in 
Czechoslovakia. Cesk. Hyg. 23(q), 383-8. 
251. SHAH, M.J., and ANDREWS, A.W. (1979). Mutagenic evaluation of oxidation products ofp-phenylenedi- 
amine-a hair dye component. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 48, A49. 
252. BURNETT, CM., FUCHS, C.M., and CORBETT, J.F. (1979). Mutagenicity studies on urine concentrates 
from female users of dark hair color products. Drug Chem. Toxicol. 2, 283-93. 
253. NISHIOKA, H. (1976). Detection of carcinogenicity of color cosmetics in bacterial test systems. Mutat. 
Res. 38, 345. 
254. BLIJLEVEN, W.G.H. (1977). Mutagenicity of four hair dyes in Drosophila melanogaster. Mutat. Res. 48(2), 
181-5. 
255. BLIJLEVEN, W.G.H. (1981). Re-evaluation of the mutagenic effects of the hair dye p-phenylenediamine 
(BASE) in the sex-linked recessive lethal test in Drosophila melanogaster. Mutat. Res. 90, 137-41. 
256. HOSSACK, D.J.N., and RICHARDSON, J.C. (1977). Examination of the potential mutagenicity of hair dye 
constituents using the micronucleus test. Experientia 33(3), 377-8. 
257. WILD, D., ECKHARDT, E., GOCKE, E., and KING, M.T. (November 15-17, 1978). Comparative results of 
short-term in vitro and in vivo mutagenicity tests obtained with select environmental chemicals. Interna- 
tional Symposium on Short-Term Systems for Detecting Carcinogens. Dortmund. Abstracts, p. 14. 
258. SEILER, J.P. (1977). Inhibition of testicular DNA synthesis by chemical mutagens and carcinogens. Prelimi- 
nary results in the validation of a novel short-term test. Mutat. Res. 46, 305-10. 
259. TOPHAM, J.C. (1980). The detection of carcinogen-induced sperm head abnormalities in mice. Mutat. 
Res. 69(l), 149-55. 
260. TOPHAM, J.C. (1980). Do induced sperm-head abnormalities in mice specifically identify mammalian 
mutagens rather than carcinogens? Mutat. Res. 74, 379-87. 
261. WILLIAMS, G.M., LASPIA, M.F., and DUNKEL, V.C. (1982). Reliability of the hepatocyte primary cul- 
ture/DNA repair test in testing of coded carcinogens and noncarcinogens. Mutat. Res. 97, 359-70. 
262. NATIONAL TOXICOLOGY PROGRAM. (July 1982). NTP Technical Bulletin No. 8. 
263. TRAUL, K.A., TAKAYAMA, K., KACHEVSKY, V., HINK, R.J., and WOLFF, J.S. (1981). A rapid in vitro assay 
for carcinogenicity of chemical substances in mammalian cells utilizing an attachment-independence 
endpoint. 1. Appl. Toxicol. 1, 190-5. 
264. GRIESEMER, R.A., and CUETO, C. (1980). Toward a classification scheme for degrees of experimental evi- 
dence for the carcinogenicity of chemicals for animals. IARC Sci. Publ. 27, 259-81. 
265. KLIGMAN, A.M. (1966). The identification of contact allergens by human assay. Ill. The maximization 
test: a procedure for screening and rating contact sensitizers. J. Invest. Dermatol. 47, 393-409. 
266. MARZULLI, F.N., and MAIBACH, H.I. (1974). The use of graded concentrations in studying skin sensi- 
tizers: Experimental contact sensitization in man. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12, 219-27. 
267. EPSTEIN, W.L., and TAYLOR, M.K. (1979). Experimental sensitization of paraphenylenediamine and 
paratoluenediamine in man. Acta Dermatol. Venereol. [Suppl.] 59, 55-7. 
268. HILLTOP RESEARCH. (November 7, 1979). Submission of data by CTFA. (2-l l-40). Repeated insult patch 
test of seven test materials.* 
269. DERMA-TEST LABORATORIES (DTL). (September 22, 1982). Submission of data by CTFA. Repeated insult 
patch test, product: 1101-48 and 1101-52 mixed to equal parts.* 
270. DTL. (September 22, 1982). Submission of data by CTFA. Repeated insult patch test, product: 110149 
and 1101-52 mixed equal parts.* 
271. DTL. (September 22, 1982). Submission of data by CTFA. Repeated insult patch test, product: 1101-5~1 
and 1101-52 mixed equal parts.* 
272. DTL. (September 22, 1982). Submission of data by CTFA. Repeated insult patch test, product: 1101-51 
and 1101-52 mixed equal parts.* 
273. HORlO, T. (1976). Allergic and photoallergic dermatitis from diphenhydramine. Arch. Dermatol. 112, 
124-6. 
274. ANGELINL G., VENA, G.A., and MENEGHINI, C.L. (1980). Shoecontact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 6, 
279-83. 
275. CALAS, E., CASTELAIN, P.Y., and PIRIOU, A. (1978). Epidemiology of contact dermatitis in Marseilles. 
Ann. Dermatol. Venereol. 105, 345-7. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFINAL REPORT: SAFETY ASSESSMENT OFp-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 265 
276. CALNAN, C.D., BANDMANN, H.J., CRONIN, E., FREGERT, S., HJORTH, N., MAGNUSSON, B., MAL- 
TEN, K., MENEGHINI, C.L., PIRILA, V., and WILKINSON, D.S. (1970). Hand dermatitis in housewives. 
Br. J. Derm. 82, 543-8. 
277. CAMARASA, J.M.C. (1979). First epidemiological study of contact dermatitis in Spain- 1977. Acta Der- 
matol. Venereol. [Suppl.] 59, 33-7. 
278. FRECERT, S., HJORTH, N., MAGNUSSON, B., BANDMANN, H.J., CALNAN, C.D., CRONIN, E., MAL- 
TEN, K., MENEGHINI, CL., PIRILA, V., and WILKINSON, D.S. (1969). Epidemiology of contact dermati- 
tis. Trans. St. Johns Hosp. Dermatol. Sot. 55, 17-35. 
279. FUJIWARA, N., SASAKI, M., HIGASHI, N., NISHIOKA, K., HONMA, M., MIZUNO, N., OHNO, M., SA- 
KAI, M., SUGANO, H., HAYAKAWA, R., UEDA, H., KOBAYASHI, M., HOTTA, R., SHOJI, A., SUGAI, T., 
TAKAGI, J., KOZUKA, T., HASHIMOTO, S., and FUJIMOTO, K. (1976). Standardization of patch tests in 
Japan. Contact Dermatitis 2, 205-l 1. 
280. KAABER, S., THULIN, H., and NIELSON, E. (1979). Skin sensitivity to denture base materials in the burn- 
ing mouth syndrome. Contact Dermatitis 5, 90-6. 
281. KOUSA, M., and SOINI, M. (1980). Contact allergy to a stocking dye. Contact Dermatitis 6, 472-6. 
282. LACHAPELLE, J.M., and TENNSTEDT, D. (1979). Epidemiological survey of occupational contact dermati- 
tis of the hands in Belgium. Contact Dermatitis 5, 244-8. 
283. MAGNUSSON, B., BLOHM, S.V., FREGERT, S., HJORTH, N., HOVDING, G., PIRILA, V., and SKOG, E. 
(1968). Routine patch testing. IV. Acta Dermatol. Venereal. 48, 110-4. 
284. MITCHELL, J.C. (1977). Multiple concomitant positive patch test reactions. Contact Dermatitis 3, 315-20. 
285. MORIEARTY, P.L., PEREIRA, C., and GUIMARAES, N.A. (1978). Contact dermatitis in Salvador, Brazil. 
Contact Dermatitis 4, 185-9. 
286. NORTH AMERICAN CONTACT DERMATITIS GROUP (NACDG). (December 4,198O). Standard screen- 
ing tray, 1979 vs. 1980 summary. 
287. OLEFFE, J., NOPP-OGER, M.J., and ACHTEN, G. (1972). European battery of skin tests: results of 300 ob- 
servations. Berufs-Dermatosen 20, 209-l 7. 
288. RUDNER, E.J., CLENDENNING, W.E., EPSTEIN, E., FISHER, A.A., JILLSON, O.F., JORDAN, W.P., 
KANOF, N., LARSEN, W., MAIBACH, H., MITCHELL, J.C., O’QUINN, S.E., SCHORR, W.F., and SULZ- 
BERGER, M.B. (1973). Epidemiology of contact dermatitis in North America: 1972. Arch. Dermatol. 108, 
537-40. 
289. RUDNER, E.J., CLENDENNING, W.E., EPSTEIN, E., FISHER, A.A., JILLSON, O.F., JORDAN, W.P., 
KANOF, N., LARSEN, W., MAIBACH, H., MITCHELL, J.C., O’QUINN, SE., SCHORR, W.F., and SULZ- 
BERGER, M.B. (1975). The frequency of contact sensitivity in North America 1972-1974. Contact 
Dermatitis 1, 277-80. 
290. LYNDE, C.W., and MITCHELL, J.C. (1982). Patch test results in 66 hairdressers 1973-81. Contact Dermati- 
tis 8, 302-7. 
291. NETHERCOTT, J.R. (1982). Results of routine patch testing of 200 patients in Toronto, Canada. Contact 
Dermatitis 8, 389-95. 
292. NACDG. Prospective study of cosmetic reactions. (1982). J, Am. Acad. Dermatol. 6, 909-l 7. 
293. KLEIN, A.D. Ill, and RODMAN, O.G. (1981). Allergic contact dermatitis to paraphenylenediamine in hair 
dye: Case report. Milit. Med. 146, 46-7. 
294. FOUSSEREAU, J., REUTER, G., and PETITJEAN, J. (1980). Is hair dyed with PPD-like dyes allergenic? Con- 
tact Dermatitis 6, 143. 
295. CRONIN, E. (1973). Dermatitis from wife’s dyed hair. Contact Dermatitis Newsletter 13, 363. 
296. MITCHELL, J.C. (1972). Allergic dermatitis from paraphenylenediamine presenting as nummular eczema. 
Contact Dermatitis Newsletter 11, 270. 
297. WARIN, A.P. (1976). Contact dermatitis to partner’s hair dye. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 1, 283-4. 
298. FISHER, A.A. (1975). Is hair dyed with para-phenylenediamine allergic? Contact Dermatitis 1, 266. 
299. STORRS, F.J., TAYLOR, J., JORDAN, W.P., and MAIBACH, H.I. (1979). Paraphenylenediamine dihydro- 
chloride. Contact Dermatitis 5, 126. 
300. BAER, R.L. (1976). Allergic contact sensitivity. Personal experiences and observations. Cutis 17, 861-8. 
301. FISHER, A.A. (1976). Sunscreen dermatitis due to glyceryl PABA: significance of cross-reactions to this 
PABA ester. Curr. Top. Radiat. Res. 18, 495-6, 500. 
302. PRICE, S.M., and SHUPACK, J.L. (1978). Allergic contact dermatitis due to N,N-dimethyl-para-phenylene- 
diamine in bacteriology technicians. Cutis 21, 330-2. 
303. RUDZKI, E. (1977). Cross reactions in occupational contact dermatitis. I. Aromatic amines. Berufsderma- 
tosen 25, 236-45. 
304. CTFA. (July 11, 1983). Submission of data by CTFA. Hair dye sensitization: test room cumulative reactions 
of Clairol, Inc. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote266 COSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 
305. MORAN, C.T. (1934). Bilateral necrosis of the cornea following the use of hair dye on the eyebrows and 
lashes. JAMA 102, 286-7. 
306. ACGIH. (1981). TLVs: Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Substances in the 
Workroom Environment with intended Changes for 1981. Cincinnati, OH: ACGIH. 
307. ANTHONY, H.M., and THOMAS, G.M. (1970). Tumors of the urinary bladder: An analysis of the occupa- 
tions of 1,030 patients in Leeds, England. j. Natl. Cancer Inst. 45, 879-98. 
308. COLE, P., HOOVER, R., and FRIEDALL, C.H. (1972). Occupation and cancer of the lower urinary tract. 
Cancer 29, 1250-60. 
309. DUNHAM, L.J., RABSON, A.S., STEWART, H.L., FRANK, A.S., and YOUNG, J.L. (1968). Rate, interview, 
and pathology study of cancer of the urinary bladder in New Orleans, Louisiana. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 41, 
683-709. 
310. WYNDER, E.L., ONDERDONK, J., and MANTEL, N. (1963). An epidemiological investigation of cancer of 
the bladder. Cancer 16, 1388-407. 
311. GARFINKEL, J., SELVIN, S., and BROWN, S.M. (1977). Possible increased risk of lung cancer among 
beauticians. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 58, 141-3. 
312. MENCK, H.R., PIKE, M.C., HENDERSON, B.E., and JING, J.S. (1977). Lung cancer riskamong beauticians 
and other female workers. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 59, 1423-5. 
313. JAIN, M., MORGAN, R.W., and ELINSON, L. (1977). Hair dyes and bladder cancer. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 
117,1131-3. 
314. HENNEKENS, C.H., SPEIZER, F.E., ROSNER, B., BAIN, C.J., BELANGER, C., and PETO, R. (1979). Useof 
permanent hair dyes and cancer among registered nurses. Lancet 1, 1390-3. 
315. KINLEN, L.J., HARRIS, R., GARROD, A., and RODRIGUEZ, K. (1977). Use of hair dyes by patients with 
breast cancer: a case-control study. Br. Med. J. 2, 366-8. 
316. NASCA, P.C., LAWRENCE, C.E., GREENWALD, P., CHOROST, S., ARBUCKLE, J.T., and PAULSON, A. 
(1979). Relationship of hair dye use, benign breast disease, and breast cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 64, 
23-8. 
317. SHAFER, N., and SHAFER, R.W. (1976). Potential of carcinogenic effects of hair dyes. NY State J. Med. 76, 
394-6. 
318. SHORE, R.E., PASTERNACK, B.S., THIESSEN, E.U., SADOW, M., FORBES, R., and ALBERT, R.E. (1979). A 
case-control study of hair dye use and breast cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 62, 277-83. 
319. WYNDER, E.L., and GOODMAN, M. (1983). Epidemiology of breast cancer and hair dyes. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 71. 
320. CLEMMESEN, J. (1981). Epidemiological studies into the possible carcinogenicity of hair dyes. Mutat. Res. 
87,65-79. 
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote50 SAFETY ASSESSMENTS—2004/2005
Ebner, F., A. Heller, F. Rippke, and I. Tausch. 2002. Topical use dexpanthenol
in skin disorders. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 3:427–433.
Egger, S. F., V . Huber-Spitzy, E. Alzner, et al. 1999. Corneal wound healing after
superﬁcial foreign body injury: Vitamin A and dexpanthenol versus a calf
blood extract. A randomized double-blind study. Ophthalmologica 213:246.
Elder, R. L. 1987. Final Report on the Safety Assessment of Panthenol and
Pantothenic Acid. J. Am. Coll. T oxicol. 6:139–162.
Gehring, W., and M. Gloor. 2000. Effect of topically applied dexpanthenol on
epidermal barrier function and stratum corneum hydration. Results of a humanin vivo study.” Arzneimittelforschung. 50:659–663.
Gottschalck, T. E., and G. N. McEwen, Jr., eds. 2004. International cosmetic
ingredient dictionary and handbook. 10th ed., vol. 2. Washington, DC: CTFA.
Hemmer, W., R. Bracun, S. Wolf-Abdolvahab, M. Focke, M. Gotz, and R.
Jarisch. 1997. Maintenance of hand eczema by oral pantothenic acid in a
patient sensitized to dexpanthenol. Contact Dermatitis 37:51.
Jeanmougin, M., J. R. Manciet, J. P. Moulin, P. Blanc, A. Pons, and J. Ci-
vatte. 1988. Contact allergy to dexpanthenol in sunscreens. Contact Dermati-
tis18:240.
Klocker, N., T. Verse, and P. Rudolph. 2003. The protective effect of dexpan-
thenol in nasal sprays. First results of cytotoxic and ciliary-toxic studies invitro. Larynogorhinootologie 82:177–182.
Lokkevik, E., E. Skovlund, J. B. Reitan, E. Hannisdal, and G. Tanum. 1996.
Skin treatment with bepanthen cream versus no cream during radiotherapy—
a randomized controlled trial. Acta Oncol. 35:1021–1026.
Pugliese, P. T., J. C. Farina, and Y . Chautems. 1995. Efﬁcacy of dexpanthenol
in wound healing: A double-blind assessment of excised wound tissue byultrasound and histologic examination. Nouv. Dermatol. 14:130.
Romitti, P., and N. Romitti. 2002. Dexpanthenol cream signiﬁcantly improves
mucocutaneous side effects associated with isotretinoin therapy. Pediatr . Der-
matol. 19:368.
Schalock, P. C., F. J. Storrs, and L. Morrison. 2000. Contact urticaria from
panthenol in hair conditioner. Contact Dermatitis 43:223.
Schepler, H., J. Kessler, and B. Hartmann. 2002. Abuse of silver-nitrate solution
for planing periorbital folds. Burns 28:90–91.
Schmid-Grendelmeier, P., M. Wyss, and P. Elsner. 1995. Contact allergy to
dexpanthenol. A report of 7 cases and review of the literature. Dermatosen in
Beruf und Umwelt 43:175–178.
Schulze-Dirks, A., and P.J. Frosch. 1988. Contact allergy to dexpanthenol. Hau-
tarzt 39:375–377.
Slyshenkov, V . S., M. Rakowska, A. G. Moiseenok, et al. 1995. Pantothenic acid
and its derivatives protect tumor cells against lipid peroxidation. Free Radical
Biol. Med. 19:767–772.
Slyshenkov, V . S., M. Rakowska, and L. Wojtczak. 1996. Protective effect of
pantothenic acid and related compounds against permeabilitzation of Ehrlichascites tumor cells by digitonin. Acta Biochim. Polon. 43:407–410.
Slyshenkov, V . S., S. N. Omelyanchik, A. G. Moiseenok, R. V . Trebukhina, and
L. Wojtczak. 1998. Pantothenol protects rats against some deleterious effects
of gamma radiation. Free Radical Biol. Med. 24:894–899.
Stables, G. I., and S. M. Wilkinson. 1998. Allergic contact dermatitis due to
panthenol. Contact Dermatitis 38:236–237.
Weiser, H., and G. Erlemann. 1988. Acceleration of superﬁcial wound healing
by panthenol zinc oxide. Cosmet. T oiletries 103:79–81, 84.
p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
A safety assessment on p-Phenylenediamine was published
in 1985 in which the CIR Expert Panel acknowledged that
p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer and some persons
may be sensitized under intended conditions of use. For those
persons not sensitized, the Expert Panel concluded that p-
Phenylenediamine is safe as a hair dye ingredient at the currentconcentrations of use (Elder 1985). Studies available since thatsafety assessment was completed, along with updated informa-tion regarding uses and use concentrations, were considered bythe CIR Expert Panel. The Panel determined to not reopen thesafety assessment.
Although the safety of p-Phenylenediamine as a hair dye in-
gredient was reafﬁrmed, the Panel did agree with FDA that otheruses of this dye are unapproved. The Panel expressed particu-lar concern over the practice of combining p-Phenylenediamine
with henna (so-called dark henna) for use in temporary tattoos—
p-Phenylenediamine is a known sensitizer, highly inappropriate
for such use as evidenced by reports of severe adverse skin re-actions to dark henna temporary tattoos. The Panel urged usersto report adverse reactions to the FDA (for more information,see the FDA website at http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/∼dms/cos-tatt.html). The Panel also will work with the Consumer Federa-tion of America to help the public understand the need to avoidusing such unapproved and potentially dangerous products.
The CIR Expert Panel also reviewed hair dye epidemiology
data. In 1993, an International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) working group evaluated 78 epidemiology literature ci-tations and concluded that “personal use of hair colourants can-
not be evaluated as to its carcinogenicity” and that occupation asa hairdresser or barber entails exposures that are probably car-cinogenic” (IARC 1993). The IARC report did not distinguishbetween personal use of oxidative/permanent versus direct hairdyes, or distinguish among the multiple chemical exposures inaddition to hair dyes to which a hairdresser or barber might beexposed.
In 2003, an updated review of the available epidemiology lit-
erature was prepared (Helzlsouer et al. 2003). This review con-sidered 83 literature citations available since the IARC review.The authors found insufﬁcient evidence to support a causal as-sociation between personal hair dye use and a variety of tumorsand cancers.
In considering this information, the CIR Expert Panel agreed
that the available epidemiology studies are insufﬁcient to con-clude there is a causal relationship between hair dye use and
cancer and other end points described in the Helzlsouer et al.(2003) review.
The Panel also stated that use of direct hair dyes, although
not the focus in all investigations, appear to have little evidence
of an association with adverse events as reported in epidemi-ology studies. However, direct hair dyes are a diverse group ofchemicals and the determination of safety may hinge on othersafety test data.
p-Phenylenediamine was used in 500 hair-coloring prod-
ucts in 1981, at concentrations of ≤0.1% to 5%. In 2002, p-
Phenylenediamine was used in 1178 hair-coloring products andin 2 nail care products. Use concentration data provided in 2004indicated use at concentrations of ≤0014% to ≤4% in hair col-
oring products. The 2004 use concentration data were providedby CTFA (CTFA 2004).
Available use and concentration information is shown in
Table 16. The most recent information now constitutes thepresent practices of use.
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCOSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 51
TABLE 16
Historical and current cosmetic product uses and concentrations for p-Phenylenediamine
Product category1981 uses
(Elder 1985)2002 uses
(FDA 2002)1981 concentrations
(Elder 1985) %2004 concentrations
(CTFA 2005) %
Hair coloring
Dyes and colors 493 1167 ≤0.1–5 ≤4
Tints 7 9 ≤0.1—
Rinses — — — ≤0.0014
Color sprays — 1 — —
Lighteners with color — 1 — —
Nail care
Basecoats and undercoats — 2 — —
Total uses/ranges for p-Phenylenediamine 500 1180 ≤0.1–5 ≤0.0014–≤4
REFERENCES
Abdulla, K. A., and N. M. Davidson. 1996. A woman who collapsed after
painting her soles. Lancet 348:658.
Adams, R. M., and H. I. Maibach. 1985. A ﬁve-year study of cosmetic reactions.
J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 13:1062–1069.
Ahn, H. J., and W. S. Lee. 2002. An ultrastructural study of hair ﬁber damage
and restoration following treatment with permanent hair dye. Int. J. Dermatol.
41:88–92.
Armstrong, D. K., A. B. Jones, H. R. Smith, J. S. Ross, I. R. White, R. J. Rycroft,
and J. P. McFadden. 1999. Occupational sensitization to p-phenylenediamine:
A 17-year review. Contact Dermatitis 41:348–349.
Ashar, A. 2003. Acute angioedema in paraphenylenediamine poisoning. J. Pak.
Med. Assoc. 53:120–122.
Ashraf, W., S. Dawling, and L. J. Farrow. 1994. Systematic paraphenylenedi-
amine (PPD) poisoning: A case report and review. Hum. Exp. T oxicol. 13:167–
170.
Averbukh, Z., D. Modai, and Y . Leonov. 1989. Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal
failure induced by paraphenylenediamine. Hum. T oxicol. 8:345–348.
Bajaj, A. K., S. C. Gupta, A. K. Chatterjee, K. G. Singh, S. Basu, and A. Kant.
1996. Hair dye depigmentation. Contact Dermatitis 35:56–57.
Bajaj, A. K., A. Misra, K. Misra, and S. Rastogi. 2000. The azo dye solvent
yellow 3 produces depigmentation. Contact Dermatitis 42:237–238.
Bajaj, A. K., R. K. Pandey, K. Misra, A. K. Chatterji, A. Tiwari, and S. Basu.
1998. Contact depigmentation caused by an azo dye in alta. Contact Dermati-
tis38:189–193.
Balato, N., G. Lembo, C. Patruno, and F. Ayala. 1990. Prevalence of textile dye
contact sensitization. Contact Dermatitis 23:111–112.
Batiste-Aletorn, M., N. Xamena, A. Creus, and R. Marcos. 1995. Genotoxicity
testing of ﬁve compounds in three Drosophila short-term somatic assays.
Mutat. Res. 34:161–167.
Berne, B., A. Bostrom, A. F. Grahnen, and M. Tammela. 1996. Adverse effects
of cosmetics and toiletries reported to the Swedish Medical Products Agency,
1989–1994. Contact Dermatitis 34:359–362.
Bork, K. 1993. Allergic contact dermatitis on a violinist’s neck from para-
phenylenediamine in a chin rest stain. Contact Dermatitis 28:250–251.
Bracher, M., C. Faller, W. Grotsch, R. Marshall, and J. Spengler. 1990. Studies
on the potential mutagenicity of p-phenylenediamine in oxidative hair dye
mixtures. Mutat. Res. 241:313–323.
Brancaccio, R., and D.E. Cohen. 1995. Contact leukoderma secondary to para-
phenylenediamine. Contact Dermatitis 32:313.
Brancaccio, R. R., L. H. Brown, Y . T. Chang, J. P. Fogelman, E. A.
Mafong, and D. E. Cohen. 2002. Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of para-
phenylenediamine in a temporary black henna tattoo. Am. J. Contact Dermat
13:15–18.Brasch, J., T. Henseler, and W. Aberer. 1994. Reproducibility of patch tests. A
multicenter study of synchronous left-versus right-sided patch tests by theGerman contact Dermatitis Research Group. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 31:584–
591.
Broeckx, W., A. Blondeel, A. Dooms-Goossens, and G. Achten. 1987. Cosmetic
intolerance. Contact Dermatitis 16:189–194.
Bronaugh, R. L., and E. R. Congdon. 1984. Percutaneous absorption of hair dyes:
Correlation with partition coefﬁcients. J. Invest. Dermatol. 83:124–127.
Bronaugh, R. L., C. D. Roberts, and J. L. McCoy. 1994. Dose-response relation-
ship in skin sensitization. F ood Chem. T oxicol. 32:113–117.
Brown, J. H., M. G. McGeown, B. Conway, and C. M. Hill. 1987. Chronic renal
failure associated with topical application of paraphenylenediamine. Br . Med.
J. (Clin. Res. Ed.) 294:155.
Bruckner-Tuderman, L., A. Konig, and U. W. Schnyder. 1992. Patch test results
of the dermatology clinic Zurich in 1989: Personal computer-aided statisticale
valuation. Dermatology 184:29–33.
Burnett, C. M., and E. I. Goldenthal. 1988. Multigeneration reproduction and
carcinogenicity studies in Sprague-Dawley rats exposed topically to oxida-
tive hair-colouring formulations containing p-phenylenediamine and other
aromatic amines. F ood Chem. T oxicol. 26:467–474.
Calzavara-Pinton, P., R. Capezzera, C. Zane, A. Brezzi, G. Pasolini, A. Ubiali,
and F. Tacchetti. 2002. Lymphomatoid allergic contact dermatitis from para-
phenylenediaimine. Contact Dermatitis 47:173–174.
Chung, W. H., Y . C. Chang, L. J. Yang, S. I. Hung, W. R. Wong, J. Y . Lin, and
H. L. Chan. 2002. Clinicopathologic features of skin reactions to temporarytattoos and analysis of possible causes. Arch Dermatol. 138:88–92.
Chung, K. T., C. A. Murdock, S. E. Stevens Jr., Y . S. Li, C. I. Wei, T. S. Huang, and
M. W. Chou. 1995. Mutagenicity and toxicity studies of p-phenylenediamine
and its derivatives. T oxicol. Lett. 81:23–32.
Chung, K. T., C. A. Murdock, Y . Zhou, et al. 1996. Effects of the nitro-group on
the mutagenicity and toxicity of some benzamines. Environ. Mol. Mutagen.
27:67–74.
Chung, W. H., C. M. Wang, and H. S. Hong. 2001. Allergic contact dermatitis
to temporary tattoos with positive para-phenylenediamine reactions: Report
of four cases. Int. J. Dermatol. 40:754–756.
Correa, A., et al. 1998. Final Report to Clairol, Inc.: Hair Dye Use Question-
naires: Development and Reliability Assessment. Unpublished data submittedby Clairol, Inc.
17
Correia, S., and F. M. Brandao. 1986. Contact dermatitis of the feet. Derm.
Beruf. Umwelt. 34:102–106.
17Available for review: Director, Cosmetic Ingredient Review, 1101
17th Street, NW, Suite 412, Washington, DC 20036-4702, USA.
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote52 SAFETY ASSESSMENTS—2004/2005
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (CTFA). 2004. Use concentra-
tion data on p-phenylenediamine from industry survey. Unpublished data
submitted by CTFA, February 6, 2004 (1 page).17
Cronin, E. 1985. Clinical patterns of hand eczema in women. Contact Dermatitis
13:153–161.
De la Cuadra Oyanguren, J., A. Marquina Vila, A. Martorell Aragones, J. Sanz
Ortega, and A. Aliaga Boniche. 1989. Contact allergic dermatitis in childhood:
1972–1987. Ann. Esp. Pediatr . 30:363–366.
Devos, S. A., and P. G. Van Der Valk. 2001. The risk of active sensitization to
PPD. Contact Dermatitis 44:273–275.
Dickel, H., O. Kuss, A. Schmidt, and T.L. Diepgen. 2002. Occupational rele-
vance of positive standard patch-test results in employed persons with an ini-tial report of an occupational skin disease. Int. Arch Occup. Environ. Health
75:423–434.
Dickel, H., J. S. Taylor, P. Evey, and H. F. Merk. 2000. Delayed readings of a
standard screening patch test tray: Frequency of lost, found, and persistent
reactions. Am. J. Contact Dermatitis 11:213–217.
Dickel, H., J. S. Taylor, P. Evey, and H. F. Merk. 2001. Comparison of patch
test results with a standard series among white and black racial groups. Am.
J. Contact Dermatitis 12:77–82.
Dossou, K. G., C. Sicard, G. Kalopissis, D. Reymond, and H. Schaefer. 1985.
Method for assessment of experimental allergy in guinea-pigs adapted tocosmetic ingredients. Contact Dermatitis 13:226–234.
Edwards, E. K. Jr., and E. K. Edwards. 1984. Contact urticaria and al-
lergic contact dermatitis caused by paraphenylenediamine. Cutis 34:87–
88.
E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Company. 1990. Acute oral neurotoxicity studies
of para, meta, and ortho-phenylenediamine in rats with cover letter dated9/17/90. OTS 40-9036454.
E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Company.1992. Subchronic oral neurotoxicity study
of ortho-, meta-, and para-phenylenediamine in rats with attachments and
cover letter dated 6/30/92. OTS 40-9236508.
Elder, R. L. 1985. Final report on the safety assessment of p-phenylenediamine.
J. Am. Coll. T oxicol. 4:203–266.
Emmons, W. W., and J. G. Jr. Marks. 1985. Immediate and delayed reactions to
cosmetic ingredients. Contact Dermatitis 13:258–265.
Estlander, T. 1988. Allergic dermatoses and respiratory diseases from reactive
dyes. Contact Dermatitis 18:290–297.
European Economic Community. 1999. EEC Cosmetics Directive 76/768/EEC,
as amended through the 26th Adapting Commission Directive 2002/34/EC,
Annexes I–VII. Brussels: EEC.
Fan, W. X., and B. Zhao. 1990. Study on Chinese common allergens of contact
dermatitis. Derm. Beruf. Umwelt 38:158–161.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 2002. Frequency of use of cosmetic
ingredients. FDA database. Washington, DC: FDA.
Fowler, J. F., Jr. 1987. Occupational dermatitis from stamp pad ink. Contact
Dermatitis 16:38.
Frosch, P. J., D. Burrows, and J. G. Camarasa, et al. 1993. Allergic reactions to
a hairdressers’ series: Results from 9 European centres. Contact Dermatitis
28:180–183.
Fuchs, T., and R. Wahl. 1992. Immediate reactions to rubber products. Allergy
Proc. 13:61–66.
Fukunaga, T., R. Kawagoe, H. Hozumi, and T. Kanzaki. 1996. Contact
anaphylaxis due to para-phenylenediamine. Contact Dermatitis 35:185–
186.
Gagliardi, L., M. Ambroso, J. Mavro, F. Furno, and G. Discalzi. 1992. Exposure
to p-phenylenediamine in hairdressing parlours. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 14:19–
31.
Gago-Dominguez, M., J. E. Castelao, J. M. Yuan, M. C., Yu, and R. K. Ross.
2001. Use of permanent hair dyes and bladder-cancer risk. Int. J. Cancer .
91:575–579.
Gago-Dominguez, M., D. A. Bell, M. A. Watson, et al. 2003. Permanent hair
dyes and bladder cancer: Risk modiﬁcation by cytochrome P4501A2 and
N-acetyltransferases 1 and 2. Carcinogenesis. 24:483–489.Gallo, R., G. Ghigliotti, E. Cozzani, and S. Balestrero. 1999. Contact dermatitis
from para-phenylenediamine used as a skin paint: A further case. Contact
Dermatitis 40:57.
Gentile, J. M., G. J. Gentile, and M. J. Plewa. 1987. Mutagenicity of selected
aniline derivatives to Salmonella following plant activation and mammalian
hepatic
activation. Mutat. Res. 188:185–196.
Goetz, N., P. Lasserre, P. Bore, and G. Kalopissis. 1988. Percutaneous absorption
ofp-phenylenediamine during an actual hair dyeing procedure. Int. J. Cosmet.
Sci.10:63–74.
Goh, C. L. 1992. Comparative study of TRUE test and Finn chamber patch test
techniques in Singapore. Contact Dermatitis 27:84–89.
Goh, C. L., S. F. Kwok, and V . S. Rajan. 1984. Cross sensitivity in colour
developers. Contact Dermatitis 10:280–285.
Goldberg, B. J., F. F. Herman, and I. Hirata. 1987. Systemic anaphylaxis due
to an oxidation product of p-phenylenediamine in a hair dye. Ann. Allergy.
58:205–208.
Gonzalo, M. A., F. Revenga, F. Caravaca, and J. L. Pizarro. 1997. Epidemiologic
study of contact dermatitis in hemodialysis patients. J. Invest. Allergol. Clin.
Immunol. 7:20–23.
Goossens, A., M. H. Beck, E. Haneke, J. P. McFadden, S. Nolting, G. Durupt,
and G. Ries. 1999. Adverse cutaneous reactions to cosmetic allergens. Contact
Dermatitis 40:112–113.
Guerra, L., A. Tosti, and F. Bardazzi, et al. 1992b. Contact dermati-
tis in hairdressers: The Italian experience. Contact Dermatitis 26:101–
107.
Guillot, J. P., and J. F. Gonnet. 1985. The epicutaneous maximization test. Curr .
Probl. Dermatol. 14:220–247.
Gupta, V ., V . Misra, R. Shanker, and P.N. Viswanathan. 1991. Effect of p-
phenylenediamine on the activity of glutathione- S-transferase in guinea pig
skin. J. T oxicol. Cutaneous Ocul. T oxicol. 10:187–194.
Hagiwara, A., S. Tamano, M. A. Shibata, M. Arai, and H. Tsuda. 1990. Lack of
modifying effects of p-phenylenediamine on induction of gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase-positive foci in a medium-term bioassay system using F344rats. T oxicol. Lett. 52:261–268.
Helzlsouer, K., D. Rollison, and S. Pinney. 2003. Association between hair
dye use and health outcomes: Review of the literature published since 1992.Unpublished data submitted by Clairol, Inc. 107 pages.
17
Hsu, T. S., M. D. Davis, R. el-Azhary, J. F. Corbett, and L. E. Gibson. 2001.
Beard dermatitis due to para-phenylenediamine use in Arabic men. J. Am.
Acad. Dermatol. 44:867–869.
Imaida, K., Y . Ishihara, O. Nishio, K. Nakanishi, and N. Ito. 1983. Carcino-
genicity and toxicity tests on p-phenylenediamine in F344 rats. T oxicol. Lett.
16:259–269.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 1978. Some aromatic
amines and related nitro compounds-hair dyes, coloring agents, and miscel-
laneous industrial chemicals. IARC Monographs on the Carcinogenic Risks
to Humans, Lyon: IARC. V ol. 16, 125–142.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 1987. Overall Evaluations
of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs V olumes 1 to 42. IARC
Monographs on the Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, V ol 16, supplement 7, 70–
142 Lyon: IARC.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 1993. Occupational expo-
sures of hairdressers and barbers and personal use of hair colourants; some hairdyes, cosmetic colourants, industrial dyestuffs and aromatic amines. IARC
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, V ol 57,
43–118, Lyon, France: IARC.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 2004. Personal communi-
cation to determine basis for 1987 IARC conclusion on p-Phenylenediamine.
Electronic mail dated January 30, 2004.
17
Ioannou, Y . M., and H. B. Matthews. 1985. p-Phenylenediamine dihydrochlo-
ride: Comparative disposition in male and female rats and mice. J. T oxicol.
Environ. Health 16:299–313.
Jappe, U., B. M. Hausen, and D. Petzoldt. 2001. Erythema-multifore-like erup-
tion and depigmentation following allergic contact dermatitis from a paint-on
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCOSMETIC INGREDIENT REVIEW 53
henna tattoo, due to para-phenylenediamine contact hypersensitivity. Contact
Dermatitis 45:249–250.
Kalish, R. S., and J. A. Wood. 1995. Sensitization of mice to paraphenylene-
diamine and structurally-related compounds adjuvant effects of vitamin A
supplementation. Contact Dermatitis 33:407–413.
Katsarou, A., M. Armenaka, I. Ale, V . Koufou, and D. Kalogeromitros. 1999.
Frequency of immediate reactions to the European standard series. Contact
Dermatitis 41:276–279.
Katsarou, A., B. Koufou, K. Takou, D. Kalogeromitros, G. Papanayiotou, and
A. Vareltzidis. 1995. Patch test results in hairdressers with contact dermatitisin Greece. Contact Dermatitis 33:347–348.
Kawakubo, Y ., H. F. Merk, T. Al Masaoudi, S. Sieben, and B. Blomeke. 2000.
N-acetylation of paraphenylenediamine in human skin and keratinocytes. J.
Pharmacol. Exp. Ther . 292:150–155.
Keystone Aniline Corporation. 1999. T echnical Guide and F ormulary. Chicago:
Keystone Aniline Corporation.
Kim, H. O., R. C. Wester, J. A. McMaster, D. A. Bucks, and H. I. Maibach. 1987.
Skin absorption from patch test systems. Contact Dermatitis 17:178–180.
Kokelj, F., and A. Cantarutti. 1986. Contact dermatitis in leg ulcers. Contact
Dermatitis 15:47–49.
Krasteva, M., A. Cristaudo, B. Hall, et al. 2002. Contact sensitivity to hair
dyes can be detected by the consumer open test. Eur . J. Dermatol. 12:322–
326.
Kulkarni, P. D., J. B. Herron, W. B. Moores, and H. B. Hahn. 2001. What
is your diagnosis? Allergic contact dermatitis to paraphenylenediamine in a
temporary henna tattoo. Cutis 68:187, 229–230.
Kvelland, I. 1984. An investigation of the mutagenic activity of four hair dyes
in bacteriophage T4D. Hereditas. 100:295–298.
L¨auchli, S., S. Lautenschlager, and S. Lauchi. 2001. Contact dermatitis af-
ter temporary henna tattoos—An increasing phenomenon. Swiss Med. Wkly.
131:199–202.
Le Coz, C. J., C. Lefebvre, F. Keller, and E. Grosshans. 2000. Allergic contact
dermatitis caused by skin painting (pseudotattooing) with black henna, amixture of henna and p-phenylenediamine and its derivatives. Arch. Dermatol.
136:1515–1517.
Lee, H., L.-Y . Perng, S.-J. Shiow, M.-Y . Chou, M.-C. Chou, and J.-Y . Lin. 1986.
Induction of sister chromatid exchange in cultured Chinese hamster cells
by short-term treatment with hair dye components. J. Chin. Biochem. Soc.
15:34–38.
Leino, T., L. Tammilehto, M. Hytonen, E. Sala, H. Paakkulainen, and L. Kanerva.
1998. Occupational skin and respiratory diseases among hairdressers. Scan.
J. W ork Environ. Health 24:398–406.
Leino, T., T. Estlander, and L. Kanerva. 1998a. Occupational allergic dermatoses
in hairdressers. Contact Dermatitis 38:166–167.
LeVine, M. J. 1984. Idiopathic photodermatitis with a positive paraphenylene-
diamine photopatch test. Arch. Dermatol. 120:1488–1490.
Li, L. F., and J. Wang. 2002. Contact hypersensitivity in hand dermatitis. Contact
Dermatitis 47:206–209.
Li, Q., H. Inagaki, and M. Minami. 1996. Evaluation of cross-sensitization
among dye-intermediate agents using a modiﬁed lymphocyte transformationtest. Arch. T oxicol. 70:414–419.
Lisboa, C., M. A. Barros, and A. Azenha. 1994. Contact dermatitis from textile
dyes. Contact Dermatitis 31:9–10.
Lodi, A., L. L. Mancini, M. Ambonati, A. Coassini, G. Ravanelli, and C. Crosti.
2000. Epidemiology of occupational contact dermatitis in a North Italianpopulation. Eur . J. Dermatol. 10:128–132.
Mainka, E. 1983. Contact dermatitis in metallurgy workers. Przegl Dermatol .
70:65–68.
Marcoux,
D., P. M. Coutureo-Trudel, G. Riboulet-Delmas, and D. Sasseville.
2002. Sensitization to para-phenylenediamine from a streetside temporary
tattoo. Pediatr . Dermatol. 19:498–502.
Marks, J. G., Jr., D. V . Belsito, V . A. Deleo, et al. 1998. North American Contact
Dermatitis Group patch test results for the detection of delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity to topical allergens. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 38:911–918.Marks, J. G., Jr., D. V . Belsito, V . A. Deleo, et al. 2000. North American Contact
Dermatitis Group patch-test results, 1996–1998. Arch. Dermatol. 136:272–
273.
Massone, L., A. Anonide, V . Isola, and S. Borghi. 1991. 2 cases of multiple azo
dye sensitization. Contact Dermatitis 24:60–62.
Mathur, A. K., B. N. Gupta, S. Narang, et al. 1990. Biochemical and histopatho-
logical changes following dermal exposure to paraphenylene diamine in
guinea pigs. J. Appl. T oxicol. 10:383–386.
Matsunaga, K., K. Hosokawa, M. Suzuki, Y . Arima, and R. Hayakawa. 1988.
Occupational allergic contact Dermatitis in beauticians. Contact Dermatitis
18:94–96.
Maurer, T., and R. Hess. 1989. The maximization test for skin sensitization
potential—updating the standard protocol and validation of a modiﬁed pro-tocol. F ood Chem. T oxicol. 27:807–811.
Maurer, T., E. G. Weirich, and R. Hess. 1984. Predictive contact allergenicity
inﬂuence of the animal strain used. T oxicology 31:217–222.
McFadden, J. P., S. H. Wakelin, D. B. Halloway, and D. A. Basketter. 1998. The
effect of patch duration on the elicitation of para-phenylenediamine contactallergy. Contact Dermatitis 39:79–81.
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW). June 29, 2001. MHW Or-
dinance No. 332. Ingredients of quasi-drugs. Products to be used directlyon the body. Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Pharmaceutical and
Medical Safety Bureau, Inspection and Guidance Division, 2-2, 1-chome,
Kasumigaseki,Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-8045, Japan.
Mohamed, M., and R. Nixon. 2000. Severe allergic contact dermatitis induced
by paraphenylenediamine in paint-on temporary “tattoos.” Austr . J. Dermatol.
41:168–171.
Nakagawa, M., and K. Kawai. 1996. Multiple azo disperse dye sensitization
mainly due to group sensitizations to azo dyes. Contact Dermatitis 34:6–11.
Neri, I., E. Guareschi, F. Savoia, and A. Patrizi. 2002. Childhood allergic contact
dermatitis from henna tattoo. Pediatr . Dermatol. 19:503–505.
Nethercott, J. R., M. MacPherson, B. C. Choi, and P. Nixon. 1986. Contact
dermatitis in hairdressers. Contact Dermatitis 14:73–79.
Nikkels, A. F., F. Henry, and G. E. Pierard. 2000. Allergic reactions to decorative
skin paintings. J. Eur . Acad. Dermatol. V enereol. 15:140–142.
O’Hagan, A. H., and E. A. Bingham. 2001. Cellist’s ﬁnger dermatitis. Contact
Dermatitis 45:319.
¨Onder, M., C. A. Atahan, P. Oztas, and M. O. Oztas. 2001. Temporary henna
tattoo reactions in children. Int. J. Dermatol. 40:577–579.
Pegas, J. R., P. R. Criado, R. F. Criado, C. Vasconcellos, and M. C. Pires. 2002.
Allergic contact dermatitis to temporary tattoo by p-phenylenediamine. J.
Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 12:62–64.
Pepe, R. C., J. A. Wenninger, and G. N. McEwen, Jr., eds. 2002. International
Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook, 9th ed. Washington, DC:CTFA, 1238.
Picardo, M., C. Cannistraci, A. Cristaudo, C. De Luca, and B. Santucci. 1990.
Study on cross-reactivity to the para group. Dermatologica 181:104–108.
Picardo, M., C. Zompeta, M. Grandinetti, F. Ameglio, B. Santucci, A. Gafﬁoni,
and S. Passi. 1996. Paraphenylenediamine, a contact allergen, induces oxida-tive stress in normal human keratinocytes in culture. Br . J. Dermatol. 134:681–
685.
Pope, R. W., J. C. Hill, and M. G. Blaskis. 1995. Contact urticaria to the M17
protective mask. Mill. Med. 160:536–537.
Rebandel, P., and E. Rudzki. 1995. Occupational allergy to p-phenylenediamine
in milk testers. Contact Dermatitis 33:138.
Rademak
er, M. 1998. Occupational contact dermatitis among New Zealand
farmers. 1998. Aus. J. Dermatol. 39:164–167.
Rojanapo, W., P. Kupradinum, A. Tepsuwan, S. Chutimatewin, and
M. Tanyakaset. 1986. Carcinogenicity of an oxidation product of p-
phenylenediamine. Carcinogenesis 7:1997–2002.
Romaguera, C., F. Grimalt, and J. Vilaplana. 1988. Shoe contact dermatitis.
Contact Dermatitis 18:178.
Saha, M., and C. R. Srinivas. 1993. Footwear dermatitis possibly due to para-
phenylenediamine in socks. Contact Dermatitis 28:295.
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote54 SAFETY ASSESSMENTS—2004/2005
Sahoo, B., S. Handa, K. Penchallaiah, and N. Kumar. 2000. Contact anaphylaxis
due to hair dye. Contact Dermatitis 43:244.
Sakai, H., T. Tsukamoto, M. Yamamoto, et al. 2002. Distinction of carcinogens
from mutagens by induction of liver cell foci in a model for detection of
initiation activity. Cancer Lett. 188:33–38.
Santucci, B., A. Cristaudo, C. Cannistraci, A. Amantea, and M. Picardo. 1994.
Hypertrophic allergic contact dermatitis from hair dye. Contact Dermatitis
31:169–171.
Scientiﬁc Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non-Food Products Intended
for Consumers (SCCNFP). 2002. Opinion of the Scientiﬁc Committee on Cos-
metic Products and Non-F ood Products Intended for Consumers Concerningp-Phenylenediamine. Brussels: SCCNFP.
Seidenari, S., L. Mantovani, B. M. Manzini, and M. Pignatti. 1997. Cross-
sensitizations between azo dyes and para-amino compound: A study of 236
azo-dye-sensitive subjects. Contact Dermatitis 36:91–96.
Sertoli, A., S. Francalanci, M. C. Acciai, and M. Gola. 1999. Epidemiological
survey of contact dermatitis in Italy (1984–1993) by GIRDA (Gruppo ItalianoRicerca Dermatiti da Contatto e Ambientali). Am. J. Contact Dermat. 10:18–
30.
Shah, M., F. M. Lewis, and D. J. Gawrodger. 1997. Patch testing children and
adolescents: Five years experience and follow-up. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol.
37:964–968.
Shapiro, M., C. Mowad, and W. D. James. 2001. Contact dermatitis due to
printer’s ink in a milk industry employee: Case report and review of the
allergen paraphenylenediamine. Am. J. Contact Dermat. 12:109–112.
Sharma, V . K., S. K. Mandal, G. Sethuraman, and N. A. Bakshi. 1999. Para-
phenylenediamine-induced lichenoid eruptions Contact Dermatitis 41:40–41.
Shigematsu, T., N. Ozawa, and H. Nakayama. 1988. In vitro study of the cross-
sensitivity of hair dye using hapten-speciﬁc lymphocytes. Contact Dermatitis
19:30–35.
Sidbury, R., and F. J. Storrs. 2000. Pruritic eruption at the site of a temporary
tattoo. Am. J. Contact Dermatitis 11:182–183.
Sieben, S., Y . Kawakubo, T. Al Masaoudi, H. F. Merk, and B. Blomeke. 2002.
Delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to paraphenylenediamine is mediatedby 2 different pathways of antigen recognition by speciﬁc alphabeta human
T-cell clones. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 109:1005–1011.
Simpson-Dent, S. L., S. H. Hunt, S. C. Davidson, and S. H. Wakelin. 2001. Tattoo
dermatitis from primary sensitization to clothing dyes. Contact Dermatitis
45:248.
Smith, H. R., S. H. Wakelin, and R. J. Rycroft. 1999. Azo dyes as allergens in
carbonless copy paper manufacturing. Contact Dermatitis 40:214–215.
Soler-Niedziela, L., X. Shi, J. Nath, and T. Ong. 1991. Studies on three struc-
turally related phenylenediamines with the mouse micronucleus assay system.Mutat. Res. 259:43–48.
Søsted, H., T. Agner, K. E. Andersen, and T. Menne. 2002. 55 cases of allergic
reactions to hair dye: A descriptive, consumer complaint-based study. Contact
Dermatitis 47:299–303.
Steiling, W., J. Kreutz, and H. Hofer. 2001. Percutaneous penetration/dermal
absorption of hair dyes in vitro. T oxicol. In Vitro 15:565–570.
Storrs, F. J., L. E. Rosenthal, R. M. Adams, et al. 1989. Prevalence and relevance
of allergic reactions in patients patch tested in North America—1984 to 1985.J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 20:1038–1045.
Stransky, L., and M. Krasteva. 1989. Changing patterns of contact sensitivity in
Soﬁa. Derm. Beruf. Umwelt. 37:214–216.
Sutthipisal, N., J. P. McFadden, and E. Cronin. 1993. Sensitization in atopic and
non-atopic hairdressers with hand eczema. Contact Dermatitis 29:206–209.
Taylor, J. S., H. I. Maibach, A. A. Fisher, and W. F. Bergfeld. 1993. Contact
leukoderma associated with the use of hair colors. Cutis 52:273–280.
Temesvari, E. 1984. Contact urticaria from paraphenylenediamine. Contact Der-
matitis 11:125.
Thune, P. 1984. Contact and photocontact allergy to sunscreens. Photoderma-
tology 1:5–9.
T
osti, A., M. Pazzaglia, and M. Bertazzoni. 2000. Contact allergy from tempo-
rary tattoos. Arch. Dermatol. 136:1061–1062.Tosti, A., M. Pazzaglia, M. Corazza, and A. Virgili. 2000. Allergic contact
dermatitis caused by mehindi. Contact Dermatitis 42:356.
Uter, W., H. Lessmann, J. Geier, D. Becker, T. Fuchs, and G. Richter. 2002.
The spectrum of allergic (cross)-sensitivity in clinical patch testing with‘paraamino’ compounds. Allergy 57:319–322.
van Zuuren, E. J., and A. P. Lavrijsen. 2002. Allergic reactions and hypopig-
mentation due to temporary tattooing with henna. Ned. Tijdschr . Geneeskd.
146:1332–1335.
Vestey, J. P., P. K. Buxton, and J. A. Savin. 1985. Eyelash curler dermatitis.
Contact Dermatitis 13:274–275.
Viswanathan, P. N., V . Gupta, and V . Misra. 1986. Studies on the dermal toxicity
ofp-phenylenediamine. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 7:213–218.
Wakelin, S. H., D. Creamer, R. J. Rycroft, I. R. White, and J. P. McFadden. 1998.
Contact dermatitis from paraphenylenediamine used as a skin paint. Contact
Dermatitis 39:92–93.
Wang, L. H., and S. J. Tsai. 2003. Simultaneous determination of oxidative hair
dye p-phenylenediamine and its metabolites in human and rabbit biological
ﬂuids. Anal. Biochem. 312:201–207.
Warbrick, E. V ., R. J. Dearman, L.J. Lea, D.A. Basketter, and I. Kimber. 1999.
Local lymph node assay responses to paraphenylenediamine: intra and inter
laboratory evaluations. J. Appl. T oxicol. 19:255–260.
Waters, M. D., H. B. Bergman, and S. Nesnow. 1988. The genetic toxicology of
Gene-Tox non-carcinogens. Mutat. Res. 205:139–182.
Wolf, R., D. Wolf, H. Matz, and E. Orion. 2003. Cutaneous reactions to tempo-
rary tattoos. Dermatol. Online 9:3.
Wolfram, L. J., and H. I. Maibach. 1985. Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes.
Arch. Dermatol. Res. 277:235–241.
Wong, G. A., and C. M. King. 2003. Immediate-type hypersensitivity and al-
lergic contact dermatitis due to para-phenylenediamine in hair dye. Contact
Dermatitis 48:166.
Xie, Z., R. Hayakawa, M. Sugiura, H. Kojima, H. Konishi, G. Ichihara, and Y .
Takeuchi. 2000. Experimental study on skin sensitization potencies and cross-
reactivities of hair-dye-related chemicals in guinea pigs. Contact Dermatitis
42:270–275.
Yabe, K., K. Saito, T. Murai, M.-A. Hara, and H. Watanabe. 1991. An experimen-
tal rhabdomyolysis due to paraphenylenediamine contained in hair dyes: Itseffects on serum escaping enzymes (CPK, GOT, and GPT) and histopatholog-ical ﬁndings in the skeletal muscles. Res. Pract. F orensic Med. 34:109–116.
Yagi, H., A. M. el Hendi, A. Diab, and A. A. Elshikh. 1996. Paraphenylenedi-
amine induced optic atrophy following hair dye poisoning. Hum. Exp. T oxicol.
15:617–618.
Yamada, K., S. Shirahata, and H. Murakami. 1985. DNA breakage by phenyl
compounds. Agric. Biol. Chem. 49:1423–1428.
Yokozeki, H., M.-H. Wu, K. Sumi, et al. 2003. Th2 cytokines, IgE and mast
cells play a crucial role in the induction of para-phenylenediamine-inducedcontact hypersensitivity in mice. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 132:385–392.
Zhang, Y ., T. R. Holford, B. Leaderer, P. Boyle, S. H. Zahm, S. Flynn, G. Tallini,
P. H. Owens, and T. Zheng. 2004. Hair-coloring product use and risk of non-
hodgkins lymphoma: A population-based case-control study in Connecticut.
Am. J. Epidemiol. 159:148–154.
Zhao, B., and W. X. Fan. 1991. Facial contact dermatitis. Pathogenetic factors
in China. Int. J. Dermatol. 30:485–486.
Zheng, T., T. R. Holford, B. Leaderer, Y . Zhang, S. H. Zahm, S. Flynn, G. Tallini,
B. Zhang, K. Zhou, P. H. Owens, Q. Lan, N. Rothman, and P. Boyle. 2004.
Diet and nutrient intakes and risk of non-hodgkin’s lymphoma in Connecticut
women. Am. J. Epidemiol. 159:454–466.
PHENYL TRIMETHICONE
In 1986, the CIR Expert Panel found that Phenyl Trime-
thicone is safe as a cosmetic ingredient in the present practices of
use and concentration (Elder 1986). A review of the recent liter-ature uncovered no new studies regarding Phenyl Trimethicone,
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteAmended FinalReportofthe
Cosmetic Ingredient Review
ExpertPanel
SafetyAssessment ofp-Phenylenediamine,
p-Phenylenediamine HC1,andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate_________________________________
December 11,2007
The2007Cosmetic Ingredient Review ExpertPanelmembers are:Chairman, WilmaF.Bergfeld, M.D.,F.A.C.P.;
Donald V.Belsito, M.D.;CurtisD.Klaassen, Ph.D.;JamesG.Marks,Jr.,M.D.,RonaldC.Shank,Ph.D.;Thomas J.
Slaga,Ph.D.;andPaulW.Snyder, D.V.M., Ph.D.TheCIRDirector isF.Alan Andersen, Ph.D.Thisreportwas
prepared byWilburJohnson, Jr.,SeniorScientific AnalysrlWriter.
Cosmetic Ingredient Review
110117thStreet,NW,Suite412(Washington, DC20036-4702 ph202.331.0651 fax202.331.0088
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotecirinfo@cir-safety.org
Copyright 2007
Cosmetic Ingredient Review
1101l7thStreet,NW.Suite4l2
Washington, DC20036
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteAmended FinalReportoftheSafetyAssessment ofp-Phenylenediamine,
p-Phenylenediamine HCI,andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
Abstract: p-Phenylenediamine isanaromatic aminethathasbeenusedinoxidatve/permanent hairdyesfor over 100years.
Itismixedwithhydrogen peroxideimmediately beforeuse.Almost1500hair-coloring productscontainp-Phenylenediamine
atconcentrations from2-4%.The extent ofuseofp-Phenylenediamine HC1andp-Phenylenedianmine Sulfateisnot
known,butuseconcentrations arearound6%.p-Phenylenediamine foruseinhairdyesismanufactured usingdirectnitration
ofbenzenewithout chlorinating. Thismethoddoesnotyieldchlorinated compounds suchaschioro-anddichloroanilines
oraminobiphenyls. Following dermal administration ofradiolabeled p-Phenylenediamine torats,themetabolite N,N
diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine wasdetectedinplasma,suggesting thattopically appliedp-Phenylenediamine ismetabolized
intheskin.Thatmetabolite plusmonoacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine werereported asurinarymetabolites inhumanstudies.
p-Phenylenediamine administered orally,intraperitoneally, orsubcutaneously tomice, rats, andrabbits waswidely
distributed, metabolized toseveralderivatives, andrapidlyexcreted intheurineandfeces.The acute oralLD50ofp
Phenylenediamine for ratsrangedfrom80to98mg/kg.Theacuteintraperitoneal LD50ofanaqueousp-Phenylenediamine
solution forratswas37mg/kg.Thepercutaneous LD50for rabbits ofahairdyecomposite containing 1.2%p
Phenylenediamine wasgreaterthan10g/kg.Chronictopicaladministration of10%p-Phenylenediamine solutions wasnot
toxictomiceandrabbits. Subchronic andchronicdermaladministration ofhairdyeproducts containing upto4%p
Phenylenediamine wasnottoxictomice,rabbits,and rats. Atsingleoraldosesupto80mg/kg,p-Phenylenediamine did
notexertaprimaryeffecton the nervous system ofrats.Rhabdomyolysis wasobserved inmicedosed orally with35mg/kg
and70mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine andindogsatdosesupto100mg/kg.Primaryskinirritation by2.5 to100%p
Phenylenediamine variedfrom none toslightinexperiments withrabbits,guineapigs, mice, miniature piglets,piglets,dogs,
andbaboons. Ahairdyecontaining 1.2%p-Phenylenediamine produced slighttomoderate erythema andmoderate edema
intheskinofrabbits.Anotherhairdyecontaining 1.8%p-Phenylenediamine wasmildlyirritating totheskinofrabbits.In
one study, p-Phenylenediamine wasaguineapigsensitizer atinduction concentrations aslowas0.001%, butwasnota
sensitizer inanotherstudyofahaircoloring formulation containing 2%p-Phenylenediamine. Cross-reactivities top
Phenylenediamine wereconfirmed inguineapigschallenged withp-toluenediamine HC1,p-aminophenol, p
aminoazobenzene, andSudanIIIinthemaximization test,butnotwith4-N,N-diethyl-2-methyl- 1,4-phenylenediamine .HC1
or4-(N-ethyl-N-2-methan-sulphonamidoethyl)-2-methyl- 1,4-phenylenediamine .1.5H2S04 .H,O.In animal tests,p
Phenylenediamine was, atmost,moderately irritating wheninstilled intothe eyes. p-Phenylenediamine wasnota
reproductive ordevelopmental toxicant inseveralanimaltests.p-Phenylenediamine, withorwithouthydrogen peroxide,
wasnegativeintheAmesSalmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity testwithoutmetabolic activation; withmetabolic
activation, both positive andnegative results have beenreported. Severaloxidation productsofp-Phenylenediamine were
positiveintheAmestest.Purifiedp-Phenylenediamine wasnotmutagenic toD.melanogaster. p-Phenylenediamine was
notmutagenic intheratormousemicronucleus test.p-Phenylenediamine administered orallytomalemicedepressed
testicular DNAsynthesis, butp-Phenylenediamine wasnot active inthemousesperm-head abnormality test.p
Phenylenediamine wasnegative inarathepatocyte primary culture/DNA repair test.Positiveresultswereobtained forp
Phenylenediamine inthemouse lymphoma forward mutation assay.The urine ofratsthatreceivedp-Phenylenediamine
intraperitoneally wasnotmutagenic inthe Ames test.The urine ofratsthatreceived p-Phenylenediamine/resorcinol
conjugates topically wasmutagenic withmetabolicactivation and wasnotmutagenic withoutmetabolic activation. Theurine
fromwomenwhoused hair dyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine wasnotmutagenic withmetabolic activation intheAmes
test.Similargenotoxicity resultswerereported forp-Phenylenediamine HC1inawidevarietyofgenotoxicity assays.p
Phenylenediamine inthefeedofrats andmiceatconcentrations of625and1250ppmfor103weekswasnotcarcinogenic.
Severalotherstudiesinratsandmiceproduced similar findings. One study infemaleratswithbothtopical application and
subcutaneous injection ofoxidizedp-Phenylenediamine HC1for18monthsresultedinastatistically significant increasein
theincidence ofmammary glandtumorsanduterinetumorsandsofttissuetumorsofbothmalignant andbenigntypes.In
anotherstudyusing rats, anincreaseinpituitaryadenomas wasobserved. p-Phenylenediamine isconsidered tobeahuman
skinsensitizer, withlesssensitization atlowerconcentrations. p-Phenylenediamine wasnotphototoxic inlimited human
testing.Numerous case reports ofdermatitis following so-called dark (black)hennatattooapplication havealsobeen
identified; p-Phenylenediamine isoneoftheadditives that isusedtoaccelerate dryinganddarkenthereddishcolorofthe
hennaindarkhennaproducts. Edemaoftheface, neck, ears,andscalpanddepigmentation havebeenreportedafterhair
dyeuse.Edemaoftheeyelidsandconjunctiva andtearinghave beenobserved andmore severe reactions (damage tovision)
haveoccurred aftertheapplication ofp-Phenylenediamine-containing hairdyestotheeyebrows andeyelashes. Asummary
oftheavailable hairdyeepidemiology dataisavailable athttp://www.cir-safety.org/findings.shtml. Inconsidering hairdye
epidemiology data,theClRExpert Panelconcluded thattheavailable epidemiology studies are insufficient toconclude there
isacausalrelationship betweenhairdye useandcancerandotherendpoints, basedonlackofstrengthoftheassociations
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteandinconsistency offindings. The CIR ExpertPanel noted that4-Aminobiphenyl and2-aminobiphenyl havebeendetected
inbatchesofchemical research gradep-Phenylenediamine (purityof97%),presumably asaby-product ofsynthesis via
reduction ofp-nitroaniline. ThemajorU.S.manufacturer ofp-Phenylenediamine produces thisp-Phenylenediamine ata
purityof>99%foruseinhairdyesviatheprocessofdirectnitrationofbenzenewithoutchlorinating, whichdoes notyield
aminobiphenyl compounds. Itistheexpectation oftheCIRExpertPanelthat99%purep-Phenylenediamine (freeof
aminobiphenyls) isbeingandwillcontinue tobeusedbythecosmetics industry. Becauseofthedangers involved, hairdyes
containing p-Phenylenediamine shouldnotbe applied totheeyebrows andeyelashes andconsumers shouldnotusedark
hematattoos.ByFederallaw, coal tarhairdyeproducts, including thosecontaining p-Phenylenediamine, areexemptfrom
theprincipal adulteration provision andthecoloradditiveprovisions oftheFederalFood,DrugandCosmetic Act of1938
whenthelabelbearsacautionstatement andpatchtestinstructions for determining whethertheproductcausesskinirritation.
Whilesomepersonsmaybesensitizedunder properconditions ofhairdyeuse,theExpertPanel expects thatfollowing label
instructions willidentifyprospective individuals whowouldhaveanirritation/sensitization reactionandallowthemtoavoid
significant exposures. TheCIRExpertPanelconcluded thatp-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HC1,andp
Phenylenediamine Sulfatearesafeashairdyesinthepractices ofuseandconcentration asdescribed inthissafety
assessment.
INTRODUCTION_____________________
Anearliersafetyassessment ofp-Phenylenediamine(Elder
1985)acknowledged thatp-Phenylenediamine isasensitizer
andthat some personsmaybesensitized underintended
conditions ofuse,butthatforpersons notsensitized,
concluded thatthisingredient issafeasahairdyeingredient
atthecurrent concentrations ofuse.CIRundertook to
amend that safety assessment toincludethehydrochloride
andsulfatesaltsofp-Phenylenediamine.
CHEMISTRY
Definition andStructure
p-Phenylenediamine
AsgivenintheInternational Cosmetic Ingredient
Dictionaiy andHandbook, p-Phenylenediamine (CASNo.
106-50-3 isanaromatic aminethatconforms tothestructure
showninFigure 1(Gottschalck andMcEwen 2006).
NH2
NH2
Figure1.Chemical structureofp-Phenylenediamine.
Synonyms listedbyEstrinetal.1982;Greenberg andLester
1954;Hawley1971;International Agency forResearch on
Cancer[IARC]1978;Sax1979;TheSocietyofDyersand
Colourists 1971;Windholz 1976;andGottschalck and
McEwen 2006include:
•p-Aminoaniline;
•1,4-Benzenediamine;
•CI76060;•p-Diaminobenzene;
•Oxidation Base10;
•1,4-Phenylenediamine;
•p-Benzenediamine;
•4-Aminoaniline;
•I,4-Diaminobenzene;
•Paradiaminobenzene; and
•PPD.
TradenameslistedbyGottschalck andMcEwen (2006)
include:
•BASFUrsolD;
•BenzofurD;
•Colorex PPD-CG;
•Covastyle PPD;
•Developer PF;
•Durafur Black R;
•Fouramine D;
•Fourrine 1andFourrine D;
•FurBlack4l867;
•FurBrown4l866;
•FurroD;
•FurYellow;
•Futramine D;
•JarocolPPD;
•NakoH;
•OriStarPPD;
•Orsin;
•PelagolD,Pelagol DR andPelagol;
•GreyD;
•PeltolD;
•RenalPF;
•Santoflex LC;
•TertralD;
•UrsolD;
•ZobaBlackD;
•RodolDandRodol D-99;
•C.I.76060;
—1—
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote•CI.Developer 13;and p-Phenylenediamine MCI
•C.I.Oxidation Base10.p-Phenylenediamine HCI(CASNos.624-18-0) isthe
aromatic aminesaltthatconforms tothestructure shownin
Figure2(Gottschalck andMcEwen 2006).
NH2
2HC1
NH2
Figure2.Chemical structure ofp—Phenylenediamine HCI
Othernamesforthischemical include:
•I,4-Benzenediamine Dihydrochloride;
•C176061;
•I,4-Diaminobenzene Dihydrochioride;
•Oxidation Base1OA;
•p-Phenylenediamine Dihydrochloride; and
•I,4-Phenylenediamine Hydrochloride.
RodolDCisatradenameofp-Phenylenediamine HCI
(Gottschalck andMcEwen 2006).
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate(CASNo.16245-77-5) isthe
aromatic aminesaltthatconforms tothestructure shownin
Figure3(Gottschalck andMcEwen 2006).
NH2
I IH2S04
NH2
Figure3.Chemical structureofp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
Othernamesinclude 1,4-Benzenediamine Sulfateand1,4-
Benzenediamine Sulfate(1:1);tradenames include Colorex
PPDS;Covastyle PPDS;JarocolPPDS;andRodolDS
(Gottschalck andMcEwen 2006).
Chemical andPhysicalProperties
Aromatic amines,suchasp-Phenylenediamine, arenonpolar
basesthatarereadilyconverted tohighly water-soluble
hydrochloride salts.Whereas thesaltsofaromatic amines
arerelatively stable(IARC1978),freearomatic aminesare
usuallyquiteunstable tolight,heat,andoxygenandoxidize
tocolored quinoneimines, quinones, andvarious
-2-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotepolymerized products (Radomski 1979).Whenusedinhairformmonoimine (E),andthenundergofurtherhydrolysis to
dyes, the amines areusuallymixedwithhydrogen peroxide
immediately beforeuse,producing theoxidation products.
Theoxidation products thenreactwithsuithydryl groups
presentinthehairtoformpermanent bonds (Radomski
1979).According tothePersonal CareProducts Council
(Council), current thinking isthattheoxidation products are
trappedratherthancovalently bonded becausethereisno
furthercolorchangethat would beexpected byreactionwith
asulfhydryl group (Council 2008).
Dataon thechemical andphysical properties ofp
Phenylenediamine arepresented inTable 1basedon
information fromGreenberg andLester1954;Hawley1971;
IARC1978;Sax1979;Windholz 1976;;BeardandNoe
1981;GlabiszandTomaszewska 1977;Mackison etal.
1978;PitterandRadkova 1974;TheSocietyofDyers and
Colourists 1971;Weast1978;andtheAmericanConference
ofGovernmental Industrial Hygiensists [ACGIH] 2000.
According toElder(1985),p-Phenylenediamine occursin
theformofwhitetolightpurplemonoclinic crystals. Itis
solubleinwater,alcohol, ether, benzene, chloroform, and
acetoneandisinsoluble incausticsoda.
Chemical andphysical properties ofp-Phenylenediamine
HC1andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfatealso areincluded in
Table1.
Reactivity
Furia(1972)statedthatphenylenediamine compounds are
potentantioxidants. TheInternational AgencyforResearch
onCancer(IARC)suggested thatphenylenediamines and
theiroxidation products arehighlyreactivesubstances that
wouldbeexpected toreactwithtissuenucleophiles, causing
variousbiological effects(IARC1978).
Elder(1985)notedthatp-Phenylenediamine reactswith
oxidizing materials. Onexposure toair,p-Phenylenediamine
oxidizes toformapurpleorblackcolor.Brownandblack
colorscanalsodevelopwhenthecompound isexposed to
5%irontrichloride (FeC13)and3%hydrogen peroxide
(H,02)solutions, respectively. Quinoneimine compounds
resulting fromtheoxidation ofp-Phenylenediamine may
hydrolyze inaqueous media toyieldp-benzoquinone and
ammonia. p-Phenylenediamine iscombustible and,when
heated,emitshighlytoxicfumesofnitrogen compounds.
Degradation following exposure toactivated sludge
microorganisms has alsobeenreported.
p-Phenylenediamine Oxidation Products
According toCorbett(1972)andCorbettandMenkart
(1973),theoxidation ofp-Phenylenediamine (AinFigure4)
bymolecular oxygen results initially intheformation ofp
benzoquinone diimine(B),which.mayreacttogiveeither
apolymerofthediimine(C)orBandrowski’s base (D).
p-Benzoquinone diiminemayalsoundergo hydrolysis to
-3-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable1.Chemical andphysicalproperties ofp-Phenylenediamine anditshydrochloride andsulfatesalts.
Property Value Reference
p-Phenylenedia,nine HC1
Appearance Whitetograyorpink-beige powder COLIPA 2006
Molecular weight 181.07 COLIPA 2006
Octanol/water partition Calculated: -0.3;Experimental: -0.84 COLIPA 2006
coefficient (LogP0w)
Meltingpoint 140.7°C COLIPA 2006
Solubility (g/100ml -22°C Water(10<S<20;ethanol(S<10);DMSO(S<1) COLIPA 2006
for24h)
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
Form off-white tograypowder Keystone Aniline Corporation 1999
Molecular weight 206.22 Keystone Aniline Corporation 1999
Solubility Slightlysolubleinwater(at25°Cand60°C);insoluble in Keystone Aniline Corporation 1999
isopropyl alcohol (at25°Cand60°C)
p-Phenylenediamine
4.0(intactguineapigstratumcomeum/water); 7.3(delipidized
guineapigstratumcorneum/water).
max:246nm(E1’=788);315 nm(E1 1=184);3l0nmWeast1978
Weast1978
Greenberg andLester1954;Hawley1971;
IARC1978;Sax1979;Windholz 1976;
Environmental Protection Agency(EPA)
1982;ACGIH2000;Beardand Noe 1981;
Mackison etal.1978;Weast1978;Grasselli
1973
Greenberg and Lester1954;BeardandNoe
1981
IARC1978;Weast1978;Grasselli 1973;
Grant1974
Mackison etal.1978
Hawley1971; Sax 1979; Windholz 1976;
EPA1982;ACGIH2000
BeardandNoe1981
Keystone Aniline Corporation 1999
IARC1978;El.DuPont DcNemours and
Company 1977
Sax1979
Hawley1971;Sax1979;ACGIH 2000;
Mackison etal.1978
EPA1982;EPA1980
Wolfram andMaibach 1985
Wolfram andMaibach 1985
IARC1978;Weast1978;Grasselli 1973;
Baranowska etal.2002
Keystone Aniline Corporation 1999Formula C6H8N,
Molecular weight 108.15
Boiling point 267°C
Melting point 139°C
140°C
141°C
145-147°C
Solubility Water:3.8%at24°C
Slightly soluble inwater(at25°C);solubleinwater(at60°C);
slightly soluble inisopropyl alcohol(at25°Cand60°C)
Volatility (technical product) <1mmat21°C
Vapordensity 3.72
Flashpoint(closedcup) 155.5°C
Octanollwater partition -0.25
coefficient (LogP0w)
0.2
Otherpartition coefficients
UVlightabsorption
Molecular weight 108.14
-4-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteNH2
Y
NH2
(A)Diimmine
Polymer
(C)
Ox H2O
NH
(D)cE:iiH2 0
(E)
.NH2(F)\
Humicacid
Figure4.Majorpathways for p-Phenylenediamine (A)oxidation wherethechemical structures are:B,p-benzoquinone
diimine; E,p-benzoquinone imine;F,p-benzoquinone; andD,aspecificdiimine polymer knownasBandrowski’s base.
p-benzoquinone (F)anditsdecomposition product,humic
acid.Nitroaniline and4,4’-diaminoazobenzene (DAAB)
havealsobeenidentified asminoroxidation products.
Thehydrolysis ofp-benzoquinone diimine top
benzoquinone isonlysignificant atapHoflessthan3inthe
presence ofastrongoxidizing agent,suchaspotassium
ferricyanide, potassium dichromate, orferricchloride. Ata
pHofgreaterthan9,theformation ofp-benzoquinone again
issignificant, butonlyifthep-Phenylenediamine solution is
ataconcentration oflessthan0.001%.Polymerization ofp
benzoquinone diimineoccursatapHgreaterthan9whena
p-Phenylenediamine solution (>l0%)isaddedtoa
solutionofastrong chemical oxidant.Themajorreaction
productunder“mostrelevantconditions” (pHof3to10and
p-Phenylenediamine concentrations of>1O%)isthe
specificdiiminepolymer Bandrowski’s base(Fig.4D)
(Corbett 1972;CorbettandMenkart 1973).
According totheScientific Committee onConsumerProducts (SCCP), thereactions showninFigure4are
examples ofself-coupling. Astherateofself-coupling isa
veryslowreactioncompared tothereactionwithacoupler
inthereaction mixture, Bandrowski’s Basemaynotbe
formedinanoxidative hair dyemixturecontaining bothp
Phenylenediamine andacoupler (SCCP 2005).
Oxidative HairColoring Process
Inoxidative (permanent) hair coloringsystems, thecolored
material isproduced insidethehairfiberbyoxidation of
colorless intermediates (Corbett andMenkart 1973).To
accomplish thecolor-formingreaction, 3classesofchemical
reactants arerequired: aprimary intermediate, anoxidant,
andacoupler.
Frequently employed intermediates arearomatic o-or
diamines oraminophenols toproduce colorsaslistedin
Table2(Corbett 1973).According toReissandFisher
(1974),themajorprimaryintermediate usedintheUSfor1H2
NH2
-5-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotepermanent hairdyesisp-Phenylenediamine.
Corbett(1973)notedthatprimaryintermediates arecapable
ofundergoing oxidation toformcolorbenzoquinone imines,
the“essential reactivespecies”inthecolor-formingreaction
asshowninFigure4.
Thesecondnecessary component istheoxidant.Hydrogen
peroxide isthemostfrequently used oxidant, although
variousacidsofsolidorganichydrogenperoxide adductsare
useddepending onthehairdyeproduct.Hydrogen peroxide
iswidely employed because itisarelatively unreactive
oxidant andcausesaslowoxidation oftheprimary
intermediate inthedye bath.
Table2.ColorsProduced byPrimaryIntermediates
(BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976).
Compound ColoronHair
p-Phenylenediamine Dark brown
p-Toluylenediamine Lightreddishbrown
p-Aminodiphenylamine Darkgray-black
p-Aminophenol Lightauburn
2-Amino-5-Flydroxytoluene Goldenblond
5-Aniino-2-Hydroxytoluene Reddish blond
o-Aminophenol Deepgold
Thethirdcomponent necessary forcolordevelopment isthe
coupler.Examples ofcolorsasafunction ofcouplerare
giveninTable3.Byvirtueoftheirstrongelectron-donating
groups,couplersreactwiththeelectrophilic quinoneimines
toproduceleuko-indo dyes.Whenmixtures ofcouplers are
used,theamountofeachdyeformeddepends ontherelative
concentration ofthecouplers inthe dye bath, therateof
couplerdiffusion intothehairfiber,andtherelative
reactivities ofthecouplers attheprevailing pH,.asshownin
Table4.
Thisauthorsuggested thatfadingofhighlycoloredindo
dyestolightbrownshadesinvolves additionofaromatic
moieties tothedinuclear indo dye. High humidity has an
accelerating effectonboththistypeoffadingandon the
intramolecular cyclization ofaminoindamines, whichresults
infadingtoredshades(Corbett 1973).
Someoftheimportant color-forming reactions ofp
Phenylenediamine arepresented inFigure5(Burnett and
Corbett1977;Corbett1976),andthechemistry ofthese
reactions issummarized inFigure6(Burnett andCorbett
1977;Corbett1976).
Theinitialreaction involves oxidation ofp
Phenylenediamine bytheoxidant, or byoxygenformedby
decomposition oftheoxidantinsidethehairfiber,togivep
benzoquinone diimine.p-Benzoquinone diimineintheformofitsconjugate acidthenreacts with thecouplerand/or
unoxidized p-Phenylenediamine toyieldaleuko-indo dye.
Reaction occursbyelectrophilic attackon themost
nucleophilic siteofthebenzeneringofthecoupler.
Table3.ColorsProduced byp-Phenylenediamine inthe
Presence ofVariousCouplers
(BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976).
Coupler ColorinHair
None Dark Brown
m-Phenylenediamine Bluishpurple
2,4-Diaminoanisole Purple-blue
m-Aminophenol Light brown
4-Methyl-3-Aminophenol Light brown
rn-Methoxyphenol Magenta
6-Methyl-3-Aminophenol Magenta
2,5-Xylenol Bluishpurple
Resorcinol Greenish brown
Hydroquinone Lightgray-
brown
Catechol Gray-brown
Table4.Reactivity ofCommonly Used Couplers Toward
p-Benzoquinone Diimine(seeFigure4)(Corbett 1973).
Coupler Experimental
SecondOrderkat
30°Cand pH9.5
Resorcinol 1.5 xi0
m-Arninophenol 5.5xl0
2,4-Diaminoanisole 6.0xl0
l-Naphthol 7.4xl0
p-Phenylenediamine 34.7
ad[dye]/dt =k[diimine] [coupler]
Ifthereactivesiteonthecouplerbearsamethoxy group,the
indodyeisformednonoxidatively byelimination ofmethyl
alcohol from thecoupledintermediate. Someoftheseindo
dyesarethe finalcoloredproduct inthehair,whereasothers
undergofurtherreactiontoformpolymeric indocompounds
(CorbettandMenkart 1973;Corbett1973;ReissandFisher
1974;BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976;Brownand
Corbett1979).
Resorcinols reactwithp-benzoquinone diiminetogivea
-6-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteH2NO_
NH
ox
HN HYxH
XandY =0orNH
R=H,MeorMeOFigure5.Color-forming
reactions inoxidative
colordevelopment
(Corbett 1976;Burnett
andCorbett1977).
H2x
PPDOX
HNHH2N
whenR=Hgreentrinuclear dyeand/orabrownpolymeric indoaniline
(Corbett 1973;Shahetal.1972).m-Diamines couplewith
TRINUCLEAR AMINOINDOANILINES
INDOANILINE (Magenta)
(Green)
Polymeric Indoanhline Trinuclear Dyes(Brown)(Brown)
+Resnol /minoPhenols
NHNH2
-HY
NH2Oxidation
+m-DiaminesBandrowskis
Base
(Brown)p-Diamine
+Phenols
Aminoindamines
(BlueorBlue-Violet)Indoanilines
(PurpleorBlue-Violet)
-7-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteFigure6.Thechemistry ofoxidative coupling reactions (Corbett 1976;BurnettandCorbett1977).
-8-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-benzoquinone toyieldblue2-aminoindamines.
Exceptforthemethoxyderivatives, 2-aminoindamines have
poorcolorstabilityandundergointramolecular cyclization
tored2,8-diaminophenazines. p-Benzoquinone diimine
coupleswithm-aminophenols atthepositionparatothe
hydroxygrouptogivemagenta2-aminoindoanilines, or,if
thisposition isblocked, coupling occursparatothe amino
grouptoyieldmagenta 2-hydroxyindamines. p
Phenylenediamine canalsoreactwith2-aminoindoaniline to
giveabrowntriangular dye.Themagentadyesarerelatively
unstable andfadetoabrown species. Coupling ofphenols
withp-benzoquinone diimineyieldspurpleindoanilines,
whereasreactionofp-benzoquinone withp-diamines gives
thebrowndye,Bandrowski’s base(Corbett 1973).
Although theinitialoxidation product ofp
Phenylenediamine isusuallyp-benzoquinone diimine(with
possible involvement ofafreeradicalintermediate), the
natureofthefinalproductsofthereaction isdependent on
theconcentration ofthediimine,thenatureoftheoxidizing
agent,thepHofthereactionenvironment, thepresence of
coupling agents, and thepresence ofcatalysts orcatalytic
surfaces.
Theoxidation ofp-Phenylenediamine byhydrogen peroxide
toformp-benzoquinone diimine isrelatively slow and even
incomplete after24hours,whereas thereaction ofthe
couplerwithp-benzoquinone diimine issorapidasto
prevent anyappreciable buildup ofthequinone-imine
intermediate, andtoprevent completely theformation of
Bandrowski’s baseinthedyesolution(although thebase
maywellforminthehair). The half-lifeofp-benzoquinone
diimine ison theorderofafewmilliseconds, andits
concentration underhairdyeingconditions neverreachesa
detectable level(Corbett andMenkart 1973;Burnettand
Corbett1977;Corbett1976).
Rastogietal.(2006)conducted astudytoestimateconsumer
exposure toprecursors andcouplersofoxidative hairdyes
duringandafter hair dyeing. The concentrations of
unconsumed precursors andcouplers in8hairdye
formulations fornon-professional usewerestudiedunder
conditions thatreflected hairdyeing. Sixproducts were
usedtostudyoxidative hairdyeformation intheabsenceof
hair.Significant amountsofunconsumed precursors and
couplers remained inthehairdyeformulations afterfinal
colordevelopment; thiswastrueinboththepresence and
absenceofhair.Upto1.1%p-Phenylenediamine wasfound
inthehairdyeformulation aftertherequired colorwas
developed.
Analytical Methods
p-Phenylenediainine
TheAssociation ofOfficial Analytical Chemists has
published bothagravimetric methodandaniodometrictitration method forthedetermination ofp
Phenylenediamine inhairdyes(Horwitz 1970).
Calorimetric methods have beenusedtoanalyze aromatic
amines,including p-Phenylenediamine, bytheirreaction
with2,6-xylenol (Corbett 1975),sodiumchlorite(Corbett
1975)ruthenium trichloridetriphenylphosphine (Hashmi et
al.1969),thiotrithiazyl chloride (Levinetal.1967),or
peroxydisulfate (GuptaandSrivastava 1971),orbytheir
coupling withdiazotized sulphanilic acidandother
compounds (Legradi 1967).
Aspottestforthedetection ofp-Phenylenediamine inhair
dyes uses avamilin-isopropyl alcoholreagent(Fregert1972;
Lange1966).
Anacid-impregnated papertapetechnique hasalsobeen
reported (Pinches andWalker1980).
Additional methodsfortheseparation and/ordetermination
ofp-Phenylenediamine orp-Phenylenediamine derivatives
andcomplexes include:
•high-pressure liquidchromatography (Graffeo and
Riggin1978;Sugdenetal.1978;Turchetto etal.1980),
•gasandgas-liquid chromatography (Choudhary 1980;
Goldstein etal.1968;Knight1971;PinterandKramer
1967;Walle1968),
•columnchromatography onananion-exchange resin(W
ligand-exchange chromatography) (Funasaka etal.
1969),
•gel-permeation chromatography (Protivova andPospisil
1974),
•thin-layer chromatography (Goldstein etal.1968;
Kottemann 1966;Legatowa 1973;Leprietal.1976;
Thielemaim 1978;Wisneski 1977;Zelazna and
Legatowa 1971)
•thin-layer chromatography andelectrophoresis (Basslet
al.1967;Cozzietal.1969;DrostandReith1967;Lepri
etal.1974;Srivastava andDua1975),
•paperchromatography (Galatik 1972;Matrkaand
Kroupa1971;Reio1970),
•chronopotentiometry (Bamberger andStrohl1969),
•polarography (Beilis1965;Usvyatsov etal.1975),
•titrimetric techniques (Ignaczak andDziegiec 1975;
Ratnikova etal.1974),
•spectrophotometry (lordanova 1978;Jenik1979;Von
Mallinckro andHerrmann 1969),
•atomicabsorption spectrophotometry (Mitsui and
Fugimura 1974),
•nuclearmagnetic resonance andmassspectrometry
(Hutzinger 1969),and
•thermogravimetric techniques (Lorant1977).
p-Phenylenediainine Sulfate
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfatehasbeenanalyzed byinfrared
spectroscopy (Keystone AnilineCorporation, 1999).
-9-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMethodofManufacture andImpurities
p-Phenylenedianzine
According totheScientific Committee onConsumer
Products (SCCP2006),thepurityofboththep
Phenylenediamine free base anditsdihydrochioride saltis
>99%.Thefollowing impurities ofp-Phenylenediamine
(reported asspecification limits)arealsomentioned: o
aminophenol (<500ppm),o-Phenylenediamine (<200
ppm),m-Phenylenediamine (<200ppm),andaniline(<50
ppm).
Whiteetal.(2006)reported that99.9%purep
Phenylenediamine has,asitsmainimpurity, Bandrowski’s
baseat0.1%. Traces ofanorganicimpurity, tentatively
identified as4,4-azodianiline, werealsoreported. A7-
monthstability analysis indicated anincrease inthe
concentration ofBrandrowski’s basefrom0.1%to0.5%.
According toCTFA(2007a), p-Phenylenediamine is
manufactured usingthefollowing threemethods: reduction
ofpara-nitroaniline, anilinediazotization, anddirect
nitrationofbenzenewithoutchlorinating. Thethirdmethod
doesnotlenditselftoandhasnotbeenshowntocontain
chlorinated compounds suchaschloro-anddichloroanilines
oraminobiphenyls.
Tureskyetal.(2003)reportedthatsomebatchesofchemical
research gradep-Phenylenediamine (purityof97%)were
contaminated with4-ABP(upto500ppb)and2-ABP(upto
70ppm)andmaybethesourceofABPcontamination in
hairdyes.
CTFA(2007a)noted that themajorU.S.manufacturer ofp
Phenylenediamine produces thischemical atapurityof>
99%foruseinhairdyesviatheprocessofdirectnitrationof
benzenewithoutchlorinating, whichdoesnotlenditselfto
theformation ofaminobiphenyl compounds, andnotbythe
anilinediazotization process.
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
Aspecification forp-Phenylenediamine HC1includes the
following: titre(>98gIlOOg,determined bypotentiometry),
relativepurity(>99%),aniline(<100.LgIg),o-aminophenol
(<500JgIg),o-phenylenediamine (<200igIg),andm
phenylenediamine (<200pg/g)(COLIPA 2006).
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
According toKeystone AnilineCorporation (1999),the
productspecifications forp-Phenylenediamine Sulfateareas
follows:off-white tograypowder,purity(95.0%minimum),
ash (0.5% maximum), iron(50ppmmaximum), and
conforms tostandard JRspectrum.
USE
Purpose inCosmetics
AsgivenintheInternational Cosmetic Ingredient
-10-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteDictionary andHandbook, p-Phenylenediamine HCI,p-reactiveingredients oftheformulation penetrate thecortex
Phenylenediamine Sulfate,andp-Phenylenediamine function ofthehairwherethecoloredcompounds areformed.Color
ashaircolorants incosmetic products (Gottschalck anddevelopment iscomplete in15to30minutes.Thedyeingis
McEwen 2006). According toKeystone Aniline
Corporation (1999),p-Phenylenediamine iscategorized as
apermanent oxidation dyeintermediate, anditsprimaryuse
isthatofaprimaryintermediate.
Scopeand Extent ofUsein Cosmetics
Datasubmitted toFDAin1981bycosmetic firms
participating intheVoluntary Cosmetic Registration
Program (VCRP)indicated that p-Phenylenediamine was
usedinatotalof500haircoloring formulations (Elder
1985).Because datawereonlysubmitted withinthe
framework ofpreset concentration ranges,theopportunity
foroverestimation ofthe actual concentration ofan
ingredient inaparticular productexisted.Nousesofthe
hydrochloride orsulfate salt werereported in198l.These
historical dataaregiveninTable5,withcurrentuseageand
useconcentration information.
The highest levelofp-Phenylenediamine inhair color
products hasbeenassociated withblackshades(normally
3.5to4%) (CTFA 1982a).
VCRPusedatawereprovided in2006 (FDA 2006),anduse
concentration datawereavailable fromacosmetics industry
survey(CTFA2007b). VCRPdata indicate thatp
Phenylenediamine wasbeingusedinatotalof1497
cosmetic products, 1478ofwhicharehairdyesandcolors.
Therewerenousesofthehydrochloride orsulfatesalt
reported intheVCRP.
Useconcentration datafromtheCosmetic, Toiletry, and
Fragrance Association (CTFA 2007b) indicate thatp
Phenylenediamine wasbeingusedincosmetics at
concentrations rangingfrom2%to4%andthatbothp
Phenylenediamine HC1andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
werebeing used ataconcentration of6%.
Permanent hairdyepreparationshave usuallybeenpackaged
in2containers, oneholdingtheintermediate mixtureandthe
othertheoxidizing agent(ReissandFisher1974).Upon
productuse,theintermediate isdilutedandoxidized by
mixingwithequal partsoftheoxidant,usually6%hydrogen
peroxide. Thisprocessmaybleachthenatural hair pigment
(Marzulli etal.1978).The hairdyebaseusuallyconsistsof
anammonium oleatesoapwithsmallamountsofdetergent.
Freeammonia ispresenttopromote theoxidative color
reactionandtogivean“on-head” pHofapproximately 9.5
(Corbett andMenkart 1973).Othermaterials maybe
presentinthedyepreparation; theseincludereducing agents
tocontroltherateofreactionandvarious ingredients toaid
inpenetration, sequestering, foaming, andadhesion (Spoor
1977).
Inpermanent hairdyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine, the
—11—
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable5.Historical andcurrentcosmetic productusesandconcentrations for
p-Phenylenediamine anditshydrochloride andsulfatesalts.
1981uses 2006uses Total 1981 2007concentrationsProductCategory (Elder (FDA, products inconcentrations (CTFA2007b)
1985) 2006)category (Elde,1985) (%)
(FDA2006)
p-Phenylenediainine
Haircoloringproducts
Dyesandcolors 493 1478 1600 0.1to5 2 to4(beforedilution; 1-2afterdilution)
Tints 7 16 56 0.l -
Lighteners withcolor - 3 14 - -
Totaluses/ranges forp-Phenylenediamine 500 1,497 0.1%to5 0.0014% to4
p-Phenylenedia:nine HCI
Haircoloringproducts
Dyesandcolors - - 1600 - 6(beforedilution; 3after dilution)
Totaluses/ranges forp-Phenylenediamine HCI . - - 6
p-Phenylenediarnine Sulfate
Haircoloringproducts
Dyesandcolors - - 1600 - 6(beforedilution; 3afterdilution)
Totaluses/ranges forp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate - - • 6
permanent; theoxidative dyeformed withp
Phenylenediamine isfixedinthehaircortexandisnot
removed byshampooing (ReissandFisher1974).
Subsequent dyeingisnecessitated primarily bytheneedto
colornewhairgrowthratherthanbythefadingofthe
previously coloredhair.However, someoff-shade fading
eventually does occur, asevidenced bythedevelopment of
aredtinge.Thisfadingisattributed toslowchemical
changes intheindodyes(Corbett andMenkart 1973;
Schwartz etal.1979).
Permanent hair coloringformulations areappliedtoormay
comeincontactwithhair,skin,eyes,andnails.While
hairdressers maycomeincontactwithproducts containing
p-Phenylenediamine severaltimesaday,consumers usehair
dyesonceevery6weeks,andmaximum exposure top
Phenylenediamine wouldoccurinusersofblackoxidation
hairdyes.Theseuserswouldapplyapproximately 100gof
adyecomposition containing upto2gofp
Phenylenediamine oneachoccasion.(CTFA l982a).
FortypercentofwomenintheUSareestimated tobe
regularusersofhairdyes(Corbett andMenkart 1973).
Undernormal use conditions, skincontactwiththehairdye
isrestricted to30minuteswithasolution containing less
than3%p-Phenylenediamine (Corbett andMenlcart 1973;
BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976).Usersareexposed
tounreacted p-Phenylenediamine andcouplers, aswellasto
reactiveintermediates, particularly quinone-imine andthe
variousindodyes(BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976).
However, exposure toquinone-imine andthebrowndye,Bandrowski’s base,maybelimited.
Whereas theoxidation of p-Phenylenediamine byhydrogen
peroxide toformp-benzoquinone diimineisrelatively slow
andeven incomplete after24hours,thereactionofthe
variouscouplers withthediimineissorapidastoprevent
anyappreciable buildupofthequinone-imine intermediate
andtoprevent completely theformation ofBandrowski’s
baseinthedyesolution(although itmayforminthehair).
Thehalf-lifeofp-benzoquinone diimineisontheorderofa
fewmilliseconds, anditsconcentration underuseconditions
neverreaches adetectable level(CorbettandMenkart 1973;
BurnettandCorbett1977;Corbett1976).
Gagliardi etal.(1992)assessed therateofexposure top
Phenylenediamine vaporsby hairdressing employees during
aworkday,considering thetypeofsalonandits
characteristics (small,medium, andlarge),thenumberof
dyeapplications perday,andthechemical-physical
characteristics oftheoxidation dyes.Theauthorsconcluded
that,evenunderextreme conditions, lungexposure of
hairdressing employees top-Phenylenediamine isnot
possible.
IntheEuropean Union,m-andp-Phenylenediamines, their
N-substituted derivatives, andtheirsalts,and,also,N-
substitutedderivatives ofo-Phenylenediamines areapproved
(atuselevel]restriction of6%,calculated asfreebase)for
bothgeneralandprofessional useasoxidizing coloring
agentsforhairdyeing.Therequiredproductlabelwarnings
areasfollows: Products forprofessional use -For
professional useonly.Contains phenylenediamines. Can
-12-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotecauseanallergicreaction. Wearsuitablegloves;Products
forgeneraluse -Cancauseanallergicreaction. Contains
phenylenediamines. Donotusetodyeeyelashes or
eyebrows (European Commission 2007).
p-Phenylenediamine anditssalt areincluded onthelistof
ingredients ofquasidrugs that aremarketed inJapan
(Ministry ofHealth,LaborandWelfare (MHLW) 2000).
Bydefinition, quasi-drugs musthaveamildeffectonthe
body,butareneitherintended forthediagnosis, prevention,
ortreatment ofdisease,nor toaffectthestructure orfunction
ofthebody.Hairdyesare among theproducts thatare
designated asquasi-drugs bytheMHLW(MHLW 2002).
In2006,theSCCPpublished adocument (references
included) containing itsopinion onthesafetyofp
Phenylenediamine asanoxidative hairdye(SCCP 2006).
The opinion included:
•p-Phenylenediamine aloneisbeingnotgenotoxic, but,
positivefindings fromgenotoxicity studiesinvivo/in
vitroofp-Phenylenediamine incombination with
couplers and/orhydrogen peroxide aswellina
carcinogenicity study were reported.
•usingaccepted approaches, amarginofsafety (MOS) of
77 wascalculated. Inanotherapproach, theAUCinrats
following aperoraldosageof4mg/kg(corresponding
totheNOAEL) wascompared totheAUCinhumans
following application ofahairdyecontaining 14 C-
labeledPPD.Inthiscaseasafetymarginof16.3was
obtained whichwasnotconsidered sufficient bythe
SCCP.
•experimental evidence wasprovided thatPPDis
metabolised inthe skin toacetylated (i.e.detoxified)
derivatives and,furthermore, thatpresumably activation
ofp-Phenylenediamine (formation ofmonoxygenated
derivatives) doesnotoccur.
Overall, theSCCPwasoftheopinionthattheinformation
submitted isinsufficient toallowafinalriskassessment to
becarriedout.Additional dataarerequired oninvivo
genotoxicity and/orcarcinogenicity ofPPDincombination
withhydrogen peroxide andcouplers (tosimulateconsumer
exposure). Further information alsoisneededtosupportthe
viewthattheMOSissufficiently high.
TheSCCPalsonotedthatthereisanincreasing useofhair
dyesbyyoungpeopleandadditional exposure toPPD
relatedsubstances from temporary tattoosandclothing
textiles.PPDisanextremesensitizer andtheriskofallergy
occurring intheconsumer shouldberealized.
IntheUnited States, p-Phenylenediamine, p
Phenylenedianmine HCI,andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
areconsidered coaltarhairdyesforwhichregulations
requirecautionstatements andinstructions regarding patch
testsinordertobeexemptfrom the principal adulteration
provision andfromthecoloradditiveprovision insections601and706oftheFederalFood, Drug, andCosmetic Act
of1938(FDA,1979).
Productlabelsshallbearacautionstatement and patch test
instructions fordetermining whethertheproductcauses skin
irritation. Inordertobeexempt, thefollowing caution
statement mustbedisplayed onallcoaltarhairdye
products:
Caution -thisproductcontainsingredients whichmaycause
skinirritation oncertainindividuals aridapreliminary test
according toaccompanying directions shouldbemade.This
productmustnotbeused for dyeingtheeyelashes or
eyebrows; todosomaycauseblindness.
TheFDAhasdetermined thatusesofp-Phenylenediamine
otherthanasahairdyeareunapproved, including asoneof
theadditives thatisusedtoaccelerate dryinganddarkenthe
reddishcolorofthehennaindark(black)hennaproducts.
AtitsFebruary 11,1992meeting, theCosmetic Ingredient
Review (CIR)ExpertPanelissuedthefollowing policy
statement oncoaltarhairdyeproductlabeling:
TheCosmetic Ingredient Review(CIR)ExpertPanelhas
reviewed thecosmetic industry’s currentcoaltarhair dye
productlabeling, whichrecommends thatanopenpatchtest
beappliedandevaluated bythebeautician and/orconsumer
forsensitization 24hoursafterapplication ofthetestmaterial
andpriortothe useofahairdyeformulation.
Sincetherecommendation ontheindustry’s adoptedlabeling
establishes aprocedure forindividual usersafety testing, itis
mostimportant thattherecommended procedure beconsistent
withcurrentmedical practice.
Thereisageneralconsensus amongdermatologists that
screening ofpatients forsensitization (allergic contact
dermatitis) shouldbeconducted bytheprocedures usedbythe
NorthAmerican ContactDermatitis Group(NACDG) andthe
International Contact Dermatitis Group(NorthAmerican
Contact Dermatitis Group, 1980;Eiermann etal.,1982;
Adamsetal., 1985).
Basically, these procedures statethat testmaterialshouldbe
appliedatanacceptable concentration tothepatient,covered
withanappropriate occlusive patch,andevaluated for
sensitization at48and72hoursafterapplication. TheCIR
ExpertPanelhascitedtheresultsofstudiesconducted byboth
theNorth American Contact Dermatitis Groupandthe
International Contact Dermatitis Groupinitssafetyevaluation
reportsoncosmetic ingredients (Elder,l985a).
DuringtheAugust 26-27, 1991publicmeetingoftheCIR
ExpertPanel,allmembers agreedthatthecosmetics industry
shouldchangeitsrecommendation fortheevaluation ofthe
openpatchtestfrom24hoursto48hoursafterapplication
ofthetestmaterial.
Noopposition tothisrecommendation wasreceived. Atthe
February 11,1992public meeting oftheCIRExpertPanel,
thispolicy statement wasadopted.
-13-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteNoncosmetic Use
p-Phenylenediamine
Inaddition toitscosmetic useas adyeintermediate in
permanent haircoloring formulations, p-Phenylenediamine
isusedasaphotographic developing agent,alaboratory
reagent, adyedeveloper forfurs,anindustrial chemical
intermediate, anintermediate inthepreparation of
antioxidants andrubber accelerators, andasanantioxidant
forrubberinsewerpipejoints.Thecompound isalsoused
inx-rayfilmfluids,printer’s ink,clothing, shoes,leather
processing, lithographic processing, photochemical
measurements, rubbervulcanization, printing ofcellulosic
textilematerials, dyestuff manufacture, andproduction of
polyparaphenylene terephthalamide, afiberusedintire
cords(Hawley 1971;IARC1978;TheSocietyofDyersand
Colourists 1971;Windholz 1976;EPA1982;BeardandNoe
1981;EPA1980;Baeretal.1973;CundellandMulcock
1976;Grant1969;KerseyandStevenson 1980;Schorr
1974).
In dyemanufacturing, p-Phenylenediamine isusedasan
intermediate intheproduction ofanumberofcolorshaving
commercial significance (IARC1978;TheSocietyofDyers
andColourists 1971;National Cancer Institute [NCI] 1978;
The Society ofDyersandColourists 1956).Theseinclude
CI.DirectOrange27,Disperse Yellow 9,Solvent Orange
53,SulphurBrown23,Leuco Sulphur Brown23,C.I.
Disperse Black2,CI.DirectGreen28,CI.AcidViolet3,
CI.Direct Black 9,CI.DirectBlack2,C.I.DirectBlack
80,and C.I.DirectBlack19.Thecompound isalsoan
intermediate intheproduction ofdyesderivedfrom4-
aminoacetanilide, 4-aminoformanilide, 4-nitro-aniline, and
4aminooxanilic acid (IARC 1978;TheSocietyofDyersand
Colourists 1971).
Chemical andbiochemical applications ofp
Phenylenediamine includeuseasanindicator andreagent
fornitrogen (Grant 1969),asachromogenic sprayreagent
forthin-layer chromatography (Adamovic 1966),andasa
hydrogen donorforperoxidase assay systems (Awasthi etal.
1977;Pilzetal.1976a,b,c; Pilzetal.1978).
p-Phenylenediamine isalsousedforremoving nitrogenand
sulfuroxides from waste gases(Ito andTatsumi 1976;Itoet
al.1978;Kohleretal.1978;Matsumoto andUlcawa1979;
Ukawa andOkino1979)andforthecalorimetric
determination ofhydrogen sulfideinair(Fedorova 1971;
Stanetal.1979),thiocyanate inbiological fluids(Pettigrew
andFell1972),andinorganic phosphorus inserum(Parekh
andJung1970).Otherapplications includeuseas a
substrate tomeasure theactivityofoxidative enzymes
(Anderson etal.1968;Cabrillat andFontainiere 1980;
Dimmit 1975;Hohbadel etal.1975;Jensenetal. 1977;
Kelleher andMason1979;Lamandetal.1980;Linderand
Moor1977;MacDonald etal.1980;Marcollett etal.1980;Peisach andLevine1965;Pettersson 1970),andas a
stainingagentforbiological materials (Colman andStockert
1979;Esponda andStockert 1978;Huffetal.1982;Ingjer
1979;JuhlinandShelley1977;Korneliussen etal.1978;
KrauhsandSalinas1980;Ledingham andSimpson 1970;
Ledingham andSimpson 1972;Macbeth etal.1975;
Sheibani etal.1981;Shepard andMitchell 1977;Snipes
1977;Stockert 1977;Szent-Gyorgyi 1980;Vaganova and
Sekamova 1980).
Thehydrochloride saltofp-Phenylenediamine isusedasan
analytical reagentinthetestingofblood, hydrogen sulfide,
amylalcohol, andmilkandasacolorandpigment
intermediate infur andtextiledyeing. It isalsousedinthe
manufacture ofrubberandplastics(IARC1978;Windholz
1976;National Cancer institute[NCI] 1978). Derivatives of
p-Phenylenediamine areimportant antioxidants insynthetic
andnaturalrubbers,petroleum products, cellulose ethers,
andalfalfameal(IARC1978;Thirtle1968).
Anoccupational exposure limitforp-Phenylenediamine
recommended by theNational Institute forOccupational
SafetyandHealth(NIOSH) hasbeenadopted bythe
Occupational SafetyandHealth Administration. Thetime-
weighted average (TWA)concentration is0.1mg/m3[skin]
foruptoa10-hourworkday duringa40-hourworkweek
(NIOSI-I2005).
f1’N1?1AT RTflT(11V
Enzyme Effects
p-Phenylenediamine
Appiani etal.(l965) reported thatthenarcotic effect of
pentobarbital inratswaspotentiated bypretreatment ofthe
animalswithp-Phenylenediamine. Microsomes from rats
pretreated withp-Phenylenediamine alsometabolized both
evipanandstrychnine invitroatlowerratesthandid
microsomes from control animals. According tothe
researchers, theincreased drug sensitivity ofindividuals
exposed top-Phenylenediamine mayhavebeenduetoa
partial inhibition ofhepaticmicrosomal enzymes.
Geratzetal.(1966)observed inhibition ofcatalaseactivity
inbeefliverexposed invitrotol04M(approximately 20%
inhibition) tol02M(approximately 90%inhibition) p
Phenylenediamine. Studieswiththemeta,ortho,andpara
isomersofphenylenediamine indicated inhibition ofcatalase
activityincreases invitro,withincreasing instability ofthe
compound towardoxidation. Noinhibition ofhepatic
catalaseactivitywasnotedinmice given injections ofthe
paraisomer(doseunspecified). Thelackofactioninvivo
maybedueto“rapiddegradation” ofp-Phenylenediamine
intheorganism.
Geratz (1969) gavep-Phenylenediamine andother trypsin
inhibitors tostarvedratsbygastricintubation todetermine
theireffectonreleaseofpancreatic enzymes. Secretory
14-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotestimulation ofthepancreas by0.01Mp-Phenylenediamine
wasnotsignificantly differentthanthatofthesalinecontrol.
The author concluded thattherewas“nostrictparallelism”
betweenpancreas-stimulating activityandtrypsin-inhibitory
strength.
Kadlubowski (1971)reported studies with mice inwhicha
totaldosageof67.6 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine wasgiven
byintramuscular injection duringeithera10-or20-day
period.Theactivityofvariousenzymes wasmeasured 48
hours following thelastinjection. When compared to
controlanimals,micegivenp-Phenylenediamine for10days
hada33%increaseinhepatic catalase activity, a32to36%
decrease inhepatic succinic dehydrogenase activity,anda
23to32%decrease inhepaticcytochrome oxidaseactivity;
nochangeswerenotedinbloodcatalaseactivityorinthe
blood peroxidase index. In animals exposed top
Phenylenediamine for20 days, a38%increase inhepatic
catalase activitywasobserved ascompared tocontrol
values;nochanges werenotedinthehepaticactivities of
succinic dehydrogenase orcytochrome oxidase, inthe
activityofbloodcatalase, orinthebloodperoxidase index.
Watanabe etal.(1976)administered atestsuspension ofp
Phenylenediamine inpropylene glycolbyintraperitoneal
injection tomaleratsinadoseof100imo1/kg (inavolume
of2ml).Bloodactivities ofaspartate aminotransferase and
alanineaminotransferase remained essentially unchanged
fromcontrolvalues.
Solanoetal.(1988)studiedornithine carboxylase activityin
thepresence ofp-Phenylenediamine. Theactivityof
ornithine decarboxylase wasdetermined bymeasuring the
rateof‘4C0,evolved from L-[1-14C] ornithine. Partially
purifiedratliverornithine decarboxylase wasinhibited byp
Phenylenediamine (1mM).Therelative activityof
ornithine decarboxylase inthepresence of p
Phenylenediamine was7.5%.
Mathureta!.(1990)exposed 44malealbino guinea pigs
(meanweight =250±10g)top-Phenylenediamine (skin
painting, 1%w/vsolution). Thetestsubstance was
administered atadosevolumeof0.1ml/dayfor1,3,5,and
7days.Lipidperoxidation waselevatedondays3,5,and
7,andsignificant increases inhistamine wereobserved on
days1,3, 5,and7.Nosignificant changes inthe
glutathione content oftheskinwerenoted.Theenzymatic
activityofaspartate aminotransferase (AST)increased on
day7andtheenzymatic activityofalanineaminotransferase
(ALT) increased on days 5and7.Tyrosinase activity
increased onday7.Theactivities of3-glucuronidase, y
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT),andALTenzymesbecame
elevatedafter5and7daysofp-Phenylenediamine painting.
Mathur etal.(1992) studied theeffectofp
Phenylenediamine onenzyme activity, lipidperoxidation,
andthehistamine contentofguineapigskin.Thirtymalealbinoguineapigs(meanweight =250±10g)were
dividedequallyintothefollowing 3groups. Group 1
(animals, clippedfreeoffur,painteddailywith3%solution
(w/v)ofp-Phenylenediamine in25%ethanol[dosevolume
=0.1 ml]for15and30days);Group2(animalspainted
withsameconcentration ofp-Phenylenediamine plus
hydrogen peroxide (6.0%,0.1ml)dailyfor15and30days);
andGroup3(animals treatedwithvehicleonly).The
activities ofacidandalkaline phosphatases, 13-
glucuronidase, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase, histidase,
andtyrosinase wereenhanced following theapplication of
eitherp-Phenylenediamine orp-Pheny!enediamine plus
hydrogen peroxide. Additionally, lipidperoxidation and
histamine content weremarkedly elevated following
exposure.
EffectonSerumProteins
p-Phenylenediamine
Rabbitsgivenp-Phenylenediamine inoraldoses of20mg/kg
perdayfor12to13dayshadincreased bloodconcentrations
ofalpha-, beta-, andgamma-globulin anddecreased serum
concentrations ofalbumin andtotalprotein.Adecreased
albumin:globulin (A:G)ratiowasalsoobserved.p
Phenylenediamine administered torabbitsdailyinoraldoses
of10mg/kgfor90daysincreased serumglobulin
concentration and total proteincontent andcauseda
decrease intheA:Gratio;nochangeinserum albumin
concentration wasnoted.Theauthors suggested thatchanges
intheserumproteinconcentration mayberelatedto
alterations invascularpermeability (Mikhlin andMarchenko
1972).
Hematological Effects
p-Phenylenediamine
Inastudyinvestigating methemoglobin formation byp
Phenylenediamine, Lin andWu(1973)reportedthat3.23x
iO’mol/kgofthehairdyeintermediate wassuspended in
0.5mlofpeanut oilandinjectedintraperitoneally intomale
rats.Methemoglobin as apercentage oftotalhemoglobin
was3.7±1.0atihour,1.4±0.6at4hours,3.8±1.4at7
hours,and3.6±1.5at10hours after injection. Invitro
determinations ofmethemoblogin werealso made. Rat
erythrocytes wereisolatedandincubated withl03Mp
Phenylenediamine dissolved indimethyl sulfoxide.
Methemoglobin asapercentoftotalhemoglobin was2.0±
1.8at1minute, 1.2±0.5at5minutes, 1.8±0.1at10
minutes, 1.8±0.1at20minutes, 2.4±0.7at30minutes, 0.5
±0.5at60minutes, 3.9±0.9at90minutes, and3.9±0.9at
120minutesofincubation. Nomethemoglobin formation
wasobserved inerythrocytes incubated withthedimethyl
sulfoxide vehicle.Additional studiesdemonstrated thatp
aminophenol induced methemoglobin formation. The
authorsconcluded that, when incubated together withp
15-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteaminophenol inisolated raterythrocytes, p
Phenylenediamine hadastrong inhibitory effect on
methemoglobin formation (Lin andWu1973).
Watanabe etal.(1976)reported astudyinwhicha
suspension ofp-Phenylenediamine inpropylene glycolwas
givenbyintraperitoneal injection tomaleratsatadoseof
1001mol/kg (inavolumeof2ml).Thepercentage of
methemoglobin formedinthebloodwas 12.9 ±4.2five
hoursaftertheinjection. Methemoglobin formation wasalso
studiedinvitrobyincubating 0.1pmolofrathemoglobin
with0.5pmolofp-Phenylenediamine at37°Cfor5hours.
Methemoglobin formation invitrowas12.8±0.4%,
whereasthecontrolmethemoglobin concentration was4.2
±1.0%.
Re andD’Aleo(1980)reported that3groupsof2female
Beagledogseachwerebled2daysbeforedosingand6and
24hours after gastric intubation ofaqueousp
Phenylenediamine solutions indosesof1.0,3.0,and10.0
mg/kg.Methemoglobin concentrations inthebloodwere
measured. Inanadditional trial ofthesameexperiment, 2
morefemaleBeagle dogs received 10mg/kgp
Phenylenediamine orally.Allmethemoglobin values were
withinthenormalrange.
Loehrand Re(1981)reportedthatagroupof10pregnant
ratsreceived 40 mg/kg p-Phenylenediamine orallyon days
8,9,and10ofgestation. Two ratsdiedafterthethirddose.
Asecondgroupof10pregnant ratsreceived 30mg/kgp
Phenylenediamine orallyonDays6through 15ofgestation.
Therewere20controlrats.Theanimalswerebled4to5
hoursafter the finaldoseofp-Phenylenediamine, and
methemoglobin concentrations weremeasured asa
percentage oftotalhemoglobin. Allthecontrolanimals had
methemoglobin concentrations oflessthan0.1%.Oneratin
the 40mg/kggroupandoneinthe30mg/kg group had
methemoglobin concentrations of0.1and0.4%,
respectively. Allothertreatedratshadmethemoglobin
concentrations oflessthan0.1%.
Cardiovascular Effects
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Administration ofp-Phenylenediamine HC1in0.9% sodium
chloride asaslowintravenous perfusion (10mg/100gor20
mg/100g)oras arapidintravenous injection (5mg/100g)
induced anirreversible cardiovascular collapse inrats
(Cession-Fossion andLecomte 1971;Lecomte 1971;
Lecomte etal.1972).Thecardiovascular collapse was
accompanied byasignificant increase inblood
catecholamine concentrations (Cession-Fossion and
Lecomte 1971),butthecauseofthecollapsecouldnotbe
explained byaliberation ofendogenous aminesfrom
mastocytes orbyconsumption ofkininogens (Lecomte
1971).p-Phenylenediamine HC1(20mg/100g)givenbyintravenous perfusion hadnoeffectontheelevation of
bloodpressureinducedinratsbyadrenalin ornoradrenalin
(Cession-Fossion andLecomte 1971;Lecomte etal.1972)
andhadnodirect medullary excitatory action(Lecomte et
al.1972).
Immune SystemEffects
p-Phenylenediamine
Samter(1970)observed massiveperibronchial infiltrates of
eosinophils inguineapigs72hours after intrapulmonary
injection ofanaqueous solution containing 1%p
Phenylenediamine. Antigen-induced infiltrates of
eosinophils werelimited totheinjected lung;no
eosinophilia developed intheblood,andnoinfiltrates of
eosinophils weredetected inthenoninjected lung,which
servedasthecontrol.Theauthornoted that although
anaphylactic sensitivity top-Phenylenediamine isknown,the
hairdyeintermediategenerally inducesadelayedsensitivity
thatisnotassociated witheosinophilia.
A0.9%sodiumchloridesolutioncontaining 100ig/mlp
Phenylenediamine failedtoinducereleaseofhistamine or5-
hydroxytryptamine whenincorporated intoisolatedratmast
cells(Lecomte andBaeckeland 1971).
p-Phenylenediamine addedtoratperitoneal mastcell
culturesatconcentrations of20to300 ng/ml hadnoeffect
ondegranulation (Lecomte etal.1972).
Usinghistochemical stainingtechniques, ShelleyandJuhlin
(1977)discovered aselectiveuptakeofp-Phenylenediamine
byLangerhans cellsinisolated guinea pig andhuman
epidermis. Itwaspostulated thatLangerhans cells were the
siteofhaptenbindingandantigen formation aswellasthe
centraltargetcellsinimmunecontactdermatitis reactions
involving p-Phenylenediamine.
EffectonMelanogenesis
p-Phenylenediamine
Lerner andFitzpatrick (1950) observed thatp
Phenylenediamine inhibitsmelanin formation invitro.The
authorssuggested thathairdyeintermediate combined with
ortho-quinones, thereby preventing theoxidation ofdopa
quinonetomelanin. Inhibition byp-Phenylenediamine of
melaninformation invivohasnotbeenreported
Brotherton (1969) found thatincubation of10mlvip
Phenylenediamine withculturesofbothwhiteandblackpig
skincaused“marked degeneration,” a“morerapid”
pyknosis, andinhibition ofboth arginine andtyrosineuptake
intoskinprotein.Incorporation oftyrosineintothemelanin
ofskinwasalsoinhibited. Thisauthorsuggested that p
Phenylenediamine wasaninhibitoroftyrosinase, anenzyme
thatcatalyzes theoxidation oftyrosine todopaandthe
oxidation ofdopaintomelanin.
-16-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMetabolic Effects
p-Phenylenediamine
O’Neilletal.(1965)reported thataconcentration of103M
p-Phenylenediaminestimulated thehexose,monophosphate
glycolytic pathway inisolatedguineapig brain tissueand
inhibited glycolysis bytheEmbden-Meyerhof-Parnas
pathway. Addition ofthe hair dyeintermediate tothe
cerebral cortex slicesasanelectron acceptor causedan
increase in14C0.from[l-14C]glucose whencompared with
that from[6-’4Clglucose.
CilentoandZinner(1967)suggested that,instudiesof
electrontransport inwhichp-pheriylene diamines areused
asmediators betweentherespiratory chainandthesubstrate,
thesubstrate oxidation may,inpart,bypasstherespiration
phosphorylation chain.Thus,alowering oftheP:Oratio
(molecules ofadenosine diphosphate [ADPI
phosphorylated:atoms ofoxygen reduced) wouldbe
expected asaresultofincreasing concentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine.
Guptaetal.(1991)studied theeffectofasingle
concentration ofp-Phenylenediamine onglutathione-S
transferase atvarioustime intervals. Groupsof8female
albinostrainCDRIguineapigs(4test,4controlspergroup;
weights =200to250g)wereused.Inthefirstexperiment,
patchescontaining 0.1mlofp-Phenylenediamine (0.9%in
25%ethanol) wereappliedfor24,48,or72hours.In
anotherexperiment, 3concentrations ofp-Phenylenediamine
solutions (0.45%,0.9%,and1.8%,allin25%ethanol)were
appliedandobservations weremadeafter24hours.
At24hours,therewasnosignificant, dose-dependent
change inglutathione-s-transferase activity inthe
postmitochondrial fraction (prepared fromguineapigskin)
ateithertestconcentration. Themaximum increase in
glutathione-S-transferase activity (71%increase) was
inducedby0.9%p-Phenylenediamine at48and72hours.
Microscopic examination ofthe skin at24hourspost-
application revealedevidence ofhyperkeratosis. Significant
changes, compared tothecontrol,werenotobserved in
other epidermal layersorinthedermis. However, at48
hours,discontinuity wasobserved inareasofthestratum
germinativum, indicating atoxic risk totheskin.A
moderate degreeofedemawasobserved inthedermis
(Guptaetal.,1991).
Mathur etal.(2005) studied theeffectofp
Phenylenediamine on theskinusinggroupsof4guinea pigs
(weights =250±10g).Inthecontrolgroup,p
Phenylenediamine (1.0%solution in25%ethanol) was
appliedtopically toa2cmx2cmareaofskin(clippedfree
ofhair).Anothergroupofguineapigswastreatedwith4
mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine dailyfor30days,andathird
groupwastreatedwith4mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine +12mg/kg linear alkylbenzene sulfonate forthesameduration.
Attheendoftreatment, controlandtestanimalswerekilled.
Sectionsoftreatedskinsiteswereobtained forbiochemical
studiesandhistopathological examination.
Compared tothecontrol,dosingwithp-Phenylenediamine
caused asignificant increase in-glucuronidase,
glutathione-s-transferase, andglutathione peroxidase
activities overthe30-day dosing period.p
Phenylenediamine alsocausedasignificant increaseinlipid
peroxidation andhistamine levels.The authors concluded
that,compared tocontrolanimals, therepeated dermal
applicaton ofp-Phenylenediamine induceddamagetothe
skin.Theyalsonotedthefollowing changes following
simultaneous treatment withp-Phenylenediamine andlinear
alkylbenzene sulfonate: severehyperkeratosis, vacuolization
ofepidermal cells,andthickening ofcollagenfibers(Mathur
etal.2005).
Inhibition ofProstaglandin Biosynthesis
p—Phenylenediainine
Endogenous prostaglandin biosynthesis inhomogenates of
rat brain wasinhibited 58to67%by2x104Mp
Phenylenediamine (Schaefer etal.1978).
Cytotoxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Interference withmitosiswasobserved inintestinal cellsof
micegivena0.05mgintraperitoneal injection ofp
Phenylenediamine (Parmentier 1949;Sarutaetal.1958).
Glutathione depletion, lipidperoxidation andcelllysiswere
observed inisolatedrathepatocytes treatedwith1.0mlvip
Phenylenediamine (Anundietal1979).
Shigematsu etal.(1988)evaluated thecytotoxicity ofp
Phenylenediamine usingepidermal cellsuspensions from
JY-lguineapigs(inbredstrain).Thecellswereculturedfor
24hoursandp-Phenylenediamine wasaddedat
concentrations of1to20ppmoveraperiodof48hours.At
atestconcentration of10ppm,thenumberofadherent cells
wasdecreased (21%to40%)whencompared tocontrol.At
atestconcentration of20ppm,anevengreaterdecrease
(41%to60%)inthenumberofadherentcellswasreported.
Chung etal.(1996) studied thepotency ofp
Phenylenediamine incausing cytotoxic effectsinChinese
hamsterovarycells.ATC50(50% toxic concentration) of
29±4ppmwasreported.
TheresultsofastudybyPicardoeta!.(1996)indicated that
p-Phenylenediamine inducedoxidative stressinnormal
humankeratinocytes inculture. Depending onthep
Phenylenediamine concentration andtheperiodofexposure,
peroxidative damage, withasignificant decrease in
membrane polyunsaturated fattyacids,wasdetected.
-17-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteConcentrations between0.5and2pg/mIproduced aninitial
increaseand,then,adecrease inbothsuperoxide dismutase
andcatalase activities andintheoxidation ofreduced
glutathione (GSH) for upto12hours.After24hours
(decomposition ofp-Phenylenediamine complete), the
recovery ofinitiallevelsoftheantioxidants wasdetected.
Concentrations greaterthan5pg/mi induced aprogressive
decrease inenzymatic activity andGSHconcentrations.
Chenetal.(2006)investigated themechanism oftoxicityof
p-Phenylenediamine onthegrowthofMardin-Darby canine
kidneycells.Thecellsweregrownfor24hours,and,after
60%confluency wasattained, thecellswereaddedto
different concentrations ofp-Phenylenediamine inDMSO
(12.5,25,37.5,or5Opg/mi).DMSO(0.1%)servedasthe
solventcontrol. Usingflowcytometry, adose-dependent
accumulation ofthesub-G1peakandtheG0/Gl-phase
arrestedinthecellcycleandatime-dependent induction of
apoptosis wereobserved. Dose-dependent DNA
fragmentation (considered biological hallmarkofapoptosis),
thereduction ofmembrane potential bymitochondrial
membrane depolarization, andanincrease intheexpression
ofp53proteinincellswerereported. Theevidence ofp
Phenylenediamine induced DNA fragmentation into
nucleosomes wasDNAladdering after24hoursof
incubation. These changes suggested thattheeffectofp
Phenylenediamine onoverallviabilityandcellnumbers was
mediated by anincrease inapoptosis.
Theauthors notedthat thoughp-Phenylenediamine-induced
apoptosis inMardin-Darby caninekidney cellswasreported
inthisstudy,relationships between inhibition ofreplication,
transcription modulation, andapoptosis induced byp
Phenylenediamine remaintobestudied. Theyaddedthat
theinteraction betweenapoptosis andcarcinogenesis also
warrants furtherinvestigation (Chenetal.,2006).
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Cytotoxicity testingofp-Phenylenediamine HC1(in0.5%
acetone or 0.5% dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSOI) was
conducted inparallelwiththetestingofthisdyeinthe
C3HI1OT1/2 celltransformation assayat2different
laboratories. Thedoserangestestedatthe2laboratories
were0.8to100pg/mland0.5to5.0pg/ml,respectively.
Themethodology fordetermining cytotoxicity wasbasedon
thefractionofcellssurviving aftera24-hourtreatment of
l0cells(numberofcellsusedintransformation assay).p
Phenylenediamine HC1wastoxicatthehighestdose tested,
100pg/mI (Dunkel etal.,1988).
Antiparasitic Activity
p-Phenylenediamine MCI
p-Phenylenediamine HCIdemonstrated schistosomicidal
activitywhengivenorallytomiceinfectedwithSchistosoma
,nansoni (Nabih andHelmy 1965).Thehairdyeintermediate alsopossessed insecticidal andtuberculostatic
properties (NabihandHelmy1965;Blocketal.1947).
ABSORPTION, DISTRIBUTION, METABOLISM
andEXCRETION
p-Phenylenediamine MCI
Ioannou andMatthews (1985) studied theabsorption,
distribution, metabolism, andexcretion ofp
Phenylenediamine HCIusingmaleandfemaleFischer344
rats(8weeksold;weights =180to200g)andmaleand
femaleB6C3F1mice(6to8weeksold;weights =18to25
g).For administration (i.v.ororal),p-Phenylenediamine
wasdissolved inasolutionof(1:1)ethanolandEmulphor
EL-620(polyoxyethylated castoroil),andwaterwasadded
toyieldafinalsolventratio(ethanoi-Emulphor:water) of
1:1:8.Radiolabeled p-Phenylenediamine diluted,asneeded,
withnonlabeled p-Phenylenediamine wasusedtoadminister
15pCilkgateachdoselevel.Thedosesadministered orally
were60and600jimollkg in1mI/kgofthedosingsolution.
Thei.v.doseof600pmol/kg (65mg/kg)wasadministered
byinjection intoatailveinfortissuedistribution studies.
Eachmeanvaluerelatingtothedistribution orexcretion of
p-Phenylenediamine-derived radioactivity wasobtainedwith
3animals.
Theisstudyshowedthat,inratsandmice(bothsexesof
eachspecies), p-Phenylenediamine HCIwasreadily
absorbed, distributed toallmajortissuesexamined, and
metabolized toseveralmetabolites (metabolites observed on
highperformance liquidchromatography (HPLC)
chromatogram notnamed). These metabolites arerapidly
clearedfromthebody(mainlythroughtheurine),and,toa
lesserextent,throughthefeces.Theresults ofacomparison
ofp-Phenylenediamine HCIdistribution andexcretion
following administration (oraloriv.)toratsandmice
suggested thatgastrointestinal absorption wasnearly
complete andthatexcretion wasnotgreatlyaffectedby the
routeofadministration ordose.Furthermore, absorption
andexcretion werenot identical, butwerecomparable
across species andsexes.Absorption wasdescribed as
rapid,and,inmostcases,excretion inurinewasmorethan
90%complete withinthefirst24hours.
Theauthorsreported only2sex-related differences inthe
concentrations ofp-Phenylenediamine HC1-derived
radioactivity inthetissuesofmice.Malemicehadhigher
concentrations inthe liver, whereas, femaleshadhigher
concentrations inmuscle.Whenresidualconcentrations of
p-Phenylenediamine HC1-derived radioactivity inthetissues
ofmiceandratswerecompared, thevalueswerefoundtobe
inthesamerange,exceptforthekidneyandmuscle.The
kidneycontained lowerconcentrations inbothsexesof
mice,andthemusclecontained lowerconcentrations inmale
mice(Ioannou andMatthews 1985).
Percutaneous Absorption
-18-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine
Maibach andWolfram (1981) added[C’4]p-
Phenylenediamine toacommercially available hairdye,and
themanufacturer’s instructions wereusedtodyethehairof
rhesusmonkeys andhumans.
Threemonkeys wereanesthetized, andthedyelotion(2.5g
ofthedyesolutionand2.5gof6%hydrogen peroxide) was
workedintotheirdryscalphairforapproximately 3minutes
andleftonforanadditional 20minutes, andthen thehair
wasrinsed,towel-dried, andshaved.Urinewascollected
fromthemonkeys at6,12,and24hours,andthenat24-
hour intervals for7days.Radioactivity determinations were
madeon thehairandurine. The 3monkeys excreted intheir
urinerangesof0.083to0.190%oftheappliedradioactivity
duringthe7daysfollowing hair dye use.Rangesof12.9to
14.5%oftheappliedradioactivity weremeasured inthehair
ofthemonkeys.[C’4]p-Phenylenediamine wasaddedtoacommercially
available hairdye,andthemanufacturer’s instructions were
usedtodyethehairofhumans. The dyemixture(-110g
total,mixtureofdyesolutionand6%hydrogen peroxide)
wasappliedtothedryhairof5humans.Itwasworkedinfor
5to8minutesandleft onforanadditional 20minutes.The
hairwasrinsed,towel-dried andshaved.Thesubjects
collected urineforthetimeperiods0to4,4to8,8to12,
and12to24hours,andthenat24-hourtimeperiodsupto
144hours.Radioactivity determinations weremadeonthe
hairand urine.
The5subjectsexcreted intheirurine ranges of 0.072 to
0.207%oftheappliedradioactivity duringthe7days
following hairdyeuse.Rangesof14.1to26.5%ofthe
appliedradioactivity were measured inthehair(Maibach
andWolfram 1981).
Asnotedearlier,hairdyesarenormally usedonceevery6
weeks, and maximum exposure top-Phenylenediamine
wouldoccurinusersofblack oxidation hairdyes.These
userswould apply approximately 100gofadye
composition containing upto2gofp-Phenylenediamine on
eachoccasion. Ifapproximately 0.2%oftheappliedp
Phenylenediamine wasabsorbed percutaneously, a50kg
personwouldabsorb80jig/kgateachhairdyeapplication
(CTFAl982a).
Bronaugh andCongdon (1984)studiedthepercutaneous
absorption ofahomologous seriesofhairdyes(p
Phenylenediamineincluded) throughhuman epidermisfrom
abdominal skin.Circular piecesofskinwereclamped
betweentwohalvesofadiffusion cellandaqueous solutions
ofthehairdyeswereapplied. Thevolumeapplied(0.5ml)
completely coveredthe1.13cm2areaofexposed skinin
eachcell.Permeability constants weredetermined by
dividing thesteady-state absorption rateby theinitial
vehicle concentration oftheapplied compound.Octanol/water partition coefficients weredetermined by
shakingthetestcompound inamixturecontaining 5mlof
waterand5mlofoctanol. At theendof24hours,theratio
oftheamountofdyeineach solvent wasdetermined.
Anoctanol/water partition coefficient of0.5anda
permeability constantof2.4x1ocm/h were reportedforp
Phenylenediamine. The authors notedthatsinceother
factors,suchasbindingtoproteins intheskin,playarolein
determining theabsorption rate,oil/water partition
coefficients aloneprovidelimitedpredictive information
(Bronaugh andCongdon 1984).
Kimetal.(1987)incorporated[‘4C]-p-Phenylenediamine
(1%inpetrolatum) intoavarietyofpatchtestsystemsata
concentration thatwasnormalized toequalasurfaceareaof
2mg/mm2. Skinabsorption inthe guinea pig was
determined byevaluating theurinaryexcretion of14C.In
decreasing order,%skinabsorption fromthe systems were
HillTopchamber(53.4±20.6)>Tefloncontrolpatch(48.6
±9.3)>smallFinnchamber withpaperdiscinsert(34±
19.8)>smallFinnchamber (29.8±9.0)>largeFinn
chamber (23.1±7.3)>AL-test chamber (8.0±0.8).
Whiteetal.(2007)conducted askinbindingstudy(6male
and6femaleSprague Dawley/Charles RiverCD[SPF]rats,
6weeks old) inconjunction withthehumanstudythatis
summarized intheClinicalAssessment ofSafetysection
(SkinSensitization subheading) laterinthereporttext. A14C-p-Phenylenediamine prototype hairdyebase vehicle
(alsocontaining otherintermediates andcouplers tomimic
in-useconditions) wasprepared toyieldatestconcentration
of3.5mgp-Phenylenediamine/g basevehicle. p
Phenylenediamine wasappliedto10cm2ofskin(previously
rinsedwithdetergent solution) inafreshlyprepared
prototype baseformulation mixedwithperoxide developer
(1:1byweight). Thus,theamountofp-Phenylenediamine
appliedwasapproximately 35jig/cm2.Treatment ofthe3
groupsof2ratswasdescribed asfollows:Group 1(single
5-mmapplication; killedat day1),Group2(single5-mm
application; killedat day3),andGroup3(3daily5-mm
applications; killedat day3).
Thetotalamountsofpenetrated andexcreted radioactivity
wereasfollows: Group 1(0.89jigequivalents ofp
Phenylenediamine), Group2(0.92jigequivalents ofp
Phenylenediamine), andGroup3(5.1jigequivalents ofp
Phenylenediamine). The overall recoveries ofthetotal
appliedradioactive doseinthe3groupswere:102.7%
(Group 1),102.6%(Group2),and102.6%(Group3).
Cumulative timeandsingleexposure timesitescorrelated
withregardtotheretentionofradiolabeled test substance in
theskin(Whiteetal.2007).
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
Kieseetal.(1968)applied p-Phenylenediamine HC1ingels
andfluids,suchasthoseusedinhuman hair dyeing,tothe
-19-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteskinofdogs,andabsorption wascalculated fromthe
concentrations ofp-Phenylenediamine observed intheblood
ortheamountsexcreted inthe urine. Correction factorswere
determined byobserving concentrations inbloodand urine
afterintravenous infusion orsubcutaneous injection of
knownamounts ofp-Phenylenediamine HCI.Maledogs
weretrainedtolieon theirbacksfor3hourswiththeirlegs
heldlooselyafterapplication ofp-Phenylenediamine HC1
preparations totheirabdominal skin.Afterthe3hourshad
elapsed, the dogs werewashedwithsoapandwaterand
wererinsed.
In thefirstseriesofexperiments, agelcontaining 2.5gofp
Phenylenediamine HC1(1.5gp-Phenylenediamine) ina
mixtureof25mlofoleicacid,isopropanol, ammonia,
higheralcoholsulfates(mainly laurylsulfate), sodium
ethylenediamine tetraacetate, sodiumsulfiteandperfume,
and25mlofwateror6%hydrogen peroxide, adjustedtopH
9.5,was used. Thegelwithwaterwasappliedtotheskin
andcovered withaluminum foilorleftuncovered and
spreadfromtimetotime with aspatula.Thegelwith
hydrogen peroxide wasappliedandleftuncovered. p
Phenylenediamine wasmeasured inthebloodafter
application ofthegelwithwater,anditwasdetermined that
absorption wasfavoredinthecoveredapplication.
Thebloodconcentrations at3hourswere 0.15 and0.5
ig/mlfortheuncovered andcovered gelwithwater
applications, respectively. Thegelwaswashedofftheskin
after3hours,andthep-Phenylenediamine concentrations in
thebloodslowlydroppedoverthenext3hours.
Absorption wasstimulated byacontinuous intravenous
infusionofp-Phenylenediamine HCIintoanesthetized dogs.
Theamountsofp-Phenylenediamine thatmusthavebeen
absorbed toresultinvariousbloodconcentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine werecalculated. Theintravenous infusion
withconstant velocity did notperfectly simulate the
absorption ofp-Phenylenediamine throughtheskin.Itwas
calculated that11mg/kgofp-Phenylenediamine was
absorbed whenthegelwithwaterwasappliedundercover
totheskin.Inthegelwith water application withoutcover,
atotalof16mg/kgofp-Phenylenediamine wasabsorbed.
Nop-Phenylenediamine wasfoundinthebloodwhengel
withH,0,wasusedforskinapplication. Sinceintravenous
infusions of0.001mg/kgperminute ofp-Phenylenediamine
yieldeddetectable bloodconcentrations, theabsorption must
havebeenlessthan2mg.
Inasecondseriesofexperiments, afluidcontaining 0.6%
p-Phenylenediamine in30mlofdetergent, aphosphoric acid
esterofahigheralcohol,sodiumhydroxide, andperfume,
10mlofisopropanol, and10mlofwater,adjusted topH
9.5,wasappliedtotheskinofdogs.p-Phenylenediamine
absorption wasestimated bydetermining theamount
excreted intheurineafteritwasinjectedsubcutaneously.Following subcutaneous injection atdosesof0.6,1.2,and
3mg/kg,the averageamountsofp-Phenylenediamine found
intheurineofdogs(ascalculated from3experiments) with
each dose wereproportional tothedoseinjected. Even
thoughtheconcentration ofp-Phenylenediamine inthe fluid
waslowerthaninthegel,thetotalamountofp
Phenylenediamine absorbed wasapproximately thesame
fromthefluidasfromtheuncovered gelwithwater
application. Absorption waslessifresorcinol and2,4-
diaminophenol were added tothefluidpreparation.
Bandrowski’s basewasabsorbed throughtheskinand was
detected intheurine,although notintheblood(Kieseetal.
1968).
Rehani etal.(1981)applied 3igof[H3]p-
Phenylenediamine HC1to2shavedareasonmice,andthe
applications wererepeated 20minutes later.Micewere
killedovera3-dayperiod,andtissue (same tissuesasafter
intravenous administration) andbloodsamplesweretaken.
Thepercutaneous absorption ofradioactivity wasrapid.
Despiteitsrapidclearance fromtheblood(concluded from
theprevious experiment), therewasasteadyrisein
concentration ofradioactivity inbloodoverthefirst24
hours.The maximum concentrations ofradioactivity at3.5
hourswerefoundinthebrain,at24hoursinthebrain,liver,
andstomach, andontheseconddayintheliver,stomach,
andadrenals.
Steilingetal.(2001)studiedthepercutaneous absorption ofp-[U-’4C]Phenylenediamine HCIusingintact,full-thickness
skin from youngdomestic pigs(12skinsamples total) in
glassdiffusion cells.Skindiscsweremounted betweenthe
receptor chamber (filledwithreceptor solution) andthe
donorchamber. Thedermiswasinclosecontactwiththe
receptorsolution. p-Phenylenediamine HCI(formulated in
standard cream)wasappliedwithoutocclusion inatotal
amountof20mg/cm2.Exposure tothetopically applieddye
wasterminated after30minutes byrinsingwithmild
shampoo anddeionized water.Thereceptor fluidwas
continuously pumped throughthereceptor chamber and
sampledovera24-hourperiod.Atstudytermination, skin
samplesweretape-stripped inordertoremovethehorny
layer.Residual skinsamples, aftertakingapproximately 20
tapestrips,wereanalyzed fortheamountabsorbed. Most of
thep-Phenylenediamine (85to89%)wasfoundinthe
washing solutions. Adsorbed p-Phenylenediamine inthe
tape(—3%)wasalsoreported. Thepercutaneous
penetration rateforp-Phenylenediamine was0.3%.The
absorbed quantityofp-Phenylenediamne waslimitedto
0.6%inthepresence ofhydrogen peroxide.
Hueber-Becker etal.(2004)investigated theabsorption of
acommerical p-Phenylenediamine HCI-containing oxidative
dark-shade in8humanvolunteers aswellasinvitrousing
humanorpigearskin.Fortheinvivostudy,theisotopic
dilution of[‘4C]p-Phenylenediamine wasprepared by
-20-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotemixing1.6Mbq[14Cjp-Phenylenediamine Dichioride with
40mlofacommerical dark-shade oxidative hairdye
formulation containing 3.98% cold[‘4C]-p-
Phenylenediamine HC1and2.0%meta-aminophenol. This
resultedinanisotopicdilutiontoaspecificactivityof54.7
disintegrations permimute(DPM)pergequivTheactual
contentof{‘4C]p-Phenylenediamine HC1inthehairdye
formulation aftertheisotopicdilutionandpriortomixing
withthedeveloper wasdetermined tobeapproximately 4%.
Thesamecommercial products wereusedfortheinvitro
study.
Thehairofeachsubjectwasdyed,washed, andthen
collected. Hair,washingwater,materials usedinthestudy,
anda24-hourscalp wash wereobtained fordetermination
ofradioactivity. Blood, urine,andfeces were analyzed for
upto120hours after dyeingofthehair.Anidentical[14C]p-
Phenylenediamine HC1-containing hairdyeformulation was
appliedfor0.5hourtobothhumanandpigearskininvitro;
radioactivity wasdetermined inskincompartments after24
hours.
Forhumans, therecovery ratewas95.7±1.5%ofthe
appliedradioactivity. Washing water,cuthair,gloves,paper
towels,capsorscalpwashcontained atotalof95.16±
1.46%oftheapplied[14C].Absorbed radioactivity
amounted to0.50±0.24%intheurineand0.04±0.04%in
thefeces. This corresponded toameanof7.0±3.4mg [‘4C]-p-Phenylenediamine HC1-equivalents absorbed. Most
oftheradioactivity waseliminated within24hoursafter
application. Thepeakconcentration (Cmax)of[‘4C]-p-
Phenylenediamine HC1-equivalents intheplasmawas0.087
geq/ml, andthetime-to-peak concentration (Tmax)was
approximately 2hours;themeanareaunderthecurve
(AUCOl2 hours)was0.67geqhlml.
Theresultsofinvitro tests usinghumanorpigskinrevealed
totalabsorbed amountsof2.4±1.6%(10.6±6.7llgeJcm2)
or3.4±1.7%(14.6±6.9l.lgec/cm2), respectively.
Percentage-based invitroresultswereconsiderably higher
thancorresponding invivodata.However, inunitsof
ig/cm2,theycorresponded toatotalabsorbed amountof
7.40or10.22mgeqforhumanorpigskin,respectively.
Theauthorsconcluded thattheresultsofthisstudy
suggested that dyeing thehairwithoxidative dyesproduces
minimalsystemicexposure thatisunlikelytoposeariskto
humanhealth(Hueber-Becker etal.2004).
Distribution
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Ranietal.(1979)administered[H31p-Phenylenediamine
HC1torabbitsbysubconjunctival injection, intravitreal
injection, localdrops,andsubcutaneous injection intothe
head.The aqueous fluidfromtheanteriorchamber ofthe
eyewasexamined forradioactivity. There wasrapidclearance from the siteofadministration. Detectable
amountsofradioactivity werefoundintheaqueousfluid15
to30minutesafteradministration. Thepeakconcentration
wasreachedwithinahalf-hour forsubconjunctival injection
andlocal drops andwithin 1hourforsubcutaneous and
intravitreal injection. With theexception ofapplication by
subcutaneous injection, theconcentration ofradioactivity in
theaqueouschamber fluidwaslessthan5%ofthepeak
concentration after4days.Thirtypercentofthepeak
concentration ofradioactivity intheaqueous chamber fluid
wasfound4daysaftersubcutaneous injection. The half-life
ofclearance ofp-Phenylenediamine fromtheaqueous
chamber fluidaftersubcutaneous injection was3.8±0.5
days.
Rehanietal.(1981)administered -.15igof[H3]p-
Phenylenediamine HC1diluted innormal saline
intravenously toarabbit. Blood wasdrawn over an8-hour
period,clearance ofp-Phenylenediamine fromthebloodwas
fittedtoabiexponential curve,andthecurveindicated a
biphasic clearance oftheradioactivity fromthebloodwith
half-lifevaluesof24minutesand43.5 hours. Inanother
experiment, approximately 30pgwasappliedtoashaved
areaontheabdomen ofarabbit.After20minutes, only
0.05%oftheapplied radioactivity couldbedetected inthe
blood.
Thetissuedistribution ofradioactivity wasstudied after
intravenous administration oflabeledp-Phenylenediamine
tomice.p-Phenylenediamine HC1(3H)wasdilutedwith
salineandapproximately 3pgwasadministered
intravenously. Micewerekilledovera12-dayperiod,and
tissue(liver,heart, kidney, stomach, intestine, adrenals,
testes,muscle,bonemarrow,bone,brain,skin,thyroid,eyes,
spleen,andlungs)andbloodsamplesweretaken.Greater
than 85% oftheradioactivity wasclearedfromtheblood
withinthefirstday. No targetorganwasapparent. The
maximum concentration ofradioactivity waslocatedinthe
stomachandkidneyat1hour,inthe skinat1day,inthe
spleenat2days,inthemuscleat3days,andinthebone
marrowat5days.On theseventhday,lessthan 0.5% ofthe
injectedradioactivity wasretained inanyofthetissues
examined (Rehanietal.1981).
p-Phenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediamine HC1
Marzulli etal.(1978)applied[C’4]p-Phenylenediamine (as
the freebase)atadoseof4pg/cm2totheforearmof6
humansubjects. Within5days12.7±6.98%ofthe
radioactivity wasrecovered intheurine.[C’4]p-Phenylenediamine wasappliedastheHC1salttothe
samesubjects, and14.8±5.5%oftheradioactivity was
recovered intheurine.Metabolic transformation wasnot
evaluated inthisstudy.
Theauthors stated thatthese valueswouldbe expected tobe
higheriftheywere corrected byadjusting foramounts found
-21-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteinurineafterintravenous injectionofknownamountsofp
Phenylenediamine (Marzulli etal.1978).
Nakao andTakeda (1979) administered [C’4]p-
Phenylenediamine intraperitoneally indosesof1.5mg/kgto
malerats, andtheradioactivity wasfollowedovertime. The
highestconcentration ofradioactivity wasfound 1hourafter
administration intissuesotherthantheintestines, andthis
wasfollowed byarapiddecrease inconcentration. Large
amountsofradioactivity werefoundintheintestinal tract
andintheurine.Onlyverysmallamountsofradioactivity
werefoundinthetissues after 48hours.Sixty-nine percent
oftheadministered radioactivity wasexcreted intheurine,
29%wasexcreted inthefeces,and26%wasinthebile
within24hours.Themaleratsrapidlyexcretedp
Phenylenediamine afteritsintraperitoneal administration.
N,N’-diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine, p-aminoacetanilide, and
unchanged p-Phenylenediamine wereidentified asurinary
metabolites. Thirtypercentoftheradioactivity intheurine
wasaccounted forbyN,N’-diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine.
Metabolism
p-Phenvlenediamine
Goetzetal.(1988)conducted astudyusing5female
volunteers whowerelong-time usersofoxidative hair
dyeingproducts. Theydetermined that,duringanon-line
flashhydrolysis oftheirurine,severalmetabolites ofp
Phenylenediamine werehydrolyzed tofreep
Phenylenediamine. The authors monitored theexcretion of
metabolites during24or48hours after application ofthe
dye.Themajormetabolite thatwasdetermined usingthis
approach wasN,N-diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine (DAPPD).
Approximately 80%ofthep-Phenylenediamine recovered
after flash hydrolysis wasfromthehydrolysis ofN,N
diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine.
Theexcretion ofthep-Phenylenediamine derivatives began
shortlyafterthedyeingprocedure wasterminated.
Approximately 85%oftheamountthatcouldberecovered
during48hourswasrecovered duringthefirst24hours
(Goetzetal.,1988).
InastudybyWangandTsai(2003),p-Phenylenediamine
(60mg,with10mlofwater)wasadministered orallyto
maleandfemalerabbits(weights =2836to4299g).
Following administration, p-Phenylenediamine andits
metabolites weremeasured intheserum. Serum
concentrations varied from 0.213to0.018Jg/mlforp
Phenylenediamine, 0.111to0.030jig/mlforN-acetyl-p
Phenylenediamine, and3.02to0.85jig/mIforN,N’
diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine. Levelsofmetabolites peaked
duringthefirst0.5-hour collection interval.
Maximum absorption ofp-Phenylenediamine (2.20jig/mI)
occurred at1.5hourspost-administration. Within24hafter
oraldosing,86%ofadministered p-Phenylenediamine wasfoundintheurine,10%wasfoundinthefeces,and4%was
foundintheblood. The majormetabolite wasN,N’
diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine andtheminormetabolite was
N-acetyl-p-Phenylenediamine.
Theseauthors alsoexamined urinesamples from5
volunteers (20to24years old) whohadusedacommercial
hairdyecontaining 1.1to1.6gofp-Phenylenediamine. The
majormetabolite wasDAPPD. This diacetyl derivative of
p-Phenylenediamine wasexcreted intheurinefor42hours
afterhair dyeing. The average amount was0.14jig/mIper
person(WangandTsai 2003).
InastudybyCITSafety&HealthResearch Laboratories
(2005a), theplasma pharmacokinetics andmassbalance
(over24hours)oftotalradiaoactivity were investigated
following singleoralgavageadministration of14C-p-
Phenylenediamine at6.45mg/kgtomaleandfemale
Sprague-Dawley rats.Additonally, themetabolic profilein
plasmawasinvestigated afterdermalapplication (4-hour
exposure, underocclusive conditions) atadoseof49.9
mg/kg. Following singleoralgavage, theplasma
radioactivity versustimeprofilesshowed afastabsorption
phase (tmax=0.5hour)withaCmaxof7l15/6880ng-eq/gfor
males/females. Overall meanexposure (AUC) for
males/females was24847/27304 ngeq/g*h. Themean
minimalfraction (radioactivity foundinurine)absorbed was
high,74.4/81.0% ofthedoseformales/females inthe24-
hourperiod. Recovery wascomplete at103.8/104.4%, with
19.3/13.8% inthefeces,3.1/4.8% inthecagewash,and
7.0/4.7% inthecarcasses.
Following singledermalapplication, thelevelsof
radioactivity intheplasmacollected attheendofthe
exposureperiod were1412and7401ng-eq/gfor males and
females, respectively. Theobserved radioactivity
corresponded tothediacetylated p-Phenylenediamine only.
Allofthedatawerecharacterized byalowinter-animal
variability. However, thereweregenerally nogender
differences (CITSafety&HealthResearch Laboratories
2005a).
InastudybyCIT Safety &HealthResearch Laboratories
(2005b), theplasmapharmacokinetics andmassbalance
(over24hours)oftotalradioactivity were investigated
following asingleoraladministration of‘4C-p-
Phenylenediamine (dose=4mg/kg)tomaleandfemale
Sprague-Dawley rats.Following oralgavage,theplasma
radioactivity versustimeprofilesshowedafastabsorption
phase (tmaxof0.5hour),withaCmaxof4098and3729ng
eq/gformalesandfemales, respectively. Overallmean
exposures (AUC0t)for males andfemaleswere10,842and
10,797ngeq/g*h, respectively. Themeanminimalfraction
(radioactivity foundinurine)thatwasabsorbed washigh,
57.0and60.1%ofthedoseformalesandfemales,
respectively (inthe24-hour period). Recovery was
complete at91.8and92.0%inthe24-hourperiod,with23.7
-22-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteand19.3%inthefeces,7.3and8.3%inthecagewash,and
3.7and4.2%inthecarcasses (eachsetofvaluesformales
andfemales, respectively). Allofthedatawere
characterized byalowinter-animal variability. Therewere
nogenderdifferences andtherewasnoevidence of
enterohepatic recycling (CITSafety&HealthResearch
Laboratories 2005b).
InVitroMetabolism
p-Phenylenediamine
Stanleyetal.(2005)usedintact human hepatocytes, human
livermicrosomes, andheterologously expressed human
cytochrome P450s(CYPs)todetermine whether[4C]-p-
Phenylenediamine ismetabolized byhepaticCYPstoform
anN-hydroxylamine. Cryopreserved humanhepatocytes
wereobtained from4maledonors.[14C1-p-
Phenylenediamine wasN-acetylated byhumanhepatocytes
toformN-acetylated metabolites .However, therewasno
evidence fortheformation ofmono-oxygenated metabolites
orforenzyme-mediated covalent binding of[14C]-p-
Phenylenediamine tomicrosomal protein. Unlike[‘4C]-p-
Phenylenediamine, 2-aminofluorene underwent CYP
mediated metabolism to4different hydroxylated
metabolites.
Theauthorsnotedthattheabsenceofevidence forhepatic
CYP-mediated metabolism of[‘4C]-p-Phenylenediamine is
inconsistent withthehypothesis thatthischemical plays a
causal role inthedevelopment ofbladdercancerviaamode
ofactionthatinvolves hepaticmetabolism toanN
hydroxyarylamine (Stanleyetal.2005).
DermalMetabolism
p-Phenylenediamine
Nohynek etal.(2005)investigated thebiotransformation of
theoxidative arylamine hairdyeingredients[14C1-p-
aminophenol (PAP)and[14C]-p-Phenylenediamine in
reconstructed humanepidermis andhumanhepatocytes. In
humanepidermis, PAPwasquantitatively transformed into
itsN-acetylated derivative (APAP). However, inhuman
hepatocytes, PAPwastransformed intosulfateorglucuronic
acidconjugates ofAPAPorPAP,aswellasfreeAPAP.In
human hepatocytes andinthehumanepidermis,[‘4C]-p-
Phenylenediamine wasconverted toMAPPD andDAPPD
derivatives. Athigherconcentrations of[‘4C1-p-
Phenylenediamine (250to1000iiM),theepidermis orthe
hepatocytes produced moreoftheMAPPD. However,
concentrations below250pMfavoredtheformation ofthe
DAPPDmetabolite.
Whencompared totheepidermis, thecapacityofhuman
hepatocytes forgeneration ofMAPPD orDAPPD was3-
foldor8-foldgreater,respectively. Therewasnoevidence
thateitherPAPor[14C]-p-Phenylenediamine was
transformed toN-hydroxylated derivatives intheepidermisorhepatocytes.
The authors statedthattheresultsofthisstudysuggestthat
afterdermal absorption ofPAPor
Phenylenediamine, humansaresystematically exposed to
acetylated derivatives; current invitro skin absorption
studiesmaybeinadequate fordetermination ofhuman
systemic exposure toarylamines duetoreducedorabsent
metabolic capacityofnon-viable skin;duetoqualitative
differences between dermalandhepaticmetabolism, oral
toxicitystudiesmaybeunsuited forthehazardassessment
ofdermalexposure toarylamines; anduseofinducedrodent
liverS9metabolic activation systems for invitro
genotoxicity studiesmayproducemisleading resultsonthe
hazardofhuman dermal exposure toarylamines.
The authors concluded thatthese data supportthegrowing
evidence thatarylamines aretransformed inhumanskinand
suggestthatcurrentpractices ofsafetyassessment of
arylamines should takethese findingsintoaccount(Nohynek
etal.,2005).
Dressler andAppelqvist (2006) studied the
pharmacokinetics andmetabolism of[14C]-p-
phenylenediamine following dermalapplication usingsix(3
males,3females)7-week-old femaleCr1CD®(SD)IGSBR
COBS-VAF® rats(3males,3females; meanbodyweights
=243gand164g,respectively). Thetestsubstance was
appliedtoclippedskininthebackandshoulderregions. A
volumecorresponding to6mgofthetestsolution (50
mg/kg)wasappliedwithaplasticsyringeandthenspread
evenlywithaspatulaovertheexposed skin.During
exposure, theapplication sitewascoveredwithanocclusive
dressing andprotected fromthelight.At4hourspost-
dosing,ananalysisoftheplasmaindicated levelsof1.41±
0.34pg/ml[‘4C1-PPD-equivalents inmales,and7.40±1.83
pg/miinfemales. Radioactivity revealed asingle
metabolite, N,N-diacetylated[14C]-p-phenylenediamine.
Theresultsofthisstudysuggestthattopically applied[‘4C]-
p-Phenylenediamine ismetabolized intheskin,presumably
byN-acetyltransferase- 1.
Immune Response
p-Phenylenediamine
Siebenetal.(2002)analyzed therecognition andprocessing
requirements of p-Phenylenediamine anditsautoxidation
product, BB, using peripheral bloodmononuclear cells
(PBMC5) fromhumansubjects. The subjects wereallergic
top-Phenylenediamine andp-Phenyienediamine- andBB
reactive Tcells. Studyresultssuggest thatp
Phenylenediamine itselfcanberecognized byTcells
through aprocessing-independent pathway, whereas its
autoxidation product (BB)required processing and,
possibly, metabolism tostimulate thesameT-cellclones.
Thesedata demonstrate thattwodistinctpathways ofantigen
presentation toactivatespecific T-cell clonesareinvolved
-23-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteintheimmuneresponse top-Phenylenediamine.
Yokozeki etal.(2003)contact-sensitized mastcell-deficient
WBB6F-W/W’1 femalemice andtheircongenic normal(+1+)
micebyfollowing aprocedure ofdailytopicalapplications
of50p1of2.5%p-Phenylenediamine solutioninacetone,in
oliveoil(1:4),onshavedabdominal skin.C57BL/6 mice
andSTAT6’ micewere contact sensitized by5daily
consecutive topical applications of50p1of2.5%p
Phenylenediamine with3%H,O,.At2daysafterthelast
abdominal application, themicewere challenged by
applying 20p1of2.5%p-Phenylenediamine solution on
bothsidesofoneearandvehicleonbothsidesoftheother
ear.The results ofthisstudyshowedthatThelper2(Th2)
cytokines, immunoglobulin E (IgE),andmast cells playan
essential roleintheinduction ofp-Phenylenediamine
inducedhypersensitivity inmice.
Cruzetal.(2005)usedflow cytometry tostudytheeffectof
p-Phenylenediamine andothersensitizers on thesurface
expression ofthechemokine receptors CCR6andCXR4
usingafetalmousedendritic cellline.Thiscellline(has
morphological, phenotypic, andfunctional characteristics of
skindendritic cells)servedasanexperimental modelofa
dendritic cell.Cellswereculturedwith2concentrations of
p-Phenylenediamine (10and50pg/mI). p
Phenylenediamine andtheothersensitizers decreased the
membraneexpression ofthechemokine receptors CCR6and
CXCR4 inthefetalmouse dendritic cellline.These
receptors regulatetherecruitment ofantigen-presenting and
immunocompetent cellsduring inflammatory and
immunological responses, namely allergic contact
dermatitis. Theauthorsnoted that theresultsofthisinvitro
studymayberelatedtotheinvivaenhancement ofdendritic
cellmigration outoftheskin and tothe lymph nodes for
antigenpresentation totheTcells.
Coulteretal.(2007)studiedtherelationship betweenp
Phenylenediamine oxidation andthefunctional maturation
ofhumanmonocyte-derived dendritic cellsinvitro.
Dendritic cellswereincubated withp-Phenylenediamine for
16hours,andtheexpression oftheco-stimulatoryreceptors
CD4O,CD8O,CD83,andCD86,majorhistocompatibility
complexclassIImolecules, intracellular glutathione levels,
andcellviability were measured. The proliferation of
allogeneic lymphocytes wasdetermined bytheincorporation
of[3Hlthymidine. Theexposure ofdendritic cells top
Phenylenediamine (5to50pM)wasassociated withan
increase inCD4Oandmajorhistocompatibility complex
(MHC)class IIexpression andproliferation ofallogeneic
lymphocytes. Dendritric cellactivation withp
Phenylenediamine wasnot associated withapoptotic or
necroticcelldeath.
AMMAL TOXICOLOGV
AcuteOralToxicityp-Fhenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediainine HC1
Theacuteoraltoxicities of p-Phenylenediamine andp
Phenylenediamine HCLandhairdyeformulations
containing p-Phenylenediamine havebeenstudiedin rats
(Burnett etal.1977;CTFA1969a;Lloydetal.1977),
rabbits,cats(Hanzlik 1923),anddogs(CTFA1980).Doses,
numberofanimals,andresultsaresummarized inTable6.
AcuteDermalToxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
The acute dermal toxicityofp-Phenylenediamine andp
Phenylenediamine-containing products torabbitshasbeen
studied.Thedry,basicformofp-Phenylenediamine anda
10%alcoholic solution ofp-Phenylenediamine appliedtoan
approximately 25cm2areaofshaved, washed, anddried
skinof3rabbitsresulted innodemonstrable signsof
systemic toxicity (Hutzinger 1969).
CTFA(1969b)reported astudyinwhichahairdye
composite formulation containing 1.2%p-Phenylenediamine
wasappliedatadoseof10g/kgtotheskinon thebacksof
2maleand2female rabbits. Thehaironthebacksofthe
rabbitshadbeen clipped, andtheapplication siteswere
approximately 10%ofthebodysurface.Afterapplication of
thecomposite, theexposure sitewaswrapped with
impervious plastic sheeting for24hours.Theanimals were
observed for14daysfollowing thetreatment. The
percutaneous LD50oftheformulation wasgreaterthan10
g/kg.
Lecomte etal.(1972)observed edemaandfocalnecrosis in
ratsfollowing skinapplication ofIto5mgp
Phenylenediamine.
AcuteSubcutaneous Toxicity
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Hanzlik(1923)reportedthattheminimum fataldosesofp
Phenylenediamine baseandhydrochloride inwater
administered subcutaneously to10ratsand3rabbitswere
170mg/kgand200 mg/kg, respectively. Edemaofthehead
andneckwasobserved insomeoftherabbits.
Inanotherstudy, the subcutaneous administration of350mg
ofp-Phenylenediamine HC1toguineapigsanddosesof120
to150mgtoratsresulted inedemaoftheheadandneck
(Tainteretal.1929).
Lecomte andCession-Fossion (1971)reported necrotic
lesionsandedemaatthesiteofinjection following
subcutaneous administration of1,2,or5%p
Phenylenediamine HC1in0.9% sodium chloride.Theedema
wasattributed toanincrease invascularpermeability and
wasaccompanied bythereleaseofhistamine and5-
hydroxytryptamine fromtissues.
AcuteParenteral Toxicity
-24-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotep-Phenylenediamine
Theratacuteintraperitoneal LD50ofanaqueousp
Phenylenediamine solution was37mg/kg(Burnett etal.
1977)
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Theminimum fataldoseofp-Phenylenediamine baseand
hydrochlorideadministered intravenously to3dogswas170
mg/kg(Hanzlik 1923).
Theintraperitoneal administration of190mg/kgofp
Phenylenediamine HC1torats and 120mg/kgtocats
resultedinedemaoftheheadandneck(TainterandHanzlik
1924).
Short-Term OralToxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
MikhlinandMarchenko (1972)gavep-Phenylenediamine
orallyatdosesof20mg/kgperdayfor12to13daysto
Table6.AcuteOralToxicityofp-Phenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediamine HC1.
Material Tested Dose Animals LDç0 Comments Reference
p-Phenylenediamine 0.1-0.45 g/kg 7rabbits - Minimum fatal dose was0.170g/kg.Increase Hanzlik 1923
asbaseand1-ICIsalt inpulseandrespiration anddecrease in
inwater temperature. Facial, tongue, andneckedema
anddyspnea observed in4rabbits receiving
from0.2to0.22g/kg.These4rabbits
eventually died,although therewasrecovery
fromtheedemaandothersymptoms. High-
doserabbitsdiedbeforeedemadeveloped
p-Phenylenediamine 0.1g/kg 1cat - Increase inpulseandrespiration anddecrease 1-Ianzlik 1923
asbaseandHC1salt intemperature
inwater
Hairdyecomposite 2maleand241.3mL/kgformale CTFA1969a
containing 1.156%p- - femaleratsatrats and 38.3mI/kg -
Phenylenediamine each dose forfemalerats
p-Phenylenediamine - 10ratsateach 80mg/kg - Bumettetal.1977
inoil-in-water dose
emulsion
p-Phenylenediamine
inwater adjusted to- 2-10 rats at 98mg/kg - Lloydetal.1977
pH 7.0each dose
p-Phenylenediamine 1.0,3.0,and 2female - The10.0mg/kg dose dogsshowedlacrimation CTFA1980
inwater 10.0mg/kg beagles ateach at2hoursandrednessandswelling of
dose conjunctiva at3to6hours.Theeyeswere
slightlyclearedat24hours.At3hours,the3.0
mg/kgdosedogsshowedslightrednessand
lacrimation and the 1.0mg/kg dose dogs
showedlacrimation. Thelower-dose groups
werenormalat24hours
p-Phenylenediamine 10.0mg/kg 2female - At2to6hours,thedogsdeveloped redand CTFA 1980
inwater beagles swollenconjunctiva andoculardischarge. At
24 hours the dogs had half-closed eyesandred
swollenconjunctiva
-25-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoterabbits.Animalshadincreased blood concentrations ofa-,
13-,andy-globulins anddecreased serumconcentrations of
albuminandtotalprotein.
Adecreased albumin:globulin (A:G)ratiowasalso
observed. p-Phenylenediamine administered torabbitsdaily
inoraldosesof10mg/kgfor90 days increased serum
globulinconcentration andtotalproteincontentandcaused
adecrease intheA:G ratio; nochangeinserumalbumin
concentration wasnoted.
Theauthorssuggested thatchanges intheserumprotein
concentration maybe related toalterations invascular
permeability (Mikhlin andMarchenko 1972).
CTFA(1981)reported astudyinwhichanaqueoussolution
ofp-Phenylenediamine wasadministered orallyinadoseof
40mg/kgto10pregnant ratsonDays8,9,and10of
gestation andinadoseof30mg/kgto10pregnant ratson
Days6through 15ofgestation. Therewere20controlrats.
Adecrease inthebodyweightsoftheratsgiven40mg/kgp
Phenylenediamine wasobserved onDays9and10.Tworats
given40mg/kgdiedafterthethirddose.Noother
differences wereobserved betweencontrolandtreatedrats.
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
TheNational Cancer Institute (NCI)studiedtheshort-term
oraltoxicityofp-Phenylenediamine HC1usingrats and mice
(NCI1978).p-Phenylenediamine HCIwasfedtorats and
miceatdietaryconcentrations ranging from 68to3160ppm
and100to4640ppm,respectively, for7weeks, and the
animalswereobserved foranotherweek.Therewere10
animalsateachof11dosesandtherewere10controls. All
oftheanimalssurvived andnosignsoftoxicitywere
observed.
Short-Term DerinalToxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Inordertodetermine theeffectofsuperoxide dismutase
(SOD)andthecombined effectofSODandp
Phenylenediamine onfemaleguineapigskin,Viswanathan
etal.(1986)appliedapatch containing a0.19mlsolution
(50unitsofenzyme) andapatchcontaining amixture[0.1
mlof0.9%p-Phenylenediamine and0.9mlofsolution
containing 50unitsofenzyme] totheclippedskinoffemale
guineapigs(weights =200to300g).Patchescontainingp
Phenylenediamine (0.1ml)wereappliedtoclippedventral
anddorsalskinsurfaces. The patcheswerecoveredwith
aluminum foilandremained inplaceforupto48hours,
afterwhichtheanimalswere killed andtheexposedportion
oftheskinremoved andhomogenized. Homogenates were
usedinanassay for lipidperoxidation.Lipidperoxidation intheventralanddorsalsidesoftheskin
wasreported at24,48,and72hours.Skindamagedueto
p-Phenylenediamine ontheventralsidewasdescribed as
96.7%at24hours, 7.18% at48hours,and59.76%at72
hours.Changes on thedorsalsideduetoapplication ofthe
dyeon theventralsideweredescribed as65.98%at24
hours,45.83%at48hours,and7.68%at72hours.At24
hourspost-exposure, nochangeintheactivityofSODwas
noted.Thehistamine contentintheskinoftheanimals
treatedwithp-Phenylenediamine atdifferent time intervals
showedanincreaseuptothefirst48hours(56.87%) and
thendecreased upto96hours(98%).
Microscopicexamination oftheskinat24hpost-application
ofp-Phenylenediamine revealedevidenceofhyperkeratosis,
butnosignificant changes inotherepidermal layersorthe
dermis.At48hours,discontinuity appeared inthestratum
germinativum andamoderate degreeofedemawas
observed inthedermis.
For SOD-exposed animals, thefollowing changes were
notedat24hourspost-treatment: irregular stratum
germinativum, slightedemainthedermis(edema more
prominent at48hours). Following exposure top
Phenylenediamine +SOD, there washardlyanyindication
ofabnormal findings inthe various layersoftheepidermis
or dermis upto48hours(Viswanathan etal., 1986).
Mathuretal.(1990)exposed 44malealbinoguinea pigs
(meanweight =250±10g)top-Phenylenediamine (skin
painting,l% w/vsolution). Thetestsubstance was
administered atadoseof0.1ml/dayfor1,3,5,and7days.
Theeffect ofp-Phenylenediamine onlipidperoxidation and
severalenzymes intheskinandserumwerestudied. The
liver, kidney, andskin were alsoexamined microscopically.
Lipidperoxidation wasincreased on days3, 5,and7.The
enzymatic activityofaspartate aminotransferase (AST)
increased onday7andtheenzymatic activityofalanine
aminotransferase (ALT) increased ondays5and7.
Tyrosinase activityincreased onday7.Theactivities of13-
glucuronidase, y-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT),andALT
enzymesincreased after5and7daysofp-Phenylenediamine
painting.
Otherthanafew focal andearlydegenerative changes in
hepatocytes (alongwithmildfattychanges), nosignsof
hepatotoxicity wereobserved ondays1and3.Moderate
congestion ofthelobules(congestion of sinusoids in
particular) wasnotedbyday5.By day 7,afocal
granulomatous reaction, withoccasional Langerhans-type
giantcells,wasnoted.Nosignificanthistological changesin
thecortexormedullaofthekidneywerenotedat days1,3,
-26-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote5,or7post-application.
OndayI,moderate changes intheskin,whichcomprised
hyperkeratosis ofthestratum corneum andfocalinfiltration
ofpolymorphs andmononuclear leukocytes, wereobserved
inthedermis.Onday7,exposure resulted inmarked
hyperkeratosis togetherwith theinfiltration ofcellsinthe
dermis;edemaandcongestion inthedermispersisted. The
biochemical defectsandmicroscopic changesintheskinand
serumcorrelated withthedurationofexposure (Mathur et
al.,1990).
Subchronic OralToxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Imaidaetal.(1983)studiedthesubchronic oraltoxicityof
p-Phenylenediamine using5groupsofF344rats(malesand
females, 10to11ratspergroup).Fourgroups were feda
dietcontaining 0.4,0.2, 0.1,or0.05%p-Phenylenediamine.
Group5(diet only) servedasthecontrol.The animals were
killedafter12weeks.Dose-dependent growthretardation
wasobserved inmalesandfemales,especially inthegroup
fed0.4%p-Phenylenediamine inthediet.Liver-to-body
weightandkidney-to-body weightratios(expressed as%)in
thegroupfed0.4%p-Phenylenediamine werehigherwhen
compared tothecontrolgroup.Inthisgroup,9malerats
and1femaleratdiedbeforetheendoftheexperiment.
Subchronic DermalToxicity
Ahairdyecomposite formulation containing 1.2%p
Phenylenediamine wasapplied topically to10rabbits(1
g/kg dose) 5timesperweekforatotalof65applications.
Mildtomarkedacanthosis andmildtomoderate dermal
fibroplasia wereobserved in7rabbits (CTFA l989c).In
anotherstudy(groupsof12rabbits), hairdyecomposite
formulations containing upto4%p-Phenylenediamine were
mixed1:1withhydrogen peroxide andappliedtopically 2
timesaweekinadoseof1mg/kgfor13weeks.Notoxic
signswereobserved (Burnettetal.1976).Resultsareshown
inTable7.
ChronicOralToxicity
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
The chronic oraltoxicityofp-Phenylenediamine HCIhas
beenstudiedinrats and inmiceby theNCI(NCI1978).p
Phenylenediamine HC1wasadministered inthefeedat
concentrations of625and1250ppmtogroupsof100rats
andgroupsof100micefor103weeks.Theratswere
observed for2weeks,andthemiceforIweek,following
thefeedingexperiment. Forty animalsofeach species were
controls. Nobodyweightdepression orothersignsof
toxicitywereobserved inthetreatedanimals.
ChronicDermalToxicity
p-PhenylenediamineFew adverse effectswerereported as aresultofchronic
dermaltoxicitystudiesofp-Phenylenediamine andhairdye
formulations containing p-Phenylenediamine inmice
(Burnett etal.1975;Burnettetal.1980;Gilesetal.1976;
Stenback etal.1977),rabbits(Stenback etal.1977),and
rats(International Research andDevelopment Corporation
[IROC]1979)asshowninTable7.
Neurotoxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
InastudybyE.I.duPontdeNemours &Company (1990),
groupsof24,63-day-old Crl:CD® rats(12males,12
females; meanbodyweights =267.5±1.5g[males]and
211.2±1.7g[females]) weredosed orally (bygavage)with
p-Phenylenediamine insterilewateratsingledosesof20,
40,and80mg/kg.Thecontrolgroupwasdosedorallywith
thevehicleonly.
Femaleshadsignificantdose-related effects on bodyweight
gain and maleshad similar effects, but onlyatthe2higher
doses. Inthefunctional observational battery(FOB)
assessments, females hadstatistically significant dose-
relatedsignsofgeneralmalaise. Maleshadsimilar
responses, but they werenotstatistically significantly
differentfromthecontrols. Decreasedmotor activity(dose-
related),wasdemonstrated; however, intheabsenceofother
signsofneurological impairment, themotoractivity
response wasinterpreted asbeingindicative ofgeneral
malaiseatthedosesofp-Phenylenediamine thatweretested.
The authors concluded thatp-Phenylenediamine didnot
exertaprimaryeffecton thenervoussystem(E.I.duPont
deNemours &Company 1990).
InanotherstudybyE.I.duPontdeNemours &Company
(1992), maleandfemale Crl:CD®BR rats(10
rats/sex/group; weights =58.8±4.50g[males] and 59.0±
7.73g[females]) received oraldosesofp
Phenylenediamine (insterilewater;4,8,or16mg/kg doses
bygavage)foraminimum of90consecutive days.As
above,aneurobehavioral testbatteryconsisting ofmotor
activity(MA) and FOBassessments wereconducted during
theweekpriortotheonsetofthedosingperiod. This
neurobehavioral testbatterywasconducted again during
weeks4,8,and13ofdosing.Following completion ofthe
dosingperiod,surviving ratswerekilledandperfused, and
neuropathologic evaluations wereconducted. The rats were
subjected toinsituwholebodyperfusion withheparinized
saline,followed byasolution of10%formalin, 2.5%
glutaraldehyde, and0.5%picricacidwithphosphate buffer.
Mortalities relatedtotest substance administration werenot
observed. Changes inbodyweightsandbodyweightgains,
aswellasabsolute feedconsumption andfeedefficiency
values,werenot treatment-related. There werenotest
substance-related effectsonanyoftheFOB(e.g.,forelimb
gripstrength, hindlimb gripstrength, footsplay)orMA
-27-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteparameters thatwereevaluated. Neuropathologic
evaluations didnot reveal abnormalities inthenervous
systemorskeletalmuscle.Therewerenoeffectsofthetest
substance onoculartissue(E.I.duPontdeNemours &
Company (1992).
Hepatotoxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Nohepatic toxicity wasobserved inmale rats givenasingle
intraperitoneal injectionofp-Phenylenediamine inpropylene
glycolatadoseof100pmollkg (inavolumeof2ml)
(Watanabe eta!.1976).
Myotoxicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Rabbitsthatreceivedp-Phenylenediamine at oraldosesof
20mg/kgfor12to13daysand10mg/kgfor90dayshad
marked alterations inmyocardial parenchyma. These
changes included edema,swelling ofmusclefibers,
cytoplasmic homogenization, andlossofcross-striation
(Mikhlin andFuior1976).
InastudybyAverbukh eta!.(1989),twogroupsof15Beit
Daganmice(9weeksold;averageweight =25g)received
dosesof70mg/kgand35mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine. A
significant increase increatinephosphokinase activitywas
notedat24hours;by120hours,thevaluesapproached
normallevels.Serumaldolaseactivityincreased rapidlyand
significantly inbothgroups,butremained significantly
increased after120hours.Inanimalskilledafter24hours,
acuterhabdomyolysis withsegmental necrosisofmyofibers
(characterized bypyknosis ofsubsarcolemnal nucleiand
fragmentation ofthesarcoplasm) wasnoted. At 120hours,
regeneration andincreased numbers ofnucleiwere
observed. Microscopic examination ofkidneyorliver
sectionsdidnotrevealanyabnormalities.
Yabeeta!.(1991)observed rhabdomyolysis indogs
exposed top-Phenylenediamine. p-Phenylenediamine was
administered orallyto14hybriddogsatdosesof50,80,and
100mg/kg.Thedogspresented withmarkededemaofthe
face,extremities, andexternal genitals andpainful muscle
rigor.Massive necrosis ofskeletalmusclewasobserved at
microscopic examination. Thisfinding wasmost
pronounced atthe80mg/kgdose.
Table7.Subchronic/Chronic DermalToxicityofp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Concentration Method Duration Animals Results Reference
Subchronic RabbitStudies
-28-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMaterial Concentration Method Duration Animals Results Reference
Hairdye 1.2% Repeated treatment 13-14 5male and 5 Accumulation ofdyeonshavedanimals CTFA 1969c
composite groupreceived 1g/kg weeks femalerabbitsinresulted infissures, scab formation, and
formulation daily5timesaweekfor treatedand desquamation; noobservations onunshaved
65applications on controlgroups group.Mildtomarkedacanthosis and mild
shavedabdomen. The tomoderate dermalfibroplasia inexposed
skinof4rabbitsinthis skinof7rabbitsinrepeated testgroup. No
groupandcontrolgroup differences between intact andabradedskin.
wasabraded. Theasused Moderate acanthosis andverymilddermal
groupreceived 10 fibroplasia inexposed skinof2animalsin
g/application massaged asusedgroup.Hematological analyses,
intotheir black fur10 clinicalbloodchemistry, andurinalyses
minutes, allowedto normal.Grosspathology revealed equivocal
remainanadditional 20 kidneylesionsintestgroups;wasnot
minutes, thenrinsedand confirmed histopathologically
dried,onceevery2
weeksfor7exposures
4hairdye 1.0,2.0,3.0,orMixed1:1withH,O,. 113weeks Groupsof12 Noevidence ofcompound-induced toxicity. Burnett etal.
composite 4.0% mg/kg applied 2timesa rabbits, 3control Body weightgainwasnormal.Blood and 1976
formulations weekto2clipped, groups urineparameters andorgan weights were not
alternated sitesonthe significantly different fromcontrols. No
back.Sitesonhalfofthe grossabnormalities observed atnecropsy.
animalswereabraded Nomicroscopic lesionsduetohairdye
onceaweek.Rabbits administration
wererestrained for1
hourfollowing dye
application andthen
wereshampooed, rinsed
anddried
ChronicmouseStudies
3hairdye 1.50%inthe Mixed1:1withH,O,. 18 Groupsof100 Noovertsignsofsystemic toxicity. Survival Burnett etal.
experimental hair dyes 0.05mlappliedweekly months mice, 250 control timeandbody weights comparable. Liver 1975
formulations orfortnightly toshaved mice weightsintherangeofnormalvalues.All
mid-scapular skin blood parameters withinnormallimits.
Microscopic examination showedskinand
appendages normal. Moderate alopecia in
abouthalfofthemice receiving hairdyes
weekly
2hairdye 1.50% Mixed1:1withH,O,. 2years 28male and 28 Noskinirritation observed. No significant Gilesetal.
formulations 0.05mlappliedweekly femalemicein differences inbodyweightgains.Survival 1976
toclippedintrascapular eachgroup,76 rateofallmicewaserratic
regionanddriedwitha male and 17
hairdryerwithoutheat female mice in
control group
p-Phenylene- 5and10% Application of0.02mlp-Lifetime Femalemice;50Average lifespan unaffected. Normal Stenback et
diamine in Phenylenediamine 2 perdose and 100behavior andnosignificant changes inbody al.1977
acetone timesaweektoa1cm controls weightorfood intake. Notreatment-related
diameter regularly ulceration ordermatitis wasobserved
shavedareaof
interscapular skin
4hairdye 1.0,2.0,3.0,orMixed1:1withH,O,. 21-23 Groups of50maleNodifferences observed inmeanabsolute Burnett etal.
composite 4.0%inthe 0.025mlapplied months and50female andrelativeliverandkidneyweights, and 1980
formulations hairdyes once/week toaclipped mice,3control survival rates
intrascapular region.20 groups
micefromeachgroup
killedandnecropsied at
7andat9months
-29-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable7(continued). Subchronic/Chronic DermalToxicityofp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Concentration Method Duration Animals Results Reference
ChronicRatStudy
3hairdye 2.0, 3.0, or Mixed1:1withH,O,. 2years 60maleand60 Dryskinnotedinfirstfewweeksof study inInternational
composite 4.0%inthe Appliedtopically toF5 femaleratsper 15-20%offemalerats andslightlydecreased Research and
formulations hairdyes generation fromtimeof group,3control mean valuesfor total erythrocytes, Development
weaning totheweaning groups(fromFIAhemoglobin, andhamatocrit observed in Corporation
ofFIA.FIAreceived 0.2 generation) maleratsreceiving hairdyecontaining 3% 1979
mlofthehairdye p-Phenylenediamine. Nootherdifferences
increased by0.1ml observed ingeneralbehavior, appearance,
weeklyto0.5ml,2times biochemistry, andurinalyses
aweekonthe clipped
neckandback.10rats
fromeach group killed
andnecropsied at12
months
ChronicRabbitStudy
p-Phenylene- 5and10% Application of0.02mlp-85weeks Female rabbits; 5Noobserved differences infood intake, Stenback et
diamine in Phenylenediamine 2 perdoseand5 weight,behavior, oroverallappearance. al.1977
acetone timesaweektothe controls Survival rate unrelated totreatment. No
insideleftear definitesignsoftoxicity. Nodifferences in
bloodandurineparameters. Nolocalskin
changes
Inastudy by Munday andManns(1999),2groupsof5
femaleSprague-Dawley-derived rats(12weeksold)
receivedsubcutaneousinjections ofp-Phenylenediamine (in
saline) twice dailyfor3days.Thetwogroups received
dosesof100imo1Ikg/day and200pmollkg/day,
respectively. Necrosis ofthegastrocnemius muscle,
diaphragm, andtonguewasobserved inthehigherdose
group.Musclelesionswerenotobserved inthelowerdose
group. Atnecropsy, macroscopic changes werenot
observed ineither dose group.Alloftheanimalsremained
ingoodcondition throughout thetreatment period.
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
MascresandJasmin(1974a,b;1975)studied skeletal muscle
lesionsinducedinrats(weighing approximately 150 to200
g)bymeansofasingle,subcutaneous injection ofp
Phenylenediamine HC1(3mg)inaqueous solution
(unspecified concentration). Lesionsoccurred 1to24hours
afterinjection andwerecharacterized bynecrosis and
edema. Inthediaphragm, lesionswereaccompanied by
various myo- andneuromyopathies. Serum activities of
creatinephosphokinase andlacticdehydrogenase remained
unchanged following thesinglesubcutaneousinjection. Two
subcutaneous injections ofthep-Phenylenediamine solution
separated byanintervalof12hourscausedanincrease in
theserumactivityofcreatine phosphokinase, butno
significant changeintheactivityoflacticdehydrogenase
wasobserved. Zonesoflysedmyocardial cells werealso
observed 24hours after the2doses.
-30-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteOcularIrritation
p-Phenylenediamine
Ahairdyecomposite formulation containing 1.2%p
Phenylenediamine wastestedforocular irritation with10
rabbits.One-tenth mlofthedyewasinstilled intothe
conjunctival sacofoneeyeofeachanimal.Thehairdyewas
rinsedfromtheeyesof5animalswith40mlwater4
secondsafter instillation. The maximum possible irritation
scorewas110.Fortheunwashed eyes, theaverageirritation
scoreat1hourwas33.0,at24hourswas34.0,at48hours
was24.0,at72hourswas14.0,at96hourswas9.0,and at
7daysafterinstillation was 2.4.Forthewashedeyes atthe
sametimesafterinstillation thescores were 23.0, 20.0, 10.0,
7.0,4.0,and0,respectively (CTFA I969d).Asimilarstudy
wasconducted withahairdyecontaining 1.8%p
Phenylenediamine. One-tenth ml was instilled intothe
conjunctival sacofoneeyeof6rabbits.Themaximum
possibleirritation scorewas110.Theaveragescoreswere
30for1day,29for2days,19for3days,15for4days, and
6for7daysafterinstillation. The hairdyewasmoderately
irritating totheeyesofrabbits(CTFA1971a).
Morikawa etal.(1976)usedtheDraizemethodandscoring
system todetermine theirritation of 100%p
Phenylenediamine inrabbiteyes.The maximum irritation
scorereported was 17.0 ofapossible 110.
Lloydetal.(1977) placed 0.1mlofa2.5%aqueousp
Phenylenediamine solution containing 0.05%Na2SO3and
adjusted topH7.0inoneeyeofeachof3rabbits. Ten
seconds later theeyeswereirrigatedwith50mloflukewarm
water.Theresearchers observed mildconjunctival
inflammation that didnotpersistformorethan24hours.
SkinIrritationHapten-amino acidadductsmaybetheprimary sensitizers
inallergiccontactsensitization, althoughthevisibleallergic
reactionwouldrequire hapten-protein conjugation (Jansen
etal.1964).Theseauthorsindicated thattherewas no
directexperimental evidence thattheallergicbehaviorofp
Phenylenediamines required thebindingofquinonoid
oxidation products toepidermal proteins.
Evidence presented byReynolds etal.(1970) suggested that
p-Phenylenediamines differedfrommanycontactallergens;
theydidnotformstable isolatable adductswithepidermal
amino acids. Intheirstudiesonguinea pig skinepidermis in
vivo,bindingbetweenhighlyreactivep-Phenylenediamine
oxidation products andskinproteinwasdemonstrated;
however, bindingwasrelatively labileandahapten-amino
acidadductcouldnotbeisolated. The authors interpreted
thistomean that, iftheantigeninp-phenylenediamine
hypersensitivity isanepidermal protein conjugate, the
conjugate isboundbyamuchlessstablelinkagethanhas
been thought necessary.
Experiments havebeenconducted withp-Phenylenediamine
and with haircoloring formulations containing p
Phenylenediamine (Herve-Bazin etal.1977;Morikawa etal.
1976;Brulosetal.1977;CTFA1982b;Goodwin etal.
1981;Kleniewska andMaibach 1980;Magnusson and
Kligman 1970;Maureretal.1979;RajkaandBlohm1970;
Stevens1967).p-Phenylenediamine wasastrongsensitizer
inguinea pigs usingavarietyoftestmethods; induction
p-Phenylenediamine
p-Phenylenediamine andhairdyeformulations containingp
Phenylenediamine have been testedforprimary skin
irritation inavarietyofanimalspecies:theseincluderabbits
(Hanzlik 1923;Lloydetal.1977;CTFA1969b;CTFA
1971b;Daviesetal.1972;Herve-Bazin etal.1977;
Morikawa etal.1976),guinea pigs, mice,miniature pigs,
piglets,dogsandbaboons (Daviesetal.1972).These
studies are summarized inTable8.
SkinSensitization
p-Phenylenediamine
Severalresearchers have proposed thattheoxidation
products ofp-Phenylenediamine wereinvolved inthe
production ofallergicsensitization reactions. Ithasbeen
suggested that quinonoid intermediates, suchas
quinonediamine, may link with skinproteins toform
antigens (ReissandFisher1974;BlohmandRajka1970;
Mayer1955).
-31-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteroutines andchallenge patcheswith0.001to10%p
Phenylenediamine sensitized 56to100%ofguineapigson
test.Ahair-coloring formulation containing 2%p
Phenylenediamine did notsensitize anyof12guineapigs.
Resultsofastudywithp-Phenylenediamine intheguinea
piglymphocyte transformation testcorrelated wellwith
sensitivity (Mimer1971).Maguire (1973)reported thata
hairdyewith28%p-Phenylenediamine derivatives wasa
strongguineapigskinsensitizer.
Sensitization maybetransferred fromasensitized guineapig
toanonsensitized guineapigbythetransferofintact,
sonicated, ordisrupted cells (Kind etal.1965),by the
transferoflymphnodeorspleniccells(Macher and
Atzpodien 1968),orbyarteriovenous cross-transfusion or
parabiosis (Wahlberg 1979).
Maureretal.(1984)conducted asensitization studyusing3
differentguineapigstrains(Pirbright white,DunkinHartley,
andHimalayan spotted). Groups of10guineapigs(5males,
5females/group) wereusedintheoptimization test.A3-
weekinduction period(10intracutaneous applications, 0.1%
p-Phenylenediamine) wasfollowed byseparatechallenges
atweek6(intradermal challenge) andatweek8(epidermal
challenge). Theanimalswerealsochallenged at14days
afterthelastinduction. ExceptforPirbright whiteguinea
pigs(9animalschallenged), groupsof10werechallenged.
Positive reactions wereobserved inallanimals(allstrains).
Dossouetal.(1985)studiedthesensitization potential ofp
Phenylenediamine using groups of12femaleHartleyalbino
guineapigs(weights =300to400g).Twoprotocols were
usedtopredictand assess allergic reactions. Thefirst
protocolinvolved openepidermal induction andchallenge,
andtheintensityofthereactionwasmaximized byinjecting
Freund’s complete adjuvant intothefootpad. The second
protocol involved aquasi-intradermal induction; boththe
adjuvant and testsubstance were injected intothefootpad.
Inbothprotocols, theinduction concentration ofp
Phenylenediamine was0.18mmollliter andthechallenge
concentration was0.09 mmol/liter. Inbothprotocols, the
challenge phase consisted ofasingletopical application, in
thelumbar region, of10Illofthetestsubstance. In
protocol #1,thesensitization ratewas30%.The
sensitization ratewas50%intheprotocol #2.
GuillotandGonnet(1985)conducted anepicutaneous
maximization testusing20adultAlbinoDunkin-Hartley
guineapigs.Theinduction phase involved 7successive
topical applications (48-hour occlusive patches) of10%
aqueous p-Phenylenediamine. Onday28,a48-hour
occlusive challenge patchcontaining 0.5% aqueous p
Phenylenediamine wasapplied. Elevenofthe20guinea
pigsweresensitized, andthese results wereconfirmed at
microscopic examination.
-32-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable8.SkinIrritation Studies on p-Phenylenediamine.
10%alcoholic solutionShaved,washed, and dried a25cm2
areaofskin.Rubbedp
Phenylenediamine into skin
Shaved, washed, anddrieda25cm2
areaofskin.Appliedp
Phenylenediamine3rabbits Milderythema observed Hanzlik 1923
Hairdye,1.2% Approximately 10%ofthebody
surface clipped (thebacks).Applied 10
g/kg,wrapped inimpervious plastic
sheeting for24hours2maleand2female
rabbitsSlighttomoderate erythema and
moderate edema observedCTFA1969b
Applied 0.1mldaily for 3daysto
intactshavedskin.Gradedat24hours.
P11(scale=0-8)determined onday
greatestirritation observed9rabbits P11=1.25.Mildlyirritating
50%, aqueous slurry 124-houroccluded patch application
toclipped, intact andabradedskin.
Erythema andedemareactions are
evaluated (0-4)at24and72hours,and
valuesareaddedandaveraged toyield
aP11(scale=0-8). Dog andbaboon
P11areestimates; noabradedsites6eachofmice,guinea
pigs,rabbits,miniature
pigs,piglets,dogsand
baboonsPilsformice,guineapigs,
rabbits,miniature pigs,piglets,
dogs,andbaboons were0.8, 0.5,
2.0,0.4,1.8,0.5,and0,
respectively. Rabbitandpiglet
showedflare-up skin reactions 2
to3weeksafterapplicationDaviesetal.1972
124-hour occluded patch application
toclippedskin.Theskinofhalfthe
animalswasabraded. Erythema and
edemareactions areevaluated (0-4)at
24 and72hours and valuesareadded
andaveraged toyieldaP11(scale=0-
8)
0.5g/ml,water;
2.5%,petrolatum; 25%,
petrolatum; 0.05gIml,
oliveoil0.5 mlofthewateroroliveoil or0.5
mlofthepetrolatum appliedtointact
andabradedskin.Erythema andedema
reactions areevaluated (0-4at24and
72hours,andvaluesareadded and
averaged toyieldaP11(scale=0-8)6rabbitspertreatment P11=3.2
P11=1.4
P11=2.3
P11=3.4Herve-Bazin etal.1977
2.5%, aqueous solution
containing 0.5%
Na,S03andadjusted to
pH7.0124-houroccluded patchapplication
toclipped intact andabradedskin.
Erythema andedemareactions are
evaluated (0-4)at24 and72hoursand
valuesareadded and averaged toyield
aP11(scale=0-8)Veryslightedemaattheabraded
sitesof2rabbits.InI,the
reactionameliorated in72hours.
P11=0.3
Shigematsu etal.(1988)evaluated thesensitizationpotential
ofp-Phenylenediamine usingthemaximization test.Four
inbredstrainJY-1guineapigs were sensitized withp
Phenylenediamine according tothemaximization test
methodology, andtheanimalswerechallenged with1%p
Phenylenediamine. All4guineapigshadapositive reaction
to1%p-Phenylenediamine. Crossreactions between 1%p
Phenylenediamine and1%p-Phenylenediamine derivatives
werealsoobserved inthisstudy.
Inaguineapigmaximization testperformed byMaurerandHess(1989),bothstandard andmodified protocols were
used.Inthemodifiedprotocol theinitialinduction consisted
of4intradermal injections (0.1mleach)ofanadjuvant
salinemixtureintotheskinofthe animals’ neck, followed
byapplication ofthetestsubstance (insoftwhite
petrolatum) on theinjection sites andunderocclusion for24
hours.Theseweretheonlymodifications tothestandard
protocol. p-Phenylenediamine wasinjected insaline.
Resultsfortheexperiment usingthestandardprotocol(0.5%
intradermal induction concentration; 10.0%epidermal
induction; 1.0%epidermal challenge) indicated 20/20Dry,basiccompoundConcentration and Method Animals Results Reference
Vehicle
3rabbits Noeffectsobserved Hanzlik 1923
Hairdye,1.8% CTFA197lb
5%,ethanol 8rabbits P11=0.88 Morikawa etal.1976
3rabbits Lloydetal.1977
-33-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotepositivereactions. Results for theexperiment usingthe
modified protocol (10% -induction concentration; 1.0% -
challenge) indicated 10/10positivereactions.
Bronaugh etal.(1994)performed aseriesoftests using
guineapigs.Thefirstwasanopenepicutaneous test(OET)
usinggroupsof10Hartleyguineapigs(malesandfemales).
Dailyapplications of0.03%p-Phenylenediamine (in
ethanol)weremadetoclippeddorsalskinfor3weeks.The
challenge phase wasinitiated atday1aftertheinduction
phase.Threechallenge concentrations ofthetestsubstance
wereapplied topreviously unusedsitesontheback;
reactions werescored24and48hours later. Sensitization
wasnotachieved, even atthehighestpossible challenge
doseof10%.Whentheinduction dosewasincreased to
0.1%,only6of10animals gave apositive response top
Phenylenediamine.
Theseauthorsalsoperformed aBuehlerocclusive patchtest
usinggroupsof10Hartleyguineapigs.Sensitization was
induced by1weeklytopicalapplication of0.03%p
Phenylenediamine (inethanol,occlusive patch)toclipped
skinfor3weeks.Thechallenge andrechallenge occurred
atweeks5and6.Atthehighestchallenge concentration
(10%p-Phenylenediamine), 9of10guineapigshadpositive
reactions.
Theseauthorsevaluated thesensitization potential ofp
Phenylenediamine inthemaximization testusingHartley
guineapigs.Intradermal injections were made onthefirst
dayofeach week for3weeks. Forweek1,p
Phenylenediamine wascombined (1:1,v/v)withFreund’s
complete adjuvant. Forweek2,p-Phenylenediamine was
combined (1:1,v/v)withFreund’ sincomplete adjuvant. For
week3,onlyp-Phenylenediamine wasused. One weekwas
allowedforthedevelopment ofsensitization, afterwhich
challenge andrechallenge wereperformed duringweeks5
and6.The animals were sensitized with5%p
Phenylenediamine andchallenged withdosesrangingfrom
0.01%to6%.
Atthehighest challenge concentration (6%),positive
responses wereobserved in223ofthe 250animals. At the
lowestchallenge concentration (0.01%),positiveresponses
wereobserved in30ofthe 200 animals. Microsopic
examination ofskinreactionsitesfromp-Phenylenediamine
sensitized guineapigsrevealed markedinfiltration of
mononuclear cells,classically seenwithdelayed-type
hypersensitivity skinreactions. Acanthosis and
mononucleocyte infiltration werereported andeosinophil
numbers weresignificantly increased (Bronaugh etal.
1994).Warbrick etal.(1999)conducted 4independent
analysesofp-Phenylenediamine inthemurinelocallymph
nodeassay(LLNA), performed inparallelineachof2
independent laboratories overaperiod of 4consecutive
months. Proliferative responses weremeasured at5test
concentrations (0.05%, 0.1%, 0.25%, 0.5%, and1%),together withconcurrent vehiclecontrolgroup. Results
obtained ineach laboratory wereexpressed asthe
incorporation of[3H]TdR intolymphnodesdrainingthesite
oftopicalexposure (dpmpernode).Chemicals that,atIor
more test concentrations, causedathreefold orgreater
increase inproliferation, compared toconcurrent vehicle-
treatedcontrols, wereconsidered tohavethepotential for
causingskinsensitization. Ineachexperiment andinboth
laboratories, p-Phenylenediamine provoked avigorous
proliferative response (positiveresponse) atconcentrations
of0.25%orgreater.
Table9summarizes thesesensitization studies.
SkinSensitization/Cross-sensitization
p-Phenylenediamine
Herve-Bazin etal.(1977)reported that 80%oftreated
guineapigsweresensitized to0.05%p-Phenylenediamine
inpetrolatum. Through crossreactions, 95to100%ofthe
treatedguineapigs were alsosensitized to0.5%in
petrolatum oftheseamineantiozonants:
•N-phenyl-N’ -cyclohexyparaphenylenediamine (CPPD),
•N-dimethyl- 1,3-butyl-N’-phenylpara-
phenylenediamine, and
•N-isopropyl-N’-phenylpara-phenylenediamine (IPPD).
Usingtheguineapigmaximization test,Xieetal.(2000)
studiedtheindividual skinsensitization potency andcross
reactivities of:
•p-Phenylenediamine,
•p-toluenediamine 2HC1(PTD),
•p-aminophenol (PAP),
•p-aminoazobenzene (PAB),and
•SudanIII(alysochrome, fat-soluble, diazodye).
Ineachgroup,6female Hartley strain albinoguineapigs
wereinducedwith0.1%ofthetestchemical byintradermal
injection and6bytopicalapplication(1.0% concentration).
Theanimals were challenged withall5chemicals (in
concentrations ofdilutionby10)from0.1%to0.001%.
Challenge withthe0.1% concentration yieldedthefollowing
numbersofpositiveresponses: p-Phenylenediamine (6/6),
PTD(6/6),PAP(5/6),andPAB(6/6)groups. Positive
responses werenotelicitedintheSudanIIIgroup.Cross
reactivities top-Phenylenediamine wereconfirmed in
animalschallenged withPTD(6/6),PAP(6/6),PAB(6/6),
andSudanIII(3/6).
InthePTD-induced group,positiveresponses tocross
challenges wereelicitedbyp-Phenylenediamine (5/6),PAP
(3/6),PAB(5/6),andSudanIII (1/6). Cross-reactivities to
PAPwereobserved onlywithp-Phenylenediamine (2/5)and
PAB(5/5).PAB-induced animalsresponded onlytop
Phenylenediamine (1/6).Studyresultsindicated thatall
-34-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotechemicals, exceptforSudanIII,arestrongsensitizers. The
cross-reactivities top-Phenylenediamine werehigherthan
thosetoPTD,PAP,andPAB (Xie et al.,2000).
Table9.SkinSensitization Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine.
Solvent Concentration Method No.ofAnimals/cell type Results Reference
(%)
GuineaPigs
induction with
10;challenge
with1
primary
irritation with
0.001,0.01,0.1.;
induction and
challenge with
0.001
water Intradermal
induction with
0.1,topical
induction with5,
challenge with1induction: 0.1mlappliedtoouterearsfor
3days;4days later, challenge: 0.2ml
appliedtodepilated flank;erythema
scored24hourslater;controls were
challenged, noninduced animals
guineapigmaximization test;scale0-3
primary irritant effectdetermined after
intradermal injection. Induction,
intradermal injection over10dayswith
0.1ml.17dayslater,challenge,
intradermal injection of0.1ml;reactions
read48hourslater;biopsiesperformed
Guineapigmaximization test;scale0-3
24-h occluded patchof0.5mlonback
read1,7,24,and48hourslater;
induction withintradermal injection of
0.1mlFreund’s complete adjuvant
dilutedto50%insalineon days 0and9,
occluded patchof0.5mlondays0,2,4,
7,9,11, 16, 18, and21toclippedback;
10 hpatchremoved day23;challenge on
day35:48-houroccluded patchof0.5 ml
toanotherbacksite;reactions readat0.,
7,24,and48hours;erythema scoredon
scaleof0to4;histological examination,
challenge siteswithmacroscopic
reactions20guineapigsontestand
18controls14/25and16/25positive
reactions. Meanscoreswere
0.65and0.71,respectively
noprimaryirritation reactions.
16/20positive sensitization
reactions; highcorrelation
betweenmicroscopic and
macroscopic reactions
allanimalssensitized; mean
erythema +edemascorewas
2.9
20/20reacted; mean erythema
scorewas2.16.2/3had
allergictypeinflammatory
reactions withintense
spongiosis andmassive
lymphocyte exocytosis; 1
showed necrosis witherosion,
weeping, andasquamous
crustMagnusson and
Kligman 1970
Rajkaand
Blohm1970
Morikawa etal.
1976dimethyl
formamide
propylene glycol
forintradermal
induction; 70%
ethanolfor
topical
induction; and
95%ethanolfor
challenge
water8guinea pigs 8/8positive(pink) reactions Stevens 1967
intradermal
induction with
0.005,topical
induction with
0.05or0.1for
largeranimals;
challenge with
0.5,landS2groupsof25female
guineapigs
70%ethanol10guineapigs
20guineapigs Brulosetal.
1977
Herve-Bazin et
al.1977oliveoilfor injection Induction withintradermal injection ofp-20guineapigsper 0.05and0.5%p
injection induction with Phenylenediamine andFreund’s complete treatment Phenylenediamine sensitized
induction, 0.5;dermal adjuvant. 1weeklater,cutaneous 80and100%oftheanimals,
petrolatum for induction with1;application; challenge 1weeklaterby respectively. 0.5%p
dermalinduction challenge with cutaneous application; control animals Phenylenediamine irritating to
andchallenge 0.05and0.5 challenged only 20%ofthenonsensitized 33
controls
-35-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable9(continued). SkinSensitization Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine.
petrolatum induction with2;
challenge with
0.1,0.5,l,and2induction, 424-hourocclusive patchesof
0.5gonalternative daysonclippedflank:
after14days,challenge onopposite flank
inocclusive chamber; reactions scored
24,48,and72hours;erythema scoredon
scaleof0-310guineapigsateachof
fourchallenge
concentrations0.5,1,and2%sensitized all
animals; meanerythema scores
were2.2,2.1,and1.5,
respectively; 0.1%sensitized
4/10;meanscorewas0.5Kleniewska
andMaibach
1980
induction
injection with
2.5;challenge
application with
5.0
intradermal
induction with
0.25,topical
induction with
0.5,challenge
with0.54simultaneous induction injections at
sitesoverlaying axillary and inguinal
lymphnodes;challenge byintradermal
injection andopentopicalapplication on
opposite shavedflanks14dayslater;
reactions gradedat24hours
guineapigmaximization test;scale=0-3 10guineapigs
singleintradermal injection ofp
Phenylenediamine andFreund’s complete
adjuvant innuchal region; challenged 12-
14dayslaterwith6-houroccluded
chamber application onashavedflank:
reactions graded18and42hourslater
(scale=0-3)
material dilutedto1%inpropylene
glycol.90.1mltopicalinductions onthe
shavedbackover3weeks;challenge 2
weekslaterattheoriginalandan
untreated site;observed at24and48
hours
3-week induction period(10
intracutaneous applications) followed by
separate challenges atweek6
(intradermal challenge) andatweek8
(epidermal challenge); animals werealso
challenged at14days after lastinductionPirbright white guinea
pigs(9challenged) and
bothDunkin Hartley
guineapigsand
Himalayan spotted guinea
pigs(groups of 10)were
challengedallguineapigsweresensitized;
astrongsensitizer
90%oftheguineapigswere
sensitized; astrongsensitizer:
meanofallpositivechallenge
scoreswas2.45Goodwin et al.
1981
Goodwin etal.
1981
allguineapigsweresensitized; Goodwin etal.
astrongsensitizer; meanofall1981
positivechallenge scoreswas
2.1
Nopositivereactions were CTFA 1982b
observed; notacontact
Sensitizer
positivereactions inall3
strainsMaureretal.
1984
water
notgiventopicalinduction
with10aqueous:
challenge with
0.5aqueous
induction with
0.18mmollliter;
challenge with
0.09mmollliter7successive topicalinduction
applications (48-hocclusive patches); 48-
hocclusive challenge patchappliedon
day28
protocol #1:openepidermal induction
(infootpad); protocol#2:quasi
intradermal injection (in footpad); both
protocols: singletopicalchallenge
application (inlumbarregion)20adultalbinoDunkin
Hartleyguineapigs
groupsof12female
Hartleyalbinoguineapigspositive reactions in11of20
sensitization rates :30%
(protocol #1) and30%
(protocol #2)Guillotand
Gonnet1985
Dossou 1985Solvent Concentration Method No.ofAnimals/cell type Results Reference
(%)
physiological intradermal induction: 3intradermal injections of0.120guineapigs 20/20and13/20positive Maureretal.
salinefor induction and mlinaweekand3intradermal injections sensitization reactions after 1979
induction and challenge with of0.1mlof1:1Freund’s adjuvant; saline intradermal andepidermal
intradermal 0.1:epidermal withp-Phenylenediamine for2weeks; challenges, respectively
challenge; challenge withIafter14days,challenge: intradermal
petrolatum for injection of0.1mlinto fresh flanksite
epidermal and24-houroccluded patch14dayslater
challenge atadifferent site;challenge reactions read
24hoursafterinjection orpatchremoval
10guineapigs notgiven
notgiven
notgiven
haircoloring
formulation
notgiveninduction
injection of
0.25;challenge
patchwith1.0
2
0.110guineapigs
12femaleguineapigs
-36-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable9(continued). SkinSensitization Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine.
Solvent Concentration Method No.ofAnimals/cell type Results Reference
(%)
notgiven induction maximization test 4inbredstrainJY-1 positivereactions inall Shigensatsu et
concentration guineapigs animals al.1988
notstated;
challenge with1
notgiven induction with maximization testwith4intradermal 20guineapigs(standard positivereactions inall Maurerand
0.5or10; induction injections ofadjuvant-saline protocol): 10guineapigs animals (bothprotocols) 1-less1989
challenge with1mixture, followed bytestsubstance (in (modified protocol)
softwhitepetrolatum) application, under
occlusion, oninjection sitesfor24h;or
modified protocol; testsubstance injected
insaline
ethanol induction with open epicutaneous test:dailyapplications groupsof10Hartley sensitization not achieved withBronaugh etal.
0.03and 0.1; of0.03% made toclippeddorsalskin for guineapigs 0.03%induction inall 1994
challenge 3weeks;3challenge concentrations (up animals, evenat10%
concentrations to10%)appliedtonew sites challenge concentration; when
upto10 induction concentration
increased to0.1%,6of10
withpositivereactions
ethanol induction with Buehler occlusive patchtest;sensitization groupsof10Hartley athighestchallenge Bronaugh etal.
0.03;challenge inducedbyoneweeklytopicalapplication guineapigs concentration (10%), 1994
concentrations madetoclippedskinfor3weeks; sensitization in9of10
up to10 challenge andrechallenge atweeks5and animals
6,respectively
notgiven induction with5;maximization test;intradermal induction Groupsof200and250 athighestchallenge Bronaugh etal.
challenge with injections ondayIofeach week; Iweek Hartleyguineapigs concentrations (6%),positive 1994
0.01to6 allowedforsensitization, afterwhich reactions in223of250
challenge andrechallenge performed animals: atlowestchallenge
duringweeks5and6. concentration, positive
reactions in30of200animals
LLNA
notgiven proliferative LLNAperformed inparallelover4 5groupsof4CBA/Ca testsubstance provoked a Warbrick etal.
responses consecutive months.Chemicals that(at1strainfemalemice vigorous proliferative response 1999
measured at5or more test concentrations) causeda3- (positive response) atconcen
testcone.(0.05, foldorgreaterincrease inproliferation, tratioos of 0.25%orgreater.
0.1,0.25,0.5, compared toconcurrent vehicle-treated
and1) controls, considered tohavethepotential
forcausingskinsensitization.
Lietal.(1996)evaluated thecrosssensitization potentialof
hairdyesinamodified lymphocyte transformation testusing
14Hartleyguineapigs(9testand5controls). Theguinea
pigsweresensitized withp-Phenylenediamine usingthe
maximization testprocedure. Thechallenge concentrations
were1%p-Phenylenediamine, 1%p-aminophenol, and5%
m-Phenylenediamine. Lymphnodecellsfromtheanimals
wereculturedwithp-Phenylenediamine, p-aminophenol, or
m-Phenylenediamine inthepresence orabsence of
epidermal cells.Transformed lymphocyte countswere
evaluated bymeansof3H-thymidine uptake. Results
suggested thatthereiscross-sensitization relationship
between p-Phenylenediamine, p-aminophenol, andrnPhenylenediamine.
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
Lidén(1988)evaluated thecross-sensitization potential of
p-Phenylenediamine HC1usingaguinea pig maximization
testprocedure. Outbred femaleDunkinHartleyalbino
guineapigs(—20exposed, —20sham-treated controls) were
usedforeachtestseries.Thenumberofanimalsper
test/control groupwasneverlessthan19.Colordeveloping
(CD)agents (CD-2, CD-3,andCD-4,allderivatives ofp
Phenylenediamine) wereusedforinduction. Atchallenge
withp-Phenylenediamine HCI(0.5%inpetrolatum), thetest
siteswererandomly rotated.Reactions werescored blindly
-37-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteat48hoursand72hourspost-application. The minimum
criterionforapositivereaction wasmoderate andconfluent
erythema.
Theincidence ofpositive challenge reactions top
Phenylenediamine HC1following induction witheitherof
thecolordeveloping agentswasasfollows:induction with
CD-2(3of20test;Iof19controls), induction withCD-3
(1of20 test; 1of20controls), andinduction withCD-4(3
of21test;0of20controls). Afewreactions top
Phenylenediamine HC1wereobserved; however, the
incidence intestanimalswasnotanygreaterthanthat
observed forshamcontrolsorthepetrolatum control.There
wasnocross-reactivity between eitherofthe3color
developing agentsandp-Phenylenediamine HC1(Lidén,
1988).
LidénandBoman(1988)evaluated thecross-reactivity ofp
Phenylenediamine HC1withcolordeveloping agents(p
Phenylenediamine derivatives) usingamaximization test.
Outbred female albinoguineapigsoftheDunkin-Hartley
strainwereused(groupsof20).Thefollowing chemicals
wereamong the color developing agents that weretested:
•4-N,N-diethyl-2-methyl- 1,4-phenylenediamine .HC1
(CD-2)and
•4-(N-ethyl-N-2-methan-sulphonamidoethyl)-2-methyl-
1,4-phenylenediamine. 1.5H2S04H,O(CD-3).
Thetestprocedure consisted ofintradermal injection of the
colordeveloper (inFreund’s complete adjuvant) onday0,
topicaltreatment withsodiumlaurylsulfate(inpetrolatum)
onday6inthe finalseries,topicalinduction onday7,and
challenge patchtestingwithp-Phenylenediamine HC1on
day21.Theinduction testconcentrations forCD-2were
2.15%and10.74%(inpetrolatum), and4.37%and21.83%
(inpetrolatum) forCD-3.p-Phenylenediamine HC1was
testedataconcentration of1.09%inpetrolatum duringthe
challenge phase.Topical induction patches consisted of
filterpaper mounted onBlenderm®. Finn chambers were
usedduringthechallenge phase. Results indicated nocross-
reactivity betweenp-Phenylenediamine HC1andeitherCD-2
orCD-3.Nopositive challenge reactions top
Phenylenediamine HC1werereported (LidénandBoman,
1988).
REPRODUCTIVE ANDDEVELOPMENTAL
TOXICITY
InVivoStudies
p-Phenylenediamine
Burnettetal.(1976)appliedhairdyeproducts containing
1.0,2.0,3.0,or4.0%p-Phenylenediamine topically indose
volumesof2ml/kgtogroupsof20pregnant ratsonDays1,
4,7,10, 13,16,and19ofgestation. Theratswereshaved 1
daypriortoeachapplication, andthedyesweremixedwith
anequalvolumeof6%hydrogen peroxidejustbeforetheiruse.Therewere3negative control groups.Theratswere
killedonDay20ofgestation. Nobiologically significant
softtissueorskeletalchanges were observed intheembryos.
Themean numbers ofcorporalutea,implantation sites,live
fetuses,resorptions perpregnancy, orlitters with resorptions
werenotsignificantly affectedbythetreatments. The litter
sexratiosandpregnant ratweightchanges andfeed
consumption weresimilarforuntreated controls anddye-
treatedgroups.
IRDC(1977)reported astudyinwhich hair dye
formulations containing 2,3,and4%p-Phenylenediamine
were mixed 1:1with6%hydrogen peroxide andapplied2
timesaweektotheclipped backs andnecksofgroupsof40
maleand40femalerats(theF0generation). Theinitialdose
levelwas0.2mlofthedyeperapplication andthiswas
increased by0.1ml/application weeklytoadoseof0.5
ml/application. Treatment wascontinuous throughgrowth,
mating,gestation, andlactation totheweaning oftheFiB,
F,B,andF3littersoftherespective generations. There were
3controlgroups.
Thedye-treated groupswerecomparable tocontrolgroups
ingeneralbehavior andappearance, feedconsumption, body
weightgain,andsurvival. Treatedratshadafewskin
reactions throughout the study; theseincluded mild
scabbing, fissuring, lossofelasticity, andleatherytexture.
ThetreatedF0,F1,andF,parentsdidnotdifferfromthe
controlsinfertility,gestation survival, andlivebirthindices.
Littersizeandbodyweightsoftheyoungwere similar.
Notreatment-related grossormicroscopic lesions were
observed intheF1parentalrats orfunctional observational
battery(FOB) weanling ratskilledandnecropsied duringthe
study. No treatment relatedgross lesions wereobserved in
theratsthat died duringthe study (IRDC1977).
Biodynamics (1977)applied ahairdyeformulation
containing 3%p-Phenylenediamine, mixed1:1with6%
hydrogen peroxide, totheclippedbacksof50femalemice
2timesaweekfor4weekspriortomatingandthroughthe
matingandgestation periods.Therewasevidence ofmating
in34treatedmice,and26becamepregnant. Eachmouse
received 0.05mlofthedye andhydrogen peroxide mixture
ateachapplication. Therewasevidence ofmatingin30
controlmice,and23becamepregnant.
Noovertsignsofmaternal toxicity wereobserved. One
treatedanimaldiedpriortogestation; ithadadiscolored
liverandanenlarged spleen.Thematernal weightgainsand
pregnancy andmortality ratesofthetreatedmicewere
comparable tothecontrols.
Themeannumbers ofimplantations, livefetusesand
resorptions andfetalsexratios,andnumbersofskeletaland
softtissuemalformations weresimilarintreatedandcontrol
mice.Slightlylowerfetalweightswereobserved inthe
treatedmice,butthemeancrown-rump distances were
-38-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotecomparable tothecontrols. Theresearchers concluded that
therewasnoevidence ofateratogenic effect.However,
theremayhavebeenaretarding effectontheossification
process,particularly ofthebonesofthefeetandofthe
cervicalandcaudalvertebral centra(Biodynamics 1977).
Biodynamics (1982)appliedthesamehairdyeformulation
totheclippedbacksof34female rabbits 2timesaweekfor
4weekspriortomatingandthrough thematingand
gestation periods. Ofthe34rabbitsthatweremated,26
becamepregnant, and3diedduringthegestation period.
Therabbitsreceived 4.0mI/kgapplications ofthemixture
ofhairdyewithhydrogen peroxide. Of the34control
rabbits,32weremated,21becamepregnant, and6died
duringgestation.
Asabove,noovertsignsofmaternaltoxicitywereobserved.
Noadverseeffectsonpregnancy rates,maternal survival,
andbodyweightswerefound. Focal alopecia wasnotedat
slightlyhigherincidences intreatedrabbitsduringthe first
twothirdsofgestation: inthelastthirdofgestation, the
incidence ofalopecia incontrolandtreatedrabbitswas
similar.The mean numbersofcorporalutea,implantations,
livefetusesandresorptions, implantation efficiency, and
numberofdoseswith2ormoreresorptions were
comparable incontrolandtreatedrabbits.Therewasno
evidence ofateratogenic effect.Theremayhavebeensome
evidence ofembryotoxicity; thepercentoflivefetuseswas
lessinthetreatedrabbits(85.4%inthetreatedrabbitsand
93.8%inthecontrolrabbits), andthefetalsexratio
(male:female ratioof0.7)wasunusually low.However,
therewasnoadverseeffecton theweightorlengthofthe
fetusesthatsurvived toDay30ofgestation (Biodynamics
1982).
Huntingdon Research Center(1978)administered an
aqueousp-Phenylenediamine solutionsubcutaneously ina
doseof28mg/kgto3groupsof25miceonDays5to7,8
to10,or11to14ofgestation. Therewere25controlmice.
Smallincreases overthecontrols inaverageresorption
numbers andpercentfetalskeletalvariations wereobserved
inthetreatedgroups;theresearchers claimedthatthese
increases werewithintherangeofvaluesfoundforhistorical
controls. The authorsconcluded thattherewas noevidence
p-Phenylenediamine hadanembryotoxic orteratogenic
effect(Huntingdon Research Center1978).
Topham (1980a,b)usedthemousesperm-head abnormality
testtodetermine theeffectsofchemical interference in
spermatozoa differentiation. Groupsof5hybridmalemice
weregiven5dailyintraperitoneal injections ofp
Phenylenediamine insaline.p-Phenylenediamine was
administered tothemiceatdosesof5,10,and20mg/kgper
day.Dosesof50and100mg/kgperdayweretoxic.Five
weekslaterthemicewerekilledandspermsmearswere
made.Twohundredfiftysperm-heads wereclassified asofnormalorabnormal morphology. p-Phenylenediamine was
notactiveinthistest.
Reetal.(1981)administered p-Phenylenediamine in
aqueoussolutionbygavageindosesof5,10,15,20,and30
mg/kgperday on Days 6through 15ofgestation togroups
of25pregnant rats.Acontrolgroupgivenonlywateranda
pair-fedcontrolgroup(pairedto30mg/kgperday group)
werealsoincluded intheexperiment. Theratswerekilled
onDay20.Feedconsumption wassignificantly reduced
duringthedosingperiodforthe20and30mg/kgperday
groups.
Thereweresignificant decreases infeedconsumption for
severaldaysduringthedosingperiodforthe15mg/kgper
daygroup.Ratsinthe 20and30mg/kgperdaygroupsand
thepair-fedcontrolshadsignificantly reducedweightgains
overthedosingperiod,butthese resultswerenotsignificant
whencompared tothecontrolsoverthe20days.
Twopregnant ratsinthe30mg/kgperdaygroupdied.
Therewerenoothermaternal deaths.
Nosignificant differences inthenumbersofcorporalutea,
implantation sites,livefetusesorresorptions, orinfetal
weightsandmale:female ratioswereobserved. There were
nobiologically meaningful orstatistically significant
increases inthenumbersoflittersorfetuseswithsofttissue
orskeletalmalformations inanyofthetreatment groups(Re
etal.1981).
BurnettandGoldenthal (1988)conducted amultigeneration
reproduction studyinvolving groupsof40animalsofeach
sex(Sprague-Dawley rats;6to8weeksold).Three
formulations containing p-Phenylenediamine (2%,3%,and
4%)weretested. The dyes(mixed with 6%hydrogen
peroxide) wereapplied(0.5ml)topically twiceweekly
throughout thegrowth,mating,gestation, andlactation
phasesoftheF0parentstotheweaningoftheFiaandF,b
litters.
Application ofthehairdyeshadnoadverseeffectonthe
fertilityofmalesorfemales, ongestation, lactation and
weaningindices. The average number weanedperlitterand
themeanbodyweightsofthe weanlings werecomparable
amongthetreatedandcontrolgroups. Theauthors
concluded thatthefrequent application ofoxidative hair
dyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine hadnoadverseeffect
onreproduction (Burnett andGoldenthal 1988).
InastudybyMDSPharmaServices(2005), 3groupsof25
matedfemaleSprague-Dawley rats(10to13weeksold;
weights: 209 to292g)received p-Phenylenediamine (in
sterilewater,bygavage)on days6through 19ofgestation,
atdosesof5.10,and 20mg/kg/day, respectively. Acontrol
groupof25matedratsreceived sterilewater(vehicle)
duringthesameperiod.
Nounscheduled deathswerereported andtherewereno
-39-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotesignsofgeneraltoxicityduringthestudy.Aslightly
transient lower mean gestational bodyweightgain
(indicative ofveryslightmaternal toxicity) wasobserved in
10mg/kg/day and20mg/kg/day dosegroupsduringthefirst
3daysoftreatment. Attheterminalnecrospsy examination
ofadultfemales, notreatment-related macroscopic findings
werenoted.
Ineachgroup,atleast23femaleswerepregnant. Except for
anequivocal increased incidence ofearlyresorptions atthe
highdoselevel,therewerenodifferences inpre-orpost-
implantation databetween treatedandcontrolgroups.
Medianlivelittersizeswerecomparable between control
andtreatedgroups.
Meanfetalweight(accompanied byslightlyretarded
ossification) andmeangraviduterineweightwereslightly
lowerinthehighdosefemales than intheothergroups
(resultsnotstatistically significant). Thefetalsexratiowas
comparable between groups.Malformed fetuseswerenot
observed inanyofthegroups.
Theauthorsnotedthattheincidences offetuseswith
morphological anomalies orvariations did notsuggestany
adverseeffectsofthetestsubstance. Therewereno
indications ofteratogenicity inanygroup,anditwas
concluded thatp-Phenylenediamine wasnon-embryo
fetotoxic andthatthematernal no-observed-effect level
(NOEL) was5mg/kg/day. According totheauthors,the
developmental no-observed-adverse effectlevel(NOAEL)
was10mg/kg/day (MDSPharmaServices, 2005).
InVitroStudies
p-Phenylenediarnine
Trauletal.(1981)treated Rauscher leukemia virus-infected
ratembryocellswithp-Phenylenediamine (1.85to3.2jigp
Phenylenediamine/5.2 xl0cells)for72hours,andcell
survivalwasdetermined 6dayslater.Thisassaymeasures
theacquisition ofattachment independence, whichis
manifested byincreased cellsurvival rates.p
Phenylenediamine waspositive inthistest.Viablecell
countsweregreaterafterp-Phenylenediamine treatment than
aftertreatment withsolvent(unspecified) alone.
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
Johnson andGable(1983)investigated theinvitrohydra
(Hydraauenuata) assayasaprescreen fordevelopmental
toxicity. Thedoseselection procedure inthecurrentstudy
wassuchthat thelowendofthedevelopmental toxicity
dose-response curvewascloselyapproximated. Substances
affecting development (D),butonlyatorveryneartheadult
(A)toxicdoselevel,arenotconsidered ashazardstothe
conceptus, eventhoughtheycaninduceterata,fetaldeath,
and/orrunts.The larger theA/Dratio,thegreaterthe
propensity ofthetestsubstance fordisruption of
development, butnotforharmingtheadult.Reportedly, theA/D ratio fortheteratogen thalidomide isapproximately 60.
The authors pointedoutthatthegreatmajorityofsubstances
have ratios thatarenearunity.AnA/DratioofIwas
reported forp-Phenylenediamine HCIinthehydraassay.
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
Jelineketal.(1985)estimated theembryotoxic potentialof
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate(insterileredistilled water)and
ahostofotherchemicals usingthechickembryoscreening
test.Thetestprocedure wascomposed ofthefollowing two
parts:theestimation oftheembryotoxicity rangeandthe
determination oftheembryotoxicity parameters. Fertilized
eggsfromWhite Leghorn Fowlor Ross Istock(embryos
aged1.5, 2,3.and4daysofincubation) wereused.The
following embryotoxicity parameters were established: (1)
beginning oftheembryotoxicity dose range, (2)dose-
response andstage-response relationships, (3)proportion of
deadandgrowth-retarded fetuses,and(4)malformation in
thesurvivors.
Fortherange estimation, eachtestsubstance wasdilutedor
suspended indecimalgeometric series,startingwitha1:102
dilution (5mg/0.5mlsolvent) toadilutionof1:106.After
anincubation periodthatwasapproximately 40hours,3or
10jilofeach dilution wereinjectedsubgerminally into
groupsof6normal embryos with10to14somitepairs.
Forembryotoxicy parameters, 3or4dosesapproximately at
thebeginning oftheembryotoxicity range(seeabove)were
appliedsinglytogroupsof10embryos thatwereincubated
for2, 3,and4daysunderthesameconditions. Onthe
secondday, thesolutions wereinjectedsubgerminally. Day
8markedtheendoftheincubation period.
Malformations evaluated wereasfollows: head
(exencephaly, microcephaly, partial cranial-vault defects),
face(crossedbeak, cleft beak,centralfacehypoplasia), eye
(microphthalmia, buphthalmia, colobomas), bodywall
(coelosomia, umbilical hernia), trunk (hyperlordosis,
scoliosis, syndrome ofcaudalregression), and,aftercutting
thebodywallandtheright ventricle oftheheart,heart
malformations (double-outlet ventricle, interventricular
septal defects). Regarding theevaluation ofresults,the
numberofdead,malformed, andgrowth-retarded fetuses
(weighing lessthan650 mg andbearing novisible
malformation, ifany)inevery group weretotaled.
Thebeginning oftheembryotoxicity rangeforp
Phenylenediamine Sulfatecomprised dosesof0.03to3.0
jig/embryo. p-Phenylenedianmine induced significant
malformations ofthebodywallwithameanincidence of
0.03andtheheartwithameanincidence of0.11(Jelineket
al.,1985).
GENOTOXICITV
p-Phenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediainine HCI
-40-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteGenotoxicity studiesaregiveninTable10andsummarized
below.
AsshownunderBacterial Assays,many studies havebeen
conducted onp-Phenylenediamine usingtheAmestestand
modifications oftheAmestest.Virtually allp
Phenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediamine andhydrogen
peroxide mixtures werenonmutagenic intheAmestestin
theabsenceofmetabolic activation. Mostly mutagenic
responses, withsomenoninutagenic results,werereported
withmetabolic activation.
AsshownunderMammalian CellAssays,these ingredients
aremostlypositivewithoutmetabolic activation, andmostly
negative withmetabolic activation.
p-Phenylenediamine wasnotgenotoxic inone assay of
bacteriophage T4D.Inatestusingbacteriophage XDNA,
DNAdamageinthe formoffragments wereproduced.
Intwostudies using fruitflies,genotoxicity wasreported,
butallstudiesusinganimalsreported nogenotoxicity.
Othergenotoxicity studiesnotshowninTable10are
discussed below.
p-Phenylenediamine Oxidation Products
ShahandAndrews (1979)tested5oxidation products of p
Phenylenediamine formutagenicity intheAmestest,andall
weremoremutagenic thanp-Phenylenediamine.
Table10.Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHCISalt.
TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
Bacterial Assays
p-Phenylenediamine S.lyphiniurium strains spottest(-Img)withandwithout S-9ap-Phenylenediamine alone had noAmeset al1975
aloneandwithH,O, TA100,TA97,TA1538, and mutagenic activitywithorwithout
TA98 S-9;p-Phenylenediamine andH,O,
mixturegaveaverystrong
mutagenic response withTA1538
whenS-9waspresent
p-Phenylenediamine S.lyphimurium strains plateincorporation withandwithoutS-9p-Phenylenediamine alonewas VenittandSearle
aloneandwithH,O, TA1535 andTA1538 slightlymutagenic withstrain 1976
TA1538 inthepresence of S-9.p
Phenylenediamine andH20,mix
wasniutagenic tostrainTA1538in
thepresence ofS-9.
p-Phenylenediamine in S.typhimuriuni strainTA98 plate incorporation (15-150pg/plate) p-Phenylenediamine inbufferandYoshikawa etal
buffer:andwithH,O, withandwithoutS-9 p-Phenylenediamine andH20, 1976
werebacteriostatic withoutS-9;p
Phenylenediamine inbufferandp
Phenylenediamine andFI,O,(50
and150pg/plate) weremutagenic
inthepresence ofS-9
-41-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHC1Salt.
p-Phenylenediamine in S.lyphimurium strainTA98
DMSOpreincubatiion at37’Cfor1hourwith
andwithoutS9,followed byplate
incorporation. S-9wasfromrats,
hamsters, andmice induced with
polychlorinated biphenyls, 3-
methylchol-anthrene, andphenobarbital
oruninducedp-Phenylenediamine wasnot
mutagenic withallhamster S-9
andwithS-9from rats and mice
inducedwithpolychlorinated
biphenyls and3-
methylcholanthrene
p-Phenylenediamine: in
water;in 2%NH4OH, in
2%NH4OH, andwith
H,O,S.typhiinurium strains
TA1535, TA100, TA1537,
TA1538, andTA98plateincorporation with and withoutS-9
fromnoninduced andinducedratsp-Phenylenediamine (5-1000
pg/plate) wasnotmutagenic
withoutinducedratliverS-9;p
Phenylenediamine wasslightly
mutagenic tostrainsTA1538 and
TA98withinducedratliverS-9.p
Phenylenediamine (250-1000
pg/plate) wasnotmutagenic to
strainTA1538 and TA98 withS-9
fromnoninduced ratliver;slight
increase inrevertant colony
numberwithp-Phenylenediamine
andNH4OHandnoactivitywith
p-Phenylenediamine, NH1OH, and
H,0.instrainTA98inthe
presence ofS-9frominducedrat
liverShahinetal.1979TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine in S.lyphimurium strainTA98 plateincorporation (0.003-1346. 153 p-Phenylenediamine inbufferandYoshikawa etal.
buffer;andwithH,0, pg/plate) withandwithoutS-9 p-Phenylenediamine and 1977
H,0,(0.003 -1346. 153pg/plate)
hadnomutagenic activity without
S-9;p-Phenylenediamine inbuffer
andp-Phenylenediamine and1-1,0.
(13,461and134.615pg/plate)
weremutagenic inthepresence of
S-9.
p-Phenylenediamine in S.tvphiinurium strain plateincorporation withS-9from Nomutagenic activitywith Dybingand
DMSO TA1538 uninduced ratsandmiceandS-9from uninduced S-9.Slightmutagenic Thorgeirsson 1977
animalsinducedwithB-naphtholfavone activitywithinducedratand
mouseliverS-9
p-Phenylenediamine in S.1-’phirnurium strain plateincorporation withandwithout p-Phenylenediamine (50and100 GarnerandNutman
DMSO TA1538 liverS-9from rats inducedwith pg/plate) wassignificantly 1977
phenobarbital mutagenic inthepresence ofS-9
3liquidhairdyesand25.ryphimuriuin strains TA98. plateincorporation with and without S-oneliquidinducedbasepair Bajajand Notani
hairdyepowders TA100, TA1535, and 9 substitutions withoutS-9;all 1978
containing p- TA1537 othersinducedframeshift
Phenylenediamine mutations withS-9
25hairdyepreparations S.tvphimurium strains 25dyestestedwithoutS-9and 20dyes 7dyesmutagenic toTA1538and Havovaetal.1978
containing p- TA1535, TAIOO,TA1537, tested withmouseliverS-9withstrain TA98withoutS-9and13were
Phenylenediamine TA1538, and TA98 TA98 mutagenic; 2suspected ofbeing
mutagenic tostrainTA98withS-9
p-Phenylenediamine in S.lyphiniuriuin strains S-9fromratsinducedwith p-Phenylenediamine (0.5-2 Degawa etal.1979
DMSO TA100andTA98 polychlorinated biphenyl; preincubation pmol/plate) wassignificantly
ofp-Phenylenediamine andbacteria mutagenic tostrainTA98inthe
withandwithoutS-9at37’C(for20 presence ofS-9
minutes) followed byplateincorporation
Yoshikawa etal.
1979
-42-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHC1Salt.
Test Substance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine HC1 S.lyphimurium strains plateincorporation withS-9from at0.1-6.6mg/plate wasnot
TA1535, TAIOO,TA1537, uninduced andinducedratsand mice. mutagenic withoutactivation butDunkeland
TA1538, andTA98 wasmutagenic instrainsTA1535,Simmon 1980
TAIOO,TA1538, andTA98with
inducedmouseandratliverS-9;
withuninduced ratliverS-9,there
wasnomutagenic activitywith
TA1535 andreduced activity with
TA1538 and TA98
p-Phenylenediamine S.ryphimurium strains preincubatiion for37CCfor1hourwith p-Phenylenediamine was Monetal.1980
TA100andTA98 andwithoutS9,followed byplate mutagenic onlyinstrainTA98in
incorporation, the presence ofS-9
purified p- S.t-’phimuriuni strainTA98 plateincorporation withandwithout S-Purified p-Phenylenediamine (0-2 Crebelli etal.1981
Phenylenediamine in 9. mg/plate) produced nosignificant
water;2commercial increase innumberofframeshift
samplesofanalytical p- revertants: bothcommercial
Phenylenediamine in samplesofp-Phenylenediamine (0-
water;and with 2mg/plate) andthep
resorcinol in50% PhenylenediamineIresorcinolfl-l,O
NH4OHandwithHO2 mixture(0-1.0mg/plate) increased
thenumberofrevertants inthe
presence ofS-9.
microtiter fluctuation test with confirmed aboveresults
microsomal activation (method of
Gatehouse andDelow1979)
p-Phenylenediamine in S.lyphimuriuni strains withS-9;freshandaged(used0-4hours aqueous solution andthefresh Burnettetal.1982
waterandinDMSO TA1538 and TA98 afterdilution) testmaterial DMSOsolutionwere
nonmutagenic withS-9:aged
DMSOsolutions weremutagenic
withS-9
p-Phenylenediamine in
DMSOS.typhimurium strainTA98 withS-9;testmaterialexposed to
Toshiba fluorescent lamps(15Wx2)at
10cmfor0-4hoursp-Phenylenediamine solutionkept
inthedarkwasnot mutagenic with
S-9;allsolutions illuminated 10
minutes to4hoursweremutagenic
withS-9Nishi and Nishioka
1982
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
(indistilledwater)S.lyphimurium strains TA98,
TAIOO,TA1535, TA1537,
andTA1538, andE.coil
StrainWP2urAplate incorporation procedure atdoses
up to6,666pg/plate withandwithout
metabolic activationclassified asmutagenic inatleast
oneSalmonella typhimurium strain
withmetabolic activation; not
possible todetermine whethertest
substance wasmutagenic inE.coil
strainWP2uvrADunkelet al.,1985
p-Phenylenediamine S.lyphimurium strainTA98 testconcentrations up to100pg/plate,
withandwithout metabolic activationmutagenic, withmetabolic
activation onlyLeeetal. 1986
p-Phenylenediamine S.typhimurium strains TA98
andTA100plateincorporation andpreincubation
protocols, with and withoutplantand
mammalian hepaticS9;test
concentrations up to10,000pg/platenotmutagenic, withorwithout
metabolic activationGentileetal.1987
Mixtureofp
Phenylenediamine HCI
(55mM),resorcinol (66
mM),andHO2(3%)S.typhiniurium strainTA98 Ames test with metabolic activation Oxidative mixturenotmutagenic.
However, sameoxidation mixture
withoutresorcinol wasmutagenicBracheret al.,1990
-43-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHCISalt.
TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine Salmonella typhimurium suspension assay; dose ofeach mutagenicity wasenhanced by Watanabe etal.
beforeandafter strainTA98 chemical/chemical mixturedid not H,0,inthepresence ofmetabolic 1990
treatment with1-1,0,; exceed10pg/plate activation; 11,0,-oxidized m
oxidized mixtures ofm- Phenylenediamine andp
Phenylenediamine andp- Phenylenediamine and theo
Phenylenediamine 1-lCl Phenylenediamine andp
inDMSO;ando- Phenylenediamine mixtures
Phenylenediamine andp- classified aspotentmutagens with
Phenylenediamine HC1 metabolic activation
inDMSO)
p-Phenylenediamine S.tvphiinuriuin strainsTA98 plateincorporation test,withand atconcentrations upto3,000 Chungetal.1995
andTAIOO withoutS-9 pg/plate, mutagenic toTA98with
metabolic activation (frameshift);
notmutagenic tostrainTA100
(base pair substitution).
p-Phenylenediamine S.i-vphiniurium strainsTA98, plateincorporation testatconcentrations Mutagenic tostrainsTA98NR andChungetal.1996
TA98NR, TA100, and upto3,000 pg/plate. TAIOONR withmetabolic
TA100NR activation.
p-Phenylenediamine S.tvphimuriuni strains TA98 Amestest(Maronand Ames 1983).TestMutagenic tostrainTA98with Assman etal.1997
andTAIOO concentrations of67to1076pg/plate metabolic activation only;
withandwithoutmetabolic activation classified asframeshift mutagen.
Increased genotoxicity instrain
TA98,withmetabolic activation,
overrangeoftestconcentrations
p-Phenylenediamine HCI S.typhinuriuoi strains: plateincorporation attestconcentrations mutagenic tostrainTA98inthe Covance
(inpurifiedwater) TA98,TAIOO,TA1535. up to5000pg/plate withS-9 presence of metabolic activation Laboratories, 2005a
TA1537, andTAIO2
p-Phenylenediamine (in S.typhimuriuin strainsTA98, plate incorporation, with and without S-statistically significant (p<0.01) Garrigue etal.2006
purifiedwater) TA100, TA1535, TA1537, 9, attestconcentrations upto5000 increase innumberofrevertants in
andTA1O2 pg/plate strainTA100(at1000pg/plate,
without metabolic activation); no
dose-response relationship:
statistically significant increase in
numberofrevertants instrain
TA98at1000pg/plate (p<0.01)
and5000pg/plate (p<0.005)
p-Phenylenediamine in S.typhimurium strainTA98 pre-incubation (withmetabolic statistically significant, dose- Garrigue etal.2006
purifiedwater activation) attestconcentrations uptorelatedincrease innumberof
5000pg/plate revertants
p-Phenylenediamine in S.lyphimurium strain with and withoutmetabolic activation atpositiveresults with metabolic Yasunaga etal.
DMSO TA1535/pSKIOO2 testconcentrations upto5mg/mI activation 2006
Bacterial VirusAssay
p-Phenylenediamine bacteriophage T4D testconcentrations inassayupto190.4 notmutagenic Kvelland 1984
pg/mi
DNAAssays
p-Phenylenediamine bacteriophage XDNA invitrodouble-stranded DNAbreaks p-Phenyienediamine (250pM) Yamada etai.1985
assay. causedDNAfragments between
0.6—4x106daltons
FruitFlyAssay
-44-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHCISalt.
L5178Y mouselymphoma
cellsL5178Y mouselymphoma forward
mutation assayattestconcentrations up
to10.ig/ml(without metabolic
activation) and400ig/ml(with
metabolic activation)testsubstance inducedsignificant
increases inmutantfrequency with
andwithoutmetabolic activation,
although the responses were
usuallylargerwithoutmetabolic
activation andoccurred atlessthan
one-tenth theconcentrations
required withmetabolic activation.
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
(indistilled water)L5178Y mouse lymphoma
cellsL5I78Ymouselyniphoma forward
mutation assayattestconcentrations up
to20pg/mlwith and withoutmetabolic
activationmutagenic withoutmetabolic
activation andnonmutagenic with
metabolic activation; lowest
concentration atwhichpositive
response observed was5ig/mlCaspary etal.,1988
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
(indistilledwater)TK6humanlymphoblasts TK6humanlymphoblast forward
mutation assayattestconcentrations up
to 20iiglmlmutagenic withoutmetabolic
activation, butnotwithmetabolic
activation: lowestconcentration at
whichpositive response observed
was20pg/mI
mixtureofp
Phenylenediamine HCI
(55mM),resorcinol (66
mM),andhydrogen
peroxide (3%)mouselymphoma cells mouselymphoma assay oxidative mixturenotmutagenic. Bracher etal.,1990TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine inD.Melanogaster sex-linked recessive assay;5.1and15.5 increase insex-linked recessive Blijleven 1977;
DMSOandsucrose mMfedfor3daystoadult males mutations infirstassayinwhich 1981
thedyewassuspected ofbeing
contaminated; repeat testwith
higherpuritywasnotmutagenic
p-Phenylenediamine D.inelanogaster zestewhiteeyemosaicsystemattest significant increase infrequency ofBatiste-Alentom et
concentrations upto0.5mM;white- mutantclones(classified as al.1995
ivorysystemattestconcentrations uptopositive) ineachtest
5mM;andwingspot test attest
concentrations up to2mM.
Mammalian CellAssays
p-Phenylenediamine HC1nonreplicating malerat DNArepairtest;testmaterial at0.005totoxicityseenat0.1mg/mI;no Williams etal.
hepatocyes 0.1mg/mlprimaryculture DNArepairsynthesis at0.005to 1982
0.05mg/ml
p-Phenylenediamine Chinesehamsterovarycells sisterchromatid exchanges assayattestinducedsisterchromatid Leeetal.1986
concentrations upto1xI0Mwithandexchanges withorwithout
withoutmetabolic activation metabolic activation
p-Phenylenediamine Chinesehamsterovarycells chromosome aberrations assayattest dose-related increase in Chungetal.1995
concentrations upto87pg/mI chromosomal aberrations
withoutmetabolic activation
p-Phenylenediamine Chinesehamster ovarycells chromosome aberrations assayattest dose-related increase in Chungetal.1996
concentrations upto87pg/mI chromosomal aberrations in
absenceofmetabolic activation
p-Phenylenediamine HCIL5178Ymouselymphoma forwardmutation assayattest concentration-related increase inMitchell etal.
(indistilledwater) cells concentrations upto6.5pg/mI(without mutagenicity in2/3trialswithout l988a
metabolic activation) and250pg/mI metabolic activation; and2/3trials
(withmetabolic activation) withmetabolic activation
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
(indistilledwater)Myhrand
Casparyl 988
-45-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHC1Salt.
micronucleus assayatconcentrations up
to1600ig/mIand5000ig/miwithand
withoutmetabolic activation,
respectively; concentrations upto2000
ig/mIand125ig/mIwithandwithout
metabolic activation, respectivelymicronuclei inducedwith
metabolic activation, butnot
without, whentestedfollowing 24-
hourphytohemagglutinin (PHA)
mitogen stimulation; when tested
after48-hourPHAmitogen
stimulation, testsubstance induced
micronuclei bothwithandwithout
metabolic activation
p-Phenylenediamine Humanurothelial cells(SV
HUC-1cells)Cometassay.Association of
genotoxicity withexpression ofp53and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) oncoproteins
alsostudieddose-dependent DNAdamageover
dose range: 2to450pg/mI;also
inducedoverexpression ofmutant
p53and COX-2 oncoproteins in
dose-dependent manneroverthe
samedoserangeHuangetal.2007
AnimalAssays
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.2%inwatermale rats dominant lethalstudy;materialgiven
i.p.3xperweekfor8weeksat2,6,an
20mg/kg;matedtounexposed femalesnoevidence ofpost-implantation
fetallossBurnettetal1977
p-Phenylenediamine in
0.5%tragacanth gum
with0.05%sodium
sulfiterats bonemarrowmicronucleus test;material
fedtwiceat500mg/kgnoclearevidence ofmutagenicity Hossack and
Richardson 1977
p-Phenylenediamine malemice testicular DNAsynthesis; material fed
onceat200 mg/kgtesticular DNAsynthesis depressed Seiler1977
dyeproductwith2.2%p
Phenylenediamine,
mixedwithHO2malerats heritable translocation study;material
paintedon 2xper week for10weeks;
matedtounexposed femalesnumbers ofimplantations, dead
fetuses,andresorptions not
different between testandcontrolBumettetal. 1981TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
mixtureofp- humanlymphocytes and chromosome aberration assaywithand humanlymphocytes: increase in
Phenylenediamine HCI Chinesehamsterovarycells withoutmetabolic activation chromosome aberrations with
(55mM),resorcinol (66 resorcinol, but notwithout;
mM),andhydrogen Chinesehamsterovarycells:
peroxide (3%);mixture chromosome aberrations andsister
ofp-Phenylenediamine chromatid exchanges withand
HCI(55mM)and withoutresorcinol, but noclear
hydrogen peroxide (3%) reproducible manner, andonlyat
cytotoxic levels
p-Phenylenediamine HC1Chinesehamsterovarycells hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl testsubstance inducedmicronuclei Oshiro etal.,1991
(inwater) transferace mutation assayattest without, but not with,metabolic
concentrations of5to30il(without activation
metabolic activation) and100to700
pg/mI(withmetabolic activation)
p-Phenylenediamine HC1L5178Ymouselymphoma mutation (athprtlocus) assay usingthetestsubstance wasnotmutagenic Covance
(inpurifiedwater) cells microtitre fluctuation technique at inthepresence orabsenceof Laboratories Ltd.,
concentrations upto80pg/mI(without metabolic activation 2005b
metabolic activation) andup to900
pg/mi(withmetabolic activation); and
atconcentrations upto 60pg/mI
(without metabolic activation) andupto
1000.tg/ml(withmetabolic activation)
p-Phenylenediamine (inheterozygous (tk/tk) mouselymphoma assayattest notmutagenic withorwithout Garrigue etal2006
purifiedwater) L5I78Ymouselymphoma concentrations upto35pg/mI(without metabolic activation; maximum
cells metabolic activation) andup to900 doseswerehighlytoxic
pg/mI(withmetabolic activation)
p-Phenylenediamine (in
purifiedwater)Humanperipheral blood
lymphocytesGarrigue etal.2006
-46-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studiesonp-Phenylenediamine anditsHC1Salt.
TestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenyienediamine HCICD-imice micronucleus test.3groupsof CD-i nosignificant dose-orsampling Soler-Niedziela et
(indistilledwater) micereceived singlei.p.dosesof25, 50, time-related response in at.,1991
and100mg/kg. The animalswerekilled micronuclei induction
andbone marrow smearsprepared.
Polychromatic erythrocytes scoredfor
incidence ofmicronuclei
p-Phenylenediamine HCImale F344 rats rathepatocyte replicative DNAsynthesis noreplicative DNAsynthesis Unoetal.,1994
(RDS)assay;testsubstance induced
administered orallyorbys.c.injection
to2groupsatdosesof38and75mg/kg
p-Phenylenediamine HC1maleB6C3F:mice RDSassay;testsubstance administered noclearpositiveevidence of Miyagawa etal.
bysingleoralgavageto2groupsat replicative DNAsynthesis 1995
dosesof75mg/kgand38mg/kg induction
p-Phenylenediamine HCIF344ratsandB6C3F1mice RDSassay.Dosesof75mg/kgand38noreplicative DNAsynthesis Yoshikawa, 1996
mg/kg. induced
p-Phenylenediamine HCImaleddYmice;cellsinthe Comet assay atasingleoraldoseof75testsubstance didnotyielda Sasakietal.,1999
(inoliveoil) following organsstudied: mg statistically significant increase in
stomach, colon,liver,kidney, DNAdamageinanyoftheorgans
bladder, lung,brain,and thatwere studied.
bonemarrow
p-Phenylenediansine ingroups(5males+5females) micronucleus assay(ratbonemarrow nocytogenetic damageleadingtoRCCCytotest Cell
deionized water received single doses of25. cells) micronucleus formation Research GmbH
50,and100mg/kgbody 2006a
weight
p-Phenylenediamine inWistarFlanlbm: WIST(SPF) invivounscheduled DNA synthesis noDNAdamageleadingto RCCCytotest Cell
deionized water ratsreceived singleoraldoses assay (rathepatocytes) unscheduled DNAsynthesis Research GmbH
of50 and100mg/kg body 2006b
weight
S-9wasprepared fromliversofratsexposed toArociorunlessotherwise specified.
Bandrowski’s baseandp-nitroaniline werepositive in
Salmonella lyphiinurium strainTA1538 withmetabolic
activation; 4,4-azodianiline andp-dinitrobenzene were
positive inSalmonella typhimurium strainsTA1538 and
TA100withmetabolicactivation; and2-(4’aminoaniline)-5-
hydroxy-1,4-quinonediimine waspositive instrainS.
typhimurium TA1538 withoutmetabolic activation. A
solutionofp-Phenylenediamine oxidized withhydrogen
peroxide inthepresence ofm-amines, suchas2,4-
toluenediamine and2,4-diaminoanisole, wasmore
mutagenic thanasolutionofp-Phenylenediamine alone
(ShahandAndrews (1979).
Genotoxicity AssaysUsingUrineFromExposedAnimals
p-PhenylenediainineAnaqueous solution ofp-Phenylenediamine was
administered intraperitoneally togroupsof20male rats in
dosesof2,6,and20mg/kg3timesaweekfor8weeks.
Theirurinewastestedin10%DMSOintheAmestestwith
strain TA1538. Compared totheDMSOvehicletheirurine
wasnotmutagenic (Burnett etal.1977).
Crebellietal.(1981)performed theAmestestwithstrain
TA98withandwithoutmetabolic activation onurine
concentrates fromratstreated topically withp
Phenylenediaminefresorcinol conjugates. Theurine
concentrates induced mutations onlywithmetabolic
activation. The urine concentrates ofuntreated ratsdid not
inducemutations. Fifteenwomencollected theirurine
beforeandafterusinghairdyescontaining 0.46to2.55%p
-47-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable10(continued). Genotoxicity Studies on p-Phenylenediamine anditsHC1Salt.
Phenylenediamine. The urine wastestedinDMSOinthe
AmestestinstrainTA1538 withmetabolic activation. The
urinewasnotmoremutagenic after hairdyeapplication than
beforehairdyeapplication (CTFA1982a;Burnettetal.
1979).EffectonGeneExpression
p-Phenylenediamine
HirotaandMoro(2006) assessed changes inthegene
expression profileofamonocytic leukemia cell line(THP
1)following exposure top-Phenylenediamine andother
chemicals, usingoligo-DNA microarrays. p
Phenylenediamine (45ig/ml)hadnoeffectongene
expression, whereas. 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB, 3
tgIml)andnickelsulfate(300jig/mI) did. Thedosestested
werethedosesthatwereselectedforstimulation of THP
lcells.Upregulation ofM1P-l13rnRNAexpression was
detected inboth DNCB-treated andnickelsulfate-treated
THP-1cells. Thesecretion ofMW113fromTFIP-1
occurred after24 hours oftreatment withDNCBornickel
sulfate,whilep-Phenylenediamine hadnoeffect.
DNABinding
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
InastudybyIoannouandMatthews (1985),asingledoseof
p-Phenylenediamine HCI(600 jimolfkg [500iCiJmI/kgl)
wasadministered tomaleandfemaleFischer344rats(8to
10weeksold;weights =180to200g)andmaleandfemale
B6C3F1mice(6to8weeksold;weights =18to25g).
Theanimals were killedat16hourspost-administration and
liverswereremoved; DNAwasisolated andpurified.
Proteinfromthe livers wasisolated,purified, hydrolyzed,
andthenanalyzed forpossible covalently boundp
Phenylenediamine HCI-derived radioactivity. Therewasno
evidence ofcovalentbindingofp-Phenylenediamine HC1or
metabolites withhepaticDNAatthe level ofdetection (1
pmol!mg DNA).Protein-bound p-Phenylenediamine HCI
radioactivity wasobserved intheliversofrats andmice
(malesandfemales, both species). Theauthors noted that
covalent binding toproteindoes not necessarily imply
toxicity, andthatthecovalently boundmaterialmayhave
eventually been eliminated inthecourseofnormalprotein
turnover.
CARCINOGENICITV
ClaysonandGarner(1976)observed thatN-hydroxylation
wasaprerequisite forcarcinogenicity ofaromatic amines.
Evidence reviewed bytheseauthorssuggested thataromatic
aminecarcinogenesis istheresultofbioactivation tothe
ultimate carcinogenic formandthendissociation ofthe
reactive species togiveapositively charged ionas
represented inFigure7.
Thuraisingham andNilar(1980)statedthattheresulting
electrophilic metabolite maysubsequently reactcovalently
withnucleophilic sitesoncriticalmacromolecules, suchas
DNA.
-48-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCellTransformation Studies
Table11presents the3celltransformation studies. In
summary, 2ofthe3studies failed tofindany cell
transformation, butonestudydidreporttypeIIIfoci.
InVivoCarcinogenicity Studies
p-Phenylenediamine
Sarutaetal.(1958)reportedthattheoraladministration of
p-Phenylenediamine did notresultinanymalignant tumors
inratsafterthreeexposures. p-Phenylenediamine was
administered dailyfor8months, at0.06and0.3mg,to
groupsof5ratsofeachsex.p-Phenylenediamine, at10mg,
wasadministered dailyfor8monthsto5rats,mg,andthese
ratswerecompared to5controls.p-Phenylenediamine, at30
mg,wasadministered dailyto4rats;3oftheseratsdied
beforetheexperiment ended.
Ar
ArNBurnettetal.(1975)conducted astudyinwhich3hairdye
formulations containing 1.5%p-Phenylenediamine were
mixedwithequalvolumesof6%hydrogen peroxide just
priortouse, and0.05mlofeachwasappliedtopically tothe
shavedmidscapular skinofgroupsof100miceweeklyor
everytwoweeksfor18months.Therewere250control
mice.Noevidenceofcarcinogenic activity bythehairdyes
wasobserved.
Gilesetal.(1976)mixed2hairdyeformulations containing
1.5%p-Phenylenediamine withanequalvolumeof6%
hydrogen peroxidejustbeforeuse,and0.05mlwasapplied
topically totheclippedintrascapular skinofgroupsof28
maleand28femalemice weekly for2years.Therewere76
maleand17femalecontrolmice.Maleandfemalemicein
allgroupsdeveloped bothbenignandmalignant neoplasms,
buttherewasnodifference between controlandtest
animals.
Stenback etal.(1977)conducted alifetimecutaneous
application studyusingmice.p-Phenylenediamine at5and
10%inacetonewasapplied(0,2ml)2xperweektothe
shavedintrascapular skinofgroupsof50mice.Therewere
100untreated controls. Tumorswereobserved bothintheOHcontrolsandinthetreatedmice,buttherewasnosignificant
difference betweentreatedandcontrolanimals.
Thesameinvestigators appliedthep-Phenylenediamine
solutions totheinsideofthe earsofgroupsof5female
rabbits2timesaweek.Fivecontrolrabbitswereincluded in
thestudy.Theexperiment wasterminated at85weeks,but
at80weekstherewereonly2surviving rabbitsinthe
control group,4surviving rabbits inthe 5%p
Phenylenediamine-treated group,and1surviving rabbitin
the10%p-Phenylenediamine-treated group.Noneoplasms
wereobserved (Stenback eta!.1977).
IRDC(1979)conducted astudyinwhich3hairdye
composite formulations containing 2,3,and4%p
Phenylenediamine wereappliedtopically torats(theF0
generation) fromthetimeoftheirweaning totheweaningof
theiryoung(theFIAgeneration). Thehairdyesweremixed
1:1withhydrogen peroxide andwereappliedtopically two
timesaweekfor2yearstotheclippedbacksandnecksof
groupsof60maleand60femaleratsoftheFIAgeneration.
Theratsreceived aninitialapplication of0.2ml,andthis
wasincreased by0.1mlweeklyto0.5ml.Tenratsfrom
eachgroupwerekilledandnecropsied at12months,andall
otherrats were necropsied atthetimeoftheirdeathsor
termination oftheexperiment. Therewere3controlgroups.
Nocompound-related gross lesions wereobserved. The
stratumcorneum oftheskinandofthehairshaftsofthe
treatedratswascoloredbythe dye.
Table11.CellTransformation Assays.ArNHR
ArN
Figure7.Schemeformetabolic activation ofaromatic
amineswhereArdenotesanarylgroup,Risahydrogen or
anacyloralkylgroup,andxisanestergroup(Clayson and
Garner1976).
-49-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTestSubstance Strain/Cell Type TestProtocol Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine l-lClC3HI10T1/2clone8mouse C3H/ 1OTI/2celltransformation assay; inactiveinbothlaboratories Dunkeletal.1988
inacetoneorDMSO embryocellline exposures from0.8to100ig/mlinone
laboratory andfrom0.5to5ig/mIina
secondlaboratory
p-Phenylenediamine HCIBALB/c-3T3 cells celltransformation assay,exposures upcytotoxicity wasobserved andtheMatthews etal.
to0.11mMfor48h testmaterial wasconsidered 1993b
positivefortype111foci
p-Phenylenediamine HCISyrianhamsterembryo SHEcelltransformation assay: 50%cytotoxicity at28ig/mIand Kerckaert etal
(pH6.7) (SHE)cells exposures up to28ig/mI 51%at12ig/mI;nosignificant 1998
transformation
Thefemale rats treatedwiththecomposite thatcontained
4%p-Phenylenediamine hadanincrease inpituitary
adenomas whencompared statistically withall3control
groups(adenomas/number femalesexamined were34/50,
36/51,and35/50forthe3controlgroupsand45/51forthe
treatedgroup).Theauthorsnotedthatpituitary adenomas
haveahighbackground incidence inrats,andtheyappeared
inanonsignificant pattern inalltheothergroups.Other
lesionswereseeninallthegroupsinlowincidences (IRDC
1979).
Burnett etal.(1980)mixed(1:1)hairdyecomposite
formulations containing 1,2,3,and4%p-Phenylenediamine
withhydrogen peroxide, and0.025mlofthe dyes was
appliedtopically totheclippedintrascapular areasofgroups
of50male and 50femalemiceonce weekly for21to23
months.At7and9months, 10maleand10femalemice
fromeachgroupwerekilledandnecropsied. Grossand
microscopic examinations were made onallmicethatdied
duringorwerekilledatthetermination oftheexperiment.
Therewerethreecontrolgroups.Theincidences oftumors
incontrolandtreatedgroupsweresimilar. Theauthors
concluded thatcarcinogenic effects were notinducedbythe
hairdyeformulations.
Inacarcinogenicity studybyImaidaetal.(1983),p
Phenylenediamine (0.1%and0.05%inthediet)wasfedto
2groupsof63to66F344ratsofeachsex(6weeksold),
respectively, for80weeks.
Thebodyweightoffemale ratsgiven 0.1% p
Phenylenediamine waslessthanthatofthecontrols, butno
differences werenotedat0.05%orateither exposure in
males.
Inbothsexes,thehighest incidence ofneoplastic lesionswas
thatofpheochromocytomas oftheadrenalgland.These
lesionswereobserved in10(27.8%)of36malerats given
0.1%p-Phenylenediamine, 8(22.9%)of35maleratsgiven
0.05%p-Phenylenediamine, and6(31.6%)of19malesin
thecontrolgroup, but therewasnosignificant difference intheirincidences indifferent groups. Infemales,
pheochromocytomas werealsofoundinallexperimental
groups, although atlowerincidences thaninmales.Other
neoplastic lesionswereasfollows: hyperplasia ofthe
forestomach inmales,afibroadenoma ofthemammary
glandinafemale, afibromaoftheskininamale,
lymphomas infemales, andductalhyperplasia ofthe
pancreas inafemale.Theincidences oftheselesionswere
notsignificantly different indifferent groups.
Theincidences of non-neoplastic lesions, including
hemorrhage ofthepituitary gland,fattydegeneration ofthe
liver,fibrosisofthepancreas, andpneumonia werealsonot
significantly different indifferent groups. Nomarked
changesofthethyroidglandwereobserved inanyrats.The
authorsconcluded that,in this study, p-Phenylenediamine
wasnotcarcinogenic toF344ratsofeithersexwhengiven
orallyfor80weeks(Imaidaetal.1983).
InastudybyBurnettandGoldenthal (1988), 3formulations
containing p-Phenylenediamine (2%,3%,and4%,
respectively) weretestedinamultigeneration reproduction
study,withacarcinogenicity arm.Thedyesweremixed
with6%hydrogen peroxide andapplied(0.5ml)topically
twiceweeklyduringthegrowth, mating, gestation, and
lactation phasesoftheF0parentstotheweaningoftheFia
andF2blitters.Inthecarcinogenicity arm,60maleand60
femaleweanling rats(randomly selectedfromeachgroupof
Fialittersofthereproduction study)received topical
applications ofthe sametestformulations astheirparentsfor
approximately 2years.
Notreatment-related grosslesionswereobserved inany
animalsnecropsied atmonth12oratstudytermination, or
inratsthat died duringthestudy.Comparison oftumor
indicesamongthesixtreatedandthreecontrolgroups
showed some significant variations amongthosetumors
occurring mostfrequently inthisstrainofrats,andpituitary
adenomas werealsoincreased significantly (P<0.05)inthe
femalesofoneofthetreatedgroups.
-50-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteThatnopituitary carcinomas occurred inthisgroup
suggested totheauthorsthatthedistribution ofthese tumors
wasnotrelated totheexperimental treatments. Noneofthe
increases inpituitary tumorsreported inthisstudywere
foundtobeconsistently significant, using P <0.01,the
valuedeemednecessary bystatisticians attheNational
Toxicology Program (NTP)toavoidfalsepositiveresults.
Theauthorsconcluded that thefrequenttopicalapplication
ofoxidative hairdyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine and
othercommonly usedintermediates andcouplers doesnot
increase theriskofdeveloping cancer(Burnett and
Goldenthal, 1988).
PreClinical SafetyConsultants Limited(2005)provided an
expertopinion on the carcinogenic potential ofp
Phenylenediamine, notingthat:thedatafromanimal studies
donotprovide anyevidenceofcarcinogenic potential; there
isvery low systemicexposure tothedye oritsmetabolites
afterapplication ofhair dyeproducts inhumans, anddata
showedthatPPDcannotbeconverted toreactiveN
hydroxyarylamine metabolites thatareimplicated inbladder
carcinogenesis.
p-Phenylenediamine HC1
The National CancerInstiture (NCI)administered p
Phenylenediamine HC1inthefeedatconcentrations of625
and1250ppmtogroupsof50ratsandmiceofeachsexfor
103weeks(NCI1979).Thecontrols weregroupsof20
animalsofeachspecies and sex.At theconclusion ofthe
experiment, allanimalswerekilledandnecropsied. Both
treatedandcontrolratshadavarietyofneoplasms
distributed almostequallybetweentreatedandcontrolrats.
Foreachsexthetumorincidence wasverylowandwas
withintherangenormally encountered inagingrats.A
varietyoftumors, allpreviously reported tooccur
spontaneously inmice,werefoundinboththecontroland
dosedmice.Someneoplasms didoccuronly, oringreater
frequency, inthedosedgroups, but nonewasconsidered
compound-related. Theresearchers concluded thatp
Phenylenediamine HC1wasnotcarcinogenic toratsorto
miceundertheconditions ofthebioassay.
In anevaluation ofthecarcinogenic risksofp
Phenylenediamine tohumans(IARC1987),theIARCad-
hocWorking Groupconcluded thatp-Phenylenediamine is
notclassifiable astoitscarcinogenicity tohumans. Itis
important tonote thatthesameconclusion waspublished by
IARCin1978;actually, carcinogenicity dataonp
Phenylenediamine HC1wereevaluated (IARC1978).
Regarding IARC’sinitialconclusion, theWorking Group
notedthatp-Phenylenediamine hasbeeninadequately tested
inmicebyskinapplication andinratsbyoraland
subcutaneous administration, andthatstudiesinmicein
whichp-Phenylenediamine asaconstituent ofhair-dye
preparations wastestedbyskinapplication cannotbeevaluated. TheWorking Groupalsonotedthatnocase
reportsorepidemiological studieswereavailable tothe
Working Group.
TheresultsfromtheNCI bioassay onp-Phenylenediamine
HC1arediscussed inapublication bySontag (1981). The
authornotedthatthisdyeinducedanelevated incidence of
bladdertumors(mainlytransitional cellpapillomas and
carcinomas) infemalerats,butthatthisfindingwasnot
statistically significant. Furthermore, thisdyewasassociated
withanelevated incidence ofkidney tumors (tubular cell
adenomas andtransitional cellcarcinomas ofthepelvis)in
maleandfemaleratsthatwasnotstatistically significant. In
lightofthese data, theauthorstated that therarityof
spontaneous bladderandkidneytumors among historical
controlratsindicated thatthelow,butelevated, incidence of
thesetumortypesmaybetreatment-related. Itwasalso
notedthatp-Phenylenediamine HC1wasassociated withan
elevatedincidence ofliver tumors infemalemicethatwas
notstatistically significant, butthatthisfindingwaspossibly
atreatment-related tumor response.
Inanotherpublication, PrivalandDunkel(1989) stated that
inviewofthestudyresultsandfailuretoachieve a
maximum tolerated doseinmalemice,itseems
unreasonable toconclude fromtheNCIcarcinogenesis
bioassay studythatp-Phenylenediamine HC1hasbeen
definitely showntobenoncarcinogenic.
Maronpot etal.(1986)evaluated thepotential ofp
Phenylenediamine HC1toinducelung tumors instrainA/St
miceat2different laboratories. p-Phenylenediamine was
subjected toblindtesting. At thefirst laboratory, groupsof
A/Stmice (10males/i0femalespergroup;6to8weeksold)
wereinjectedi.p.withhigh,½high,or1/4highdosesof
eachtestsubstance, respectively, threetimesperweek for
8weeks.Thedosevolumeper injection was0.1ml/mouse.
Thehigh dose selectedwasthemaximumdose ofachemical
thatdidnotcausedeath,growthretardation, oroverttoxicity
duringthepreliminary dose-setting phaseofthestudy.p
Phenylenediamine HC1(intricaprylin) wastestedatdosesof
6.25,12.5and25mg/kgperinjection. The control groups
consisted ofuntreated mice,vehiclecontrolmice(dosed
withtricaprylin), andpositivecontrolmice (dosed with
urethan).
Atthesecond laboratory, groupsofAIJmice(30malesper
doseperchemical) wereinjectedi.p.withhigh,½high,and
1/5highdoses3timesperweekfor8weeks.Thedose
volumeper injection was0.1mi/lOg body weight.p
Phenylenediamine HC1(incornoilvehicle)wastestedat
dosesof6.4,16,and32mg/kgperinjection. The control
groupsconsisted ofuntreated mice,vehiclecontrolmice
(dosedwithcornoilorsaline),andpositivecontrolmice
(dosedwithurethan).
Atboth laboratories, dosingwasfollowed bya16-week
-51-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteincubation periodandtheanimalswerekilledattheendof
thestudy.Lungswereremoved andtumorscounted48hours
afterplacement inafixative Microscopic examination
confirmed severalrepresentative tumorstobealveolar
bronchiolar adenomas. A statistically significant (p<0.05)
increase inboththeincidence oftumor-bearing miceand
tumormultiplicity wasnecessary fortheclassification of
resultsaspositive. Ifonly 1ofthe2wasstatistically
significant, theoutcome wasdesignated asequivocal.
Overall, testresultsfromthefirstlaboratory forp
Phenylenediamine HCIintricaprylin werenegative inmale
A/Stmiceandequivocal infemaleA/Stmice.Thoughthe
results for p-Phenylenediamine HC1were equivocal in
femalemice, the numberoftumorspermousewas
significantly different (p<0.05)onlyatadoseof25mg/kg
whencompared tothevehiclecontrolgroup.Foralldose
levels,valuesforthepercentage ofsurvivors withtumors
andthenumberofsurvivors were notsignificantly different
from the vehicle control group.
Thetestresultsinthesecond laboratory (maleA/Jmice
tested)indicated thatforp-Phenylenediamine HCIinsaline
(alldoselevels), values fortumors per mouse, percentage of
survivors withtumors,andnumberofsurvivors werenot
significantly different fromvehiclecontrols. Theresultsfor
p-Phenylenediamine HCIwereclassified asnegative
(Maronpot etal., 1986).
Rojanapo eta!.(1986)evaluated thecarcinogenicity ofp
Phenylenediamine HC1(commercial sample)usingWistar
rats(4groupsof10malesand10females;weights =120to
140g).The testsubstance wasappliedtopically toshaved
skinandwasalsoinjectedsubcutaneously (s.c.).Ingroup
1,thetestsubstance (0.5mlofa1:1mixtureof5%p
Phenylenediamine, in2%NH4OH) and6%H,02were
paintedontoshavedskinofthebackonceperweekfor18
months.Group2animalswereinjecteds.c.with0.1mlofa
1:1mixtureof5%p-Phenylenediamine (in2%NH4OHand
1.8%NaCl)and6%H,O,every other weekfor18months.
Groups 3and4(controls) weredosedwithvehicleonly
(topicalapplication ands.c.injection vehicles,respectively).
Infemalerats,both topical application ands.c.injectionof
oxidized p-Phenylenediamine HC1for18monthsinduced a
statistically significant incidence ofmammary glandtumors
(>50%, P<0.05).Additionally, uterinetumorsandsoft
tissuetumorsofbothmalignant andbenigntypeswerealso
significantly induced(43%and57%,P<0.05)inthe s.c.
injection group.Tumorsofmammary glandandsofttissue
werenotobserved inmale rats undersimilarexperimental
conditions. However, tumorsofotherorgans,including
liver,kidney,adrenalgland,thyroidgland,urinarybladder,
andlungwereoccasionally observed inmaleratsofboth
groupsandmightberelatedtop-Phenylenediamine HCI
treatment (Rojanopo etal.,1997).Sakaietal.(2002)evaluated thecarcinogenic potential of
p-Phenylenediamine HC1usingamedium-term bioassay
systemthatwasbasedontheinduction ofglutathione 5-
transferase placental form(GST-P)positivelivercellfociin
rats.According toLow-Baselli etal.(2000),GST-P
positivecells can beconsidered initiated andcapableof
evolving intohepaticpreneoplastic lesions.Additionally,
according toTatematsu etal.(1988),GST-Ppositivecells
developrapidlyintoGST-Ppositivefoci,andthefocican
bestimulated stronglybyfeeding2-acetylaminofluorene (2-
AAF)topartiallyhepatectomized animals.
Asingledoseofp-Phenylenediamine HCI(40mg/kg,in
saline)wasadministered to14maleFischer344rats(7
weeksold;weights =150to 170g)intragastrically (i.g.)at
12hoursafterpartialhepatectomy. The18controlanimals
received salinei.g.Theanimalswerefedabasaldietfor2
weeks,afterwhichtheywereplacedonadietcontaining
0.015%2-AAFforthenext2weeks.Atthreeweeksafter
partialhepatectomy, alloftheanimalsreceived carbon
tetrachioride (Cd4,0.8ml/kgbodyweight,i.g.)asa
stimulusforproliferation. Afterweek5,thesurvivors were
killedandliverswereexcised andprepared forthe
immunohistochemical examination ofGST-Ppositivefoci.
Compared tothenegativecontrol,p-Phenylenediamine HC!
did notcauseasignificant increase inthenumberofGST-P
positive foci.However, thefollowing fivegenotoxic
hepatocarcinogens causedsignificant induction ofGST-P
positive foci:2-AAF,diethy1nitrosamine,
dimethylnitrosamine, N-bis(2-hydroxypropyl)-nitrosamine,
andsafrole(Sakaietal.,2002).
Modification ofCarcinogenicity
p-Phenylenediamine
Hagiwara etal.(1990)investigated themodifying effectsof
p-Phenylenediamine onlivercarcinogenesis inmale
F344/Dudrj ratsinitiallytreatedwithN-nitrosodiethylamine
(DEN).Atotalof150malerats(6weeks old) wasused.
Twoweeksafteradministration ofasingledoseofDEN
(200mg/kg,i.p.),groupsof25ratsweregiven1000,330,
and110ppmp-Phenylenediamine indiet,respectively, for
6weeks. 3‘-Methyl-4-dimethylaminobenzene (positive
control:3-Me-DAB, 600ppm)wasalsoadministered inthe
dietfor6weeks. At week3following DENadministration,
alloftheanimalsweresubjected topartialhepatectomy.
Slightretardation ofbodyweightwasobserved inrats
treatedwithp-Phenylenediamine (alldietarylevels).
Significant increases inrelativeliverweightwerereported
foranimalstreatedwith1000ppmp-Phenylenediamine.
Growthretardation andincreased liverweight werereported
for ratsfed3-Me-DAB inthediet.
p-Phenylenediamine didnotsignificantly increasethelevel
ofy-glutamyl transpeptidase (y-GT)positivefocithatwere
observed afterDENinitiation. Incontrast. 3-Me-DAB
-52-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteinduced markedenhancing activity, asevidenced by
significantly increased valuesfory-GTpositive foci,
compared tocontrols givenDENalone.Theauthors
concluded thattheseresults demonstrated thatp
Phenylenediamine doesnotmodifylivercarcinogenesis in
thisassaysystem(Hagiwara etal.(1990).
CLIMCAL ASSESSMENT OFSAFETY_________
DermalMetabolism
p-Phenulenediamine
Kawakubo eta!.(2000)investigated thecapacityofhuman
skinforN-acetylation ofp-Phenylenediamine. Inhuman
skinsamples(obtained throughmammoplasty reduction), p
Phenylenediamine wasacetylated tomonoacetyl-p
Phenylenediamine (MAPPD), whichinturnwasacetylated
toN,N-diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine (DAPPD). Thiswas
determined usingcytosolic fractions fromhumanskin(n=
9)andculturednormalhumanepidermal keratinocytes (n=
7).
Nohynek etal.(2004)profiledurinary[14CJ-metabolites
andN-acetyltransferase 2(NAT2) genotype in8male
subjects(meanage:25±9years; mean bodyweight:78.5±
10.0kg),aftertreatment withadark-shade oxidative hair
dyecontaining[‘4C]-p-Phenylenediamine. Theoxidative
dye(70ml;corresponding toameanof1.31±0.05geq.[14 C] -PPDpersubject) wasappliedtothehairfor30
minutes. Application wasfollowed byrinsingandwashing
withwaterandshampoo. The[‘4C]-radioactivity ofthe
formulation appliedtothehairamounted toameantotalof
7.14±0.26xioDPM per subject. Urinefractions were
collected fromthesubjectsfor120hoursfollowing hairdye
treatment at4-hour intervals (upto14hours),followed by
collection at12-hourintervals.
Genotyping identified 3subjects asslowacetylators, and5
subjectswereclassified asintermediate NAT2acetylators.
Thesubjectsexcreted ameantotalof0.43±0.24%ofthe
applied[14 C]intheurinewithin24hoursafter treatment,
andMAPPD andDAPPD (considered majorurinary
metabolites, presentinallurinesamples; accounted for80
to95%ofthetotalurinary[‘4C])weretwoofthe
metabolites thatwereidentified. Another metabolite,
possibly aglucuronic acidconjugate, wasidentified (in6/8
urinesamples,amounting to5to13%oftotal urinary[14C]).
Allofthemetabolites appeared tohavebeenrelatedto [14Cj-p-Phenylenediamine. Highmolecular weightdye-
intermediates orcorresponding metabolites werenotfound.
Regarding themetabolite profileforthesubjects,therewere
nosignificant differences between theNAT2intermediate
andtheNAT2slowacetylator subgroups. Theurineofthe
NAT2slowacetylators contained MAPPD atamean
concentration of42.2±10.2%andDAPPD atamean
concentration of54.1±7.6%ofthetotal urinaryradioactivity. Thecorresponding meanvaluesforthe
intermediate acetylators were46.0±8.9%and45.7±9.9%,
respectively. Theresultsofthisstudysuggestthatthe
humanacetylation rate of[14 C]-p-Phenylenediamine after
topicalapplication isindependent oftheNAT2genotype
status,mostlikelyduetometabolism byepidermal NATI
priortosystemic absorption (Nohynek etal.2004).
ContactUrticaria
p-Phenylenediainine
FuchsandWahl(1992)tested31patients(20to53yearsof
age)withcontacturticaria and/orsystemic reactions to
different latexproducts todifferent allergens. Mostofthe
patientswereconsidered tobeatopicbasedonahistoryof
hayfeverandskintests(mite,mold,andpollentested).
Both48-hourpatchtests(Finnchambers) andscratchtests
wereperformed according toInternational Contact
Dermatitis Research Group (ICDRG) recommendations.
For2ofthepatients, positive (urticarial) scratch-test
reactions top-Phenylenediamine mix(blackrubbermix)
werereported.
Katsarou etal.(1999)studiedtheincidence ofimmediate
contact reactions (whealandflare)in664patients(308
males,356females; ages:7to74years)withsuspected
contactdermatitis. Inpatchtests,Finn chambers were
appliedtotheupper back for30minutesandthenpartially
removed. Sites were reexamined andreactions evaluated
after5minutes. Positivereactions wereconsidered those
withwell-distinguished erythema atthetestsite.After
recording forimmediate reactions, thepatches were
reapplied andremoved at day2;testswereevaluated for
delayed sensitivity atdays2and4.Thenumberof
immediate reactions andtheirassociation withdelayed
reactions tothesameallergenin664patientswaspresented.
Twoimmediate reactions at30minutesand11delayed
reactions (top-Phenylenediamine werereported.
SkinIrritation
p-Phenylenediamine
A50%aqueousslurryofp-Phenylenediamine wasapplied
totheskinof6subjects for24hoursunderocclusive
conditions. Skinreaction wasassessed at24and72hours
forerythema (0to4)andedema(0to4).Erythema and
edemavalueswereaddedandaveraged forthe2skin
readings toyieldaP11.TheP11forthep-Phenylenediamine
onhumanskinwas0.8(maximum possible totalof8)
(Daviesetal.1972).
SkinSensitization -Predictive Tests
Table12summarizes predicitve andprovocative skin
sensitization data.
p-Phenylenediamine
Kligman (1966)appliedfive48-hour induction patches
-53-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotecontaining 1mlof10%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum,
with24-hour rest periods between thepatches, tothe
forearms orcalvesof24“mostlyblack”volunteers froma
prison. The challenge application wasa48-houroccluded
patch,containing 0.4mlof0.5%p-Phenylenediamine in
petrolatum, on theback.All 24ofthe
Table12.Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
p-Phenylenediamine at10%
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.01,0.1, or1%24subjects
Groupsof97, 98,and88
subjectssensitization inallsubjects
sensitization: 7of97(0.01% at
induction; 0.01%atchallenge); 11
of98(0.1%atinduction; 1%at
challenge); 47of88(1%at
induction; 1%atchallenge)Kligman 1966
Marzulli and
Maibach 1974
Hairdyecontaining 0.4%
p-Phenylenediaminepatchtest(maximization procedure) 34subjects
patchtest.Semi-occlusivepatch
application andinitial1-hchallenge
(dye,100%),followed by924-h
induction patcheswith10%(v/v)
aqueoussolutionofdye over 22-day
period. 1-hfinalchallenge patch with
dye(100%)15of34withsensitization
reactions
20negative reactions and5
reactions (slightdermatitis) at
initialchallenge. 19negative
reactions and6reactions (slight
dermatitis) atinduction. Final
challenge: 8reactions (no
dermatitis), 7reactions (slight
dermatitis), and7reactions
(significant dermatitis)
nopositivereactions atinduction
orchallengeDerma-Test
Laboratories
(DTL)1982a
Hairdyecontaining 0.49%
p-PhenylenediamineRIFT(nonocclusive patches) 206subjects no positive reactions atinduction
or challengeDTL1982b
Hairdyecontaining 0.596%
p-PhenylenediamineRIFT(nonocclusive patches) 206subjects nopositive reactions atinduction
or challengeDTL1982c
Hairdyecomposites patchtest
containing upto3.5%p
Phenylenediamine
TRUEtest(ready-to-apply patch test
system -0.05mg/cm2tested)and
Firmchamber (1%tested)patchtest
techniques; 48-h application and
reactions scoredatday4;reactions
withscoreof1+classified as
positive3500(totalnumber of
individual hair dye
applications was116,647 from
1975to1983)
13subjects.nopositive reactions atinduction
or challenge
205positive reactions in163
females. Most ofthesubjects
reporting reactions hadlater
applications ofhairdyes.Only8
reactions in4subjectsidentified as
allergicresponses totheproducts
4of13positive inbothtests;IofGoh1992
13positive inTRUEtestonly;8
of13positive inFinnchamber test
only
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest.Occlusive patchesapplied
3timesperweekfor3weeks.48-h
challenge patch3of98withgrade 1orgrade2
challenge reactionat96h.Basketter etal.
2006Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
Predictive Tests
patchtest(maximization procedure)
repeated insultpatchtest(RIFT)
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
Hairdyecomposition
containing 2%p
Phenylenediamine22subjects
206subjectsEpsteinand
Taylor1979
HillTop
Research 1979
RIFF (nonocclusive patches)
Hairdyecontaining RIPT
2.144%p
Phenylenediamine206subjects
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
and0.05mg/cm2in
petrolatumDTL1982d
CTFA1983
98healthy volunteers.
-54-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpetrolatum5558Scandinavian patients
(over2yearspan) from 6
clinicsMagnusson et
al.1968
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtests 4,825European patients
281housewives withcontact
dermatitis ofthe hands; 1000
people doing domestic work
only (this includes the281
women)(patients from5
European clinics)4.9% (237) reactedpositively
5%ofbothpopulations had
positivereactions top
PhenylenediamineFregertetal.
1969
Calnanetal.
1970
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtests
inpetrolatum184men and 116women
suspected ofhavingcontact
dermatitis (from Belgium)
540patients(in U.S.A. during
1968to1970),themajority
withcontactdermatitis;
reactions scoredona1+to4+
scale13.0%(24)ofthe menand 4.3%
(5)ofthewomen were positive;
9.7%ofallofthesubjectswere
positive
13.5%reactedtop
Phenylenediamine; 12,24, 26,and
11patientswith1+,2+,3+,and
4+reactions, respectivelyBaeretal.
1973
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpetrolatumpatchtests 229patients(in U.S.A. during
1968to1970)suspected of
havingcontactdermatitis due
toshoesorrubber.Reactions
werescoredonaI+to4+
scale7.0%reactedtop
Phenylenediamine; 1,3, 12,and0
patientswith1+,2+,3+,and4÷
reactions, respectively
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumAl-testpatches; removed after48
hoursandreactions recorded at48,
72,and/or96hours1200patientsfromprivateand
outpatient clinicsinNorth
America (fromJanuary 1,
1971toJune30, 1972)8%(98)reactedpositively Rudneretal.
1973
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumAl-testpatches; removed after48
hoursandreactions recorded at48,
72,and/or96hours3041patientsfromprivateand
outpatient clinicsinNorth
America (fromJuly1,1972 to
June30,1974)6.1%reactedpositively Rudneretal.
1975
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inwaterclosedpatchtestfornonsensitized
subjects and open patchtest for
sensitized subjects32hairdressers whohadnever
sufferedfromallergiccontact
dermatitis duetop
Phenylenediamine and7
hairdressers whohadstrongly
positivereactions top
Phenylenediamine (from
Japan)0/32 and 6/7positivereactions for
thenonsensitized andsensitized
hairdressers, respectivelyMorikawa etal.
1976Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtest.48-h occlusive patch 2171healthyadults with no Positivereactions: (1)80of1107; Basketter etal.
inpetrolatum application historyofhairdyeallergyand(2)7of548;(3)2of516 2006
whohadnotdyedtheirhair
duringpast2yearsdivided
into3groups:(1)exposed to
hair colorant containing p
Phenylenediamine; (2)
exposed topermanent hair
dye,or(3)unexposed for
duration ofstudy.
Provocative Tests
patchtestsonthighorback
p-Phenylenediamine at1%Al-testpatches4.5%reactedpositively
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpetrolatumpatchtestsOleffeetal.
1972
-55-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtests 2363tested (from 1978-1979)
intheU.S.A.7%(157)positive reactions Morikawa etal.
1976
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtests 2094tested (from 1979-1980)
intheU.S.A.6%(136)positivereactions Morikawa etal.
1976
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumAl-test patches ontheback;results
readat48and72hours155Japanese hospital patients,
mainlyoutpatients22.58%(35)werepositive Fujiwara etal,
1976
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpeiroalatumJapanese-made patchesontheback.
Results read at48and72hours196Japanese hospitalpatients,
mainlyoutpatients (from
September of1973toAugust
of1975)28.57%(55)werepositive Fujiwara etal.
1976
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtestsonbackremoved atDay2
andreadatDays2and7.(Other
chemicals testedsimultaneously).
Positives werereapplied onDay7
andremoved andreadonDay935patients(fromCanada) 17%(6)positivetestreactions on
Day2and5or14%positivetest
reactions onDay9Mitchell 1977
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpetrolatum250hospitalpatientsand 250
privatepatients(spans3years
inFrance)6.8%(34)ofthesubjectsgave
positiveresponses top
Phenylenediamine, withlittle
difference betweenhospital and
privatepatientsCalasCtal.
1978
p-Phenylenediamine at2%
inpetrolatumoccluded patches appliedtotheback.
Patchesremoved at48hoursandread
at48and96hours536patients(testedin1976,
fromBrazil)1.1%reactedpositively Moriearty etal.
1978
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumAl-testpatches; reactions read48and
96hoursafterpatch application2806patients(inSpainduring
1977),fromcontactdermatitis
sectionsofhospitals oran
occupational dermatitis center9.90%(278)werepositivetop
Phenylenediamine; 14.02, 10.43,
and8.63%weremasons,
metallurgists, andhousewives,
respectivelyCamarasa 1979
p-Phenylenediamine (in
experimental hairdye)
mixedwithhydrogen
peroxide (5ml)Openpatchtests 6subjects(openpatchtest) positivereactions in4of6subjects Epsteinand
Taylor1979
p-Phenylenediamine (in
experimental hairdye)
mixedwithhydrogen
peroxide (5ml)
p-Phenylenediamine (in
experimental hairdye)
mixedwithhydrogen
peroxide (15ml)7subjects(openpatchtest);12
subjects (closed patchtest)positivereactions; 4of7subjects
(openpatches) andall12subjects
(closedpatches)
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtestsontheback;readings after
48and72hours53denture-wearing patients
with“burning mouth
syndrome” (fromDenmark)1positivereaction(erythema and
infiltration withpapulesor
vesicles)Kaaberetal.
1979
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatches applied, removed atDay2;
reactions readatDay2andDay4225men and 175womenwith
hand eczema (from Belgium)9.3%(21)ofthemenand14or
8%ofthewomen reacted
positivelyLachapelle and
Tennstedt 1979
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatum108patients(spans4.5years
inItaly)withcontact
dermatitis ofthefeet
correlated clinically with shoe
contact24.8%(41)ofthesubjectswere
positive top-PhenylenediamineAngelini etal.
1980patchtests on the hand
Openandclosed patch tests
Openandclosedpatchtests 6subjects(openpatchtest);12
subjects (closed patchtest)Epsteinand
Taylor1979
Epsteinand
Taylor1979positivereactions: 4of6subjects
(openpatches) andall12subjects
(closedpatches)
patchtests
-56-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtests with p-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtests 13eczemapatientsallergicto
abrownstocking dye (from
Finland)11patientswerepositive Kousaand
Soini1980
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatum362Finnisheczema patients
(fromMarch 1toSeptember
30,1979)Kousaand
Soini1980
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtests 66hairdressers witheczema
(1973-1981; fromCanada)45%(30)werepositive Lyndeand
Mitchell 1982
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtestsonthebackfor48hours;
readat48and96hours200Canadian hospitalclinic
patientswitheczematous
dermatitis (1977-1979)30%werepositve Nethercott
1982
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatch test ontheupperbackfor48
hours;readat48and/or72hours149patientsfromprivate
practices andclinicsinthe
U.S.A. with cosmetic-related
contactdermatitis (1977-1980)16%(24)werepositive NACDG 1982
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatum3patientswithpositivereactions;
allofwhomalsodeveloped
urticaria.Temesvari
1984
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtests:open-filterpaperdisc
(reactions scored at45mm)andFinn
chambers (48-h application; reactions
scoredat48hand96 h50volunteers: 19controls, 15
(with eczematous dermatitis),
and16(withcosmetic
sensitivity)nocontact urticaria inthe open
patchtest;12positivereactions
usingFinnchambersEmmons and
Marks1985
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest:48-h application
reactions scoredat48hand72h13,216dermatitis patients 41cutaneous reactions Adamsand
Maibach 1985
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 25patientswithhand eczema 25positive reactions Cronin1985
p-Phenylenediamine
mixtureat1%inpetrolatumpatchtest 539dermatitis patients 36positive reactions Correiaand
Brandao 1986
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 25patientswithlegulcers 2positive reactions Kokeljand
Cantarutti 1986
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstated
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
invaseline10.3%of patients withpositive
reaction
67positive patch testreactions.
Dermatitis induced in7%of
patientswithpositive reactionsBroeckx etat.
1987
DclaCuadra
Oyanguren et
al.1989
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest:220 tested in1975;240
testedin1987460 patients withcontact
sensitization10.52%withpositivereactions in
1975;8.52%withpositive
reactions in1987Stransky and
Krasteva 1989
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatch test (Finn chamber): 48hor72
happlication79allergicreactions; 2irritant
reactionsStorrsetal.
1989
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 19patientswitheczemaand
allergicreactions todisperse
dyes6positivereactions Balatoetal.
1990
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat72h
and96 h204dermatitis patients 18positivereactions FanandZhao
1990patchtests 2.5%(9)ofthesubjectswere
positivetop-Phenylenediamine
patchtest(20-minute test) 129patients
patchtest
patchtest5202patients
190children
1138dermatitis patients
-57-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48hpatch
test;reactions scoredat48h,72h,
and96h.921patientswithdifferential
diagnosis, including contact
dermatitis5.4%sensitization rate Bruckner
Tuderman etal.
1992
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.5%inpetrolatumpatchtest;reactions scoredat2and3
days261dermatitis patients 19positivereactions Guerraetal.
1992a
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.5%inpetrolatumpatchtest(Finnchamber): 1285patients 82non-negative reactions Braschetal.
1994
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 79patients(96%witheczema) 2positive, relevantreactions Beme etal.
1996
p-Phenylenediamine at patchtest
3.75%14patientswithpatchtest
reactions tovarioussubstances, 3
ofwhomhadapositivereaction to
3.75%p-Phenylenediamine
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 84dermatitis patients(azo-dye
positive)40positivereactions Seidenari etal.
1997
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application83children withdermatitis 2positivereactions Shahetal.
1997
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.01%to1%inpetrolatumpatchtest;15,30,120,and165mm
applications16patients: 7patchtestedwith
1%forup to120mill;9patch
testedwith0.01%, 0.1%,
0.3%,and1%forup to165
millFollowing 120-mm exposure, 11of
16reactedtol%p
Phenylenediamine and2of9
reactedto0.01%p
Phenylenediamine. Mostreactions
were+and++.McFadden et
al.1998
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat48h
to72handbetween 72hand168h111dermatitis patients 6.8%withallergicreaction Marksetal.
1998a
patchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat48h
to72 handbetween 72hand168 h.
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtestdata collected over4-month
period(retrospective survey)475patientswithcontact
allergy33positivereactions Goossens etal.
1999
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest:48-happlication. Studyto
determine frequency of“lost”,
“found”, and“persistent” reactions to
standard screening tray587patients 10positivereactions Dickeletal.
2000
patchtest(Finn chamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat72h
andbetween 96and192 h
p-Phenylenediamine - patchtest
concentration notstatedstatistically significant difference
(P=0.00599)insensitization rate
inblack patients (10.6%)when
compared towhitepatients(4.5%)
with and withoutsimultaneous
testingwithpara
aminoazobenzene, 4.3% and 3.1%
ofthepatients, respectively,
reactedtop-Phenylenediamine
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest (Finn chamber): reactions
scoredat2and3days105handdermatitis patients;
361non-hand allergiccontact
dermatitis patientspositivity ratesinhanddermatitis
group and control group were
14.3%and14.1%,respectivelyLiandWang
2002
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest:reactions scoredat72h 638patients 14.1%withpositivereactions Uteretal.200280chronic hemodialysis
patientsGonzalo etal.
1997
p-Phenylenediamine at1% 5831dermatitis patients 4.9% with allergic reaction; 0.1% Marksetal.
with irritant reaction 1998b
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration not stated991patients
678patientsDickeletal.
2001
DevosandVan
DerValk2001
-58-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
Haircoloring product
containing l.8%p-
Phenylenediamineopentest(testrecommended 48h
priortohairdyeapplication): 48-h
application, norinsing,andreactions
scoredat1hpost-application andon
days2and430contact dermatitis patients
withpositivepatchtest
reactions top
Phenylenediamine; 30sex-
andage-matched p
Phenylenediamine-negative
subjectswithnohistoryof
adversereactions tohair
coloringproductsKrasteva etal.
2002
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat48 h
to72handbetween72hand l68hsensitization rates:1992-1994
(blacks:7.8%;whites 5.8%),
1994-1996 (blacks:13.5%:whites:
5.8%,P<0.05 -significant
difference), and1996-1998
(blacks: 10.3%;whites:5.3%,P<
0.05)
p-Phenylenediamine in
petrolatum -concentration
notstatedpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredatday3
andbetween days4and8991patients(877whites;114
blacks)statistically significant difference
(P=0.00599) insensitization rate
inblack patients (rate =10.6%)
whencompared towhitepatients
(rate=4.5%)Dickeletal.
2001
Lewisetal.
2004
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest(Finn chamber); reactions
scoredonday2andonday3orday427patientswithlichen
simplexchronicus (LSC) who
dyedtheir hair regularly11patientswithpositivereactions Cheyetal.
2004
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest(Finnchamber); reactions
scoredon day2andonday3or day4560dermatitis patientswith
concurrent LSCandlor other
neurodermatitis63weaklypositivereactions Cheyeta].
2004
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest 13,300dermatitis patients 449positivereactions fromyears
1990to2000Daweeta].
2004
patchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h 4,913patients
application; reactions scoredat48h
to 72handbetween 72hand168h
post-application4.8%ofpatientswithpositive
reactions; 0.2%withirritant
reactions
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredat48h
to72handat96 hto168hpost-
application4.9%ofpatientswithpositive
reactionsWettereta].
2005
378eczemapatients (73
suspected ofhaving cosmetic
allergiccontactdermatitis
[CACD]; 37withconfirmed
CACDpositivepatchtestreactions in
patientssuspected ofhaving
CACDandinthosewith
confirmed CACDwere5.5%and
8.1%,respectively
Oxidative hair dyeproducts
containing p
Phenylenediamine at0.1,
0.5,1.0,or1.5%openpatchtest(recommended 48h
priortohaircoloring)34subjects withallergic
reactions top
Phenylenediamine; 49non-
allergicsubjectscumulative allergicreactions as
follows:0.1%p-Phenylenediamine
(27of34subjects), 0.5%p
Phenylenediamine (30of34),
1.0%p-Phenylenediamine (33of
34),or1.5%p-Phenylenediamine
(34of34),corresponding to79,
88,97, or100%ofthestudy
subjects, respectivelyKrasteva eta].
2005allergicreactions iiiallp
Phenylenediamine positive
patients; noreactions inp
Phenylenediamine-negative
subjects
9624patients Deleoetal.
2002
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 191children sensitization rate=6%
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatum
1,320patients
p-Phenylenediamine - patchtest
concentration notstatedPratteta].
2004
Wangeta].
2005
-59-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtests with p-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest 9948dermatitis patients sensitization frequency of4.2% Oppel and
Sehnuch 2006
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstated
(impurities: 0.1%
Bandrowski’s base and
tracesof4,4’-azodianiline)
p-Phenylenediamine at
0.01%,0.1%,and1%
(impurities: 0.1%
Bandrowski’s baseand
tracesof4,4’-azodianiline)
p-Phenylenediamine at1%patchtest
inpetrolatum6dermatitis patients atone
clinic;29dermatitis atanother
(allpatients[bothclinics]
patchtestpositivetop
Phenylenediamine); 642
normalvolunteers
25patients8positivereactions. 1patientwith
positivereaction to1%
Bandrowski’s base
p-Phenlenediamine positive
reactions indermatitis patients: I
of6(0.01% concentration); 3of6
(0.1%); 5of6(1%):26of29;
normalvolunteers: 14of642:5of
14testedwerepositive to1%
Bandrowskis base
24positivereactionsWhiteetal.
2006
p-Phenylenedi amineat1%
inpetrolatum and2
complete permanent black
hairdyes,undilutedpatchtest,group 1(1%inpetrolatum.
Firmchamber): 48-happlication;
reactions scored atday2.Patchtest,
groups2and3(2hairdyes,
respectively): 30-mm,i-h.and24-h
applications pergroup;reactions
scoredatdays1,2,and3post-
removal3groupsof15volunteers (all
allergicto
Phenylenediamine) with
positivie reactions at2days
post-removal.24-happlication of eitherhairdye
wasthe onlyduration sufficient to
yieldpositivereactions inall
subjects inthe2hairdyetreatment
groups;frequency ofhairdye
positivereactions (after24h)
comparable tothatobserved
following 48-hexposure to1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatumJowseyetal.
2006
p-Fhenylenediamine at1%
andserialdilution (1to
10,000ppm)inpetrolatumpatchtest(Firmchamber): 48-h
application; reactions scoredondays
3and715patients(allergic top
Phenylenediamine)14patientswithatleastaweakly
positive reaction to1%p
Phenylenediamine; threshold value
for10%ofpatientstested, based
on+reaction orgreateronback,
was38ppmSpstedetal.
2006a
p-Phenylenediamine -
concentration notstatedpatchtest(Firmchamber: 48-h
application; reactions scoredat48h
and96h500children withdermatitis Sensitization rateof8% Claytonetal.
2006
p-Phenylenediamine at1%
inpetrolatumocclusive patchtests:24-hand48-h
applications. Reactions scoredon
days1-3(24-htest)and ondays2-3
(48-htest). Late readings madeon
days7,14,and21post-applicationdataon1428patientswere
evaluable; two-thirds 48hand
one-third 24hreadings21of1428withpositivereactions;
withexception of1reaction, all
latereactions observed inpatients
in48-htest
p-Phenylenedaimine at1%
inpetrolatumpatchtest 1,222dermatitis patients 144(11.8%) wihpositivereactions Hillenetal.
2007
p-Pheoylenediamine -
concentration notstated
0.5%p-Phenyleoediamioe
MCI;l%p
Phenylenediamine base
0.5%p-Pheoylenediamine
MCI;1%p
Phenylenediamine freebasepatchtest;reactions scoredat2/3
daysand4/5days
patchtest:48-h application; reactions
scored20to60mmafterpatch
removal and24and48 hafterfirst
reading.p-Phenylenediamine MCI
tested from 1984 to1988;p
Fhenylenediamine basetestedfrom
1989to1993
patchtest.p-Fhenylenediamine
Dichloride testedbetween 1985and
1988;p-Phenylenediamine wastested
forremaining years,upto1998positivereactions rangedfrom
3.8%in1989to7.1%in2004
SertolietaI.
1999
Armstrong et
al.1999patchtest (Finn chamber)
patchtest(Firmchamber)159dermatitis patients
Whiteetal.
2006
Uteretal.2006
Hillenetal.
2006
6,177dermatitis patients
42,839dermatitis patients
26,706 dermatitis patientsPateletal.
2007
1481positivereactionstop
Phenyleoediamioe
667positivereations top
Phenylenediamine
-60-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTable12(continued). Resultsofpredictive andprovocative patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine.
Material Tested Method Subjects Results Reference
p-Phenylenediamine HC1atpatchtest 80patients 27positive reactions Picardoetal.
0.5% 1990
p-Phenylenediamine HC1 -patchtest(Finnchamber): 48-h 107dermatitis patients 17positivereactions Zhao and Fan
concentration notgiven application; reactions scoredat48h, 1991
72 h,and96h
p-Phenylenediamine HC1atpatchtest (Finn chamber; reactions 437patients: 256(contact 1of256withallergicreaction; no Lee andLam
0.5% scoredatdays2and4 dermatitis), 109(endogenous positive reactions inthe2eczema 1996
eczema), and 72(unclassified groups
eczema)
subjectsweresensitized top-Phenylenediamine.
Marzulli andMaibach (1974)reported astudyinwhich,10
occluded patches, containing 0.5gofa0.01, 0.1, or1.0%
solutionofp-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum, wereapplied
totheskinofmalesubjects for48or72h.Thiswas
followed bya2-weekrestperiod.Thechallenge wasa72-
hourpatchwithanonirritant concentration.
The0.01%p-Phenylenediamine induction application was
followed bya0.01percentchallenge patch.Sevenof97,or
7.2%ofthe men,responded positively tothechallenge.
The 0.1% p-Phenylenediamine induction application was
followed bya1.0percentchallenge patch,and11of98,or
11.2%ofthemen,responded positively.
The1.0percentp-Phenylenediamine induction application
wasfollowed bya1.0%challenge application.
Forty-seven of88,or53.4%ofthemen,responded
positively. The authors suggested anincrease inthe
incidence ofsensitization withhigherconcentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine usedininduction applications (Marzulli
andMaibach 1974).
EpsteinandTaylor(l979) useda2%aqueoussolutionofp
Phenylenediamine forinduction applications andchallenge
patchesinamaximization testwith34malevolunteers from
acorrectional facilityassubjects. Fifteenofthe34,or44%
ofthesubjects, weresensitized top-Phenylenediamine.
HilltopResearch (1979)entered25panelists intoapatch
teststudy with adyecomposition containing 2%p
Phenylenediamine. Threepanelists quitthe study beforethe
finalchallenge application. Semiocclusive patches
containing 0.3mlofthetestmaterialwereplacedonthe
arms.Therewasaninitial 1-hour challengepatch with100%
ofthedyefollowed by924-hourinduction patcheswitha
10%(vlv)aqueoussolutionofthedyeovera22-dayperiod.
Thefinalchallenge patchwasa1-hourpatchwith100%of
thedyeonboththeoriginalsite and anewsite.Reactions
werescoredonascaleof0to7.At the initial challenge therewere20negative reactions
(scoresof0to1)and5reactions ofslightdermatitis (scores
of2to3).Nineteen ofthepanelists hadnegativereactions
duringtheinduction period,and6hadreactions ofslight
dermatitis. Therewere8reactions ofnodermatitis, 7
reactions ofslightdermatitis, and7reactions ofsignificant
dermatitis (4to7)atthefinalchallenge patching (Hilltop
Research 1979).
Derma-Test Laboratories (DTL)conducted arepeatedinsult
patchtestwithahairdyecontaining 0.039%4-nitro-o-
phenylenediamine (4NOPD) and0.4%p-Phenylenediamine
(DTL1982a).Twohundred sixsubjectswereenrolled in
andcompleted thestudy.Thedyewasmixedwithanequal
volumeofoxidizer, andeachnonocclusive patchcontained
0.1ml/cm2ofthedyeandoxidizermixture. Ten 48-to72-
hourconsecutive patch applications were made onthebacks
ofthesubjects, andreactions wereread after removalof
eachpatch.These induction patcheswerefollowed byan
11-dayrestperiod.A48-hournonocciusive challenge patch
wasappliedtoapreviously unexposed site onthebackof
eachsubject,andthereactionwasreadatremovaland at15
minutesandat24hourslater.
Therewere41doubtful reactions (verymild erythema,
barely exceeding thatofuntreated skin)duringinduction.
Therewerenopositive reactions atanyinduction or
challenge reading.Theresearchers statedthattherewasno
evidence toindicatethatthehairdye and oxidizer test
product causedeitherirritation orsensitization (DTL
l982a).
Arepeated insultpatchtestwasconducted withahairdye
containing0.49% p-Phenylenediamine and0.027%4NOPD
onthesame206subjectsandfollowing thesameprocedure
(DTL1982b).Therewerenopositivereactions atany
induction orchallenge reading. The researchers statedthat
their data provided noevidence that the hair dye and
oxidizertestproductcausedeitherirritation orsensitization.
-61-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteArepeated insultpatchtestwasconducted withahairdye
containing 0.596% p-Phenylenediamine and0.049%
4NOPDon thesame 206 subjects andfollowing thesame
procedure (DTL 1982c).Therewerenopositivereactions at
anyinduction orchallenge reading. The researchers stated
thattheirdataprovided noevidence toindicatethatthehair
dyeandoxidizer testproductcausedeitherirritation or
sensitization.
Arepeated insultpatch test wasconducted withahairdye
containing 2.144%p-Phenylenediamine onthesame206
subjectsandfollowing thesameprocedure. (DTL 1982d)
Therewerenopositive reactions atanyinduction or
challenge reading. The researchers statedthattheirdata
provided noevidence that thehairdye andoxidizer test
productcaused either irritation orsensitization.
CTFA(1983)reported astudyinwhichahairdyecompany
performed preliminary patch testsonapproximately 3500
prospective modelsinNewYork, NY (totalnumberof
individual hairdyeapplications was116,647) withhairdye
composites containing uptothemaximum amountofp
Phenylenediamine usedintheproductline(3.5%)overthe
period1975 to1983.(Virtually allofthe dyescontainedp
Phenylenediamine.) Twohundred fivepositivereactions
wereobserved in163women. Most ofthewomenwho
reportedreactions hadlater applications ofhairdyes.Only
8reactions on4womenwereidentified asallergicresponses
totheproducts.
Goh(1992)patchtested 13subjects(mean age =34.5years)
usingTRUEtest(ready-to-apply patchtestsystem) and Finn
chamber patchtesttechniques. Teststripswereapplied
symetrically onupperback,andremoved aftertwodays.
Reactions werescoredatday4.IntheTRUEtest,p
Phenylenediamine wastestedataconcentration of0.05
mg/cm2. IntheFinnchamber test,p-Phenylenediamine was
testedataconcentration of1%inpetrolatum. Reactions
withascoreofiwereclassified aspositive. Fourofthe
13subjectshadpositive reactions inbothtests.Oneofthe
13subjectshadapositive reaction intheTRUEtestonly.
Eight subjects hadpositivereactions intheFinnchamber
testonly.
Basketter etal.(2006)conducted ahumanrepeated insult
patchtestinwhich98healthy volunteers werepatchtested
with1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum. Occlusive
patcheswereappliedtotheupperarm(deltoidregion) for 5
minutes three timesperweekforatotalofthreeweeks.
Duringthechallenge phase, occlusive patchescontaining
1%p-Phenylenediamine (inpetrolatum) weereappliedfor
48hours,andreactions werescoredat30minutespost-
removalandat96hourspost-application. Threeofthe98
volunteers (3%)hadagrade 1orgrade2challenge reaction
at96hours.
Inasecond experiment, 2171healthyadults with nohistory
ofhairdyeallergywhohad not dyed their hair duringthepast2yearsweredividedintothefollowing groups:group
1(1107subjects: exposure top-Phenylenediamine inhair
colorant formulation base +peroxide activating system
[finalconcentration onhead=0.48%p-Phenylenediamine]
5mmperday for4consecutive days, then onceperweekfor
remainder of6-monthexposure period), group2(548
subjects: exposure topermanent hairdyecontaining p
Phenylenediamine [finalconcentration onhead=1.5%p
Phenylenediamine] oncepermonth; -30to40mmper
exposure, 6exposures total),andgroup3(516subjects:
unexposed fordurationofthe study). A48-hourocclusive
patchtest(1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum) was
conducted attheendoftheexperiment. Siteswerescored
at1hourpost-removal according totheICDRGgrading
scale.Thehighestresponse occurred ingroup 1(80of1107
[7.2%]withpositivereactions). Ingroup2,7of548
volunteers (1.3%) had positivereactions. Theincidence of
positivereactions ingroup3was0.4%(2of516volunteers)
(Basketter etal.2006).
SkinSensitization -Provocative Tests
The30provocative testsreported through 1982are
summarized inTable12,butnotinthetext that follows.
Generally, these patchtestswereperformed with1or 2%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum, and1.1to84.6%ofthe
patientswerepositiveforp-Phenylenediamine.
The48studiesafter1982aresummarized inTable12and
discussed below.
p-Phenylenediamine
Temesvari (1984)performed 20-minute patchtestson129
patients. Threeofthepatientshadpositivereactions to1%
p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum. Twoofthepatients(28
and32yearsold)hadurticariathatdeveloped whiledyeing
theirhair.Initially,theurticaria waslocalized onhairyskin,
butlaterspread over thebody. The3t(patient(52yearsold)
usedblackcotton thread inherprofession and hadpainful
palms(witherythema andedema),andurticariadeveloped
overherbody.Patchtestingwithp-Phenylenediamine also
provoked 1urticarial reaction.
AdamsandMaibach (1985)patchtested13,216patients
withcontactdermatitis overa64-month period. Patch tests
appliedtoupper back for48hoursandreactions were
scoredat48and72hours.Forty-one cutaneous reactions to
p-Phenylenediamine werereported.
InastudybyCronin(1985),oneof25women(agesnot
stated)withoccupational handeczemahadapositivepatch
testreactiontop-Phenylenediamine.
Emrnons andMarks(1985) patch tested50volunteers (19
males,31females), comprised of19controls, 15with
eczematous dermatitis, and16withcosmetic sensitivity. In
opentesting,1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum (several
milliliters) wassmearedontotheskin,andtheapplication
-62-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotesitewascoveredwithafilter paper disc.Reactions were
scoredat45minutes. Patches(Finnchambers) containing
p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum werealsoappliedtothe
backfor48hours;reactions werescoredat48and96hours.
Resultsofopenpatch testing indicated nocontacturticaria.
InpatchtestsusingFinnchambers, p-Phenylenediamine
produced 12positive reactions, themajorityofwhich were
notclinically relevant. Therewasnocorrelation between a
historyofcosmeticsensitivity determined viaquestionnnaire
andpatchtest results (Emmons andMarks1985).
CorreiaandBrandao (1986)patch tested 539dermatitis
patients(50%between 30and50years old) witha1%p
Phenylenediamine mixture(inpetrolatum) overaperiodof
12years.Thirty-six patients hadpositive patch test
reactions top-Phenylenediamine.
KokeljandCantarutti (1986)patch-tested 25patients(120
males,15females; average age:69years)withlegulcers.
Twoofthepatientshadpositivepatchtest(sensitization)
reactions top-Phenylenediamine.
Broeckx etal.(1987)patchtested5202 patients (3330
women,1872men;agesnotstated)inastudyofcosmetic
intolerance. Theauthorsconsidered allergytohairdyesto
beimportant, inthat10.3%ofthepatientsreactedtop
Phenylenediamine.
DelaCuadra Oyanguren etal.(1989)conducted a
retrospective studyinvolving 190children (ages:2to14)
withdermatitis. Ofthe190children, 67(35%) had positive
patchtestreactions. p-Phenylenediamine (1%invaseline)
induceddermatitis in7%ofthepatientswithpositivepatch
testreactions.
Between January 1,1984andMay1,1985,Storrsetal.
(1989)patchtested1138patients(meanage=42.9years)
suspected ofhavingallergiccontactdermatitis with1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum usingFinnchambers.
Patches remained inplacefor48or72hours.Seventy-nine
allergicreactions and2irritantreactions werereported. A
relevance valueof59%wasassigned tothisallergen.
Stransky andKrasteva (1989)patchtested460patients(21
to40 years old; mostly male) with contactsensitization.
Two-hundred twentypatientswerepatchtestedin1975,
and240patients werepatch-tested in1987.The
percentages ofpatients with positive reactions top
Phenylenediamine (1%inwhitepetrolatum) were 10.52% in
1975and8.52%in1987.
FanandZhao (1990) patch tested 204patients(69males
and135females; ages15to59 years) suspected ofhaving
allergiccontactdermatitis between Marchof1988and
Marchof1989.Patches(Finnchambers) remained inplace
for48hoursandreactions werescoredat72and96hours.
Eighteen patients hadpositive reactions top
Phenylenediamine.Balatoetal.(1990)patchtested19patients (6males,13
females) withvariouseczemas andallergicreactions to
dispersedyes.Sixofthe19patientshadpositive reactions
top-Phenylenediamine. The6alsoreactedtoDisperse
Orange 3.The authors suggested thatthereactions to
Disperse Orange3wereprobably duetocross-sensitivity to
p-Phenylenediamine.
Bruckner-Tuderman etal.(1992)patchtested921patients
(withdifferential diagnoses, including contactdermatitis).
Finnchambers wereappliedfor48hoursandreactions were
scoredat48,72,and96hours.Only++reactions with
infiltration, erythema, andscattered papulovesicles, or
stronger, wereconsidered tobeofanallergicnature.A
5.4%sensitization ratewasassociated withp
Phenylenediamine.
Braschetal.(1994)patchtested1285patients(487men,
798women; ages notstated)with0.5%p-Phenylenediamine
freebase inpetrolatum. Finn chambers (onbothsidesofthe
back)remained inplacefor24or48hours.Ofthe1285
patients, 82hadnon-negative reactions top
Phenylenediamine. Approximately 75%ofthereactions that
wereobserved onbothsidesofthebackwereallergic
reactions; ofthese,88%werescoredas+reactions and12%
werescoredas++or+++reactions.
Anadversereactions reportoncosmetics byBerneetal.
(1996),for years 1989to1994,indicated that thepatch
testingof79patients (90%witheczema) resulted in2
relevantreactions top-Phenylenediamine.
Gonzalo etal.(1997)evaluated 80patients(40males,40
females; meanage=56±17years)whowereonchronic
hemodialysis (meanduration =46±50months). The
authorsnotedthat hemodialysis impliescontactwith
potential allergenic materials (e.g.,gloves,catheters,
needles, etc.).Fourteen ofthe80patientshadpatchtest
reactions tovarioussubstances. Threeof14patientshad
positive patch testreactions to3.75%p-Phenylenediamine.
Seidenari etal.(1997)investigated cross-reactions between
different azodyesandpara-amino compounds inazo-dye
sensitive subjects. Ofthe84azo-dyepositivesubjectswith
handdermatitis, 40 had positive reactions top
Phenylenediamine (testconcentration notstated).
Inastudy by Shahetal.(1997),83children (47girls,36
boys;meanage=12.1years)withdermatitis werepatch
tested(Finnchambers, 48-hour application) between
Januaryof1991andDecember of1995. Themean
durationofthe dermatitis was5years;patchtest reactions
werescoredat2and4days.Twopatientshadpositive
reactions to1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum.
McFadden etal.(1998)studiedthe length oftheexposure
timerequiredtoelicitp-Phenylenediamine allergicreactions
using16patients(age range: 17to65years).Seven
patientswerepatch-tested with1%p-Phenylenediamine in
-63-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotepetrolatum for15minutes, 30minutes, and120minutes.
The remaining 9patientswerepatch tested with1%,0.3%,
0.1%,and0.01%p-Phenylenediamine for165minutes, 30
minutes, and120minutes each.
Following the120-minute exposure, 11of16subjects
reactedto1%p-Phenylenediamine and2of9reactedto
0.01%p-Phenylenediamine. Following the15-minute
exposure, 6of16reactedto1%p-Phenylenediamine and0
of9reactedto0.01%p-Phenylenediamine. Themajorityof
thereactions observed weredefinedas+and++reactions.
The authors concluded thattheduration ofexposure
requiredforcontactallergens suchasp-Phenylenediamine
toelicit allergic contactdermatitis reactions maybevery
brief(McFadden etal.1998)
Marksetal.(l998a)patchtestedpatientssuspected of
having allergic contactdermatitis betweenJuly1,1994and
June30,1996.Patches (Finn chambers) remained inplace
for48hoursandtestsiteswereevaluated twice,initiallyat
48to72hoursand,again,between 72and168hoursafter
initialplacement. Reactions of1+,2+,or 3+were
classified aspositive. Ofthe111patientspatchtestedwith
1%p-Phenylenediamine, 6.8%hadanallergicreaction.
InanotherreportbyMarksetal.(1998b) over 5800 patients
suspected ofhavingallergiccontactdermatitis werepatch
testedfromJuly1,1998toDecember 31,2000.Thepatch
testprocedure wasidentical tothat stated inthepreceding
paragraph. Ofthe 5831 patientspatchtestedwith1%p
Phenylenediamine, 4.9% hadanallergicreactionand0.1%
hadanirritantreaction.
Inastudy by Armstrong etal.(1999)conducted from
January 1982toDecember 1998,26,706patients(41%
male, 59% female)withsuspected contactdermatitis were
patchtested.p-Phenylenediamine HC1(0.5%inpetrolatum)
wasthetestallergenbetween 1985and1988,whilep
Phenylenediamine-free base (1%inpetrolatum) wastested
duringtheremaining years. Of the26,706patientspatch
tested,667(217male,450female)hadpositivereactions (+
to+++)top-Phenylenediamine, representing 2.5%ofthe
totalpatch-test population.
Goossens etal.(1999)conducted aretrospective surveyof
allergiccontactreactions tocosmetics. Dataon475patients
withcontactallergytocosmetic ingredients, observed during
a4-monthperiod(January toAprilof1996),werecollected.
Atotalof33positivereactions top-Phenylenediamine (test
concentration notstated)wasreported.
Dickeletal.(2000)conducted astudytodetermine the
frequency of“lost,”“found,” and“persistent” reactions toa
standard screening traybycomparing initialanddelayed
readingsofthesamepatchtests.Themethodology involved
aretrospective reviewofpatchtestreactions for587patients
(agesnotstated)whoweretested between January 1,1988
andDecember 31,1991.Forty-eight-hour patchtestswereperformed. Resultsforthe 587patientswerereported as
follows: 81“found”reactions (15%),342“persistent”
reactions (62%),and127“lost”reactions (23%).The3
mostcommon “found”reactions weretoneomycin sulfate
(n=19;53%),p-Phenylenediamine (n10;29%),and
thiomersal (n=10;18%).
DevosandVanDer Valk (2001)conducted anexperiment
(678patients; ages:8to85years)toevaluatepatchtest
reactions top-Phenylenediamine andtheirrelevance, when
testedaloneorsimultaneously withpara-aminoazobenzene.
Withandwithout simultaneous testingwithpara
aminoazobenzene, 4.3%and3.1%ofthepatientsreactedto
p-Phenylenediamine, respectively. Thereactions were
estimated asrelevant in21.1%and39.7%ofthepatients,
respectively, withandwithoutsimultaneous testing with
para-aminoazobenzene.
Dickeletal.(2001)conducted astudytodetermine
differences insensitization ratesbetween 2racial groups
undergoing patchtesting over aperiodof4years.A
retrospective computerreview ofthestandard screening tray
resultsof991patients(877whites[88.5%]; 114blacks
[11.5%]averageage:45.9years)wascompleted. Thepatch
testmethodology involved theapplication ofFinnchambers
tothebackfor48hours;reactions werescoredatday3and
between days4and8.
Nickel sulfate andthiomersal andnickel sulfate andp
Phenylenediamine werethe2mostcommon sensitizers
among whites andblacks, respectively. Therewasa
statistically significant difference (P=0.00599) inthe
sensitization rateforp-Phenylenediamine inblackpatients
(10.6%)whencompared towhitepatients(4.5%).There
werealsostatistically significant differences insensitization
ratesforp-Phenylenediamine (21.2%;P0.00005) and
imidazolidinyl ureainpetrolatum (9.1%; P =0.04103) in
blackmen when compared towhitemen(p
Phenylenediamine [4.25%]andimidazolidinyl urea[2.6%
inpetrolatum]).
Theauthors stated thatthedifferences insensitization rates,
especially forp-Phenylenediamine, mayreflectvariations in
allergen exposure amongracial groups orinterindividual
variations intheN-acetylation (N-acetyltransferase 1
[NAT1]and2[NAT2] )capacities ofhumanskin forp
Phenylenediamine (Dickeletal.2001).
DeLeoetal.(2002) examined the differences inpatchtest
resultsbetweenblackandwhiteindividuals patchtestedby
members oftheNACDG) fromJuly1,1992toJune30,
1998.Patches(Finnchambers onScanpor tape) were
appliedtotheupper back andremained inplacefor48
hours.Reactions werescoredat48to72hoursinitially,and,
again,between72and168hours.
Atotalof9624 patients waspatch tested withvarious
allergens during 32-yearperiods,andthesensitization rates
-64-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotefor1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum wereasfollows:
1992-1994 (black:7.8%;white:5.8%);1994-1996 (black:
13.5% ;white:5.8%,P<0.05 -significantdifference); 1996-
1998(black:10.3%; white: 5.3%,P<0.05). Differences
between whiteandblackpatients intheirresponses to
specific allergens werenoted.
Theauthors stated thatthesedifferences, although possibly
relatedtogeneticfactorsbasedonrace,aremorelikely
relatedtodifferences inallergen exposure that arebasedon
ethnicity (DeLeoetal.2002)
LiandWang(2002)studiedcontacthypersensitivity inhand
dermatitis bypatchtesting105consecutive adulthand
dermatitis patients(29males,76females;averageage:41.8
±15.5years)and361casesofsuspected non-hand allergic
contactdermatitis (101males,260females; averageage:
41.5±22.4 years). The test substances (allergens) were
appliedtotheupperbackusingFinnchambers; resultswere
recorded at2and3days.Reactions inthehand dermatitis
groupwerelower than inthenon-hand dermatitis group
(46.7%versus63.2%,p<0.01).p-Phenylenediamine was
amongthemostcommonallergens, at 14.3%. Theincidence
ofreactions top-Phenylenediamine inthenon-hand
dermatitis groupwas14.1%.
Uteretal.(2002)patchtested638patientsbetweenJanuary
of1995andDecember of1999.Positive reactions were
basedonscoresat72hours.More frequently, positive
reactions tothefollowing chemicals were observed: p
aminoazobenzene (16.2%),p-Phenylenediamine (14.1%),p
toluylenediamine (10.0%), 4,4-diaminodiphenylmethane
(8.5%),Disperse Orange 3(8.4%),andp-aminophenol
(3.1%).
Inamulticenter study,Krasteva etal.(2002)investigated
thevalidityoftheopentest(“skinsensitivity test” or “dab
test”)thatisrecommended 48hoursbeforehairdye
application asapractical methodfordetecting allergic
reactions top-Phenylenediamine-containing hairdyes.The
studygroupsconsisted of30contact dermatitis patients (28
females, 2males;meanage:40years)withpositivepatch
testreactions top-Phenylenediamine and30sex-andage-
matched p-Phenylenediamine-negative subjects withno
historyofadverse reactions tohaircoloringproducts. Inan
openpatchtest,ahaircoloringproductcontaining 1.8%p
Phenylenediamine wasappliedtotheretroauricular areaof
eachsubjectandremained for48hours(nowashingofsite).
Reactions werescoredon day0(at1hourpost-application)
andon days2and4.
Allergic reactions wereobserved inallp-Phenylenediamine
positivepatients (maximal intensity onday2).Allergic
reactions werenotobserved inanyofthep
Phenylenediamine negativesubjects(Krasteva etal.2002).
Cheyetal.(2004)conducted a2-phasestudytoexamine
patientswith lichen simplexchronicus (LSC)orothertypesofneurodermatitis anddetermine anyassociation withhair
dyeing.Ina14-month prospective study,patchtestingwas
performed on27patients(18females, 9males;meanageof
48.4years)whodyed their hairregularly andhadclinical
manifestations ofLSC.Finnchambers (onScanportape)
wereappliedtotheback,andreactions werescoredatday
2andday4(or day 3)according toICRDG
recommendations. Ofthe27patients, 11patients(40.7%)
hadpositive reactions (2++and9+reactions) top
Phenyelendiamine (testconcentration notstated).The11
patientshadbeenusinghairdyeformorethan5yearsata
frequency of1to3months.
Inaretrospective study,560patients(meanagenotstated)
wereexamined from Marchof1997toAprilof2001.This
groupcomprised patients suspected ofhavingallergic
contactdermatitis andfurtherselectedcaseswithconcurrent
LSCand/or other neurodermatitis. Ofthe560patients
patch-tested (sameprocedure), 63(11.3%)hadweakly
positive reactions top-Phenylenediaminme (test
concentration notstated). Fourteen (22.2%)ofthe63
patientshadclinical findings ofLSCandwerealsousing
hairdyes(usefrequency =ito3months)(Cheyetal.2004).
Daweetal.(2004)reviewed theresultsofallpatientspatch
tested between 1990and 2000 atSt.John’sInstitute of
Dermatology intheUnitedKingdom. Atotalof13,300
patientswithsuspected contactdermatitis werepatchtested
withtheEuropean standard series.The records ofall
patients withapositive patchtest reaction to1%p
Phenylenediamine-free baseinpetrolatum (fromJanuaryof
1990toDecember of1999)wereobtained. The total
numberofpositive reactions top-Phenylenediamine (+to
+++)overthe10-yearperiodwas449(3.4%ofthe13300
patients).
Lewisetal.(2004)searched patch-test databases at2
dermatology centersintheUnited Kingdom (years1993to
2003;totalpopulation 677,500) forallpatientswhowere
16yearsofageandhadapositive patchtesttothe
European standard series. The results yielded 191
consecutively patch tested children, andthe most common
allergens inthesepatientswereasfollows:nickel (13% of
the191patients), followed byfragrance (9%),thiuram(9%),
cobalt(8%),p-Phenylenediaimine (6%),tixocortol pivalate
(5%), and myroxylon pereiraeresin(5%).
Prattetal.(2004)reported theresultsofpatchtestingfrom
January 1,2001toDecember 31,2002,bytheNorth
AmericanContact Dermatitis Group. The patients(2to97
years old) werepatch-tested withascreening seriesof65
allergens. Patchtestingwasdone with astandardized
technique usingFinnchambers onScanpor tape.The
patchesremained inplacefor48hours,andtestsiteswere
evaluated initiallyat48to72hours,and,again,between72
and168hours after placement. Apositivereaction was
interpreted as+,++,or+++,manifested byerythematous
-65-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotepapules, vesicles and/oraspreading reaction, sometimes
withcrustingandulceration. The clinical relevance ofthe
positivepatch testreactions wasdetermined bythepatient’s
historyandclinicalskinexamination findings.
Ofthe4,903patients patchtestedwith1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum, 4.8%hadpositive
reactions, 0.2%hadirritantreactions, and0.5% had
reactions thatwereclassified asunknown (Prattetal.2004).
Wetteretal.(2005)compared theresultsof patchtesting
withthestandard seriesattheMayoClinic (from July 1,
1998toDecember 31,2000)withthoseoftheNACDG for
thesameperiod.TheMayoClinicpatientgroupconsisted
of1320patients(meanage=54.7years)andtheNACDG
studyconsisted of5831patients. The methodology for
patchapplication (Finnchambers onScanpor tape)and
readingtimesused bytheMayoClinicwereidentical to
thoseusedby theNACDG. Patches wereappliedtothe
upper back andremained for48hours.Reactions were
scoredat48to72hours initially, and, again, at96to168
hours.Apositive allergic patch testresultwasdefinedasa
weak,strong,orextremereaction, orasamacularerythema
reactioniftheresultwasrelevant. Thepositivereactionrate
forp-Phenylenediamine (1%inpetrolatum) was4.9%for
boththe 1,320 patientsinthe Mayo Clinicstudygroupand
the 5,831 patientsintheNACDG studygroup.
Krasteva etal.(2005) investigated thesensitivity and
specificity oftheskinallergytest(aconsumer test)todetect
andprevent contact allergytooxidative haircoloring
products that contained arangeofconcentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine andcorresponded todifferent shades
(light,medium, anddark). The skinallergytestconsisted of
theopenapplication ofthecolorantbasepriortomixing
withthedeveloper, whichisrecommended at48hoursprior
tohair coloring. Thirty-four subjects(agerange:23to68
years) with allergicreactions top-Phenylenediamine and49
non-allergic subjects were involved inthestudy.The
experimental groupconsisted ofsubjectswithpositivepatch
testreactions (+to+++)top-Phenylenediamine during
routine investigations during thelast5years.Testcoloring
products that contained increasing concentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine (0.1,0.5,1.0,or1.5%)wereappliedto
bothgroupsofsubjects.
Openpatchtestresultsindicated allergicreactions tothetest
products containing p-Phenylenediamine (atday2post-
application) ineachofthe34subjects withahistoryof
positivepatchtestreactions top-Phenylenediamine. All34
subjects developed definite typeIVallergicreactions
(erythema andpapulesorhomogeneous infiltration) tothe
testproducts. Allergicreactions werenotobserved inthe49
controlsubjects. Ofthe34subjects, 27hadadefinite
allergicreaction(allergiccontactdermatitis) toproductA
(lightshadeprototype, 0.1%p-Phenylenediamine), andthe
reactions wereevaluated asfollows: weakly positive(2of27subjects), moderately positive (12of27),orstrongly
positive(13of27).Threesubjects had apositive reaction
toproductB(contained 0.5%p-Phenylenediamine) and3
subjectsalsohadapositivereactiontoproductC(contained
1%p-Phenylenediamine). Onesubjecthadapositive
reaction toproduct D(darkshadeprototype, 1.5%p
Phenylenediamine).
The authors explained that,because amore severe reaction
maybeexpected following theapplication ofaproduct
containing p-Phenylenediamine ataconcentration greater
than the firstelicitingconcentration, theyrefrained from
applying higher concentrations whenever asubject
developed aclear-cut contactallergicreaction tothetest
products. Thus,ifoneconsiders that27subjectscompleted
thestudyafterreacting toproductA(contained 0.1%p
Phenylenediamine), onlysevensubjects remained tobe
testedwithproducts containing higher concentrations ofp
Phenylenediamine. Withthisinmind,theauthorsreported
thatthecumulative response ratesforsubjectswithreactions
totheproducts wereasfollows:0.1%p-Phenylenediamine
(27of34subjects), 0.5%p-Phenylenediamine (30of34),
1.0%p-Phenylenediamine (33of34),or1.5%p
Phenylenediamine (34of34subjects), corresponding to79,
88,97,or100%ofthestudysubjects,respectively (Krasteva
etal.2005).
Wangetal.(2005) analyzed cosmetic allergic contact
dermatitis (CACD) ineczemapatients inChinaand
examined thefrequency ofpatchtestreactions tocommon
cosmetic-related allergens (CRA).Three-hundred seventy-
eightconsecutive eczemapatients(120 males, 258females;
averageage=40.5±16.4years)inChinawerepatch-tested
withamodified European standardseriesofallergens during
a2-year period.
Ofthe378patients, 73(19.3%)weresuspected of having
CACDand37patients(9.8%)wereclassified asconfirmed.
Thefrequencies ofthepositivepatchtestreactions in
patientssuspected ofhavingCACDandinthosewith
confirmed CACDto atleast1CRAwere64.4%and89.2%,
respectively.
Thevaluesassociated withp-Phenylenediamine patchtests
were5.5%and8.1%,respectively; thevaluesassociated
withfragrance mixpatchtests were 27.4%and32.4%,
respectively. Theresultsofthisstudysuggested thatCACD
isverycommon inpatch-tested eczemapatientsinChina.p
Phenylenediamine andfragrance mixweretheleading
allergens thatwereidentified (Wangetal.2005).
Aretrospective analysisbyOppelandSchnuch (2006)was
basedon2004patchtestresults that werecollected by the
Information Network ofDepartments ofDermatology in
Germany. Data on9,948patients(6,175females; 3,773
males)werereferredforevaluation ofsuspected contact
allergytodetermine thefrequency ofsensitization tothe10
mostcommon contact allergens. The top10allergens were
-66-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteasfollows: nickelsulfate(frequency ofsensitization,
standardized forsexandage:17.2%), fragrance mix
(sensitization frequency: 7.2%),balsamofPeru(6.7%),
cobaltchloride (6.5%),potassium dichromate (5.3%),
colophony (4.6%), lanolin alcohol (4.3%),p
Phenylenediamine (4.2%),ammoniated mercury (3.5%), and
methyldibromoglutaronitrile/phenoxyethanol (3.4%).
Whiteet al.(2006)studiedtheroleofBandrowski’s basein
p-Phenylenediamine-induced allergy.Thepurityofthetest
substance was99.9%.Themain impurity wasBandrowski’s
baseat0.1%,andtracesofanorganicimpurity, tentatively
identified as4.4-azodianiline, werealsoreported. A7-
monthstability analysis indicated anincrease inthe
concentration ofBandrowski’s basefrom0.1%to0.5%.In
patchtests, test substances wereappliedinFinnchambers.
Ofthe159patients attending adermatology clinicin
Bangkok, 8werepatchtestpositivetop-Phenylenediamine.
Only1patienthadapositivereactionto1%Bandrowski’s
base,andthisreactionwasobserved inthepatientwhohad
astrongpositivereaction(+++)top-Phenylenediamine.
Additional testsinvolved 6subjects whohadpreviously
attended thedermatology clinicinLondonand29patients
inBangkok (patients from bothclinicspatchtestedpositive
top-Phenylenediamine). Reactions inthe6subjects
(London) whooriginally had+reactions top
Phenylenediamine wereasfollows: 0.01%p
Phenylenediamine(l patient),0.1%p-Phenylenediamine (3
patients), 1%p-Phenylenediamine (5patients), andno
reactions toanyconcentration ofp-Phenylenediamine (1
patient). All6werenegative toBandrowski’s base.
Twenty-six ofthe29subjects(Bangkok) hadI+reactions to
p-Phenylenediamine. Only5ofthe29subjectsreactedto
Bandrowski’s base.Ofthe 642 normalvolunteers (in
Bangkok) patch-tested, 14hadpositive reactions top
Phenylenediamine. Fiveofthe14alsohadpositive
reactions to1%Bandrowski’s base(Whiteetal.2006).
Uteretal.(2006)conducted astudytodetermine whether
anilineshouldberegarded as apotential causeofcontact
allergy.Aretrospective analysisofclinicaldatacollected in
acontactallergysurveillance network(Information Network
ofDepartments ofDermatology) betweenJanuaryof1992
andJuneof2004wasperformed. Thepatchtestprocedure
wassaidtofollowcurrentinternational guidelines, further
amended bytheGerman Contact Dermatitis Research
Group. Duringthisperiod,25(meanage=57)of119
patients patch tested withaniline(1%inwateror
petrolatum) hadpositive(allergic) reactions. Themedian
ageofthepatientswhotested negative was43.Ofthe25
patients, 24werediagnosed withcontactallergytop
Phenylenediamine (1%inpetrolatum).
Jowseyeta!.(2006)conducted astudytoassessthe
elicitation response characteristics observed inpPhenylenediamine-allergic volunteers patchtestedwith
complete hairdyes.Threegroupsof15volunteers(18
years)with+(group1),++(group2),or+++(group3)
reactions top-Phenylenediamine at2daysafterpatch
removalparticipated inthestudy.p-Phenylenediamine (1%
inpetrolatum) wasappliedtothearmfor48hoursinFinn
chambers. Reactions werescoredatday2post-application
according totheICDRGscale.Subsequently, eachgroup
waspatchtestedwith2complete hair dyes(AandB,both
permanent blackhairdyes) for 30minutes, 1hour,and24
hours.Reactions werescoredatdays1,2,and3afterpatch
removal.
The authors statedthatexposure toeithercomplete hairdye
AorBfor30minutesor1hourwasinsufficient toyielda
positivepatchtestreactioninallofthep-Phenylenediamine
allergicpatientsingroup 1orgroup2.Additionally, the
application ofeitherhairdyefor24hourswassufficient to
yieldpositivereactions inallofthevolunteers ingroup3
andgroup4.Following 24-hour exposure tocomplete
permanent hair dyes, thefrequency ofpositivepatchtest
reactions wascomparable tothatobserved after48-hour
exposure to1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum in
volunteers whosedegreeofsensitization wassuchthatthey
typically presentwith++or+++reactions diagnostically
(Jowseyetal.2006).
SØstedetal.(2006a)evaluated thedose-effect elicitation of
allergiccontactdermatitis inp-Phenylenediamine allergic
patientsusing48-hourpatchtests.Thestudyinvolved 15
patients(14female, 1male;24to64yearsold)whohada
positivepatchtestreaction top-Phenylenediamine overthe
period encompassing 1999to2003.Allwereallergictop
Phenylenediamine. Thestudywasconducted atthe
Department ofDermatology atGentofte Hospital in
Denmark fromJanuarytoJulyof2005.The test substance
(1%p-Phenylenediamine inwhitepetrolatum) andserial
dilutionof thetestsubstance toconcentrations rangingfrom
1ppmto10,000ppmwereevaluated. Whitepetrolatum
servedasthenegativecontrol. Finn chambers onScanpor
tapewereappliedfor48hours,andreactions werescoredon
days3and7according totheICDRG’s gradingscale:0
(negative) to4(strongly positive). Testsitesincluded the
back, outer aspectsofthearms,andretroauricular area.
Onefemalesubjectdid nothavearesponse to1%p
Phenylenediamine inwhitepetrolatum, considering thata++
reactiontothetestsubstance wasobserved 6yearsago.The
remaining patients hadatleasta+?(weakly positive)
reaction to1%p-Phenylenediamine inwhitepetrolatum.
Sevenofthe15patientsalso had othercontactallergies.
Thethreshold valuefor10%ofthepatientstested(ED10),
basedon+reactions orgreaterontheback,was38ppm.
Foreachofthe3regions(back,ears,andarms),dose
response curvesweredrawn. Statistically significant
differences inthesensitivity ofthe3anatomical regions
werenotfound.Theauthorsstatedthattheupper back isa
-67-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotesuitableregionforpatchtestingpatients withhairdye
dermatitis (SØstedetal.,2006a).
Claytonetal.(2006)conducted aretrospective studyto
determine whetherthesiteofprimarydermatitis inchildren
couldpredictadiagnosis ofallergiccontactdermatitis.
Between theyears1995and2004, 500 childrenwerepatch
tested.Theagegroupsrangedfrom0to<2yearsto15
years. The allergens wereapplied,under Finn chambers
securedwithScanportape,tohealthyskinontheback. The
patchesremained inplacefor48hoursandreactions were
scoredat48and96hoursaccording toICDRGcriteria.
Ofthechildrentested,133(27%)had1ormorepositive
patchtestreactions. ThemostfrequentfindingwastypeIV
allergytonickel (33% ofthechildren). Reactions to
fragrance mix(18%),cobalt(11%),mercapto chemicals,
Myroxylon pereirae, andp-Phenylenediamine (each8%)
werealsoreported. Nostatistical significance wasfound
regarding therelationship between the siteofprimary
dermatosis andapositivepatchtestresult(Clayton etal.
2006).
Hillenetal.(2006)assessed thefrequency oflatereactions
top-Phenylenediamine andepoxyresinsin1,748patients
(dataon1428patientswere evaluable). Diglycidyl ether of
bisphenol A(1%inpetrolatum) andp-Phenylenediamine
(1%inpetrolatum) wereamongthechemicals thatwere
tested.Bothsubstances wereappliedtothe medial sideof
theupperarm.Patchtestocclusion timewas24hours(588
patients) or48hours(1,160 patients). For24-hourpatch
tests,reactions werescoredondays1-3;for48-hourpatch
tests,reactions werescoredon days2-3.Latereadingswere
madeondays7,14,and21afterpatchapplication.
Reactions werescoredaccording toICDRGcriteria.
Ofthe1,428patientsforwhichdatawereevaluable, patch
testsfor25patientswerenotpositive before day7.These
included 21reactions top-Phenylenediamine (1.5%ofthe
1,428patients) and4reactions todiglycidyl etherof
bisphenol A(1%inpetrolatum). For 5ofthe7patients,
repeated patchtestswithp-Phenylenediamine revealed
patch-test sensitization asthecauseofthelatereaction.
Withtheexception of1reaction, alllatereactions were
observed inpatientsinwhompatcheswereappliedfor48
hours.Theauthorsconcluded thatp-Phenylenediamine (1%
inpetrolatum) elicitedlatereactions in1.5%of routine
patchtests,andthatthemajorityofthelatereactions was
causedbypatch-test sensitization (Hillenetal.,2006).
Aalto-Korte etal.(2007)reportedlatepatchtestreactions to
p-Phenylenediamine. Alatereaction wasdefinedasa
reactionthatwasnoticed(bythepatientorsomeone else)at
least10daysafterpatchapplication, andwhichwasnegative
atthelastreadingon days4through 6.Patchtestswere
performed according toICDRGguidelines usingtheFinn
chambermethod.Between Januaryof2002andFebruary of
2006,826patients werepatchtestedwithpPhenylenediamine (1%inpetrolatum). Ofthe826patients,
26(3.1%)hadpositivereactions top-Phenylenediamine.
Latereactions wereobserved in6patients(0.75%of826
patients).
Hillenetal.(2007)patch-tested 1,222patients(agesnot
stated),withsuspected allergiccontactdermatitis ofthe
scalp, with 1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum. Patch
testswerereadaccording toICDRG criteria. Ofthe1,222
patients, 144(11.8%) hadpositivereactions tothetest
substance.
InastudybyPate!etal.(2007),6177patientswithsuspect
contactdermatitis were patchtestedfromJanuaryof1999to
December of2004usingstandard ICDRG criteria.
Reactions werescoredat2/3days and 4/5 days. Thepatch
testfrequency (%)top-Phenylenediamine wasascertained
foreachyear.Astatistical analysiswasperformed usinga
Chi-Squared andCochrane-Armitage trendtest.Results
indicated that theproportion ofpatientsthattestedpositive
top-Phenylenediamine rangedfrom 3.8% in 1989to7.1%
in2004,and,thus,wasnotconstant (P<0.001). A
Cochran-Armitage lineartrendtestwasappliedtothese
data,andtheP-valueof<0.001thatwasdetermined means
thatthelackofhomogeneity inproportions couldbe
attributed toalinearincreaseovertime.
Whiteetal.(2007)compared elicitation reactions following
singleandintermittent exposure top-Phenylenediamine.
Both single-dose andrepeated exposure involved thesame
23patients(14females, 9males;25to68yearsold)who
wereclassified asallergictop-Phenylenediamine. Inthe
singledoseexperiment, p-Phenylenediamine wasappliedto
different sitesontheupperbackatthefollowing
concentrations oneachsuccessive day:0.3%inpetrolatum,
0.3%aqueous, 0.03%inpetrolatum, and0.03%aqueous.
The testconcentrations wereappliedfor5mmonday1,for
10mmonday2andonwarduptoa40mmapplication as
asingle exposure. Intherepeatedexposure experiment, the
sameconcentrations ofp-Phenylenediamine basewereused;
however, 5-mmapplications weremadeon8successive
days(samesite).
Reactions toeither 0.03% aqueousp-Phenylenediamine or
0.03%inpetrolatum werenotobserved aftersingleor
repeated applications. Eightreactions to0.3%aqueousp
Phenylenediamine wereobserved atthecumulativeexposure
site.For7ofthereactions, therewasanexactcorrelation
between thereaction tothecumulative timeneeded for
repeatexposures toelicitareactionandthetimeneededfor
areaction tothesingle exposure. Therewasalsoaclose
correlation between thegradeoftheoriginalreactionand
thereaction frequency to0.3%p-Phenylenediamine in
petrolatum.
Theseresults, together withtheresultsofthe skinbinding
study(rats)bytheseauthorsdiscussed earlier,demonstrate
that,overthetimeperiodtested,theallergenic component
-68-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteofp-Phenylenediamine accumulates intheskin.Therefore,
the authors concluded thatasmallercumulative time
exposure isequivalent toalargersingle-time exposure in
thisstudy(Whiteetal.2007).
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
Picardoetal.(1990)conducted patchtestsinvolving freshly
prepared solutions ofp-Phenylenediamine HC1and3
selectedaromatic compounds thatarestructurally similarto
p-Phenylenediamine (p-aminophenol, o-aminophenol,
hydroquinone). Eightypatients(agesnotstated)whowere
positive to atleastonehaptenoftheparagroup(p
Phenylenediamine, diaminodiphenylmethane, benzocaine, p
Phenylenediamine mix)participated inthestudy.The
numberofpositive reactions correlated withtherateof
decomposition ofthesubstances, asevaluated byhigh-
pressureliquidchromatography. p-Phenylenediamine HC1,
whichwasalmostdecomposed after24hours,gavethe
highestnumberofpositive reactions, followed byo
aminophenol andbyp-aminophenol, whilehydroquinone
(oxidized totheextentof35%)didnotgiveanyreactions.
Patchtestresultsfor 0.5% p-Phenylenediamine HCI
indicated 27positivereactions.
ZhaoandFan(1991)patchtested107patients (89
females,18 males;ages2to65years)withfacialcontact
dermatitis. Patches(Finnchambers) remained inplacefor
48hours(Finnchambers; 48-hourapplication) andreactions
werescoredat48,72,and96hours.p-Phenylenediamine
HC1wasthemostfrequentcontactallergen(17patientswith
positivereactions).
Guerraetal.(1992a)patchtested261hairdresser clients(5
males, 256 females; meanage:43.3 years) from1985to
Juneof1990.Ofthe261,176haddermatitis. Reactions
werescoredat2and3days.Amonghairdyeallergens,p
Phenylenediamine wasthemost frequent sensitizer (7.3%;
19patients withpositive reactions to0.5%p
Phenylenediamine HC1inpetrolatum).
LeeandLam(1996)patch-tested 490eczematous patients
withEuropean standard allergens andsuspected causative
substances thatwerebroughtinbythepatients. Ofthe490
patients, 437completed thetests.The437patientswere
classified asfollows: 256(withcontact dermatitis), 109
(withendogenous eczema), and72(withunclassified
eczema). Patchtestswereconducted usingFinnchambers
securedwithsurgicaltape.Reactions werescoredat days2
and4.p-Phenylenediamine HC1wastestedata
concentration of0.5%.Ofthe256contact dermatitis
patientspatch-tested, Ihadanallergicreactionto0.5%p
Phenylenediamine HCI.Noreactions to0.5%p
Phenylenediamine HCIoccurred intheremaining 2patient
groups.
p-Phenylenediatnine andp-Phenylenediamine HC1
Sertolietal.(1999) conducted amulticenter surveyinvolving 42,839contactdermatitis patients (agesnot
stated). Thestudywasinitiated in1984.p
Phenylenediamine HC1(0.5%)wastestedfrom1984to
1988,andp-Phenylenediamine base(1%)wastestedfrom
1989to1993.Thepatchtestswereappliedtothebackand
remained inplacefor48hours.Reactions werescored
initiallyat20to60minutes after patchremovaland24and
48hoursafterthefirstreading.Of42,839patientspatch
tested(1984to1993),therewere1481positivereactions.
Cross-sensitization
Asreported byBaeretal.(1973),Baer(1976),Fisher
(1976).Morikawa etal.(1976),Herve-Bazin etal.(1977),
Rudzki (1977), PriceandShupack (1978), Epstein and
Taylor(1979),andKleinandRodman (1981),allergic
sensitivity top-Phenylenediamine hasbeenassociated with
crosssensitization to:
•azoandanilinedyes;
•localanesthetics, procaine andbenzocaine;
•p-aminobenzoic acid,itsesters,andsunscreens
containing them;
IPPD,usedinrubbertires;
CPPD;
•p-aminosalicylic acid;
•hydrodiuril;
•carbutamide;
•pyrogallol;
•sulfonamides;
•hydroquinone;
•hydrochlorothiazide;
•p-hydroxybenzoic acidesters;
•benzidine;
•phenylhydrazine; and
•p-toluenediamine.
Storrsetal.(1979)observed crossreactivity betweenp
Phenylenediamine andp-Phenylenediamine HCI.Eleven
menand11women whoweresensitive to1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum werepatchtestedwith1%
p-Phenylenediamine HCIinpetrolatum. Only3ofthemen
and6ofthewomenweresensitive top-Phenylenediamine
HC1.Nosubjectswhowerenegative top-Phenylenediamine
werepositivetop-Phenylenediamine HC1.
Turchinetal.(2006)evaluated therateofcross-reactivity
between parabens, p-Phenylenediamine, andbenzocaine in
apopulation ofpatientspatch-tested inahospital-based
dermatitis clinic.Aretrospective analysisof4,368patients
(witheczematous skindisease)consecutively patch-tested
betweenJulyof1989andJuneof2005wasconducted. The
testmaterials wereplacedonthepatient’s uperbackand
remained for2days.Reactions werescoredafter48and96
hoursaccording toICDRGguidelines.
Thepositivereactions inthegroupof4,368 patients were
reported asfollows: 253(5.7%)patch-test positive top
-69-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuotePhenylenediamine, 37(0.8%)patch-test positive to
benzocaine, and34(0.7%) patch-test positivetotheparaben
mix.Ofthe253patientswithpositivepatchtestreactions
top-Phenylenediamine, 23(9%)alsohadpositive reactions
tobenzocaine and6(2.37%) hadpositivereactions to
parabens.
The results ofthisstudyindicated thattherateofcross-
reactions toparabens inp-Phenylenediamine- and
benzocaine-positive patients combined was2.0%.The
authorsconcluded thatthiscross-reaction rateissignificant
inthetestedpopulation, butstillfallswithinthepreviously
reported ratesofsensitivity toparabens inthegeneral
population (0to3.5%)(Turchin etal.2006).
Genetic Susceptibility toSensitization
Severalstudiesreported inthesectiononprovocative testing
suggested apossible genetic component top
Phenylenediamine sensitization. Thestudiesbelowfurther
addressthat question.
p-Phenylenediamine
Bransetal.(2005)performed acase-control analysis to
compare thedistribution of2polymorphisms ingenes
encoding forthemanganese-containing superoxide
dismutase 2inmitochondria (MnSOD) inpatientswitha
confirmed sensitization top-Phenylenediamine todetermine
whether thesepolymorphisms haveaninfluence onthe
individual’s susceptibility. TheauthorsnotedthatMnSOD
isoneoftheprimary enzymes thatdirectly scavenge
potentially harmfuloxidizing species,andthatavaline(Val)
toalanine(Ala)substitution ataminoacid-9(located in
MnSOD gene)hasbeenassociated withvariousdisease
risks.
Theaimofthisstudywastoinvestigate possible
associations oftheMnSOD 47T>C(thymine tocytosine
basepairtransition) genotype inexon2(Ala-9Val) andthe
339T>Cgenotype inexon3(lLe58Thr) withcontact
sensitization top-Phenylenediamine inhumans. Thecases
thatwere recruited forthestudyincluded 157females
(medianage=45years,range:11to96years).Eachofthe
157femalesubjectshadapositivepatchtestreactiontop
Phenylenediamine (reactions rangedfrom1+to3+).The
controls(n=201)thatwererecruited did nothaveahistory
ofsensitization top-Phenylenediamine, andwereage- and
gender-matched tothecases.
Studyresultsindicated noheterozygous (CT)or
homozygous (TT)carriersfortheIle5SThr polymorphism.
Furthermore, frequency valuesfortheCalleleoftheAla
9Valpolymorphism were51%(79of157cases)and49%
(107of201controls). Valuesfortheincidence of
homozygous CCcarriers (Ala/Ala) were27%(43of157
cases),and23% (46of201controls; oddsratio(OR)=1.3;
95%confidence interval(CI)=0.8to2.1).Anincreased
riskforsensitization amonghomozygous CCcarriers(Ala/Ala) wasreported only forthegroupofolderwomen
(>45years,25%versus18%;OR=1.5;95% CI =0.7to
2.34).The authors statedthatthese data suggest that theC
(Ala)alleleofMnSOD modifies thecontactdermatitis risk
inolderfemales,butisnotanindependent susceptibility
factorforcontactsensitization top-Phenylenediamine
(Bransetal.,2005).
Nacaketal.(2006)conducted astudytoevaluatewhether
geneticpolymorphism ofNAT2 plays aroleinthe
individual susceptibility top-Phenylenediamine sensitivity.
Seventycontact dermatitis patients(42females, 28males;
medianage=38years)participated inthestudy.The
controlgroupconsisted of100age-andsex-matched
controls(40males,60females; medianage=34years).
Thesesubjects(controls) did nothavecontactdermatitis or
signsofatopicdisease, allergicorlungdisorders, and
diseasesthatmayhaveanassociation withtheacetylation
polymorphism, suchasdiabetesmellitusandcancer.The
frequencies of7NAT2 point mutations weredetermined by
polymerase chainreaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis.
Thestudyresultsindicated thatthegenotypes codingrapid
acetylation werefoundin52.9%and37.0%ofthepatients
withcontactdermatitis andcontrolsubjects, respectively.
Additionally, thefrequency of theNAT2*4 alleleand
NAT2*4/*4 genotype, coding forrapidacetylation, were
alsosignificantly higherinthecontactdermatitis patients
thaninthecontrol subjects (P=0.003).The results ofthis
studysuggestanassociation between rapidacetylation
polymorphism andsusceptibility top-Phenylenediamine
sensitization (Nacaketal.2006).
Photosensitization
p-Phenylenediamine
Horio(1976)performed patchandphotopatch testswith2%
p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum onthebackofa52-year-
old man. Thephotopatch sitewasirradiated for15minutes
atadistanceof15cm,24hoursafterapplication. Thesites
werescoredat24and48hoursafterirradiation. The light
sourcewasablacklight(Toshiba FLZOBLB) emitting
wavelengths from 300 to420nmandconsisting mainlyof
long-wave UVpeaking at360nm.Thepapulovesicular
reactions observed atthepatchandphotopatch siteswere
approximately equal.
Thune(1984)conducted aphotosensitization study
involving 23patients(15females, 8males)witheczema,
redness, stinging, orburningofthefacefollowing sun
exposure. Nineofthepatients hadpolymorphic light
eruptionand3hadpersistent lightreactivity. Anadditional
patienthadaphotosensitivity thatwasofunknown origin
andchroniccontactdermatitis. Patchtestswereperformed
andreactions werescoredat48and72hours.For
photopatch testing,a150Wxenon solar simulator, equipped
-70-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuotewithSchottfilterWG345 toeliminate IJVB,wasused
(UVAirradiance =13mW/cm2). Photocontact allergytop
Phenylenediamine wasobserved inonepatientandplain
contactallergywasobserved inasecondpatient.
Occupational Exposure
p-Phenylenediamine
Astudywasconducted with20subjectswhohadsuffered
allergiccontactdermatitis fromp-Phenylenediamine andhad
stronglypositivepatchteststop-Phenylenediamine. The
subjects werepatch tested withhaircontaining p
Phenylenediamine dyed24hours previously. The patches
wererepeated 3weeks later. Therewerenoreactions atthe
endof48hoursor3weeks (Reiss andFisher1974;Fisher
1975).
Mainlca(1983)reportedallergicreactions, causedmainlyby
chromium, cobalt,andp-Phenylenediamine, inworkersat
asteelplant.Ofthe53workers(ages=25to58years)
evaluated, 7hadpositive reactions top-Phenylenediamine.
Gohetal.(1984)reportednegativepatchtestreactions top
Phenylenediamine in4patients (ages not stated)who
workedatdifferentphotographic developing companies.
Matsunaga etal.(1988)patchtested13beauticians (mean
age=19)withhanddermatitis between 1982and1986.A
personal orfamily history ofatopywascommon inthese
patients. Patch testing involved the useof Finnchambers
thatremained inplacefor48hours.Twelveof13subjects
haddefinitepositivereactions top-Phenylenediamine. With
theexception ofI+reaction, allofthereactions were
classified as++.
Matsunaga eta!.(1989)patchtested35hairdressers and
barberswithhanddermatitis inanefforttopreventthis
occupational skinhazard. Patch testing (open test)was
performed during a23-month period fromJanuaryof1987
toNovember of1988.Thirty-three ofthe35caseswere
identified asallergiccontactdermatitis. Ofthese33patients,
28(85%) had apositive patch testreaction to1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum.
Guerraetal.(1992b) conducted amulticenter studyto
evaluatethefrequency andsourceofcontactsensitization in
agroupof302hairdressers (43males,259females; mean
age:24.6years) with dermatitis. Inpatchtests(Finn
chambers), reactions werereadat2and3days.p
Phenylenediamine caused73positivereactions (24.2%).
Sutthipisal etal.(1993)investigated thepotential foratopics
tobesensitized tocontactallergens. Thestudygroup
consisted of143hairdressers (18men,125women)with
handeczema. Patchtests(1%p-Phenylenediamine, Finn
chambers) wereappliedfor48hoursandreactions were
scoredat2and4days .Thefollowing positive reactions to
1%p-Phenylenediamine werereported: 11of45
eczematous atopics (24%incidence) 11of32mucousmembrane atopics(34%incidence) and22of66non-atopics
(33%incidence).
Froschetal.(1993)patchtested809hairdressers ina
multicenter study.Theleadingallergens wereglyceryl
monothioglycolate (sensitization rate=19%)andp
Phenylenediamine (sensitization rate =15%).
Katsarou etal.(1995)patchtested106hairdressers (102
females, 4males; mean age23.7 years) withcontact
dermatitis. Thirty-two positive reactions to0.5%p
Phenylenediamine (inpetrolatum) werereported.
Rademaker (1998)patchtested46farmers(21males,25
females; mean age:59years)overa4-yearperiodto
determine whether theirdermatitis wassecondary toan
occupational allergen. Fourofthefarmers(allwithhand
dermatitis) hadpositive patch test reactions torubber
compounds. Ofthese,2hadapositivereaction top
Phenylenediamine.
-71-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteInastudybyLeinoetal.(1998a), 71femalehairdressers
withcontactdermatitis werediagnosed during1974to1993.
Positivereactions top-Phenylenediamine wereobserved in
5of65(7.7%) patients whowere tested.
Leinoetal.(l998b)studiedtheoccurrence andcausesof
hairdressers’ occupational skinandrespiratory diseases.
Thestudygroupconsisted of355hairdressers (15to54
yearsold).Ofthe189subjectswhoreportedwork-related
skinandrespiratory symptoms ,130underwent aphysical
examination, lungfunctiontests,prickandpatchtesting,and
nasalandlungprovocation tests.p-Phenylenediamine,
naturalrubberlatex,andskinirritation werelistedassome
ofthecausesofhanddermatitis. Patchtest(48-hour
application) resultsfor54hairdressers revealed 2positive
reactions top-Phenylenediamine. Reactions werescoredat
timeofremovaland,also,24and48to 120hourslater.
Lodietal.(2000)patchtested1,565out-patients (1,056
females, 509 males) withdermatitis whohad various
occupations (e.g.,41hairdressers tested).Thedermatitis
wassuspected ofbeingjob-related. Theallergenwiththe
highestfrequency ofpositivereactions inthe1,565patients
wasp-Phenylenediamine (25.3% =frequency ofpositive
reactions). Ofthe41hairdressers (34females, 7males)
patchtested,15hadpositivepatchtest reactions top
Phenylenediamine (36.5% frequency ofpositive
reactions).
Dickeletal.(2002)reportedstandard patch testresultsfor
4,112 employed persons withaninitialreport of
occupational skindiseaseovera10-yearperiod.p
Phenylenediamine inducedsensitization in10.7%ofthe
patients(440 patients).
Fautzetal.2002investigated thecrossreaction pattern of
newgeneration hairdyes(FD& Cand D&Cdyes)thatare
usedinhairdyeformulations amonghairdressers (n40).
Eachhairdresser hadaknownrelevantreaction top
Phenylenediamine and/or2,5-diaminotoluene sulfate and/or
2-Nitro-p-Phenylenediamine. The 40hairdressers were
patchtestedwiththeindividual dyes(totalof11,highest
non-irritant concentration), thehairdyeformulations (total
of8,highestnon-irritant concentration), andwithp
Phenylenediamine (1.0%inpetrolatum), 2,5-diaminotoluene
sulfate (1.0%inpetrolatum), and2-Nitro-p-
Phenylenediamine (1.0%inpetrolatum).
Inthe 40hairdressers tested, there werenopositive
reactions toanyoftheindividual dyesatday2orday3.
Thirty-eight ofthehairdressers didnothavepositive
reactions toanyofthehairdyeformulations atday2or day
3.Theresultsofthisstudysuggestthat,forhairdressers
sensitized top-Phenylenediamine and/or 2,5-
diaminotoluene sulfateand/or 2-Nitro-p-Phenylenediamine,
thenewgeneration ofhairdyesisasafealternative foruse
intheirsalons(Fautzetal.2002).
-72-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotelorizzoetal.(2002)conducted astudytoevaluate the
frequency, agedistribution, andsourceofcontact
sensitization inagroupof209hairdressers (182females, 27
males;meanage:14to72years)whovisitedadermatology
clinicinBologna Italy.Themeandurationofthedermatitis
was1.75year.Patchtestswereconducted usingFinn
chambers onScanpor tape,andreactions werescoredon
days2and3according tothefollowing scale:+(erythema
withinfiltration) to+++(erytherma withinnfiltration,
papules,andvesicles). Ofthe209hairdressers patchtested,
132hadoneormoreclinically relevantpositivereactions to
different allergens. Thehaptenthatmostfrequently caused
positive reactions amongthe209patients was1%p
Phenylenediamine baseinpetrolatum (77patients,36.8%of
patientstested).
Uteretal.(2003)conducted astudytodetermine whether
thepatternofsensitization tocosmetic ingredients was
different inhairdressers (884patients; medianage=24)
versustheirclients(1,217 patients; medianage=46).The
2groupsincluded femalecontactdermatitis patientswho
consulted withtheparticipating centersoftheInformation
Network ofDepartments ofDermatology (IVDK). The
patients were patchtestedbetween Januaryof1995and
December of2002.Inordertoquantifytheriskofspecific
contact allergy inhairdressers versusclientsandtoidentify
possible variations overtime(whilecontrolling forageasa
potential cofounder), logisticregression analyses were
performed foreachallergenthatwastested. The strengthof
association wasquantified withtheoddsratio(OR),which
wasaccompanied by95%confidence intervals (CIs).
Studyresultsindicated thattheproportion ofp
Phenylenediamine-allergic hairdressers decreased steadily,
butnotsignificantly (OR:1.30;CI:1.00to69).However,
incontrast, asignificant increase inp-Phenylenedianine
contactallergywasnotedinclients(P<0.05,adjustedfor
age)(Uteretal.2003).
Lietal.(2003)investigated 14patients(agesnotstated)
withoccupational allergiccontactdermatitis overaperiod
of2years(2001-2003). Patchtestswereconducted using
Finn chambers; reactions werescoredatdays2and3
according toICDRG recommendations. Ofthe14patients,
positivepatchtestreactions top-Phenylenediamine base
werereported for3.Twoofthepatientswerehairdressers
andthethirdpatientwasachemistwhoworkedwithp
Phenylenediaimine.
InastudybyLindetal.(2005)involving 33hairdressers
(meanage=37years),itwasconcluded thathairdressers’
skinisexposed toallergenic compounds duringdyeing.
Exposure wassaidtoresultfromdyeapplication, from
cuttingnewly-dyed hair, and from background exposure.
Theexposure loadings weresaidtohavebeenatalevel
wherethereisariskofsensitization and/orelicitation of
contactallergy(i.e.,22to939nmolper hand forpPhenylenediamine).
InastudybyValkset al.(2005),300hairdressers were
patchtested withp-Phenylenediamine andother allergens in
thedermatology department oftheInstituto Nacional de
Medicina ySeguridad inMadridSpainfrom1994to2003.
Mostofthehairdressers werewomen(mean age =23.7
years).Patchtestswereappliedtotheupperbackand
securedwithself-adhesive Fixomull for48hours.Reactions
werescoredondays2and4.Resultswerecompared with
thosefromaprevious study(Conde-Salazar etal.1995)
involving 379hairdressers whovisitedthedermatology
department from1980to1993.Thepresentstudyyielded
asignificant increase inthefrequency ofpositivepatchtest
reactions (78.3%versus58.8%)andoccupational allergic
contactdermatitis (58% versus 48.8%), compared tothe
previous study.
Positivepatchtestreactions to1ormoreoftheallergens
tested were observed in235patients(78.3%). Non-
occupational allergiccontactdermatitis wasdiagnosed in16
patients (5.3%). Asignificant increase insensitization
reactions tomostallergens, thefollowing included, was
observed: p-Phenylenediamine base(54%versus45.9%),4-
aminobenzene (40.7% versus31.9%), ammonium
thioglycolate (2.7%versus 2.3%), ammonium persulfate
(7.9%versus 14.3%), p-toluenediamine sulfate(6.8%versus
15.3%),p-aminodiphenylamine (2.9%versus7.7%),o-nitro
4-phenylenediamine (2.1%versus7.3%),andaminophenols
(0%versus 9%). However, adecrease inthenumberof
sensitization reactions toDisperse Orange(17%versus
42.7%)andthioglycolic acid(15.3%versus3%)wasnoted.
Theauthorsconcluded thatthehighfrequency ofand
increase insensitization reactions amonghairdressers
requireurgentmeasures toimproveprotective measures and
theirapplication (Valksetal.,2005).
InastudybyHoetal.(2005),400patients(majority in31
to60agegroup;109withhistoryofatopiceczema)
developed apositive reaction top-Phenylenediamine
betweenJanuaryof1995andAprilof2004.Morefemale
(68%ofpatients) thanmale (32%) patientswereinvolved.
These reactions occurred inanaverageof47patientsper
year.The face andhand were identified asthemore
common primarysites(in112[28%]patients, followed by
thehandsand what wasdescribed asgeneralized
involvement. Ofthe400patients, 36(9%)were
hairdressers. Nodifference intheseverityofthereactionto
p-Phenylenediamine wasobserved whenhairdressers were
compared withotherpatients(p=0.81).Themajority(53%)
ofthehairdressers developed a+reaction top
Phenylenediamine. Tenofthe400patientshadtemporary
black henna tattoosappliedinthepast.Threeofthe10
developed a++reactionand7developed a+++reactionto
p-Phenylenediamine.
Hueber-Becker etal.(2007)conducted astudyinwhich128
-73-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotehealthyhairdressers (125males,3females; meanbody
weight =71±12kg)were exposed tooxidative hairdyes,
undercontrolled conditions, for6workdays.The
hairdressers coloredhairdresser’s trainingheadsbearing
naturalhuman hair withadark-shade oxidative hairdye
containing 2%[‘4C}-p-Phenylenediamine for6hours per
workday.Urineandbloodsampleswerecollected fromall
exposedsubjects. Liquidscintillation counting wasusedto
determine thelevelofradioactivity inallbiological samples
andstudymaterials, tools,andwashingliquids,anda[14C]-
massbalancewasperformed daily.
Adverseeventswerenotreported foranyofthesubjects in
thestudy.Hair+scalpaccounted for53.46±4.06%ofthe
appliedradioactivity. Theconcentration ofdyeinthe
plasma wassaidtohavebeenbelowthe limit of
quantification (lOngp-Phenylenediamimineeq/mL). Total
urinary(0to48hours)excretion of[14 C]ranged from atotal
of<2to18pgp-Phenylenediamineeq, andwassaidtohave
beensimilarinsubjects thatwereexposed duringthe
differentphasesofhairdyeing.Themeanmassbalanceof[4C]forthe6-daystudywas 102.50 ±2.20%. The overall
meantotalsystemic exposure ofhairdressers tooxidative
hairdyesduringaworkdaythatincluded 6hairdyeing
processes wasestimated tobe<0.36pgp
Phenylenediamineeq/kg bodyweightJwork day(Hueber
Beckeretal.2007).
p—Phenyelendianzine HC1
Lidén(1988)investigated theoccurrence andcausesof
occupational dermatoses inapopulation of114subjects
(agesnotstated)exposed tocolordeveloping (CD)agents
(p-Phenylenediamine derivatives) atalargeobsolescent film
laboratory. Ofthe114,51weresubjectswithprevious or
presentskindisease. The23subjectswithdermatoses that
mayhavebeenassociated withworkinthefilmlaboratory
werepatch-tested withp-Phenylenediamine HC1(1%in
petrolatum). Finnchambers secured withsurgicaltapewere
removed after48hoursandreactions werescoredat72
hourspost-application. Reactions werescoredagainat2to
3weeks later. Twoofthe23subjects hadapositive
reaction tothetestsubstance. Theincidence ofpositive
reactions indermatitis patients patch-tested with2
developing agentswasasfollows:CD-2(9/23)and CD-3
(4/23).
Sixty-five employees atamodernized filmlaboratory with
ahistoryofchemical exposure and/ordermatitis werepatch-
tested(sameprocedure) withp-Phenylenediamine HCI
(0.5%or1%inpetrolatum). Only 1reactionwasreported.
Theincidence ofpositive reactions indermatitis patients
patch-tested with2developing agentswasasfollows:CD-2
(5/65)andCD-3(2/65).
Another studywasconducted toevaluate therelationship
betweenchemical exposure andlichenplanus. The study
involved 119patients(17to68years old) withlichenplanusfrom2generaldermatology departments. Ofthe119
patients, 79werepatch-tested. Thetestconcentration ofp
Phenylenediamine HCIinthepatchtestwasnotstated.At
the72-hourreading,therewerenocasesofcontactallergy
top-Phenylenediamine HCI.However, apositivereaction
wasreportedatthere-reading after2weeks,andat72hours
duringre-testing ayearlater.Lichenplanuswasnot
aggravated bypatchtestingand typical lichenplanus lesions
didnotdevelopatthetestsite.(Lidén,1988).
DeBoeretal.(1989)conducted anepidemiological study
involving 286metalworkers (exposed tometalworking
fluids)todetermine theprevalence ofcontact sensitization.
Tenmetalworking factories intheNetherlands were
involved inthestudy.Thirty-nine ofthe286workers
presented withdermatitis ofthehandsand/orforearms, and
anadditional 5recalled aperiodofhanddermatitis inthe
past.Fortyofthe 286workerswereavailable forpatch-
testingwithaseriesofcommon components of
metalworking fluids,including p-Phenylenediamine HCI
(0.5%inpetrolatum). p-Phenylenediamine HCI(0.5%in
petrolatum) wasappliedtotheupper back ofeachofthe40
subjectsusingaVanderBendSquarechamber, secured with
Fixomull tape,for48hours.Reactions werescoredat72
hours.Ofthe 40workers, 8hadacontactallergytooneor
morechemicals. p-Phenylenediamine HCIwasnotincluded
inthelistofchemicals thatinducedcontactallergy.
CaseReports
According toGrant(1974),the useofp-Phenylenediamine
containing hairdyes onthehairhasbeenaccompanied by
edemaoftheeyelidsandconjunctiva andtearing.
Infrequently, thereislimitation ofeyemovements, lossof
thecorneal epithelium, andcellularinfiltration ofthe
stroma.Thecorneausuallyrecovers rapidly.Moresevere
reactions occurred aftertheapplication ofp
Phenylenediamine-containing hairdyestotheeyebrows and
eyelashes. Generally, rapidonsetofpainandburningofthe
eyeswasaccompanied byrednessandswellingofthelids
andedemaandhyperemia oftheconjunctiva. Insome
persons, thecorneal epithelium waseroded and
accompanied byiritisandiridocyclitis. Vision has
occasionally beenlostorpermanently damaged bysevere
corneal ulceration. Specificcasereportsfollow.
p-Phenylenediainine
Awomanwhohad dyed hereyebrows andeyelashes witha
product containing p-Phenylenediamine developed
conjunctivitis within 3daysofapplication andthen
developed cornealulcersinbotheyes.Treatment included
removalofeyelashes andeyebrows. Twoandone-half
monthsfollowing productapplication, thewomanwas
“feelingbetter,”and6.5monthsfollowing application she
wasabletosee“fairlywell”(Moran1934).
Warm(1976)reported 3case studies inwhichmensuffered
-74-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotefromeczemaontheirarms.In2studies,themenhad
positivepatchteststo1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum
andtotheirwives’dyedhair(Cronin1973;Mitchell 1972).
Inthethirdstudy,the man’s eczema flared upwhenever his
partner had justdyedherhair.Patchteststo1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum andtothehairdyewere
positive, andapatchtesttohispartner’s hair dyed 1week
previously wasnegative. The author suggested thatamore
recentuseofhairdyemighthaveresulted inapositive
reaction.
Intheir review, Marzulli etal.(1978)described aclinical
caseinwhichabeautician developed generalized urticaria
whenworkingwithhairdyes;p-Phenylenediamine caused
awheal-andflare-response on theskinofhisback.
Foussereau etal.(1980)observed adermatitis covering the
wholescalp,neck, chest, andboth ears inamanwhohad
dyedhishair1week previously. Patchtestswerepositive
for2%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum forhisownhair
andforthehairdye.Incomplete oxidation mighthavebeen
more likely tooccurwhenthedyewasnot applied byan
experthairdresser.
KleinandRodman (1981)reported vesiculation, oozing,
crusting, andmarkededemaoftheskinoftheface,neck,
ears,andscalp after aman dyed hisownhair;his eyes were
swollen shut.Apatchtesttop-Phenylenediamine was
positive. Intheirreview, Marzulli etal.(1978) noted thatthe
skinaroundtheeyesisswollenfrequently inhairdye
dermatitis. They commented thatimmediate hyper
sensitivity maysometimes beacomponent ofcontact
dermatitis.
Edwards andEdwards (1984)reported acaseofa22-year-
oldbeautician withacuteedematous, vesicular eruption of
bothhandsandnopasthistoryofskindisease.Anintensely
pruriticwhealdeveloped within2minutesofapplication of
1%p-Phenylenediamine totheforearm.Thereactionfaded
completely after30minutes. Noreactionwasobserved at
24hours,buta3+reactionwasobserved at48hours.There
wasnoimmediate ordelayedhypersensitivity reaction in
control patients (numbernotstated)patchtestedwith1%p
Phenylenediamine.
LeVine(1984)reported acaseofa61-year-old malewith
recurrent eczematous dermatitis. Patchtest(48-hour
application toback) results for p-Phenylenediamine were
negative. Photopatch testingwas alsoperformed. Patches
wereappliedasusual,exceptthat,after24hours,the skin
wasirradiated withUV-Aradiation (5joules/cm2) from
fluorescent UV-Alamps. Apositive photopatch test
reaction top-Phenylenediamine wasreported, and
photopatch testingdisclosed anidiopathic photosensitivity
toUV-A.Theavoidance ofsunlightexposure andtheuse
ofasunscreen prevented anyfurtherrecurrence of
dermatitis.AcasereportbyVesteyetal.(1985)involved a25-year-old
femalewhohadascaly, itchy eruptionontheeyelidsfor10
months. She hadusedaneyelashcurlerthatwasfacedwith
blackrubber.Patch-testing withp-Phenylenediamine mix
resultedinareactionthatwasclassified asstronglypositive.
Nethercott etal.(1986)reported 18casesofhand dermatitis
observed inhairdressers overa5-yearperiod.Patchtest
resultswerepositive (2+or3+reaction) forp
Phenylenediamine in8patients.
Brownetal.(1987)reportedcasesof2patientswithrenal
failure.A51-year-old femalehabitually usedahennahair
dyewithap-Phenylenediamine baseanda62-year-old
femalehadusedahairdyewithap-Phenylenediamine base
for2years.Theseweredescribed as2casesofvasculitis
andcrescentic glomerulonephritis associated withprolonged
hairdyeapplication.
Fowler(1987)patchtesteda34-year-old femalewith
chronic,recurrent handeczema. The patienthadnohistory
ofatopy,buthadanoccupational historyofrubber-stamping
withaparticular ink.Resultsofthe48-hourpatchtest
revealed a++reaction top-Phenylenediamine.
Goldberg etal.(1987)presented the caseofa59-year-old
female,withnoknownhistoryofatopyorchemical
sensitivity, whohadbeenusingavarietyofhaircolorings
forseveral years priortodeveloping evidence of
hypersensitivity. The first reaction, swolleneyes and itchy
handswithin10minutesofhairdyeapplication, occurred
earlyin1984.Asecondreaction(dysphonia, palpitations,
andswolleneyes,within20minutesofdyeapplication) to
ahairdyefromadifferent manufacturer wasalsoreported.
Puncture skintestsrevealed awhealandflareresponse top
Phenylenediamine. Themagnitude of theresponse was
increased byadding hydrogen peroxide top
Phenylenediamine priortoskintesting, implying reactivity
toanoxidation productformedbytheactionofhydrogen
peroxide onp-Phenylenediamine.
Estlander (1988)reported 5cases(4males, 1female;24to
52years old) ofoccupational eczema, urticaria, and
respiratory disease that resultedfromexposure toreactive
dyesfrom1977to1987.Thepatientshadworkedindye
housesortextileplants,and hadbeen exposed toreactive
dyesfor8months. In24-hourpatchtests(Finnchambers),
reactions werescoredatthe timeofpatchremoval andat24,
48,and72to 120hourspost-removal. p-Phenylenediamine
(testedat1to2%inpetrolatum) didnotinduceapositive
reaction ineitherofthe5patients.
InacasereportbyRomaguera etal.(1988),a39-year-old
femalepresented withacutecontacteczemaofthefoot2
monthsaftershebeganwearinganorthopedic shoe.The
resultsofastandard patchtestwerepositive forp
Phenylenediamine (+++reaction).
Massone etal.(1991)presented twocasereports.Thefirst
-75-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotewasa67-year-old malewithrelapsing erythemato-vesicular
palmardermatitis anditchyerythematous rashesonthe
trunk.A++patch test reactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine
base(inpetrolatum) wasobserved atdays2and5.
Intheothercasereport,a50-year-old femalewithahistory
ofthefollowing reactions waspatchtestedwithp
Phenylenediamine: allergicrhinitis,asthmatic bronchitis,
costumejewelryintolerance, andanitchyskineruptionfor
3years.At day4,a+patchtestreaction to1%p
Phenylenediamine base(inpetrolatum) wasreported
(Massone etal.1991).
Bork(1993)presented acaseofa35-year-old professional
violinistwithafive-month historyofcontactdermatitis on
theleftsideofherneck.Thereactionwasobserved weeks
after using anewchinrestthatwasmadeofebonywood.A
positivepatchtestreaction(+++)top-Phenylenediamine
wasnotedat2days.
InacasereportbySahaandSrinivas(1993),a12-year-old
patientwasdiagnosed withfootdermatitis, whichwas
possibly duetothepresence ofp-Phenylenediamine in
socks.Apositivepatchtestreaction (+reaction) to1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum wasobserved ondays2and
3.
Lisboaetal.(1994) patch tested6female patients (ages
between 15and58years)withallergiccontactdermatitis
duetoclothing, fromJanuaryof1988toOctober of 1992.
Apositivepatchtestreaction top-Phenylenediamine was
observed inonepatient.
Rebandel andRudzki(1995)presented acaseofa51-year-
oldfemale(withnopersonal orfamilyhistoryofatopy)who
hadworkedatadairy plant, whereshewasincontactwith
p-Phenylenediamine daily.The results ofstandard patch
testsindicated astriking hypersensitivity top
Phenylenediamine.
InacasereportbyPopeetal.(1995),a32-year-old male,
withnosignificant pastmedicalhistoryorallergies, hada
delayedlocalized urticarial reactionafterwearinganM17
protective maskforseveralhoursduringbasiccombat
training. Patchtest results indicated apruritic, vesicular
reaction totheblackrubber mix(contains p
Phenylenediamine). Thepatientwasdiagnosed with
nonimmunologic contacturticaria toblackrubberproducts
containing p-Phenylenediamine.
Nakagawa andKawai (1996) reported acaseofa62-year-
oldpatient(nopersonal orfamily atopic history) withan
itchyedematous rashontheneckandforearms, which
appeared withinadayofwearing anew navy-blue dress.
Positive patch test reactions (++)top-Phenylenediamine
werereportedondays2and3.
InacasereportbyFukunaga etal.(1996), syncope occurred
ina57-year-old femalewithinminutesofusingahairdyethatcontained p-Phenylenediamine. Itchybumpson the
headandhandswere noted 10to30minutes after dye
application, andthesesymptoms disappeared spontaneously
within3hours.Patchtestsinvolving thehairdye andp
Phenylenediamine indicated thatthepatienthadan
immediate-type allergytop-Phenylenediamine. There were
nosignsofadelayedtypeallergicreaction.
Sharmaetal.(1999)reportedlichenoid eruptions in4male
patients(ages60,32,41, and60)whoappliedblackhairdye
tothebeard. Positive patchtestreactions top
Phenylenediamine werereported.
InacasereportbySmithetal.(1999),a49-year-old man
withatwo-year historyofhanddermatitis hadapositive
patchtestreactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine.
Sahooetal.(2000)reported acaseofanon-atopic, 50-year-
oldclerkwhoexperienced swellingofbotheyelids8hours
afterusingahairdye.The entire faceand lipsalsobecame
swollen. Apositive patchtestreaction (+++)top
Phenylenediamine wasreported.
InacasereportbyHsuetal.(2001), 8malepatientshad
bearddermatitis that wasrelatedtodyeuse.The lesions
observed weredescribed aspruritic, erythematous, papular
eruptions thatdeveloped inthejawarea after each dye
application. Patchtestresultswerepositive forp
Phenylenediamine.
O’Hagan andBingham (2001)reported acaseofan11-year
oldschoolgirlwitha3-yearhistoryofrednessandscaling
ontherightthumbandindexandmiddlefinger.She had a
historyofinfantileatopiceczemaandhadbeenplayingthe
cello (using black-stringed bow)forayear when the rash
wasfirstobserved. Apositivepatchtestreaction(++)top
Phenylenediamine wasobserved onday4.
Onderetal.(2001)reported acaseofa9-year-old girl who
hadappliedatemporary hennatattoototherightarmand
repeated theapplication 1week later. Erythema and
papulovesicular eruptions werenotedattheapplication site.
Thepatienthada3+reactiontonaturalhennaandto1%p
Phenylenediamine.
Shapiroetal.(2001)presented acaseofa44-year-old man
(noatopichisory)withlichenification andfissuring ofthe
hands.Whileonthejob,hehadcomeincontactwithdyed
milkcartons thathad notdried.Patchtests(Finnchambers)
involved 4-day applications totheback.Thelastdayon
whichreactions werescoredwasday4.Theonlypositive
findingwasa2+reactiontop-Phenylenediamine.
Simpson-Dent etal.(2001)reported acaseofa39-year-old
femalewitha2-year history ofapruritic rash on thelower
legs(spreading tothetrunk). Threemonthspriorto
presentation, shehadatattoo(blackdye)appliedtoherarm.
Apositive patch testreaction(++)top-Phenylenediamine
wasreported ondays2and4..
-76-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteAhnandLee (2002) studiedultrastructural changes inthe
hairshaftfollowing application ofapermanent hairdye
(containing p-Phenylenediamine,m-aminophenol, resorcin,
andhydrogen peroxide) bya26-year-old female.Scanning
andtransmission electron microscopy wasperformed
immediately priortoapplication of thehairdye,andthenat
intervals ranging from30minutes to8weekspost
application. Cuticular swellingwithfocaldegeneration was
observed. Additionally, exposure ofthehaircortex(dueto
extensive cuticular detachment) insomeplacesalongthe
hairfiberwasalsoobserved. Findings were most dramatic
inspecimens evaluated at6hoursandday1post-
application. Nearlycomplete restoration ofthehaircuticle
andreturntothepre-coloring state were reported forthe8-
weekspecimen.
Calzavara-Pinton etal.(2002)reported acaseofa40-year-
old manwithasix-month history ofaneczematous eruption
inmajorbodyfolds.Thepatientwasemployed asatrader
inoilproducts andoften wore blacksynthetic materials.
Duringpatch-testing, astronglatepositive reaction top
Phenylenediamine, beginning atday4andlasting for as
alongas4weeks,wasnoted.Thepositivereaction was
characterized byerythema andinfiltration,withoutclinically
evidentvesicles.
Søstedetal.(2002)compiled dataonconsumer complaints
relatingtoadverse reactions tohairdyes.Fifty-five cases
(52women, 3men;mean age =43years)ofsevere,acute
allergiccontactdermatitis werereported. Themain
symptoms were severe edemaoftheface, scalp, andears.
Someofthepatients(29%ofthecases) were patchtested,
allofwhomhadpositive reactions top-Phenylenediamine.
InacasereportbyBhatandSmith (2003), a38-year-old
femalepresented withahistoryofdiscreteyellowareason
hereyelids. This wasnoted6weeksafteranepisodeofa
severerashonhereyelids after usingablackeyelash-tinting
product. Patchtestingwith1%p-Phenylenediamine in
petrolatum resulted inastrongpositive reaction, with
vesiculation.
InareportbyWongandKing(2003),a42-year-old female
presented withahistoryofasevererashafterusingahair
dye.A20-minute occluded patchtestwith1%p
Phenylenediamine baseinpetrolatum resulted inan
immediate urticarial reaction atthetest site on theright
ventralforearm. Aneczematous reaction developed at this
site48hourslater.
SØstedetal.(2004)presented casesof9patients(8females,
1male)whohaddermatitis thatwasrelatedtothe useof
oxidative hairdyes.Eachpatientusedadifferent hairdye
product, andthe9products represented atotalof4
international cosmetic manufacturers. Thefemalesranged
inagefrom20to58years, and themalewas21yearsold.
Patchtestreactions top-Phenylenediamine werepositive(+
reactionorgreater)in allofthe9patientswhoweretested.InacasereportbyCharlesetal.(2004),apositivepatch test
reactiontop-Phenylenediamine wasreported ina40-year-
oldfemale(formerhairdresser) withulcerative colitis.
Limetal.(2004)presented acaseofa9-year-old girl(no
historyofatopy)whohadahennatattooappliedtoherback.
Within48hoursoftattooapplication, acuteallergic contact
dermatitis (erythema, edema, andvesiculation) was
observed. A+++patchtestreactiontop-Phenylenediamine
wasreported.
InacasereportbyHoetal.(2004b),acute dermatitis on the
scalp,ears,pre-auricular areas and neckwasobserved ina
40-year-old maleonedayafterdyeing hishair.Sensitization
top-Phenylenediamine inthedyewassuspected. Patch test
resultsrevealed a+++reactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine
inpetrolatum. Cross-reactions (+reactions) toDisperse
Orange3andDisperse Red17,atatestconcentration of1%
inpetrolatum, werealsoreported.
Saunders etal.(2004)presented acaseofa28-year-old mill
workeratanaluminum refinerywhopresented witha10-
monthhistoryofanerythematous andpruriticrashon the
dorsaofherfeet,extending totheankles.The patient
developed anitchyrashatthesiteofapplication ofa
temporary tattoo2.5yearsagoandhad dyed her hairSyears
ago.Patchtests (Finn chambers onScanpor tape) were
performed andreactions scored accoring toICDRG
recommendatiions ondays2and5.Apositive(2+)reaction
top-Phenylenediamine wasreported.
IncasereportsbyMatulich andSullivan(2005),2female
subjects(15and17years)eachhadatemporaryblack henna
tattooappliedtothelowerback,andarepeatapplication of
themixturewasmade2days later. The17-year-old subject
(historyofhayfeverandfirst-degree familyhistoryof
atopy)developed apruritic vesicular reaction intheareaof
thetattooatday10afterthefirstapplication. Thereaction
developed intoavesico-pustular reaction, whichspread
rapidlytothefeet, thighs, axillae,arms,trunk,face,and
scalp.
The 15-year-old subject(historyofeczemaasyoungchild)
developed apruritic vesicular eruption atthesiteofthe
tattoo, which remained localized. Patch testswere
conducted using Finnchambers onScanpor tape.The
patchesremained inplacefor48hours,andreactions were
scoredat72hoursandat7days.
Forthe17-year-old subject,patch-testing confirmed an
extreme, spreading vesicobullous reaction (strongly
positive) top-Phenylenediamine. Patchtestresultsforthe
15-year-old subject confirmed aweakreaction top
Phenylenediamine (Matulich andSullivan2005).
SøstedandMenné(2005)patch-tested a50-year-old female
withahistoryofnickelallergy.Thepatienthaddyedher
hairanddeveloped ascalpdermatitis withsevereitching
-77-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotethathadspreadtoherface,neck,andupperthorax.Patch
testswereconducted usingFinnchambers onScanportape,
andaweaklypositivereaction(+?)top-Phenylenediamine
(1%inpetrolatum) atdays3and7wasreported.
Martinet al.(2005a)patch-tested a14-year-old femalewho
presented withanacutelyinflamed eruption thatwas
described asexudative andeczematous. Theeruption
involved theentirescalp,posterior neck,ears,andforehead.
Theacutescalpdermatitis wasthoughttohavebeenan
allergiccontactdermatitis reaction top-Phenylenediamine
inthehairdyes.Erythema andedemaoftheleft sideofthe
faceandperiorbital regionwereobserved. Signswere
observed withinhoursofapplying 2permanent hairdyesat
home2daysago.Itisalsoimportant tonotethatthepatient
hadatemporary black hennatattoo applied totheright
upperarm3yearsago.Patchtestresults indicated a
positive(+++),necroticreactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine.
InastudybyJasimetal.(2005),2caseswerepresented. A
15-year-old boy presented withfacialrednessafterhishair
hadbeendyed(permanent hairdyebleached). On the
following morning, hisentireface and neckwereswollen.
Itisimportant tonotethatablistering reaction toablack
henna tattoo occurred ayearago.Whenthesubjectwas
testedwithp-Phenylenediamine (20-minute application),
severeblistering wasobserved at24hours.
A14-year-old girlpresented withseverefacialswellingand
redness afewhours after havingherhairdyed.Shealso
reported areaction tohennatattoosthathadoccurred 2
yearspreviously. Whenthesubjectwastestedwithp
Phenylenediamine (20-minute application), astrongreaction
wasobserved at4hours(Jasimetal.,2005).
InastudybySØstedetal.(2006b), 8children(between 12
and15years old) suspected ofhavinganallergicreactionto
ahairdyeproductwerereferred todermatology clinics
locatedinDenmark. For5ofthepatients,haircoloringhad
beenperformed athome.Fortheremaining 3patients,hair
dyeingwasperformed byahairdresser. Sixpatientshada
historyofskinreactions toatemporary tattooand2had
reactions tohairdyesonly.Patchtestswereperformed
according toICDRGrecommendations. Occlusive patches
wereappliedtotheupperbackfor2days,andreactions
werescoredatday3and/orday4andday7.Patchtest
resultsindicated positivereactions top-Phenylenediamine
inallsubjects (++,5subjects; +++,3subjects).
Paleyetal.(2006)reported acaseofa67-year-old male
withacomplaint ofitchy,red bumps onthefaceandscalp.
Symptoms wereobserved approximately 1monthbefore the
initialvisittoadermatologist. Atphysical examination,
therewereerythematous nodules andtumorswithout
epidermal changes ontherighttempleandpostauricular
area.Abiopsyrevealed adense,nodulardermalinfiltrate
thatconsisted predominantly oflymphocytes alongwith
someeosinophils andhistiocytes. Priortothevisit,thepatienthadbeencoloringhishairregularly forover5years.
Afterconsidering thelocationofthelesions,thehistoryof
exposure, andthecharacteristic pathology, thediagnosis of
pseudolymphoma secondary tohaircosmetic allergywas
suspected. Patchtestresultsindicated a2+reaction top
Phenylenediamine andcinnamic alcoholanda1+reaction
tofragrance mix,andthepatientwasinstructed toavoidp
Phenylenediamine. Useofap-Phenylenediamine-free hair
dyewasrecommended. Ata2-monthfollow-up visit,itwas
notedthatalllesionshadresolved.
InacasereportbyTeixeira etal.(2006), a30-year-old
femaleatopicpatientdeveloped aseveredermatitis, onthe
eyelidsandperiorbital region,andconjunctivitis afterher
eyelashes weretintedwithapermanent blackeyelashand
eyebrow dye.Thedyewastestedinasemiocclusive patch
test.Patcheswere secured withMiocropore® tape,and
reactions werescoredafter2and4days.Positivepatchtest
reactions totheeyelashdyeandtop-Phenylenediamine
(0.01%and1%inpetrolatum) wereobserved.
BirnieandEnglish(2007)reported acaseofa17-year-old
hairdresser traineewhosearmbecame red andextremely
pruriticaftertestingwithhairdyes.Thepatientwasscratch
testedwith3hairdyes,2ofwhichcontained p
Phenylenediamine. Within10minutes, astrongurticarial
reactiontothetwohairdyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine
wasobserved. Apositive urticarial reaction wasalso
observed following testingwith1%p-Phenylenediamine in
petrolatum. Adiagnosis ofimmediate hypersensitivity (type
1allergy)top-Phenylenediamine, resulting inurticaria, was
made.
Following theingestion ofp-Phenylenediamine (7g)bya
pregnant female(Younous etal.2007),auterineultrasound
showednormalfetusviability, normalheartnoises,a
normally insertedplacenta, andbiometry thatwasconsistent
withtheendofpregnancy. The clinical andbiological
assessments (creatine phosphokinase [CPK],creatinemia,
andkalemia) ofthechildimmediately afterdelivery by
Cesarean sectiondid not show anyoftheclassicsignsofp
Phenylenediamine poisoning. The authors notedthatthis
casereporthighlights thefactthatp-Phenylenediamine does
notseemtocrosstheplacental barrier.
p-Phenylenediamine HCI
According toSuandSun(1998),a47-year-old female
hairdresser witha4-yearhistoryofitchyerythema overthe
handswaspatch-tested. Thepatienthadneitherafamilynor
personal historyofatopy.Apositive (++)patchtest
reactiontop-Phenylenediamine HCI(testconcentration not
stated)wasreported ondays2and4.
InacasereportbyGalindoetal.(1994),a23-year-old male
whoworkedataphotographic developing laboratory for2
yearspresented witheczematous lesionsonthehands,
wrists, and forearms. Thelesionswerefirstobserved after
-78-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotethefirstmonthofemployment. Patch testresultsfor1%p
Phenylenediamine HC1inpetrolatum werenegativeondays
2and4.Patchtestreactions forthetencontrolsubjects
werealsonegative.
CaseReportsRelatedtoTattooing
Asnotedearlier,theU.S.FDAhasdetermined thatusesof
p-Phenylenediamine otherthanasahairdyeare
unapproved, including asoneoftheadditives thatisusedto
accelerate dryinganddarkenthereddishcolorofthehenna
indark(black) henna products. Suchuseapparently
continues, however, based on the case reportsbelow.
p-Phenylenediamine
InacasereportbySantucci etal.(1994),hypertrophic
allergic contact dermatitis wasobserved ina26-year-old
femalefollowing application ofablackhairdyetotheskin.
Thepatientwaspatch-tested with0.5%p-Phenylenediamine
(inpetrolatum) usingFinnchambers. Reactions werescored
at2and3days,andapapulovesicular reaction to0.5%p
Phenylenediamine wasreported.
Wakelin etal.(1998)reported acaseofa32-year-old
femalewhodeveloped anacuteblistering eruption on the
dorsumofthehands, forearms, andfeet2weeksafter
application ofablack hair dyecontaining p
Phenylenediamine totheskin.Patchtestresults revealed ++
and+++reactions toa1%p-Phenylenediamine basein
petrolatum atdays2and4,respectively.
Galloetal.(1999)presented acaseofa26-year-old female
whohadadesign(hennadye used) paintedonher right
shoulder. Patchtestreactions to1%p-Phenylenediamine (in
petrolatum) were++on days2and3.
Tostietal.(2000)presented casesof3patientswithallergic
contactdermatitis following theapplication ofatemporary
hennatattoo. Thefirstpatient(30yearsold)hada++
reactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine (inpetrolatum) on days
2and3.Thesecondpatient(36yearsold)hadapositive
reaction to1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum. Patch
testresults for thethirdpatient(48yearsold)werepositive
(+++reaction) forp-Phenylenediamine ondays2and3.
InareportbySidburyandStorrs(2000),a35-year-old male
presented withacircumferential, erythematous, vesicular
eruption onthe right, proximal upperextremity, thesiteof
application ofahennatattoo.Thepatienthadapastmedical
historyofrespiratory atopy,butnoknownpersonal history
ofexposure tohennaorhairdyes.Apositive(3+)patch
testreaction to1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum was
reported.
Mohamed andNixon(2000)reportedswellingandscabbing
at7to8daysafterapplication of2temporary tattoostoboth
armsofa20-year-old male.Theskinpaintcontained 2.94%
p-Phenylenediamine. Patchtest results revealed avery
strong(3+)reactiontop-Phenylenediamine. Twotemporarytattooswerealsoappliedtotheleftupperarmofa42-year-
oldfemalewith2temporary tattoosonleftupperarm.
Within48hafterapplication ofthesecondtattoo,itching,
weeping andacrustedareawereobserved. Patchtesting
revealed a3+reactiontop-Phenylenediamine.
InacasereportbyLeCozetal.(2000),4patients(7,8,20,
and25years old) developed allergiccontactdermatitis after
theirskinwaspaintedwithblackhenna.Forthe3patients
patchtested,resultswerepositiveforp-Phenylenediamine.
Thepatchtestprocedure wasdescribed asfollows:patches
(1%p-Phenylenediamine inwhitepetrolatum, Finn
chambers) remained inplacefor48hoursandreactions
werescoredat48-and72-hourreadings.
Nikkelsetal.(2000)reported acaseofa10-year-old girl
whohadaskindecoration (hennadye)paintedon theright
arm.Uponreturning home,shedeveloped anallergic
contactdermatitis that wasrestricted tothesiteofskin
decoration. Thepatienthadnohistoryofcontactdermatitis,
butsufferedfromhay fever. Patchtestingrevealed asevere
(+++)reaction top-Phenylenediamine. Thesamesevere
reactionwasobserved in2othercases(17-year-old boy,8-
year-old girl)afteraskindecoration (hennadye)was
appliedtotheneckandarm,respectively.
InacasereportbyChungetal.(2001),4patientsdeveloped
itchyandinflamed skinreactions totemporary paint-on
tattoos(vegetable dyeorhenna). Alldeveloped intense
itchy,raisedorswollenanderythematous eruptions along
thetattoo designs at10to14dayspost-application. Patch
testswereremoved after48hours,andreactions werescored
according toICDRGrecommendations at72hours.Patch
testresultsforcase 1indicated a+3reaction top
Phenylenediamine and2+1reactions to10%and20%
aqueoushenna powder, respectively. Patchtestresults for
case2,case3,andcase4indicated +3, +2,and+3reactions
top-Phenylenediamine, respectively.
InacasereportbyKulkarni etal.(2001),a2+patchtest
reaction (withvesiculation) top-Phenylenediamine was
reported fora26-year-old malewhohadreceived ablack
hennatattoo.
InacasereportbyLäuchlietal.(2001),4patients(31,32,
33,and43years,respectively)developed contactdermatitis
toblack henna tattoos.At2to10daysafterskinpainting,
itching,erythema, andswelling attheapplication sitewere
reported. Microscopic examination revealed spongiotic
dermatitis withdenselymphohistiocytic infiltrates. At72
hours,astrongly positive patch testreaction top
Phenylenediamine (inpetrolatum) wasreported.
Avnstorp etal.(2002)presented acaseofa24-year-old
malewithavesiculobullous reactiononthefingertips. Four
dayspriortotheeruption, thepatienthadusedhisfingertips
topaintasubjectwithtemporary tattoopaint.Healsohad
atemporary tattoo applied totherightsideofhisneck four
-79-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoteyearsago.Thetemporary tattoopaintwasfoundtocontain
0.3%w/wp-Phenylenediamine. Patchtest(Finnchamber
onScanpor tape)resultsindicated a+++reaction top
Phenylenediamine.
Brancaccio eta!.(2002)presented acaseofa37-year-old
femalewithblack henna tattoosontheleftupperarmand
lowerback.Within24to48hours,pruriticdermatitis was
observed atbothsites.Thepatientwaspatchtested(Finn
chambers) with1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum.
Within7hours,thetestsitesbecameseverelypruritic. At
24hourspost-application, astronglypositive3+(erythema,
edema,andvesicles)reactionwasobserved atbothtestsites.
By1week,thereactionpersisted andremained strongly
positive. Reactions werenot observed inanyofthe10
control patients.
According toChungetal.(2002), 10patients(18to28
yearsold)developed inflamed skineruptions afterreceiving
temporary paint-ontattoos. The 6patientswhowerepatch-
tested(48-hour IQchamber; reactions scoredat72hours)
allhadmoderately tostrongly positive reactions top
Phenylenediamine..
Marcoux eta!.(2002)reported acaseofa17-year-old
femalewithanacute,itchyeruptionovertheears,temples,
andscalp.Theeruption wasaccompanied bysevereedema
oftheperiorbital, perimandibular, andanterocervical soft
tissues.Complaints occurred 12hoursaftercoloring the
hairathome,and,also,ahennatattoowasappliedtothe
rightshoulder 7monthsearlier. The patients’ past medical
historyincluded atopicdermatitis duringchildhood and
hyperthyroidism (diagnosed at13yearsofage).Patchtest
resultsfor1%p-Phenylenediamine werepositive (3+
reaction).
Nerietal.(2002)presented 2casereports. Thefirstcase
wasa9-year-old boywithanerythema multiforme-like
eruption, mainlylocalized onthe limbs, for4days.Healso
hadaneczematous, itchypatchattheapplication siteofa
hennatattoo. The boy’spersonal medicalhistorywas
unremarkable withrespecttoatopyorallergicreactions.
Patchtestresultsat48and72hoursrevealed a3+reaction
top-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum. Thesecondcasewas
a7-year-old girlwithaneczematous reaction atthe
appplication siteofahennatattoo.Erythema, swelling, and
vesicles,accompanied by itching, werereported. Patchtest
resultsfor1%p-Phenylenediamine (inpetrolatum) were
negative at48and72hours.
According toPegasetal.(2002),a12-year-old boy received
ahenna tattoo, andapplication wasfollowed bysevere
itchingand2erythematous, papulous lesionsatthetattoo
site.Askinbiopsyrevealed alymphomononuclear
interstitial andperivascular dermalinfiltrate, withfollicular
epidermal spongiosis. Patchtest(Finnchamber) resultsfor
p-Phenylenediamine werepositive(+++).VanZuurenandLavrijsen (2002)reported casesof3
patients(8-year-oldboy,10-year-oldboy,and30-year-old
female) withallergic contact dermatitis and
hypopigmentation afterapplication ofahennatattoo. A
stronglypositivepatchtestreaction top-Phenylenediamine
wasreportedforallthree patients.
Nawafeta!.(2003)reported acaseofa17-year-old girl
withblistersoverher hands overaperiodof5days.The
blisterswerefirstobserved within72hoursofapplying a
temporary hennapainttothehands.Similarlesionswere
observed ontheface.Aclinicaldiagnosis ofacuteallergic
contactdermatitis wasmade.Patch testing ofthepatient
with1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum (48-hour
application) yielded a3+reaction. Noreaction was
observed atthesitepatchtestedwithnaturalhennapowder.
InacasereportbyWolfetal.(2003),6patients[ages:11
(male), 11(male),18(male),18(female), 17(female), and
12(female)] developed allergiccontactdermatitis afterskin
painting withblackhenna.Thesepatientsalsoshowed
hypersensitivity top-Phenylenediamine (2+to3+reactions).
Inareportby Hoeta!.(2004a), 12(11females; 1male;
ages:6to54years old) patientsatacontactdermatitis clinic
hadpositivepatchtestreactions top-Phenylenediamine, and
hadaprior history of exposure totemporary blackhenna
tattoosbetweenAprilof1997andAprilof2004.Exceptfor
oneofthepatients (20-minute patchapplication), the
patches remained inplacefor2days.Patchtestresultswere
asfollows: ++or+++reactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine
inpetrolatum (6patients); +++reaction to0.3%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum (1patient); +or++
reactionto0.01%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum; and+
reactionto1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum (Ipatient,
after20minute application).
InacasereportbyBlaireta!.(2004),a32-year-old female
presented witha5-dayhistoryofaseverely pruritic,
erythematous reactionatthe siteofatemporary blackhenna
tattoo.The tattoo hadbeen applied 2weeksearlier.The
patienthadnohistoryofpriorexposure tohennainhair
dyesorcoloringherhair.Patchtest results indicated a2+
reactiontop-Phenylenediamine.
Borregoetal.(2005)patch-tested a24-year-old femalewho
presented withchronic dermatitis on thehands,duringthe
previous year,whichbecamesevereduringemployment as
atemporary tattooartisan.Aninflammatory skinreaction
wasobserved when, on Ioccasion, sheappliedatemporary
tattootoherself. Apositivepatchtestreaction top
Phenylenediamine (-H-+)wasobserved at48and96hours.
Martinetal.(2005b)presented 3cases(6,29,and41years
old)ofallergic contact dermatitis totemporary henna
tattoos.p-Phenylenediamine is1oftheadditives thatis
usedtoaccelerate dryinganddarkenthereddishcolorofthe
-80-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotehenna.Patchtest results forp-Phenylenediamine were
positive in2ofthepatients. In1ofthe2patients, the
lesionsresolved, leavingpersistent hypopigmentation.
InacasereportbyTomlijanovi&Veselski (2006),an11-
year-oldboyexperienced aburning sensation andmarked
rednessatthesiteoftattooapplication (rightbrachium) on
day1afterapplication ofthetattoo.Onday10,thepatient
visitedadermatologist because ofpersistent lesions,with
pronounced rednessandscalingattheapplication site.
Visibleresidualhypopigmentation waspresentat4weeks
afterapplication ofthetattoo.Patchtest results were
positive forp-Phenylenediamine. Thepatchtest
concentration ofp-Phenylenediamine (0.5%)wassaidto
havebeenlOtimeslowerthan the concentration ofp
Phenylenediamine inthetattoopaste.Theauthors noted
thattheseverereactionon thedayfollowing application of
thetattoo could be explained bysensitization toap
Phenylenediamine-containing tattootheyearbefore.
Jungetal.(2006a)reported acaseofa9-year-old boywho
experienced apainful,itchyblisteringreaction 2weeksafter
beingpaintedwithahennatattoo. The reactionspreadto
the arms, trunk,andfeet.Theboy’shairwasdyedblack6
monthslaterandpapulovesicular eruptions atthehairline,
accompanied bypruritus, were observed thenextmorning.
Apositive (+++)patchtestreaction to0.2%p
Phenylenediamine wasreported.
InacasereportbyJungetal.(2006b), exudative bullous
eruptions (painfulanditchy) were observed ona40-year-
oldmaleseveralhours after hehadahennatattoopaintedon
hisleftupperarm.Patchtestresults indicated a+++
reactiontop-Phenylenediamine. Thepatient’spastmedical
history(4yearsearlier)revealed erythematous, vesiculous
dermatitis intattooedareas2hours after theapplication of
atemporary hennatattoo. Post-inflammatory
hypopigmentation, inthedesignoftheoriginal tattoo,
persisted for1yearafter the lesions had resolved.
TanandGarioch(2007)reported acaseofan8-year-old
boywitha3-dayhistoryofanitchyvesicular rashatthesite
ofatemporaryhenna tattoothathadbeenobtainedone week
ago.The boy wasdiagnosed withcontact dermatitis to
blackhennatattoowithauto-eczematization. Positivepatch
testreactions to1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum were
reported (+++at48hand96h).
SkinDepigmentation
p-Phenylenediamine
Tayloretal.(1993)presented acaseofa67-year-old male
whousedhairdyesandhada4.5yearhistoryof
depigmentation ofthescalpandforehead. Apositivepatch
testreaction(2+)to5%aqueousp-Phenylenediamine was
notedat72hours,andthepatchtestsitewascompletely
depigmented at2yearspost-application. Skindepigmentation wasalsoobserved in3othermales(62, 45,
and56yearsold)whohadusedhairdyes.
Brancaccio andCohen(1995)reported acaseofa51-year-
oldmale,withnohistoryofvitiligo,whodeveloped contact
leukoderma afterusingamustache coloring solution. At
week4,aphysical examination revealed complete
depigmentation ofapproximately 50%ofthemustache area
and4satelliteareasofdepigmentation on thefaceand neck.
Patchtestresultsforp-Phenylenediamine werenegative at
2and7days.Nopigmentary alterations were notedatpatch
testsitesforupto2weeksaftertesting.
InacasereportbyBajajetal.(1996),a55-year-old female
appliedahairdyecontaining 16%p-Phenylenediamine for
3hours. Itching andburningovertheentirescalp were
reported after8to10applications ofthistype.Within24
hours,exudation andedemaoverthescalp, which subsided
with time, wereobserved. Depigmentation ofthescalpwas
noted3to4weekslater.At1.5yearsaftertheonsetof
depigmentation (hairdyenotusedfor1.5years),
depigmentation wasnoted over thescalp,backofneck,and
forehead.
InacasereportbyBajajetal.(1998),a50-year-old female
presented withdepigmentation onbothfeet,corresponding
tositeswherealta(scarlet-red solutionusedby someIndian
women asacosmetic tocolorfeet)hadbeenapplied.
Itchingandscalingwere also reported. Patchtesting(48-
hour patch) with1%p-Phenylenediamine (inplastibase)
resulted ina+reaction anddepigmentation atthe
application site.
InacasereportbyBajajetal.2000,a34-year-old female
presented withdepigmentation (overa4-monthperiod)on
thesidesanddorsaofbothfeet,wherealta(redskin
decoration) hadbeenapplied. Itching anddermatitis were
alsoreported. Duringthepatchtest,patcheswereremoved
onday2andreactions werescoredon days 2and3.A
positivereaction (+reaction) top-Phenylenediamine was
reported.
Jappeetal.(2001)reportedcasesof5youths(9to17years
old) with apaint-onhennatattooonthearm.Anerythema
multiforme-like eruptionanddepigmentation wereobserved
following anallergic contact dermatitis reaction tothe
tattoo.Patchtest results forp-Phenylenediamine were
stronglypositive inallpatients.
HAIRDYEEPIDEMIOLOGY_____________
Hairdyesmaybebroadly grouped intooxidative
(permanent) anddirect(semipermanent) hairdyes.The
oxidative dyesconsistofprecursors mixedwithdevelopers
toproduce color,whiledirecthairdyesareapreformed
color.p-Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HC1,and
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfateareoxidative! permanent dyes.
Whilethesafetyofindividual hairdyeingredients arenot
addressed inepidemiology studiesthat seek todetermine
-81-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotelinks,ifany,betweenhairdyeuseanddisease,suchstudies
doprovidebroadinformation andhavebeenconsidered by
theCIRExpertPanel.
In1993,anInternational AgencyforResearch onCancer
(IARC)workinggroupevaluated 78epidemiology literature
citationsandconcluded that“personal useofhaircolourants
cannotbeevaluated astoitscarcinogenicity” andthat
“occupation as ahairdresser orbarberentailsexposures that
areprobably carcinogenic” (IARC,1993).TheIARC report
didnotdistinguish between personal useof
oxidative/permanent versusdirecthairdyes,ordistinguish
amongthemultiplechemical exposures inaddition tohair
dyestowhichahairdresser orbarbermightbeexposed.
Rollison etal.(2006)reviewed theavailable epidemiology
literature published fromi992throughFebruary 2005,which
includes over 80citationsonpersonal hair dyeusepublished
sincetheIARCreview.The authors foundthathairdye
exposure assessment ranged fromever/never useto
information ontype,color,duration andfrequency ofuse.
The authors found insufficient evidence tosupportacausal
association betweenpersonal hairdyeuseandavarietyof
tumorsandcancers. Thereview highlighted well-designed
studies with anexposure assessment thatincluded hairdye
type,color,andfrequency ordurationofuse,whichfound
associations betweenpersonal hairdyeuseanddevelopment
ofacute leukemia, bladdercancer,multiplemyeloma, and
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Thesefindings, however, were
notconsistently observed acrossstudies.
Several studies addressing thepossible linkbetween hair
dye useandbladdercancer, lymphoma andleukemia, other
cancers, reproductive anddevelopmental outcomes, and
otherendpoints published sincetheabovereviewalsohave
beenconsidered. Asummary oftheavailable hairdye
epidemiology dataisavailable athttp://www.cir
safety.org/findings.shtml.
SUMMARY
p-Phenylenediamine isanaromatic aminethathasbeenused
inpermanent hairdyesforover100years.Itismixedwith
hydrogen peroxide immediately beforeuse,andtheresulting
oxidation products eitherreactwithsulthydryl groups
presentinhairtoform permanent bondsoraresimply
trappedinhair protein. Data provided toFDAbyindustry
aspartoftheVoluntary Cosmetic Reporting Program
indicated that p-Phenylenediamine wasusedinatotalof
1497hair-coloring products; therewerenoreportedusesof
p-Phenylenediamine HC1orp-Phenylenedianmine Sulfate.
Useconcentration dataprovided bytheCosmetic, Toiletry,
andFragrance Associaton indicated thatp
Phenylenediamine wasbeing used incosmetics at
concentrations rangingfrom2%to4%andthatbothp
Phenylenediamine HC1andp-Phenylenediamine Sulfate
werebeingusedatconcentrations of6%.ByFederallaw,coaltarhairdyeproducts, including those
containing p-Phenylenediamine, are exempt fromthe
principal adulteration provision andthecolor additive
provisions oftheFederalFood,DrugandCosmetic Actof
1938whenthelabelbearsacautionstatement andpatchtest
instructions for determining whether theproductcausesskin
irritation.
TheU.S.FDAhasdetermined thatusesofp
Phenylenediamine otherthanas ahairdye areunapproved,
including asoneoftheadditives thatisusedtoaccelerate
dryinganddarkenthereddishcolorofthehennaindark
(black)henna products.
p-Phenylenediamine ismanufactured usingthefollowing
three methods: (1)reduction ofpara-nitroaniline, (2)aniline
diazotization, and(3)directnitration ofbenzene without
chlorinating. The third methoddoesnotyieldchlorinated
compounds suchaschioro- anddichloroanilines or
aminobiphenyls.
p-Phenylenediamine hasalowoctanol/water coefficient.
Following dermaladministration ofradiolabeled p
Phenylenediamine torats,themetabolite N,N-diacetyl-p
Phenylenediamine wasdetected intheplasma,suggesting
thattopically applied p-Phenylenediamine ismetabolized in
theskin.p-Phenylenediamine administered orally,
intraperitoneally, orsubcutaneously tomice, rats, and
rabbits waswidelydistributed, metabolized toseveral
derivatives, andrapidlyexcreted inthe urine andfeces.
p-Phenylenediamine appliedtopically tohumans,wasfound
intheurine. When ahairdyecontaining p
Phenylenediamine wasusedbyhumans,radioactivity was
detected inthehairandintheurine. In humanstudies,
monoacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine (MAPPD) andN,N
diacetyl-p-Phenylenediamine (DAPPD) havebeenidentified
asurinarymetabolites ofp-Phenylenediamine. Theresults
ofanotherhumaninvivostudyofanoxidative hairdye
formulation containing p-Phenylenediamine HC1suggested
thatdyeingthehairwithoxidative dyesproduces minimal
systemic exposure thatisunlikelytoposearisktohuman
health.
TheacuteoralLD50ofp-Phenylenediamine for ratsranged
from80to98mg/kg. Dietary p-Phenylenediamine at
concentrations of3160ppmadministered toratsand4640
ppmtomicefor7weeks and 1250ppmtoratsandmicefor
103weeksdid notresultinanysignsoftoxicity. Inanother
study,dose-dependent growthretardation wasobserved in
ratsfedconcentrations upto0.4%p-Phenylenediamine in
thedietfor12weeks. Theacuteintraperitoneal LD50of
anaqueousp-Phenylenediamine solutionfor ratswas37
mg/kg.Thesubcutaneous minimum lethal doses ofp
Phenylenediamine were170mg/kgfor rats,200mg/kg for
rabbits, and100mg/kgfordogs.lntraperitoneal
administration ofp-Phenylenediamine toratsandcatsand
subcutaneous administration ofp-Phenylenediamine torats,
-82-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quoterabbits,andguineapigsresulted inedemaoftheheadand
neck.
No signs oftoxicity wereobserved whendryp
Phenylenediamine ora10%alcoholic solution ofp
Phenylenediamine wasappliedtoa25cm2areaoftheskin
ofrabbits.
Thepercutaneous LD50(forrabbits)ofahairdyecomposite
containing 1.2%p-Phenylenediamine wasgreaterthan10
g/kg.Chronic topical administration of10%p
Phenylenediamine solutions wasnottoxictomiceorrabbits.
Subchronic andchronicdermaladministration ofhairdye
products containing upto4%p-Phenylenediamine wasnot
toxictomice,rabbits,andrats.Inguineapigs,evidence of
hyperkeratosis wasnotedat24hpost-application (under
occlusive patch) ofp-Phenylenediamine. At48h,
discontinuity appeared inthestratum germinativum; a
moderate degree ofedemawasobserved inthedermis.
At single oral doses upto80mg/kg,p-Phenylenediamine
didnotexertaprimary effect onthenervoussystemofrats.
Rhabdomyolysis wasobserved inmicedosedorallywith35
mg/kgand70mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine. Rhabdomyolysis
wasalsoobserved indogsatdosesupto 100mg/kgp
Phenylenediamine andmassivenecrosisofskeletal muscles
wasobserved atmicroscopic examination intheseanimals.
Necrosis ofthegastrocnemius muscle,diaphragm, and
tongue were observed atadoseof200imol/kg/day, butnot
1001mo1/kg/day inratsinjectedsubcutaneously withp
Phenylenediamine dailyfor3days.
Primaryskinirritation by2.5to 100%p-Phenylenediamine
varied from nonetoslightinexperiments withrabbits,
guineapigs,mice,miniature piglets,piglets,dogs,and
baboons. Ahairdyecontaining 1.2%p-Phenylenediamine
produced slighttomoderate erythema andmoderate edema
inthe skinofrabbits.Anotherhairdyecontaining 1.8%p
Phenylenediamine wasmildly irritating totheskinof
rabbits.Inonestudy,p-Phenylenediamine wasaguineapig
sensitizer atinductionconcentrations aslowas0.001%, but
wasnotasensitizer inanotherstudyofahaircoloring
formulation containing 2%p-Phenylenediamine.
Cross-reactivities top-Phenylenediamine wereconfirmed in
guineapigschallenged withp-toluenediamine HCl,p
aminophenol, p-aminoazobenzene, andSudanIIIinthe
maximization test.Whenthecross-reactivity ofp
Phenylenediamine HC1withcolordeveloping agents(p
Phenylenediamine derivatives) wasevaluated usingthe
maximization testprocedure, therewasnocrossreactivity
betweenp-Phenylenediamine and4-N,N-diethyl-2-methyl-
1,4-phenylenediamine HC1(CD-2)or4-(N-ethyl-N-2-
methan-sulphonamidoethyl)-2-methyl- 1,4-phenylenediamine
1.5H.,504H,O(CD-3).
Mildconjunctival inflammation that didnotpersistformorethan24hourswasobserved aftertheinstillation ofa2.5%
aqueousp-Phenylenediamine solutionintorabbiteyes.The
maximum irritation scorewas17.0outofapossible 110
after100%p-Phenylenediamine wasplacedinrabbiteyes.
Ahairdyecomposite formulation containing 1.2%p
Phenylenediamine andonecontaining 1.8%p
Phenylenediamine wereinstilledintotheconjunctival sacs
oftheeyesofrabbits producing, at1daypostinstillation, a
scoreof33.0 for unwashed eyesand23.0forwashedeyes
forthe lowconcentration andascoreof30forunwashed
eyesatthehigherconcentration; irritation wasminimal after
7days.
Dosesof5to30mg/kgperdayofp-Phenylenediamine by
gavagetopregnant ratsdidnotaffectreproduction, andp
Phenylenediamine wasnotteratogenic. Oraladministration
of40mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine topregnant ratsresultedin
maternal toxicity. The maternal no-observed-effect level
(NOEL) was5mg/kg/day andthedevelopmental no-
observed-adverse effectlevel(NOAEL) was10mg/kg/day.
Subcutaneous administration of28mg/kgperdayp
Phenylenediamine topregnant micedidnotresultin
embryotoxic orteratogenic effects.Noevidence ofan
increase inpostimplantation fetallossoccurred whenmale
ratsreceived 2to20mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine
intraperitoneally 3timesaweekfor8weeksand then were
mated.Theresultsofachickembryotoxicity screening test
indicated that p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate induced
significant malformations ofthebodywallandheart.
Hairdyescontaining 1.0 to4.0%p-Phenylenediamine
appliedtotheskinofpregnant ratsatadoseof2mllkgper
day after beingmixedwithanequalvolumeofhydrogen
peroxide produced noadverseeffectsonreproduction and
werenot teratogenic. Ahairdyecontaining 3%p
Phenylenediamine mixedwithhydrogen peroxide, applied
dermally 2timesaweektofemalemicepriortomatingand
throughout gestation, resulted innoadverseeffectson
reproduction andwasnotteratogenic, although theremay
have been aretarding effectonfetalossification. The same
hairdyecontaining 3%p-Phenylenediamine applied
dermally atadoseof2.0mlfkg2timesaweektofemale
rabbitspriortomatingandthroughgestation produced no
adverseeffectsonrabbit reproduction, andthedyewasnot
teratogenic. Reproduction wasunaffected, andteratogenicity
wasnotobserved afterthedermalapplication of0.5mlof
hairdyescontaining 2to4%p-Phenylenediamine andmixed
withhydrogen peroxide 2timesaweekto3generations of
mice.Ahairdyecontaining 2.20%p-Phenylenediamine
appliedtotheskinofmaleratsinadoseof0.5ml2timesa
weekfor 10weeks, after beingmixedwithanequalvolume
ofhydrogen peroxide, produced noadverseeffectson
reproduction.
p-Phenylenediamine, withorwithouthydrogen peroxide,
wasnegative intheAmesSalmonella/mammalian
microsome mutagenicity test without metabolic activation.
-83-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteBothpositiveandnegativeresultswithmetabolic activation
havebeenreported. Different researchers haveused
different solvents forthep-Phenylenediamine, different
chemicals for induction, different S-9s,andslight
modifications totheAmestestprocedure. Anyorallofthese
mayexplaintheobserved differences inresults.Several
oxidation productsofp-Phenylenediamine werepositivein
theAmestest.Purified p-Phenylenediamine wasnot
mutagenic toD.melanogaster. p-Phenylenediamine wasnot
mutagenic intheratormousemicronucleus test.Oral
administration of200mg/kgp-Phenylenediamine tomale
micedepressed testicular DNAsynthesis. p
Phenylenediamine wasnotactiveatintraperitoneal dosesof
5to20mg/kg per dayfor5daysinthemousesperm-head
abnormality test.p-Phenylenediamine wasnegative inarat
hepatocyte primaryculture/DNArepair test.Positiveresults
wereobtained forp-Phenylenediamine inthemouse
lymphoma forward mutation assay.
Theurineofratsthatreceived p-Phenylenediamine
intraperitoneally 3timesaweekfor8weekswasnot
mutagenic intheAmestest.Theurineofrats thatreceived
p-Phenylenediamine/resorcinol conjugates topically was
mutagenic withmetabolic activation andwasnotmutagenic
withoutmetabolic activation. Theurine from women who
usedhairdyescontaining 0.46to2.55%p
Phenylenediamine wasnotmutagenic withmetabolic
activation intheAmestest.
p-Phenylenediamine HCIwasmutagenic toone(strain
TA98)offiveSalmonella lyphilnuriun? strainstestedwith
metabolic activation. Bothpositiveandnegative results
(withandwithoutmetabolic activation) werereportedforp
Phenylenediamine HC1intheL5178Y mouselymphoma
assay.IntheTK6humanlymphoblast forwardmutation
assay,resultsforp-Phenylenediamine HCIwerepositive
without,butnotwith,metabolic activation. Exceptforthe
Chinese hamster ovarycell/hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase (CHO/HGPRT) mutation assay
(positive without,but notwith,metabolic activation), the
results for p-Phenylenediamine HC1inothermammalian
assays(micronucleus, replicative DNAsynthesis, andDNA
damage) werenegative. Mixtures ofp-Phenylenediamine,
HC1,resorcinol, andhydrogen peroxide werenotmutagenic
inthemouselymphoma assayorthechromosome
aberrations assay(humanlymphocytes).
InSalmonella lyphimurium strainTA98,themutagenicity of
p-Phenylenediamine HC1wasenhanced byH,02treatment
inthepresenceofmetabolic activation. p-Phenylenediamine
HCIhadnoeffecton thegeneexpression profileofa
monocytic leukemia cell line(THP-l). InaDNAbinding
study,therewasnoevidence ofcovalent bindingofp
Phenylenediamine HCIormetabolites withrathepaticDNA.
p-Phenylenediamine inthefeedofratsandmiceatconcentrations of625and1250ppmfor103weekswasnot
carcinogenic. Therewasnoevidence ofacarcinogenic
effectaftertheoraladministration of0.06to30mg/kgper
dayp-Phenylenediamine for8monthstorats.Resultswere
alsonegative forp-Phenylenediamine inan80-week oral
carcinogenicity studyinvolving rats.p-Phenylenediamine
wasnotcarcinogenic inassaysinwhich5and10%solutions
wereappliedtopically twiceaweekindosesof0.02mlto
micefor theirlifetimeandtofemalerabbitsfor85weeks.
Italso did notmodify liver carcinogenesis inmalerats
initiallytreatedwithN-nitrosodiethylamine. Theresultsfor
p-Phenylenediamine HC1wereclassified asnegative ina
studyevaluating itspotential fortheinduction oflung
tumorsinmice.Infemale rats, bothtopicalapplication and
s.c.injection of oxidized p-Phenylenediamine HC1for18
monthsinducedastatistically significant increased incidence
ofmammary glandtumors. Uterinetumorsandsofttissue
tumorsofbothmalignant andbenigntypeswerealso
significantly induced. Tumorsofthemammary glandand
softtissuewerenotobserved inmalerats.
Whenthecarcinogenic potentialofp-Phenylenediamine HCI
wasevaluated inabioassay system that wasbasedonthe
induction ofglutathione S-transferase placental form(GST
P)positivelivercell foci inrats,unlikethe5genotoxic
hepatocarcinogens evaluated, thishairdyedid notcausea
significant increase inthenumberofGST-Ppositivefoci.
Threehairdyescontaining 1.5%p-Phenylenediamine mixed
withhydrogen peroxide beforeuse, andappliedtopically to
mice weekly orevery2weeksfor18monthswerenot
carcinogenic. Noevidence ofacarcinogenic effectwas
foundafterthetopicaladministration (0.5mlweeklyfor2
years)tomiceof2hairdyescontaining 1.5%p
Phenylenediamine andmixedwithhydrogen peroxide
immediately beforeuse.Nocarcinogenic effectswere
observed when4hairdyecomposite formulations
containing 1to4%p-Phenylenediamine weremixedwith
hydrogen peroxide and 0.025 mlofthedyeswereapplied
topically tomiceweeklyfor21to23months.Threehairdye
formulations containing 2to4%p-Phenylenediamine were
mixedwithanequalvolumeofhydrogen peroxide and
appliedtopically toaparentalgeneration ofrats from the
timeoftheirweaning totheweaningoftheiryoung.The
second generation received topicalapplications of0.5ml2
timesaweekfor2years.Anincrease inpituitaryadenomas
wasobserved intheratsreceiving the4%formulation; these
adenomas haveahighbackground incidence inrats.Anon
significant patternforthispituitarytumorwasobserved in
thetwolowerdosegroups.
TheP11for50%p-Phenylenediamine appliedtotheskinof
6humanvolunteers for24hoursunderocclusive conditions
was0.8ofamaximum possibletotalof8.Allof24subjects
weresensitized after548-hourinduction patchesof10%p
Phenylenediamine. Positive (urticarial) scratchtest
reactions top-Phenylenediamine mix(blackrubbermix)
-84-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotewereobserved in2of31patientswithcontact urticaria
and/orsystemic reactions todifferent latex products. In
anotherstudy,apositiveimmediate patchtestreaction(at30
minutespostapplication) wasobserved in2of664patients
patchtestedwithp-Phenylenediamine.
p-Phenylenediamine testedatconcentrations rangingfrom
1%to 10%inpredictive patch testsinducedsensitization in
eachofthe24subjects tested atthehighesttest
concentration (maximization test).The following positive
reactions werereportedfor2171subjectstestedwith1%p
Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum ina48hocclusive patch
test:80positives in1017subjects whousedalowp
Phenylenediamine concentration hairdyeproduct
frequently; 7positives in548subjectswhousedahairdye
withtwicethep-Phenylenediamine concentration, butless
frequently; and2positives in516subjectswhodid notuse
p-Phenylenediamine hairdyes.
Patchtest results for80chronichemodialysis patients
indicated 14patientswithreactions tovarioussubstances, 3
ofwhomhadapositive reaction to3.75%p
Phenylenediamine. Fifteenpatients (allergic top
Phenylenediamine) werepatch tested with1%p
Phenylenediamine andserialdilutions downto1ppm.Of
the15, 14hadaweaklypositive reaction to 1%p
Phenylenediamine. Thethreshold valuefor10%ofthe
patients tested, based on+reactions orgreateron theback,
was38ppm.Of13,300dermatitispatientspatch testedwith
1%p-Phenylenediamine inpetrolatum from1990to2000,
449positivereactions werereported.
Overa9-yearperiod,42,839dermatitis patientswerepatch
testedwithbothdyes(p-Phenylenediamine HC1,from1984
to1988;p-Phenylenediamine, from1989to1993) and 1481
positivereactions top-Phenylenediamine (dataonbothdyes
combined) werereported. Inanother study,26,706
dermatitis patients werepatchtestedwith0.5%p
Phenylenediamine HC1(between 1985and1988)and0.5%
p-Phenylenediamine (from1989to1998)and667positive
reactions top-Phenylenediamine (dataonbothdyes
combined) werereported. The results ofotherprovocative
testsindicated thattheincidence ofpositivepatchtest
reactions to2hairdyes,aftermixingwithhydrogen
peroxide, variedfrom15.4to100%.
Repeated insultpatchtestson 206patientswith4hairdyes
containing upto2.144%p-Phenylenediamine foundno
irritation orsensitization. Hairdyecomposites containing
upto3.5%p-Phenylenediamine patchtestedinanother
studyinvolving 3500subjects, foratotalnumberof
individual hairdyeapplications of116,647,produced atotal
of205positivereactions in163femalesubjects; 8reactions
in4subjects wereidentified asallergicresponses tothe
products.
Ap-Phenylenediamine photopatch testwasconducted on1
subject;p-Phenylenediamine wasnot phototoxic. Inaphotosensitization studyinvolving 23patients,photocontact
allergytop-Phenylenediamine wasobserved inonepatient
andplaincontactallergywasobserved inasecondpatient.
Inoccupational studies involving hairdressers/barbers, p
Phenylenediamine sensitization ratesintherangeof3.7%(2
of54tested)to85%(28of33tested) have beenreported.
Positive patch testreactions top-Phenylenediamine andp
Phenylenediamine HC1appearinnumerous casereports,
someofwhichalsoreported skindepigmentation atthep
Phenylenediamine patchtestsite.Incasesinwhich skin
depigmentation wasobserved atpatchtestsites,thepatients
evaluated eitherusedhairdyesorvarious colorants (i.e.,for
themustache, feet,ortattoos),andskindepigmentation was
alsonotedintheareasofapplication ofeachhair
dye/colorant.
Numerous casereportsofdermatitis following hennatattoo
application havealsobeen identified inthepublished
literature; positive (+to+++)patchtest reactions top
Phenylenediamine werealsoobserved. Inoneofthecase
reports,theskinpaintfortemporary tattoos contained 2.94%
p-Phenylenediamine. Reportedly, p-Phenylenediamine is
oneoftheadditives that isusedtoaccelerate dryingand
darkenthereddishcolorofthehenna.
Edemaoftheface,neck,ears,andscalphasoccurred after
hairdyeuse.Edemaoftheeyelidsandconjunctiva and
tearing have been observed andmore severe reactions
(damage tovision)haveoccurred after theapplication ofp
Phenylenediamine-containing hairdyestotheeyebrows and
eyelashes.
Themostrecentcomprehensive reviewofavailable
epidemiology studiesconcluded thatthereisinsufficient
evidence tosupportacausalassociation betweenpersonal
hairdye use andavarietyoftumorsandcancers. A
summary oftheavailable hairdyeepidemiology datais
available athttp://www.cir-safety.org/findings.shtml.
DISCUSSION__________________________
TheExpertPanel recognizes thatp-Phenylenediamine and
itssalts are used mostly inhairdyesandcolorsat
concentrations of6%,butthatuseshave been reported in
tints and lighteners withcolor,withnoavailable dataon
concentration. ThePanelexpectsthatuseconcentrations in
theseproductcategories willbenohigherthan forhairdyes
andcolors.
4-Aminobiphenyl, aknownurinary bladdercarcinogen, and
2-aminobiphenyl (carcinogenic, induceshemangiosarcomas)
havebeen detected inbatchesofchemical researchgradep
Phenylenediamine (purityof97%).TheExpertPanelstates
thatcosmetic gradep-Phenylenediamine shouldnotcontain
4-aminobiphenyl or2-aminobiphenyl, notingthatthemajor
U.S.manufacturer ofp-Phenylenediamine produces this
chemical (purityof>99%p-Phenylenediamine) forusein
-85-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotehairdyes via theprocessofdirectnitration ofbenzene
withoutchlorinating, whichdoes not yield aminobiphenyl
compounds, andnotbythereduction ofp-nitroaniline.
Thus,itistheexpectation oftheExpertPanelthat99%pure
p-Phenylenediamine (freeofaminobiphenyls) isbeingused
bythecosmetics industry.
p-Phenylenediamine maycausemutations, depending onthe
testsystemand testconditions. Inthe Ames test,different
researchers useddifferent solvents forthep
Phenylenediamine, different chemicals forinduction,
different metabolic activation systems, andslight
modifications ofthetestprocedure; anyorallofthesemay
explaintheobserved differences inresults. Theavailable
studies donotsuggest thatp-Phenylenediamine is
carcinogenic orteratogenic.
Inconsidering hairdyeepidemiology data,theCIRExpert
Panelconcluded thattheavailable epidemiology studies are
insufficient toconclude thereisacausalrelationship
between hairdyeuseandcancerandotherendpoints, based
onlackofstrengthoftheassociations andinconsistency of
findings. Useofdirecthairdyes,whilenotthe focus inall
investigations, appears tohavelittleevidence ofany
association withadverseeventsasreported inepidemiology
studies.
Theapplication ofhairdyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine
totheeyebrows andeyelashes canresultinlostor
permanently damaged vision. p-Phenylenediamine isa
sensitizer forguineapigsandforhuman beings.
Phototoxicity andphotosensitization dataarelimited,but
suggestthat sensitization isapproximately the same withor
withoutlight.Hairdyescontaining p-Phenylenediamine are
exempt from theprincipal adulteration provision andfrom
thecoloradditiveprovisions insections 601and706ofthe
Federal Food, DrugandCosmetic Actof1938when
cautionary statements andpatchtestinstructions are
conspicuously displayed on thelabels.Whilesomepersons
maybesensitized underproperconditions ofuse, theExpert
Panelexpectsthatfollowing thisprocedure willidentify
prospective individuals whowould havean
irritation/sensitization reaction andallowthemtoavoid
significant exposures.
Articlesreporting casesofdepigmentation afterexposure to
p-Phenylenediamine havebeenidentified inthepublished
literature andtheExpertPanelnotedthat,clinically, thishas
tobeaveryuncommon orrareeventandisnotasignificant
safetyconcern. Itwasnotclearwhether thereaction
observed inthereportswasvitiligoinduced byanallergic
reaction, truechemical leukoderma, orpost-inflammatory,
andthenature of thereaction requires furtherstudy.
Additionally, itwasnotedthatthe48-hour patchtestfor
evaluating theskinirritation potential ofhairdyesis
sufficient forevaluating theskindepigmentation potential of
p-Phenylenediamine.TheFDAhasdetermined thatusesofp-Phenylenediamine
otherthanasahairdye are unapproved. ThePanel
expressed particular concernoverthepracticeofcombining
p-Phenylenediamine withhenna(so-called darkorblack
henna)foruseintemporary tattoos p-Phenylenediamine
isaknownsensitizer, highly inappropriate forsuch use as
evidenced byreportsofsevereadverseskinreactions todark
hennatemporary tattoos.
ThePanelurgeduserstoreportadversereactions tothe
FDA(formoreinformation, see theFDAwebsiteat:
http://www.cfsan.fda. gov/—dms/cos-tatt.html).
CONCLUSION
The CIR ExpertPanelconcluded thatp
Phenylenediamine, p-Phenylenediamine HCI,andp
Phenylenediamine Sulfatearesafeashairdyesinthe
practices ofuseandconcentration asdescribed inthis
safetyassessment.
REFERENCES_________________________
Aalto-Korte, K.,K.Alanko,0.Kuuliala. andR.Jolanki.2007.
Latereactions inpatchtests:A4-yearreviewfromaclinic
ofoccupational dermatology. ContactDermatitis. 56:81-86.
Abdulla, K.A.andN.M.Davidson. 1996.Awomanwho
collapsed afterpaintinghersoles.Lancet.348:658.
-86-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteAdams, R.M., HI.Maibach, W.W.Clendenning, etal.1985.A
five-year studyofcosmetic reactions. J.Am.Acad.
Dermatol. 13:1062-1069.
Admovic, V.M.1966.Aromatic aminesassprayreagents inthe
thin-layer chromatography ofchlorinated organic
pesticides. J.Chromatogr. 23:274-279.
Ahn,H.J.and W.-S. Lee.2002.Anultrastructural studyofhair
fiberdamageandrestoration following treatment with
permanent hairdye.mt.J.Dermatol. 41:88-92.
American Conference ofGovernmental Hygienists (ACGIH).
(2000)2000TLVsandBEIs.Threshold LimitValuesfor
Chemical Substances andPhysical AgentsandBiological
Exposure Indices. Cincinnati, OH:ACGIH.
Ames,B.N., W.E. Durston. E.Yamasalci, and F.D.Lee.1973.
Carcinogens aremutagens: asimpole test systemcombining
liverhomogenates foractivation andbacteriafordetection.
Proc.NatI.Acad.Sd.70:2281-2285.
Ames,B.N.,HO.Kammen, andE.Yamasaki. 1975.Hair dyes
aremutagenic: Identification ofavarietyofmutagenic
ingredients. Proc.Nail.Acad.Sci.72:2423-2427.
Ames,B.N.,J.McCann. andE.Yamasaki, E.1975.Methods of
detecting carcinogens andmutagens withthe
Salmonellalmammalian-microsome mutagenicity test.
Mutat.Res.31:347-364.
Anderson, JR.,O.H.Strumeyer. andD.Pramer. 1968.
Purification andproperties ofperoxidase from
Nitrosomonas europaea. J.Bacteriol. 96:93-97.
Angelini, G.,G.A.Vena,andC.L.Meneghini. 1980.Shoe
contactdermatitis. ContactDermatitis. 6:279-83.
Anundi, I., J.Hoegberg, andA.H.Stead.1979.Glutathione
depletion inisolatedhepatocytes: itsrelationtolipid
peroxidation andcelldamage. ActaPharmacol. Toxicol.
45:45-51.
Appiani, L.,D.Laveneziana, andE.Chiesara. 1965.Inhibition
ofmicrosomal drug-metabolizing enzymes byp
phenylenediamine. Boll.Sot.Ital.Biol.Sper.41:1352-1356.
Armstrong, D.K.,A.B.Jones,HR.Smith,J.S.Ross,JR.White,
R.J.Rycroft, andJ.P.McFadden. 1999.Occupational
sensitization top-phenylenediamine: a17-year review.
ContactDermatitis. 41:348-349.
Assmann, N.,M.Emmrich, G.Kampf,andM.Kaiser.1997.
Genotoxic activityofimportant nitrobenzenes and
nitroanilines intheAmestestandtheirstructure-activity
relationship. Mutat.Res.395:139-144.
Averbukh, Z.,D.Modai,Y..Leonov. 1989.Rhabdomyolysis
andacuterenalfailureinducedbyparaphenylenediamine.
HumanToxicol.8:345-348.
Avnstorp, C.,S.C.Rastogi, andT.Menné.2002.Acutefingertip
dermatitis fromtemporary tattooandquantitative chemical
analysisoftheproduct. ContactDermatitis. 47:119-120.
Beme,B..A.Bostrom. a.F.Grahnen. andM.Tammela. 1996.
Adverse effectsofcosmetics andtoiletries reported totheAwasthi, Y.C.,H.H.Morris,S.S.Schochet, G.F.Powell.F.C.
Schmalstieg, andS.K.Srovastava. 1977.Studiesin
neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis: Leukocyte peroxidase
deficiency inapatientwithneuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis
(Jansky-Bielschowsky type).J.Lab.Clin.Med.89:770-780.
Baer.R.L.1976.Allergiccontact sensitivity. Personal
experiences andobservations. Cutis.17:861-868.
Baer,R.L.,D.L.Ramsey, and E.Biondi.1973.Themost
common contactallergens: 1968-1970. Arch.Dermatol.
108:74-78.
Bajaj, A.K.. S.C.Gupta.A.K.Chatterjee. K.G.Singh,S.Basu.
andA.Kant.1996.Hairdyedepigmentation. Contact
Dermatitis. 35:56-57.
Bajaj,AK.,A.Misra,K.Misra,andS.Rastogi.2000.Theazo
dyesolventyellow3produces depigmentation. Contact
Dermatitis. 42:237-238.
Bajaj,M.H.andN.K.Notani.1978.Mutagenicity ofsixIndian
hairdyestestedinSalmonella typhimurium strains.Mutat.
Res.53:149-50.
Bajaj,AK..R.K.Pandey. K.Misra,A.K.Chatterji, A.Tiwari.
andS.Basu.1998.Contactdepigmentatiion causedbyan
azodyeinalta.ContactDermatitis. 38:189-193.
Balato,N..G.Lembo.C.Patruno, andF.Ayala.1990.
Prevalence oftextiledydcontactsensitization. Contact
Der,natitis. 23:111-112.
Bamberger, R.L.andJ.H.Strohl.1969.Quantitative analysisof
p-nitrophenol, hydroquinone, andp-phenylenediamine
usingthin-layer chronopotentiometry. Anal.Chem.
41:1450-52.
Baranowska, I.,C.Piesko,D.Raróg.andA.Pielesz.2002.
Analysis ofsomearomatic aminesbymeansofderivative
spectrophotometry. .1.Environ. Sci.HealthATox.Hazard
Subst.Environ. Eng.37:1841-1848.
Basketter, D.A.,D.Jefferies, B.J.Safford, etal.2006. The
impactofexposure variables ontheinduction ofskin
sensitization. ContactDermatitis. 55:178-185.
Bassl,A.,H.J.Heckemann, andE.Baumann. 1967.Thin-layer
chromatography of primaryaromatic amines. I.J.Prakt.
Chem.36:265-73.
Batiste-Alentorn, M.,N.Xamena, A.Creus,andR.Marcos.
1995.Genotoxicity testingoffivecompounds inthree
Drosophila short-term somaticassays.Mutat.Res.
341:161-167.
Beard,R.R., and J.T.NOE.1981.Aromatic NitroandAmino
Compounds. In:Clayton,GD.,andClayton,FE.(eds.).
Patty’sindustrial Hygiene andToxicology, 3rded.New
York:JohnWiley&Sons,pp.2A:2476-7.
Beilis,I.1965.Quantitative polarographic determination of
microconcentrations ofp-phenylenediamine andbenzidine.
Lab.DeIo.10: 584-5.
Swedish MedicalProducts Agency, 1989-1994. Contact
Dermatitis. 34:34:359-362.
-87-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteBhat,J.andA.G.Smith. 2003. Xanthelasma palpebrarum
following allergiccontactdermatitis frompara
phenylenediamine inablackeyelash-tinting product.
ContactDermatitis. 49:311.
Biodynamics. 1977.Amodified segment IIteratology studyof
hairdyesinmice.ProjectNo.76-1667. Unpublished data
submitted byCTFA(2-11-35).’
Biodynamics. 1982. Amodified segment IIteratology studyof
hairdyesinrabbits.ProjectNo.76-1666. Unpublished data
submitted byCTFA(2-1136).1
Birnie,A.J.and J.S.English. 2007.Immediate hypersensitivity
toparaphenylenediamine. Contact Dermatitis. 56:240.
Blair,J.B.,R.T.Brodell,andS.T.Nedorost. 2004.Dermatitis
associated withhennatattoo.2004.“Safe” alternative to
permanent tattoos carries risk.Postgrad. Med.116:63-65.
Blijleven, W.G.H. 1977.Mutagenicity offourhairdyesin
Drosophila melanogaster. Mutat.Res.48:181-185.
Blijieven, W.G.H. 1981.Re-evaluation ofthemutagenic effects
ofthehairdyep-phenylenediamine (BASE) inthesex-
linked recessive lethal test inDrosophila melanogaster.
Mutat.Res.90:137-41.
Bloch,H.,G.Brubacher, H.Erlenmeyer, andE.Suter.1947.
UberdenStoffwechsel vonTuberkelbazillen. Systematische
untersuchungen uberdiewirkungprimarer aromatischer
amineaufdaswachstum vonTuberkelbazillen. Helvetica
Chim.Acta.30:539-43.
Blohm,S.C.andG.Rajka.1970.Allergenicity of
paraphenylenediamine. ActaDerm.Venereal. 58:49-52.
Bork,K.1993.Allergiccontactdermatitis onaviolinist’s neck
frompara-phenylenediamine inachinreststain.Contact
Dermatitis. 28:250-251.
Borrego, L.,B.Hernahndez-Machin, 0.Gonzalez, andB.
Hernandez. 2005.Sensitization topara-phenylenediamine
inastreetside temporary tattoo artisan.ContactDermatitis.
52:288-289.
Bracher, M.,C.Faller,W.Groetsch, R.Marshall, andJ.
Spengler. 1990.Studiesonthepotential mutagenicity ofp
phenylenediamine inoxidative hair dyemixtures. Mutat.
Res.241:313-324.
Brancaccio, R.AndD.E.Cohen.1995.Contactleukoderma
secondary topara-phenylenediamine. Contact Dermatitis.
32:313.
Brancaccio, R.R.,L.H.Brown,Y.T.Chang,J.P.Fogelman, E.A.
Mafong, andD.E.Cohen.2002.Identification and
quantification of para-phenylenediamine inatemporary
blackhennatattoo.Am.J.ContactDermat. 13:15-18.
Brans,R.,D.Heinrich, T.Bruckner, P.-J.Coenraads, M.
Heesen,HF.Merk,andB.Blömeke. 2005.MnSOD
polymorphisms insensitized patientswithdelayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions tothechemical allergen paraphenylenediamine: Acase-control study.Toxicology.
212:148-154.
Brasch,J.,T.Henseler, W.Aberer.1994.Reproducibility of
patchtests.Amulticenter studyofsynchronous left-versus
right-sided patchtestsbytheGerman contact Dermatitis
Research Group.J.Am.Acad.Dermatol. 31:584-591.
Broeckx, W.,A.Blondeel, A.Dooms-Goossens, andG.Achten.
1987.Cosmetic intolerance. ContactDermatitis. 16:189-
194.
Bronaugh, R.L.andER.Congdon. 1984.Percutaneous
absorption ofhairdyes:correlation withpartition
coefficients. J.invest.Dermatol. 83:124-127.
Bronaugh, R.L.,CD.Roberts, andJ.L.McCoy. 1994.Dose-
response relationship inskinsensitization. FoodChem.
Toxicol.32:113-117.
Brotherton, J.1969.Uptakeofaminoacidsintopigskinin
organculture,and theeffectofinhibitors ofrespiration,
proteinbiosynthesis, andtyrosinase. J.invest.Dermatol.
52:78-88.
Brown,K.C.andJ.F.Corbett. 1979.The roleofmeta
difunctional benzenederivatives inoxidative hairdyeing.
II.Reactions withp-aminophenols. J.Soc.Cosmetic
Chemists. 30:191-211.
Brown,J.H.,MG.McGeown, B.Conway, andCM.Hill.1987.
Chronicrenalfailureassociated withtopicalapplication of
paraphenylenediamine. Br.Med.J.(Clin.Res.Ed.)
294:155.
Bruckner-Tuderman, L.,A.Konig,andU.W.Schnyder. 1992.
Patchtest results ofthedermatology clinic Zurich in1989:
Personal computer-aided statistical evaluation.
Dermatology. 184:29-33.
Brulos,M.F.,J.P.Guillot,MC.Martini,andJ.Cotte.1977.The
influence ofperfumes onthesensitizing potential of
cosmetic bases.I.Atechnique forevaluating sensitizing
potential. J.Soc.Cosmetic Chemits.28:357-65.
Burnett,CM.and J.F.Corbett. 1977.Thechemistry and
toxicology ofhairdyes.In:Drill,V.A.,andLazar,P.(eds.).
Cutaneous Toxicity. NewYork:Academic Press,pp.203-
21.
Burnett,CM.,CM.Fuchs,and J.F.Corbett.1979. Mutagenicity
studiesonurineconcentrates fromfemaleusersofdarkhair
colorproducts. DrugChem.Toxicol.2:283-93.
Burnett, C.,C.Fuchs,J.Corbett,andJ.Menkart. 1982.The
effectofdimethylsulfoxide onthemutagenicity ofthehair
dyep-phenylenediamine. Mutat.Res.103:1-4.
Burnett, C.M. and El.Goldenthal. 1988.Multigeneration
reproduction andcarcinogenicity studiesinSprague
Dawleyratsexposedtopically tooxidative hair-colouring
formulations containing p-phenylenediamine andother
aromatic amines.FoodChem.Toxicol.26:467-474.
1Available forreviewfromtheDirector, Cosmetic Ingredient
Review, 110117thStreet,NW,Suite412,Washington, D.C.,20036,
USA
-88-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteBurnett, C.,El.Goldenthal, SB.Harris,F.X.Wa.zeter, J.
Strausburg, R.Kapp,andR.Voelker. 1976.Teratology and
percutaneous toxicitystudiesonhairdyes.J.Toxicol.
Environ. Health.1:1027-1040.
Burnett, C.,M.M.Jacobs,A.Seppala., andP.Shubik.1980.
Evaluation ofthetoxicityandcarcinogenicity ofhairdyes.
IToxicol.Environ. Health.6:247-257.
Burnett. C.,B.Lanman, R.Giovacchini, G.Wolcott. andR.
Scala.1975.Long-term toxicitystudiesonoxidation hair
dyes.FoodCosmet. Toxicol. 13:353-357.
Burnett, C..R.Loehr,andJ.Corbett. 1977.Dominant lethal
mutagenicity studyonhairdyes.J.Toxicol. Environ.
Health.2:657-662.
Burnett, C.,R.Loehr.andJ.Corbett. 1981.Heritable
translocation studyontwohairdyeformulations. Fund.
AppI.Toxicol. 1:325-328.
Cabrillat, H.andB.Fontainiere. 1980.Paraphenylenediamine
pyrocatechol: analternative substrate todiaminobenzidine
for thedemonstration ofendogenous peroxidase of
mammalian leukocytes. Histochem. J.12:488-491.
Calas,E.,P.Y.Castelain. andA.Piriou.1978.Epidemiology of
contactdermatitis inMarseilles. Ann.Dermarol. Venereol.
105:345-347.
Calnan,CD.,H.J.Bandmann. E.Cronin,etal.1970.Hand
dermatitis inhousewives. Br.J.Derm.82:543-548.
Calzavara-Pinton, P.,R.Capezzera, C.Zane,A.Brezzi,G.
Pasolini, A.Ubiali.andF.Tacchetti. 2002.Lymphomatoid
allergiccontact dermatitis frompara-phenylenediaimine.
ContactDermatitis. 47:173-174.
Camarasa, J.M.C.1979.First epidemiological studyofcontact
dermatitis inSpain-1977.ActaDer,natol. Venereol. 59:33-
37.
Caspary, W.J.,R.Langenbach, B.W.Penman. C.Crespi,B.C.
Myhr,andAD.Mitchell. 1988.Themutagenic activityof
selectedcompounds attheTKlocus:Rodentvs.human
cells.Mutat.Res.196:61-81.
Ceriotti, G.,L.Spandrio, andA.Agradi.1966.Anticatalase
activity of phenylenediamines invitroandinvivo.
Enzymologia. 30:290-298.
Cession-Fossion, A.andJ.LeComte. 1971.Orthosympathetic
reactions intherattreatedwithp-phenylenediamine. CR
Soc.Biol.164:2404-2406.
Charles, J.,iL.Bourain, A.Tessier,J.P.Lepoittevin, and J.C.
Beani.2004.Mesalazine andpara-phenylenediamine
allergy.Contact Dermatitis. 51:313-314.
Chen, S.C., C.H.Chen,CL.Chern,L.S.Hsu. Y.C. Huang,K.T.
Chung,andSM.Chye.2006.p-Phenylenediamine induces
p53-mediated apoptosis inMardin-Darby canine kidney
cells.Toxicol. InVitro.20:801-807.
Chey,WY.,K.L.Kim, T.-Y. Yoo,andA.-Y.Lee.2004.
Allergiccontactdermatitis fromhairdyeanddevelopment
oflichensimplexchronicus. ContactDermatitis. 51:5-8.Choudhary, G.1980.Gas-liquid chromatographic determination
oftoxicdiamines inpermanent hairdyes.J.Chromatogr.
193:277-84.
Chung,W.H.,Y.C.Chang,L.J.Yang,SI.Hung.W.R.Wong,
J.Y.Lin,andH.L.Chan.2002.Clinicopathologic features
ofskinreactions totemporary tattoos andanalysisof
possible causes.Arch.Dermatol. 138:88-92.
Chung,K.T.,CA.Murdock. SE.Jr.Stevens, Y.S.Li,CI.Wei,
T.S.Huang,andMW.Chou.1995.Mutagenicity and
toxicitystudiesofp-phenylenediamine anditsderivatives.
Toxicol. Len.81:23-32.
Chung,K.T..CA.Murdock.Y. Zhou etal.1996.Effectsofthe
nitro-group onthemutagenicity andtoxicityofsome
benzamines. Environ. Mol.Muragen. 27:67-74.
Chung,W.H.,CM.Wang.and H.S. Hong.2001.Allergic
comtact dermatitis totemporary tattooswithpositivepara
phenylenediamine reactions: reportoffourcases.hit.J.
Dermatol. 40:754-756.
Cilento, G.andK.Zinner.1967.Oxygenactivation. Ill.Therole
ofmonoprotonated p-phenylenediamines. Biochim Biophys
Acta143:93-96.
CITSafety&HealthResearch Laboratories. 2005a.Testitem[‘4C1-PPD. Pharmacokinetics andmassbalanceof
radioactivity inSprague-Dawley ratsfollowing single
administration of[‘4C1-PPD byoralgavage(Laboratory
studynumber26336PAR).Unpublished data.105 pages.’
CITSafety&Health Research Laboratories. 2005b.Testitem[’4C1-PPD. Pharmacokinetics andmassbalanceor
radioactivity inSprague-Dawley ratsfollowing single
administration of[‘4C1-PPD by oralgavage (Laboratory
studynumber27160PAR).Unpublished data.85pages.’
Clayson, D.B.andR.C.Garner.1976.Carcinogenic aromatic
aminesandrelatedcompounds. In:Searle,CE.(ed).
Chemical Carcinogens. Washington, DC:American
Chemical Society,ACSMonograph 173.pp.366-461.
Clayton, T.H.,SM.Wilkinson, C.Rawcliffe, B.Pollock, and
SM.Clark. 2006. Allergiccontactdermatitis inchildren:
shouldpatternofdermatitis determinereferral? A
retrospective studyof500childrentestedbetween 1995and
2004inoneU.K.centre.Br.J.Dermatol. 154:114-117.
Clemmesen, J.1981.Epidemiological studiesintothepossible
carcinogenicity ofhairdyes.Mutat.Res.87:65-79.
Cole,P.,R.Hoover,andC.H.Friedall.1972. Occupation and
cancerofthelowerurinarytract.Cancer. 29:1250-1260.
COLIPA. 2006.p-Phenylenediamine HCI.COLIPA A007.
Analytical file.Rawmaterialpresentation on007
(Dihydrochloride). Unpublished datasubmitted byCTFA.’
Colman, O.D.andJ.C.Stockert. 1979.Electron microscopy of
synaptonemal complexes insemithin sections. Z
Naturforsch 34:299-300.
Conde-Salazar. L.,M.Baz,D.Guimaraens, andA.Cannavo.
1995.Patchtestresultsin379hairdressers (1980-1993).
Am.J.ContactDermatitis. 6:19-23.
-89-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteCorbett, J.F.1975.Application ofoxidative coupling reactions
totheassayofp-phenylenediamines andphenols. Anal.
Chem.47:308-3 13.
Corbett, J.F.1972.Autoxidation ofp-phenylenediamine. J.Soc.
Cosmetic Chemists. 23:683-693.
Corbett, J.F.1973.The roleofmetadifunctional benzene
derivatives inoxidative hair dyeing. I.Reaction withp
diamines. J.Soc.Cosmetic Chemists. 24:103-134.
Corbett, J.F.1976.Hairdyes-Their chemistry andtoxicology.
Cosmet. Toilet.91:21-28.
Corbett, J.F. and J.Menkart. 1973.Haircoloring. Cutis.12:190-
197.
Correia, S.AndF.M.Brandao. 1986.Contactdermatitis ofthe
feet.Derm.BerufUmwelt.34:102-106.
Cosmetic, Toiletry, andFragrance Association (CTFA). 1969a.
CIRsafetydatatestsummary response form,acuteoral
toxicityofhairdyecontaining PPDAinrats.Unpublished
data submitteed byCTFA.’
CTFA.1969b..CIR safety data test summary response form
acutedermaltoxicityandprimaryskinirritation of hairdye
containing PPDAinrabbits.Unpublished data submitted by
CTFA.’
CTFA.1969c.CIR safety datatestsummary response form,
dermalsubacute studiesofhairdyecontaining PPDAin
rabbits.Unpublished datasubmitted byCTFA.’
CTFA.1969d..CIRsafetydata test summary response form,
rabbiteyeirritation study withhairdyecontaining PPDA.
Unpublished data submitted byCTFA.’
CTFA.1971a..CIRsafetydatatestsummary response form,
rabbiteyeirritation studywithhairdyeproductcontaining
PPDA.Unpublished datasubmitted byCTFA.’
CTFA.197lb.CIRsafetydatatestsummary response form,
repeat patch test with hairdyeformulation containing
PPDAinrabbits.Unpublished data submitted byCTFA(2-
11-28).’
CTFA.1982a.Summary ofcosmetic ingredient safetyanalysis
ofp-phenylenediamine. Unpublished datasubmitted by
CTFA.’
CTFA.1982b.CIR safety datatestsummary response form,
guineapig skinsensitization withhair-coloring product
containing PPDA.Unpublished datasubmitted byCTFA.’
CTFA.1983..Hairdyesensitization: testroomcumulative
reactions ofClairol,Inc.Unpublished datasubmitted by
CTFA.’
CTFA.2007a.Chemical routestop-phenylenediamine.
Unpublished data submitted byCTFA(3pages).’
CTFA.2007b.Useconcentration dataonp-phenylenediamine
fromindustrysurvey.Unpublished data submitted by
CTFA,November 8,2007(1page).’
Coulter,EM.,J.Farrell,K.L.Matthews etal.2007.Activation
ofhumandendritic cellsbyp-Phenylenediamine. J.
Pharmacol. Exp.Ther.320:885-892.Covance Laboratories Ltd.2005a.p-Phenylenediamine HC1:
Reversemutation infivehistidine-requiring strainsof
Salmonella typhimurium, Unpublished datasubmitted by
CTFA(53pages).’
Covance Laboratories Ltd.2005b.p-Phenylenediamine HCI:
Mutation atthehprt locus ofL5l78Y mouselymphoma
cellsusingmicrotitre fluctuation technique (Covance report
number413/123-D6173). Unpublished datasubmitted by
CTFA(50 pages).’
Cozzi,D.,P.O.Desideri,L. LEPRI,andV.Coas.1969.Thin-
layerchromatographic andelectrophoretic behaviour of
primary aromatic aminesonweakionexchangers. J.
Chromatogr. 43:463-472.
Crebelli, R.,L.Conti,A.Carere.,andR.Zito.1981.
Mutagenicity ofcommercial p-phenylenediamine andofan
oxidation mixtureofp-phenylenediamine andresorcinol in
Salmonella typhimurium TA98.FoodCosmet. Toxicol.
19:79-84.
Cronin,E.1973.Dermatitis fromwife’sdyedhair.Contact
Dermatitis Newsletter 13:363.
Cronin,E.1985.Clinicalpatternsofhandeczemainwomen.
Contact Dermatitis. 13:153-161.
Cruz,MT.,M.Gonçalo, A.Paiva,J.M.Morgao, AFigueiredo,
C.B.Duarte,andMC.Lopes.2005.Contactsensitizers
downregulate theexpression of thechemokine receptors
CCR6andCXR4inaskindendritic cellline.Arch.
Dermatol. Res.297:43-47.
Cundell,AM.andA.P.Mulcock. 1976.Thebiodeterioration of
naturalrubberpipe-joint ringsinsewermains.Proc.3rd
mt.Biodegration Symp:659-664.
Davies,RE.,K.H.Harper,andSR.Kynoch. 1972.Inter
speciesvariation indermalreactivity. J.Soc.Cosmetic
Chemists. 23:371-381.
Dawe,S.A.,JR.White,R.J.G.Rycroft, D.A.Basketter, and J.P.
McFadden. 2004.Activesensitization topara
phenylenediamine anditsrelevance: a10-yearreview.
ContactDermatitis. 51:96-97.
De Boer, EM.,W.G.VanKetel,andD.P.Bruynzeel. 1989.
Dermatoses inmetalworkesII.Allergiccontactdermatitis.
Contact Dermatitis. 20:280-286.
Degawa, M.,Y.Shoji,K.Masuko, andY.Hashimoto. 1979.
Mutagenicity ofmetabolites ofcarcinogenic aminoazo dyes.
CancerLett. 8:71-76.
DelaCuadraOyanguren, J.,A.Marquina Vila,A.Martorell
Aragones, J.SanzOrtega,andA.Aliaga Boniche. 1989.
Contactallergic dermatitis inchildhood: 1972-1987. Ann.
Esp.Pediatr.30:363-366.
DeLeo,V.A.,S.C.Taylor,DV.Belsito,etal.2002.Theeffect
ofrace andethnicity onpatch test results. J.Am.Acad.
Dermatol. 46:S107-S112.
Derma-Test Laboratories (DTL).1982a..Repeated insult patch
test,product: 1101-48 and1101-52mixedtoequal parts.
Unpublished datasubmitted by CTFA.’
-90-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteDTL.1982b.Repeated insultpatchtest,product: 1101-49and
1101-52mixedequalparts.Unpublished data submitted by
CTFA.’
DTL.1982c.Repeated insultpatchtest,product: 1101-50and
1101-52 mixedequalparts.Unpublished data submitted by
CTFA.
DTL.l982d.Repeated insult patch test,product: 1101-51 and
1101-52mixed equal parts.Unpublished data submitted by
CTFA.’
Devos,S.A.andP.O.Van Der Valk.2001.The riskofactive
sensitizatiion toPPD.ContactDermatitis. 44:273-275.
Dickel,H.,0.Kuss,A.Schmidt, andT.L.Diepgen. 2002.
Occupational relevance ofpositivestandard patch-test
resultsinemployed personswithaninitialreportofan
occupational skindisease.mt.Arch.Occup.Environ.
Health.75:423-434.
Dickel,H.,iS.Taylor,P.Evey,andH.P.Merk.2000.Delayed
readingsofastandard screening patch testtray:frequency
oflost,found,andpersistent reactions. Am.J.Contact
Dermatitis. 11:213-217.
Dickel,H.,J.S.Taylor,P.Evey,andHF.Merk. 2001.
Comparison of patchtestresultswithastandard series
amongwhiteandblackracial groups. Am.J.Contact
Dermatitis. 12:77-82.
Dimmitt, S.K.1975.Theeffectofbiologicamineson
peroxidase activity(p-phenylenediamine asCosubstrate in
detecting leukocyte peroxidase deficiency: Batten’s
disease). .1.Am.Med.WomenAssoc.30:473-483.
Dossou,KG.,C.Sicard,G.Kalopissis, D.Reymond, andH.
Schaefer. 1985.Methodforassessment ofexperimental
allergyinguinea-pigs adaptedtocosmetic ingredients.
ContactDermatitis. 13:226-234.
Dressler,WE.andT.Appelqvist. 2006.Plasma/blood
pharmacokinetics andmetabolism after dermal exposure to
para-aminophenol orpara-phenylenediamine. FoodChem.
Toxicol.44:371-379.
Drost,RH.,andJ.F.Reith.1967.Identification oftoxic
substances bymeansofFeldstein’s extractionmethod, thin-
layerchromatography, and UVspectrometry. I.Basic
substances. Pharm.Weekbl.102:1379-1387.
Dunham, L.J.,AS.Rabson, H.L.Stewart,AS.Frank,andJ.L.
Young.1968.Rate,interview, andpathology studyof
canceroftheurinarybladderinNew Orleans, Louisiana. .1.
Natl.CancerInst.41:683-709.
Dunkel,V.C.,L.M.Schechtman, T.U.As,A.Sivak,R.A.Lubet,
andT.P.1988.Cameron. Interlaboratory evaluation ofthe
C3H-lOTl-2 celltransformation assay.Environ. Mol.
Mutagen. 12:21-32.
Dunkel, V.C., andV.F.Simmon. 1980.Mutagenic activityof
chemicals previously tested for carcinogenicity inthe
National CancerInstitute bioassay program. IARCSci.
PubI.27:283-302.Dunkel,V.C.,E.Zeiger,D.Brusicketal.1985.Reproducibility
ofmicrobial mutagenicity assays.2.Testingofcarcinogens
andnoncarcinogens inSalmonella typhimurium and
Escherichia coli.Environ. Mutagen. 7:1-248.
Dybing, E.andS.S.Thorgeirsson. 1977.Metabolic activation of
2,4-diaminoanisole, ahairdyecomponent. 1.Roleof
cytochrome P-450 metabolism inmutagenicity invitro.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 26:729-734.
Edwards, E.K.Jr.andE.K.Edwards. 1984.Contact urticaria
andallergiccontactdermatitis causedby
paraphenylenediamine. Cutis.34:87-88.
El.DuPontDeNemours &Company. 1977.USDept.of
Labor,Occupational SafetyandHealthAdministration,
Material Safety DataSheet,Dupont:Wilmington, DE.
E.I.DuPontdeNemours &Company. 1990.Acuteoral
neurotoxicity studiesofpara,meta,andortho
phenylenediamine inrats with coverletterdated 9/17/90.
OTS40-9036454. Unpublished data.
E.I.DuPontdeNemours &Company. 1992.Subchronic oral
neurotoxicity studyofortho-,meta-,andpara
phenylenediamine inratswithattachments andcover letter
dated6/30/92. OTS40-9236508. Unpublished data.
Eiermann, H.J.W.Larsen,HI.Maibach, etal.1982.
Prospective studyofcosmetic reactions: 1977-1980. J.Am.
Acad.Dermatol. 6:909-917.
Elder,R.L.1985.Finalreportonthesafetyassessment ofp
phenylenediamine. J.Am.Coll.Toxicol.4:203-266.
Elias,E.A.andA.E.Meijer.1981.Theincrease inactivityof
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and6-
phosphogluconate dehydrogenase inskeletalmusclesofrats
aftersubcutaneous administration ofN,N’-dimethyl-para
phenylenediamine. Histochemistry. 71:543-558.
Emmons, W.W.andJO.Jr.Marks.1985.Immediate and
delayedreactions tocosmetic ingredients. Contact
Dermatitis. 13:258-265.
Environmental Protection Agency(EPA).1980.Sixthreportof
theinteragency testing committee totheadministrator:
Environmental Protection Agency;receiptofthereportand
requestforcomments regarding prioritylistofchemicals.
FederalRegister. 45:35897-359 10.
EPA.1982.Phenylenediamines: Response toInteragency
TestingCommittee. FederalRegister 47:973-983.
Epstein, W.L.andM.K.Taylor.1979.Experimental
sensitization ofparaphenylenediamine and
paratoluenediamine inman.ActaDermatol. Venereol.
59:55-7.
Esponda, P.,andJ.C.Stockert. 1978.Localization ofthe
synaptonemal complex underthelightmicroscope.
Chromosoma. 68:83-90.
Estlander, T.1988.Allergicdermatoses andrespiratory diseases
from reactive dyes.ContactDermatitis. 18:290-297.
Estrin,N.F.,PA.Crosley, andCR.Haynes(eds.).1982.CTFA
Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary,3ed.Washington, DC:
TheCosmetic ToiletryandFragrance Assoc.,p.232.
-91-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteEuropean Commission. 2007.Therulesgoverning cosmetic
products intheEuropean Union.Volume 1Cosmetics
legislation -Cosmetic products. internetsiteaccessed May
8,2007.http://dg3.eudra.org/F3/home.htm1.
Fan,W.X.andB.Zhao.1990.StudyonChinese common
allergens ofcontact dermatitis. Derm.BerufUmwelt.
38:158-161.
Fautz,R.,A.Fuchs,H.Van Der Walle,V.Henny,andL.Smits.
2002.Hairdye-sensitized hairdressers: thecross-reaction
patternwithnewgeneration hairdyes.Contact Dermatitis.
46:319-324.
Fisher,A.A.1974.Sensitivity Testing. In:Balsam,M.S.,and
Sagarin, E.(eds.).Cosmetics: Science andTechnology, 2nd
ed.NewYork:Wiley-Interscience, Vol.3,p.286.
Fisher,A.A.1975.Ishairdyed with para-phenylenediamine
allergic? ContactDermatitis. 1:266.
Fisher,A.A.1976.Sunscreen dermatitis duetoglycerylPABA:
significance ofcross-reactions tothisPABAester.Curr.
Top.Rad.Res.18:495-496, 500.
Fogliano, V.,V.Verde,G.Randazzo, andA.Ritieni.1999.
Methodformeasuring antioxidant activityandits
application tomonitoring theantioxidant capacityofwines.
J.Agric.FoodChem.47:1035-1040.
FoodandDrugAdministration (FDA).1979.Cosmetic product
warningstatements: coaltarhairdyescontaining 4-
methoxy-m-phenylenediamine (2,4-diaminanisole) or4-
methoxy-m-phenylenediamine sulfate(2,4-diaminoanisole
sulfate).FederalRegister. 44:59509-595 10.
FDA.1981.Cosmetic product formulation data:(a)Ingredients
usedineachproductcategory and(b)Numberofbrand
nameproducts ineachproductcode.FDADatabase.
FDA:Washington, DC.
FDA.2006.Frequency of useofcosmetic ingredients. FDA
database. Washington:FDA.
Foussereau, J.,G.Reuter,andJ.Petitjean. 1980.Ishairdyed
withPPD-like dyesallergenic? ContactDermatitis. 6:143.
Fowler,J.F.Jr.1987.Occupational dermatitis fromstamppad
ink.ContactDermatitis. 16:38.
Fregert, S.1972.Chemical determination ofp
phenylenediamine inhairdyes.frlautarzt. 23:393-394.
Fregert,S.,N.Hjorth,B.Magnusson, etal.1969.Epidemiology
ofcontactdermatitis. Trans.St.JohnsHosp.Dermatol. Soc.
55:17-35.
Frosch,P.J.,D.Burrows, andJ.G.Camarasa etal.1993.
Allergic reactions toahairdressers’ series:Resultsfrom9
European Centres. ContactDermatitis. 28:180-183.
Fuchs,T.andR.WahI.1992.Immediate reactions torubber
products. AllergyProc.13:61-66.
Fujiwara, N.,M.Sasaki,N.Higashi, etal.1976.Standardization
ofpatchtestsinJapan.Contact Dermatitis. 2:205-211.
Fukunaga, T.,R.Kawagoe, H.Hozumi, andT.Kanzaki. 1996.
Contactanaphylaxis duetopara-phenylenediamine. Contact
Dermatitis. 35:185-186.Funasaka, W.,K.Fujimura, andS.Kuriyama. 1969.Ligand
exchange chromatography. I.Separation of
phenylenediamine isomersbyligand-exchange
chromatography. BunsekiKagaku. 18:19-24.
Funasaka, W.,T.Hanai,K.Fujimura, andT.Ando.1972.Non-
aqueoussolventchromatography. II.Separation ofbenzene
derivatives intheanion-exchange andn-butylalcohol
system.J.Chromat. 72:187-191.
Furia,T.E.,ed.1972.CRCHandbook ofFoodAdditives,2ed.
Cleveland, OH:CRCPress,Vol.1,p.196.
Gagliardi, L.,M.Ambroso, J.Mavro,F.Furno,andG.Discalzi.
1992.Exposure top-phenylenediamine inhairdressing
parlours.mt.J.Cosmet. Sci.14:19-3 1.
Galatik, J.1972.Chromatographic determination of freep
phenylenediamine inthepresence ofpyrocatechol infurs
dyedwithoxidizing dyes.Kozarstvi. 22:21-23.
Galindo, P.A.,R.Garcia,J.A.Garrido, F.Feo,andF.
Fernandez. 1994.Allergic contact dermatitis fromcolour
developers: Absenceofcross-sensitivity topara-amino
compounds. Contact Dermatitis. 30:301.
Gallo,R.,G.Ghigliotti, E.Cozzani, andS.Balestrero. 1999.
Contact dermatitis frompara-phenylenediamine usedasa
skin paint: afurthercase.ContactDermatitis. 40:57.
Garfinkel, J.,S.Selvin,andSM.BROWN. 1977.Possible
increased riskoflung cancer amongbeauticians. J.Nail.
Cancerinst.58:141-143.
Garner,R.C.andC.A.Nutman, C.A.1977.Testingofsomeazo
dyesandtheirreduction products formutagenicity using
Salmonella typhimurium TA1538. Mutat.Res.44:9-19.
Garrigue, J-L,M.Ballantyne, T.Kumaravel, M.Lloyd,G.J.
Nohynek, D.Kirkland, andH.Toutain. 2006.Invitro
genotoxicity ofpara-phenylenediamine anditsN
monoacetyl orN,N’-diacetyl metabolites. Mutat.Res.
608:58-71.
Gatehouse, D.G.andG.F.Delow.1979.Thedevelopment ofa
“microtiter” fluctuation test forthedetection ofindirect
mutagens anditsuseintheevaluation ofmixedenzyme
induction oftheliver.Mutat.Res.60:239-252.
Gentile,J.M.,G.J.Gentile,andM.J.Plewa.1987.Mutagenicity
ofselected aniline derivatives toSalmonella following plant
activation andmammalian hepaticactivation. Mutat.Res.
188:185-196.
Geratz,J.D.1969.Secretory stimulation oftheratpancreas by
p-aminobenzamidine. Am.J.Physiol.216:812-817.
Giles,A.L.Jr., C.W. Chung,andC.Kommineni. 1976.Dermal
carcinogenicity studybymouseskinpainting with2,4-
toluenediamine aloneorinrepresentative hairdye
formulations. J.Toxicol.Environ. Health.1:433-440.
Glabiaz, U.andM.Tomaszewska. 1977.Studiesofthe
decomposition ofaromatic amines withozoneindilute
aqueous solutions. Przem.Chem.56:426-428.
Goetz,N.,P.Lasserre, P.Bore,andG.Kalopissis. 1988.
Percutaneous absorption ofp-phenylenediamine duringan
actualhair dyeing procedure. mt.J.Cosmet. Sci.10:63-74.
-92-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteGoh,C.L.1992.Comparative studyofTRUEtestandFinn
chamber patchtesttechniques inSingapore. Contact
Dermatitis. 27:84-89.
Gob,C.L.,S.F.Kwok,andVS.Rajan.1984.Crosssensitivity
incolourdevelopers. ContactDermatitis. 10:280-285.
Goldberg, B.J.,F.F.Herman, andI.Hirata.1987.Systemic
anaphylaxis duetoanoxidation product ofp
phenylenediamine inahairdye.Ann.Allergy.58:205-208.
Goldstein. S..A.A.Kopf.andR.Feinland. 1968.Analysis of
Oxidation DyesinHairColorants byThin-Layer andGas
Chromatography. Proc.JointConfCos,net. Sci.,pp.19-38.
Washington, DC:ToiletGoodsAssoc.
Gonzalo, MA.,F.Revenga, F.Caravaca. andJ.L.Pizarro. 1997.
Epidemiologic studyofcontact dermatitis inhemodialysis
patients. J.Investig. Allergol. Clin.Immunol. 7:20-23.
Goodwin, B.F.J..R.W.R. Crevel. andA.W.Johnson. 1981.A
comparison of threeguinea-pig sensitization procedures for
thedetection of19reported humancontactsensitizers.
ContactDermatitis. 7:248-58.
Goossens, A..M.H. Beck. E.Haneke. J.P.McFadden, S.
Nolting, G.Durupt,andG.Ries.1999.Adversecutaneous
reactions tocosmetic allergens. ContactDermatitis. 40:112-
113.
Gottschalck, T.E.andG.N.McEwen. Jr.,eds.2006.
International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and
Handbook, 11tbed.Washington. D.C.:CTFA, 1739-1740.
Graffeo, A.P.andR.M.Riggin.1978.Theapplication of
electrochemical detection totheHPLCanalysisof
nonvolatile pollutants. Proc4thJointConfSens.Environ.
Pollut.,pp.637-639.
Grant,J.1969.Hackh‘sChemical Dictionary.4Ihed.NewYork:
McGraw-Hill BookCo.,pp.510-511.
Grant,W.M.1974.Toxicology ofthe Eye,2ded.Springfield,
IL:CharlesCThomas, pp.817-818.
Greenberg, L.A. and D.Lester.1954.Handbook ofCosmetic
Materials. NewYork:Interscience,
Guerra,L.,F.Bardazzi, andA.Tosti.1992a.Contactdermatitis
inhairdressers’ clients.ContactDermatitis. 26:108-111.
Guerra,L..,A.Tosti,andF.Bardazzi etal.1992b.Contact
dermatitis inhairdressers: The italianexperience. Contact
Dermatitis. 26:101-107.
Guillot,J.P.andJ.F.Gonnet. 1985.Theepicutaneous
maximization test.Curr.Prob.Dermatol. 14:220-247.
Gupta,R.C.andS.P.Srivastava. 1971.Oxidation ofaromatic
aminesbyperoxodisulphate ion.II.Identification of
aromatic aminesonthebasisofabsorption maximaof
coloured oxidation products. Z.Anal.Chem.257:275-277.
Gupta,V.,V.Misra,R.Shanker. andP.N.Viswanathan. 1991.
Effectof p-phenylenediamine ontheactivityofglutathione
s-transferase inguineapig skin. J.Toxicol. Cutan.Ocul.
Toxicol. 10:187-194.Hagiwara, A.,S.Tamano,MA.Shibata, M.Arai,andH.Tsuda.
1990.Lackofmodifying effectsofp-phenylenediamine on
induction of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase-positive foci
inamedium-term bioassay systemusingF344rats.Toxicol.
Lett.52:261-268.
Hansson, C.andK.Thorneby-Andersson. 2001.Allergiccontact
dermatitis from2-chloro-p-phenylenediamine inacream
dyeforeyelashes andeyebrows. ContactDermatitis.
45:235-236.
Hanzlik, P.J.1923.Thepharmacology ofsome
phenylenediamines. J.lndust.Hg.4,386-409, 448,462.
Hashmi, H.H.,Iftikhar,A.A..Rashid,A.,andQureshi, T.1969.
Spectrophotometric determination ofo-andp
phenylenediamine. Mikrochim. Acta.1:100-107.
Havova, R.,L.Soskova, andP.Hava.1978.Mutagenic action
ofsomehairdyesmanufactured inCzechoslovakia. Cesk.
Hyg.23:383-8.
Hawley, G.G..ed.1971.TheCondensed Chemical Dictionaty,8thed.NewYork:VanNostrand Reinhold. p.680.
Hennekens, C.H.,FE.Speizer, B.Rosner,C.J.Bain,C.
Belanger. andR.Peto.1979.Useofpermanent hairdyes
aridcanceramongregistered nurses.Lancet.1:1390-3.
Herve-Bazin, B.,D.Gradiskil, P.Duprat, B.Marignac, J.
Foussereau. C.Cavelier, andP.Bieber.1977.Occupational
eczemafromN-isopropyl-N’-phenylparaphenylenediamine
(IPPD)andN-dimethyl-1,3-butyl-N’-
phenylparaphenylenediamine (DMPPD) intyres.Contact
Dermatitis. 3:1-15.
Hillen,U.,S.Grabbe,andW.Uter.2007.Patchtestresultsin
patientswith scalp dermatitis: analysisofdataofthe
Information Network ofDepartments ofDermatology.
ContactDermatitis. 56:87-93.
Hillen,U.,U.Jappe,P.J.Frosch,etal.2006.Latereactions to
thepatch-test preparations para-phenylenediamine and
epoxyresin:aprospective multicentre investigation ofthe
GermanContactDermatitis Research Group.Br..1.
Dermatol. 154:665-670.
HilltopResearch. 1979.Repeatinsultpatch test ofseventest
materials. Unpublished datasubmitted byCTFA.
Hirota,M.and0.Moro.2006.MIP-1B, anovelbiomarker for
invitrosensitization testusinghuman monocytic cellline.
Toxicol. InVitro.20:736-742.
Ho,5G.,D.A.Basketter, D.Jeffereis, R.J.Rycroft,JR.White,
and J.P.McFadden. 2005.Analysis ofpara
phenylenediamine allergicpatients inrelationtostrengthof
patchtest reaction. Br.J.Dermatol. 153:364-367.
Ho,5G.,JR.White,R.J.Rycroft,andJ.P.McFadden. 2004a.A
newapproach topatchtestingpatientswithpara
phenylenediamine allergysecondary totemporary black
hennatattoos.ContactDermatitis. 51:213-214.
Ho,5G.,JR.White,R.J.Rycroft, andJ.P.McFadden. 2004b.
Allergic contact dermatitis frompara-phenylenediaimine in
Bigen®powderhairdye.ContactDermatitis. 51:93-94.
-93-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteHohbadel, P.C.,M.D.McNeely, andF.W.Sunderman. 1975.
Automated biochromatic analysisofserumceruloplasmin.
Ann. Clin. Lab.Sci.S(l):65-70.
Horio,T.1976.Allergicandphotoallergic dermatitis from
diphenhydramine. Arch.Dermatol. 112:124-126.
Horwitz, W.,ed.1970.OfficialMethods ofAnalysisofthe
Association ofOfficialAnalytical Chemists, 11thed.
Washington, DC:Assoc.Official Analytical Chemists, p.
614.
Hossack, D.J.N.andJ.C.Richardson 1977.Examination ofthe
potential mutagenicity ofhairdyeconstituents usingthe
micronucleus test.Experientia. 33:377-378.
Hsu,T.S.,M.D.Davis,R.el-Azhary, J.F.Corbett, andL.E.
Gibson.2001.Bearddermatitis duetopara
phenylenediamine useinArabicmen.J.Am.Acad.
Dermatol. 44:867-869.
Huang,Y.C., W.C. Hung,W.Y. Chang, W.T.Chen,andC.Y.
Chai. 2007. p-Phenylenediamine inducedDNAdamagein
Sv-40immortalized human uroepithelial cells and
expression ofmutantp53andCOX-2proteins. Toxicol.
Lett.170:116-123.
Hueber-Becker, F.,G.J.Nohynek, W.J.A.Meuling, F.Benech
Kieffer,andH.Toutain. 2004. Human systemic exposure to
a[‘4C1-p-Phenylenediamine-containing oxidative hairdye
andcorrelation withinvitropercutaneous absorption in
humanorpigskin.FoodChem. Toxicol. 42:1227-1236.
HuffJ.C., W.L. Weston, and K.W. Wanda.1982.Enhancement
ofspecificimmunofluorescent findings withuseofapara
phenylenediamine mounting buffer.J.Invest.Dermatol.
78:489-50.
Hutzinger, 0.1969.Electron acceptor complexes for
chromagenic detection andmassspectrometric
identification ofphenolandaniline derivatives, related
fungicides, andmetabolites. Anal.Chem.41:1662-1665.
Ignaczak, M., and J.Dziegiec. 1975.Useofcericperchlorate in
thedetermination ofp-quinone, p-aminophenol, p
phenylenediamine, p-aminobenzoic acid,andsulfanilic
acid.Chem.Anal.20:229-232.
Imaida,K.,Y.Ishihara,0.Nishio,K.Nakanishi, andN.Ito.
1983.Carcinogenicity andtoxicitytestson
phenylenediamine inF344rats.Toxicol.Lett.16:259-269.
Ingjer,F.1979.Correlation ofindividual skeletal muscle fibers
from“semithin” sectionsstainedwithp-phenylenediamine
andhistochemical sectionsincubated formyofibrillar ATP
ase.Histochemistry. 60:107-11.
International Agency for Research onCancer(IARC). 1978.
Somearomatic aminersandrelated nitro compounds-hair
dyes,coloring agents,andmiscellaneous industrial
chemicals. IARCMonographs onheCarcinogenic Risksto
Humans, vol16.Lyon:IARC, 125-142.
IARC.1987.Overallevaluations ofcarcinmogenicity: An
updating ofIARCmonographs volumes 1to42.IARC
Monographs ontheCarcinogenic RiskstoHumans, vol16,
supplement 7.Lyon:IARC, 125-142.IARC.1993.IARCMonographs ontheevaluation of
carcinogenic riskstohumans. Vol57.Occupational
exposures ofhairdressers andbarbersandpersonal useof
hair colourants; somehairdyes,cosmetic colourants,
industrial dyestuffs andaromatic amines.Lyon, France:
IARC.(pages43-118).
International Research andDevelopment Corporation (IRDC).
1979.Lifetime toxicity/carcinogenesis studyinrats with
attached appendix. NTISReportNo.0TS0528870.
IRDC.1977..Multigeneration reproduction studyinrats.
Unpublished data submitted byCTFA.’
Ioannou, Y.M.and H.B. Matthews. 1985.p-phenylenediamine
dihydrochloride: comparative disposition inmaleand
femaleratsand mice. J.Toxicol.Environ. Health.16:299-
313.
lordanova, I.1978.Quantitative determination ofoxidative dyes
inthe hygienic evaluation ofhaircoloring cosmetic agents.
Khig.Zdraveopaz. 21:83-87.
lorizzo,M.,G.Parente, C.Vincenzi, M.Pazzaglia, andA.Tosti.
2002.Allergiccontact dermatitis inhairdressers: frequency
andsourceofsensitization. Eur.J.Dermatol. 12:179-182.
Ito,H.,H.Niwa,andS.Mitsuta.(September 9,1978).Removal
ofnitrogen oxidesfromwastegases.JapanPat.No.78
32795.Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd.
Ito,H.andS.TATSUMI. (July 31,1976).Simultaneous
removalofsulfur oxides andnitrogen oxidesfromfluegas.
JapanKokaiPat.No.7687473.Kawasaki Heavy
Industries Ltd.
Jam,M.,R.W.Morgan, andL.Elinson. 1977.Hairdyesand
bladdercancer.Can.Med.Assoc.J.117:1131-1133.
Jansen,L.A.,L.Berrens, andJ.Vandelden. 1964.Contact
sensitivity tosimple chemicals: The role ofintermediates in
theprocessofsensitization. Naturwissenschaften. 51:387.
Jappe,U.,B.M.Hausen, andD.Petzoldt. 2001.Erythema
multifore-like eruption anddepigmentation following
allergic contact dermatitis fromapaint-onhennatattoo,due
topara-phenylenediamine contact hypersensitivity. Contact
Dermatitis. 45:249-250.
Jasim,Z.F.,JR.Darling, andJ.M.Handley. 2005.Severe
allergiccontact dermatitis toparaphenylene diamine inhair
dyefollowing sensitization toblackhennatattoos.Contact
Dermatitis. 52:116-117.
Jelinek,R.,M.Peterka,andZ.Rychter. 1985.Chick
embryotoxicity screening test -130substances tested.
IndianJ.Exp.Biol.23:588-595.
Jenik,J.1979.Analysis ofindustrial emissions. I.
Spectrophotometric determination oforganicamino
compounds inindustrial emissions. Sb.Ved.Pr.Vys.Sk.
Chemickotechnol. Pardubice. 40:133-14 1.
Jensen,G.E.,J.Clausen, J.C.Melchior, andG.Konat.1977.
Clinical, social and biochemical studiesonBatten’s
syndrome, aliasSpielmeyer-Vogot orStengel’s Syndrome.
Eur.Neurol. 15:203-211.
Johnson,EM,and B.G. Gabel.1983.Anartificial embryofor
-94-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quotedetection ofabnormal developmental biology. Fund.Appi.
Toxicol.3:243-249.
Johnson, E.M.,R.M.Gorman,BEG.Gabel,andME.George.
1982.Thehydraattentuata systemfordetection of
teratogenic hazards. Teratogen. Mutagen. Carcinogen.
2:263-276.
Jowsey,l.R.,D.A.Basketter, J.P.McFadden, P.Kullavanijaya,
andI.Duangdeeden. 2006.Elicitation response
characteristics topermanent hair dyein
paraphenylenediamine-allergic volunteers. Contact
Dermatitis. 55:330-334.
Juhlin.L.andW.B.Shelley. 1977.Newstainingtechniques for
theLangerhans cell.ActaDerm. Venereol.. 57(4), 289-296.
Jung,P.,G.Sesztak-Greinecker. F.Wantke, M.Goyz,R.
Jarisch,andW.Hemmer. 2006a. The extentofblackhenna
tattoo’scomplications arenotrestricted toPPD
sensitization. ContactDermatitis. 55:57.
Jung,P.,G.Sesztak-Greinecker, F.Wantke, M.Goyz,R.
Jarisch,andW.Hemmer. 2006b.Apainfulexperience:
blackhennatattoocausingsevere,bullouscontact
dermatitis. ContactDermatitis. 54:219-220.
Kaaber,S.,H.Thulin,andE.Nielson. 1979.Skinsensitivity to
denture base materials intheburningmouthsyndrome.
ContactDermatitis. 5:90-96.
Kadlubowski, R.1971.Activityofcertainoxidoreductases in
theorganism poisoned experimentally withp
phenylenediamine. FoliaMed.Lodz.14:167-183.
Katsarou, A.,M.Armenaka, 1.Ale.V.Koufou. andD.
Kalogeromitros. 1999.Frequency ofimmediate reactions to
theEuropean standard series.Contact Der,natitis. 41:276-
279.
Katsarou, A.,B.Koufou, K.Takou,D.Kalogeromitros, G.
Papanayiotou, andA.Vareltzidis. 1995.Patchtestresultsin
hairdressers withcontactdermatitis inGreece.Contact
Dermatitis. 33:347-348.
Kawakubo, Y.H.F.Merk,T.A.Masaoudi, S.Sieben,andB.
Blomeke. 2000.N-acetylation ofparaphenylenediamine in
humanskinandkeratinocytes. J.Pharmacol. Exp.Ther.
292:150-155.
Kelleher, C.A.andJ.Mason.1979.Theeffectof
tetrathromolybdate uponsheepceruloplasmin amine
oxidaseactivityinvitro: the influence ofsubstrate on
apparent sensitivity toinhibition. ResVetSci26:124-125.
Kerckaert, G.A., R.A. LeBoeuf, andR.J.Isfort.1998.Assessing
thepredictiveness ofthe Syrian hamsterembryocell
transformatiion assayfordetermining therodent
carcinogenic potential ofsingleringaromatic citroaromatic
aminecompounds. Toxicolog. Sci.41:189-197.
Kersey,P.andC.J.Stevenson. 1980.Linchenoid eruption dueto
colourdeveloper. Anewoccupational hazardofautomatic
self-photographing machines. ContactDermatitis. 6:503-
504.
Keystone AnilineCorporation. 1999.Technical Guideand
Formularv. Chicago:Keystone Aniline Corporation.Kiese,M,M.Rachor,andE.Rauscher. 1968.Theabsorption of
somephenylenediamines throughtheskinofdogs.Toxicol.
Appl.Pharmacol. 12,495-507.
Kim,HO.,R.C.Wester,J.A.McMaster, D.A.Bucks,andHI.
Maibach. 1987.Skinabsorption frompatchtestsystems.
ContactDermatitis. 17:178-180.
Kind,PD.,F.C.Bocobo, A.C.Curits,andP.Bulala.1965.
Cellularpassivetransfer ofcontacthypersensitivity to
paraphenylenediamine andto2.4-dinitrochlorobenzene in
guineapigs.J.invest.Dermatol. 44:7-11.
Kinlen.L.J..R.Harris.A.Garrod.andK.Rodriguez. 1977.Use
ofhairdyesbypatientswithbreastcancer:acase-control
study.Br.Med.J.2:366-368.
Klein,A.D.Ill,and0G.Rodman. 1981.Allergiccontact
dermatitis toparaphenylenediamine inhairdye: Case report.
Milit.Med.146.46-7.
Kleniewska, D.,andH.Maibach. 1980.Allergenicity of
aminobenzene compounds: Structure- function
relationships. Dermnatosen BerufUmwelt.28:11-13.
Kligman, AM.1966.Theidentification of contactallergens by
humanassay.Ill.Themaximization test:aprocedure for
screening andratingcontactsensitizers. J.invest.Dermatol.
47:393-409.
Knight.J.A.1971.Gaschromatographic analysisofgamma-
irradiated anilineforaminoaromatic products. J.
Chromatogr. 56:201-208.
Kohler,J.J.,J.Gautney. Y.K. Kim. and J.F.McCullough. (May
2,1978).Removal andrecovery ofsulfuroxidesfromgas
streamswithmelamine. USPat.No.970008.Tennessee
ValleyAuthority.
Kornbrust, D.J. and T.R.Barflcnecht. 1984.Comparison of7
azodyesandtheirazoreduction products intheratand
hamster hepatocyte primaryculture/DNA-repair assays.
Mutat.Res.136:255-266.
Korneliussen, H.,H.A.Dahl,and J.E.Paulsen. 1978.
Histochemical definition ofmuscle fiber typesinthetrunk
musculature ofateleostfish.Histochemistry. 55:1-16.
Kottemann, CM.1966.Two-dimensional thin-layer
chromatographic procedure fortheidentification ofdye
intermediates inarylamine oxidation hairdyes.J.Assoc.
OffAnal.Chemists. 49:954-955.
Kousa,M.,andM.Soini.1980.Contactallergytoastocking
dye.ContactDermatitis. 6:472-476.
Krasteva, M.,M.Cottin,A.Cristaudo, etal.2005.Sensitivity
andspecificity oftheconsumer openskinallergytestasa
methodofproduction ofcontactdermatitis tohairdyes.
Eur.J.Dermatol. 15:18-25.
Krasteva. M.,A.Cristaudo, B.Halletal.2002.Contact
sensitivity tohairdyes can bedetected bytheconsumer
opentest.Eur.J.Dermatol. 12:322-326.
Krauhs,J.M..andN.L.Salinas. 1980.Ultrastructural studyof
unencapsulated vertebrate mechanoreceptor terminals
facilitated bydoublestainingandresectioning ofthick
plasticsections. J.Neurosci. Methods. 3:175-182.
-95-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteKulkarni, P.D.,J.B.Herron,W.B.Moores, andH.B.Hahn.
2001.Whatisyour diagnosis? Allergiccontactdermatitis to
paraphenylenediamine inatemporary hennatattoo.Cutis.
68:187,229-230.
Kvelland, I.1984.Aninvestigation ofthemutagenic activity of
fourhairdyesinbacteriophage T4D.Hereditas. 100:295-
298.
Lachapelle. J.M.,andD.Tennstedt. 1979.Epidemiological
surveyofoccupational contactdermatitis ofthehandsin
Belgium. ContactDermatitis. 5:244-248.
Lamand. M.,C.Lab.J.C.Tressol,andJ.Mason.1980.
Biochemical parameters usefulforthediagnosis ofmild
molybdenosis insheep.Ann.Rech.Vet.11:141-145.
Lange,F.W.1966.Fastmethodfordetection ofp
phenylenediamine inhairdyes.Seifen-Ole-Fette- Wachse.
92:751-753.
Läuchli, S.,S.Lautenschlager, andS.Lauchi.2001.Contact
dermatitis aftertemporary hennatattoos --anincreasing
phenomenon. SwissMed.Wkly.131:199-202.
Lecomte. J.1971.Cardiovascular collapseinducedbyp
phenylenediamine intherat.C.R.Sot.Biol.164:2401-3.
Lecomte. J..andE.Baeckeland. 1971.p-Phenylenediamine is
notahistamine releaser invitro.CR.Sot.Biol.165:208-10.
Lecomte. J.. E.Baeckeland. andA.Cession-Fossion. 1972.
Pharmacological properties ofp-phenylenediamine inthe
normalrat.Bull.Sot.Roy.Sci.Liege.41:302-318.
Lecomte, J.,andA.Cession-Fossion. 1971.Increase invascular
permeability inducedbyp-phenylenediamine. CR.Sot.
Biol.165:210-213.
LeCoz,C.J.,C.Lefebvre, F.Keller.andE.Grosshans. 2000.
Allergiccontactdermatitis causedbyskinpainting
(pseudotattooing) withblackhenna,amixtureofhennaand
p-phenylenediamine anditsderivatives. Arch.Dermatol.
136:1515-1517.
Ledingham, J.M.,and F.O. SIMPSON. 1970.Intensification of
osmium staining byp-phenylenediamine: paraffinandepon
embedding; lipidgranules inrenalmedulla. StainTechnol.
45:255-60.
Ledingham, J.M.,andF.O.SIMPSON. 1972.Theuseofp
phenylenediamine intheblocktoenhanceosmium staining
forelectronmicroscopy. StainTechnol. 47:239-243.
Lee, T.Y. and T.H. Lam.1996.Patchtestingof490 patients in
HongKong.ContactDermatitis. 35:23-26.
Lee,H.,L.-Y.Perng,S.-J.Shiow,M.-Y. Chou, M.-C.Chou,
and J.-Y. Lin.1986.Induction ofsisterchromatid exchange
inculturedchinesehamstercellsbyshort-term treatment
withhairdyecomponents. J.Chin.Biochem. Soc.15:34-38.
Legatowa, B.1973.Determination ofaromatic aminesand
aminophenols inhairdyes.Rocz.Panstw. Zaki.Hig.
24:393-402.
Legradi. L.1967.Detection ofcoexisting isomeric
phenylenediamines. aminophenols, anddihydric phenols.
Mikrochi,n. Acta.4:608-625.Leino,T.,T.Estlander, andL.Kanerva. 1998a.Occupational
allergicdermatoses inhairdressers. ContactDermatitis.
38:166-167.
Leino,T.,L.Tammilehto, M.Hytonen, E.Sala,H.
Paakkulainen, andL.Kanerva. 1998b.Occupational skin
andrespiratory diseasesamonghairdressers. Scand.J.Work
Environ. &Health.24:398-406.
Lepri,L..P.G.Desideri. andV.Coas.1974.Chromatographic
andelectrophoretic behaviour ofprimaryaromatic amines
onanion-exchange thinlayers.J.Chromatog.r 90:331-339.
Lepri,L..P.G.Desideri. andV.Coas.1976.Separation and
identification ofcoloringagentsintheoxidation-type hair
dyesbyion-exchange thin-layer chromatography. Ann.
Chim.66:451-600.
Lerner,A.B.andT.B.Fitzpatrick. 1950.Biochemistry of
melanin formation. Physiol. Rev.38:91-126.
Levin.V.,B.W.Nippoldt, andR.L.Rebertus. 1967.
Spectrophotometric determination ofprimaryaromatic
amineswiththiotrithiazyl chloride application to
determination of toluene-2,4-diisocyanate inair.Anal.
Chem.39: 581-584.
LeVine,M.J.1984.Idiopathic photodermatitis withapositive
paraphenylenediamine photopatch test.Arch.Dermnatol.
120:1488-1490.
Lewis,V.J.,B.N.Statham, andM.M.U.Chowdhury. 2004.
Allergiccontactdermatitis in191consecutively patchtested
children. ContactDermatitis. 51:155-1576.
Li,L.-F.,S.A.Sujan,andJ.Wang.2003.Detection of
occupational allergic contact dermatitis bypatchtesting.
ContactDermatitis. 49:189-193.
Li,L.F.andJ.Wang.2002.Contacthypersensitivity inhand
dermatitis. ContactDermatitis. 47:206-209.
Li,Q.,H.Inagaki,andM.Minami. 1996.Evaluation of cross
sensitization amongdye-intermediate agentsusinga
modified lymphocyte transformation test.Arch.Toxicol.
70:414-419.
Lidén,C.1988.Occupational dermatoses fromphotographic
chemicals. Withspecialreference tocontactallergyand
lichenoid reactions fromcolour developing agents.Acta
Dermato-Venereologica. 141:1-37.
Lidén,C.andA.Boman.1988.Contactallergytocolour
developing agentsintheguineapig.ContactDermatitis.
19:290-295.
Lim,S.P.R.,L.Prais,andIS.Foulds.2004.Hennatattoosfor
children: apotential sourceofpara-phenylenediamine and
thiuramsensitization. Br.J.Dermatol. 151:1271.
Lin,I.andY.Wu.1973.Mechanism of methemoglobin
formation inducedbyaminoazo compounds. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 22:1883-1891.
Lind,M.-L.,A.Boman. J.Sollenberg, S.Johnsson. G.
Hagelthorn. andB.Meding. 2005.Occupational dermal
exposure topermanent hairdyesamonghairdressers. Ann.
Occup.Hyg.49:473-480.
-96-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteLinder,M.C.andJ.R.Moor.1977.Plasmaceruloplasmin.
Evidence foritspresence inanduptakebyheartandother
organsoftherat.Biochim. Biophys. Acta499:329-336.
Lisboa,C.,M.A.Barros,andA.Azenha. 1994.Contact
dermatitis from textiledyes.ContactDermatitis. 31:9-10.
Lloyd,G.K.,M.P.Liggett,SR.Kynoch, andR.E.Davies.1977.
Assessment oftheacutetoxicityandpotential irritancyof
hairdyeconstituents. FoodCosmet. Toxicol. 15:607-6 10.
Lodi,A.,L.L.Mancini, M.Ambonati, A..Coassini, G.
Ravanelli, andC.Crosti. 2000.Epidemiology of
occupational contact dermatitis inaNorthItalian
population. Eur.J.Dermatol. 10:128-132.
Loehr,R.,andT.A.Re.1981.Methemoglobin levelsin
pregnant Sprague-Dawley ratsfollowing oraladministration
ofp-phenylenediamine. Finalreport.Unpublished data
submitted byCTFA.’
Lorant,B.1977.Thermogravimetric determination of basicand
intermediary substances incosmetics. SeifenOeleFette
Wachse. 103:393-396.
Low-Baselli, K.Hufnagl, W.Parzefall, R.Schulte-Herman, and
B.Grasl-Kraupp. 2000.Initiated rathepatocytes inprimary
culture:anovel tool tostudyalterations ingrowthcontrol
duringthe firststageofcarcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis.
21:79-86.
Lynde, C.W., and J.C.Mitchell. 1982.Patchtestresultsin66
hairdressers 1973-81. ContactDermatitis. 8:302-307.
Macbeth, R.A.,S.Bazin,andJ.C.Allain.1975.Observations of
thestainingofceruloplasmin following disc-electrophoresis
utilizing polyacrylamide gels.Clin.Biochem. 8:52-59.
MacDonald, D.J.,KM.Nicol,A.Belfield,MM.Shah,andS.D.
Mack.1980.Enzyme-linked immunoassay forplacental
lactogen inhumanserum.Clin.Chem.26:745-749.
Macher, E.andI.Atzpodien. 1968.Double sensitization of
guineapigsusingdinitrochlorobenzene andp
phenylenediamine andthepassive transfer of both
hypersensitivities. Arch.Kim.Exp.Dermatol. 232:195-204.
Mackison, F.W., R.S. Stricoff, andL.J.Partridge, eds.
September 1978.N/OSH/OSHA PocketGuidetoChemical
Hazards. DHEW (NIOSH) Publication No.78-210,pp.
152-153.
Magnusson, B.,S.V.Blohm,S.Fregert, N.Hjorth,G.Hovding,
V.Pirila,andE.Skog.1968. Routine patchtesting.IV.Acta
Dermatol. Venereal. 48:110-114.
Magnusson, B.,andAM.Kligman. 1970.AllergicContact
Dermatitis intheGuineaPig.Identifications ofContact
Allergens. Springfield, IL:CharlesCThomas.
Maguire, H.C.Jr.1973.Thebioassay ofcontactallergens inthe
guineapig.J.Soc.Cosmetic Chemidts. 24:151-162.
Maibach, HI.,andL.J.Wolfram. 1981.Percutaneous
penetration ofhairdyes.J.Soc.Cosmetic Chemists. 32:223-
229.
Mainka, E.1983.Contactdermatitis inmetallurgy workers.
Przegl.Dermatol. 70:65-68.Marcollett, M.,J.Morin,andP.Lecher.1980.Comparison
between twochromagenic substrates forrevealing an
immunoperoxidase reaction of human metaphase
chromosomes. StainTechnol. 55:35-38.
Marcoux, D.,P.M.Coutureo-Trudel, G.Riboulet-Delmas, and
D.Sasseville. 2002.Sensitization topara-phenylenediamine
fromastreetside temporary tattoo.Pediatr.Dermatol.
19:498-502.
Marks,J.G.Jr.,DV.Belsito,V.A.Deleoetal.1998.North
American ContactDermatitis Grouppatchtestresultsfor
thedetection ofdelayed-type hypersensitivity totopical
allergens. J.Am.Acad.Dermatol. 38:911-918.
Maron,D.M. and B.N.Ames.1983.Revisedmethods for
Salmonella mutagenicity test.Mutat.Res.113:173-215.
Maronpot, R.R.,MB.Shimkin, H.P.Witschi, L.H.Smith,and
J.M.Cline.1986.StrainAmousepulmonary tumor test
resultsforchemicals previously testedintheNational
Cancer Institute carcinogenicity tests.J.NatI.CancerInst.
76:1101-1112.
Martin,J.A.,TM.Hughes, andN.M.Stone. 2005. Black
henna’tattoos:anoccultsourceofnaturalrubberlatex
allergy.ContactDermatitis. 52:145-146.
Martin,J.M.,A.Revert,V.Alonso, L.Garcia,I.Molina, C.
Pereda,andE.Jordá.2005.Eczemadecontacgto agudloa
parafenilendiamina contenida entatuajes transitorios con
henna.Actas Dermosifiliogr. 96:382-385.
Marzulli, F.N.S.Green,andHI.Maibach. 1978.Hairdye
toxicity-A review. 1.Environ. Pathol.Toxicol. 1:509-530.
Marzulli, F.N.andHI.Maibach. 1974.Theuseofgraded
concentrations instudying skinsensitizers: Experimental
contact sensitization inman.FoodCosmet. Toxicol.
12:219-227.
Mascres, C.andG.Jasmin.1974a.Serum enzyme activity
following skeletal muscle lesions inducedbyp
phenylenediamine inrats.Rev.Can.Biol.33:175-183.
Mascres, C.andG.Jasmin.1974b.Pathogenic studyof
muscular lesionsinducedbyp-phenylenediamine. Union
Med.Can.103:672-677.
Mascres, C.andG.Jasmin.1975.Changes inthemusclefiber
inducedbyp-phenylenediamine intherat.Pathol.Biol.
23:193-199.
Massone, L.,A.Anonide, V.Isola,andS.Borghi.1991.2cases
of multiple azo dyesensitization. ContactDermatitis.
24:60-62.
Mathur,AK.,B.N.Gupta,S.Narangetal.1990.Biochemical
andhistopathological changesfollowing dermalexposure to
paraphenylenediamine inguineapigs.J.AppI.Toxicol.
10:383-386.
Mathur,AK.,B.N,.Gupta,S.Singh,A.Singh,andS.Narang.
1992.Dermaltoxicity ofparaphenylenediamine. Biomed.
Environ. Sci.5:321-324.
-97-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMathur,A.K.,R.B.Raizasda, M.K.Srivastava, andA.Singh.
2005.Effectofdermalexposure toparaphenylenediamine
andlinearalkylbenzene sulphonate inguineapigs.Biomed.
Environ. Sci.18:238-240.
Matrka,M.,andJ.Kroupa. 1971.AnalysevonFarbstoffen und
vonbeiderFarbstofferzeugung anfallenden
Zwischenprodukten. XIV.Sichtbarmachung aromatischer
diamine inderpapierchromatographie mitHilfevon
Bromdampfen. Collec.Czech.Chem.Commun. 36:2366-
2371.
Matsumoto. K.,andN.Ukawa.August23,1979.Simultaneous
removalofnitrogenoxidesandsulfurdioxidefromboiler
fluegas.JapanKokaiPat.No.79107467. Mitsubishi
HeavyIndustries, Ltd.
Matsunaga, ,K..R.Hayakawa, M.Suzuki, K.Kawaguchi, Y.
Ogino,and0.Hirose.1989.Allergic contact dermatitis in
hairdressers andbarbers .Causative factorsandchemicals.
Symposium onContactDermatitis andPatch Test Xheldat
thel3tAnnualMeeingofJapanPatch Test Research
Group,Nagoya, Japan, December 3-4,1988.SkinRes.
31:167-175.
Matsunaga. K..K.Hosokawa. M.Suzuki,Y.Arima, and R.
Hayakawa. 1988.Occupational allergic contact Dermatitis
inbeauticians. ContactDermatitis. 18:94-96.
Mathews, E.J.1986.Assessment ofchemical carcinogen-
inducedtransforming activityusing BALB/c-3T3 cells.J.
TissueCultureMethods. 10:157-164.
Matthews, E.J., J.W. Spalding, andR.W.Tennant. 1993a.
Transformation ofBALB/c-3T3 cells:IV.Rank-ordered
potencyof24chemical responses detected inasensitive
newassayprocedure. Environ. Health.Perspect. 101:319-
345.
Matthews, E.J.,J.W.Spalding, andR.W.Tennant. 1993b.
Transformation ofBALB/c-3T3 cells:V.Transformatiion
responses of168chemicals compared withmutagenicity in
Salmonella andcarcinogenicity inrodentbioassays.
Environ. HealthPerspect. 101:347-482.
Matulich, J.andJ.Sullivan. 2005.Atemporary hennatattoo
causinghairandclothing dyeallergy.ContactDermatitis.
53:33-36.
Maurer, T.andR.Hess.1989.Themaximization test forskin
sensitization potential - -Updating thestandard protocol
andvalidation ofamodified protocol. FoodChem.Toxicol.
27:807-811.
Maurer,T.,P.Thomann, E.G.Weirich, andR.Hess.1979.
Predictive evaluation inanimalsofthecontact allergenic
potential of medically important substances. 11.Comparison
ofdifferent methods ofcutaneous sensitization with
“weak”allergens. ContactDermatitis. 5:1-10.
Maurer, T.,E.G.Weirich, andR.Hess.1984.Predictive contact
allergenicity influence oftheanimalstrainused.
Toxicology. 31:217-222.
Mayer,V.W.andC.J.Goin.1980.Induction ofmitotic
recombination bycertainhair-dye chemicals in
Saccharomvces cerevisiae. Mutat.Res.78:243-252.Mayer,V.W.,C.J.Hybner,andD.J.Brusick. 1976.Genetic
effectsinduced inSaccharomyces cerevisiae by
cyclophosphamide invitrowithoutliverenzyme
preparations. Mutat.Res.37:201-2 12.
Mayer,R.L.1955.Groupsensitization ofcompounds of
quinonestructure anditsbiochemical basis:roleofthese
substances incancer.In:Kalbos, P.(ed.)Progress in
Allergy.Boston,MA:Little, Brown, VolIV,p.79.
Mcfadden, J.P..S.H.Wakelin, D.B.Halloway, andD.A.
Basketter. 1998.The effect ofpatchduration onthe
elicitation ofpara-phenylenediamine contactallergy.
ContactDermatitis. 39:79-81.
MDSPharmaServices. 2005.p-Phenylenediamine -
Embryotoxicity studybytheoralroute(gavage) intherat
(Segment II)(MDSPharmaServices Studynumber
AA29083). Unpublished data submitted byCTFA.248
pages.’
Menck,H.R.,M.C.Pike,B.E.Henderson. andJ.S.Jing.1977.
Lungcancerriskamongbeauticians andotherfemale
workers. J.Nat!.CancerInst.59:1423-1425.
Menkart, J..andB.M.Lanman. 1977.Cancerandhairdyes.
N.Y.StateJ.Med.77:439.
Mikhlin. L.M..andIF.Fuior.1976.Morphological changes in
rabbit myocardium undertheeffectofurosolD.
Zdravookhranenie. 19:29-31.
Mikhlin, L..M.,and Y.G. Marchenko. 1972.Changes inthe
concentration oftotalproteinsandproteinfractions in
bloodserumofrabbitduringoraladministration ofUrsolD
inacuteandchronic experiments. Zdravookhranenie.
15:35-36.
Milner,J.E.1971. Invitrolymphocyte responses incontact
hypersensitivity. mt.J.Invest.Dermatol. 56:349-52.
Ministry ofHealth,LaborandWelfare(MHLW). (September
29,2000).MHWOrdinance No.332.Ingredients ofquasi-
drugs.Products tobeuseddirectlyonthebody.Ministryof
Health,LaborandWelfare, Pharmaceutical andMedical
Safety Bureau, Inspection andGuidance Division, 2-2,1-
chome,Kasumigaseki,Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo100-8045, Japan.
MHLW. 2002.Pharmaceutical andMedicalSafetyBureau
Notification No.990.Ministry of Health,Laborand
Welfare, Pharmaceutical andMedicalSafetyBureau,
Inspection andGuidance Division, 2-2,1-chome,
Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo100-8045, Japan.
Mitchell, A.D.,C.J.Rudd,andW.J.Caspary. l988a.Evaluation
oftheL5178Y mouselymphoma cellmutagenesis assay:
Intralaboratory resultsforsixty-three codedchemicals
testedatSRIInternational. Environ. Mo!.Mutagen. 12:37-
101.
Mitchell, A.D.,B.C.Myhr,C.J.Rudd,W.J.Caspary. andV.C.
Dunkel. 1988b.Evaluation oftheL5178Y mouse
lymphoma cellmutagenesis assay:Methods usedand
chemicals evaluated. Environ. Mo!.Mutagen. 12:1-18.
Mitchell, J.C.1972.Allergicdermatitis from
paraphenylenediamine presenting asnummular eczema.
ContactDermatitis Newsletter. 11:270.
-98-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteMitchell, J.C.1977.Multiple concomitant positivepatchtest
reactions. ContactDermatitis. 3:315-20.
Mitsui,T.andY.Fujimura. 1974.Indirect determination of
primaryaminesbyatomicabsorption spectrophotometry.
BunsekiKagaku.23:1309-13 14.
Miyagawa, M.,H.Takasawa, A.Sugiyama. Y.Inoue.T.Murata.
Y.Uno,andK.Yoshikawa. 1995.Theinvivo-invitro
replicative DNAsynthesis (RDS) test withhepatocytes
prepared from male B6C3F1 miceasearlyprediction assay
forputativenongenotoxic (Ames-negative) mouse
hepatocarcinogens. Mutat.Res.343:157-183.
Mohamed. M.andR.Nixon.2000.Severeallergic contact
dermatitis inducedbyparaphenylenediamine inpaint-on
temporary “tattoos’. Australas J.Dermatol. 41:168-171.
Moran,CT.1934.Bilateral necrosisofthecorneafollowing the
useofhairdyeontheeyebrows andlashes.J.Am.Med.
Assoc.102:286-287.
Mori,Y.,T.Niwa.T.HORI.andK.Toyoshi. 1980.
Mutagenicity of3’-methyl-N,N-dimethyl-4- amino
azobenzene metabolites andrelated compounds.
Carcinogenesis. 1:121-128.
Moriearty, P.L.,C.Pereira,andNA.Guimaraes. 1978.Contact
dermatitis inSalvador, Brazil.ContactDermatitis. 4:185-
189.
Morikawa, F.,S.Fujii.M.Tejima.H.Sugiyama. andM.Uzuka.
1976.Safetyevaluation ofhaircosmetics. In:Toda,K..et
al.(eds.).BiologyandDiseaseoftheHair.Baltimore, MD:
University ParkPress,pp.641-657.
Munday, F.andE.Manns.1999.Briefcommunication. Muscle
necrosis inratsinducedby2-methoxy-p-phenylenediamine.
FoodChem.Toxicol.37:561-564.
Myhr,B.C.andW.J.Caspary. 1988.Evaluation oftheL5178Y
mouselymphoma cellmutagenesis assay:Intralaboraory
reslutsforsixty-three coded chemicals testedatLitton
Bionetics, Inc.Environ. Mol.Mutagen. 12:103-194.
Nabih,I.andE.Helmy.1965.p-phenylenediamine asa
schistosomicidal agentanditscondensation with
acetoacetic ester.J.Pharm.Sci.54:1698-1700.
Nacak,M.Z.Erbagci, andS.Aynacioglu. 2006.Human
arylamine N-acetyltransferase 2polymorphism and
susceptibility toallergiccontactdermatitis. lot.J.Dermatol.
45:323-326.
Nagao,M.,T.Yahagi,M.Honda,Y.Seino,T.Kawachi, andT.
Sugimura. 1977.Comutagenic actionsofnorharman
derivatives with4-dimethylaminoazobenzene andrelated
compounds. CancerLett.3,339-46.
Nakagawa, M.andK.Kawai.1996.Multiple azodisperse dye
sensitization mainlyduetogroupsensitizations toazodyes.
ContactDermatitis. 34:6-11.
Nakao.M.andY.Takeda. 1979.Distribution, excretion, and
metabolism ofp-phenylenediamine inrats.Yakugaku
Zasshi.99:1149-53.Nasca,P.C.,CE.Lawrence, P.Greenwald, S.Chorost, J.T.
Arbuckle, andA.Paulson. 1979.Relationship ofhairdye
use,benignbreastdisease,andbreastcancer.J.Nat!.
CancerInst.64:23-28.
National CancerInstitute(Nd).1978.Bioassay ofp
phenylenediamine dihydrochloride forpossible
carcinogenicity. NTISReportNo.PB290124.
NCI.1979.Bioassay ofp-phenylenediamine dihydrochioride for
possiblecarcinogenicity. NTISReportNo.PB290124.
National Institute forOccupational SafetyandHealth (NIOSH).
2005.NIOSHPocketGuidetoChemical Hazards. Entryfor
p-Phenylene diamine.
http:f/www.cdc.eov/nioshJnp/npnd0495.html accessed
December 2007.
Nawaf,A.-M.,A.Joshi,and0.Nour-Eldin. 2003.Acute
allergic contact dermatitis duetopara-phenylenediamine
aftertemporary hennapainting. J.Dermarol. 30:797-800.
Neri.I., E.Guareschi, F.Savoia,andA.Patrizi.2002.
Childhood allergiccontactdermatitis fromhennatattoo.
Pediatr.Der,natol. 19:503-505.
Nethercott, JR..M.MacPherson, B.C.Choi,andP.Nixon.
1986.Contactdermatitis inhairdressers. Contact
Dernwtitis. 14:73-79.
Nethercott, JR.1982.Resultsofroutinepatchtestingof200
patientsinToronto. Canada.ContactDermatitis. 8:389-95.
Nikkels, A.F.,F.Henry.andG.E.Pierard.2000.Allergic
reactions todecorative skinpaintings. J.Eur.Acad.
Dermatol. Venereol. 15:140-142.
Nishi,K.andH.Nishioka. 1982.Lightinducesmutagenicity of
hairdyep-phenylenediamine. Mutat.Res.104:347-350.
Nohynek, G.J.,D.Duche,A.Garrigues, P-A.Meunier, H.
Toutain, andJ.Leclaire. 2005.Undertheskin:
Biotransformation ofpara-aminophenol andpara
phenylenediamine inreconstructed humanepidermis and
humanhepatocytes. Toxicol. Len’.158:196-212.
Nohynek, G.J., J.A. Skare,W.J.A.Meuling, D.W. Hem,
A.Th.H.J. de Bie,andH.Toutain. 2004.Urinaryacetylated
metabolites andN-acetyltransferase-2 genotype inhuman
subjectstreatedwithapara-phenylenediamine-containing
oxidative hairdye.FoodChem.Toxicol.42:1885-189 1.
NorthAmerican ContactDermatitis Group(NACDG).1980a.
Standard screening tray,1979vs.1980summary.
NACDG. 1980b.Patchtestinginallergic contact dermatitis.
EvastonIL:American Academy ofDermatology.
NACDG. 1982.Prospective studyofcosmetic reactions.]. Am.
Acad,Dermatol. 6:909-917.
O’Hagan, A.H.andE.A.Bingham. 2001.Cellist’sfinger
dermatitis. ContactDermatitis. 45:319.
Oleffe,J.,M.J.Nopp-Oger, andG.Achten. 1972.European
battery of skin tests: resultsof300observations. Berufs
Dermatosen. 20:209-217.
-99-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteOnder,M.,Atahan,C.A.,Oztas,P.andMO.Oztas. 2001.
Temporary hennatattooreactions inchildren.mt.J.
Dermatol. 40:577-579.
O’Neill, J.,S.H.Simon,andW.W. Shreeve. 1965.Alternate
glycolytic pathways inbrain.Acomparison between the
actionofartificial electron acceptors andelectrical
stimulation. J.Neurochem. 12:797-802.
Oppel,T.andA.Schnuch. 2006.Themostfrequent allergens in
allergiccontact dermatitis. Dtsch. Med.Wochenschr.
131:1584-1589.
Oshiro,Y.,P.S.Balwierz, andC.E.Piper.1988.Evaluation of
thedivisionarrestmethodoftheCHO/HGPRT mutation
assay.J.Appi.Toxicol.8:129-134.
Oshiro,Y.,C.E.Piper,P.S.Balwierz, andS.G.Soelter.1991.
Chinesehamsterovarycellassaysformutation and
chromosome damage:datafromnon-carcinogens. J.Appi.
Toxicol. 11:167-178.
Paley,K., L.J.Geskin,andM.J.Zirwas.2006.Cutaneous B-cell
pseudolymphoma duetoparaphenylenediamine. Am.J.
Dermatopathol. 28:438-441.
Parekh,AC.andD.H.Jung.1970.Seruminorganic phosphorus
determination usingp-phenylenediamine asareducing
agent.Clin.Chim.Acta.27:373-377.
Parmentier, R.1949.Antimitotic actioninmiceofsomephenols
andaromatic amines.Compt. Rend. Sot.Biol.143:585-586.
Patel,S.,D.A.Basketter, D.Jeffries,I.R.White,R.J.G.Rycroft,
J.P.McFadden, andS.Y.Ho.2007.Patchtestfrequency to
p-Phenylenediamine: followupoverthelast6years.
ContactDermatitis. 56:35-37.
Pegas,J.R.,P.R.Criado,R.f.Criado,C.Vasconcellos, andM.C.
Pires.2002.Allergiccontactdermatitis totemporary tattoo
byp-phenylenediamine. J.Investig. Allergol. Clin.
Immunol. 12:62-64.
Peisach, J.,andW.G.Levine.1965.Acomparison ofthe
enzymic activities ofpigceruloplasmin andRhus
vernicifera lactase.J.Biol. Chem. 240:2284-2289.
Pettersson, G.1970.Electronic characteristics of substrates for
ceruloplasmin.Acta Chem.Stand.24:1838-1839.
Pettigrew, AR.,andG.S.Fell.1972.Simplified calorimetric
determination ofthiocyanate inbiological fluids,andits
application toinvestigation ofthetoxic amblyopias. Clin.
Chem.18:996-1000.
Picardo, M.,C.Cannistraci, A.Cristaudo, C.DeLuca,andB.
Santucci. 1990.Studyoncross-reactivity totheparagroup.
Dermatologica. 181:104-108.
Picardo, M.,C.Zompeta, M.Grandinetti, F.Ameglio, B.
Santucci, A.Gaffioni, andS.Passi.1996.Paraphenylene
diamine, acontactallergen, induces oxidative stressin
normal human keratinocytes inculture.Br.J.Dermatol.
134:681-685.
Pilz,H.,H.H.Goebel,and J.S.O’Brien. 1976a.Isoelectric
enzymepatternsofleukocyte peroxidase innormalcontrols
andpatientswithneuronal ceroid-lipofuscinoses.
Neuropaediatrie. 7:261-270.Pilz,H.,J.S.O’Brien, andR.Heipertz.. l976b.Human
leukocyte peroxidase: activity of asolubleandmembrane-
boundenzymeforminnormalpersonsandpatientswith
neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Metabolism. 25:561-570.
Pilz,H., J.S.O’Brien, andR.Heipertz. 1976c.Humansaliva
peroxidase: microanalytical isoelectric fractionation and
properties innormalpersonsandincaseswithneuronal
ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Clin.Biochem. 9:85-88.
Pilz,H.,G.Schwendemann, and H.H. Goebel.1978.Diagnostic
significance of myeloperoxidase assayinneuronalceroid
lipofuscinoses (Batten-Vogt syndrome).
Neurology..28:924-927.
Pinches,MA.,andR.F.Walker. 1980.Determination of
atmospheric contaminants usingacontinuous paper-tape
personal monitor. I.Analysis ofaromatic amines.Ann.
Occup.Hyg.23:335-352.
Pinter,I.andM.Kramer. 1967.Gaschromatographic detection
anddetermination ofsomearomatic diamines inhairdyes.
Parfeum Kosmet.48:126-128.
Pitter,P.andH.Radkova. 1974.Relation between thestructure
andbiodegradability oforganic compounds. IV.
Biodegradability ofphenylenediamines andnitroanilines.
Sb.Vys.5k.Chem.Technol. Praze,Technol.. Vooly.Fl9,
99-109.
Popa,G.,E.Radulescu-Jercan, andF.M.Albert.1966.
Photometric determination ofsome aromatic amines.Rev.
Roumaine. Chim.11:1449-1452.
Pope,R.W.,Hill,J.C., and MG.Blaskis. 1995.Contact
urticaria totheM17protective mask.Mill.Med.160:536-
537.
Pratt,M.D.,DV.Belsito,V.A.Deleo,etal.2004.North
American Contact Dermatitis Grouppatch-test results,
2001-2002 studyperiod.Dermatitis. 15:176-183.
PreClinical SafetyConsultants Limitedl. 2005.P
Phenylenediamine (PPD).Expertopiniononcarcinogenic
potential. Unpublished data submitted byCTFA.32pages.’
Price,SM.andJ.L.Shupack. 1978.Allergic contact dermatitis
duetoN,N-dimethyl-p-Phenylenediamine inbacteriology
technicians. Cutis.21:330-332.
Prival,M.J. and V.C. Dunkel. 1989.Reevaluation ofthe
mutagenicity andcarcinogenicity ofchemicals previously
identified asfalsepositives intheSalmonella-i yphimurium
mutagenicity assay.Environ. Mol.Mutagen. 13:1-24.
Protivova, J.andJ.Pospisil. 1974.Antioxidants andstabilizers.
XLVII.Behaviour ofamineantioxidants andantiozonants
andmodelcompounds ingelpermeation chromatography.
J.Chromatogr. 88:99-107.
Rademaker, M.1998.Occupational contact dermatitis among
NewZealandfarmers. 1998.Australas. J.Dermatol.
39:164-167.
Radomski, J.L.1979.Theprimaryaromatic amines:Their
biological properties andstructure-activity relationships.
Ann.Rev.Pharmacol. Toxicol. 19:129-157.
100-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteRajka,G.andS.C.Blohm.1970.Theallergenicity of
paraphenylenediamine. II.ActaDerm.Venereol. 50:51-54.
Rani,M.M.,IS.Jam,G.C.JAIN,R.L.KAUL,,andR.R.
Sharma. 1979.Aqueous chamber kineticsofthe‘H-labeled
hairdye,Bull.Postgrad. Inst.Med.Educ.Res.Chandigarh.
13:211-215.
Rastogi, S.C.,H.SØsted,J.D.Johansen, T.Menné,andR.
Bossi.2006.Unconsumed precursors andcouplers after
formation ofoxidative hairdyes.ContactDermatitis.
55:95-100.
Ratnikova, TV.,VI.Klochkov, V.M.Kharchevnikov, LI.
Devikina, and V.N. Lipilin.1974.Analysis ofsome
ingredients ofrubbers. Zh.Prikl.Khim.(Leningrad).
47:850-854.
Re,T.A.,andC.D’Aleo. 1980.CTFA.Methemoglobin levelsin
beagle dogs following oraladministration ofp
phenylenediamine. Finalreport; addendum. Unpublished
datasubmitted byCTFA.1
Re,T.A.,R.F.Loehr,D.E.Rodwell, C.J.D’Aleo,andC.M.
Burnett. 1981.Theabsenceofteratogenic hazardpotential of
p-phenylenediamine inSprague-Dawley rats.Fund.Appi.
Toxicol. 1:421-425.
Rebandel, P.andRudzki, E.1995.Occupational allergytop
phenylenediamine inmilktesters.ContactDermatitis.
33:138.
Rehani,M.M.,IS.Jam, and5K.Sharma. 1981.Distribution
kineticsof3H-labeled p-phenylenediamine--a hairdye.
IndianJ.Med.Res.74:129-34.
Reio,L.1970.Thirdsupplement for thepaper chromatographic
separation andidentification ofphenol derivatives and
relatedcompounds ofbiochemical interestusinga
‘reference system.’ J.Chromatogr. 47:60-85.
Reiss,F.,andA.A.Fisher.1974.Ishairdyed with para
phenylenediamine allergenic? Arch.Dermatol. 109:221 -
222.
Reynolds, R.C.,B.D.Astill,andD.W.Fassett.1970.Interaction
ofN,N-disubstituted p-phenylenediamines withguinea-pig
epidermis invivo.FoodCosmet. Toxicol.8:635-646.
Reznikoff, C.A.,J.S.Bertram, D.W.Brankow, andC.
Heidelberger. 1973.Quantitative andqualitative studiesof
chemical transformation ofclonedC3Hmouse embryo cells
sensitive topostconfluence inhibition ofcelldivision.
CancerRes.33:3239-3249.
Rojanapo, W.,P.Kupradinum, A.Tepsuwan, S.Chutimatewin,
andM.Tanyakaset. 1986.Carcinogenicity ofanoxidation
productofp-phenylenediamine. Carcinogenesis. 7:1997-
2002.
Rollison, D.E.,K.J.Helzlsouer, andSM.Pinney.2006.
Personal HairDyeUse andCancer:ASystematic Literature
ReviewandEvaluation ofExposure Assessment inStudies
Published Since1992.J.Toxicol.Environ. Health.PartB.
9:413-439.
Romaguera, C.,F.Grimalt, andJ.Vilaplana. 1988.Shoe contact
dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis. 18:178.
-101-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteRudner,E.J.,WE.Clendenning, E.Epstein, etal.1973.
Epidemiology ofcontactdermatitis inNorthAmerica: 1972.
Arch.Dermatol. 108:537-540.
Rudner,E.J.,W.E.Clendenning, E.Epstein, etal.1975.The
frequency ofcontactsensitivity inNorthAmerica 1972-
1974.ContactDermatitis 1,277-280.
Rudzki,E.1977.Crossreactions inoccupational contact
dermatitis. I.Aromatic amines. Berufsdermatosen. 25.236-
245.
Saha,M.andCR.Srinivas. 1993.Footwear dermatitis possibly
duetopara-phenylenediamine insocks.ContactDermatitis.
28:295.
Sahoo,B.,S.Handa,K.Penchallaiah, andN.Kumar.2000.
Contact anaphylaxis duetohairdye.ContactDermatitis.
43:244.
Sakai,H..T.Tsukamoto. M.Yamamoto etal.2002.Distinction
ofcarcinogens frommutagens byinduction oflivercellfoci
inamodelfordetection ofinitiation activity.CancerLett.
188:33-38.
Sam.M.1970.Earlyeosinophilia induced inguineapigsby
intrapulmonary injection ofantigenic determinants and
antigens. J..Allergy.45,234-47.
Samter,M.1970.Earlyeosinophilia induced inguineapigsby
intrapulmonary injection ofantigenic determinants and
antigens. J.Allergy.45:234-247.
Santucci, B.,A.Cristaudo, C.Cannistraci. A.Amantea, andM.
Picardo. 1994.Hypertrophic allergiccontactdermatitis from
hairdye.ContactDermatitis. 31:169-171.
Saruta,N.,S.Yamaguchi, andY.Nakatomi. 1958.Sarcoma
produced bysubdermal administration of
paraphenylenediamine. Kyushu J.Med.Sci.9:94-101.
Sasaki,Y.F.,K.Fujikawa, K.Ishidaetal.1999.Thealkaline
singlecellgelelectrophoresis assaywithmousemultiple
organs:esultswith30aomaticaminesevaluated bythe
IARCandU.S. NTP. Mutat.Res.440:1-18.
Saunders, H.,T.O’Brien, andR.Nixon.2004.Casereport.
Textiledyeallergiccontact dermatitis following
paraphenylenediamine sensitization fromatemporary tattoo.
Australas J.Dermatol. 4:229-23 1.
Sax,N.I.,ed.1979.Dangerous Properties ofindustrial
Materials, 5thed.NewYork:VanNostrand Reinhold, 902.
Schaefer, A.,M.Komlos, andA.Seregi.1978.Effectsof
biogenic aminesandpsychotropic drugsonendogenous
prostaglandin biosynthesis intheratbrainhomogenates.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 27:213-218.
Schorr,W.F.1974.Contact dermatitis. Officediagnosis and
management. Minn.Med.57:831-837.
Schwartz. I..J.Kravitz, andA.D’angelo. 1979.Laboratory
evaluation ofsomeoxidation haircolorintermediates.
Cosmet. Toilet.94:47-50.
Scientific Committee onConsumer Products (SCCP). 2005.
Opinion onexposure toreactants andreaction products of
oxidative hair dyeformulations. European Commission.
Internetsiteaccessed December 2007.http://ec.europa.eu/healthlph_risklcommittees/04_sccp/docs
/sccp_o_032.pdf
Scientific Committee onConsumer Products (SCCP). 2006.
Opiniononp-Phenylenediamine. COLIPA N°A7.Internet
siteaccessed December 2007.
http://ec.europa.eu/healthlph_risk!committees/04_sccp/docs
/sccp_o_069.pdf
Seidenari. S.,L.Mantovani, B.M.Manzini, andM.Pignatti.
1997.Cross-sensitizations between azodyesandpara
aminocompound: Astudyof236azo-dye-sensitive
subjects. ContactDermatitis. 36:91-96.
Seiler,J.P.1977.Inhibition oftesticular DNA synthesis by
chemical mutagens andcarcinogens. Preliminary resultsin
thevalidation ofanovelshort-term test.Mutat.Res.46.
305-10.
Sertoli,A..S.Francalanci, MC.Acciai,andM.Gola.1999.
Epidemiological surveyofcontactdermatitis inItaly(1984-
1993)byGIRDA(Gruppo ItalianoRicercaDermatiti da
Contatto eAmbientali). Am.J.ContactDermnt10:18-30.
Shafer,N..andR.W.Shafer.1976.Potential ofcarcinogenic
effectsofhairdyes.N.Y.StateJ.Med.76:394-396.
Shah,M.J.,andA.W.Andrews. 1979.Mutagenic evaluation of
oxidation products ofp-phenylenediamine- ahairdye
component. Toxicol. App!.Pharmacol. 48:A49.
Shah,M.,F.M.Lewis,D.J.Gawrodger. 1997.Patchtesting
children andadolescents: Fiveyearsexperience andfollow
up.J.Am.Acad.Dermatol. 37:964-968.
Shah,M.J., W.S. Tolgyesi, andAD.Brilt.1972.Cooxidation of
p-phenylenediamine andresorcinol inhairdyes.J.Soc.
Cosmetic Chemists. 23:853-861.
Shahin,MM.,P.Andrillon, N.Goetz.,P.Bore.A.Bugaut,and
G.Kalopissis. 1979.Studiesonthemutagenicity ofp
phenylenediamine inSaalmonella typhimurium: presence of
PCBsinrat-livermicrosomal fraction induced byAroclor.
Mutat.Res.68:327-336.
Shapiro, M.,C.Mowad, andW.D.James. 2001. Contact
dermatitis duetoprinter’s inkinamilkindustryemployee:
casereportandreviewoftheallergen
paraphenylenediamine. Am.J.ContactDermat. 12:109-
112.
Sharma, V.K.,5K.Mandal, G.Sethuraman, andNA.Bakshi.
1999.Para-phenylenediamine-induced lichenoid eruptions
ContactDermatitis. 41:40-41.
Sheibani, K.,F.V.Lucas,R.R.Tubbs,R.A.Savage,andGA.
Hoeltge. 1981.Alternatechromagens assubstitutes for
benzidine formyeloperoxidase cytochemistry. Am.J.Clin.
Pathol.75:367-370.
Shelley,W.B.,andL.Juhlin.1977.Selective uptakeofcontact
allergens bytheLangerhans cell.Arch.Dermatol. 113:187-
192.
Shepard, N.,andN.Mitchell. 1977.Theuseofruthenium and
p-phenylenediamine tostaincartilage simultaneously for
lightandelectronmicroscopy. J.Histochem. Cytochem.
25:1163-1168.
-102-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteShigematsu, T.,N.Ozawa, and H.Nakayama. 1988.Invitro
studyofthecross-sensitivity ofhairdyeusinghapten
specificlymphocytes. ContactDermatitis. 19:30-35.
Shore,R.E.,B.S.Pastemack, E.U.Thiessen, M.Sadow,R.
Forbes,andR.E.Albert.1979.Acase-control studyofhair
dyeuseandbreastcancer.J.Nati.CancerInst.62:277-283.
Sidbury, R.andF.J.Storrs. 2000. Pruriticeruption atthe siteof
atemporary tattoo.Am.J.ContactDermat. 11:182-183.
Sieben,S.,Y.Kawakubo. T.AlMasaoudi, H.F.Merk.andB.
Blomeke. 2002.Delayed-type hypersensitivity reactionto
paraphenylenediamine ismediated by2different pathways
ofantigenrecognitiion byspecificalphabeta humanT-cell
clones.J.AllergyClin.Immunol. 109:1005-1011.
Simpson-Dent. S.L.,S.H.Hunt,S.C.Davidson. andS.H.
Wakelin. 2001.Tattoodermatitis fromprimarysensitization
toclothing dyes.ContactDermatitis. 45:248.
Smith,H.R.,SR.Wakelin, andR.J.Rycroft. 1999.Azodyesas
allergens incarbonless copypapermanufacturing. Contact
Dermatitis. 40:214-215.
Snipes,R.L.1977.Identification oflipidsforintestinal
absorption studiesinresin-embedded tissue.Microsc. Acta.
79:127-130.
Solano.F..R.Penafiel. ME.Solano.andJ.A.Lozano. 1988.
Kineticstudyoftheinhibition ofratliverornithine
decarboxylase bydiamines; considerations onthe
mechanism ofinteraction betweenenzymeandinhibitor.mt.
J.Biochem. 20:463-470.
Soler-Niedziela, L.,X.Shi,J.Nath,andT.Ong.1991.Studies
onthreestructurally relatedphenylenediamines withthe
mousemicronucleus assaysystem.Mutat.Res.259:43-48.
Sontag,J.M.1981.Carcinogenicity of substituted
benzenediamines (phenylenediamines) inratsandmice.J.
Nail.CancerInst.66:591-602.
SØsted,H.,T.Agner,K.E.Andersen, andT.Menne.2002.55
casesofallergicreactions tohairdye:adescriptive,
consumer complaint-based study.ContactDermatitis.
47:299-303.
SØsted,H.,J.D.Johansen, K.E.Andersen, andT.Menné. 2006b.
Severe allergic hairdyereactions in8children. Contact
Dermatitis. 54:87-91.
SØsted,H.andT.Menné.2005.Allergyto3-nitro-p-
hydroxyethylaminophenol and4-amino-3-nitrophenol ina
hairdye.ContactDermatitis. 52:317-319.
SØsted,H.,T.Menné,andJ.D.Johansen. 2006a.Patchtestdose-
response studyofp-Phenylenediamine: thresholds and
anatomical regional differences. ContactDermatitis.
54:145-149.
Søsted,H.,S.C.Rastogi, K.E.Andersen, J.D.Johansen, andT.
Menné.2004.Hairdyecontactallergy:quantitative
exposure assessment ofselectedproducts andclinicalcases.
ContactDermatitis. 50:344-348.
Spoor.H.J.1977.Permanent hair colorants: oxidation peroxide
dyes.I.Chemical technology. Cutis.19:424.428, 430.Srivastava, S.P.,and V.K. Dua. 1975.TLC(thin-layer
chromatography) separation ofcloselyrelatedamines.
Fresenius. Z.Analyt.Chem.276:382.
Stan,T.,V.Antonescu, E.Stefanescu, andE.Feraru.1979.A
newspectrophotometric methodfor thedetermination of
hydrogen sulfideintheair.Farmacia. 27:85-89.
Stanley,L.A.,J.A.Skare,E.Doyle,R.Powrie.D.D’Angelo,
andCR.Elcombe. 2005.Lackofevidence formetabolism
ofp-phenylenediamine byhumanhapaticchtochrome P450
enzymes. Toxicology. 210:147-157.
Steiling, W..J.Kreutz,andH.Hofer. 2001. Percutaneous
penetrationldermal absorption ofhairdyesinvitro.Toxicol.
InVitro.15:565-570.
Stenback, F.G..J.C.Rowland. andL.A.Russell. 1977.Non
carcinogenicity ofhairdyes:Lifetime percutaneous
applications inmice and rabbits.FoodCosmet. Toxicol.
15:601-606.
Stevens, M.A.1967.Useofthealbinoguineapigtodetectthe
skin-sensitizing abilityofchemicals. Br.J.Indust.Med.
24:189-202.
Stockert, J.C.1977.Osmium tetroxidelp-phenylenediamine
stainingofnucleoliandBalbiani rings inChironomus
salivaryglands.Histochemistrv. 53:43-56.
Storrs,F.J.,L.E.Rosenthal, R.M.Adamsetal.1989.Prevalence
andrelevance ofallergicreactions inpatientspatchtestedin
NorthAmerica --1984to1985.J.Am.Acad.Derinatol.
20:1038-1045.
Storrs,F.J.,J.Taylor,W.P.Jordan,andHI.Maibach. 1979.
Paraphenylenediamine dihydrochloride. Contact
Dermatitis. 5:126.
Stransky, L.andM.Krasteva. 1989.Changing patternsof
contactsensitivity inSofia.Derm.BerufUmwelt. 37:214-
216.
Su,L.-H. And C-C.Sun.1998.Positivepatchtestto
cocamidopropyl betaineinahairdresser. Contact
Dermatitis. 38:168-169.
Sugden, K.,GB.Cox, and Loscombe, CR.(1978).
Chromatographic behavior ofbasicaminocompounds on
silicaandODS-silica usingaqueousmethanol mobile
phases.J.Chromatogr. 149,377-90.
Sutthipisal, N.,J.P.McFadden, andE.Cronin.1993.
Sensitization inatopicandnon-atopic hairdressers with
handeczema.ContactDermatitis. 29:206-209.
Szent-Gyorgyi, A.1980.Thelivingstateandcancer.mi
Quantum Chem.7:217-22.
Tainter,ML.,andP.J.Hanzlik. 1924.Themechanisms of
edemaproduction byparaphenylenediamine. .1.Pharmacol.
Exp.Ther.24:179-211.
Tainter,ML.,M.James,andW.Vandeventer. 1929.
Comparative edemicactionsofortho-,meta-.andpara
phenylenediamines indifferent species.Arch.Int.
Pharntacodvn. 36:152-162.
-103-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteTan,E.andJ.Garioch. 2007. Blackhennatattoos:coexisting
rubberandpara-phenylenediamine allergy? Clin. Exp.
Dermatol. 32:782-783.
Tatematsu, M.,Y.Mera,T.Inoue,K.Satoh,K.Sato,andN.Ito.
1988.Stablephenotypic expression ofglutathione 5-
transferase placental typeandunstable phenotypic
expression ofgamma-glutamyltransferase inratliver
preneoplastic andneoplastic lesions.Carcinogenesis. 9:215-
220.
Taylor,J.S.,Maibach, HI.,A.A.Fisher,andW.F.Bergfeld.
1993.Contactleukoderma associated withthe useofhair
colors.Cutis.52:273-280.
Teixeira, M.,L.DeWachter, E.Ronsyn, andAnGoossens.
2006.Contactallergytopara-phenylenediamine ina
permanent eyelashdye.ContactDermatitis. 55:92-94.
Temesvari, E.1984.Contacturticaria from
paraphenylenediamine. ContactDermatitis. 11:125.
Terayama, H.andA.Hanaki.1959.Studiesonthemechanism of
livercarcinogenesis bycertainaminoazo dyes.III.Effectof
paraformaldehyde, dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine and
disulfiram upon thecarcinogenic potency(truncated) Gann;
Jap.J.CancerRes.50:169-176.
TheSocietyofDyersandColourists. 1956.Co/ourIndex,2ed.
vol.4.Yorkshire, U.K.
The Society ofDyersandColourists. 1971a.Co/ourIndex,3 d
ed.,vol.3.Yorkshire, UK,3262.
The Society ofDyersandColourists. 197lb. Co/our Index,3l
ed., vol. 4.Yorkshire, UK,4644,4822.
Thielemann, H.1978.Thin-layer chromatographic detection
limitswithrespecttosemiquantitative determination of
severalcoupling-capable aromatic amines,aminoacids,and
aminophenols onprepared filmsandsilicagelGlayerswith
fast dye salts assprayreagents. Sci.Pharm.46:231-233.
Thind,T.S.,SB.Saksena, andS.C.Agrawal. 1979.Effectof
somephenolic compounds ongermination of sporesof
Clathridium corticola. IndianPhytopathol. 32:273-274.
Thirtle,J.R.1968.Phenylenediamines andtoluenediamines. In:
Kirk,R.E., and Othmer,D.F.,eds.Encyclopedia of
Chemical Technology, 2nd ed., vol 15.NewYork:John
Wiley&Sons,216-24.
Thune,P.1984.Contactandphotocontact allergytosunscreens.
Photodermatol. 1:5-9.
Thuraisingham, R.A.,andH.M.Nilar.1980.Atheoretical study
ofthecarcinogenic nature ofsome aromatic amines.J.
Theor. Biol. 86:577-80.
Tomljanoviá-Veselski, M.andilih-Ostojiá, C.2006.Contact
dermatitis totemporary tattoo.ActaDermatovenerol. Croat.
14:160-162.
Topham, J.C.1980a.Thedetection ofcarcinogen-induced sperm
headabnormalities inmice.Mutat.Res.69:149-155.
Topham, J.C.1980b.Doinduced sperm-head abnormalities in
micespecifically identifymammalian mutagens rather than
carcinogens? Mutat.Res.74:379-3 87.Tosti,A.,M.Pazzaglia, andM.Bertazzoni. 2000.Contact
allergy from temporary tattoos.Arch.Dermatol. 136:1061
1062.
Traul,K.A.,K.Takayama, V.Kachevsky, R.J.HINK,andJ.S.
Wolff.1981.Arapidinvitroassayforcarcinogenicity of
chemical substances inmammalian cells utilizing an
attachment- independence endpoint. 1.AppI.Toxicol.
1:190-195.
Turchettro, L.,GAMBERO, P.,PAPETFI, P.,
TERRACCIANO, M.,andQUERCIA, V.(1980).
Applications ofHPLC for theidentification ofsome
amines,phenols, andaminophenols insamplesofcream
andshampoo hair-dyeing products. Boll.Chim.Farm.
119:23-30.
Turchin, I., L.Moreau, E.Warshaw, andD.Sasseville. 2006.
Cross-reactions amongparabens, para-phenylenediamine,
andbenzocaine: Aretrospective analysisofpatchtesting.
Dermatitis. 17:192-195.
Turesky, J.P.Freeman, R.D.Holland etal.2003.Identification
ofaminobiphenyl derivatives incommercial hair dyes.
Chem.Res.Toxicol.16:1162-1173.
Uno,Y.,H.Takasawa, M.Miyagawa, Y.Inoue,T.Murata,and
K.Yoshikawa. 1994.Aninvivo-invitroreplicative DNA
synthesis (RDS)testusingrathepatocytes asanearly
prediction assay for nongenotoxic hepatocarcinogens
screeningof 22knownpositiveand25noncarcinogens.
Mutat.Res.320:189-205.
U.S.TariffCommission. 1919.Reportondyes and relatedcoal-
tarchemical 1918.Washington, DC:USGovernment
PrintingOffice.
Usvyatsov, A.A.,I.M.Medvedeva, I.M.,AS.Slavnova, and
E.V.Genkina. 1975.Polarographic studyofsome
derivatives of diphenylamine onaplatinum electrode. Nov.
Polyarogr. TezisyDokl.Vses.Soveshch. Polyarogr. 6:190.
Uter, W., H.Lessmann, J.Geier,D.Becker,T.Fuchs,andG.
Richter.2002.Thespectrum ofallergic(cross)-sensitivity in
clinical patch testing with‘paraamino’ compounds. Allergy.
57:319-22.
Uter,W.,H.Lessmann, J.Geier, and A.Schnuch. 2003.Contact
allergytoingredients ofhair cosmetics infemale
hairdressers andclients -an8-yearanalysisofIVDKdata.
ContactDermatitis. 49:236-240.
Ukawa,N.,andS.Okino.August23,1979.Removal of
nitrogen oxides andsulfur dioxide fromwastegas.Japan
KokaiPat.No.79107468. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries,
Ltd.
Uter,W.,G.Stropp,A.Schnuch, andH.Lessmann. 2006.
Aniline -Ahistorical contactallergen? Currentdatafrom
therIVDKandreviewoftheliterature. Ann.Occup.Hyg.
November28 Issue:l-8.
Vaganova, M.E.,andSM.Sekamova. 1980.Identification of
the types ofmusclefibersincryostatic sections byusingp
phenylenediamine. Ark/i.Patol.42:75-77.
104-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteVaiks,R.,L.Conde-Salazar, J.Malfeito, andS.Ledo.2005.
Contactdermatitis inhairdressers, 10yearslater:patch-test
resultsin300hairdressers (1994to2003)andcomparison
withprevious study.Dermatitis. 16:28-3 1.
vanZuuren,E.J.andA.P.Lavrijsen. 2002.Allergicreactions
andhypopigmentation duetotemporary tattooing with
henna.NedTijdschr. Geneeskd. 146:1332-1335.
Venitt,S.,andC.E.Searle.1976.Mutagenicity andpossible
carcinogenicity ofhaircolourants andconstituents. In:
International AgencyforResearch onCancerScientific
Publications No.13.vol52.Lyon,France:INSERM
Symposia Series,263-72.
Vestey,J.P.,P.K.Buxton,andJ.A.Savin.1985.Eyelashcurler
dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis. 13:274-275.
Viswanathan, P.N.,V.Gupta.andV.Misra.1986.Studieson
the dermal toxicityofp-phenylenediamine. mt.J.Cosinet.
Sci.7:213-218.
VonMallinckro. G.,andA.Hermann. 1969.Agroupreaction
for thedetection ofp-nitrophenols, p-aminophenols andp
phenylenediamines inurine.Z.Kim.Chem.KIm.Biochem.
7:34-37.
VonOetingen, W.F.1941.The aromatic amino andnitro
compounds, theirtoxicityandpotential dangers. Areviewof
theliterature. PublicHealth Bulletin No.271.39-44.US
PublicHealth Service. Washington, DC:USGovernment
PrintingOffice.
Wahlberg J.E.(1979.Transferofparaphenylenediamine
delayed-type hypersensitivity: aComparative investigation
intheguineapig,usingarteriovenous cross-transfusion and
parabiosis. I.Invest.Dermatol. 72:52-4.
Wakelin, S.H.,D.Creamer, R.J.Rycroft, 1.R.White,andJ.P.
McFadden. 1998.Contact dermatitis from
paraphenylenediamine usedas askinpaint.Contact
Dermatitis. 39:92-93.
Walle,T.1968.Quantitative gas-chromatographic determination
ofprimaryaminesinsubmicrogram quantities after
condensation with2,5-hexanedione. ActaPharm.Suecica.
5:353-66.
Wang,L.H.andS.J.Tsai.2003.Simultaneous determination of
oxidative hairdyep-phenylenediamine anditsmetabolites
inhumanandrabbitbiological fluids.Anal.Biochem.
312:201-207.
Wang,W.-H.,L.-F.Li,X.-Y.Lu,andJ.Wang. 2005. Cosmetic
dermatitis inChineseeczemapatientspatchtestedwitha
modified European standard seriesofallergens. Contact
Dermatitis. 53:314-319.
Warbrick, E.V., R.J.Dearman, L.J.Lea,D.A.Basketter. andI.
Kimber. 1999.Locallymphnodeassayresponses to
paraphenylenediamine: intra- and inter-laboratory
evaluations. J.AppI.Toxicol. 19:255-260.
Warm.A.P.1976.Contactdermatitis topartner’s hairdye.Clin.
Exp.Derinatol. 1:283-284.Watanabe, T.,T.Hirayama, andS.Fukui.1990.Themutagenic
effectofp-phenylenediamine ontheoxidation ofo-orm
phenylenediamine withhydrogen peroxide inthe
Salmonella test.Mutat.Res.245:15-22.
Watanabe, T.,N.Ishihara, andM.Ikeda.1976.Toxicityofand
biological monitoring for1,3-diamino- 2.4,6,-
trinitrobenzene andother nitro-amino derivatives of
benzene andchlorobenzene. mt.Arch. Occup. Environ.
Health.37:157-68.
Weast,R.C..ed.1978.CRCHandbook ofChemistry and
Physics,59thed.WestPalm Beach. FL:CRC Press, C-I
56.
Wetter,D.A..M.D.P. Davis. J.A.Yiannias. etal.2005. Patch
testresultsfromthe Mayo CliniccontactDermatitis Group,
1998-2000. J.Am.Acad.Dermatol. 53:416-42 1.
White,J.M.,D.A.Basketter, C.K.Pease.D.A.Sanders, andJ.P.
McFadden. 2007.Intermittent exposure tolow-
concentration paraphenylenediamine canbeequivalent to
single,higher-dose exposure. ContactDermatitis. 56:262-
265.
White, J.M.L., P.Kullavanijaya, I.Duangdeeden, R.Zazzeroni,
N.J.Gilmour. D.A.Basketter, and J.P.McFadden. 2006.p
Phenylenediamine allergy:the roleofBandrowski’s base.
Cliii.Exp.Allergy.36:289-293.
Williams. G.M.. M.F. Laspia,andV.C.Dunkel. 1982.
Reliability ofthehepatocyte primaryculture!DNArepair
testintestingofcodedcarcinogens andnoncarcinogens.
Mutat.Res.97:359-370.
Windholz, M.,ed.1976.TheMerkIndex,9thed.Rahway, NJ:
Merck&Co.,948.
Wisneski, HR.1977.Analysis ofhairdyes.In:Senzel,A.J.
(ed).Newburger’s ManualofCosmeticAnalysis, 2’ed.
Washington, DC:Assoc.Off.Anal.Chem..93-103.
Wolf,R.,D.Wolf,H.Matz,andE.Orion.2003.Cutaneous
reactions totemporary tattoos.Dermatol. Online.9:3.
Wolfram, L.J.andHI.Maibach. 1985.Percutaneous
penetration ofhairdyes.Arch.Dermatol. Res.277:235-241.
Wong,GA.andCM.King.2003.Immediate-type
hypersensitivity andallergiccontactdermatitis duetopara
phenylenediamine inhairdye.ContactDermatitis. 48:166.
Xie,Z.,R.Hayakawa, M.Sugiura, H.Kojima, H.Konishi, G.
Ichihara, andY.Takeuchi. 2000.Experimental studyon
skinsensitization potencies andcross-reactivities of hair-
dye-related chemicals inguineapigs.ContactDermatitis
42:270-275.
Yabe,K..,K.Saito,T.Murai,M.-A.Hara,andH.Watanabe.
1991.Anexperimental rhabdomyolysis dueto
paraphenylenediamine contained inhairdyes:Itseffectson
serumescaping enzymes (CPK,GOT,andGPT)and
histopathological findings intheskeletal muscles. Res.
Pract.Forensic Med.34:109-116.
Yamada. K..S.Shirahata, andH.Murakami. 1985.DNA
breakage byphenylcompounds. Agric.Biol.Chemn.
49:1423-1428.
-105-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteYasunaga, K.,A.Kiyonari, M.Nakagawa, andK.Yoshikawa. Yoshikawa, K.,H.Uchino,andH.Kurata.1976.Studieson
2006.Different resultsoftheSalmonella umutestbetween mutagenicity of hairdye.EiseiShikensho Hokoku. 94:28-
threeisomersofphenylenediamine (PDA) derivatives). 32.
DrugChem.Toxicol.29:203-2 13.Yoshikawa, K.,H.Uchino, N.Tateno,andH.Kurata.1977.
Yokozeki, H.,M.-H.Wu,K.Sumietal.2003.Th2cytokines, Mutagenic activities ofsamplesprepared withrawmaterials
IgEandmast cells playacrucialroleintheinduction of ofhairdye.EiseiShikensho Hokoku.95:15-24.
para-phenylenediamine-induced contacthypersensitivity inYounous, S.,M.A.Semkaoui. T.Aboulhassan, andR.ElAdib.mice.Clin.Exp.Immunol. 132:385-92.2007[Translation]. Doestheparaphenylenediamine cross
Yoshikawa. K.1996.Anomalous nonidentity between theplacenta? Ann.Fr.Anesth.Reani,n.26:466.
Salmonella genotoxicants androdentcarcinogens andZela.zna. K.,andB.Legatowa. 1971.Identification ofbasicdyesgeontoxic noncarcinogens. Environ. HealthPerspect.inemulsion hairdyesbythin-layer chromatography. Rocz104:40-46.PanstivZaki Hig 22:427-430.
Yoshikawa, K..T.Nohmi.R.Harada,M.Jr.Ishidate, andY.Zhao,B.AndW.X.Fan.1991.Facialcontactdermatitis.Inokawa. 1979.Differential mutagenicities oftriaminoPathogenetic factorsinChina.mt.J.Dermatol. 30:485-486.benzenes againstSalmonella typhimurium TA98inthe
presence ofS-9fractions frompolychlorinated biphenyls,
phenobarbital or3-methylcholanthrene-pretreated rats,
hamsters, andmice.J.Toxicol. Sci.4:317-326.
-106-
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or QuoteConcentration of Use by FDA Product Category * 
p-Phenylenediamine  
p-Phenylenediamine HCl  
p-Phenylenediamine Sulfate  
Ingredient  Product Category  Maximum Concentration of Use  
p-Phenylenediamine  Hair dyes and colors  0.98 -3% (after dilution maximum 
on-head use concentration 1%)  
*Ingredients included in the title of the table but not found in the table were included in the 
concentration of use survey, but no uses were reported.  
Information collected in 2021  
Table prepared:  January 12, 2022 
Clarification of use maximum on- head use concentration May 9, 2022  
Distributed for Comment Only -- Do Not Cite or Quote