Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth
reactors with different carriers
H. T. Le, N. Jantarat, W. Khanitchaidecha, K. Ratananikom and A. Nakaruk
ABSTRACT
Two waste materials, concrete and sponge, were used as biomass carriers in the attached growth
reactor in a nitrogen wastewater treatment system. The nitrogen removal performance was comparedto a control reactor using commercial carrier material. The highest nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency, 87%,
was found in the sponge reactor, with the concrete reactor showing 82% ef ﬁciency ahead of the
commercial reactor of 76%. A thick bio ﬁlm developed on the ﬁber of the sponge carrier, with the
biomass increasing from 270 g-VSS/m
3-carrier to 1,000 g-VSS/m3-carrier. For the concrete
carrier, biomass was observed on the concrete cracks and also as a bio ﬁlm on the surface. The maximal
biomass was 630 g-VSS/m3-carrier. The content of the biomass agglomerated in the commercial carrier
was 310 g-VSS/m3-carrier. Nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation simultaneously occurred to remove nitrogen in
the sponge and the commercial carrier reactor. However, in the concrete reactor, nitri ﬁcation mainly
occurred during the aeration phase and denitri ﬁcation occurred in the non-aeration phase. These results
demonstrate that the sponge was the best carrier, with high nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency, dense biomass
and tolerance to shock loading. The simplicity inherent in the system design together with goodperformance make it suitable for use in wastewater treatment systems.H. T. Le
N. Jantarat
W. Khanitchaidecha (corresponding author)
Department of Civil Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering,
Naresuan University,Phitsanulok,ThailandandCentre of Excellence for Innovation and
Technology for Water Treatment,
Naresuan University,Phitsanulok,ThailandE-mail: wilawank1@gmail.com
K. Ratananikom
Department of Science and Mathematics,
Faculty of Agro-Industrial Technology,
Kalasin University, Kalasin,Thailand
A. Nakaruk
Department of Industrial Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering,
Naresuan University,Phitsanulok,Thailand
Key words |attached growth reactor, commercial carrier, concrete carrier, sponge carrier,
wastewater treatment
INTRODUCTION
The removal of nitrogen, including ammonium-nitrogen
(NH 4-N), nitrite-nitrogen (NO 2-N) and nitrate-nitrogen
(NO 3-N), from domestic wastewater is an important issue
for water resource management, especially for controllingpolluting water runoff with a high nitrogen content. Highnitrogen levels in wastewater discharged into local watersources, such as ponds and small catchments, common inrural areas, can often result in toxic blooms of algae and‘scum ’on water surfaces, rendering it un ﬁt forﬁsh breeding,
crop watering and animal consumption, important uses inrural areas. Domestic wastewater usually has high nitrogencontent and is an easily identi ﬁable source as well as
being easily treated at the local level.
Several physical and biological treatment methods have
been developed to remove the nitrogen from domesticwastewater. These treatment methods include granular nitri-tation and anammox in membrane-aerated bio ﬁlm reactors
(Liet al. ), hybrids of activated carbon and sequencing
batch reactors ( Sirianuntapipoon & Chairattanawan ),
and combined subsurface and surface ﬂow constructed wet-
lands ( Sartori et al. ). Current treatment systems are
mainly focused on the modi ﬁcation of exiting traditional sys-
tems to enhance their treatment ability with co-removalmechanisms. However, more importantly in remote areas,a reliable supply of clean water is an imperative, and there-fore reliable domestic wastewater treatment plants of simple
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Licence (CC BY 4.0), which permits copying,adaptation and redistribution, provided the original work is properly cited(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).331 © 2018 The Authors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
doi: 10.2166/wrd.2017.182
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018design, using uncomplicated materials available locally, with
low operating costs, to remove the nitrogen from the waste-water, are essential. The attached growth reactor is a type ofbiological treatment plant, in which the active sludge isattached to a carrier as a bio ﬁlm, is such a reliable technol-
ogy appropriate to remote areas.
The positive effects on the nitrogen removal performance
of biomass immobilization in the attached growth reactorhave been discussed previously ( Xiangli et al. ;Dong
et al. ). The advantages of these attached growth reactors
included high biomass concentration, simultaneous nitri ﬁca-
tion and denitri ﬁcation, and resistance to nitrogen shock
loading and other environmental changes. In recent years,various natural and arti ﬁcial solid materials have been pro-
posed as the carrier in attached growth reactors forwastewater treatment. Natural zeolite and activated carbonhave been used as the biomass carrier ( Park et al. ;
Feng et al. ) which had the signi ﬁcant advantage of the
co-removal mechanisms of adsorption and biological pro-cesses. Well-known arti ﬁcial carriers are made from
polyethylene and polyurethane. The polyurethane formcarrier can improve the ef ﬁciency of long-term nitri ﬁcation
and denitri ﬁcation and sustain microbial populations of
slow growing microorganisms ( Daniel et al. ). Biodegrad-
able polymers (such as polycaprolactone) have also beenused in treating domestic wastewater. A biodegradable carriercan provide the soluble organic carbon for denitri ﬁcation in
wastewater containing a low C/N ratio ( Chu & Wang ).
Although there has previously been extensive research on
nitrogen removal performance, and microbial communities,in attached growth reactors, with a variety of carriers, theuse of waste material as the biomass carrier for biomassattachment to enhance the nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation
has not been comprehensively explored. Concrete is a con-struction waste product which is mostly disposed by open
dumping in land ﬁlls or otherwise illegally dumped. The
surface roughness and high voids of concrete make it poten-tially useful as a biomass carrier. Another waste product,sponge, probably used in all households in the nation, is aporous material appropriate for biomass attachment, inex-pensive and readily available, even in remote areas.
Prior to this, carbon in various forms has been used for
nitrogen removal from domestic wastewater. This is becausethe wastewater has a low carbon content which isinsufﬁcient for complete denitri ﬁcation. In previous studies,
the carbon concentration was maintained in the range of500 –6 0 0 m g / L ,a n dt h eC / Nr a t i ow a sa r o u n d2 5( Feng
et al. ;Liuet al. ). Although excellent performance
of nitrogen removal has been attained in previous studies(Walters et al. ), the residual carbon can impact the qual-
ity of the treated water. Further, when the biodegradablematerial acted as carrier and carbon source, the amount ofcarbon release and stable release rate were matters of concern.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the
possibility of using alternative materials for domestic waste-water treatment in the attached growth reactor. Concreteand sponge were considered, for the reasons previouslystated. The nitrogen removal performance at low carboncontent levels of an attached growth reactor, using variouslythe concrete and the sponge material as the carrier, wasinvestigated. The performance of these materials was com-
pared to that of a commercial carrier which is commonly
used in attached growth reactor wastewater treatmentplants. The removal mechanisms occurred in the differentcarriers was clari ﬁed, and the attached biomass was
observed for volume and time of growth.
METHODOLOGY
Carrier
Concrete and sponge are two waste materials which were
used for biomass attachment in this research. The concretewhich came from a construction site and sponges from alocal market were cut into 2 cm cubic shape. The commercial
carrier with 2 cm diameter was used as a control to compare
the performance. The carriers were transferred to a sus-pended sludge which had been cultivated by NH
4-N
feeding for a month. The accumulated biomass was in therange of 270 g-VSS/m
3-carrier for the concrete and sponge
carriers and 180 g-VSS/m3-carrier for the commercial carrier.
Experimental set-up
Three attached growth reactors were established ( Figures 1
and2). The size of each reactor was 11 cm internal diameter
and 40 cm height with a working volume of about 3 L. The332 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018three carriers –concrete, sponge and commercial –were
each added to a reactor to be 60% of the working volume.The synthetic wastewater (in ﬂuent) was continuously fed
to the reactors at the ﬂow rate of 5 L/day. The reactors
had a hydraulic retention time of 12 hours. Air was intermit-
tently diffused through an air stone in a three-hour aerationandﬁve-hour non-aeration cycle. The continuous in ﬂuent
ﬂow along the reactors height enhanced the mass transfer
and water circulation during the aeration and non-aerationcycle. The aeration period enabled nitri ﬁcation and thenon-aeration (anaerobic) period allowed denitri ﬁcation in
a manner suggested in Leet al. (). The dissolved
oxygen (DO) was around 5 mg/L in the aeration periodand was gradually decreased to 0.5 mg/L in the ﬁrst hour
of the anaerobic period.
In the experiment, there were three conditions with
different in ﬂuent NH
4-N and organic carbon concen-
trations. An initial concentration of 40 mg/L of NH 4-N
was fed to the reactors in Phases 1 and 2, and the NH 4-N
concentration was then increased to 80 mg/L in Phase 3.
Figure 2 |Schematic of attached growth reactors.
Figure 1 |(a) Concrete carrier, (b) sponge carrier and (c) commercial carrier.333 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018The C/N ratio was kept at 2.5 in Phase 1 and increased to
3.5 in the sequencing phases (in Table 1 ).
Synthetic wastewater preparation
Synthetic domestic wastewater was used for evaluating the
reactor performance. This wastewater was prepared bymixing in the following chemicals (g/L); NH
4Cl 0.15 –0.30,
CH 3COONa 0.34 –0.48, KH 2PO30.02, MgSO 40.03, CaCl 2
0.36, FeSO 40.003 and trace elements 0.5 mL ( Guo et al.
). The concentrations of NO 2-N and NO 3-N were
lower than 1 mg/L while the NH 4-N concentration was
between 40 mg/L and 80 mg/L.
Biomass measurement
The carriers were taken from the attached growth reactors at
the initial stage, day 0, and day 45 and 70 (the steady stateday). The biomass was removed from the carriers by rinsingand shaking for 15 minutes, and the liquid was then centri-fuged and ﬁltered. The mixed liquor suspended solids and
mixed liquor volatile suspended solids concentrations inthe biomass samples were measured according to the stan-
dard method ( APHA ). The biomass content was
calculated as g-VSS/m
3-carrier. In addition, the carrier and
its bio ﬁlm were observed by using a scanning electron
microscope (Leo 1400 Series).
Analytical method
The performance of the attached growth reactors was
measured by two parameters: NH 4-N removal ef ﬁciencyand nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency. The reduction of NH 4-N
between the in ﬂuent and ef ﬂuent was only concerned with
the NH 4-N removal ef ﬁciency which refers to nitri ﬁcation
ability. However, all nitrogen forms of NH 4-N, NO 2-N and
NO 3-N were included in the nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency
which refers to both nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation. The
inﬂuent samples were immediately taken from the synthetic
wastewater after preparation, while the ef ﬂuent samples
were collected from the end of non-aeration (after 24-houroperation). The concentrations of NH
4-N, NO 2-N and NO 3-
N were analyzed in accordance with the standard method(APHA ). NH
4-N removal ef ﬁciency and nitrogen
removal ef ﬁciency were calculated according to Equations
(1) and (2). The speci ﬁc nitrogen removal which referred to
the nitrogen removal per biomass unit was calculated accord-ing to Equation (3). The organic carbon was measured using atotal organic carbon analyzer (HACH, IL530 TOC-TN). The
pH and DO were measured daily using a pH meter (Eutech
Instruments) and a DO meter (CyberScan DO 110 Model).
NH
4-N removal efficiency (%)
¼1/C0NH 4e f f l u e n t
NH 4i n f l u e n t/C18/C19
×100 (1)
Nitrogen removal efficiency (%)
¼1/C0NH 4e f f l u e n t þNO 2e f f l u e n t þNO 3e f f l u e n t
NH 4 influent þNO 2i n f l u e n t þNO 3i n f l u e n t/C18/C19
×100 (2)
Specific nitrogen removal(mg N =g VSS)
¼Total N in influent /C0Total N in effluent
Biomass/C18/C19
(3)
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Performance of attached growth reactors
At the low NH 4-N loading in Phase 1, the nitrogen removal
efﬁciency for the three attached growth reactors increased
continuously until it became stable at the steady state onday 45. In the steady state, the sponge reactor showed thehighest nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency of 68%, followed by
the concrete reactor of 61% and the commercial carrierreactor of 56% ( Figure 3 ). However, the NH
4-N removalTable 1 |Operating condition of attached growth reactors
CarrierInﬂuent
NH4-N
(mg N/L)Organic
carbon
(mg C/L) C/N Operation day
Concrete 40 100 2.5 Phase 1: day 1 –20
40 140 3.5 Phase 2: day 21 –45
80 280 3.5 Phase 3: day 46 –70
Sponge 40 100 2.5 Phase 1: day 1 –20
40 140 3.5 Phase 2: day 21 –45
80 280 3.5 Phase 3: day 46 –70
Commercial
carrier40 100 2.5 Phase 1: day 1 –20
40 140 3.5 Phase 2: day 21 –45
80 280 3.5 Phase 3: day 46 –70334 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018efﬁciency for all three reactors was 85% (data not shown).
These results show that nitri ﬁcation is more effective than
denitri ﬁcation for oxidizing NH 4-N to NO 3-N. The low con-
centration of organic carbon in the ef ﬂuent indicated that
the nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation was limited by the rate
of denitri ﬁcation due to the inadequate supply of carbon.
In Phase 2, the nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency continued to
increase at the higher C/N ratio of 3.5. At the steady state, thenitrogen removal ef ﬁciency achieved 82% for the concrete
reactor, 87% for the sponge reactor and 76% for the commer-cial carrier reactor. Similarly, the NH
4-N removal ef ﬁciency
also increased and reached 90 –95% for all reactors. The dra-
matic increase in nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency was due to
there being suf ﬁcient carbon available for microbial metab-
olism to remove the nitrogen, as indicated by there beingresidual carbon in the ef ﬂuent. In addition, the growth of
the biomass on the carriers was another signi ﬁcant reason
for the dramatic increase in nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency.
The biomass content increased from 270 g-VSS/m
3-carrierin the initial stage to 610 and 1,000 g-VSS/m3-carrier for
the concrete and sponge at the steady state, and increasedfrom 180 g-VSS/m
3-carrier to 290 g-VSS/m3-carrier for the
commercial carrier ( Figure 4 ). It can be seen that dense bio-
mass was observed in the sponge and concrete carriers,which has a high porosity and particular surface character-istics which encouraged the faster attachment of biomass,whereas the commercial carrier has a smooth and rigid sur-face not as conducive to biomass attachment.
At the high NH
4-N loading of 80 mg/L in Phase 3, the
nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency suddenly dropped and then
increased again to 80% for the concrete reactor, 88% for thesponge reactor and 70% for the commercial carrier reactor.
The nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency of each carrier at steady
state showed that the nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency values at
the high NH
4-N loading were very similar to those at the low
NH 4-N loading. This means that all three reactors can effec-
tively operate at either low or high NH 4-N loadings. In
addition, the biomass content slightly increased to 630, 1,030
Figure 3 |(a) Nitrogen removal ef ﬁciency, (b) ef ﬂuent NH 4-N concentration, (c) ef ﬂuent NO 3-N concentration and (d) ef ﬂuent organic concentration.335 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018and 310 g-VSS/m3-carrier for the concrete, sponge and com-
mercial carriers respectively ( Figure 4(a) ).Figure 4(b) shows
that the speci ﬁc nitrogen removal from the concrete and com-
mercial reactors had a similar value of 940 mg-N/g-VSS, butthe value was only 620 mg-N/g-VSS for the sponge reactor.This indicates that the sponge reactor can ef ﬁciently treat
wastewater containing higher NH
4-N (>80 mg/L) up to the
point when the speci ﬁc nitrogen removal value reached the
maximum of approximately 940 mg-N/g-VSS.
The results clearly demonstrate that the waste materials of
concrete and sponge can be used as effective and ef ﬁcient bio-
mass carriers in a biological nitrogen treatment system. Theeffectiveness of nitrogen removal was in the following order:
sponge >concrete >commercial carrier. This variation in
nitrogen removal which was related to the porosity and surfaceroughness. Moreover, the sponge carrier shows tolerance tohigh NH
4-N loading and retains excellent performance.
Characteristics of biomassDuring operation, the biomass developed as a bio ﬁlm cover-
ing the carrier. The bio ﬁlm on the sponge carrier grew rapidly
from 270 g-VSS/m
3-carrier at the initial state to 1,000 g-VSS/
m3-carrier in 45 days. The bio ﬁlm on the commercial carrier
Figure 4 |(a) Biomass content and (b) speci ﬁc nitrogen removal on various carriers.336 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018grew more slowly due to the bio ﬁlm falling off the smooth sur-
face of the commercial carrier. The sponge carrier was madefrom cellulose wood ﬁber which provided the larger surface
area for biomass attachment and avoided bio ﬁlm scouring.
In contrast, the commercial carrier was made from plasticand contained large cavities which negatively impacted onthe biomass growth and strength of attachment. The concretecarrier had a rough surface, which was appropriate for bio-mass attachment, but the rigid structure of the materialprevented the growth of biomass inside the concrete.
Figure 5(a) shows the surface of the concrete carrier with
the biomass covering the surface as a bio ﬁlm and also in therough indents or cracks on the concrete surface. For the
sponge carrier, the biomass was mostly attached on theﬁber as a bio ﬁlm; a thick bio ﬁlm was observed on the surface
and on the ﬁbers in the core of the sponge carrier. The bio ﬁlm
was only slightly developed on the commercial carrier andhad agglomerated as microbial ﬂoc on its internal structures.
Nitrogen removal model of carriers
At the end of the experiment (day 70), the mechanisms of
nitrogen removal in three attached growth reactors wasclariﬁed. The reactors were operated under intermittent air
Figure 5 |Scanning electron microscope images of (a) concrete carrier, (b) sponge carrier, and (c) commercial carrier.337 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018supply (three hours of aeration and then ﬁve hours of non-
aeration), and the change of nitrogen levels in the eight-hour cycle was demonstrated. The level of NH
4-N in the
concrete reactor continuously decreased in the three hoursof aeration, while the NO
3-N was increasing. When the
non-aeration phase started at hour 4, the NO 3-N immedi-
ately decreased and reached the low level of 0.5 mg/L(Figure 6 ). These results suggest that the nitri ﬁcation to oxi-
dize NH
4-N to NO 3-Nﬁrstly occurred in the aeration phase,
and the denitri ﬁcation which occurred in the non-aeration
phase reduced the NO 3-N to N 2gas.
In term of the biomass attached to the concrete carrier,
the bio ﬁlm of biomass fully covered the concrete surface
and no biomass was detected in the core. The biomassrequired oxygen to encourage nitri ﬁcation, but the high
oxygen during the aeration phase inhibited the denitri ﬁca-
tion from occurring simultaneously. The concrete carrier
required the non-aeration phase, in which the very low
oxygen was observed for denitri ﬁcation to occur as pre-
sented in Figure 6(a) . Nitri ﬁcation was possible during
oxygen depletion in the non-aeration phase. However, theincreasing NH
4-N in the non-aeration phase was due to
the continuous in ﬂuent feeding, with NH 4-N accumulating
in the reactor. The NH 4-N accumulation had more effect
on the actual concentration than the decrease in NH 4-N
from nitri ﬁcation. Nitri ﬁers and denitri ﬁers existed concur-
rently on the carrier surface, and each microorganismplayed an important role as the key microbial activity inappropriate environment.
For the sponge carrier, the concentration of NH
4-N,
NO 2-N and NO 3-N changed slightly in the eight-hour
cycle. This is because the nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation
can simultaneously occur within the bio ﬁlm, in which
there are DO gradients because of diffusion limitation(Kotlar et al. ). Nitri ﬁcation took place at the aerobic
layer of the sponge surface, whereas denitri ﬁcation hap-
pened in the deeper layer of bio ﬁlm which was an anoxic
zone. Further, the NH
4-N concentration was stable during
the non-aeration possibly because the nitri ﬁer in the
sponge carrier can metabolize under either low or highoxygen ( Fitzgerald et al. ).
Similarly, simultaneous nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation
was found in the commercial carrier, as indicated by slightlychanging NH
4-N and NO 3-N concentrations. As discussedabove, the high oxygen on the commercial carrier surface
induced nitri ﬁcation to occur in the outer microbial ﬂoc,
and the low oxygen from diffusion resulted in denitri ﬁcation
in the inner ﬂoc. From all results, the concrete and sponge
carriers can perform well in removing nitrogen from waste-water; however, the mechanisms of nitrogen removal were
Figure 6 |Change of NH 4-N, NO 2-N and NO 3-N in (a) concrete reactor, (b) sponge reactor,
(c) commercial carrier reactor.338 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018signiﬁcantly different which affected the operating con-
ditions required to achieve effective reactor performance.
CONCLUSIONS
Concrete and sponge waste materials can be used as the
biomass carrier in nitrogen wastewater treatment. The per-
formance of both in attached growth reactors was betterthan the use of a commercial carrier which is commonlyfound in wastewater treatment system. The highest nitrogenremoval ef ﬁciency of 87% was found in the sponge reactor:
this is due to the high biomass attachment of 1,030 g-VVS/m
3-carrier. The ef ﬁciencies of concrete and commercial
carrier reactors were 82% and 76% respectively. The porosityand surface roughness of the carriers impacted on biomassattachment and mechanism of nitrogen removal. The biomassof 630 g-VSS/m
3-carrier was mainly found on the surface of
the concrete carrier, thus the concrete reactor requires inter-mittent aeration to obtain nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation.
On the other hand, the biomass attached in the inner cavitiesof the sponge and agglomerated as microbial ﬂoc in the
commercial carrier, therefore simultaneous nitri ﬁcation and
denitri ﬁcation can occur without a non-aeration period.
REFERENCES
APHA 1998 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste Water , 20th edn, American Public Health Association,
Washington.
Chu, L. & Wang, J. Comparison of polyurethane foam and
biodegradable polymer as carriers in moving bed bio ﬁlm
reactor for treating wastewater with a low C/N ratio .
Chemosphere 83,6 3 –68.
Daniel, L. M. C., Pozzi, E., Foresti, E. & Chinalia, F. A. 
Removal of ammonium via simultaneous nitri ﬁcation-
denitri ﬁcation nitrite-shortcut in a single packed-bed batch
reactor .Bioresour. Technol. 100, 1100 –1107.
Dong, W., Lu, G., Yan, L., Zhang, Z. & Zhang, Y. Characteristics
of pellets with immobilized activated sludge and itsperformance in increasing nitri ﬁcation in sequencing batch
reactors at low temperatures .J. Environ. Sci. 42,2 0 2 –209.
Feng, Q., Yu, A., Chu, L. & Xing, X.  Performance study of the
reduction of excess sludge and simultaneous removal oforganic carbon and nitrogen by a combination of ﬂuidized-
andﬁxed-bed bioreactors with different structured
macroporous carriers .Biochem. Eng. J. 39, 344 –352.
Feng, Y., Yu, Y., Qiu, L., Feng, S. & Zhang, J.  Domestic
wastewater treatment using biological aerated ﬁltration
system with modi ﬁed zeolite as bio ﬁlm support .Desalination
Water Treat. 52,2 5 –27.
Fitzgerald, C. M., Camejo, P., Oshlag, Z. & Noguera, D. R. 
Ammonia-oxidizing microbial communities in reactors withefﬁcient nitri ﬁcation at low-dissolved oxygen .Water Res. 70,
38–51.
Guo, J., Zhang, L., Chen, W., Ma, F., Liu, H. & Tian, Y. 
The regulation and control strategies of a sequencingbatch reactor for simultaneous nitri ﬁcation and
denitri
ﬁcation at different temperatures .Bioresour.
Technol. 133,5 9 –67.
Kotlar, E., Tartakovsky, B., Argaman, Y. & Sheintuch, M.  The
nature of interaction between immobilized nitri ﬁcation and
denitri ﬁcation bacteria .J. Biotechnol. 51, 251 –258.
Le, H. T., Jantarat, N., Khanitchaidecha, W., Ratananikom, K. &
Nakaruk, A. Development of sequencing batch reactor
performance for nitrogen wastewater treatment. J. Microb.
Biochem. Technol. 7, 363 –366.
L i ,X . ,S u n ,S . ,B a d g l e y ,B .D . ,S u n g ,S . ,Z h a n g ,H .&H e ,Z . 
Nitrogen removal by granular nitritation-anammox in an up ﬂow
membrane-aerated bio ﬁlm reactor .Water Res. 94,2 3 –31.
Liu, Y., Shi, H., Xia, L., Shi, H., Shen, T., Wang, Z., Wang, G. &
Wang, Y.  Study of operational conditions of
simultaneous nitri ﬁcation and denitri ﬁcation in a Carrousel
oxidation ditch for domestic wastewater treatment .
Bioresour. Technol. 101, 901 –906.
Park, S., Oh, J. & Yoon, T.  The role of powdered zeolite
and activated carbon carriers on nitri ﬁcation in activated sludge
with inhibitory materials .Process Biochem. 39,2 1 1 –219.
S a r t o r i ,L . ,C a n o b b i o ,S . ,F o r n a r o l i ,R . ,C a b r i n i ,R . ,M a r a z z i ,F .&
Mezzanotte, V. COD, nutrient removal and disinfection
efﬁciency of a combined subsurface and surface ﬂow constructed
wetland: a case study .Int. J. Phytoremediation 18, 416 –422.
Sirianuntapipoon, S. & Chairattanawan, K.  Comparison of
sequencing batch reactor (SBR) and granular activatedcarbon-SBR (GAC-SBR) systems on treatment textilewastewater containing basic dye .Desalination Water Treat.
57
, 27096 –27112.
Walters, E., Hille, A., He, M., Ochmann, C. & Horn, H. 
Simultaneous nitri ﬁcation/denitri ﬁcation in a bio ﬁlm airlift
suspension (BAS) reactor with biodegradable carriermaterial .Water Res. 43, 4461 –4468.
Xiangli, Q., Zhenjia, Z., Qingxuan, C. & Yajie, C. 
Nitriﬁcation characteristics of PEG immobilized activated
sludge at high ammonia and COD loading rates .
Desalination 222, 340 –347.
First received 5 October 2016; accepted in revised form 24 April 2017. Available online 7 June 2017339 H. T. Le et al .|Performance of nitrogen removal in attached growth reactors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.3|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/3/331/240751/jwrd0080331.pdf
by guest
on 18 December 2018