 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Aug 30, 2024
Descriptive and predictive assessment of enzyme activity and enzyme related
processes in biorefinery using IR spectroscopy and chemometrics
Baum, Andreas
Publication date:
2013
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Baum, A. (2013). Descriptive and predictive assessment of enzyme activity and enzyme related processes in
biorefinery using IR spectroscopy and chemometrics. Technical University of Denmark.Descriptive and predictive assessment of  enzyme 
activity and enzyme related processes in 
biorefinery using IR spectroscopy and 
chemometrics
Andreas Baum
05001000150020002500
100011001200130014001500-0.15-0.1-0.0500.050.10.150.20.25
/g3
/g3/g3
 
DESCRIPTIVE AND PREDICTIVE ASSESSMENT OF ENZYME 
ACTIVITY AND ENZYME RELATED PROCESSES IN 
BIOREFINERY USING IR SPECTROSCOPY AND 
CHEMOMETRICS 
/g3
/g3
Andreas Baum 
Ph.D. Thesis 
 
May 2013 
/g3
/g3/g3
 
Supervisors: 
Prof. Jørn D. Mikkelsen 
Per W. Hansen 
Max Egebo /g3/g349/g3
/g3 
 
PREFACE 
/g3
 
 This Ph.D. thesis is submitted as a partial fulfillment of requirements for a Ph.D.-
degree at Technical University of Denmark.  
The research, which is the basis of this in dustrial Ph.D. project, has been carried out 
as collaboration between FOSS ANALYTICAL and Center for Bioprocess 
Engineering, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical 
University of Denmark. 
The project comprises work conducted under supervision of Prof. Jørn Dalgaard 
Mikkelsen (Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, DTU), Per 
Waaben Hansen and Max Egebo (both from FOSS ANALYTICAL, Hillerød) 
between June 2010 and May 2013. The work was financed by the 7th Framework 
Program via the Marie Curie Initial Training Network, LeanGreenFood (EU-ITN 
238084). 
   /g349/g349/g3
/g3 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
/g3
 
 I sincerely thank my supervisors Per Waaben Hansen and Jørn Dalgaard Mikkelsen 
for inspiration, motivation, encouragement and support during the project work. 
During my time at FOSS, I had the pleasure to work with highly talented personalities which gave me a lot of inspiration to thrive in.  
My acknowledgement goes also to Malgorzata Maria Dominiak, Silvia Vidal Melgosa, 
Anne Meyer and Jane Agger for the fruitful collaborations within and between Technical University of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, FOSS and Dupont. 
Without their enthusiastic effort this thesis would not have been possible.  
Furthermore I highly appreciated helpful chemometric support from Rasmus Bro and 
his colleagues at University of Copenhagen. Lastly, I want to thank my family for the 
continuous support and especially Josephine for encouragement and love. 
 
   /g349/g349/g349/g3
/g3SUMMARY 
Enzyme technology provides key strategies 
to green chemistry as many processes have 
undergone re-design to serve increasing demands towards being sustainable. While the population is rapidly increasing on our 
planet it is leading to accumulative problems 
in terms of production of waste, depletion of natural fossil resources and increasing demands for food and energy.      Biorefinery, in particular, deals with related challenges, as it is defined to deal with the conversion of biomass using enzyme technology to produce renewable energy, in 
terms of heat, power and fuel. Furthermore, 
biorefinery intends to extract value-added compounds from biomass to avoid down-cycling effects prior to e.g. biofuel production.  Those value-added compounds are highly attractive to be utilized as food ingredients, bio-chemicals or precursors for pharmaceutical products and represent high 
market potentials for related industries.  
However, as biorefinery concepts are implemented in many industrial processes an increasing demand for Process Analytical Technology (PAT) evolves to monitor, understand and steer processes optimally. Biomasses can be very diverse and are usually of complex chemical nature. 
Conventional univariate analytical methods 
therefore require time-consuming sample preparation which is mostly cumbersome to analyze biomass conversion related processes. Throughout this project alternative approaches will be presented to deal with the individual challenges. As outlined it seems obvious that more 
advanced techniques are necessary to 
monitor such difficult reactions as enzymatic biomass degradations. Such techniques should be of multivariate nature to capture and understand complex patterns in comparison to univariate techniques which can only capture information in a highly specific sense which does not allow 
interference of information. Vibrational 
spectroscopy (e.g. infrared) represents such multivariate techniques and is mostly used throughout the project. Data is analyzed by  chemometric methods to extract the 
underlying patterns from the complex datasets. Hence, this project focuses on chemometric approaches utilizing mostly Fourier 
Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic 
data to provide descriptive and predictive insights into biomass conversion related processes.  Two main study fields are introduced to the reader. First, two-way chemometric methods are used to establish Process Analytical Technology (PAT) solutions for 
prediction of monosaccharide release 
efficiency of pretreated destarched corn bran using Near Infrared (NIR) spectroscopy (PAPER 1). Throughout this study predictive and descriptive models were established to evaluate the pre-treatment effect without the need to perform the subsequent enzymatic 
hydrolysis itself.  Furthermore, the efficiency 
(and quality) of differently extracted pectin from lime peel could be predicted from measuring FTIR spect ra (PAPER 2). The 
prediction models were compared to results retrieved from carbohydrate microarray analysis which additionally enhanced the understanding of the structural properties of 
the extracted pectin.  
Secondly, enzyme kinetics of biomass converting enzymes was examined in terms of measuring enzyme activity by spectral evolution profiling utilizing FTIR. Chemometric multiway methods were used to analyze the tensor datasets enabling the second-order calibration advantage 
(reference Theory of Analytical chemistry). 
As PAPER 3 illustrates the method is universally applicable without the need of any external standards and was exemplified by performing quantitative enzyme activity determinations for glucose oxidase, pectin lyase and a cellolytic enzyme blend (Celluclast 1.5L). In PAPER 4, the concept 
is extended to quantify enzyme activity of 
two simultaneously acting enzymes, namely pectin lyase and pectin methyl esterase. By doing so the multiway methods PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS were compared and evaluated towards accuracy and precision.  /g349/g448/g3
/g3RESUMÉ 
Enzym teknologi er en af de nøgle strategier, 
der har stor betydning for forskning inden for området, ”den grønne kemi”. Mange processer i industrien er blevet ændret til at imødegå en bæredygtig grøn teknologi. Befolknings tilvæksten er meget stor og 
skaber problemer med hensyn til produktion 
af side-strømme (forurening), overudnyttelse af de naturlige fosile energi kilder, og et forøget krav til fødevarer og energi. Bio-rafinaderi kan være svaret på disse udfor-dringer, da denne teknologi fokuserer på omdannelse af biomassen ved hjælp af enzymer til produktion af grøn energi, der 
kan anvendes i form af varme, energi eller 
brændstof. Endvidere kan biorafinering udvinde værdiskabende forbindelser hvis en differentiel proces kan anvendes før biomassen nedbrydes til bio-brændstof produktionen. Disse værdiskabende for-bindelser kan anvendes som fødevare ingredienser (1), og repræsenterer et højt 
markedspotentiale i beslægtede industrier. 
Biorafinerings konceptet er implementeret i mange industrielle processer og behovet for proces analytisk teknologi (PAT) for at måle, forstå og styre processen optimalt er meget værdifuld. Biomassen kan være meget forskelligt og er sædvanligvis meget komplekst opbygget med mange forskellige 
kemiske strukturer. Konventionel univa-
riable analytiske metoder er derfor meget tidskrævende både med hensyn til prøve forberedelse, og kompleksitet af de kemiske målemetoder. I dette PhD projekt er der anvendt alternative metoder for at måle disse komplekse biomasse processer. Der er adskillige udfordringer med at udskifte de 
klassiske teknikker med mere avancerede 
metoder, der kan måle de mange enzym reaktioner når biomassen nedbrydes. De multivariable metoder, der kan fange og forstå komplekse mønstre i modsætning til de univariable, som kun kan opfatte simple informationer, der ikke involverer inter-ferens. Vibrations spektroskopi (f. eks. 
infrarød) repræsenterer multivariable teknik-
ker, der er anvendt bredt i dette PhD studie. Data er blevet analyseret ved hjælp af    
kemometriske metoder for at ekstrahere de 
komplekse mønstre fra de forskellige dataset.  
Dette PhD projekt har fokuseret på 
kemometriske anvendelser baseret hoved-sageligt på Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spektroskopiske data, der kan beskrive og forudsige enzym baserede biomasse processer.   To hovedområder er blevet introduceret til læseren. Det første er en to-vejs kemo-
metrisk metode, der er anvendt til at etablere 
Process Analytical Technology (PAT) løsninger til at forudsige frigørelse af monosaccharider fra forbehandlet ”de-starched corn bran” ved hjælp af Near Infrared (NIR) spektroskopi (artikel 1). I dette studie er der etableret modeller til at forudsige og beskrive effekter af forbe-
handling uden at udføre en egentlig 
enzymatisk hydrolyse. Endvidere kunne ekstraktion af pektin fra citrus skaller udført med forskellige processer forudsiges og beskrives ved en måling med FTIR spektrum (artikel 2). Modellen for forud-sigelsen blev sammenlignet med data opnået fra kulhydrat micro-array analyser, som 
bidrog yderligere med analyser på kulhydra-
ternes strukturelle egenskaber.  Det andet område er biomasse åbning, hvor enzymers aktivitet og kinetik blev målt ved ”spectral evolution profiling” ved hjælp af FTIR. Kemometriske multivariable metoder blev anvendt til at analysere tensor datasets, der tillader en anden ordens kalibrerings 
fordel. Som artikel 3 illustrerer, er metoden 
universiel anvendelig  uden det klassiske 
behov for eksterne stan darder og dette er 
bevist ved at anvende kvantitative enzym aktivitets målinger for glucose oxidase, pektin lyase og cellolytiske blandinger (Celluclast 1,5L). I artikel 4, er konceptet blevet udvidet til a kvantificere to enzym 
aktiviteter samtidigt, nemlig pektin lyase og 
pektin methylesterase. I dette forsøg blev de tre multiveje metoder, PARAFAC, TUCKER3 og NPLS sammenlignet og vurderet med hensyn til nøjagtighed og præsision. /g3
/g3/g448/g3
/g3 
 
 
 
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS 
 
  PAPER 1  
Andreas Baum, Jane Agger, Anne S. Meyer, Max Egebo, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; Rapid near 
infrared spectroscopy for prediction of enzymatic hy drolysis of corn bran after various pretreatments; 
New Biotechnology, Volume 29, Issue 3, 15 February 2012, Pages 293-301 
PAPER 2  
Andreas Baum, Malgorzata Dominiak, Silvia V. Melgosa, William G.T. Willats, Karen 
M. Søndergaard, Per W. Hansen, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; FTIR and carbohydrate microarray 
analysis for prediction and characterization of enzymatic versus acidic extracted pectin; 
Carbohydrate Polymers, submitted 
PAPER 3  
Andreas Baum, Anne S. Meyer, Javier L. Garcia, Max Egebo,  Per W. Hansen, Jørn D. 
Mikkelsen; Enzyme activity measurement via spectral evolution profiling and PARAFAC; 
Analytica Chimica Acta, Volume 778, 17 May 2013, Pages 1-8 
PAPER 4 
Andreas Baum, Per W. Hansen, Anne  S. Meyer, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; Simultaneous 
measurement of two enzyme activities using infrared spectroscopy: comparative evaluation of 
PARAFAC, TUCKER and N-PLS modeling; Analytica Chimica Acta, submitted 
 /g448/g349/g3
/g3 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
  ANN  Artificial Neural Networks biPLS  backwards interval Partial Least Squares (regression) CBM  Carbohydrate Binding Module DCB  Destarched Corn Bran DNA  Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
FT  Fourier Transform 
FTIR  Fourier Transform Infrared GRAM  Generalized Rank Annihilation Method  HGI  Homogalacturonan I HPLC  High Performance  Liquid Chromatography iPLS  interval Partial Least Squares (regression) IR  Infrared LDA  Linear Discriminant Analysis 
LV  Latent Variable 
mAb  Monoclonal Antibody MLR  Multiple Linear Regression MPCA  Multiway Principal Component Analysis MSC  Multiple Scatter Correction NIR  Near Infrared NMR  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance NPLS  Multiway Partial Least Squares (regression) 
PARAFAC Parallel Factor Analysis 
PARAFAC2 Parallel Factor Analysis 2 PAT  Process Analytical Technology PCA  Principal Component Analysis PCR  Principal Component Regression PL  Pectin Lyase PLS  Partial Least Squares (regression) PLS-DA Partial Least Squares - Discriminant Analysis 
PME  Pectin Methyl Esterase 
RGI  Rhamnogalacturonan I RGII  Rhamnogalacturonan II RMSEC  Root-Mean-Square-Error of Calibration RMSECV Root-Mean-Square-Error of Cross Validation RMSEP  Root-Mean-Square-Error of Validation SIMCA  Soft Independent Modeling of Class Analogy  SNV  Standard Normal Variate Introduction 
/g448/g349/g349/g3
/g3 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................... ........................................................ 1 
2. Enzyme Technology and Biorefin ery .......................................................................................... .................................. 2 
3. Infrared spectroscopy ...................................................................................................... ................................................. 3 
3.1 Near Infrared Spectroscopy ................................................................................................ ....................................... 3 
3.2 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy ................................................................................... ........................... 3 
4. Chemometrics ............................................................................................................... ..................................................... 4 
4.1 Two-way methods ........................................................................................................... ............................................ 4 
4.2 Multi-way methods ......................................................................................................... ............................................. 6 
4.3 Preprocessing ............................................................................................................. .................................................. 7 
4.4 Validation ................................................................................................................ ...................................................... 7 
5. Two-way chemometric methods for prediction of process relevant parameters (PAT) ....................................... 8 
5.1 Near Infrared spectroscopy for prediction of enzymatic hydrolysis of corn bran  
after various pretreatments.................................................................................................... ..................................... 8 
5.2 FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analysis for prediction and characterization of  
enzymatic versus acidic extracted pectin ...................................................................................... .......................... 11 
6.  Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of  
enzyme activity ............................................................................................................... .................................................. 15 
6.1 Measuring enzyme activity using FTIR and PARAFAC .......................................................................... ........... 15 
6.2 Simultaneous measurement of two enzyme  activities: a comparative evaluation of  
PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and N-PLS modeling ........................................................................................... .......... 19 
7. Conclusion and Perspectives ................................................................................................ ......................................... 23 
8. References ................................................................................................................. ....................................................... 24 
 
 
 
/g3
/g3/g3
/g3Introduction 
/g1005/g3
/g31. Introduction 
The beneficial use of enzymes for production of 
foods and beverages like cheese, yoghurt, bread, beer, vinegar, wine etc has been known for thousands of years. In fact paper and textiles were produced with the help of enzymes which were present in starting material s as early as 6000 BC in 
China, Sumer and Egypt [1].     
Nonetheless, the industrial application of enzymes 
did not kick off before 1913 when Otto Roehm filed a patent on a crude protease mixture isolated from pancreases for use in  laundry detergents [2]. 
The modern era of industrial enzymology had begun. Not least because of evolving recombinant biotechnological methods, many enzymes have been made commercially available up to today [3, 
4]. Applications of enzymes can be found in 
biorefinery, textile, detergent, starch, paper and food industry, including the dairy, juice, brewing, wine and baking industries. As the development of enzyme technology evolves fast, the refurbishment of industrial processes to be more environmentally clean and sustainable goes hand in hand. For many decades 
production processes were merely designed and 
optimized for cost efficient production using classical chemical methods which apply harsh chemicals accumulating and emitting a lot of waste to our environment. Furthermore those classical designed processe s are not selective, give 
rise to side-streams of low quality, ask for rather extreme reaction conditions and are therefore 
energy inefficient. While many of such processes 
were replaced by more sustainable processes implying the concept of green chemistry [5], many resources are still down-cycled. To avoid such down-cycling effects Braungart and McDonough recently proposed a change in production philosophy towards a “cradle to cradle” perspective [6] which generally states the idea of 
re-designing industrial processes to expand  our 
understanding of sustainability. Claiming the possibility of utilizing the, terrestrial spoken, infinite amount of renewable energy from the sun “Cradle to Cradle” processes should not be primarily optimized for energy consumption, but rather for being intrinsic meaning that all resources being used can and should be perfectly 
recycled instead of being lost at the end of a 
products lifetime.  In fact, enzyme technology  presents a key strategy 
to such cradle-to-cradle  processes since enzymes 
can bio-catalyze the formation of many industrial products. The obvious advantage is that mild 
reaction conditions in aqueous media can be 
applied for direct conversions from substrates to the products while conventional approaches often involve several reaction steps possibly employing environmentally unfriendly organic solvents. 
Adding up to this, enzymes are highly chemo-, 
regio- and stereoselective enabling the possibility 
for design of targeted processes.  
Those advantages are also very important for the concept of green chemistry [1]. An example for industrial application of green chemistry has been the production of penicillin [5]. While the conventional production of semi-synthetic 
penicillin requires several steps including a 
chemical hydrolysis using unattractive chemicals 
as CH
2CL 2 at -40 °C the one step bio-catalytic 
conversion can be performed in water at 37 °C 
using only light amounts of NH 3 for pH 
adjustment. 
As by 2002 already more than 130 processes have 
been established using green chemical approaches as reported in [7]. The increasing industrial interest in green process design gives rise to high expectations of many more to come, as by now recombinant DNA tech niques makes it, in 
principle, possible to produce virtually any enzyme for a commercially acceptable price [1]. 
However, it keeps challenging to avoid down-
cycling of valuable resources.  The present project is part of a larger cross-European collaboration effort that focuses on production of value-added compounds in biorefinery relevant processes. As biorefinery is concerned about sustainable biomass conversion processes to produce fuel s, power, and heat from 
biomass, especially the value-added components 
in diverse biomasses can elevate the economy of a process, e.g. the specific extraction of nutrition relevant biopolymers from biomass prior to biofuel refining.  The hypothesis of the project was that fast and non-invasive techniques, such as Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) and near infrared 
(NIR) spectroscopy, in combination with 
chemometrics create useful analytical solutions for qualitative and quantitative assessment of enzyme activity and enzyme related processes in biorefinery. The methodologies thereby provide much better understanding of the complex and obtrusive nature of biomass and offer valuable analytical alternatives, also with respect to the 
cumbersome reducing sugar analysis.    
 /g3Figure 1. left: illustration of primary c
is a structural heteropolysaccharide wh i
 
The specific objectives were to app l
 1.  Near infrared spectroscopy as 
a
invasive techni que to eva l
pretreatment effects towards s
efficiency; 
2. Fourier transform infrared sp e
carbohydrate microarray multivariate techni
ques to m
extraction in different media a
its structural properties; 
3. Fourier transform infrared spe
universal fingerprinting techni q
enzyme activity of one or s e
without the need of environm e
chemicals. 
 Throughout this thesis four scient
i
be introduced to the reader. Prior t
the results of those individual fi n
description of the used conce p
technology and chemometrics s h
Finally a conclusion will be draw n
discussion of future perspectives.  
2. Enzyme Technolo g
Biorefinery 
Biorefinery is a sub-discipline of 
which deals with the bio-catalyze d
biomass for production of fuels, h
to provide renewable energy sourto depletion of fossil resour
c
biorefinery also intends to produ c
value products, such as solvents, p l
Enzyme Technology and Biorefinery 
  
ell wall structure containing complex structural polysac c
ich binds cell wall components together [11].  
ly: 
a rapid and non 
luate biomass 
saccharification 
ectroscopy and 
analysis as 
onitor pectin 
and to evaluate 
ctroscopy as a 
que to measure 
everal enzymes 
ental unfriendly 
ific articles will 
to summarizing 
ndings a short 
pts in enzyme 
hall be given. 
n followed by a 
gy and 
biotechnology 
 conversion of 
heat and power 
ces in contrast 
ces. However, 
ce high-added-
lastics and food ingredients [8, 9] which 
potentials.  Biorefineries are often 
d
second generation bi o
generation biorefineries bioconversion of biomass
e
or starch it has been regarding its competition 
On the other hand, sec
o
production utilizes bioma s
food crops or inedible w a
this competition. This 
classification between b i
waste-material-utilization China, USA, Australia an
d
countries are typical bi
countries while Japan, 
European countries reputilization type countries available agricultural space However, as mentione
d
biomasses often contain p
value, such as pectin, xyl o
Biorefinery processes ther e
on specific extraction of s
they were found to be be n
when used as dietary fib e
[13]. Furthermore, polysac
be used in the food iengineer desired product 
q
of jams.  The complex composition 
therefore primarily degrad
sense to extract polysacch
a
specific enzymes. Hereby ,
indicate advantages wh i
/g1006/g3 
charides [10]; right: pectin 
 promise high market 
divided into first and 
orefineries. As first 
are concerned about 
es like corn, sugarcane 
controversy criticized 
 with food production. 
ond generation biofuel 
sses derived from non-
aste products to avoid 
 leads to possible 
iomass-producing and 
type refineries [12]. 
d other south-east asian 
omass-producing type 
Denmark and other 
resent waste-material-
due to the lack of 
 [9].   
 earlier the utilized 
polysaccharides of high 
oglucan, etc. (Figure 1). 
efore increasingly focus 
such biopolymers since 
eficial to human health 
ers in food production 
ccharides as pectin can 
ngredient industry to 
qualities, e.g. the gelling 
 of cell wall material is 
ed in a highly targeted 
arides of interest using 
, the used biocatalysts 
ich help to extract 
Infrared spectroscopy 
/g1007/g3
/g3polysaccharides with desired structural properties. 
Additionally, enzymes are employed to break down residual and waste-material to release monosaccharides which can be used readily in 
bioethanol fermentation. Because of their chemical complexity enzymatic 
biomass conversion processes require a 
comprehensive understanding and engineering. Enzyme technology helps to understand enzymatic catalysis, which involves studies concerning discovery and manufacturing of enzymes and its optimal working conditions (temp, pH, pressure) and immobilization and inhibition of enzymes. It also deals with 
investigations towards the mechanisms of 
enzymatic conversions and studies underlying kinetic phenomena. However, many conventional analytical methods employed to investigate biomass conversions are of univariate nature and require time-consuming sample preparations utilizing diverse chemicals. Throughout this project alternative approaches 
will be presented to deal with the individual 
challenges. As outlined it seems obvious that more advanced techniques are necessary to monitor such difficult reactions as enzymatic biomass degradations. Such techniques should be of multivariate nature to capture and understand complex patterns in comparison to univariate techniques which can only capture information in 
a highly specific sense which does not allow 
interference of information. 
3. Infrared spectroscopy 
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy accounts for 
measuring the interactions of electromagnetic light from the infrared region with inter-atomic covalent bonds and intermolecular bondings of a sample. Since all organic molecules have intra- 
and intermolecular bonds that absorb in this 
range the IR spectrum obtained therefore reflects the chemical and structural composition of the sample being analyzed in a fingerprint sense. Further comprehensive introduction on Infrared spectroscopy is given by [14-16].  Hence, a spectral fingerprint measured by IR spectroscopy can be related to a certain 
thermodynamic state of a measured sample. In 
addition, the concept can be extended to measure time-resolved changes of such fingerprints enabling the possibility to study kinetics e.g. of enzymatic reactions. However, such analytical methods employing IR spectroscopy have been proven to be difficult due to high water 
interferences originating from the aqueous reaction media and a high degree of overlapping information in the spectra. During this project Near Infrared (NIR) spectroscopy and Fourier Transform Infrared 
(FTIR) Spectroscopy were utilized to study a) 
thermodynamic states of carbohydrate systems to extract PAT relevant parameters and b) kinetic changes in carbohydrate systems to quantify enzyme activity in a more universal fashion. 
3.1 Near Infrared Spectroscopy 
Near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is concerned 
about IR spectroscopy in the range between 780 and 2500 nm. It typically contains highly overlapped absorption patterns due to overtone and combined vibrational modes. As water gives rise to very high interferences NIR is often used to characterize solid samples using, e.g., diffuse reflectance methods. The high degree of 
overlapping information made NIR somewhat 
inaccessible to chemical analysis until chemometrics evolved in the 1970s [17] which helped to understand the complex patterns in the spectra and to build calibration models. One advantage of NIR is that it can typically penetrate much farther into a sample than mid infrared radiation [18]. Near infrared spectroscopy is 
therefore directly applicable for analyzing bulk 
material without the need of complex sample preparation. These striking advantages of NIR gave rise to many industrial applications, especially to be found in routine control analyses in agricultural food, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, clinical and environmental industrial sectors [17, 19].  
3.2 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy 
Mid-infrared spectroscopy is concerned about IR spectroscopy in the range between 2.5 µm and 25 µm. While diverse NIR instruments are commercially available using monochromator and 
Fourier Transform (FT) technology for light 
dispersion, instruments for the mid-infrared region are dominantly using FT technology [20]. Besides being the cheaper solution the FT technology has several advantages, especially in the mid infrared region. Typically using a Michelson Interferometer, a spectrum is recorded 
for all wavelengths simultaneously resulting in an 
interferogram in contrast to scanning the 
wavelengths consecutively using a dispersive device. The interferogram is thereafter de- Chemometrics 
/g1008/g3
/g3Table 1 . Possible classification of chemometric methods into exploratory methods (descriptive) and methods being 
suitable for calibration modeling (predictive) . The individual methods should not be understood as strictly assigned to a 
one group since some methods can be used as descriptiv e and/or predictive tools. ANN can be used in diverse 
situations. However, ANN requires very large sample sizes to establish robust models. 
 exploratory calibration modeling 
two-way PCA, LDA, PLS-DA, SIMCA, ANN, 
dendrogram analysis MLR, CLS, PCR,PLS, ANN 
multi-way PARAFAC, PARAFAC2, 
TUCKER3, MPCA GRAM, NPLS 
 
convoluted using Fourier Transformation [21]. 
This results in faster spectrum acquisition and enables the possibility for replicate measurements to encounter interfering noise. Hence, FTIR offers better sensitivity and a better signal-to-noise ratio than NIR spectroscopy.  FTIR is widely used in diverse kinds of scientific and industrial fields, e.g. in quality control analysis 
of milk and wine [22], as a PAT tool in 
bioprocesses [23], for characterization of plant cell wall material [24] or as a typical technique for sample classification [25]. In contrast to NIR spectra, which contain highly overlapped information, a mid-IR spectrum often indicates more resolved vibration bands which often enables the possibility for qualitative analysis of 
univariate kind, i.e. the identification of particular 
bands [26, 27]; although the full potential of FTIR is exploited by using multivariate methods to understand complete underlying spectral patterns.  
4. Chemometrics 
Chemometrics describes a scientific discipline 
which utilizes mathematical and computational tools to understand multi-parametric data in a 
descriptive and predictive way. It evolved as a 
consequence of the introduction of computational technology in chemical laboratories [28], which enabled acquisition of very big data sets. These data sets were difficult to understand with common univariate methods as they intend to extract correlations between single analytical responses and the investigated underlying 
phenomenon. However, those newly available 
data sets consisted of many variables encrypting mostly overlapped information, e.g. from spectroscopy. To extract the underlying patterns in the data which could lead to a comprehensive understanding of its underlying (bio)-chemistry 
multivariate methods were necessary. As previously mentione d chemometric methods 
could be divided into descriptive and predictive methods. However, they could also be distinguished in terms of being exploratory or being suitable for calibration modeling. A proposed overview is presented in table 1. 
Detailed descriptions of the chemometric 
methods used during the individual studies are given in the corresponding PAPERS 1-4. 
4.1 Two-way methods 
4.1.1 Descriptive chemometric methods 
Our brain uses millions of receptors gathering 
tons of cues in every second of our life. This 
gathered information is filtered through neural networks to achieve very certain (and trained) pattern recognitions. Those highly complex (and non-linear) recognized patterns lead to every day’s abilities as recognizing voices, tastes, scents, looks and textures of certain materials and living beings. Strikingly, we are able to recognize our friends’ 
faces through billions of people on this planet 
using multivariate approaches, sorted out by our brain. Similarly descriptive chemometric methods aim to extract patterns from chemical and biochemical data sets [29]. Due to limited available computational power and algorithms the amount of parameters to be analyzed simultaneously is 
much lower comparing it to neural networks of a 
human brain, but complexity evolves as 
algorithms and computational power are also being developed further [30]. The most principal descriptive chemometric method is Principal Component Analysis (PCA) which was initially described by Hotelling in 1933 and brought to the 
chemometric world by Wold in 1987 [31, 32]. By  Chemometrics 
/g1009/g3
/g3 
Figure 2 . Sample scores derived from PCA can be used to distinguish between different sample groups using 
classification methods. To discriminate between two groups of samples linear discriminants (a) can be sufficient while 
other situations might demand non-linear discriminants (b). Discriminants are indicated by dashed lines.  
performing a mathematical eigenvector 
decomposition on a data sets covariance matrix it finds suitable orthogonal projections to transform complex data sets, containing information along many variables, into spaces which have less significant dimension to represent the variance in the data more intuitively [33]. This is referred to 
as feature reduction and is one common property 
of chemometric methods.  More precisely, PCA decomposes data sets into loadings and scores. As loadings can be understood as orthogonal projections in space which describe the major variance in the data, the scores indicate how abundant the mentioned loadings are for each sample to be described in 
the feature reduced space. The scores are 
therefore a useful measure to compare samples with each other. Consider ing e.g. FTIR spectra of 
olive oils from two different regions, one can expect discrimination ability between the two origins, by simply plotting the scores of the major Principal Components against each other, assuming that the FTIR spectra contain 
discriminating spectral features. Such approaches 
can lead to classification of samples as they can form clusters in score plots. Clustering can be useful to discriminate between various properties in terms of origin, taste, (bio)-chemical properties, etc. As illustrated in Figure 2 clusters can form different shapes as they are colored in red and blue. Since PCA is an unsupervised decomposition 
method which simply represents the over-all variance in the data it does not intend to separate the clusters to the highest extent, neither does it know about the group belonging of individual samples. To establish models which are able to 
discriminate between pre-defined groups 
supervised classification methods are necessary. Dependent on the shape of the discriminant as shown in Figure 2 linear or non-linear classification methods are utilized. The most basic methods used for linear discrimination between sample groups (Figure 2a) are Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) and Partial Least Squares 
Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA). On the other 
hand methods as Support Vector Machines (SVM) [34, 35] or Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) [36, 37] are used for non-linear cases as illustrated in Figure 2b. 
4.1.2 Predictive chemometric methods 
Analytical chemistry often requires quantitative estimations of certain properties of (bio)-chemical system possibly using fast and non-invasive techniques [38].  Those properties may be any kind of quality measure of a final product, intermediate product or starting material. During a process, relevant 
parameters as temperature,  pH, time, etc. could be 
of high interest while often simply the yield of a 
process is to be predicted; in simple words: any  0 5 10-4-20246
PC 1 scorePC 2 score
-10 -5 0 5 10-1-0.500.51
PC1 scorePC2 score/g3Figure 3 . Samples which are recorde d
by two- way methods using unfolded d a
kind of quantitative measure rega r
could be of interest. 
While determining those propertieunivariate analytical techni
ques
cumbersome for decades predictivmethods, as given in Table 1, ha
v
the key to provide fast and non-in v
solutions, especially in industr y
intends to reduce efforts conce r
sample preparation [39, 40]. Predictive chemometric model
s
established from two data bloc k
measurements techni ques as 
spectroscopy, mass spectrom e
Magnetic Resonance (NMR), etc. 
generate arrays of data for various 
are typically stored as a combine d
so-called X-block. For each vecmultivariate data matrix the kn
o
value of the property of inter e
determined by conventional analy s
and stored in the Y-block. While descriptive chemometric 
m
only decompose X-blocks it is n o
use the information in the Y-block calibration projections in the multi
v
the X block. The simplest approknown as Principal Component R
e
where Princi pal Com ponents obta i
are regressed against the Y-blalthough related, approach is call
e
Squares (PLS) [41] regression w
Chemometrics 
d using coherent time steps and coherent spectral wind o
ata or by multiway methods using folded data in tensor f
rding a process 
s by traditional 
s has been 
ve chemometric 
ve shown to be 
vasive analytical 
y, where one 
rning complex 
s are usually 
ks. Multivariate 
infrared (IR) 
etry, Nuclear 
are utilized to 
 samples which 
d matrix in the 
tor in such a 
own reference 
est is typically 
sis (e.g. HPLC) 
ethods usually 
ow possible to 
 to find suitable 
variate space of 
ach for this is 
egression (PCR) 
ined from PCA 
ock. Another, 
ed Partial Least 
here Principal Components are rotated 
projections which indica t
with the Y-block data. H e
PCR is that the orthogo n
loadings in the principa l
from PCA) is omitted. Once a prediction model 
used to predict the wanted 
multivariate measurement reference analysis. Hand
y
topic of multivariate calib r
41-43].  
4.2 Multi-way methods 
Previously mentioned met h
two-wa y methods, meanin g
can be expressed in matri c
is represented by a vector.  On the other hand c
h
analysis is concerned abou t
T h i s  k i n d  o f  d a t a  d e m a n d
are capable to deal with three dimensional arrays, 
a
the simplest, tri-linear cas e
each sample is represente d
matrix of analytical respelements of each resp
o
depend on an additional m
e.g. time. Accordingly qu
consist of four measuremeach sample would contai
n
First attempts to analyze h
made in the 1960s and 
/g1010/g3 
ow can be analyzed either 
format.  
 i n  s p a c e  t o  f i n d  n e w  
te maximal covariance 
ence, the difference to 
nality of the individual 
l components (results 
is obtained it can be 
 property from a single 
without the need of 
y introductions to the 
ration are given in [39, 
 
hods are referred to as 
g that their bilinear data 
ces, where each sample 
 
hemometric multi-way 
t higher order data [44]. 
ds new methods which 
 data sets expressed in 
as we can imagine it for 
e. In this particular case 
d by a two dimensional 
onses. The individual 
onse matrix therefore 
easurement dimension, 
uadri-linear data would 
ent dimensions, where 
n a cube of data itself. 
higher order data were 
1970s in the field of 
Chemometrics 
/g1011/g3
/g3psychometrics [45-47] which led to the 
introduction of multiway analysis in chemometrics in the 1980s [48, 49]. As reviews on multi-way chemometrics were published in 1995 and 2005 by Bro et al. the number of publications in the field of multi-way analysis increased significantly 
from around 120 to more than 300 with many 
more to come after 2005 [49, 50].  So far, multiway analysis has been applied using diverse data sets deri ved from fluorescence 
spectroscopy [51, 52], chromatography [53, 54], flow injection analysis [55], magnetic resonance spectroscopy [56, 57], NIR [58], UV-VIS [59] and other types of data. The rising number of 
applications clearly shows the high potential of 
multiway methods in many scientific disciplines.  To introduce the concept of multiway methods in more detail, the difference between two-way and multi-way data structures is illustrated in Figure 3.  When talking about multiway methods the borderline between descriptive vs. predictive methods (Table 1) is more blurry than for two-
way methods. An example could be Parallel 
Factor Analysis (PARAFAC) [47, 60]. When performing a PARAFAC one obtains a unique solution, meaning that the solution has no rotational ambiguity [60], but rather characterizes common unique underlying profiles for all samples. This leads to the so called second-order calibration advantage, meaning that the obtained 
calibrations retrieved from PARAFAC are robust 
against unknown interfer ences when predicting 
future test samples. To benefit from the second-order advantage the inte rfering samples must, 
however, indicate loadings in mode 2 and 3 which differ from the calibration model [60, 61]. In addition, the ability to obtain calibration models from unsupervised methods like 
PARAFAC leads to another advantage. While 
supervised regression methods like multiway Partial Least Squares regression (NPLS) [62] open up possibilities for biasing the results of the models, unsupervised tensor decomposition methods as PARAFAC and TUCKER3 [46, 63] can find prediction models without the need for reference analysis. However, since no scaling of 
the scores would be available the results would 
only contain valuable information when comparing samples in relation to each other. Nonetheless, this can be very valuable when relative results are desirable. 4.3 Preprocessing 
Prior to application of any kind of chemometric method the data is usually preprocessed. The purpose is to remove any kind of irrelevant systematic variation in the data to gain better prediction performance and to decrease the 
necessary number of factors for modeling. The 
major two types of preprocessing are centering and scaling [64, 65]. Centering typically removes offsets in spectral data and therefore reduces the rank of the dataset. A PCA applied to non mean-centered spectroscopic data would therefore typically result in an additional Principal Component representing the common spectral 
offset in relation to the origin of the coordinate 
system. In addition, all other Principal Components indicating spectral features in the dataset would therefore be biased by the offset since PCA finds Principal Components being orthogonal to each other. It is therefore important to remove such offsets using appropriate centering methods.  
Secondly, scaling methods are concerned about 
leveling the impact of the individual variables during modeling since the individual leverages of the used variables might be biased due to different measurement units (e.g. units of temperature, pressure, concentration) . To correct for such 
effects auto-scaling is typically used. In spectroscopic data such biasing effects are not 
present since all variable s are measured using the 
same units. In this case it can be believed that variables with a great deal of variation are indeed more important to describe a dataset. However, other non-linear effects in spectroscopic data, such as unwanted light sca ttering effects, need to 
be considered. Those effects are typically corrected for using preprocessing methods as 
Standard Normal Variate (SNV) [66] or Multiple 
Scatter Correction (MSC) [67, 68] on a per-spectrum basis.  
4.4 Validation 
Chemometric modeling is usually supported by strong concepts of validation. These models are 
often established using factors derived from 
principal components and the question arises of how many are necessary to describe a data set sufficiently without implementing random variation as noise in the model (overfitting). Cross validation and prediction errors as the root-mean-square-error of prediction (RMSEP) provide useful indications to find the right number of 
factors to be used in a model.  Two-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1012/g3
/g3When using cross-validation the data is usually 
split into equally sized groups and a model is calculated several times excluding an alternating group at a time. Thereafter the established models are used to predict exactly those left-out groups and the mean error is calculated accordingly. This 
procedure can be repeated using different 
numbers of factors. The resulting root-mean-square-errors of cross validation (RMSECV) are then plotted against the used number of components. Thus, this plot is able to indicate overfitting by an increasing RMSECV when an increasing number of  factors is used.  
On the other hand, the RMSEP derives from test 
set validation, meaning that an established model 
is used to test for prediction ability towards an independent set of samples. By doing so the RMSEP also indicates additional concerns as poor accuracy of a model or the presence of potential systematic bias by the test set samples themselves. If a systematic bias is present the responsible chemometrician should consider that the used 
data for the calibration did not contain variance as 
it was only present in the test set. Hence, the RMSEP represents a measure for model accuracy.  
5. Two-way chemometric 
methods for prediction of 
process relevan t parameters 
(PAT) 
Prediction of valuable process analytical 
parameters offers high market potentials as customers increasingly de mand more certified and 
standardized quality measures for industrial products. The pharmaceutical industry introduced process analytical tec hnology (PAT) in 2003 by 
defining PAT’s as systems for design, analysis, 
and control of manufacturing processes. Those systems are utilized to assure high quality through timely measurements of critical quality and performance attributes of raw materials, in-process materials, and fi nal products [69, 70].  
Industrial implemented PAT in e.g. industrial fermentation of pharmaceutical products are 
exemplified by studies as “Batch-to-batch 
reproducibility of fermentation processes by robust process operational design and control” [71] or “Chemometrics in  bioprocess engineering: 
process analytical technology (PAT) applications” [72].  While in the past cumbersome and highly specific univarate chemical methods have been used to characterize such chemical systems multivariate 
methods combined with spectroscopy offer fast 
and high through-put capable approaches to measure analytes or properties of interest which typically indicate no need to interrupt the process. By doing so the major aim is to design, develop 
and operate processes consistently to ensure a 
predefined quality at the end of the manufacturing process [72]. 
5.1  Near Infrared spectroscopy for 
prediction of enzymatic hydrolysis of corn bran after various pretreatments 
5.1.1 Background and hypothesis 
Enzymatic conversion of biomasses is an 
important step in the exploitation of biomass residuals in the food and biofuel industry and viable processes are dependent on reliable, fast and low-cost process conditions. It is of great importance to know the basic monosaccharide composition and the distribution in 
polysaccharide forms to target and develop 
enzymatic conversion, and this traditionally represents a demanding task. In addition, most low-priced biomass resource s are of a recalcitrant 
nature, which is why various hydrothermal or thermo-chemical pretreatment forms are often applied to maximize the yields of enzymatic conversion [73-75]. Such pretreatments are costly 
and the efficiency of the pre-treatment step in 
generating a substrate which is enzymatically degradable needs utmost optimization. Evaluations of pretreatment methods are commonly done by large experimental setups and require time-consuming and advanced analytical methods [76, 77]. In the present work differently pretreated samples 
(varying time, pH, temp) originating from 
destarched corn bran (DCB), an agro-industrial residue from corn starch  processing, have been 
evaluated using NIR spectroscopy. Destarched Corn bran is a fibrous, heteroxylan rich side-stream from the starch industry which may be used as a feedstock for bioethanol production [78, 79] or as a source of xylose for other purposes 
(flavors, pharmaceuticals, animal feed) [80]. 
During this study the specific hypothesis was that NIR spectroscopy offers a rapid and non-invasive technique to predict the saccharification efficiency of destarched corn bran after various pretreatments, but prior to enzymatic hydrolysis.   
 
/g3Two-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1013/g3
/g3 
Figure 4 . NIR spectra of 43 differently pretreated DCB samples.  Standard spectra for arabinoxylan soluble (red), 
arabinoxylan insoluble (blue), cellulose (green) and xylan (cya n) have been included with an offset for comparison. 
Various combination, first overtone and second overtone vibration bands have been highlighted for chemical 
interpretation. /g3
5.1.2 Experimental 
Diffuse reflectance near Infrared spectroscopy 
(NIR) was used as a rapid and non-destructive 
analytical tool for evaluation of the pretreatment effects. Spectra were acquired between 1400 and 2500 nm using a monochromator based XDS instrument connected to a Rapid Content Analyzer (FOSS ANALYTICAL, Hillerød). The 43 destarched corn bran samples were measured 
directly as powders with no further physical 
pretreatment using a round quartz cuvette 
(Hellma, Sussex, UK). The 43 samples were divided into five groups due to their pretreatment conditions (indicated colors refer to Figure 5):  A) raw destarched corn bran (green color) B) elevated temperature pr etreatment (red color) 
C) mid-range pH catalyzed pretreatments at        intermediate temperatures (blue color) 
D) low pH catalyzed pretreatment at intermediate  
     temperature (light blue color) E) pH catalyzed pretreatme nts with extended    
     incubation time (black) 
5.1.3 Chemometric Analysis 
Prior to any modeling all spectra were pretreated by Multiple Scatter Correction (MSC) and mean-centered to correct for unwanted light scattering effects and to remove obstructive background 
signals. 
Multivariate analysis of the 43 acquired spectra 
was performed to identify classification criteria between the five pretreatment groups. To do so, PCA and hierarchal clustering methods (Dendrogram) were used to distinguish between the different pretreatment groups and to identify outliers clearly. Secondly, backwards interval Partial Least Squares 
regression (biPLS) and normal PLS were used to 
establish quantitative multivariate prediction models towards the monosaccharide release after standardized enzymatic hydrolysis. The three monosaccharides which were determined by HPLC reference analysis after hydrolysis were glucose, arabinose and xylose. Leave-one-out cross validation was used during modeling to 
validate the results and to evaluate the necessary 
number of components. By using an interval selection algorithm [81, 82] important wavelengths could be highlighted for modeling the individual monosaccharides. However, the small sample size did not leave abilities for further validation in terms of prediction test set validation.  1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400
wavelength (nm)absFirst Overtone Second Overtone Combinations
CH2
CH
CH2
CHH2O
CH2
CHH2OH2O
ROHTwo-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1005/g1004/g3
/g3Figure 5 . A dendrogram of 43 DCB samples led to clear classification and identified outliers (*). Arrows additionally 
indicated samples which belonged rather to another pretre atment group than expected. They were therefore merged 
into their new groups (PAPER 1). 
5.1.4 Results  
The 43 acquired NIR spectra are shown in Figure 
4 together with relevant spectra of biopolymer 
standards. When looking at the spectra it can be 
seen that the DCB samples are most comparable with the blue standard spectrum, indicating insoluble arabinoxylan. Using descriptive chemometric methods as PCA resulted not only in formation of clusters according to pretreatment grouping, but also in identification of outliers. A score plot is given in 
PAPER 1. Additional evidence to identify certain 
samples as outliers was given by dendrogram plotting (marked as stars in Figure 5). To establish classification using the dendrogram scores from five principal components have been used to calculate the Euclidean distances using an average linkage algorithm [26]. In fact, some samples could be identified to belong to another group 
than originally expected (arrows Figure 5). The achieved classification th erefore introduced useful 
quality measures of the pretreatment. The sample 
groups in Figure 5 were marked using colors according to pretreatment group belonging as indicated in the experimental section of the chapter.  PLS and biPLS modeling parameters are given in  
Table 2. As the correlation coefficients and the 
RMSECV values improved significantly for the 
biPLS models calibration performance increased 
by deselecting disturbing spectral ranges. All three 
relative monosaccharide amounts after enzymatic hydrolysis could be predicted well. Further calibration details are given in PAPER 1. 
 
Table 2 . Modeling parameters as RMSECV, RMSEC, correlation coefficients R2 and number of latent variables (LV) 
are presented for the PLS/biPLS prediction models using the full spectra and the selected spectral intervals, 
respectively. 
RMSECV (%)  RMSEC (%)  R2  number of LVs 
  full spectra biPLS  full spectra biPLS  full spectra biPLS  full spectra biPLS 
arabinose 3.12 1.39  1.07 0.99  0.82 0.96  7 6 
xylose 1.16 0.77  0.90 0.62  0.95 0.98  3 3 
glucose 8.68 5.69  6.37 3.83  0.84 0.93  5 5 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6Euclidean Distances
Data 1 4 3 13 15 14 7 12 8 11 2 5 26 40 16 21 22 18 17 19 20 6 10 41 42 9 43 23 28 24 25 29 27 32 30 38 37 33 36 31 39 34 35
* *Two-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1005/g1005/g3
/g3 
Figure 6 . Main structural domains being present in pectin. Th e figure was retrieved from [87] and subsequently 
modified /g3
5.1.5 Conclusion 
As the results show NIR spectroscopy is a useful technique to monitor the pretreatment of recalcitrant biomass like destarched corn bran to elevate monosacchriade release for efficient production of biofuels. Using chemometric classification outliers could easily be detected. 
Secondly, iPLS and PLS have proven to be useful 
prediction tools in respect to the final monosaccharide yield, even without performing the enzymatic hydrolysis itself. This in particular represents a useful PAT tool to monitor the quality of incoming biomass batches at the beginning of the process chain and enables possibilities to react (e.g. change process 
parameters) when dissatisfying pretreatment has 
undergone.  
5.2 FTIR and carbohydrate microarray 
analysis for prediction and characterization of enzymatic versus 
acidic extracted pectin 
5.2.1 Background 
Enzymes are used in many processes to release fermentable sugars for production of biofuel, but also for refinery of biomass to extract functional food ingredients such as pectin and other prebiotic oligosaccharides. The complex biomasses may, however, require a multitude of 
specific enzymes which enhance the biomass 
opening and help to specifically extract a biopolymer of interest. In the present study it was demonstrated that FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analysis represent useful PAT tools for industrial pectin extraction from lime peel, i.e. the prediction of pectin yield and characterization of 
its quality. The methods also intend to enable continuous process monitoring and feedback control, identifying causes of process deviation and process failure. This opposes post-process product testing which is especially time-consuming and does not provide any continuous 
process control.  
Pectin, mainly being produc ed from citrus peel, is 
a valuable resource used as gelling agent in jams and jellies, in medicines, sweets, as a stabilizer in fruit juices and milk drinks, and as a source of dietary fiber [83, 84]. Its efficient industrial production relies on acidic or enzymatic extraction methods which insist on optimization 
to increase the pectin yield and to obtain desired 
structural properties. Pectin is a complex bio-polymer which is commonly understood to be composed by three main structural domains, namely Homogalacturonan I (HGI), Rhamno-galacturonan I (RGI) and Rhamnogalacturonan II (RGII).  While HGI regions are generally de-scribed as linear backbone regions of α-(1–4)-
linked D-galacturonic acid molecules, RGI and 
RGII regions indicate backbones with high degree of side-chains containing neutral sugars as arabinose, galactose and xylose. An illustration of 
typical pectic structures is given in Figure 6. 
Comprehensive introduction on carbohydrate microarrays can be found in [85, 86]. The hypothesis of the particular study was that 
FTIR spectroscopy and carbohydrate microarray 
analysis are suitable techniques for monitoring the 
pectin yield during the extraction process and that they are furthermore able to characterize the 
Two-way chemo m
/g3Figure 7 . Extraction I spectra at diff e
structural pectin features are identifie d
elapsing extraction  time for extracti o
optimized as the scores did not change
structural properties of the obtain e
different extraction media.  
5.2.2 Experimental 
Three time-resolved pectin extract i
conducted. In each case samples 
specific time points and individu a
were determined by propan-2- o
(reference analysis). Pectin extrac t
were conducted usin g the com m
preparation Laminex C2K (D u
Netherlands) to degrade the li m
extraction III was carried out using FTIR spectroscopy and carbohyd
r
analysis have been utilized for acquisition.  One ali
quot of all samples was u
spectra acquisition in the spectral 950 and 1550 cm
-1. All spectra 
using a MilkoScan FT2 (FOSS A
Hillerød, Denmark). The instrume n
metric methods for prediction of process relevant parameters (PA T)
erent time points illustrated by  changing grey-scale (fr o
 in the spectra. Upper right: Scores from a one comp o
on I (green dots) and extraction II (red triangles). E
 after 120 min. 
ed pectins from 
ions have been 
 were taken at 
al pectin yields 
l precipitation 
tions I and II 
ercial enzyme 
upont, Leiden, 
me peel while 
 42% HNO 3. 
rate microarray 
 separate data 
used for FTIR 
 range between 
were ac quired 
NALYTICAL, 
nt consisted of an interferometer which s c
using a cuvette with a path 
Carbohydrate microarray a
at the Department of Pl a
Sciences, University of detailed procedure the 
r
PAPER 2. In brief, one ali q
printed on a nitrocellulo s
piezoelectric robot, Ar r
Roslin, UK) followed b y
probing with a number of (mAb) and carbohydrate b
i
The microarrays were dev e
of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-i
nitro blue tetrazolium. F
microarrays were quantifi e
dpi using CanoScan 88 0
Denmark). The results w
microarray software Ar r
(Media Cybernetics, Ro c
heatmap was printed.  
) 
/g1005/g1006/g3 
om dark to light). Various 
nent PCA plotted against 
Extraction time could be 
canned the IR spectrum 
 length of 50 µm.  
analysis was carried out 
ant and Environmental 
 Copenhagen. For a 
reader is referred to 
quot of all samples was 
se membrane using a 
rayjetSprint (Arrayjet, 
y immobilization and 
 monoclonal antibodies 
inding modules (CBM). 
eloped using a solution 
ndolylphosphate and 
Finally the developed 
ed by scanning at 2400 
00F (Canon, Søborg, 
were quantified usin g 
ray-Pro Analyzer 6.3 
ckville, USA) and a 
Two-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1005/g1007/g3
/g3Table 3 . Figures of merit for PLS models which were established using pectin yields ranging from 0.07 to 0.34 g.  
FTIR Microarray 
model 1 model 2 model 3 model 4 
Rcal 0.97 0.93 0.89 0.88 
Rpred 0.99 0.98 0.91 0.73 
RMSEP [g] 0.016 0.023 0.058 0.064 LVs 2 4 2 5 
/g3
5.2.3 Chemometric analysis 
The data obtained from both techniques were chemometrically analyzed using PCA and PLS. Prior to analysis spectra were pretreated using 
SNV and mean centering while the heatmap data 
from the carbohydrate microarray was pretreated using auto-scaling and mean centering.  PCA was used to monitor the FTIR spectral changes. Two PCA models were established a) for enzymatic extraction I and II; and b) for the acidic extraction III.  Secondly, PLS was used to establish quantitative 
models to predict the pectin yield using data from 
both techniques. To do so, two sets of models were established. For FTIR, model 1 and 2 were established on extraction I and extraction I+III samples, respectively. Both models were validated and evaluated by extraction II samples which served as prediction test set. Models 3 and 4 were established for the carbohydrate microarray data 
in a similar fashion which enabled the possibility 
to compare prediction performance of both techniques. The numbers of latent variables were determined by leave-one-out cross validation. Additionally, FTIR spectra and carbohydrate microarray binding patterns of acidic versus enzymatic extracted pectin were analyzed towards structural properties using spectral PCA loadings 
and bi-plots derived from PLS.   
5.2.4 Results 
The FTIR spectra for extraction I are shown as 
difference spectra in Figure 7 while extraction II and III difference spectra are given in PAPER 2. Monosaccharide standard spectra for xylose, 
arabinose and galactose are also given in PAPER 
2 for qualitative interpretation of the spectra. Main spectral features due to Homogalacturonan backbone, degree of esterification and neutral sugar content could be identified as indicated in Figure 7. While spectra for enzymatic extracted pectin (extraction I and II) indicated similar characteristics spectra from acidic extracted pectin 
showed lower bands at 1045 and 1076 cm
-1 indicating lower amounts of neutral sugars 
released from the lime peel (see PAPER 2).  Additionally, FTIR measurement indicated lower degree of esterification for acidic extracted pectin. 
However, at this point FTIR could not determine 
the neutral sugars to be part of RGI or RGII pectic regions or to be free in solution. In fact, the carbohydrate microarray results (Figure 8) suggested lower abundances of RGI regions and neutral sugar oligosaccharide like arabinan and galactan for enzymatic extracted pectin. This lead to the conclusion that the high amounts of neutral 
sugars, being enzymatically extracted from lime 
peel, were free in solution and therefore measured by FTIR while they were not immobilized on the highly specific microarrays. When looking at the heatmap in Figure 8 it could also be seen that antibody responses regarding RGI pectic regions and galactan decreased throughout the enzymatic extraction. This indicates the presence of side-
chain cleaving enzymes in the commercially 
preparation Laminex C2K which led to degradation of RGI regions during the extraction period. Further elaboration is given in PAPER 2. Using the FTIR data, one component PCA models for a) the enzymatic extraction I and II (Figure 7); and b) the acidic extraction III (PAPER 2) indicated optimal extraction times at 
120 min in both cases since spectra did not 
change significantly after that time point. This finding could be confirmed by pectin yield determination (reference analysis).  PLS prediction models were established using data from both techniques as described in the previous section. Results towards accuracy (RMSEP), precision (correlation coefficients) and 
number of latent variables are given in Table 3.  
PLS modeling of the carbohydrate microarray data, i.e. the interpretation of bi-plots, gave a comprehensive understanding of the antibody binding pattern being related to pectin release. Two-way chemometric methods for prediction  of process relevant parameters (PAT) 
/g1005/g1008/g3
/g3
Figure 8 . Screening of polysaccharides from lime peel extractions using microarray technology. Extracted pecti n
microarrays were probed with a panel of 30 cell wall glyca n directed monoclonal antibodies and CBMs. Binding results 
were presented in a heatmap in which colo ur intensity was correlated to mean spot signal values. The highest mean spot 
signal value was set to 100 and the rest of values were norma lized accordingly. At the top of the heatmap the used probes 
can be seen between brackets preceded by a short explanation of the epitope recognized by the particular probe. At the 
right part of the heatmap extraction times are shown. The su b-heatmap at the bottom, “controls”, includes some defined 
pectic samples with various degrees of  methylation. At the top, a commercially produced pectin with degree o f 
esterification (DE) 81%, in the middle a pectin with DE 31% and at the bottom, rhamnogalacturonan I. (PAPER 2) Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1005/g1009/g3
/g3Those binding patterns were rather difficult to 
identify without multivariate methods since none o f  t h e  3 0  u s e d  a n t i b o d i e s  o r  C B M s  l e d  t o  prediction ability itself.  More information is given 
in PAPER 2. 
When looking at the figures of merit of all four 
PLS models (Table 3) it can be concluded that 
models 2 and 4, which included the acidic extraction III samples, decreased in prediction performance for both techniques. However, yield prediction ability for carbohydrate microarray data did decrease more severe when including the acidic extraction III as it can be seen from the increasing RMSEP for model 4 and the decreasing 
correlation coefficients. Noticeably, the higher 
RMSEP (lower accuracy) did not only result from worse precision, as it can be seen when comparing the raw data in Figure 7 and Figure 8, but also from a bias induced by the prediction samples itself. Further elaboration, including calibration curves, is given in PAPER 2. 
5.2.5 Conclusion 
Two multivariate techniques, namely FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analysis showed predictive and descriptive abilities towards the extraction of pectin from lime peel. Both methods could predict the pectin yield well using PLS modeling. However, while FTIR predicted the 
pectin yield better in terms of accuracy and 
precision, the highly specific carbohydrate microarray analysis contributed with valuable information regarding the structural properties of the extracted pectin.  Thus, both techniques represent rapid (FTIR) and 
high-throughput capable (carbohydrate microarray) tools which can help to understand 
the extraction of pectin in different media. Both 
techniques are furthermore recommended to be implemented as industrial PAT solutions. Especially FTIR has shown to be highly suitable for online-monitoring of the pectin extraction process which could lead to optimization of parameters regarding process routine and product quality.  6. Temporal Evolution 
Profiling and chemometric 
multiway analysis for determination of enzyme 
activity 
In the previous chapter 5 spectral fingerprints 
derived from FTIR and NIR have been used to characterize certain thermodynamic states of carbohydrate systems. A constant thermodynamic state was hereby directly linked to the acquired 
spectrum which also reflected qualitative and 
quantitative properties of its underlying chemical constituents. Two-way chemometric methods 
have been used to analyze the corresponding data sets.  However, in this chapter multilinear data sets are handled which are constructed in a way that they contain an additional measurement dimension, 
namely time. This new measurement dimension 
enables the possibility to observe and calibrate for changes of thermodynamic states. In this chapter we therefore deal with data structures which are defined by its dimensions of samples, wavenumbers and time points (as described in Figure 3). Those multiway data structures can be used to study kinetic phenomena, as determining 
the enzyme activity of one or several enzymes.  
An interesting property of such data sets is that the underlying enzyme activity can be extracted independently from the interfering background as illustrated in Figure 9. This means that calibration models are still valid, even if a new sample indicates a different chemical matrix. The interfering background is simply removed by 
chemometric preprocessing as shown in Figure 9.  
To construct multiway data structures, mathe-matically denoted as tensors, time-resolved measurements are necessary. During the two studies, which are introduced in chapters 6.1 and 6.2, these measurements ha ve been carried out by 
continuously monitoring FTIR spectra of various samples which differed by the fact that they 
contained different amounts of active enzyme 
during the time-course of the enzymatic reaction.   
6.1 Measuring enzyme activity using FTIR 
and PARAFAC 
6.1.1 Background 
A key point to investigate enzyme related 
processes is the estimation of enzyme activity which is a fundamental measurement required for determining the amount of active enzyme. Temporal Evolution Pro fi
/g3Figure 9 . The figure shows simulat e
changing grey-scale. Bottom: The o b
independently from the sample matri x
the initial spectrum was subtracted fro m
Formally, enzyme activity is d e
amount of active enzyme which w
transformation of a particular m o
substrate per time unit under opti m
Its measurement is decisive for d e
dosage, reaction time, substrate u s
yields in practical enz yme catal yze
quantitative enzyme activity ass a
measured directly as the reaction r a
initial substrate consumption rate –
a fundamental measurement used f
specific enzyme. 
However, according to this it is di f
the enzyme activity of enzymes w
catalyze more than one substr a
corresponding products are even a
substrates themselves. A particu l
given by pectin lyase which cat
polymerization of homogalacturo n
pectin which can serve as substra t
and therefore produce a distributi o
with different chemical and struct u
Hence, the question arises of 
product or substrate to use for th e
of the enzyme activity althoug h
reaction is best described by all of t
filing and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enz y
ed data. Top: A time-resolved change of spectral fin g
bserved kinetic phenomenon, e.g., an enzymatic re a
x as the background can be removed by simple data p r
m all spectra of the series yi elding similar evolution pro fi
efined as the 
will catalyze the 
olar amount of 
mal conditions. 
efining enzyme 
se and product 
ed reactions. A 
ay - optimally 
ate defining the 
– is thereby also 
for identifying a 
fficult to define 
which can bio-
ate. Often the 
able to serve as 
lar example is 
alyzes the de-
nan regions in 
te several times 
on of products 
ural properties. 
which unique 
e quantification 
h the catalytic 
them? It appears to be e qually 
overall enzyme activity of c
since they contain cellul a
accompanying enzymes w
break down recalcitrant bi o
IUPAC defined a stan d
cellulase related enzyme using Filter Paper unit
s
employs standardized filte r
be degraded by the enzy m
reducing sugar assays [88, 8
the enz ymatic de gradati o
formation of reducing s u
course of the catalyzed re a
assays are usually referenc e
reducing sugar as, e.g., gl u
strongly depend on monosaccharide itself. H
e
how well those filter pape r
actual overall enzyme acti v
dependence of the prese n
and the used reduc i
Additionally, reducin g suga
[88, 89] are very cumberand often employ to
x
unfriendly chemicals.  
yme activit y 
/g1005/g1010/g3 
gerprints is illustrated by 
action, can be extracted 
reprocessing. In this case, 
files in both cases. 
 difficult to define the 
cellolytic enzyme blends 
ases and several other 
which actively help to 
omasses efficiently. The 
dardized method for 
 activity determination 
s [88]. This method 
r paper as a substrate to 
mes while conventional 
89] are used to monitor 
on by screenin g the 
ugars during the time-
action. However, those 
ed to only one standard 
ucose and are therefore 
the used reference 
ence, it is questionable 
r units can describe the 
vity as it might vary in 
nt biomass (substrate) 
ing sugar standard. 
ar assa ys as described in 
rsome, time-consuming 
xic and environment 
Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1005/g1011/g3
/g3 
Figure 10 . Each enzymatic reaction results in a specific spectral evolution profile, representing both, substrate depletion 
and product evolution. The enzymes used were glucose oxidas e (A, B), pectin lyase (C, D) and Celluclast 1.5L (E, F).  
During this study (PAPER 3) the hypothesis is 
tested, that FTIR and chemometric multiway analysis can be used as an universally applicable approach for rapid assessment of enzyme activity 
without using any external standards, even on 
genuine, complex substrates as biopolymers (which may not be chromogenic). The methodology is demonstrated by spectral evolution profiling of Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectral fingerprints using parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) for pectin lyase, glucose 
oxidase, and a cellulase preparation. 
6.1.2 Experimental 
All spectral evolution profiles were obtained using a MilkoScan
TM FT2 (FOSS ANALYTICAL, 
Hillerød, Denmark) and reference enzyme activity determinations were carried out by conventional enzymatic assays as described in PAPER 3. 
Spectra were acquired in the range between 1000 
cm
-1 and 1600 cm-1 while the temperature of the cuvette (path length 50 µm) was equilibrated at 42 
°C during all measuremen ts. Sets of evolution 
profiles were acquired using equal substrate 
concentrations and different dosages of enzyme. 
Depending on the nature of the enzymatic reaction, measurements ha ve been carried out in 
flow-back mode where the reaction mixture was continuously led back to the reaction container to ensure access of gases as oxygen which was 
necessary for the reaction of glucose oxidase. The other enzymatic reactions have been pumped into 
the cuvette only once for continuous 
measurements (pectin lyas e and Celluclast 1.5L). 
In this case the reaction mixture stayed inside the cuvette during the whole acquisition period. Spectra for each evolution profile were measured consecutively using time steps of 16.6 s for pectin lyase and Celluclast 1.5L and 31.0 s for glucose oxidase, respectively.  
Temporal Evolution Pro fi
/g36.1.3 Chemometric analysis 
The acquired evolution profiles w e
into tri-linear data structures dimensional arrays as illustrated in 
F
Figure 11 . Conversion from two- way
data structure. All data matrices c
resolved spectra for a certain enz y
stacked behind each other to form a t e
data structure fulfills trilinearity sin c
profiles are recorded using the same c
steps.  
The three-dimensional arrays 
enzymatic reactions contained ev o
where each enzyme activity was r
triplicate measurements. Some out l
out during the calibration: The indicated the following dimensions
:
Glucose oxidase: 29 samples x 4 0
121 spectral variables; Pectin lyas e
15 time points x 128 s pec
Celluclast 1.5L: 33 samples x 15 ti m
spectral variables.  
Wavenumber ran ges have bee n
optimize the calibration perform a
tensor formation spectra were n
each sample slab of the tens o
(PAPER 3).  
Parallel Factor Analysis was used common underlying spectral product evolutions by decompos
i
into spectral and kinetic loadialternating least s
quares al g
Decomposition of the trilinear therefore could be understood 
a
kinetic phenomena were fitted t
simultaneously (see PAPER 3).   
filing and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enz y
ere transformed 
 using three-
Figure 11.  
 
y to a three-way 
containing time-
yme activity are 
ensor. The cubic 
ce all evolution 
consecutive time 
for all three 
olution profiles 
represented by 
liers were taken 
 final tensors 
:  
0 time points x 
e: 32 samples x 
ctral variables; 
me points x 148 
n selected to 
ance. Prior to 
normalized for 
or using SNV 
 to resolve the 
substrate and 
ing the tensor 
ngs using an 
gorithm [60]. 
data structure 
as if common 
to all samples 6.1.4 Results 
Individual evolution pr o
enzymatic reactions of g l
lyase and Celluclast 1.5L a
as difference spectra.  
Figure 12 . Spectral evoluti o
FTIR containing different a m
catalyzing pectin degradation  
 
 
12001300140015001600-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.040.06
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
12001300140015001600-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.040.06
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
12001300140015001600-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.040.06
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs0 U 
1.44 U 
2.88 U yme activit y 
/g1005/g1012/g3ofiles for the three 
lucose oxidase, pectin 
are shown in Figure 10 
 
on profiles measured by 
ounts of pectin lyase bio-
 0102030
10001100time [min]
102030
10001100time [min]
102030
10001100time [min]Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1005/g1013/g3
/g3Table 4 . Calibration parameters for the three modeled enzymatic reactions 
 pectin lyase glucose oxidase Celluclast1.5L 
R2 substrate calibration 0.998 / 0.99 
R2 product calibration 0.995 0.97 0.98 
Time of spectral evolution 4.2 min 20.7 min 4.2 min Number of spectra in each Evolution Profile 15 40 15 Calibration range (per ml Substrate) 0-200 mU/ml 0-6 U/ml 0-80 mU/ml 
LOD* 9 mU/ml 277 mU/ml 3.79 mU/ml 
* Limit of Detection (LOD) only valid for used time of sp ectral evolution. LOD decreased for extended observation 
time. 
The figure shows that each enzymatic reaction 
results in its own specific temporal evolution due to the complex IR fingerprints of substrates and products. In addition, the intensity of the spectral 
evolution depended on the used enzyme amount. 
Several evolution profiles indicating different amounts of pectin lyase which bio-catalyzed the 
degradation of pectin are shown in Figure 12. For 
enzyme activity calibrations the scores retrieved from the three PARAFAC decompositions were plotted against the determined reference values. Since the evolution profiles monitored both, substrate depletion and product evolution simultaneously, the PARAFAC decomposition resulted in two calibrations for each enzymatic 
reaction. Correlation coefficients of the 
calibrations are given in Table 4. However, the glucose oxidase calibration showed poorer performance than the calibrations of the other two enzymatic reactions due to a lower signal-to-noise ratio in the spectra. It therefore resulted in only one calibration. Calibration relevant parameters as limit of detection (LOD), spectral 
calibration range, time of spectral evolution and 
number of spectra in the individual evolution profiles are given in Table 4. In addition, the calibration performance was investigated in dependence of observation time used in the individual evolution profiles. Further information on this and an application example of the method to investigate the thermal stability of 
pectin lyase is given in PAPER 3.  
6.1.5 Conclusion 
The method presents a universal and straight forward approach to quantify enzyme activity without using any external standards. Three 
enzyme activities, namely glucose oxidase, pectin 
lyase and the overall activity of a cellolytic enzyme 
blend, could be determined using spectral evolution profiling and PARAFAC analysis. The 
suggested approach enables possibilities to monitor and create a better understanding of complex biomass degrading enzymatic reactions 
and therefore offers attractive alternatives to the cumbersome reducing sugar analysis. Although FTIR serves as a very versatile and non-invasive technique to monitor both, substrate depletion and product evolution, its major drawback can be found in the low sensitivity as detection limits are 
relatively high as indicated in Table 4. 
6.2 Simultaneous measurement of two 
enzyme activities: a comparative evaluation of PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and N-PLS modeling 
6.2.1 Background 
Chapter 6.1 dealt with enzyme activity 
determinations of bio-catalytic systems which contained only one enzyme or a blend of enzymes whose amounts relative to each other were constant in all reactions as if they would represent 
a single “overall enzyme activity”.  This chapter focuses on extending the concept to 
determine enzyme activity of two co-acting 
enzymes simultaneously, i.e. pectin lyase and pectin methyl esterase acting on the same substrate, i.e. pectin from citrus peel. Both enzymatic reactions are given in Figure 14. While assuming that both enzymes do not interact with each other in an initial phase of the reaction, a superimposed nature of the individual evolution 
profiles can be expected as illustrated in Figure 13 
(simulated data). In addition, substrate depletion during spectral acquisition should be avoided by 
choosing high initial concentrations. When mixing different amounts of the enzymes the overall absorption pattern of the spectral evolution is therefore expected to change indicating simple superimposition (Figure 13).  
Throughout this study the hypothesis shall be 
tested if mid-infrared spectral evolution profiling and chemometric multiway analysis can determine two enzyme activities simultaneously. By doing so, three multiway methods shall be comparedTemporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1006/g1004/g3
/g3 
Figure 13 . Simulated data for three enzymatic reactions. A) En zyme 1 catalyzes the conversion of the substrate to 
product P1; B)  Enzyme 2 converts the substrate to product P2; C) Enzyme1+Enzyme2 (half dose enzyme1 + half dose 
enzyme2) convert the Substrate to both Products (P1 and P2) at the same time. The spectral changes from Substrate 
fingerprint to product fingerpr int are illustrated on the left side, whereas di fference spectra using surf plots are shown 
on the right side.  Individual final product fingerprints  are given by red and blue dashed lines, respectively.  1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 16000.050.10.150.20.25
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
051015
1000120014001600-0.15-0.1-0.0500.050.1
time [min]wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 16000.080.10.120.140.160.180.20.220.240.26
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
051015
1000120014001600-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.040.060.08
time [min]wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 16000.050.10.150.20.25
wavenumber [cm-1]Abs
051015
1000120014001600-0.1-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.04
spectrumwavenumber [cm-1]AbsA 
B 
C Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1006/g1005/g3
/g3A 
O
OHOHCOOCH 3
OOO
OHOHCOOCH 3
OO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O OHO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O +
 
B 
O
OHOHCOOCH 3
OOO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O+ 2H 2O
- 2CH 3OHO
OHOHCOOH
OOO
OHOHCOOH
O
 
Figure 14 . A) Enzymatic reaction of pectin lyase; B) enzymatic  reaction of pectin methyl esterase; although both 
enzymes act on the same substrate, namely pectin, they cleave the polymer at different specific sites.  
towards modeling performance, namely 
PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS.  
6.2.2 Experimental 
All spectral evolution profiles were acquired between 1000 cm
-1 and 1600 cm-1 using FTIR in a 
similar fashion as described in chapter 6.1. To 
establish calibration models for both enzymes, PL and PME, an appropriate experimental design was necessary. It should take into account that e.g. samples with one particular PL activity can be superimposed by PME activities which span from zero to a certain maximum value and vice versa. To establish robust calibration models all possible 
degrees of superimposition had therefore to be 
considered as shown in Figure 15.  
 
Figure 15 . Experimental Design: Red samples 
define calibration ranges, while black samples are randomly placed to create a normally distributed 
sampling scenario. 
Thus, a total number of 56 evolution profiles 
were acquired resembling diverse scenarios of superimposed PL and PME activities being added to 20 ml of 1g/l pectin solution. The spectra were acquired consecutively using time steps of 16.6 
seconds which resulted in eleven minutes observation time for one evolution profile (40 spectra). The molar enzyme activities of PL and PME for reference analysis were determined by conventional assays as described in PAPER 4.  
6.2.3 Chemometric analysis 
The acquired 56 evolution profiles were transformed into trilinear data structures as shown in Figure 11. 37 samples were used for calibration modeling and the 19 remaining samples served as a prediction test set for validation. Prior to any 
multiway modeling all spectra were normalized 
using SNV for each individual sample slab of the three-way array (PAPER 4). The final tensor contained data in the format 56 samples x 40 time points x 128 spectral variables. The three-way array was consecutively double centered using multiway centering towards mode 1 and mode 2 [64]. 
PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS analysis were 
carried out using PLS toolbox 6.0.1 (Eigenvector Research Inc., WA, USA). The mean prediction error (RMSEP) and the pooled standard deviation (s
p) were calculated as described PAPER 4 and 
represent measures for accuracy and precision.  
6.2.4 Results 
The calibration results for PARAFAC, 
TUCKER3 and NPLS modeling are given in Table 5 and Figure 16. Individual evolution profiles containing different amounts of PL and PME are given in PAPER 4.  Using leave-one-out cross-validation the number 
of factors for the PARAFAC model was 
determined to be 2 while the individual ranks for TUCKER3 modeling towards the modes 1 (sample mode), 2 (kinetic mode) and 3 (spectral 0 2 4 6 80510152025
Pectin Lyase activ ity [U]Pectin Methyl Esterase activity [U]Temporal Evolution Profiling and chemometric multiway analysis for determination of enzyme activity 
/g1006/g1006/g3
/g3  
 
Figure 16 . PL and PME calibrations derived from PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS models. Top: PME, bottom: PL; 
The blue points indicate leave-one-out cross validated calibra tion samples while red triangles indicate predictions for the 
test set samples.  
mode) were found to be 2, 1 and 2, respectively. 
The kinetic mode loadings of the TUCKER3 and 
NPLS models indicated that the rank in this mode 
was indeed 1 since both enzymatic reactions evolved identically, i.e. the initial rates changed in a similar fashion. The reduction of the rank in the kinetic mode (mode 2) was therefore assumed to be beneficial for calibration modeling as PARAFAC had problems to model the two enzymatic systems simult aneously (Figure 16). 
Further elaboration and loadings from all modes 
are presented in PAPER 4. Individual NPLS models for PL and PME indicated only one significant factor (one underlying evolution profile) for each activity calibration because leave-one-out cross validation indicated no prediction 
improvement for NPLS models when using more 
than one factor, respectively. 
Surprisingly, TUCKER3 calibration performance was comparably good with  respect to the result 
retrieved from the supervised regression method NPLS. This study therefore indicated a useful application for TUCKER3, especially in contrast to PARAFAC. In addition the high calibration accuracy of the 
unsupervised result from TUCKER3 indicated 
that no significant disturbing interaction between the enzymes was present since it would have led to decrease in calibration performance. 0 2 4 6 8-10-5051015
PL activ ity [U]predicted PL activity [U]
  
0 2 4 6 8-2-10123456789
  
PL activ ity [U]predicted PL activity [U]
0 2 4 6 8-2-10123456789
PL activ ity [U]predicted PL activity [U]
0 5 10 15 20 25-10-5051015202530
PME activ ity [U]predicted PME activity [U]
  
0 5 10 15 20 25-50510152025
PME activ ity [U]predicted PME activity [U]
  
0 5 10 15 20 25-50510152025
PME activity [U]predicted PME activity [U]/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g87/g4/g90/g4/g38/g4/g18/g3 /g3 /g3 /g3/g3/g3/g3/g100/g104/g18/g60/g28/g90/g1007/g3 /g3 /g3 /g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g3/g69/g87/g62/g94/g3Conclusion and Perspectives 
/g1006/g1007/g3
/g3 
Table 5 . Regression coefficients for calibration and prediction set samples are given together with pooled standard 
deviation s p and root-mean-square-error of prediction RMSEP  
                        PARAFAC          TUCKER3          N-PLS 
 PL PME PL PME PL PME 
R2cal 0.67 0.52 0.92 0.88 0.95 0.89 
R2pred 0.48 0.70 0.96 0.89 0.96 0.89 
Sp 1.10 U 1.62 U 0.26 U 1.19 U 0.24 U 1.10 U 
RMSEP 3.60 U 5.31 U 0.62 U 2.72 U 0.70 U 2.85 U 
 
6.2.5 Conclusion 
FTIR spectroscopy was employed to follow the 
bioconversion of two enzymatic reactions time-
resolved.  All three multiway methods, namely PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS, could predict the enzyme activities of the two co-acting enzymes, PL and PME, simultaneously. When comparing the three multiway models mainly TUCKER3 surprised with its outstanding performance. As both, accuracy and precision 
were comparable to the regression results from 
N-PLS, although resulting from a non-supervised analysis; it shows clearly that TUCKER3 has great potential when analyzing kinetic data, especially when PARAFAC fails to resolve the underlying phenomena as it could be seen during this study. Since many enzymatic reactions still rely on monitoring only one substrate or product the here 
presented approach enables much better 
observation of the whole reaction pattern. This is particularly important when enzyme kinetics is to be investigated on genuine substrates where two (or more) enzymes act concerted on the same substrate. At present those reactions can hardly be monitored by univariate measurement principles as they result in very complex reaction patterns. 
Time-resolved multivariate analysis and FTIR 
spectroscopy therefore inaugurate new possibilities to monitor such reactions to gain a better understanding of their complex underlying nature. 
7. Conclusion and 
Perspectives 
This thesis dealt with descriptive and predictive 
assessment of enzyme activity and enzyme related processes in biorefinery using FTIR and chemometrics. Within the project two major research fields were dealt with, i.e. the establish-ment of PAT tools for prediction of relevant parameters in biorefinery processes and the establishment of universally applicable enzyme 
 activity assessment methods. The developed 
methodologies complied with concepts like 
“cradle-to-cradle” [6], meaning that no resources are meant to be wasted and toxic chemicals should be avoided. The major results are summarized in the following:  
 
1. Hydrolysis efficiency of destarched corn 
bran after various pretreatment can be 
predicted by non-invasive NIR spectroscopy 
and chemometric modeling prior to enzymatic conversion. Prediction models towards the monosaccharide release enable a useful PAT to monitor the quality of incoming biomass batches and to evaluate the effect of pretreatment while outliers are easily detected. (PAPER 1) 
2. FTIR, carbohydrate microarray analysis and 
chemometric data analysis are suitable techniques for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of time-resolved pectin extraction. FTIR represents a useful PAT tool to monitor the extraction process online using predictive models which also leads to optimization of extraction time. 
Carbohydrate microarray analysis gives 
strong support to determine the obtained pectin structure, i.e. to determine the degree of esterification and neutral sugar side-chain abundance. (PAPER 2)   
3. FTIR and chemometric multiway analysis, 
i.e. PARAFAC, give better and more objective determination abilities towards 
enzyme activity. The method is universally 
applicable to a wide range of enzymes and does not require use of any external chemicals. (PAPER 3) 
4. FTIR and chemometric multiway 
chemometrics, i.e. PARAFAC, TUCKER3 and NPLS, can determine the enzyme activities of the co-acting enzymes pectin References 
/g1006/g1008/g3
/g3lyase and pectin methyl simultaneously. 
(PAPER 4) 
 
The results of the project were presented in 
chapter 5 and chapter 6. The division of the 
chapters was hereby based on application of two-way versus multiway chemometric methods. On one hand, two-way chemometric methods primarily enabled opportunities for analysis of thermodynamic states, while on the other hand multiway methods were employed to establish models towards time-resolved changes of 
thermodynamic states.  
While chemometric two-way methods, in 
combination with rapid and non-invasive 
techniques which required almost no sample preparation, showed great benefit when characterizing (bio)-chemical systems the study indicated some outstanding advantages of 
multiway analysis. Enzyme activity was hereby 
found to form specific spectral evolution profiles, 
being composed of spectral substrate and product evolutions, whose intensit y varied in dependence 
of the used enzyme amount. Enzyme activities could therefore be quantified and identified according to the shape of their specific evolutions measured by FTIR. The inherent uniqueness property of e.g. 
unsupervised PARAFAC models paves the road 
for establishment of enzyme activity calibrations, even without reference analysis which is in particular interesting as relative enzyme activities are desired when characterizing an enzyme in terms of its thermal stability. Secondly, the second order advantage makes 
models derived from multiway methods robust 
against unknown interf erences in future 
prediction samples. This means that enzyme activity calibrations can be applied to different sample matrices, even containing possible additional interfering substrates. However, this was not investigated throughout this project and, theoretically, only holds when kinetic and fingerprint loadings of the interfering spectral 
evolution differ from the loadings of the 
calibrated enzymatic spectral evolution.  Outlining these striking advantages, hence, promises further application areas of the proposed multiway methods regarding enzyme activity determination. In terms of future perspectives, studies could concern investigation of more than two enzymes acting simultaneously 
on common substrates to evaluate the limits of de-convoluting underlying evolution profiles of 
the individual enzymatic reactions. In addition, the interaction between enzymes can be investigated as its appearance would be expected to disturb calibration performance of the unsupervised multiway models. The method also 
enables descriptive possibilities to monitor the 
quality of enzyme production batches in terms of side-activity abundance as the specific spectral evolution profiles indicate additional spectral evolution easily. The major advantage is hereby, that the method utilizes the fingerprinting technique FTIR which captures information concerning literally all changes in (bio)-chemical 
systems making it universally applicable, even 
considering recalcitrant sample matrices as, e.g., milk and juice.  In terms of biorefinery, the proposed methodologies offer outstanding opportunities to screen enzymatic reactions, also in a qualitative sense, and could therefore have significant impact on analyzing bio-catalytic processes as they have 
been cumbersome to understand for decades 
because of their obtrusive complexity.  
8. References 
[1] R. Rastall, Novel enzyme technology for 
food applications, Woodhead Publishing Ltd, 2008. 
[2] J.T. Wood, Das Entkälken und Beizen der 
Felle und Häute, Springer, 1914, p. 104. 
[3] K. Chen, F.H. Arnold, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 90 (1993) 5618. 
[4] W.P. Stemmer, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 91 (1994) 10747. 
[5] R.A. Sheldon, I. Arends, U. Hanefeld, Green 
chemistry and catalysis, Wiley-VCH, 2007. 
[6] W. McDonough, M. Braungart, Cradle to 
cradle : remaking the way we make things, 
North Point Press, New York, 2002. 
[7] A.J. Straathof, S. Panke, A. Schmid, Current 
opinion in biotechnology, 13 (2002) 548. 
[8] K. Buchholz, V. Kasche, U.T. Bornscheuer, 
Biocatalysts and enzyme technology, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012. 
[9] H. Ohara, Applied microbiology and 
biotechnology, 62 (2003) 474. 
[10] M. McCann, K. Roberts, The cytoskeletal 
basis of plant growth and form (1991) 109. 
[11] S. Pérez, M. Rodríguez-Carvajal, T. Doco, 
Biochimie, 85 (2003) 109. References 
/g1006/g1009/g3
/g3[12] H. Ohara, Preprints of zero emission 
symposium, 2000, p. 81. 
[13] F. Guillon, M. Champ, J.-F. Thibault, 
Functional foods 315. 
[14] N. Colthup, L. Daly , S. Wiberley,  (1990). 
[15] B.H. Stuart, Infrared spectroscopy: 
fundamentals and applications, Wiley, 2004. 
[16] M. Paradkar, S. Sakhamuri, J. Irudayaraj, 
Journal of food science, 67 (2002) 2009. 
[17] M. Blanco, I. Villarroya, TrAC Trends in 
Analytical Chemistry, 21 (2002) 240. 
[18] J. Lammertyn, A. Peirs, J. De Baerdemaeker, 
B. Nicolaı /g523, Postharvest biology and 
technology, 18 (2000) 121. 
[ 1 9 ]  H . W .  S i e s l e r ,  Y .  O z a k i ,  S .  K a w a t a ,  H . M .  
Heise, Near-infrared spectroscopy: 
principles, instruments, applications, Wiley-
Vch, 2008. 
[20] J. Russell, A. Fraser, Clay Mineralogy: 
Spectroscopic and chemical determinative methods, Springer, 1994, p. 11. 
[21] P. Griffiths, J.A. De Haseth, Fourier 
transform infrared spectrometry, Wiley-Interscience, 2007. 
[22] S.K. Andersen, P.W. Hansen, H.V. 
Andersen, Handbook of Vibrational 
Spectroscopy (2002). 
[23] S. Sivakesava, J. Irudayaraj, A. Demirci, 
Journal of Industrial Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 26 (2001) 185. 
[24] M. McCann, L. Chen, K. Roberts, E. 
Kemsley, C. Sene, N. Carpita, N. Stacey, R. 
Wilson, Physiologia Plantarum, 100 (1997) 
729. 
[25] O. Faix, Holzforschung-International Journal 
of the Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Technology of Wood, 45 (1991) 21. 
[26] N. Wellner, M. Kačuráková, A. Malovı /g501ková, 
R.H. Wilson, P.S. Belton, Carbohydrate 
research, 308 (1998) 123. 
[27] M. Kacurakova, P. Capek, V. Sasinkova, N. 
Wellner, A. Ebringerova, Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 43 (2000) 195. 
[28] K.J. Astrom, B. Wittenmark, Computer-
Controlled systems: theory and design, Prentice hall, 1999. 
[29] T.W. Anderson, An introduction to 
multivariate statistical analysis, Wiley New York, 1958. 
[30] R. Bro, S. De Jong, Journal of chemometrics, 
11 (1997) 393. 
[31] S. Wold, K. Esbensen, P. Geladi,  (Vol. 1), 
Elsevier, 1987, p. 37. 
[32] H. Hotelling, 1933, p. 498. [33] B.M. Wise, N.B. Gallagher,  (Vol. 6), 
Elsevier, 1996, p. 329. 
[34] M.A. Hearst, S. Duma is, E. Osman, J. Platt, 
B. Scholkopf, Intelligent Systems and their Applications, IEEE, 13 (1998) 18. 
[35] C.J. Burges, Data mining and knowledge 
discovery, 2 (1998) 121. 
[36] D.W. Patterson, Artificial neural networks: 
theory and applications, Prentice Hall PTR, 1998. 
[37] A.K. Jain, J. Mao, K.M. Mohiuddin, 
Computer, 29 (1996) 31. 
[38] K.S. Booksh, B.R. Kowalski, Analytical 
Chemistry, 66 (1994) 782A. 
[39] K.R. Beebe, B.R. Kowalski, Analytical 
Chemistry, 59 (1987) 1007A. 
[40] B.R. Kowalski, Analytical Chemistry, 52 
(1980) 112R. 
[41] S. Wold, M. Sjöström, L. Eriksson, 
Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory 
systems, 58 (2001) 109. 
[42] E. Sanchez, B.R. Kowalski, Journal of 
chemometrics, 2 (1988) 247. 
[43] E. Sanchez, B.R. Kowalski, Journal of 
chemometrics, 2 (1988) 265. 
[44] H.A. Kiers, Journal of chemometrics, 14 
(2000) 105. 
[45] L.R. Tucker, Contributions to mathematical 
psychology (1964) 109. 
[46] L.R. Tucker, Psychometrika, 31 (1966) 279. 
[47] R.A. Harshman,  (1970). 
[48] A. Smilde, R. Bro, P. Geladi, Multi-way 
analysis: applications in the chemical sciences, Wiley, 2005. 
[49] R. Bro, J.J. Workman JR, P.R. Mobley, B.R. 
Kowalski, Applied Spectroscopy Reviews, 32 (1997) 237. 
[50] R. Bro, Critical reviews in analytical 
chemistry, 36 (2006) 279. 
[51] C.M. Andersen, R. Bro, Journal of 
chemometrics, 17 (2003) 200. 
[52] L. Moberg, G. Robertsson, B. Karlberg, 
Talanta, 54 (2001) 161. 
[53] A.E. Sinha, C.G. Fraga, B.J. Prazen, R.E. 
Synovec, Journal of Chromatography A, 1027 (2004) 269. 
[54] B.J. Prazen, K.J. Johnson, A. Weber, R.E. 
Synovec, Analytical Chemistry, 73 (2001) 5677. 
[55] M. Pistonesi, M.E. Centurión, B.S.F. Band, 
P.C. Damiani, A.C. Olivieri, Journal of 
pharmaceutical and biomedical analysis, 36 (2004) 541. References 
/g1006/g1010/g3
/g3[56] W. Windig, B. Antalek, Chemometrics and 
intelligent laboratory systems, 37 (1997) 241. 
[57] H.T. Pedersen, R. Bro, S.B. Engelsen, 
Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 157 (2002) 141. 
[58] P. Geladi, P. Åberg, Journal of near infrared 
spectroscopy (2001). 
[59] A.M. Antunes, M. Ferreira, P.L. Volpe, 
Journal of chemometrics, 16 (2002) 111. 
[60] R. Bro, Chemometrics and intelligent 
laboratory systems, 38 (1997) 149. 
[61] Y. Wang, O.S. Borgen, B.R. Kowalski, M. 
Gu, F. Turecek, Journal of chemometrics, 7 (1993) 117. 
[62] R. Bro,  (1996). 
[63] C.A. Andersson, R. Bro, Chemometrics and 
intelligent laboratory systems, 42 (1998) 93. 
[64] R. Bro, A.K. Smilde, Journal of 
chemometrics, 17 (2003) 16. 
[65] R.A. van den Berg, H.C. Hoefsloot, J.A. 
Westerhuis, A.K. Smilde, M.J. van der Werf, BMC genomics, 7 (2006) 142. 
[66] R. Barnes, M. Dhanoa, S.J. Lister, Applied 
spectroscopy, 43 (1989) 772. 
[67] S. Jensen, H. Martens, Cereal Chem, 60 
(1983) 172. 
[68] P. Geladi, D. MacDougall, H. Martens, 
Applied spectroscopy, 39 (1985) 491. 
[69] M.L. Balboni, Pharmaceutical Technology 
(2003). 
[70] L.X. Yu, R.A. Lionberger, A.S. Raw, R. 
D'Costa, H. Wu, A.S. Hussain, Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 56 (2004) 349. 
[71] S. Gnoth, M. Jenzsch, R. Simutis, A. 
Lübbert, Journal of biotechnology, 132 (2007) 180. 
[72] J.A. Lopes, P.F. Costa, T.P. Alves, J.C. 
Menezes, Chemometrics and intelligent 
laboratory systems, 74 (2004) 269. 
[73] S.D. Mansfield, C. Mooney, J.N. Saddler, 
Biotechnology Progress, 15 (1999) 804. 
[74] B.C. Saha, R.J. Bothast, Applied 
biochemistry and biotechnology, 76 (1999) 65. 
[75] M. Pedersen, A.S. Meyer, New 
biotechnology, 27 (2010) 739. 
[76] J. Agger, K.S. J ohansen, A.S. Meyer, New 
biotechnology, 28 (2011) 125. 
[77] N. Qureshi, B.C. Saha, B. Dien, R.E. Hector, 
M.A. Cotta, biomass and bioenergy, 34 (2010) 559. 
[78] K. de Carvalho Lima, C. Takahashi, F. 
Alterthum, Journal of industrial microbiology & biotechnology, 29 (2002) 124. [79] B. Dien, R. Hespell, L. Ingram, R. Bothast, 
World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 13 (1997) 619. 
[80] J. Schutte, J. De J ong, E. Van Weerden, M. 
Van Baak, British Poultry Science, 33 (1992) 89. 
[81] C.M. Andersen, R. Bro, Journal of 
chemometrics, 24 (2010) 728. 
[82] X. Zou, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Vibrational 
spectroscopy, 44 (2007) 220. 
[83] W.G. Willats, J.P. Knox, J.D. Mikkelsen, 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 17 (2006) 97. 
[84] I. Bottger, Gums and stabilisers for the food 
industry, 5 (1990) 247. 
[85] I. Moller, S.E. Marcus, A. Haeger, Y. 
Verhertbruggen, R. Verhoef, H. Schols, P. Ulvskov, J.D. Mikkelsen, J.P. Knox, W. Willats, Glycoconjugate journal, 25 (2008) 37. 
[86] T. Kristensen, J.D. Mikkelsen, J.P. Knox, 
Proteomics, 2 (2002) 1666. 
[87] J. Harholt, A. Suttangkakul, H.V. Scheller, 
Plant physiology, 153 (2010) 384. 
[88] T.M. Wood, K.M. Bhat, Methods in 
enzymology, 160 (1988) 87. 
[89] G.L. Miller, Analytical Chemistry, 31 (1959) 
426. 
 
 /g3
/g3/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3/g3
PAPER 1  
Andreas Baum, Jane Agger, Anne S. Meyer, Max Egebo, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; Rapid 
near infrared spectroscopy for prediction of enzy matic hydrolysis of corn bran after various 
pretreatments; New Biotechnology, Volume 29, Issue 3, 15 February 2012, Pages 
293-301 New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012  RESEARCH  PAPER
Rapid  near  infrared  spectroscopy  for
prediction  of  enzymatic  hydrolysis  of
corn  bran  after  various  pretreatments
Andreas  Baum1,2,  Jane  Agger3,  Anne  S.  Meyer1,  Max  Egebo2and
Jørn  Dalgaard  Mikkelsen1
1Center  for  BioProcess  Engineering,  Department  of  Chemical  and  Biochemical  Engineering,  Technical  University  of  Denmark,  DK-2800  Lyngby,  Denmark
2Foss  Analytical,  Slangerupgade  69,  DK-3400  Hillerød,  Denmark
3Department  of  Chemistry,  Biotechnology  and  Food  Science,  Norwegian  University  of  Life  Sciences,  P. O.  Box  5003,  N-1432  A˚s,  Norway
Efﬁcient  generation  of  a  fermentable  hydrolysate  is  a  primary  requirement  in  the  utilization  of  ﬁbrous
plant  biomass  as  feedstocks  in  bioethanol  processes.  The  ﬁrst  biomass  conversion  step  usually  involves  a
hydrothermal  pretreatment  before  enzymatic  hydrolysis.  The  purpose  of  the  pretreatment  step  is  to
increase  the  responsivity  of  the  substrate  to  enzymatic  attack  and  the  type  of  pretreatment  affects  the
enzymatic  conversion  efﬁciency.  Destarched  corn  bran  is  a  ﬁbrous,  heteroxylan-rich  side-stream  from
the  starch  industry  which  may  be  used  as  a  feedstock  for  bioethanol  production  or  as  a  source  of  xylose
for  other  purposes.  In  the  present  study  we  demonstrate  the  use  of  diffuse  reﬂectance  near  infrared
spectroscopy  (NIR)  as  a  rapid  and  non-destructive  analytical  tool  for  evaluation  of  pretreatment  effects
on  destarched  corn  bran.  NIR  was  used  to  achieve  classiﬁcation  between  43  differently  pretreated  corn
bran  samples  using  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  and  hierarchal  clustering  algorithms.
Quantiﬁcation  of  the  enzymatically  released  monosaccharides  by  HPLC  was  used  to  design  multivariate
calibration  models  (biPLS)  on  the  NIR  spectra.  The  models  could  predict  the  enzymatic  release  of
different  levels  of  arabinose,  xylose  and  glucose  from  all  the  differently  pretreated  destarched  corn  bran
samples.  The  present  study  also  demonstrates  a  generic,  non-destructive  solution  to  determine  the
enzymatic  monosaccharide  release  from  polymers  in  biomass  side-streams,  thereby  potentially
replacing  the  cumbersome  HPLC  analysis.
Introduction
Enzymatic  conversion  of  biomasses  is  an  important  step  in  the
exploitation  of  biomass  residuals  in  the  food  and  biofuel  industry
and  viable  processes  are  dependent  on  reliable,  fast  and  low-cost
process  conditions.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  know  the  basic
monosaccharide  composition  and  the  distribution  in  polysacchar-
ide  forms  to  target  and  develop  enzymatic  conversion,  and  this
traditionally  represents  a  demanding  task.  In  addition,  most  low-
priced  biomass  resources  are  of  a  recalcitrant  nature,  which  is  why
various  hydrothermal  or  thermo-chemical  pretreatment  forms  are
often  applied  in  to  maximize  the  yields  of  enzymatic  conversion[1–3] .  Such  pretreatments  are  costly  and  the  efﬁcacy  of  the  pre-
treatment  step  in  generating  a  substrate  which  is  enzymatically
degradable  needs  utmost  optimization.  Evaluations  of  pretreat-
ment  methods  are  commonly  done  by  large  experimental  setups
and  require  time-consuming  and  advanced  analytical  methods
[4,5] .
Near  infrared  spectroscopy  (NIR)  as  an  analytical  tool  offers
beneﬁts,  such  as  high-throughput  screening,  which  are  highly
valuable  to  the  research  ﬁeld  of  biomass  conversion  and  various
studies  have  focused  on  applying  NIR  spectroscopy  as  an  alter-
native  method  for  rapid  and  reliable  screening  of  biomass  com-
position  and  digestibility.  Such  diverse  cases  include  prediction  of
polysaccharide  composition  of  several  botanical  fractions  of
Research Paper
Corresponding  author:  Mikkelsen,  J.D.  (jdm@kt.dtu.dk )
1871-6784/$  -  see  front  matter  /C223  2011  Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved.  doi:10.1016/j.nbt.2011.11.010  www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt  293switchgrass  and  corn  stover  [6],  wheat  straw  digestibility  [7],
characterization  of  feedstock  and  fermentation  yields  of  rye,  wheat
and  triticale  kernels  for  bioethanol  production  [8]  and  character-
ization  of  starch  waxiness  in  wheat  breeding  programs  [9].  Besides
being  rapid  it  is  a  low  cost,  highly  versatile  analytical  technique
and  has  the  special  advantage  of  being  capable  of  analyzing
insoluble,  powder  samples  and  suspensions,  which  are  features
particularly  relevant  for  recalcitrant  biomasses.
NIR  analysis  involves  acquisition  of  large  numbers  of  absorben-
cies  in  a  spectral  region  typically  ranging  from  1000  to  2500  nm,
where  organic  matter  has  distinct  spectral  ﬁngerprints  related  to
functional  groups  [10].  The  large  amounts  of  data  generated  by
such  methods  are  generally  combined  with  multivariate  quanti-
tative  and  qualitative  analysis  by  which  predictive  models  and
interpretations  can  be  made  [10].  The  combination  of  NIR  spectro-
scopy  and  multivariate  analytical  techniques  represents  an  excep-
tionally  feasible  method  for  building  reliable  models  to  describe
biomasses.  Because  of  the  capacity  of  the  multivariate  analysis
such  models  can  be  based  on  comprehensive  data  amounts,  which
may  include  variables  like  cultivars,  harvest  time,  plant  tissues,
storage  conditions,  growth  conditions  and  locations  [6–12] .
In  the  present  work,  NIR  spectroscopy  has  been  applied  to
evaluate  differently  pretreated  samples  originating  from  corn
bran,  an  agro-industrial  residue  from  corn  starch  processing
[4,11] .  The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  examine  the  potential  for
employing  NIR  spectroscopy  and  chemometrics  to  predict  the
efﬁciency  of  different  pretreatments  on  enzymatic  degradation
of  corn  bran.  Corn  bran  represents  a  complex  and  recalcitrant
biomass  stream  particularly  rich  in  C-5  carbohydrates  mainly
present  as  the  structural  polysaccharide  arabinoxylan,  which  con-
stitutes  approximately  56%  of  the  dry  matter  (DM)  [11].  Corn  bran
also  contains  signiﬁcant  amounts  of  cellulose  and  is  therefore  an
interesting  substrate  for  enzymatic  biomass  conversion  into  read-
ily  available  monosaccharides.
The  spectral  data  originating  from  corn  bran  samples  after
various  pretreatments  were  compared  to  results  of  enzymatic
hydrolysis  obtained  by  HPLC  analysis  of  enzymatically  released
monosaccharides.  It  was  hypothesized  that:  (i)  NIR  spectroscopy
can  hierarchically  distinguish  insoluble  corn  bran  according  to
pretreatment  conditions  and  (ii)  the  extent  of  enzymatic  hydro-
lysis  of  corn  bran  after  a  particular  set  of  pretreatment  condi-
tions  can  be  predicted  from  the  insoluble  corn  bran’s  NIR
spectra.
Materials  and  methods
Experimental  setup
The  experiment  was  designed  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  1.  Destarched
corn  bran  was  subjected  to  different  pretreatments  with  varying
temperature,  pH  and  time  as  outlined  in  ‘Biomass’  section.  Freeze
dried  samples  from  each  pretreatment  experiment  were  used  in
powder  form  for  NIR  measurements.  Concomitantly  the  pre-
treated  DCB  samples  were  enzymatically  hydrolyzed  to  release
monosaccharides,  which  were  quantiﬁed  by  HPLC  techniques  as
described  in  ‘Enzymatic  hydrolysis  and  monosaccharide  analysis’
section.
First  NIR  spectroscopy  was  used  to  achieve  classiﬁcation  among
the  different  pretreatment  conditions  in  relation  to  carbohydrate
composition  and  to  detect  outliers  in  the  sample  sets  by  usinghierarchal  clustering  algorithms  in  connection  with  PCA  Analysis.
Secondly,  the  determined  quantities  of  glucose,  xylose  and  arabi-
nose  from  HPLC  were  employed  to  establish  multivariate  calibra-
tions  using  Partial  Least  Squares  modeling  (Fig.  1a).  The
established  models  could  then  be  used  for  prediction  of  mono-
saccharide  release  (Fig.  1b)  by  just  measuring  the  NIR  spectrum  of
the  pretreated  DCB  samples  (validation).
Biomass
Destarched  corn  bran  after  various  pretreatments  was  used  as
substrate  in  all  enzymatically  catalyzed  conversions  and  all  NIR
spectroscopy  measurements.  Raw  corn  bran  was  obtained  from
Archer  Daniel  Midlands  Company,  Decatur  Illinois,  USA.  The
material  was  milled  and  enzymatically  destarched  with  a-amylase
and  amyloglucosidase  as  previously  described  [11]  before  all  pre-
treatments,  measurements  and  hydrolysis  experiments.
Pretreatment  conditions  were  categorized  into  ﬁve  different
setups  (A–E)  as  follows:
A:  Raw  destarched  corn  bran,  sorted  according  to  particle  sizes.  This
substrate  was  identical  to  group  B  substrate  except  that  no
pretreatment  other  than  destarching  had  occurred.  After
destarching,  the  material  was  freeze  dried,  milled  and  sorted
into  four  particle  size  fractions  based  on  size  by  sieving,
namely  from  [1000;710],  [710;355],  [355;250],  [250;150]  mm
[4].  These  four  particle  size  fractions  were  analyzed  by  NIR  and
enzymatically  hydrolyzed.
B:  Elevated  temperature  pretreatment,  sorted  according  to  particle
sizes.  Destarched  corn  bran  in  an  aqueous  non-buffered  6%
DM  weight/volume  (w/v)  slurry  was  pretreated  in  a  loop
autoclave  at  Risø  DTU,  National  Laboratory  for  Sustainable
Energy,  Roskilde,  Denmark  as  described  previously  [4,12] .  The
pretreatment  consisted  of  heating  to  190 8C  for  10  min.  No
chemicals  were  added.  After  pretreatment  the  pH  was  4.2  in
the  total  slurry.  Hereafter  the  material  was  separated  into  a
soluble  and  an  insoluble  fraction  by  ﬁltration  and  theRESEARCH  PAPER  New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012
FIGURE  1
Principle  of  multivariate  calibration.  HPLC  and  NIR  spectroscopy  were  used  to
determine  carbohydrate  composition  of  pretreated  DCB  samples:  (a)  HPLC
data  from  enzymatic  hydrolyzed  samples  were  used  to  establish  multivariate
calibration  on  the  NIR  spectra;  (b)  The  prediction  model  established  from  (a)
can  then  be  used  to  predict  the  outcome  of  the  enzymatic  hydrolysis  directly
from  NIR  spectra  without  need  for  hydrolysis.
294  www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt
Research Paperinsoluble  residue  was  washed  in  Milli-Q  water  and  freeze
dried.  Finally,  the  freeze  dried  insolubles  were  milled  and
sorted  into  four  fractions  of  different  particle  size  as  described
for  group  A.  These  four  particle  size  fractions  were  analyzed  by
NIR  and  enzymatically  hydrolyzed.
C:  Mid-range  pH  catalyzed  pretreatments  at  intermediate  tempera-
tures.  In  these  experiments  destarched  corn  bran  was
suspended  in  a  2%  DM  (w/v)  aqueous  non-buffered  slurry
before  heat  incubation  in  a  custom-built  pretreatment  reactor
as  described  in  [4].  Before  incubation  pH  was  adjusted  by
either  HCl  or  NaOH  to  meet  initial  pH  conditions  of  either  2,  7
or  12  in  the  pretreatment.  The  pre-pH  adjusted  corn  bran
slurry  was  incubated  at  temperatures  ranging  from  100  to
150 8C  for  10–120  min.  The  pretreated  slurries  were  enzyma-
tically  hydrolyzed  and  an  aliquot  of  the  material  was  then
ﬁltered  and  the  insoluble  residues  were  washed  in  Milli-Q
water  before  freeze  drying  for  NIR  measurements.
D:  Low  pH  catalyzed  pretreatment  at  intermediate  temperature .  This
material  was  pretreated  at  conditions  similar  to  those  applied
for  group  C  as  the  pretreatment  reactor,  DM  loadings  and
handling  after  pretreatment  were  the  same.  In  contrast  to
group  C  the  pH  was  adjusted  between  1  and  2,  all  experiments
were  performed  at  150 8C  and  the  pretreatment  time  was
narrowed  down  to  be  between  10  and  65  min  [4].
E:  pH  catalyzed  pretreatments  with  extended  incubation  time.  The
last  pretreatment  group  included  destarched  corn  bran
samples  which  had  been  pretreated  similarly  as  the  samples
in  group  C  and  D,  but  either  pre-adjusted  to  pH  2  or  12  and
then  incubated  for  extended  time  intervals  (from  120  to
240  min)  as  described  in  [4].
Enzymatic  hydrolysis  and  monosaccharide  analysis
All  enzymatic  hydrolysis  experiments  were  conducted  according
to  the  same  scheme.  For  dry  samples  a  2%  DM  (w/v)  suspension
was  made  in  0.1  M  succinate  buffer  pH  5.  Slurry  samples  were  pH
adjusted  to  5  before  hydrolysis.  A  basic  set  of  enzymes  was  applied
to  all  samples,  one  endo-(1,4)- b-xylanase  (GH10,  Humicola  inso-
lens),  one  b-xylosidase  (GH3,  Trichoderma  reesei ),  two  a-L-arabi-
nofuranosidases  (GH43  from  H.  insolens  and  GH51  from  Meripilus
giganteus )  all  described  in  [13,14] .  These  four  enzymes  were  dosed
at  0.25  mg  enzyme  protein  (EP)/g  DM  each  as  mono  component
preparations  and  the  blend  was  further  supplemented  by  acetyl
xylan  esterase  from  Flavolaschia  sp.  [11]  and  feruloyl  esterase  type
A  from  Aspergillus  niger  [15]  each  dosed  at  0.5  mg  EP/g  DM.  Finally,
a  commercially  available  cellulase  preparation  was  added,  named
CellicTMCTec  which  is  based  on  the  well-known  T.  reesei  cellulase
enzyme  complex,  supplemented  by  b-glucosidase  and  hydrolysis-
boosting  proteins  GH61  [16,17] .  The  cellulase  preparation  was
dosed  at  4  mg  EP/g  DM.  Samples  were  incubated  at  508C  for
24  hours  and  enzymatic  reactions  stopped  by  heating  to  100 8C
for  10  min.  All  enzymatic  hydrolysis  experiments  were  performed
in  triplicate.  Hereafter,  all  samples  were  analyzed  for  free  mono-
saccharides  arabinose,  glucose  and  xylose  by  HPAEC-PAD  on  a
BioLC  Dionex  system,  equipped  with  a  CarboPac  PA1  column
(analytical  4  mm  /C2  250  mm)  also  from  Dionex,  according  to  the
method  given  in  [18].  Before  pretreatment  experiments  the  basic
monosaccharide  composition  of  raw  destarched  corn  bran  was
established  by  methods  described  in  [11].  This  compositionwas  generally  applied  for  calculating  yields  after  enzymatic
hydrolysis.
Diffuse  reﬂectance  near  infrared  spectroscopy  (NIR)
Diffuse  reﬂectance  NIR  spectra  were  obtained  using  a  monochro-
mator-based  XDS  instrument  connected  to  a  Rapid  Content  Ana-
lyzer  (FOSS  ANALYTICAL,  Hillerød).  The  instrument  scans  the  full-
visible  and  near  infrared  range  spanning  from  400  nm  to  2500  nm
using  a  Dual  detector  (silicon  400–1100  nm;  lead  sulﬁte  1100–
2500  nm)  and  at  a  resolution  of  2  nm/C01.  Wavelength  accuracy  and
acquisition  rate  were  speciﬁed  as  <0.05  nm  and  2  scans  per  second,
respectively.
The  destarched  corn  bran  samples  were  measured  directly  as
powders  with  no  further  physical  pretreatment  using  a  round
quartz  cuvette  (Hellma,  Sussex,  UK)  speciﬁed  by  a  1.8  cm  diameter.
The  sample  amount  was  150  mg  and  the  measurement  window
(spot-size)  for  spectra  acquisition  reduced  to  10  mm.  Thirty-two
scans  were  performed  for  each  spectrum  acquisition.
Four  Polysaccharide  Standards  were  used  for  comparison  of
spectral  features.  Cellulose  (Avicel)  and  Xylan  (Birchwood)  were
purchased  from  Sigma–Aldrich  (Steinheim,  Germany)  and  water
soluble  and  insoluble  wheat  arabinoxylan  from  Megazyme  (Bray,
Ireland),  respectively.  Each  polysaccharide  standard  was  simply
measured  directly  by  NIR  as  the  powder.
Chemometrics
Spectra  were  acquired  by  the  Software  VISION  (Version  3.4.0.0,
Foss  Analytical,  Hillerød,  Denmark)  and  thereafter  exported  for
examination  using  Matlab  2010  (MathWorks,  Natick,  MA,  USA)
concerning  the  following  chemometric  methods.
All  spectra  were  pretreated  using  Multiplicative  Signal  Correc-
tion  (MSC)  and  mean-centering.  MSC  [19,20]  removes  scatter
components  in  spectra  which  can  arise  when  measuring  directly
on  powders.  The  technique  calculates  an  average  spectrum  of  all
samples  followed  by  a  univariate  regression  between  the  average
spectrum  and  all  others.  The  estimated  offset  and  slope  were
ﬁnally  subtracted  from  and  divided  by  each  individual  spectrum,
thereby  yielding  a  corrected  spectrum.  Individual  scatter  effects
are  therefore  corrected.
Further  on  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  [21],  partial  least
squares  [22]  and  backwards  interval  partial  least  squares  models
(biPLS)  [23]  were  performed  using  PLS  TOOLBOX  (Version  6.0.1,
Eigenvector  Research).  Dendrograms  [24,25]  were  calculated  and
drawn  by  a  MATLAB  program  using  average  linkage  algorithm  [26].
Short  descriptions  of  these  methods  are  given  in  the  following.
Principal  component  analysis
PCA  is  a  mathematical  method  which  decomposes  a  set  of  obser-
vations  (set  of  spectra)  into  a  set  of  principal  components  (PCs)
whose  number  is  less  or  equal  to  the  number  of  original  variables.
Concerning  spectroscopy  a  set  of  spectra  can  therefore  be
expressed  by  several  orthogonal  ‘factor  spectra’  called  loadings .
Furthermore  each  spectrum  can  be  recombined  by  a  linear  com-
bination  of  those  loadings  using  individual  scores .  Usually  the
application  of  PCA  implies  a  remarkable  reduction  of  necessary
variables  (PCs)  to  describe  a  spectral  system.  If  only  few  PCs  are
necessary  to  characterize  a  spectral  system  it  is  therefore  possible  to
visualize  differences  between  spectra  by  plotting  the  scores  ofNew  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012  RESEARCH  PAPER
www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt  295
Research Paperthose  PCs  against  each  other.  Thus  the  position  of  a  sample  in  a
score  plot  describes  the  characteristics  of  the  measured  sample.
Dendrogram
Dendrograms  are  used  for  hierarchal  clustering  analysis  to  achieve
classiﬁcation.  Usually  it  is  very  difﬁcult  to  visualize  clusters  along
PCA  scores  using  more  than  three  PCs.  Dendrogram  plotting
overcomes  that  disadvantage  because  it  can  handle  visualization
of  samples  with  more  than  three  independent  variables  using  a
hierarchal  family  tree  like  structure.
The  algorithm  performs  n  /C0  1  steps  where  n  is  the  sample  size.
In  all  the  steps  it  calculates  the  Euclidean  distance  of  the  two
closest  samples.  Thereafter  it  combines  those  two  closest  samples
to  a  new  one  with,  for  example,  average  coordinates  (average
linkage  algorithm).  After  n  /C0  1  steps  a  dendrogram  can  be  drawn
to  visualize  hierarchically  in  which  samples  are  most  probably
comparable  even  considering  many  independent  variables.  This
tool  is  very  useful  if  classiﬁcation  using  PCA  along  a  sample  set
needs  to  consider  more  than  three  factors.
Partial  least  squares  regression
Partial  least  squares  regression  functions  are  comparable  to  PCA.  In
contrast  to  PCA  such  a  regression  calculates  loadings  which  max-
imize  variance  using  supervising  information  concerning,  for
example,  analyte  concentration.  It  ﬁnds  projections  of  scores
which  maximize  spreading  of  the  scores  due  to  different  under-
lying  analyte  concentrations  and  therefore  enables  multivariate
calibration  modeling.
Interval  partial  least  squares  and  backwards  interval  partial  least
squares  regression
In  comparison  to  usual  PLS  interval  partial  least  squares  regression
(iPLS)  optimizes  model  performance  by  selecting  spectral  regions
which  contain  highly  signiﬁcant  information  about  the  analyte.
Spectral  intervals  with  high  degree  of  interference  from  the  matrix
will  be  ignored  because  they  deteriorate  the  model  performance.
Backwards  interval  partial  least  squares  regression  is  working  in  the
same  manner  as  iPLS,  but  instead  of  adding  spectral  intervals  with
signiﬁcant  information  it  subtracts  regions  which  deteriorate  the
model  performance.  Both  iPLS  and  biPLS  are  usually  combined
with  interval  selection  algorithms  to  optimize  computing  time.
Genetic  algorithms  have  been  reported  [27,28]  to  be  very  efﬁcient
in  that  sense.  Besides  improvement  of  modeling  performance
interval  selection  methods  as  iPLS  and  biPLS  lead  to  highlightspectral  regions  and  identiﬁcation  of  speciﬁc  bands  in  the  spectra
concerning  the  modeled  analyte.
Results  and  discussions
NIR  spectra
The  sample  set  consisted  of  43  powder  samples,  which  were
organized  in  groups  according  to  the  different  pretreatment
conditions  they  had  undergone  (Table  1).  All  spectra  showed
different  absorbencies  concerning  different  NIR  vibration
regions  (Fig.  2).  In  addition  the  ﬁgure  also  shows  the  spectra
of  four  polysaccharide  standards  namely,  for  example,  water-
insoluble  arabinoxylan  (blue),  water-soluble  arabinoxylan  (red),
xylan  (cyan)  and  cellulose  (green).  Several  polysaccharide  NIR
absorbencies  could  be  identiﬁed  due  to  either  combination
vibration  bands  at  2000–2500  nm,  ﬁrst  overtone  at  1600–
2000  nm  or  second  overtone  vibration  bands  at  1400–1600  nm
(Fig.  2).  Strong  absorbencies  due  to  moisture  appeared  at
1950  nm,  2450  nm  and  less  intensely  around  1450  nm  (Fig.  2).
Carbohydrate  bands  could  be  identiﬁed  for  CH 2and  CH  between
2300  and  2400  nm  due  to  combination  bands,  at  1700–1800  nm
due  to  ﬁrst  overtone  and  around  1400–1500  nm  due  to  second
overtone  bands,  respectively  [10].  ROH  combination  bands
appeared  around  2100  nm  (Fig.  2).  The  spectral  features  of  the
carbohydrates  and  the  subtle  differences  among  the  samples
could  be  recognized  in  all  the  43  spectra.  Noticeably  all  43  corn
bran  spectra  were  most  comparable  to  the  insoluble  arabinox-
ylan  standard  spectrum  (blue  spectrum  in  Fig.  2).  Additionally
some  samples  showed  stronger  absorbencies  related  to  cellulose
features  (green  spectrum  in  Fig.  2)  than  others.  Regardless  that
there  are  spectral  features  of  the  carbohydrates  being  visible  in
the  spectra  many  were  strongly  overlapped  with  spectroscopic
responses  from  the  sample  matrix.  This  emphasizes  the  need  of
chemometric  tools  for  multivariate  analysis  to  prove  the  under-
lying  carbohydrate  chemistry.
PCA  and  hierarchal  cluster  analysis
The  spectra  were  MSC  pretreated  followed  by  mean-centering.  All
43  samples  were  considered  for  PCA  Analysis  and  hierarchal
classiﬁcation  based  on  the  PCA  scores.
The  PCA  decomposition  showed  that  11  PCs  were  necessary  to
explain  the  signiﬁcant  variance  in  the  spectra.  The  number  of
components  could  be  reduced  to  5  by  excluding  the  spectra  of
group  D  (harsh  acidic,  Table  1)  thus  indicating  that  those  samples
were  least  comparable  to  the  rest  of  the  groups.  This  ﬁnding  wasRESEARCH  PAPER  New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012
TABLE  1
Group  assignment  of  samples  according  to  pretreatment  conditions
pH  Temperature  (8C)  Time  (min)
Average  Interval  Average  Interval  Average  Interval
Aa,b–  –  –  –  –  –
Ba4.2  4.2–4.2  190.0  190–190  10.0  10–10
C  5.8  1.7–9.8  125.0  100–150  65.0  10–120
D  1.5  0.9–2.1  150.0  150–150  32.0  5–65
E  3.8  1.8–9.1  143.8  125–150  187.5  120–240
aPowders  with  different  particle  size  due  to  milling.
bNo  pretreatment.
296  www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt
Research Paperalso  evident  from  the  scores  plot  in  which  group  D  clustered  with
the  highest  distance  to  the  others  (Fig.  3).
It  was  also  evident  from  the  PCA  scores  plot  that  noticeably  the
scores  of  group  A,  which  belonged  to  samples  with  different
particle  sizes,  spread  more  than  scores  from  other  groups.  This
is  in  contrast  to  scores  from  group  B,  which  were  also  measured  on
different  particle  sizes  (Fig.  3).  Particle  size  inﬂuences  NIR  spectraremarkably  due  to  scattering  effects  which  have  been  proven  in
several  studies  for  determination  of  particle  size  itself  [20].  How-
ever,  in  this  particular  case  the  application  of  MSC  pretreatment
removed  those  effects  and  the  spread  of  group  A  scores  was  there-
fore  not  explained  by  different  particle  sizes,  but  rather  by  other
features,  notably  the  water  content  of  the  samples.
As  water  has  a  high  impact  on  NIR  spectra  the  scores  especially
along  PC1  were  highly  affected  by  the  water  content  of  the  samples
as  illustrated  in  Fig.  3.  The  interpretation  of  the  ﬁrst  PCA  loading
showed  that  different  amounts  of  moisture  in  the  powder  samples
imply  high  leverage  on  the  PC1  scores.  Thus  the  spreading  of
group  A  samples,  which  occurred  mainly  along  PC1,  can  be
explained  by  large  variations  of  moisture  content  of  the  samples.
This  can  also  be  directly  observed  from  the  MSC  pretreated  spectra
regarding  different  intensities  of  the  ﬁrst  overtone  vibration  band
due  to  H2O  at  1950  nm.  Group  B  showed  no  signiﬁcant  shift  on
PC1  scores  thus  indicating  comparable  amounts  of  moisture  in
these  samples.  Differences  between  the  two  groups  probably  arose
from  different  storage  conditions  which  might  have  affected  the
uptake  of  moisture  from  the  surroundings.
Two  samples  from  group  A  (marked  with  stars  in  Fig.  3)  were
excluded  from  the  cluster  as  outliers.  Group  D  samples  revealed
the  highest  amount  of  moisture.  In  group  C  there  was  also  one
sample  which  indicated  a  very  high  amount  of  moisture,  but  this
sample  has  not  been  identiﬁed  as  an  outlier  due  to  the  following
interpretation  using  a  dendrogram.
When  including  the  discriminative  power  of  the  second  PC  a
classiﬁcation  not  only  due  to  moisture  was  possible.  Nonetheless
11  PCs  were  needed  in  the  PCA  decomposition  to  describe  the  43
spectra  completely  in  relation  to  their  full  underlying  chemical
composition  as  mentioned  before.New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012  RESEARCH  PAPER
1500 160  0 170  0 180  0 190  0 200  0 210  0 220  0 230  0 240  0
wavelen gth (n m)absFirst Overton  e Second  Overton e Combination  s
CH2
CH
CH2
CHH2O
CH2
CHH2OH2O
ROH
FIGURE  2
NIR  spectra.  Information  from  the  visible  range  has  been  cut  off  and  each  spectrum  has  been  MSC  pretreated  (black).  Standard  spectra  for  arabinoxylan  soluble
(red),  arabinoxylan  insoluble  (blue),  cellulose  (green)  and  xylan  (cyan)  have  been  included  with  an  offset  for  comparison.  Various  combination,  ﬁrst  overtone  and
second  overtone  vibration  bands  have  been  highlighted  for  chemical  interpretation.
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.40.60.81
A
AAAA
PC1 (84.99%)PC2 (8.82%)
B
BB
BBB
BCC
CCCC
CC
CC
C
CCCCDD
D
DD D
DDDD
EEEEdegree of moisture
FIGURE  3
PCA  score  plot  colored  due  to  pretreatment  grouping.  All  groups  are  presented
with  95%  conﬁdence  regions.  Two  samples  have  been  identiﬁed  as  outliers  (*).
Four  samples  (marked  with  arrows)  rather  clustered  to  a  foreign  group.
www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt  297
Research PaperAs  it  was  difﬁcult  to  visualize  the  data  in  more  than  two
dimensions  all  43  scores  from  ﬁve  PCs  were  used  to  draw  a
dendrogram  (Fig.  4).  The  Euclidean  distances  were  calculated  by
average  linkage  algorithm  as  described  in  [26].  The  outlier  samples
26  and  27  due  to  much  higher  amount  of  moisture  could  be  clearly
detected  and  were  therefore  removed  (marked  with  *  in  Figs  3,4).
Additionally  it  can  be  concluded  that  group  D  was  the  most
outlying  group  because  its  averaged  Euclidean  distance  to  the  rest
of  the  samples  was  very  high.  That  result  was  already  indicated
above  by  the  remarkably  increasing  number  of  necessary  PCs  to
describe  the  system  including  that  group.  Thus,  the  result  of  the
Euclidean  distance  calculation  justiﬁed  the  decision  to  not  con-
sider  those  samples  for  the  calibration  of  multivariate  prediction
models  for  the  enzymatic  hydrolysis.
Finally  it  was  noted  that  hierarchal  clustering  enabled  strong
classiﬁcation  power  along  the  different  sample  sets.  Especially  by
interpreting  the  dendrogram  in  Fig.  4  it  was  found  that  foursamples  were  rather  clustered  to  a  foreign  group.  Those  samples
6,  9,  10  and  40  have  been  highlighted  with  arrows  in  Fig.  3  and
recolored  according  to  the  groups  which  they  rather  belong  to  in
Fig.  4.  Those  reassignments  could  be  conﬁrmed  by  examining  the
pretreatment  parameters  of  those  samples.  Sample  40  was  pre-
treated  at  a  pH  comparable  to  that  from  group  C.  Thus  it  can  be
seen  that  pH  has  a  strong  inﬂuence  on  the  NIR  spectra  and
therefore  on  the  carbohydrate  composition  as  described  pre-
viously  in  [4].
The  ﬁndings  show  that  PCA  in  combination  with  hierarchal
analysis  is  perfectly  suitable  for  discriminating  between  the  dif-
ferent  kinds  of  pretreatment.  Further  discriminant  analysis  meth-
ods  such  as  linear  discriminant  analysis  (LDA)  [29]  or  partial  least
squares  discriminant  analysis  (PLSDA)  [30]  can  be  used  to  establish
intelligent  instrumentation  devices  with  implemented  pattern
recognition.  At  this  point  such  kind  of  study  was  beyond  the
scope  of  the  present  work.RESEARCH  PAPER  New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012
00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6Euclidean Distances
Data 1 4 31 3 1 5 1 4 71 2 81 1 2 5 2 64 01 62 12 21 81 71 92 0 61 0 4 1 4 2 9 4 32 32 82 42 52 92 73 23 03 83 73 33 63 13 93 43 5
* *
FIGURE  4
Hierarchal  clustering  using  a  dendrogram.  Samples  26  and  27  are  identiﬁed  as  outliers  by  the  dendrogram  (*).  Samples  marked  with  arrows  rather  clustered  to
foreign  groups.  In  this  particular  case  they  have  been  colored  according  to  the  group  they  actually  clustered  to  green  –  group  A,  red  –  group  B,  blue  –  group  C,  light
blue  –  group  D  and  black  –  group  E.
TABLE  2
Relative  monosaccharide  release  after  enzymatic  hydrolysis  for  the  groups  representing  different  pretreatment  conditions
Arabinose  (%)  Xylose  (%)  Glucose  (%)
Average  Interval  Average  Interval  Average  Interval
Aa,b,c9.2  2.5–16.5  3.7  0.9–7.5  15.2  5.5–30.2
Ba25.1  22.1–28.4  17.3  14.7–21.2  65.5  51.0–86.4
C  16.7  1.4–26.3  9.5  4.2–25.3  24.7  10.4–63.7
D  13.2  5.7–18.3  n.d.  n.d.  57.1  41.3–66.7
E  6.3  0.0–25.4  11.7  10.2–14.4  59.5  51.5–69.1
aPowders  with  different  particle  size  due  to  milling.
bNo  pretreatment.
cOutliers  have  been  excluded  from  multivariate  calibration.
298  www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt
Research PaperMultivariate  prediction  models  for  enzymatic  hydrolysis  using
biPLS
PLS  models  were  calibrated  for  prediction  of  enzymatic  release  of
glucose,  xylose  and  arabinose  using  HPLC  data  from  the  hydro-
lyzed  samples  on  the  MSC  and  mean  centered  NIR  spectra  of  the
pretreated  material  before  hydrolysis  (as  illustrated  in  Fig.  1).  Only
samples  from  groups  A,  B,  C  and  E  were  considered  for  the  PLS
calibration  (Table  2)  due  to  outlying  characteristics  of  groups  D  as
discussed  earlier.  To  highlight  the  most  informative  spectral
regions  iPLS  and  biPLS  regression  were  applied,  respectively.  BiPLS
generated  better  model  performances  and  is  therefore  the  onlymethod  considered  in  the  following.  The  associated  modeling
performance  of  biPLS  in  comparison  to  PLS  on  the  whole  NIR
spectra  is  illustrated  in  Table  3,  where  additional  important  para-
meters  such  as  RMSEC,  RMSECV  and  regression  coefﬁcients  R2are
also  stated.  To  emphasize  the  actual  underlying  chemistry  due  to
the  monosaccharide  content  selected  spectral  regions  have  been
cut  out  and  pretreated  separately.
As  an  example,  Figure  5d,  presents  the  spectral  region  from  2172
to  2272  nm  which  was  highly  signiﬁcant  for  total  arabinose  con-
tent.  Looking  at  this  selected  interval  it  was  clearly  visible  that
there  were  trends  in  spectra  in  relation  to  the  total  amount  ofNew  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012  RESEARCH  PAPER
TABLE  3
Modeling  parameters  as  leave-one-out  cross-validated  RMSECV,  RMSEC,  regression  coefﬁcients  R2and  number  of  latent  variables  (LV)
are  presented  for  the  PLS/biPLS  prediction  models  using  the  full  spectra  and  the  selected  spectral  intervals,  respectively
RMSECV  (%)  RMSEC  (%)  R2Number  of  LVs
Full  spectra  biPLS  Full  spectra  biPLS  Full  spectra  biPLS  Full  spectra  biPLS
Arabinose  3.12  1.39  1.07  0.99  0.82  0.96  7  6
Xylose  1.16  0.77  0.90  0.62  0.95  0.98  3  3
Glucose  8.68  5.69  6.37  3.83  0.84  0.93  5  5
(a) (b)
(c) (d)1400 150 0160 0170 0180 0190 0200 0210 0220 0230 0240 0-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.53
wavelength (nm)absXylose
1400 150 0160 0170 0180 0190 0200 0210 0220 0230 0240 0-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.53abs
wavelength (nm)Glucose
1400 150 0160 0170 0180 0190 0200 0210 0220 0230 0240 0-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.5abs
wavelength (nm)Arab inose
2180 219 0220 0221 0222 0223 0224 0225 0226 0227 0-1-0.500.511.522.53abs
wavelength (nm)Arab inose cut
FIGURE  5
Selected  spectral  intervals  using  biPLS  highlighted  in  grey.  Xylose  (a),  glucose  (b)  and  arabinose  (c).  Spectra  are  colored  according  to  analyte  concentration  (black
–  low  conc.;  light  blue  –  high  conc.)  Spectral  range  from  2172  to  2272  nm  is  cut  out  to  emphasize  underlying  arabinose  bands  (d).
www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt  299
Research Paperarabinose  being  present  in  the  pretreated  DCB  samples.  Addition-
ally  it  is  remarkable  that  samples  with  high  glucose  amounts
showed  exceptionally  strong  absorbencies  in  the  second  overtone
regions  around  1600  nm,  which  are  highly  inﬂuenced  by  cellulose
bands,  as  it  can  be  seen  from  the  cellulose  standard  spectrum  in
Fig.  2.  The  spectral  regions  have  been  selected  by  biPLS.  Finally  one
can  state  that  the  spectral  regions  selected  for  multivariate  cali-
bration  can  be  interpreted  in  agreement  with  earlier  discussed
spectral  features  of  the  measured  commercial  polysaccharide  stan-
dards.  This  result  emphasizes  that  interval  selection  in  combina-
tion  with  PLS  is  suitable  for  highlighting  chemical  information
about  arabinose,  glucose  and  xylose  in  the  NIR  spectra.  Accord-
ingly  strong  support  for  multivariate  modeling  of  monosaccharide
content  can  be  ascertained.
All  spectral  intervals  which  were  selected  for  the  calibration  of
PLS  prediction  models  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Spectrum  color
indicated  the  extent  of  enzymatic  release  concerning  each
monomer  (black  indicates  low  releases,  light  blue,  high  releases)
measured  by  HPLC.  Out  of  the  three  monomers  in  question
xylose  was  modeled  with  the  best  performance  because  it  had
the  highest  abundance  in  DCB  as  reported  in  [11].  Meanwhile
biPLS  also  showed  that  xylose  modeling  performance  could  notbe  improved  by  leaving  rather  many  segments  out  as  it  could  for
arabinose  and  glucose.  All  three  models  could  be  improved  by
leaving  out  spectral  segments  with  strong  water  absorbencies
due  to  moisture.
The  leave-one-out  cross-validated  result  of  the  biPLS  calibration
models  for  arabinose,  xylose  and  glucose  are  shown  in  Fig.  6.
Results  have  also  been  validated  by  leaving  out  subgroups  while
calibrating  the  models  which  did  not  decrease  model  performance
signiﬁcantly.  Poorest  performance  was  reported  for  the  model  of
glucose  release  after  hydrolysis.  This  might  be  inﬂuenced  by  two
factors.  First,  the  content  of  total  glucose  monomers  is  lower
compared  to  that  of  arabinose  and  xylose  [11].  As  mentioned
earlier  the  spectra  were  generally  best  described  by  the  standard
spectrum  of  insoluble  arabinoxylan  and  therefore  the  crucial
information  about  the  glucose  monomers  in  the  biomass  may
be  hidden  behind  the  higher  content  of  arabinoxylan  constitu-
ents.  Secondly,  differences  in  glucose  origin  from  either  crystalline
or  amorphous  cellulose  might  also  be  speculated  to  interfere  with
the  modeling  as  crystalline  cellulose  is  more  difﬁcult  to  hydrolyze
than  amorphous.  However  previous  studies  on  crystalline  lactose
[31]  have  shown  that  NIR  is  capable  of  differentiating  between
both  species.RESEARCH  PAPER  New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012
(a) (b)
(c)0 5 10 15 20 2502468101214161820
Release (%) measured by HPLCRelease (%) predicted from NIR
CVXylose
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 900102030405060708090
Release (%) measured by HPLCRelease (%) predicted from NIR
CVGlucose
0 5 10 15 20 25 30051015202530
Release (%) measured by HPLCRelease (%) predicted from NIR
CVArabinose
FIGURE  6
Cross-validated  prediction  of  enzymatic  release  of  xylose  (a),  glucose  (b)  and  arabinose  (c)  from  NIR  versus  measured  Monomer  Release  by  HPLC  after  hydrolysis.
300  www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt
Research PaperConclusion
Two  major  hypotheses  were  tested  and  conﬁrmed  in  this  study.  First
it  was  possible  to  enable  classiﬁcation  between  the  different  pre-
treatments  of  the  DCB  samples.  It  was  shown  that  NIR  spectroscopy
is  a  powerful  non-destructive  tool  for  rapid  evaluation  of  the  pre-
treatment  process.  Hence,  both  of  the  hypotheses  set  up  for  the
study  were  found  to  be  valid,  and  this  offers  remarkable  potentials
for  fast  screening  and  evaluation  of  the  effects  of  biomass  pretreat-
ment.  As  NIR  can  also  be  used  to  measure  suspensions  further  studies
can  be  carried  out  measuring  NIR  spectra  even  during  the  pretreat-
ment  process  and  therefore  examine  the  effect  of  pretreatment  time-
resolved.  This  will  give  valuable  information  about  optimization
parameters  and  thereby  enhance  monosaccharide  release  and
reduce  the  process  cost.  In  addition  the  method  is  highly  suitable
for  detection  of  outliers,  can  be  utilized  using  discriminant  analysis
and  implemented  within  intelligent  instrumentation.
Furthermore,  by  means  of  sophisticated  chemometric  methods
it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  monosaccharide  release  of  the
pretreated  material  can  be  predicted  quantitatively  from  the  solidpretreated  DCB  samples  directly  without  need  for  the  enzymatic
hydrolysis  itself.  Thus  once  having  a  quantitative  calibration
model  established  there  is  no  demand  for  the  reducing  sugar
and  HPLC  analysis  to  determine  the  monosaccharide  release  or
composition  of  the  biomass  polymer.  The  explicit  effects  of  the
different  pretreatments  can  be  assessed  rapidly  and  reliable.
Industry  has  not  recognized  the  great  potential  of  NIR  spectro-
scopy  yet  as  a  fast  and  reliable  method  eminently  suitable  for  high-
throughput  screening  and  on-line  monitoring  tasks  in  carbohy-
drate  analytics.  The  exploitation  of  this  generic  method  could  be
extended  to  a  range  of  biomass  feedstocks,  using  both  high-
throughput  and/or  on-line  analyses  of  the  pretreatments  as  well
as  the  enzymatic  hydrolysis  data.  With  proper  multivariate  cali-
bration  NIR  methodology  can  be  developed  further  to  directly
predict  enzymatic  susceptibility  of  pretreated  biomasses.
Acknowledgement
This  work  was  partially  ﬁnanced  by  the  7th  Framework  Programme
via  the  Marie  Curie  Initial  Training  Network,  LeanGreenFood.
References
1  Mansﬁeld,  S.D.  et  al.  (1999)  Substrate  and  enzyme  characteristics  that  limit
cellulose  hydrolysis.  Biotechnol.  Progr.  15,  804–816
2  Saha,  B.C.  and  Bothast,  R.J.  (1999)  Pretreatment  and  enzymatic  sacchariﬁcation  of
corn  ﬁber.  Appl.  Biochem.  Biotechnol.  76,  65–77
3  Pedersen,  M.  and  Meyer,  A.S.  (2010)  Lignocellulose  pretreatment  severity  –
relating  pH  to  biomatrix  opening.  New  Biotechnol.  27,  739–750
4  Agger,  J.  et  al.  (2011)  pH  catalyzed  pretreatment  of  corn  bran  for  enhanced
enzymatic  arabinoxylan  degradation.  New  Biotechnol.  28,  125–135
5  Cotta,  M.A.  and  Saha,  B.C.  (2009)  Fuel  Ethanol  Production  from  Barley  Straw
(Research  NCfAU  ed),  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture
6  Liu,  L.  et  al.  (2010)  Variability  of  biomass  chemical  composition  and  rapid  analysis
using  FT-NIR  techniques.  Carbohydr.  Polym.  81,  820–829
7  Bruun,  S.  et  al.  (2010)  Prediction  of  the  degradability  and  ash  content  of  wheat
straw  from  different  cultivars  using  near  infrared  spectroscopy.  Ind.  Crops  Prod.  31,
321–326
8  Pohl,  F.  and  Senn,  T.  (2011)  A  rapid  and  sensitive  method  for  the  evaluation  of
cereal  grains  in  bioethanol  production  using  near  infrared  reﬂectance
spectroscopy.  Bioresour.  Technol.  102,  2834–2841
9  Delwiche,  S.R.  et  al.  (2011)  Starch  waxiness  in  hexaploid  wheat  (Triticum  aestivum
L.)  by  NIR  reﬂectance  spectroscopy.  J.  Agric.  Food  Chem.  59,  4002–4008
10  Zou,  X.B.  et  al.  (2010)  Variables  selection  methods  in  near-infrared  spectroscopy.
Anal.  Chim.  Acta  667,  14–32
11  Agger,  J.  et  al.  (2010)  Enzymatic  xylose  release  from  pretreated  corn  bran
arabinoxylan:  differential  effects  of  deacetylation  and  deferuloylation  on
insoluble  and  soluble  substrate  fractions.  J.  Agric.  Food  Chem.  58,  6141–6148
12  Bjerre,  A.B.  et  al.  (1996)  Pretreatment  of  wheat  straw  using  combined  wet
oxidation  and  alkaline  hydrolysis  resulting  in  convertible  cellulose  and
hemicellulose.  Biotechnol.  Bioeng.  49,  568–577
13  Sorensen,  H.R.  et  al.  (2006)  A  novel  GH43  alpha- L-arabinofuranosidase  from
Humicola  insolens :  mode  of  action  and  synergy  with  GH51  alpha- L-
arabinofuranosidases  on  wheat  arabinoxylan.  Appl.  Microbiol.  Biotechnol.  73,
850–861
14  Sorensen,  H.R.  et  al.  (2007)  Enzymatic  hydrolysis  of  wheat  arabinoxylan  by  a
recombinant  ‘minimal’  enzyme  cocktail  containing  beta-xylosidase  and  novel
endo-1,4-beta-xylanase  and  alpha-( L)-arabinofuranosidase  activities.  Biotechnol.
Progr.  23,  100–107
15  Faulds,  C.B.  and  Williamson,  G.  (1994)  Puriﬁcation  and  characterization  of  a
ferulic  acid  esterase  (Fae-Iii)  from  Aspergillus  niger  –  speciﬁcity  for  the  phenolic
moiety  and  binding  to  microcrystalline  cellulose.  Microbiology-UK  140,  779–78716  Rosgaard,  L.  et  al.  (2007)  Evaluation  of  minimal  Trichoderma  reesei  cellulase  mixtures
on  differently  pretreated  barley  straw  substrates.  Biotechnol.  Progr.  23,  1270–1276
17  Harris,  P.V.  et  al.  (2010)  Stimulation  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  hydrolysis  by
proteins  of  glycoside  hydrolase  family  61:  structure  and  function  of  a  large,
enigmatic  family.  Biochemistry  49,  3305–3316
18  Sorensen,  H.R.  et  al.  (2003)  Enzymatic  hydrolysis  of  water-soluble  wheat
arabinoxylan.  1.  Synergy  between  alpha- L-arabinofuranosidases,  endo-1,4-beta-
xylanases,  and  beta-xylosidase  activities.  Biotechnol.  Bioeng.  81,  726–731
19  Geladi,  P.  et  al.  (1985)  Linearization  and  scatter-correction  for  near-infrared
reﬂectance  spectra  of  meat.  Appl.  Spectrosc.  39,  491–500
20  Martens,  H.  et  al.  (2003)  Light  scattering  and  light  absorbance  separated  by
extended  multiplicative  signal  correction.  Application  to  near-infrared
transmission  analysis  of  powder  mixtures.  Anal.  Chem.  75,  394–404
21  Hotelling,  H.  (1933)  Analysis  of  a  complex  of  statistical  variables  into  principal
components.  J.  Educ.  Psychol.  24,  417–441
22  Wold,  S.  et  al.  (1983)  The  multivariate  calibration-problem  in  chemistry  solved  by
the  PLS  method.  Lect.  Notes  Math.  973,  286–293
23  Leardi,  R.  and  Norgaard,  L.  (2004)  Sequential  application  of  backward  interval  partial
least  squares  and  genetic  of  relevant  spectral  regions.  J.  Chemom.  18,  486–497
24  Aldecoa,  R.  and  Marin,  I.  (2010)  Jerarca:  Efﬁcient  analysis  of  complex  networks
using  hierarchical  clustering.  Plos  One  5
25  Stanberry,  L.  et  al.  (2003)  Cluster  analysis  of  fMRI  data  using  dendrogram
sharpening.  Hum.  Brain  Mapp.  20,  201–219
26  Massart,  D.L.  et  al.  (1997)  Handbook  of  Chemometrics  and  Qualimetrics.  Elsevier
Science  B.V.
27  Leardi,  R.  and  Gonzalez,  A.L.  (1998)  Genetic  algorithms  applied  to  feature
selection  in  PLS  regression:  how  and  when  to  use  them.  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.
41,  195–207
28  Leardi,  R.  et  al.  (2002)  Variable  selection  for  multivariate  calibration  using  a  genetic
algorithm:  prediction  of  additive  concentrations  in  polymer  ﬁlms  from  Fourier
transform-infrared  spectral  data.  Anal.  Chim.  Acta  461,  189–200
29  Baum,  A.  et  al.  (2010)  Differentiation  between  origins  of  extra  virgin  olive  oils  by
GC-C-IRMS  using  principal  component  analysis,  linear  discriminant  analysis,  and
hierarchical  cluster  analysis.  Spectroscopy  25,  40-+
30  Yang,  Z.  et  al.  (2008)  Discrimination  of  wood  biological  decay  by  NIR  and  partial
least  squares  discriminant  analysis  (PLS-DA).  Spectrosc.  Spect.  Anal.  28,  793–796
31  Norgaard,  L.  et  al.  (2005)  Multivariate  near-infrared  and  Raman  spectroscopic
quantiﬁcations  of  the  crystallinity  of  lactose  in  whey  permeate  powder.  Int.  Dairy  J.
15,  1261–1270New  Biotechnology/C15Volume  29,  Number  3/C15February  2012  RESEARCH  PAPER
www.elsevier.com/locate/nbt  301
Research Paper/g3
/g3/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3/g3
PAPER 2  
Andreas Baum, Malgorzata Dominiak, Silvia V. Melgosa, William G.T. Willats, 
Karen M. Søndergaard, Per W. Hansen, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; FTIR and carbohydrate 
microarray analysis for prediction and characterization of enzymatic versus acidic extracted pectin; 
Carbohydrate Polymers, submitted 
/g3ORIGINAL PAPER
Prediction of Pectin Yield and Quality
by FTIR and Carbohydrate Microarray Analysis
Andreas Baum1,2&Malgorzata Dominiak1,3&Silvia Vidal-Melgosa4,5&
William G. T. Willats4&Karen M. Søndergaard3&Per W. Hansen2&Anne S. Meyer1&
Jørn D. Mikkelsen1
Received: 4 May 2016 /Accepted: 5 September 2016
#Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016
Abstract Pectin production is complex, and final product
quality assessment is generally accomplished at the end of
the process using time-consuming off-line laboratory analysis.
In this study, pectin was extracted from lime peel either by
acid or by enzymes. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
and carbohydrate microarray analysis were performed directly
on the crude lime peel extracts during the time course of theextractions. Multivariate analysis of the data was carried out to
predict final pectin yields. Fourier transform infrared spectros-
copy (FTIR) was found applicable for determining the optimalextraction time for the enzymatic and acidic extraction pro-
cesses, respectively. The combined results of FTIR and carbo-
hydrate microarray analysis suggested major differences in thecrude pectin extracts obtained by enzymatic and acidextraction, respectively. Enzymatically extracted pectin, thus,showed a higher degree of esterification (DE 82 %) than pec-tin extracted by acid (DE 67 %) and was moreover found to be
more heterogeneously esterified when probed with the mono-
clonal antibodies JIM5, JIM7, and LM20. The data infer that
enzymatic pectin extraction allows for extraction of complex,
high DE pectin, and that FTIR and carbohydrate microarrayanalysis have potential to be developed into online process
analysis tools for prediction of pectin extraction yields and
pectin features from measurements on crude pectin extracts.
Keywords Enzymatic extraction .Multivariate analysis .
PLS .Antibodies .Online monitoring .Chemometrics
Introduction
Comprehensive monitoring of pectin yield and quality during
extraction, as opposed to quality check after extraction, is
needed in the industry to achieve optimal extraction condi-
tions and to enhance process control. Pectin designates a fam-ily of plant cell wall polysaccharides, which is principally
made up of four structural units: homogalacturonan (HG),
xylogalacturonan, rhamnogalacturonan type I (RGI), andrhamnogalacturonan type II (RGII). HG consists of an un-
branched chain of α-1,4-linked galacturonic acid residues,
which may be methyl esterified and/or acetylated and whichmay be intervened by rhamnose residues (Voragen et al.
2008 ). Quantitatively, HG (of different degrees of esterifica-
tion) is the most dominant component in commercial
Bpectin, ^which in fact designates a series of hydrocolloids
used as thickening and gelation agents in foods and in other
products such as pharmaceuticals, personal care, and cos-
metics (Ciriminna et al. 2015 ). Pectin is approved for food
use in the European Union (E440 (i) and E440 (ii)) and is
Andreas Baum and Malgorzata Dominiak contributed equally to the
manuscript.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s11947-016-1802-2) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
*Andreas Baum
aba@kt.dtu.dk
1Center for BioProcess Engineering, Department of Chemical andBiochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark,2800 Lyngby, Denmark
2Foss Analytical, Foss Allé 1, 3400 Hillerød, Denmark
3Department of Hydrocolloid Science, DuPont Nutrition BiosciencesApS, Edwin Rahrs Vej 38, 8220 Brabrand, Denmark
4Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty ofScience, University of Copenhagen, Thorvaldsensvej 40,1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark
5Present address: Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,Celsiusstrasse 1, 28359 Bremen, GermanyFood Bioprocess Technol
DOI 10.1007/s11947-016-1802-2
usually produced by extraction from apple pomace or citrus
peels (lemon, lime, and orange). Recently, significant efforts
have been made to develop pectin extraction methods that aremore sustainable than the classical acid-assisted extraction,
e.g., using enzymes instead of acid (Lim et al. 2012 ; Wikiera
et al. 2015 ; Zykwinska et al. 2008 ), by ultrasound and micro-
wave assisted methods (Boukroufa et al. 2015 ;G r a s s i n oe ta l .
2016 ) or by employing new heating strategies in order to
lower the energy expenditure (Rudolph and Petersen 2011 ).
Nevertheless, current industrial practice for large-scale pectinproduction involves extended acid extraction of the raw ma-
terial, usually involving HNO
3treatment for 3 –12 h at 50 –
90 °C (Rolin et al. 1998 ). The final product quality assessment
of the pectin is based on data obtained from a number ofclassical laboratory methods, such as size exclusion chroma-tography for determination of molecular weight, high-
performance liquid chromatography analysis for determina-
tion of the monosaccharide composition, and intrinsic viscos-ity and calcium sensitivity measurements. These methods are
carried out in an off-line fashion, are time consuming, and
therefore unsuitable for process control. In this paper, twoadvanced analytical techniques, namely FTIR and carbohy-
drate microarrays, are assessed with regard to their ability to
monitor extractions of pectin by either acid or enzymes.
Fourier transform infrared spe ctroscopy (FTIR) is based on
measurement of absorption in the mid-infrared frequencyrange. Since organic molecules h ave intramolecular and inter-
molecular bonds that absorb in this frequency range, each spec-trum obtained will reflect the chemical (structural) compositionof the sample being analyzed. Hence, FTIR, in combination
with appropriate chemometric me thodology required to extract
patterns in the spectra obtained, is a rapid, non-destructive an-
alytical method (Kuligowski et al. 2012) that can be employed
for a number of complex, analytical applications includingquality assessment. FTIR has prov en useful for detecting, e.g.,
the authenticity and adulte ration of milk (Nicolaou et al. 2010)
and virgin olive oil samples (Rohman and Man 2010)a n dh a s
more recently shown applicabili ty within more advanced appli-
cations to determine enzyme activ ity by spectral evolution pro-
filing and multiway analysis (Baum et al. 2013a, b).
Carbohydrate microarrays are chip-based tools to study in-
teractions of biomolecules with carbohydrates and thus repre-
sent an alternative methodology for carbohydrate analyses (de
Paz and Seeberger 2012). Thousands of binding events can be
assessed in parallel on a single slide with very small amounts of
samples, making this analysis high-throughput capable (Fangelet al. 2012). Carbohydrate microarrays are not only applied in
medical, animal, and prokaryote research (de Paz and Seeberger
2012 ;F a n g e le ta l . 2012 ) but have also been found to be a
valuable tool in pec tin research. HG-directed monoclonal anti-
bodies, differing in relation to p attern and degree of esterifica-
tion, have been developed and applied for analysis of plant cell
walls (Clausen et al. 2003; Sørensen and Willats 2011).The hypothesis of this study is that FTIR and carbohydrate
microarrays represent advanced tools for quantitative predic-tion of pectin yield from measurements on crude extracts dur-ing the extraction. The two methods either are high-throughput
capable or can enable rapid measurements, therefore having
the potential to move pectin quality control closer to the ex-traction process. In addition, the crude pectin extracts, obtained
by acidic and enzymatic treatment of lime peels, can be struc-
turally characterized using the two analytical techniques.
Materials and Methods
Three pectin extractions were carried out. Crude pectin ex-tracts were taken at different time points during the timecourse of the extractions (Table 1). Pectin extractions I and
II were conducted enzymatically using Laminex C2K, whileextraction III was conducted using HNO
3. Aliquots of all
crude extracts were measured using FTIR spectroscopy and
carbohydrate microarray analysis. Pectin yields, used as
Table 1 Pectin yields (%), obtained by propan-2-ol precipitation, at
specific time points during enzymatic (extractions I and II) and acidic
(extraction III) extraction
Pectin yield (%)
Extraction time (min) Extraction I Extraction II Extraction III
0 6.67 6.67 8.152.5 9.635 10.4 8.89 14.17.5 11.110 11.1 11.1 14.812.5 11.915 12.617.5 13.320 13.3
35 14.8
30 15.6 16.3 19.335 17.040 17.045 17.050 17.055 17.060 18.5 18.5 21.570 19.380 20.090 20.7100 21.5110 20.7120 24.5 22.2 23.0240 23.0 24.4Food Bioprocess Technolreference values for the multivariate regression models, were
determined by propan-2-ol precipitation. In addition, the mo-
nomeric composition of the final products was determinedusing high-performance anion exchange chromatography
with pulsed amperometric d etection (HPAEC-PAD).
Detailed protocols of the applied methods are given below.
Materials
Dry lime peel was obtained from DuPont ’s pectin plant in
Mexico (Dupont Nutrition and Biosciences Mexicana S.R.L,
Tecomán, Colima, Mexico). The pr e-treatment involved milling
of the peel to pass a 35-mesh size screen (centrifugal mill Retsch
ZM 200, Haan, Germany). Several standard polysaccharides
were used as benchmarks in the final analytical evaluation,namely pectin E81 from lime peel, with a degree of esterification
(DE) of 81 %; pectin F31 (DE 31 %) derived from E81 treated
with Aspergillus niger ’s pectin methyl esterase (both from
DuPont Nutrition Biosciences, Brabrand, Denmark), preparedas described in Limberg et al. ( 2000); and RGI from soy bean
(Megazyme, Bray, Ireland). The enzyme preparation, Laminex
C2K, derived from Penicillium funiculosum (obtained from
DuPont Industrial Biosciences, Leiden, the Netherlands), wasa commercial preparation containing cellulase, xylanase andarabinoxylanase activities and a low level of pectinase activity.
The enzyme preparation was chosen as a suitable candidate for
pectin extraction in a prev ious study (Dominiak et al. 2014).
Enzymatic Extraction
For each sample, 1.35 g of milled lime peel was mixed with
40 mL of 50 mM citric acid buffer pH 3.5. The mixture was
heated to 50 °C before addition of 75 μLo ft h ee n z y m e
Laminex C2K, equivalent to 235 carboxymethylcellulose-
dinitrosalicylic acid activity units. After addition, each sample
was incubated in a water bath at 190 rpm for 0 –240 min (exact
incubation times for extractions I and II are presented inTable 1). The reaction was terminated by heating at 100 °C
for 5 min to inactivate the enzyme. The crude extract was
separated from the residual biomass by centrifugation for
10 min at 3500 rpm and stored at −20 °C until further
analyses.
Acidic ExtractionFor each sample, 1.35 g lime peel was mixed with 40 mL de-
ionized water and the mixture was heated to 70 °C. The pH wasadjusted to 1.7 with 42 % nitric acid, and the mixture was then
incubated in a water bath at 190 rpm (more details about the
incubation times in Table 1). The crude extract was separated
from the residual biomass by centrifugation for 10 min at
3500 rpm. The pH of the crude extracts was increased to 3.5,
and the extracts were then stored at −20 °C until further analyses.Determination of Pectin Yield
Pectin crude extracts (two replicates) were precipitated by
mixing with a double volume of propan-2-ol, followed by
agitation for 1 h. The precipitated pectin samples were sepa-
rated by filtration through a cotton canvas and dried overnightin a 40 °C ventilated oven. Dried pectin samples were
weighed and ground to <0.5 mm in an Ultra Centrifugal
Mill ZM 200 (Retsch, Haan, Germany).
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
and Colorimetry
To verify and compare the structural information obtained by
FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analyses, the chemicalcomposition of the propan-2-ol precipitated pectin samples
was determined by HPAEC-PAD and colorimetric measure-
ments. Each pectin sample was washed three times in 80 %ethanol followed by washing one time in 96 % ethanol to
remove sugars. After hydrolysis in 1 M sulfuric acid (6 h,
100 °C), the samples were di luted; filtered through a
0.45-μm filter; and the quantitative content of
D-fucose, L-
rhamnose, D-arabinose, D-galactose, D-glucose, and D-xylose
was determined. The separation and quantification were per-formed using an ICS-3000 system (Dionex Corp., Sunnyvale,
CA) utilizing a CarboPac ™PA1 (4 mm × 250 mm) analytical
column and a CarboPac ™PA1 guard column. Eluent A
consisted of deionized water and eluent B of 150 mMNaOH. Twenty-minute isocratic elution with 15 mM NaOH
was followed by 10-min washing with 150 mM NaOH. Theflow was kept at 1 mL min
−1. Before injection of each sample
(50μL), the column was re-equilibrated with 15 mM NaOH
for 8 min. Data analysis was carried out using Chromeleon
6.80 (Dionex Corp., Sunnyvale, CA).
The galacturonic acid content was determined colorimetri-
cally by the m-hydroxybiphenyl method in a microtiterplate
format reaction (van den Hoogen et al. 1998 ) after hydrolysis
f o r1ha t8 0° Ci nc o n c e n t r a t e ds u l f u r i ca c i dw i t h0 . 0 1 2 5M
tetraborate (Blumenkrantz and Asboe-Hansen 1973 ).
The degree of esterification was determined by alkaline
saponification followed by qua ntification of methanol by
HPLC as described in V oragen et al. ( 1986 ).
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
An aliquot of each crude extract was used to acquire the mid-
infrared spectrum between 950 and 1550 cm−1. All spectra
were measured at 42 °C using a MilkoScan ™FT2 (FOSS
Analytical, Hillerød, Denmark). The instrument consisted ofan interferometer which scanned the IR spectrum using a cu-vette with a path length of 50 μm. Acquisition was carried out
according to the method described by Andersen et al. ( 2002 )
with an optical resolution of 14 cm
−1. All spectra wereFood Bioprocess Technolmeasured against an aqueous blank using an automatic flow-
through system (FOSS Analytical, Hillerød, Denmark).
Carbohydrate Microarray Analysis
Extracted Pectin Microarray Printing
The crude extracts were diluted twofold with printing buffer
(55.2 % glycerol, 44 % water, 0.8 % Triton X-100) and then
two further fivefold dilutions were made. Each of these dilu-tions was printed in triplicate employing six drops per spot. A
piezoelectric microarray robot, Arrayjet Sprint (Arrayjet,
Roslin, UK), equipped with a 12-sample high-capacity
JetSpyder sample pickup device was used to deposit the crude
extracts onto a nitrocellulose membrane with a pore size of0.45μm (Whatman, Maidstone, UK) at 22.5 °C and 50 %
humidity. As positive controls, the three pectin standard sam-ples E81, F31, and RGI were also deposited on the nitrocel-lulose membrane.
Extracted Pectin Microarray Probing
Microarrays were blocked for 1 h in PBS (140 mM NaCl,
2 . 7m MK C l ,1 0m MN a
2HPO 4,1 . 7m MK H 2PO 4,
pH 7.5) containing 5 % w/vlow fat milk powder (5%M-
PBS). Thereafter, microarrays were probed for 2 h with apanel of 30 anti-rat antibodies , anti-mouse antibodies, and
carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) diluted in 5%M-
PBS to 1/10, 1/1000, and 10 μgm L
−1, respectively. The
antibodies and CBMs were obtained from PlantProbes(Leeds, UK), INRA (Nantes, France), BioSupplies(Bundoora, Australia), and NZYTech (Lisboa, Portugal),
respectively. Afterward, arrays were washed with PBS
and incubated for 2 h in either anti-rat, anti-mouse, oranti-His tag secondary antibodies conjugated to alkaline
phosphatase (Sigma, Poole, UK) diluted 1/5000 (for anti-
rat and anti-mouse) or 1/1500 (for anti-His tag) in 5 % M-PBS. After the incubation, arrays were washed with PBS
and developed with a solution of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-
indolylphosphate and nitro blue tetrazolium in alkalinephosphatase buffer (100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl
2,
100 mM diethanolamine, pH 9.5). Development wasstopped by washing the arrays in deionized water.
Quantification of the Data
Developed microarrays were scanned at 2400 dpi (CanoScan
8800F, Canon, Søborg, Denmark), converted to TIFF files,
and antibody and CBM signals were quantified using Array-Pro Analyzer 6.3 (Media Cybernetics, Rockville, USA).
Results were presented in a heatmap, where the maximal
mean spot signal was set to 100 and the rest of valuesnormalized accordingly. A cutoff of 5 was implemented, and
color intensity was correlated to mean spot signals.
Chemometrics
Chemometric modeling was performed using MATLAB (ver-
sion 2012b, The Mathworks Inc., MA, USA) and PLS
Toolbox (version 6.0.1, Eigenvector Research Inc., WA,
USA).
Principal Component Analysis
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a descriptive che-
mometric method which decomposes multivariate datasets
into principal components (PCs) using loadings andscores (Hotelling 1933 ;W o l de ta l . 1987). Principal com-
ponents represent orthogonal projections in the originalmultidimensional variable space which ideally character-ize the main features of a data set. Normally, a low num-
ber of principal components is sufficient to express the
measured variance of a (chemical) system, e.g., the IRspectral changes recorded during a time-resolved chem-
ical extraction. The established PCA models were used
for exploratory purposes only and were not validated(no test set).
Partial Least Squares RegressionIn contrast to PCA, Partial Least Squares regression is a
supervised decomposition method wherein a Y-block, typ-
ically containing reference analysis data, is used to find
projections in the original multidimensional variable
space which is suitable for prediction of desired parame-ters (Beebe and Kowalski 1987). Illustratively spoken, it
rotates principal components, e.g., retrieved from PCA, inspace to find maximal covariance between the X-block
(multivariate dataset contain ing independent variables)
and the Y-block (containing kno wn reference values)
while minimizing the residuals in a least squares sense.The resulting projections lead to latent variables which
allow prediction of one or more parameters from a newly
measured sample. PLS calibrations can be employed to
reveal data patterns from complex data, such as FTIR
spectra or carbohydrate microarray heat maps.
To obtain robust models using PLS, a number of deci-
sion criteria was required to find out about how manylatent variables were necessary to describe the dataset suf-ficiently (Geladi et al. 1985). Leave-one-out cross valida-
tion was used to choose the appropriate amount of latentvariables for PLS. In addition, extraction II samples wereused as a prediction test set during the study. Thus, vali-
dation of the PLS models was achieved by calculating the
root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) for the testFood Bioprocess Technolset samples. The RMSEP was calculated using Eq. 1,
where yiandyidenote actual and model predicted pectin
yield, respectively.
RMSEP ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃX n
i¼1yi−yi/C16/C172
nvuut
ð1Þ
Pre-Processing
Pre-processing of the data was necessary to remove irrelevant
systematic variation to gain better model prediction perfor-
mance and to decrease the required number of componentsnecessary for the analysis (due to removal of undesirable off-
sets) (Barnes et al. 1989 ;B e r ge ta l . 2006 ; Bro and Smilde
2003 ). The FTIR data were normalized using standard normal
variate (SNV) and mean centered. The carbohydrate microar-ray data were auto-scaled and mean centered. While SNV is
typically used for spectroscopic techniques to remove lightscattering effects, auto-scaling is used when variables indicate
different units.
Results
Results for FTIR and carbohydrate microarrays are reported in
separate sections. The results are thereafter compared in rela-
tion to the HPAEC results in the BDiscussion ^section.
Pectin Yield, High-Performance Liquid Chromatography,
and Colorimetric Results
Pectin yields (%) determined by propan-2-ol precipitation are
presented in Table 1. As expected, the pectin yield increased
with extraction time in all three extraction cases. The HPAEC-PAD and colorimetric results of the final pectins (Table 2)
showed that both extraction methods delivered a pectinproduct very rich in galacturonic acid —and since both meth-
odologies gave a higher than 65 % by weight of galacturonicacid in the precipitate, both methods were in essence validpectin extraction methods. The results will be utilized for
comparison in the following sections.
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
All spectra of extractions I, II, and III are shown in Fig. 1as
difference spectra. To calculate difference spectra, the initial
spectrum (first sample) was subtracted from the entire series to
remove constant background signals. Therefore, the spectrumof sample 1 resulted in a zero line, while spectra at later stages
evolved according to the continuous release of soluble pectin
and oligosaccharides during extraction. The elapsing time wasillustrated by gray scale shifting from dark to light. For com-
parison, benchmark spectra of arabinose, xylose, and galac-
tose are included in Fig. 1b, c.
When investigating the spectra of the three extractions, it
appeared that the spectral changes of extractions I and II weresimilar (Fig. 1a, b). These two extractions were performed
using enzymatic hydrolysis, while the spectra of extraction
III (acid) evolved differently (Fig. 1c). Hence, different mo-
lecular properties of the extracted pectin/oligosaccharides in
the two types of crude extract were expected.
Individual spectral bands for pectin, including the back-
bone and side group vibration bands, are identified inFig.1a. The strong evolving peaks at 1022, 1106, and less
abundant at 1149 cm
−1(a) were due to the high HG content
(specifically due to C-C, C-O, CCH, OCH vibrations) as re-ported previously (Coimbra et al. 1999 ; Fellah et al. 2009 ;
Kacurakova et al. 2000 ; Wellner et al. 1998 ). The band at
1149 cm
−1is characteristic for C-O-C vibrations of glycosidic
linkages (+glycosidic ring) (Wellner et al. 1998 ) and is there-
fore also characteristic for pectin backbone structures. Bandsat 1045 and 1076 cm
−1(b) were interpreted to be mainly
caused by neutral sugars, such as arabinose, xylose, and
Table 2 Chemical composition of enzyme (extraction II) and acid (extraction III) extracted pectin samples after 240 min incubation
Galacturonic acid
(%DM)Arabinose(%DM)Fucose(%DM)Galactose(%DM)Glucose(%DM)Rhamnose(%DM)Xylose(%DM)DE(%)
Enzyme extracted
pectin81.3 9.3 0.1 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.7 82
Acid extracted
pectin90.1 3.3 0.1 3.9 0.4 1.4 0.2 67
F31 74.5
a0.2 0.1 3.3 0.1 1.0 0.1 31
E81 78.7a0.2 0.1 4.0 0.2 1.3 0.1 81
RGI from soybean 51b3.4b10.3b12.3bn.d. 6.4b13.7bn.d.
Samples E81, F31, and RGI were added for comparison
aData from Limberg et al. ( 2000 )
bData from the manufacturer specification sheet̂
̂Food Bioprocess Technolgalactose (Coimbra et al. 1998 ). Higher amounts of neutral
sugars were detected in the enzymatic crude extracts. This
was especially evident when looking at the intensity ratios ofthe two band groups (a) vs. (b) as shown in Fig. 1a–c. The
intensities of the bands (b) were relatively high for enzymaticextracted samples, which suggested higher amounts of neutral
900 1000 1100 1200 1300-101234
wavenumber [cm   ]-1Abs
1400 1500 1600 900 1000 1100 1200-0.500.511.522.53Abs
1300 1400 1500 1600
wavenumber [cm   ]-1wavenumber [cm   ]-1a
bcAbs
Fig. 1 FTIR spectra of crude pectin extracts: aenzymatic extraction I, b
enzymatic extraction II, and cacidic extraction III. Changing gray scale
from dark tolight indicates elapsing extraction time. Spectra are
displayed as difference spectra to highlight changes during extractionand to eliminate background signals. Monosaccharide standard spectra
are included in bandcfor comparison ( dotted —xylose; dashed —
arabinose; dashed dot —galactose)Food Bioprocess Technolsugars in the extracts (Fig. 1a, b), as compared to acidic ex-
tracts (Fig. 1c). As neutral sugars are mainly found in side
chains of pectin rhamnogalacturonan I (RGI) structural do-
mains, these bands indicated Bhairy regions^ in the pectin
molecules. Alternatively, the bands could have been a re-sponse caused by free neutral sugars or shorter oligomers,which could have independently coexisted in the crude
extract.
An additional band at 970 cm
−1(c) indicated the degree of
esterification. Accordingly, at 1460 cm−1(d), one can observe
a carboxylate band which tends to be weaker, when highly
esterified pectin is present (Coimbra et al. 1998 ,1999 ;F e l l a h
et al. 2009 ;K a čuráková et al. 1999 ; Wellner et al. 1998 ). It
could be concluded that the degree of esterification (DE) ofthe enzymatic extracted pectin was higher than that of acidicextracted pectin.
Principal Component Analysis
PCA was used to analyze the spectral changes of the crude
pectin samples, extractions I and II in one common model(Fig. 2a) and extraction III in a separate model (Fig. 2b).
Both PCA models required only one principal component
to describe 97.3 and 98.6 % of the variance in the spectra,respectively. This was not surprising since the extraction pat-
tern was expected to stay constant over the entire time period
of the extraction. The spectral loadings for both PCA modelsare given in Fig. 2c, d and appear as expected for neutral sugar
rich and less neutral sugar rich extracted material.
As shown in Fig. 1, the spectra converged for all three
extractions with elapsing time. This trend was also described
by the PC 1 scores which also converged as shown in Fig. 2a,
b. In addition, the PC 1 scores of both PCA models correlated
to a high extend ( R
2> 0.92) with the estimated pectin yields
determined by propan-2-ol precipitation (Table 2), therefore
indicating potential of PCA analysis to assist the optimizationof the pectin extraction time. As it can be seen from Fig. 2a, b,
the three extractions indicated no additional release of pectinafter 120 min.
Partial Least Squares Modeling
Multivariate calibrations were established to predict the pectin
yield when measuring the crude extract at different time points
during the extraction. PLS models were prepared for extrac-tion I (model 1) and extractions I and III (model 2). In both
cases, the extraction II samples were used as a prediction test
set for validation of the model acknowledging the fact thatthey did not contain extraction III samples due to the limited
sample size. The calibrations of models 1 and 2 are presented
in Fig. 3a, b. Calibration and test set samples are indicated as
circles and triangles, respectively. Leave-one-out cross valida-
tion indicated the necessity of two and four latent variables for
model 1 and model 2, respectively. In the previous section, it
ab
cdFig. 2 PC1 scores derived from
PCA models plotted against
extraction time for aenzymatic
extractions I ( circles )a n dI I
(triangles ) and for b,a c i d i c
extraction III. PC1 loadingsdescribing the main spectral
features of the enzymatic andacidic crude extracts are presentedincandd. Characteristic band
regions for neutral sugars aremarked in both loadings witharrowsFood Bioprocess Technolwas discussed that PCA models could be established using
only one principal component to represent the spectral vari-
ances well. However, minor spectral shifts were present, i.e.,for bands around 1160 and 1450 cm
−1(Fig. 1). A second
latent variable of model 1 compensated for these shifts andresulted in a lower RMSECV . Model 2 required four latentvariables as additional spectral variance related to extraction
III samples was present. Both models could predict the yield
of the extracted pectin with high confidence. Furthermore, thetest set samples (validation) correlated with the reference
values to a high extend. All figures of merit, including R
2
and RMSEP, are given in Table 3.
Carbohydrate Microarray Analysis
In carbohydrate microarray analysis, antibodies with well-
defined sugar-binding epitopes were utilized to obtain infor-
mation about the sample deposited on the array. The specific
binding of the antibody is detected by the use of a fluorescent-ly tagged or enzyme-linked secondary antibody. Within a cer-
tain range, the concentration of the deposited epitope covaries
with the spot signal produced by the antibody or CBM bind-ing. Such arrays therefore provide direct information about the
relative abundance of specific epitopes across the sample set
being tested. From the heatmap data displaying the bindingresponses of 30 different antibodies and CBMs, it was evident
that predominantly pectin-related epitopes were detected inthe crude pectin samples, and many of the non-pectin relatedprobes thus produced no signal in the microarray analysis
(entire heatmap not shown). A size reduced heatmap of thecarbohydrate microarray analysis of the three pectin extrac-
tions is shown in Fig. 4. To evaluate the performance of the
microarray, three pectin samples were included as positive
controls, namely E81 (a), F31 (b), and RGI (c). Further infor-
mation on structure and composition of these samples is given
in Table 2.
Assessment of the responses on the antibodies for pectin in
the microarray revealed clear differences in the profiles of theenzymatic extractions I and II and the acidic extraction III(Fig. 4). All crude extracts obtained during the acidic extrac-
tion III thus showed interactions with monoclonal antibody(mAb) JIM5 (Clausen et al. 2003 ). JIM5 binds to unesterified
and partially methyl-esterified HG having preference in bind-
ing low methylated pectins. In addition, JIM5 also recognized
the epitopes of the control pectin (b, F31) with high affinity,confirming the presence of a HG structure with lower degree
of esterification in the acidic extracted pectin. In contrast, no
JIM5 signal was detected for any of the enzymatically extract-ed samples. Instead, relatively strong signals from mAb JIM7
(Clausen et al. 2003 ) and LM20 (Verhertbruggen et al. 2009 )
were found. JIM7 and LM20 are binders of methyl-esterified
HG binding preferably to high methylated pectins. This sug-
gests that the enzymatic crude extracts contained pectin with a
relatively high DE. Data also indicated that the acid extracted
pectin contained both low and high DE pectin and that it was
much more heterogeneous in terms of DE than that of theenzymatic extracted pectin. The high DE (82 %) of enzymat-
ically extracted pectin and the low DE (67 %) of the acidic
extracted pectin (Table 2) corroborated the microarray data.
The heatmap results also confirmed that acidic extraction and
low pH are not a preferable combination for achieving homo-
geneous pectin with high DE values.
Moreover, the carbohydrate microarray results suggest that
acidic extracted pectin contained additional regions with lowerdegree of esterification, which could not be detected in the
Table 3 Figures of merit for PLS models
FTIR Microarray
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
R2
cal 0.97 0.93 0.89 0.88
R2
pred 0.99 0.98 0.91 0.73
RMSEP [%] 1.19 1.70 4.30 4.74
RMSEP root mean square error of prediction3.7 7.4 11.1 14.8 18.5 22.2 25.93.77.411.114.818.522.2
yield [%]predicted yield [%]
yield [%]predicted yield [%]
3.7 7.4 11.1 14.8 18.5 22.2 25.93.77.411.114.818.522.2ab Fig. 3 FTIR pectin yield models:
aPLS model 1 calibrated on
enzymatic extraction I ( circles )
and tested/validated on enzymatic
extraction II ( triangles ).bPLS
model 2 calibrated on extractionsI and III (enzymatic and acidic
extractions, circles ) and tested/
validated on enzymatic extraction
II (triangles )Food Bioprocess Technolenzymatically extracted pectin. The l o w e rd e g r e eo fe s t e r i f i c a t i o n
of acid extracted pectin was not surprising as low pH enhances
the hydrolysis of ester bonds and can, therefore, reduce the de-
gree of esterification in acidical ly extracted pectin (Rolin et al.
1998 ). Another explanation might be that a low level of
polygalacturonase activity, present in the Laminex C2K prepara-tion (unpublished data), induced degradation of the non-esterified HG stretches, thereb y leaving highly esterified HG
available for binding to the nitrocellulose membrane.
Partial Least Squares Modeling
When analyzing the obtained heatmap signals column-wise for
each of the 30 antibodies/CBMs (Supplementary Fig. S 1), none
could be directly identified to co rrelate with the extracted amount
of pectin. However, when combining all 30 antibody and CBMresponses using multivariate PLS regression, a correlation didoccur. As performed for FTIR, two models were established.
Model 3 (Fig. 5a) was calibrated on extraction I samples, while
model 4 (Fig. 5b) was calibrated on extractions I and III samples.
In both cases, the extraction II samples served as the predictiontest set. High R
2values of both models indicated strong correla-
tions in the data sets. All figu res of merit are summarized in
Table 3. While only two latent variables were used for modeling
the enzymatic extraction (model 3), five were necessary to estab-
lish a combined model for acidic and enzymatic extraction (mod-
el 4). This was not surprising when looking at the microarray
heatmap (Fig. 4), showing that the signal pattern was very dif-
ferent for the enzymatic and the acidic extractions. Especially
since JIM5 and antibodies recognizing RG I regions gave strong
responses mainly for samples from the acidic extraction, whichled to a higher rank in the data.
Discussion
Multivariate Analysis
FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analysis could predict the
pectin yield well using PLS modeling. PLS models 2 and 4,
which included the crude acidic extraction III samples, hadFig. 4 Crude pectin extracts from extractions I to III were printed as
microarrays and probed with a panel of cell wall glycan directed
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and carbohydrate binding modules
(CBMs). Binding results of a selection of pectin-related monoclonalantibodies are presented in this heatmap in which color intensity was
correlated to mean spot signal values. Antibody names and their
corresponding epitopes (recogni zed by a particular antibody) are
depicted at the topof the heatmap. Each sample extraction time is
shown on the right side of the heatmap. Controls include aa
commercially produced pectin with degree of esterification (DE) 81 %
extracted from lime peel (E81), ba pectin with DE 31 % derived from
E81 by treatment with Aspergillus niger ’s pectin methylesterase, and c
RGI from soy bean
Food Bioprocess Technollower prediction performance for both FTIR and microarray
analysis. In particular, the yield prediction ability for carbohy-
drate microarray data decreased, when including the crudeacidic extraction III. The higher RMSEP did result not only
from a worse precision but also from a bias induced by the
prediction samples itself. This bias was evident by the fact thatboth carbohydrate microarray models (3 and 4) predicted all
test set samples (extraction II) with an intercept offset (Fig. 5).
This bias was not recognizable for predictions using the FTIR
models 1 and 2 (Fig. 3). It should be pointed out at this point
that the sample size was limited and further efforts will, there-fore, be necessary to validate and consolidate the results.Nonetheless, the study showed in principle that both tech-
n i q u e sc o u l db eu s e dt oe s t a b l i sh quantitative calibration
models to predict the final pectin yield from crude samples
measured during the extractions.
Structural Characterization
FTIR and carbohydrate microarrays provided comprehensive
understanding of structural properties of the crude pectin ex-
tracts even prior to precipitation. However, certain contempla-tions in the results were present. While FTIR detected high
amounts of neutral sugars in the enzymatic extracted samples,
which was in agreement with compositional analysis of pre-cipitated pectins (Table 2) and literature data (Nielsen 1996 ;
Zykwinska et al. 2008 ), carbohydrate microarray analysis sug-
gested lower amounts of RGI and neutral sugars in those ex-tracts. In fact, carbohydrate microarray analysis detected a low
level of arabinan by LM6 (Willats et al. 1998 ) and neither RGI
backbone by INRA-RU1 and INRA-RU2 (Ralet et al. 2010 )
nor galactan by LM5 (Jones et al. 1997 ) in the final enzymat-
ically extracted pectin sample (240 min extraction). However,
the crude extracts investigated in this study probablycontained oligomers with a sufficient degree of polymeriza-
tion (DP) to be precipitated by propan-2-ol. On the other hand,
the oligomers must have been too short to bind to the nitro-cellulose membrane and, hence, were not detected bymicroarray analysis. The results, furthermore, suggested that
the enzymatic cocktail decreased the amount of neutral sugars
in the enzymatically extracted pectin over time, as the anti-body responses of the monoclonal antibodies INRA-RU1
(RGI backbone) and LM5 (galactan) decreased with increas-
ing extraction time. The presence of pectinase activity in theused Laminex C2K preparation would explain the hydrolysis
of the pectin, yielding more oligomers as extraction time
elapsed.
Conclusion
The present study illustrated the potential analytical power of
FTIR spectroscopy and carbohydrate microarray analysis in a
new application namely for direct assessment of crude pectinextracts during enzymatic and acidic extraction. Two aspects
have been investigated and compared with respect to the two
techniques, namely the ability to predict final pectin yield (andoptimal extraction time) from crude samples taken during the
extraction and the ability to predict the structural quality and
complexity of final pectin product.
While both techniques were able to predict the respec-
tive pectin yield during the extractions, especially FTIRshowed high accuracy and precision. Furthermore, simplePCA on FTIR data indicated possibilities to determine the
optimal extraction time, even without the need of
interrupting the process. Rapid and non-invasive FTIRspectroscopy, therefore, enables possibilities for online
monitoring of pectin extraction processes and has great
potential to replace cumbersome and time consuming quan-titative chemical analysis.
Secondly, both techniques gave insight into structural fea-
tures of the extracted pectins. The results confirmed majordifferences between the enzymatically and the acidically ex-
tracted products with respect to degree of esterification and
abundance of RGI pectin regions. Due to its high-throughputcapability, carbohydrate microarray analysis has proven to be
3.7 7.4 11.1 14.8 18.5 22.2 25.93.77.411.114.818.522.2
yield [%]predicted yield [%]
3.7 7.4 11.1 14.8 18.5 22.2 25.93.77.411.114.818.522.2
yield [%]predicted yield [%]ab Fig. 5 Carbohydrate microarray
pectin yield models: aPLS model
3 calibrated on enzymatic
extraction I ( circles ) and tested/
validated on enzymatic extractionII (triangles ).bPLS model 4
calibrated on extractions I and III(enzymatic and acidic extractions,
circles ) and tested/validated on
enzymatic extraction II ( triangles )Food Bioprocess Technola remarkable tool to assess structural features of the extracts
that in turn can be used for pectin quality prediction.
Hence, both FTIR and carbohydrate microarray analysis
have potential to move pectin analysis closer to pectin produc-tion, which is particularly important in industrial process and
quality control.
Acknowledgments This work was financed by the Seventh
Framework Program via the Marie Curie Initial Training Network,
LeanGreenFood (EU-ITN 238084).
References
Andersen, S. K., Hansen, P. W., & Andersen, H. V. (2006). Vibrational
Spectroscopy in the Analysis of Dairy Products and Wine. Handbookof Vibrational Spectroscopy. doi: 10.1002/0470027320.s6602 .
Barnes, R. J., Dhanoa, M. S., & Lister, S. J. (1989). Standard normal
variate transformation and de-trending of near-infrared diffuse re-flectance spectra. Applied Spectroscopy, 43(5), 772 –777.
Baum, A., Hansen, P. W., Meyer, A. S., & Mikkelsen, J. D. (2013a).
Simultaneous measurement of two enzyme activities using infraredspectroscopy: a comparative evaluation of PARAFAC, TUCKERand N-PLS modeling. Analytica Chimica Acta, 790 ,1 4–23.
Baum, A., Meyer, A. S., Garcia, J. L., Egebo, M., Hansen, P. W., &
Mikkelsen, J. D. (2013b). Enzyme activity measurement via spectralevolution profiling and PARAFAC. Analytica Chimica Acta, 778 ,
1–8.
Beebe, K. R., & Kowalski, B. R. (1987). An introduction to multivariate
calibration and analysis. Analytical Chemistry, 59 (17), 1007A –
1017A.
Berg, R. A., Hoefsloot, H. C. J., Westerhuis, J. A., Smilde, A. K., & Werf,
M. J. (2006). Centering, scaling, and transformations: improving the
biological information cont ent of metabolomics data. BMC
Genomics, 7 (1), 1.
Blumenkrantz, N., & Asboe-Hansen, G. (1973). New method for quan-
titative determination of uronic acids. Analytical Biochemistry,
54(2), 484 –489.
Boukroufa, M., Boutekedjiret, C., Petigny, L., Rakotomanomana, N., &
Chemat, F. (2015). Bio-refinery of orange peels waste: a new con-
cept based on integrated green and solvent free extraction processesusing ultrasound and microwave techniques to obtain essential oil,
polyphenols and pectin. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 24 ,7 2–79.
Bro, R., & Smilde, A. (2003). Centering and scaling in component anal-
ysis. Journal of Chemometrics, 17 (1), 16 –33.
Ciriminna, R., Chavarría-Hernández, N., Inés Rodríguez Hernández, A.,
& Pagliaro, M. (2015). Pectin: a new perspective from the
biorefinery standpoint. Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining, 9 (4),
368–377.
Clausen, M. H., Willats, W. G. T., & Knox, J. P. (2003). Synthetic methyl
hexagalacturonate hapten inhi bitors of anti-homogalacturonan
monoclonal antibodies LM7, JIM5 and JIM7. Carbohydrate
Research, 338 (17), 1797– 1800.
Coimbra, M. A., Barros, A., Barros, M., Rutledge, D. N., & Delgadillo, I.
(1998). Multivariate analysis of uronic acid and neutral sugars inwhole pectic samples by FT-IR spectroscopy. Carbohydrate
Polymers, 37 (3), 241 –248.
Coimbra, M. A., Barros, A., Rutledge, D. N., & Delgadillo, I. (1999).
FTIR spectroscopy as a tool for the analysis of olive pulp cell-wallpolysaccharide extracts. Carbohydrate Research, 317 (1), 145 –154.
de Paz, J. L., & Seeberger P. H. (2012). Recent advances and future
challenges in glycan microarray technology. In Y . Chevolot (Ed.),Carbohydrate Microarrays: Methods and Protocols. Methods in
Molecular Biology (pp 1–12). Humana Press.
Dominiak, M., Wichmann, J., Vidal Melgosa, S., Willats, W., Meyer, A.,
Søndergaard, K., & Mikkelsen, J. (2014). Application of enzymesfor efficient extraction, modification, and development of functionalproperties of lime pectin. Food Hydrocolloids, 40 ,2 7 3–28
2.
Fangel J. U., Pedersen H. L., Vidal-Melgosa S., Ahl L. I., Salmean A. A.,
Egelund J., et al. (2012) Carbohydrat e microarrays in plant science. In J.
Normanly (Ed.), High-Throughput Phenotyping in Plants: Methods and
Protocols. Methods in Molecular Biology (pp 351 –62). Humana Press
Fellah, A., Anjukandi, P., Waterland, M. R., & Williams, M. A. K. (2009).
Determining the degree of methylesterification of pectin by ATR/
FT-IR: methodology optimisation and comparison with theoreticalcalculations. Carbohydrate Polymers, 78 (4), 847 –853.
Geladi, P., MacDougall, D., & Martens, H. (1985). Linearization and
scatter-correction for near-infrared reflectance spectra of meat.Applied Spectroscopy, 39 (3), 491 –500.
Grassino, A. N., Brn čić, M., Viki ć-Topi ć, D., Roca, S., Dent, M., &
Brnčić, S. R. (2016). Ultrasound assisted extraction and characteri-
zation of pectin from tomato waste. Food Chemistry, 198 ,9 3–100.
Hotelling, H. (1933). Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into prin-
cipal components. Journal of Educational Psychology, 24(6), 417.
Jones, L., Seymour, G. B., & Knox, J. P. (1997). Localization of pectic
galactan in tomato cell walls using a monoclonal antibody specificto (1 [ −>] 4)-[beta]-D-galactan. Plant Physiology, 113 (4), 1405 –
1412.
Kacurakova, M., Capek, P., Sasinkova, V ., Wellner, N., & Ebringerova,
A. (2000). FT-IR study of plant cell wall model compounds: pectic
polysaccharides and hemicelluloses. Carbohydrate Polymers, 43 (2),
195–203.
Kačuráková, M., Wellner, N., Ebringerová, A., Hromádková, Z., Wilson,
R., & Belton, P. (1999). Characterisation of xylan-type polysaccha-
rides and associated cell wall components by FT-IR and FT-Ramanspectroscopies. Food Hydrocolloids, 13 (1), 35 –41.
Kuligowski, J., Cascant, M., Garrigues, S., & de la Guardia, M. (2012).
An infrared spectroscopic tool for process monitoring: sugar con-
tents during the production of a depilatory formulation. Talanta, 99 ,
660–667.
Lim, J., Yoo, J., Ko, S., & Lee, S. (2012). Extraction and characterization
of pectin from Yuza (Citrus junos) pomace: a comparison of
conventional-chemical and combined physical –enzymatic extrac-
tions. Food Hydrocolloids, 29 (1), 160 –165.
Limberg, G., Körner, R., Buchholt, H. C., Christensen, T. M. I. E.,
Roepstorff, P., & Mikkelsen, J. D. (2000). Analysis of different de-
esterification mechanisms for pectin by enzymatic fingerprinting
using endopectin lyase and endopolygalacturonase II fromA. niger .Carbohydrate Research, 327 (3), 293 –307.
Nicolaou, N., Xu, Y ., & Goodacre, R. (2010). Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy and multivariate analysis for the detection and quanti-fication of different milk species. Journal of Dairy Science, 93 (12),
56
51–5660.
Nielsen, B. U. (1996). Fiber-based fat mimetics: pectin. In S. Roller & S.
A. Jones (Eds.), Handbook of fat replacers (pp. 161 –173). Boca
Raton: CRC Press.
Ralet, M.-C., Tranquet, O., Poulain, D., Moïse, A., & Guillon, F. (2010).
Monoclonal antibodies to rhamnogalacturonan I backbone. Planta,
231(6), 1373 –1383.
Rohman, A., & Man, Y . B. C. (2010). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy for analysis of extra virgin olive oil adulterated with
palm oil. Food Research International, 43 (3), 886 –892.
Rolin, C., Nielsen, B. U., & Glahn, P. E. (1998). In S. Dumitriu (Ed.),
Polysaccharides –structural diversity and functional versatility (pp.
377–431). New York: Marcel Dekker Inc.
Rudolph B., & Petersen S. A. (2011). US Patent App. 13/013,709 Pub:
US20120190831 A1. Methods for Steam Flash Extraction of Pectin.
Cp Kelco Aps, assignee. United StatesFood Bioprocess TechnolSørensen, I., & Willats, W. G. T. (2011). Screening and characterization
of plant cell walls using carbohydrate microarrays. In Z. Popper
(Ed.), The plant cell wall: methods and protocols. Methods in
Molecular Biology (pp 115 –121). India: Humana Press.
van den Hoogen, B. M., van Weeren, P. R., Lopes-Cardozo, M., van
Golde, L. M. G., Barneveld, A., & van de Lest, C. H. A. (1998).A microtiter plate assay for the determination of uronic acids.Analytical Biochemistry, 257 (2), 107 –111.
Verhertbruggen, Y ., Marcus, S. E., Haeger, A., Ordaz-Ortiz, J. J., & Knox,
J. P. (2009). An extended set of monoclonal antibodies to pectichomogalacturonan. Carbohydrate Research, 344 (14), 1858 –1862.
V oragen, F., Beldman, G., & Schols, H. (2008). Chemistry and enzymol-
ogy of pectins. Advanced dietar y fibre technology ,3 7 9–397.
doi:10.1002/9780470999615.ch33 .
V oragen, A. G. J., Schols, H. A., & Pilnik, W. (1986). Determination of
the degree of methylation and acetylation of pectins by h.p.l.c. Food
Hydrocolloids, 1 (1), 65 –70.Wellner, N., Ka čuráková, M., Malovíková, A., Wilson, R. H., & Belton,
P. S. (1998). FT-IR study of pectate and pectinate gels formed bydivalent cations. Carbohydrate Research, 308 (1), 123 –131.
Wikiera, A., Mika, M., & Grabacka, M. (2015). Multicatalytic enzyme
preparations as effective alternative to acid in pectin extraction.Food Hydrocolloids, 44 ,1 5 1–161.
Willats, W. G. T., Marcus, S. E., & Knox, J. P. (1998). Generation of a
monoclonal antibody specific to (1 →5)-α-L-arabinan.
Carbohydrate Research, 308 (1), 149 –152.
Wold, S., Esbensen, K., & Geladi, P. (1987). Principal component analysis.
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 2 (1–3), 37–52.
Zykwinska, A., Boiffard, M.-H., Kontkanen, H., Buchert, J., Thibault, J.-
F., & Bonnin, E. (2008). Extraction of green labeled pectins andpectic oligosaccharides from plant byproducts. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56 (19), 8926– 8935.Food Bioprocess Technol/g3
/g3/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3/g3
PAPER 3 
Andreas Baum, Anne S. Meyer, Javier L. Garcia, Max Egebo, Per W. Hansen, Jørn 
D. Mikkelsen; Enzyme activity measurement via spectral evolution profiling and 
PARAFAC; Analytica Chimica Acta, Volume 778, 17 May 2013, Pages 1-8 Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1–  8
Contents  lists  available  at  SciVerse  ScienceDirect
Analytica  Chimica  Acta
j  ourna  l  ho  mepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/aca
Enzyme  activity  measurement  via  spectral  evolution  proﬁling  and
PARAFAC
Andreas  Bauma,b,  Anne  S.  Meyera,  Javier  Lopez  Garciaa,  Max  Egebob,
Per Waaben  Hansenb,  Jørn  Dalgaard  Mikkelsena,∗
aCenter  for  BioProcess  Engineering,  Department  of  Chemical  and  Biochemical  Engineering,  Technical  University  of  Denmark,  DK-2800  Lyngby,  Denmark
bFoss  Analytical,  Foss  Allé  1,  DK-3400  Hillerød,  Denmark
h  i  g  h  l  i  g  h  t  s
•Enzyme activity determination using
FTIR  and  PARAFAC.
•Directly and universally  applicable
without the  need  of  any  external
standards.
•The  method  provides  alternative
solutions to the  cumbersome  reduc-
ing sugar  analysis.
•Enzymatic  hydrolysis  of  plant  poly-
mers and  sugar  release  can  be  deter-
mined.g  r  a  p  h  i  c  a  l  a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article  history:
Received
 18  January  2013
Received
 in  revised  form  5  March  2013
Accepted
 12 March 2013
Available online 21 March 2013
Keywords:ChemometricsFourier transform  infrared  spectroscopy
Enzyme
 kinetics
Substrate
 evolution
Product
 evolution
Multiwaya  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
The  recent  advances  in  multi-way  analysis  provide  new  solutions  to  traditional  enzyme  activity  assess-
ment. In  the  present  study  enzyme  activity  has  been  determined  by  monitoring  spectral  changes  of
substrates and  products  in  real  time.  The  method  relies  on  measurement  of  distinct  spectral  ﬁngerprints
of the  reaction  mixture  at  speciﬁc  time  points  during  the  course  of  the  whole  enzyme  catalyzed  reac-
tion and  employs  multi-way  analysis  to  detect  the  spectral  changes.  The  methodology  is  demonstrated
by spectral  evolution  proﬁling  of  Fourier  Transform  Infrared  (FTIR)  spectral  ﬁngerprints  using  parallel
factor analysis  (PARAFAC)  for  pectin  lyase,  glucose  oxidase,  and  a  cellulase  preparation.
© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Quantitative assessment  of  enzyme  activity  is  a  fundamen-
tal measurement required  for  determining  the  amount  of  an
enzyme.  The  enzyme  activity  is  deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  active
enzyme which  will  catalyze  the  transformation  of  a  particular
molar  amount  of  substrate  per  time  unit  under  standard  conditions.
Its  measurement  is  decisive  for  deﬁning  enzyme  dosage,  reaction
∗Corresponding  author.  Tel.:  +45  60856300.
E-mail address:  jdm@kt.dtu.dk  (J.D.  Mikkelsen).time,  substrate  use  and  product  yields  in  practical  enzyme  cat-
alyzed reactions. A quantitative  enzyme  activity  assay  –  optimally
measured  directly as  the  reaction  rate  deﬁning  the  initial  substrate
consumption  rate  –  is  also  the  fundamental  measurement  used  for
studying  enzyme  action,  speciﬁcity,  kinetics,  possible  inhibition,
and for  identifying  a  speciﬁc  enzyme.
Existing  large  scale  industrial  enzyme  based  processes  range
from  speciﬁc  conversions  of  crude  penicillins  to  deﬁned  /H9252-lactam
antibiotics  [1]  to  multi-enzymatic  degradation  of  cellulose  and
other biomass materials for  novel  bio-based  fuel  production
and bioreﬁnery  products  [2].  Current  activity  assay  methods  for
biomass  and  polysaccharide  degrading  enzymes  are  particularly
0003-2670/$ –  see  front  matter ©   2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2013.03.0292 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8
cumbersome  because  of  the  complexity  of  the  substrates.  The  cur-
rently  used  enzyme  assays  therefore  rely  on  the  use  of  artiﬁcial
substrates  and  assessment  of  their  conversion  by  laborious  spec-
trophotometric  techniques,  which  may  only  measure  the  reaction
indirectly,  or  are  based  on  crude  measurements  such  as  reducing
end  analyses,  or  employ  advanced  chromatography-based  analy-
ses  of  changes  in  the  substrate  or  product  levels  [3–5] .  A  main
disadvantage  of  all  existing  enzyme  assays  is  that  they  rely  on
measurement  of  either  the  product  formation  or  the  substrate  con-
sumption,  not  both  at  the  same  time.
FTIR  (Fourier  transform  infrared)  spectroscopy  is  based  on
measurement  of  absorption  in  the  mid-infrared  frequency  range.
All  organic  molecules  have  intra-  and  intermolecular  bonds  that
absorb  in  this  range,  and  the  spectrum  obtained  therefore  reﬂects
the  chemical  (structural)  composition  of  the  sample  being  ana-
lyzed.  The  absorption  pattern  of  the  chemical  bonds  having  an
electric  dipole  moment  that  changes  during  vibration  will  in
turn  produce a unique  ﬁngerprint  signature  for  the  biomolecules
present  in  the  sample  [6].  Although  FTIR  is  a  rapid  and  easy  to
use method, two  major  challenges  are  (a)  it  is  difﬁcult  to  iden-
tify  distinct  peaks  and  (b)  interference  of  an  inherent  strong  water
background at the  mid  infrared  wavelength  range.
FTIR  spectroscopy  is  used  commercially  to  quantify  constituents
in, e.g. milk  and  wine  utilizing  multivariate  and  advanced  statistical
approaches  to  help  identify  the  relevant  information  in  the  spec-
tra  [7].  FTIR  spectroscopy  has  also  been  employed  previously  to
determine  enzyme  activity  [8].  In  this  particular  case  deuterated
water  –  which  exhibits  a  much  lower  absorption  in  the  infrared
range  –  was  used  to  eliminate  the  water  interference  in  the  enzyme
activity  measurements.  Alternatively,  the  enzyme  activity  for  each
individual  enzyme  was  determined  by  monitoring  the  rate  of  the
decrease  in  intensity  of  a  speciﬁc  band:  for  amidase  (EC  3.5.1.4.)
and  urease  (EC  3.5.1.5)  the  drop  in  the  amide  band  at  1635  cm−1or
1605  cm−1,  respectively,  was  thus  measured  as  a  function  of  time
[8,9] .  FTIR  spectroscopy  has  also  been  used  to  assess  the  inﬂuence  of
enzymatic  treatment  of  a  complex  substrate,  in  particular  the  enzy-
matic  degradation  of  sea  buckthorn  berries  [10].  However,  in  order
to  monitor  the  enzymatic  reaction,  only  the  intensity  of  single,  spe-
ciﬁc  peaks  were  used  to  quantify  a  certain  product  or  substrate  [10].
Hence, the  available  methods  have  not  exploited  the  full  potential
of  monitoring  the  full  spectral  ﬁngerprint.  When  relying  on  assess-
ment  of  only  one  band,  each  method  becomes  highly  speciﬁc  in
a  classical  univariate  sense  and  moreover  not  applicable  to  multi-
component  enzymatic  systems  with  more  complex  distributions  of
various  substrates  and  products.
The  work  presented  in  this  paper  was  undertaken  to  test  the
hypothesis  that  FTIR  and  chemometric  multiway  analysis  can  be
used  as  a  universally  applicable  approach  for  rapid  assessment
of  enzyme  activity  without  using  any  external  standards,  even
on  genuine,  complex  substrates  as  biopolymers  (which  may  not
be  chromogenic).  A  more  comprehensive  introduction  to  FTIR  in
microbiology  and  examples  of  chemical  applications  of  multi  way
chemometrics  are  given  in  [11,12] ,  respectively.
2.  Theory
Based  on  the  assumption  that  different  substrate(s)  and  prod-
uct(s)  have  distinguishable  spectral  ﬁngerprints  (when  measured
by  FTIR  spectroscopy),  enzyme  kinetics  can  principally  be  observed
directly  in  aqueous  solutions  by  monitoring  the  evolution  of  the
full  spectral  ﬁngerprint,  i.e.  by  assessing  the  time  resolved  changes
over  the  bandwidth  from  1000  to  1600  cm−1.  During  this  continu-
ous  measurement,  as  the  substrate  is  consumed,  the  FTIR  spectrum
will  change  simultaneously  with  the  development  of  the  product
molecules and  as  the  conversion  of  substrate  to  product  progresses
the  spectral  proﬁle  will  thus  shape  a  “landscape”  in  relation  toenzyme  activity  Those  spectral  landscapes,  each  identifying  the  full
enzyme  catalyzed  reaction  accomplished  at  one  particular  enzyme
level,  i.e.  one  particular  enzyme  activity,  are  referred  to  as  Evolu-
tion  Proﬁles  and  are  illustrated  for  three  different  enzyme  catalyzed
reactions  with  glucose  oxidase  (EC  1.1.3.4),  pectin  lyase  (EC  4.2.2.1),
and  a  mixed  cellulase  preparation,  respectively  (Fig.  1B,  D,  F  and
Supplementary  Fig.  A).
This  spectral  evolution  proﬁling  in  real  time,  combined  with
chemometric  multi-way  methodology,  i.e.  parallel  factor  analy-
sis  (PARAFAC),  allows  for  the  quantitative  detection  of  spectral
changes  of  both  the  substrate  and  the  product  during  the  enzyme
catalyzed  reaction.
2.1.  PARAFAC
PARAFAC  [13–15]  is  a  numerical  decomposition  method  suit-
able  for  decomposing  multilinear  datasets  into  loadings  or  scores
using  an  alternating  least  squares  algorithm  [12].  By  doing  so
PARAFAC  ﬁnds common proﬁles/patterns which are  present  in  all
samples and  therefore  enables  the  advantage  of  ﬁtting  those  com-
mon proﬁles to all samples  simultaneously.  In  order  to  generate
a calibration  which  correlates  enzymatic  activity  with  the  spec-
tral  evolution data a  multilinear  data  structure  (tensor)  must  be
formed:
Each  Evolution  Proﬁle  is  represented  by  a  data  matrix  where
vectors  are  spectra  at  consecutive  time  points.  Since  all  Evolution
Proﬁles  are recorded at  the  same  consecutive  time  points  those
matrices can  be  stacked  to  form  a  tensor  which  is  deﬁned  by  its
three dimensions, namely  wave  number  (K),  time  (J)  and  activity  (I).
The  tensor  connecting  those  three  measurement  dimensions  fulﬁlls
trilinearity  and  is  a  starting  point  for  multi-way  analysis  (Fig.  2).
The  tensor  X  was  mathematically  decomposed  into  three  matri-
ces  A,  B  and  C  (Eq.  (1)  and  Fig.  3)  using  the  PARAFAC  algorithm  [14]:
xi,j,k=F/summationdisplay
f  =1aifbjfckf+  ei,j,k (1)
2.2. Data pre-processing
The  spectra  have  been  scaled  using  standard  normal  variate
(SNV).  To  do  so  the  tensor  was  unfolded  and  scaled  slab  wise  across
the  sample  mode  as  described  below  [14,16] .
¯xik=/summationtextJ
j=1xijk
J(2)
wi=/radicalBigg/summationtextK
k=1/summationtextJ
j=1(xijk−¯xik)
KJ  −  1(3)
xSNV
ijk=xijk
wi(4)
Additionally  the  three-way  array  was  consecutively  double  cen-
tered  across  mode  1  and  mode  2.  Multi-way  centering,  e.g.  for  mode
1  can  be  understood  as  unfolding  the  tensor  to  a  I  ×  JK  matrix  and
proceeding  as  in  usual  two-way  analysis  [16]:
xcent
ijk=  xijk−/summationtextI
i=1xijk
I(5)
2.3. Evolution  Proﬁles
All Evolution  Proﬁles  from  FTIR  data  have  been  visualized  using
surf plots.  To  display  the  time-resolved  spectra  of  an  enzymatic
reaction  in  this  paper  all  spectra  have  been  SNV  scaled  slabwiseA.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8 3
Fig.  1.  (A)  Enzymatic  reaction  of  glucose  oxidase;  (B)  Spectral  Evolution  Proﬁle  of  glucose  oxidase  visualized  using  a  surf  plot.  Spectra  are  displayed  as  difference  spectra
to
 emphasize temporal changes and to disable  the  visualization  of  background  signals.  The  observation  time  was  20.7  min  as  the  signal  to  noise  ratio  was  low.  Substrate
consumption (decreasing  bands)  did  not  exhibit  efﬁcient  spectral  change;  (C)  enzymatic  reaction  of  pectin  lyase;  (D)  Spectral  Evolution  Proﬁle  of  pectin  lyase  using  1%  apple
pectin
 apple  as  substrate.  Observation  time  was  4.2  min;  (E)  enzymatic  reaction  of  a  cellulolytic  enzyme  blend  (Celluclast  1.5L);  (F)  spectral  Evolution  Proﬁle  of  Celluclast
1.5L
 using  1%  CMC  as  substrate.  The  observation  time  was  4.2  min.
as  described  above  and  difference  spectra  have  been  calculated  by
subtracting  the  ﬁrst  spectrum  from  all  remaining  spectra  including
the  ﬁrst  one.  Constant  background  signals  were  therefore  elimi-
nated  as  the  ﬁrst  difference  spectrum  results  in  a  vector  of  zeros
(zero  absorption  over  the  whole  spectral  range).  Concluding,  the
following  spectra  contain  signal  changes  due  to  the  enzymatic
reaction.
3. Materials  and  methods
3.1.  Materials
Glucose  oxidase  from  Aspergillus  niger  (TypeX-S),  apple  pectin
and  sodium  carboxymethylcellulose  were  purchased  from  Sigma
Aldrich  (St.  Louis,  USA).  The  pectin  lyase  gene  from  Emericella  nidu-
lans  was  expressed  in  Pichia  pastoris  and  produced  in-house  by
Center  for  Bioengineering,  DTU,  Lyngby,  Denmark.  The  Celluclast
1.5L  was  donated  by  Novozymes,  Bagsværd,  Denmark.
3.2.  Experimental
All  spectra  were  obtained  using  a  MilkoScanTMFT2  (FOSS  ANA-
LYTICAL, Hillerød,  Denmark).  The  instrument  consisted  of  a  FTIRwhich  scanned  the  IR  spectrum  in  the  range  of  1000–1600  cm−1.
Acquisition  was  carried  out  according  to  the  method  described
in  [17]  with  an  optical  resolution  of  14  cm−1.  The  instrument
was  equipped  with  an  automatic  ﬂow-through  system  apparatus
and  worked  semi-automated.  The  optical  system  was  hermetically
sealed  and  pressure  and  humidity  controlled.  The  path  length  of
the  cuvette  was  50  /H9262m.  The  temperature  was  equilibrated  at  42◦C.
For  measurements  the  sample  was  placed  underneath  the
automatic  sample  intake  which  was  supported  by  peristaltic
pumps.  All  spectra  have  been  measured  against  an  aqueous  blank
(FOSS  Analytical,  Hillerød,  Denmark).  After  each  measurement  the
ﬂow-through  system  was  cleaned  automatically.  Furthermore  the
samples  possibly  were  recycled  back  to  the  main  reaction  con-
tainer  in-between  time-resolved  measurements  to  avoid  oxygen
depletion  in  the  cuvette.
3.3.  Calibration  procedure
To  obtain  enzyme  activity  calibrations  several  steps  were  per-
formed.
(1)
 Evolution  Proﬁles  of  two  control  mixtures  have  been  acquired.
One  control  contained  only  the  substrate  without  enzyme.4 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8
Fig. 2.  Conversion  from  two-way  to  a  three-way  data  structure.  All  data  matrices  containing  time-resolved  spectra  for  a  certain  enzyme  activity  are  stacked  behind  each
other
 to form a tensor.  The  cubic  data  structure  fulﬁlls  trilinearity  since  all  Evolution  Proﬁles  are  recorded  in  the  same  consecutive  time  steps.
Buffer  was  added  instead  of  the  enzyme  solution.  The  second
control  contained  only  enzyme  and  no  substrate.  Instead  of
substrate  solution  only  buffer  was  added.  The  Evolution  Pro-
ﬁles  of  both  controls  showed  no  signiﬁcant  change  in  time.  That
step  is  especially  important  to  assure  that  the  observed  spec-
tral  evolution  in  spectra  was  due  to  enzyme  activity  and  not
Fig. 3. Schematic illustration  of  a  PARAFAC  decomposition  of  time-resolved  enzy-
matic FTIR  data.  The  matrices  contain  the  following  information:  (A)  this  matrix
contains
 the  true  spectra  (ﬁngerprints)  of  the  enzymatic  system.  Here  spectral  ﬁn-
gerprints
 representing  both  the  substrate  and  the  product  are  illustrated  by  green
and
 blue  color.  (B)  This  matrix  contains  the  kinetic  (i.e.  time  resolved)  behavior  of
substrate(s)
 and  product(s).  (C)  This  matrix  contains  the  information  about  how
abundant
 the  change  in  spectra  in  (B)  is  considering  the  pure  spectra  from  (A).
Those
 values  of  that  matrix  therefore  correlate  with  the  used  enzyme  activity  (hav-
ing
 opposite  slopes  for  substrate(s)  and  product(s)  if  non-negativity  constraints  are
applied
 to  the  analysis).due  to  altering  circumstances  like  temperature,  precipitation,
denaturation, mutarotation  etc.
(2)  Various  Evolution  Proﬁles  were  acquired  using  equal  substrate
concentrations  and  different  dosages  of  enzyme  (activities).
Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  enzymatic  reaction,  measure-
ments  have  been  carried  out  in  ﬂow-back  mode  where  the
reaction  mixture  was  continuously  led  back  to  the  reaction
container  to  ensure  access  of  gases  as  oxygen  which  was  nec-
essary  for  the  reaction  of  glucose  oxidase.  The  other  enzymatic
reactions  have  been  pumped  into  the  cuvette  only  once  for
continuous  measurements  (Pectin  Lyase  and  Celluclast  1.5L).
In  this  case  the  reaction  mixture  stayed  inside  the  cuvette  dur-
ing  the  whole  acquisition  period.  Three  replicates  have  been
measured  for  each  calibration  point.  Spectra  for  each  Evolu-
tion  Proﬁle  were  measured  consecutively  using  time  steps  of
16.6  s  for  Pectin  Lyase  and  Celluclast  1.5L  and  31.0  s  for  glucose
oxidase,  respectively.  Acquisition  of  the  Evolution  Proﬁles  was
carried  out  in  random  order  to  prevent  systematic  biases.
(3)  The  acquired  spectral  data  was  exported  to  MATLAB  (The  Math-
works  Inc.,  MA,  USA)  where  it  was  treated  using  designated
scripts.  PARAFAC  analysis  was  performed  using  PLS  Toolbox
6.0.1  (Eigenvector  Research  Inc.,  WA,  USA).
(4)  The  obtained  scores  from  the  PARAFAC  decomposition  were
plotted  against  the  added  enzyme  activities,  respectively.  The
absolute  activities  have  been  determined  by  conventional  col-
orimetric assays  as  described  below.
3.4.  Colorimetric  assays
3.4.1.  Pectin  lyase
Pectin lyase  activity  was  measured  on  1  g  L−1pectin  from  apple
by  incubating  in  50  mM  sodium  phosphate  Buffer  at  pH  7.0  and
42◦C.  The  increase  in  absorbance  was  determined  at  235  nm  during
4  min  in  an  Inﬁnite200  microplate  reader  (Tecan,  Salzburg,  Austria);
the  data  collection  was  controlled  by  the  program  Tecan  i-control
version 1.5.14.0.  The  extinction  coefﬁcient  used  was  5.5  mM−1L−1
[18,19] .A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8 5
3.4.2.  Glucose  oxidase
Incubation conditions were set to pH  6.9  and  42◦C.  Samples
were taken  at relevant time  points  during  a  30  min  reaction  and
the  extent  of  the  reaction  was  determined  by  the  described  assay
below.
20 /H9262L of  each  sample  were  mixed  with  10  /H9262L  o-dianisidine
solution  (30 mg mL−1),  160  /H9262L  0.1  M  glucose  solution  and  10  /H9262L
peroxidase  solution (1  mg  mL−1)  to  form  a  yellow-orange  dye.  The
samples  were measured  photometrically  at  420  nm  using  an  Inﬁ-
nite200  microplate reader (Tecan,  Salzburg,  Austria).  1  unit  was
deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  which  catalyzed  the  formation  of
1 /H9262mol  H2O2per  minute  in  50  mM  sodium  phosphate  buffer  at  pH
6.9  and 42◦C  [20].
3.4.3. Celluclast  1.5L
Incubation conditions  were  set  to  pH  5.0  and  42◦C.  Samples
were  taken  at  relevant  time  points  during  a  30  min  reaction  and
the  extent  of  the  reaction  was  determined  by  reducing  sugars.
The  procedure  for  the  determination  of  reducing  sugars  based
on  alkaline  p-hydroxybenzoic  acid  hydrazide  (PAHBAH)  is  a  poten-
tially valuable  assay  because  of  its  apparent  selectivity  for  reducing
sugars,  and  the  limited  number  of  reported  interfering  substances.
The  method  utilizes  the  instability  of  sugars  in  hot  alkaline
solution  to  produce  the  yellow  anionic  species  of  the  bis(4-
hydroxybenzoylhydrazones)  of  glyoxal  and  methylglyoxal  in  the
presence  of  HBAH  [21–23]  The  reaction  was  catalyzed  and  therefore
ampliﬁed  for  small  analyte  concentrations  using  bismuth  [24].
1  M  bismuth,  1  M  potassium  sodium  tartrate,  and  3  M  sodium
hydroxide  were  mixed  with  0.5  M  sodium  hydroxide  and  5%  (w/v)
4-hydroxybenzoic  acid  hydrazide  in  0.5  M  hydrochloric  acid  in  the
ratio  1:899:100.  The  reagent  was  mixed  with  the  samples  and  incu-
bated  at  70◦C  for  10  min,  cooled  down  to  42◦C,  and  the  absorbance
was  measured  at  410  nm  in  an  Inﬁnte200  microplate  reader  (Tecan,
Salzburg,  Austria).
1  U  was  deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  which  catalyzed  the
conversion  of  1  /H9262mol  glucose  per  minute  in  50  mM  sodium  acetate
buffer  at  pH  5.0  and  42◦C.
4.  Results  and  discussion
4.1.  Enzyme  activity  calibrations
For  each  enzyme  calibration  several  spectral  Evolution  Pro-
ﬁles  were  acquired  using  three  replicate  measurements.  The  total
amounts  of  Evolution  Proﬁles  used  for  the  calibrations  of  glucose
oxidase,  pectin  lyase  and  Celluclast  1.5L  were  29,  32  and  33,  respec-
tively.
The Evolution  Proﬁles ,  each  measuring  a  certain  enzyme  activity
(i.e.  the  speciﬁc  amount  of  an  enzyme),  have  been  visualized  using
difference  spectra,  implying  that  the  ﬁrst  spectrum,  and  therefore
all  constant  background  signals  including  the  water  signals,  were
subtracted  from  the  spectra  series.  The  absorption  of  certain  bands
decreased  over  time  due  to  substrate  consumption  whereas  other
bands  grew  over  time  due  to  product  formation  (Fig.  1B,  D,  F).
Except  for  glucose  oxidase,  the  products  being  formed  cannot  be
explicitly  identiﬁed  as  a  single  product,  but  rather  a  distribution
of  products.  Nonetheless  the  various  products  lead  to  a  combined
ﬁngerprint  which  was  measurable  by  FTIR.
When  examining  the  Evolution  Proﬁles  it  is  noticeable  that
the  spectral  change  depends  on  the  used  enzyme  dosage  (enzyme
activity)  and  the  differences  are  evident  for  pectin  lyase  Evolution
Proﬁles  (Fig.  4).  This  enzyme  dosage  dependence  was  quantiﬁed
using  PARAFAC.
The multi  way  scores  were  obtained  by  decomposing  the  ten-
sors  of  each  of  the  three  enzymatic  systems  (Fig.  3)  and  theTable  1
Calibration
 parameters  for  the  three  modeled  enzymatic  systems.
Pectin  lyase  Glucose  oxidase  Celluclast  1.5L
Time  of  spectral
evolution4.2  min  20.7  min  4.2  min
Number  of  spectra  in
each
 Evolution  Proﬁle15 40  15
Calibration range  (per  mL
substrate)0–200  mU  mL−10–6  U  mL−10–80  mU  mL−1
LODa9  mU  mL−1277  mU  mL−13.79  mU  mL−1
aLimit  of  detection  (LOD)  only  valid  for  used  time  of  spectral  evolution.  LOD
decreased
 for extended  observation  time.
corresponding  enzyme  activities  were  determined  by  conventional
colorimetric  and  photometric  assays.
The  plotting  against  classical  units  determined  by  conventional
assays  (Fig.  5)  gives  the  calibrations  an  absolute  character  and  at  the
same  time  described  goodness  of  ﬁt.  Various  calibration  parameters
for  the  three  enzymatic  assays  are  stated  in  Table  1.  The  sign  of
the  calibration  slope  of  each  individual  calibration  is  not  linked  to
substrate or product  character  as  it  can  result  as  positive  or  negative
when  repeating  the  PARAFAC  analysis.  This  results  from  an  existing
sign  ambiguity  in  Component  analysis  and  is  further  described  in
[25].
The  unique  solution  derived  from  PARAFAC  highly  correlated
with  the  enzyme  activity  in  each  case  (Fig.  5).  Since  the  PARAFAC
scores  were  retrieved  to  encompass  one  score  result  for  the  spectral
evolution  of  the  substrate(s)  and  another  one  for  the  product(s),  per
deﬁnition  two  calibrations  should  result  from  the  PARAFAC  analysis
for  each  enzyme  (Fig.  3).  Overlap  of  strong  ﬁngerprint  abundances
from  the  PARAFAC  derived  solution  with  substrate  depletion  bands,
e.g.  gave  evidence  to  identify  this  PARAFAC  Component  as  a  sub-
strate  depletion  calibration  and  vice  versa.  Hence,  for  pectin  lyase
and  Celluclast  1.5L  a  set  of  two  calibrations,  one  for  the  substrate
consumption  and  one  for  the  product  formation  could  be  estab-
lished,  respectively  (Fig.  5A–D).  However,  glucose  oxidase  showed
poorer  performance  than  the  other  enzyme  reactions  due  to  lower
signal/noise  ratio  and  resulted  in  only  one  calibration  (product  cal-
ibration)  (Fig.  5E).  Even  increasing  observation  time  to  20.7  min  for
glucose  oxidase  did  not  improve  substrate  calibration  performance
as  the  spectral  evolution  of  the  substrate  consumption  (bands  with
decreasing  abundance)  did  not  exhibit  efﬁcient  spectral  change  in
the  observed  time  period  as  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  1B.  Addition-
ally  the  product  calibration  indicated  poorer  precision  and  a  lower
linear  correlation  coefﬁcient  R2=  0.97  (Fig.  5E).  Underlying  linear
correlation  was  validated  by  modeling  several  PARAFAC  calibra-
tions  using  different  observation  times.  Assuming  each  calibration
to  be  linear  the  correlation  coefﬁcient  R2increased  with  observa-
tion  time  as  shown  in  Fig.  6.  Further  details  are  given  in  Section
4.2.
4.2. Calibration robustness
In general  calibration  robustness  depends  on  each  enzymatic
system  itself  since  the  Spectral  Evolution  Proﬁles  appear  to  look  dif-
ferent  for  various  enzymatic  reactions.  The  nature  of  each  Evolution
Proﬁle  is  therefore  speciﬁc  for  each  investigated  enzyme/substrate
system.  Concluding,  the  spectral  bands  of  substrates  and  products
can  overlap  each  other  to  a  different  extent  which  can  hide  valuable
information  concerning  the  reaction  kinetics.
As  mentioned  previously  calibration  robustness  secondly
depends  on  the  observation  time  of  the  Evolution  Proﬁle .  For  a  com-
mercially  useful  method  it  is  valuable  to  optimize  the  acquisition
time  for  an  Evolution  Proﬁle .  Considering  glucose  oxidase  Fig.  6
shows how  the  calibration  performance  declines  as  the  observa-
tion  time  of  the  enzymatic  reaction  is  shortened.  Yet,  following6 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8
Fig. 4. Spectral  Evolution  Proﬁles  for  the  enzymatic  reaction  of  pectin  lyase  using  different  activities.  Spectral  evolution  clearly  depends  on  added  enzyme  activity.  The
observation time  was  extended  for  illustrational  purposes.
the  reaction  for  10  min  resulted  in  a  calibration  with  a  regression
coefﬁcient  R2>  0.90.  Calibration  performances  of  pectin  lyase  and
Celluclast  1.5L  have  been  much  more  robust  as  observation  times
were  much  shorter  (Table  1).4.3.  PCA  versus  PARAFAC
The PARAFAC  approach  has  been  compared  to  chemomet-
ric  two-way  methods  as  Principal  Component  Analysis  (PCA).A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8 7
0 2 4-0.4-0.200.20.4
U [ µmol/min]Parafac Comp2
Score
0 2 4-0.4-0.200.20.4
U [ µmol/min]Parafac Comp1 
Score
0 0.5 1 1.5-0.4-0.200.20.4
U [ µmol/min]Parafac Comp1
Score
0 0.5 1 1.5-0.2-0.100.10.20.3
U [µmol/min]Parafac Comp2
Score
0 50 10  0-0.1-0.0500.050.1
U [µmol/min] Parafac Comp1
Score
Fig.  5.  PARAFAC  scores  from  both  Components  were  plotted  against  determined  enzyme  activities  (derived  from  conventional  assays)  to  build  calibrations.  PARAFAC  is
an
 unsupervised  multi-way  decomposition  method  and  identiﬁed  the  scores  without  any  knowledge  about  the  added  enzyme  activity.  (A)  Pectin  lyase  product  calibration
(R2=  0.995);  (B)  pectin  lyase  substrate  calibration  (R2=  0.998);  (C)  Celluclast  1.5L  product  calibration  (R2=  0.98);  (D)  Celluclast  1.5L  substrate  calibration  (R2=  0.99);  E:  glucose
oxidase
 product  calibration  (R2=  0.97).  The  sign  of  the  slope  of  each  individual  calibration  is  not  linked  to  substrate  or  product  character  (sign  ambiguity  in  Component
analysis
 [25]).
Chemometric  algorithms  as  Principal  Component  Analysis  (PCA)
[26]  are  commonly  used  to  visualize  the  characteristics  of  differ-
ent  spectra  in  a  feature  reduced  subspace  deﬁned  by  its  Principal
Components.
To  analyze  the  kinetics  of  a  certain  enzymatic  reaction  (for  one
Evolution  Proﬁle )  the  scores  of  each  spectrum,  derived  from  PCA,
need  to  be  plotted  against  the  time.  However,  since  PCA  ﬁnds  Prin-
cipal Components  only  due  to  maximal  variance  in  the  spectra  the
outcome  strongly  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  Evolution  Proﬁle
itself  (e.g.  signal-to-noise  ratio).  It  was  therefore  impossible  to  use
PCA  to  ﬁnd  reproducible  kinetic  proﬁles  for  the  same  enzymatic
reaction  using  different  amounts  of  enzyme,  simply  because  the
variance  in  spectra  was  distributed  in  a  different  manner,  e.g.  in  lowactivity  cases  noise  was  so  abundant  that  the  ﬁrst  and/or  second
Principal  Component  were  highly  biased.  PCA  was  therefore  not
useful  for  enzyme  activity  calibrations  since  it  did  not  necessarily
identify  the  right  variance  in  spectra  being  related  to  the  enzymatic
reaction.
Due  to  many  interfering  background  signals  (mainly  water  and
buffer  as  shown  in  Supplementary  Fig.  A1)  the  sensitivity  of  FTIR  is
somewhat lower  in  comparison  to  other  techniques  as  it  can  be  seen
from  Fig.  5E  (considerably  small  calibration  slope).  In  that  regard
the  signal-to-noise-ratios  of  the  Evolution  Proﬁles  for  glucose  oxi-
dase  were  especially  low  as  shown  in  Fig.  1B.  This  reaction  requires
oxygen  as  a  second  substrate.  Its  measurement  was  therefore  cum-
bersome  since  the  reaction  had  to  be  pumped  out  of  the  instrument
Fig. 6.  Illustration  of  how  the  product  calibration  performance  increases  with  observation  time.  The  Evolution  Proﬁle  shows  the  Difference  spectra  of  a  glucose  oxidase
reaction
 for  an  extended  observation  time.8 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  778 (2013) 1 – 8
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 160.511.522.533.544.55
time [min]ln(activity)R2 = 0.94
R2 = 0.97R2 = 0.96
ln (a) = -0.0567 t + 4.5895
ln (a) = -0.1399 t + 4.7094
ln (a) = -0.2296 t + 4.7339
Fig.  7.  Thermal  inactivation  of  pectin  lyase  for  70◦C  (blue),  75◦C  (red)  and  80◦C
(green).
 The  study  was  carried  out  as  an  application  example  of  “Measuring  enzyme
activity
 using  spectral  evolution  proﬁling”.  All  three  inactivation  experiments  have
been
 ﬁtted  to  Eq.  (7).  (For  interpretation  of  the  references  to  color  in  this  ﬁgure
legend,
 the  reader  is  referred  to  the  web  version  of  this  article.)
after each measurement to ensure constant  oxygen  supply.  How-
ever,
 the  PARAFAC  analysis  overcomes  possible  constraints  which
may arise from low signal-to-noise ratio  since  the  multi-linearity
of
 the  dataset  interconnects  all  the  Evolution  Proﬁles  (Fig.  2).  A  com-
mon kinetic pattern  can  therefore  be  found  by  PARAFAC  and  ﬁtted
to  all  Evolution  Proﬁles  simultaneously  (Fig.  3),  unlike  ﬁtting  sepa-
rate  parameters to  the  unfolded  data  using  PCA.  PARAFAC  therefore
even  recognizes  the  kinetics  for  enzymatic  reactions  with  very
small changes in  spectra  over  time  and  high  amounts  of  noise.  Noisy
Evolution  Proﬁles  due  to  low  activity  therefore  beneﬁt  from  strong
spectral  evolutions  due  to  high  enzyme  activity.
4.4.  Application  example:  thermal  inactivation  of  pectin  lyase
The  proposed  method  was  used  to  study  the  thermal  inactiva-
tion  of  pectin  lyase  at  three  different  temperatures,  namely  70,  75
and  80◦C.  To  do  so,  enzymatic  samples  have  been  incubated  accord-
ingly  for  different  time  intervals  using  three  replicates.  Thereafter
the  precipitated  protein  was  separated  using  centrifugation  and
the  supernatant  was  used  for  the  acquisition  of  a  spectral  Evolution
Proﬁle ,  respectively.  The  obtained  scores  from  using  a  pectin  lyase
PARAFAC  model  (as  in  Fig.  5)  were  used  to  determine  the  activity
of  the  sample  after  thermal  treatment.  All  three  thermal  inactiva-
tion  experiments  at  70,  75  and  80◦C  could  be  ﬁtted  to  Eq.  (6).  The
regression  constants  R2were  0.96,  0.93  and  0.95,  respectively.
[Et]  =  [E0]e−kDt(6)
ln([ Et])  =  ln([ E0])  −  kDt  (7)
A  linearized  form  (Eq.  (7))  was  used  to  determine  the  inacti-
vation  rate  constants  expecting  a  ﬁrst  order  denaturation:  NkD→D
where  N  was  the  enzymes  native  and  D  the  enzymes  denat-
urated  form.  The  determined  inactivation  rate  constants  were
0.0567  min−1,  0.1399  min−1and  0.2296  min−1,  respectively  (Fig.  7).
With  reference  to  the  Arrhenius  equation  (Eq.  (8))  temperature
correlated  with  inactivation  rate.  The  regression  constant  R2wascalculated  to  be  0.98  when  using  the  linearized  plot  in  Eq.  (8).
kD=  k0·  e−(EA/RT)→  ln  kD=  ln  k0−EA
R1
T(8)
5. Conclusion
The presented  study  demonstrates a new approach to  moni-
tor enzymatic  reactions  continuously by taking  all  substrate(s)  and
product(s)  into account. By observing  temporal  spectral  evolution
using  FTIR  the method inaugurates  possibilities  to  also  character-
ize  multi  component  enzymatic  systems.  The  approach  does  not
require  any chemical standards  or  biomarkers,  but  instead  util-
izes  multivariate analysis to continuously  monitor  the  enzymatic
reaction  in  real time. Thus  the  method  is  directly  applicable  to  a
wide  range  of  enzymes,  even  considering  complex  sample  matrices,
and  may  furthermore  be  highly  suitable  for  automation  imply-
ing  intelligent  instrumentation.  Replacing  cumbersome  univariate
enzyme  activity  assays  with  universal  and  direct  spectroscopic
assays  promise  a  better  and  direct  observation  of  the  big  picture
regarding  ongoing  enzymatic  reactions.  The  recent  advances  in
multivariate  analysis  allow  substantial  alternatives  to  question  the
reasonability  of  traditional  enzyme  activity  assessment.
Acknowledgements
This work  was  partially  ﬁnanced  by  the  7th  Framework  Pro-
gram  via  the  Marie  Curie  Initial  Training  Network,  LeanGreenFood
(EU-ITN  238084).  The  Fungal  Generic  Stock  Center  (FGSC)  is
acknowledged  for  the  Pichia  pastoris  clone  expressing  the  pectin
lyase gene  AN2569.2.
Appendix  A.  Supplementary  data
Supplementary  data  associated  with  this  article  can  be  found,  in
the  online  version,  at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2013.03.029 .
References
[1]  S.M.  Drawz,  R.A.  Bonomo,  Clin.  Microbiol.  Rev.  23  (2010)  160–201.
[2]  M.W.  Bevan,  M.C.R.  Franssen,  Nat.  Biotechnol.  24  (2006)  765–767.
[3] A. Hennig, H. Bakirci,  W.M.  Nau,  Nat.  Methods  4  (2007)  629–632.
[4] R.K. Bera,  A.  Anoop,  C.R.  Raj,  Chem.  Commun.  47  (2011)  11498–11500.
[5]  J.L.  Reymond,  Food  Technol.  Biotechnol.  42  (2004)  265–269.
[6]  F.L.  Martin,  Nat.  Methods  8  (2011)  385–387.
[7] F.A.  I˜nón,  S.  Garrigues,  M.  de  la  Guardia,  Anal.  Chim.  Acta  513  (2004)  401–412.
[8] K. Karmali,  A.  Karmali,  A.  Teixeira,  M.J.M.  Curto,  Anal.  Biochem.  333  (2004)
320–327.
[9] R.  Pacheco,  A.  Karmali,  M.  Serralheiro,  P.I.  Haris,  Anal.  Biochem.  346  (2005)
49–58.
[10]  C.  Adina,  F.  Florinela,  T.  Abdelmoumen,  S.  Carmen,  Rom.  Biotechnol.  Lett.  15
(2010)  5739–5744.
[11]  M.  Beekes,  P.  Lasch,  D.  Naumann,  Vet.  Microbiol.  123  (2007)  305–319.
[12]  R.  Bro,  Crit.  Rev.  Anal.  Chem.  36  (2006)  279–293.
[13] R.A. Harshman,  M.E.  Lundy,  Comp.  Stat.  Data  Anal.  18  (1994)  39–72.
[14]  R.  Bro,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  38  (1997)  149–171.
[15]  R.A.  Harshman,  UCLA  Work.  Pap.  Phon.  16  (1970)  1–84.
[16] R.  Bro,  A.K.  Smilde,  J.  Chemometr.  17  (2003)  16–33.
[17] S.K. Andersen,  P.W.  Hansen,  H.V.  Andersen,  Handbook  of  Vibrational  Spec-
troscopy, 1st  edition,  2002.
[18] L.A.M.  van  den  Broek,  E.D.  den  Aantrekker,  A.G.J.  Voragen,  G.  Beldman,  J.P.
Vincken,  J.  Sci.  Food  Agric.  75  (1997)  167–172.
[19] R.  Edstrom,  H.  Phaff,  J.  Biol.  Chem.  239  (1964)  2403–2408.
[20]  S.B.  Bankar,  M.V.  Bule,  R.S.  Singhal,  L.  Ananthanarayan,  Biotechnol.  Adv.  27
(2009) 489–501.
[21]  M.  Koziol,  Anal.  Chim.  Acta  128  (1981)  195–205.
[22] A.B.  Blakeney,  L.L.  Mutton,  J.  Sci.  Food  Agric.  31  (1980)  889–897.
[23]  M.  Lever,  Anal.  Biochem.  47  (1972)  273–279.
[24]  P.  Hartmann,  S.J.  Haswell,  M.  Grasserbauer,  Anal.  Chim.  Acta  285  (1994)  1–8.
[25] R.  Bro,  E.  Acar,  T.G.  Kolda,  J.  Chemometr.  22  (2008)  135–140.
[26]  S.  Wold,  K.  Esbensen,  P.  Geladi,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  2  (1987)  37–52./g3
/g3/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3
/g3/g3
PAPER 4 
Andreas Baum, Per W. Hansen, Anne S. Meyer, Jørn D. Mikkelsen; Simultaneous 
measurement of two enzyme activities using infrared spectroscopy: comparative evaluation of 
PARAFAC, TUCKER and N-PLS modeling; Analytica Chimica Acta, submitted Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14–  23
Contents  lists  available  at  SciVerse  ScienceDirect
Analytica  Chimica  Acta
jou  rn  al  h  om  epage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/aca
Simultaneous measurement of  two  enzyme  activities  using  infrared
spectroscopy:
 A comparative evaluation  of  PARAFAC,  TUCKER  and
N-PLS
 modeling
Andreas  Bauma,b,  Per  Waaben  Hansenb,  Anne  S.  Meyera,  Jørn  Dalgaard  Mikkelsena,∗
aCenter  for  BioProcess  Engineering,  Department  of  Chemical  and  Biochemical  Engineering,  Technical  University  of  Denmark,  DK-2800  Lyngby,  Denmark
bFoss  Analytical,  Foss  Allé  1,  DK-3400  Hillerød,  Denmark
h i g h l i g h  t  s
•Simultaneous  enzyme  activity  deter-
mination of  two  co-acting  enzymes.
•Activity  calibration  and  validation
for pectin  lyase  and  pectin  methyl
esterase.
•Chemometric  multiway  modeling
comparing PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and
N-PLS.
•Kinetic  investigations  on  genuine
substrates as  pectin.
•Universally  applicable  without
using any  external  standards  or
(bio-)markers.g r a p h i c  a  l  a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article  history:
Received
 17  April  2013
Received
 in  revised  form  19  June  2013
Accepted
 24  June  2013
Available online 28 June 2013
Keywords:Fourier transform  infrared  spectroscopy
Enzyme
 activity
Spectral
 evolution  proﬁles
MultiwaySecond-order calibrationa  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
Enzymes  are  used  in  many  processes  to  release  fermentable  sugars  for  green  production  of  biofuel,  or  the
reﬁnery of biomass for extraction of  functional  food  ingredients  such  as  pectin  or  prebiotic  oligosaccha-
rides.  The  complex  biomasses  may,  however,  require  a  multitude  of  speciﬁc  enzymes  which  are  active  on
speciﬁc substrates generating a  multitude  of  products.  In  this  paper  we  use  the  plant  polymer,  pectin,  to
present a  method  to  quantify  enzyme  activity  of  two  pectolytic  enzymes  by  monitoring  their  superim-
posed spectral  evolutions  simultaneously.  The  data  is  analyzed  by  three  chemometric  multiway  methods,
namely PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS,  to  establish  simultaneous  enzyme  activity  assays  for  pectin  lyase
and pectin  methyl  esterase.  Correlation  coefﬁcients  R2
predfor  prediction  test  sets  are  0.48,  0.96  and  0.96
for
 pectin  lyase  and  0.70,  0.89  and  0.89  for  pectin  methyl  esterase,  respectively.  The  retrieved  models  are
compared and  prediction  test  sets  show  that  especially  TUCKER3  performs  well,  even  in  comparison  to
the supervised  regression  method  N-PLS.
© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1.  Introduction
Comprehensive  understanding  of  enzymatic  reactions  has
become  increasingly  important  as  trends  in  biotechnological
research  have  led  to  a  higher  industrial  demand  concerning  diverse
production  of  enzymes.  To  understand  the  mechanism  of  an
∗Corresponding author.  Tel.:  +45  60856300.
E-mail address:  jdm@kt.dtu.dk  (J.D.  Mikkelsen).enzymatic  reaction  enzyme  activity,  as  deﬁned  of  how  much  sub-
strate  is  converted  into  product  per  time  unit,  is  of  major  interest.
Previously  reported  enzyme  activity  assays  rely  on  univari-
ate  measurement  principles  being  applied  to  data  discontinuously
obtained  from  Colorimetry  [1]  and  HPLC  [2–4] .  Alternatively,
spectroscopic  measurements  are  used  utilizing  univariate  peak
integration  methods  or  comparable  analytical  methods  as
described  in  [5–7] .  Hence,  each  enzyme  activity  assay  is  designed
to  be  speciﬁcally  bound  to  a  certain  enzymatic  system.  Besides
being  rather  cumbersome,  time-consuming  and  not  suitable  for
0003-2670/$ –  see  front  matter ©   2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2013.06.039A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23 15
high-throughput  measurements  these  assays  rely  on  measuring
the  enzyme  activity  by  either  following  the  substrate  depletion
or  the  product  formation,  but  not  both  simultaneously.  Addition-
ally,  no  enzymatic  assay  has  been  reported  which  can  continuously
quantify  enzyme  activities  of  two  co-acting  enzymes  in  one  sam-
ple  simultaneously.  Such  measurements  are  particularly  relevant
in  relation  to  processing  of  complex  substrates,  e.g.,  plant  biomass,
since  in  this  case  efﬁcient  degradation  requires  the  concerted  action
of  several  enzymes.
Thus,  it  would  be  beneﬁcial  to  develop  a  feasible  and  univer-
sal  methodology  to  directly  observe  the  kinetics  of  an  enzymatic
reaction,  without  any  need  to  apply  chemical  markers.  Addition-
ally,  such  a  method  should  be  universally  applicable  to  all  kinds  of
enzymes  and  independent  from  its  surrounding  sample  matrix.
One  solution  is  to  use  a  multivariate  measurement  technique
which  is  able  to  capture  information  considering  all  reaction
parameters,  as  to  observe  all  products  and  all  substrates  of  an  enzy-
matic  system. Such great  amount  of  information  usually  overlaps
within  a  certain  measurement  (e.g.,  spectral)  range  and  therefore
leads to ﬁngerprints  which  are  interrelated  with  the  underlying
chemical  nature.  Fourier  infrared  spectroscopy  (FTIR)  is  such  a  ﬁn-
gerprinting technique. It  analyses  the  absorption  pattern  of  infrared
light  due  to  vibrational  modes  of  covalent  bonds  and  enables  the
possibility to monitor  the  overall  pattern  of  an  ongoing  enzymatic
reaction  continuously  if  spectra  are  acquired  consecutively.
However,  applying  such  multivariate  measurement  principles
to,  e.g.,  time-resolved  FTIR  data  requires  the  use  of  (multiway)
chemometric  tools.  A  method  utilizing  chemometric  multi-
way  methodologies  for  enzyme  activity  determination  has  been
reported  recently  [8].  In  this  particular  study  spectral  evolution
proﬁling  in  connection  with  FTIR  has  been  used  to  quantify  the
enzyme  activity  of  one  enzyme,  e.g.,  glucose  oxidase,  pectin  lyase,
or  a  composition  of  enzymes,  e.g.,  a  cellulolytic  enzyme  blend.  The
study  also  discussed  critical  detection  limits  and  major  drawbacks
of  FTIR,  which  are  related  to  its  comparable  low  sensitivity,  and  fur-
thermore  described  how  chemometric  multiway  analysis  can  help
to  overcome  these  challenges.
On  the  other  hand,  this  paper  extends  the  concept  consequently
to  distinguish  and  quantify  the  enzyme  activity  of  two  enzymes,
i.e. pectin  lyase  and  pectin  methyl  esterase,  simultaneously  [9,10] .
Such  a  multi-enzyme  analysis  could  be  of  high  interest  to  deter-
mine  side  activities  in  enzyme  production  and  to  provide  a  tool  to
control  the  quality  of  fermentation  processes.  Monitoring  of  several
activities  could  therefore  be  of  potential  interest  in  both,  industrial
processes  and  scientiﬁc  research.
The  present  study  is  carried  out  by  continuously  monitoring
the  combined  spectral  evolution  of  the  enzymatic  reactions  using
FTIR.  Thereafter  the  underlying  spectral  patterns  related  to  the  two
enzyme  activities  are  deconvoluted  to  build  individual  enzyme
activity  calibrations  using  three  different  chemometric  multiway
methods  on  the  same  data.  The  retrieved  models,  derived  from  Par-
allel  Factor  Analysis  (PARAFAC),  TUCKER3  and  multilinear  Partial
Least  Squares  regression  (N-PLS),  are  compared  toward  feasibility
and  calibration  performance.
Further  comprehensive  introduction  and  overview  on  different
applications  of  multiway  chemometrics  is  given  by  Bro  [11,12] .
2.  Theory
2.1.  Spectral  evolution  proﬁling
In  this  chapter  a  simulated  dataset  is  used  for  illustrational  pur-
pose.
If we consider  an  enzymatic  reaction  which  converts  a  sub-
strate  S  into  a  product  P1,  following  ﬁrst  order  or  pseudo  ﬁrst  orderkinetics,  the  hypothesis  can  be  stated  that  (taking  mid-infrared
spectroscopic  measurements  into  account)  substrate  and  product
have  distinguishable  ﬁngerprints  which  should  evolve  from  one  to
another.  This  spectral  evolution  is  linked  to  the  enzymatic  reaction
and  its  kinetics  and  is  presented  in  Fig.  1A.
A  second  enzymatic  reaction  from  substrate  S  to  product  P2  is
exempliﬁed  as  in  Fig.  1B.  If  we  combine  both  enzymatic  reactions
and  let  them  occur  simultaneously  we  can  imagine  the  time-
resolved  spectra  to  appear  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  1C,  assuming  that
both  enzymes  are  present  in  equal  amounts.  In  all  scenarios  the
reaction  is  stopped  before  reaching  a  total  conversion,  where  the
ﬁnal  product  ﬁngerprints  are  illustrated  as  red  and  blue  dashed
lines  (Fig.  1A–C).
All  enzymatic  reactions  are  monitored  using  very  high  ini-
tial  substrate  concentrations  to  assure  that  there  is  no  signiﬁcant
(competing)  interaction  between  the  enzymes.  This  is  of  particu-
lar  importance  because  interaction  of  the  enzymes  would  disturb
independent  assessment of individual  enzyme  activities.  Fig.  1A–C
also  shows  the  spectral  changes  using  difference  spectra  visualized
utilizing surf plots.  These  plots  have  advantages  visualizing  small
changes  in  spectra  and  furthermore  enhance  visibility  of  spectral
convergence since the  dimension  of  time  is  resolved  in  space  [8].
When  no  signiﬁcant  interaction  between  the  enzymes  during  the
observation time can  be  assured  a  perfect  superimposition  of  the
individual  “enzymatic  landscapes”  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  1C  can  be
expected.
In the  present  study  pectin  lyase  (PL)  and  pectin  methyl  esterase
(PME)  have  been  used  simultaneously  to  degrade  the  same  sub-
strate,  namely  pectin  from  citrus  peel.  Biopolymers  as  pectin  can
serve  as  substrates  for  several  enzymatic  reactions  at  the  same
time.  While  pectin  lyase  catalyzes  the  de-polymerization  of  homo-
galacturonan  regions  in  pectin,  pectin  methyl  esterase  catalyzes
the  de-esteriﬁcation  of  the  methyl  ester  groups  of  the  pectin.  The
chemical  equations  of  both  reactions  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.
2.2.  Chemometrics
Each  acquired  spectrum  can  be  represented  by  a  vector  of  mid
infrared  absorption  values.  Hence,  a  time-resolved  evolution  proﬁle
forms a  matrix  with  n  vectors  at  n  consecutive  time  points.
In  order  to  quantify  the  enzyme  activity  of  both  enzymes  simul-
taneously  all  evolution  proﬁles,  represented  by  data  matrices,  were
stacked  on  top  of  each  other  to  form  a  tri-linear  data  structure
as  illustrated  in  Fig.  3A  and  B.  Since  all  evolution  proﬁles  have
been  acquired  using  the  same  consecutive  time  steps  this  data
structure  transformation  adds  up  one  more  measurement  dimen-
sion,  namely  activity.  Instead  of  working  with  unfolded  matrices
of  the  single  evolution  proﬁles  one  three-way  array,  mathemati-
cally  spoken  tensor,  is  therefore  obtained.  This  tensor  is  thereafter
decomposed  by  multiway  methods  as  PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  (Fig.  3A)
or  NPLS  (Fig.  3B)  into  three  mode  loadings  A,  B  and  C  which  in  this
particular  paper  refer  to  sample  mode,  kinetic  mode  and  ﬁnger-
print  mode.  The  loadings  of  the  sample  mode  are  also  referred  to
as  scores.
2.2.1. PARAFAC
PARAFAC  [13]  is  a  mathematical  tensor  decomposition  method
which  results  in  a  unique  solution  meaning  that  the  solution  has
no  rotational  freedom  as  in  ambiguous  models  derived  from  e.g.,
PCA  [14].  The  three-way  array  X  is  decomposed  into  three  matrices
A,  B  and  C  by  minimizing  the  sum  of  squares  of  the  residuals  in  E
according  to  Eq.  (1),  where  a,  b  and  c  are  elements  of  those  matri-
ces  while  R  represents  the  number  of  components.  A  schematic
illustration  is  given  in  Fig.  3.  Ideally  the  core  tensor  G  is  super-
diagonal meaning  that  all  positions  along  the  dashed  line  contain
ones  while  the  remaining  positions  contain  zeros,  respectively.16 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23
Fig.  1.  Simulated  data  for  three  enzymatic  reactions.  (A)  Enzyme  1  catalyzes  the  conversion  of  the  substrate  to  product  P1;  (B)  Enzyme  2  converts  the  substrate  to  product
P2; (C)  Enzyme  1  +  Enzyme  2  (half  dose  enzyme  1  +  half  dose  enzyme  2)  convert  the  Substrate  to  both  products  (P1  and  P2)  at  the  same  time.  The  spectral  changes  from
Substrate
 ﬁngerprint  to  product  ﬁngerprint  are  illustrated  on  the  left  side,  whereas  difference  spectra  using  surf  plots  are  shown  on  the  right  side.  Individual  ﬁnal  product
ﬁngerprints
 are  given  by  red  and  blue  dashed  lines,  respectively.  (For  interpretation  of  the  references  to  color  in  this  ﬁgure  legend,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  web  version
of
 this  article.)A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23 17
A
O
OHOHCOOCH 3
OOO
OHOHCOOCH 3
OO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O OHO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O +
B
O
OHOHCOOCH 3
OOO
OHOHCOOCH 3
O+ 2H 2O
- 2CH 3OHO
OHOHCOOH
OOO
OHOHCOOH
O
Fig.  2.  Enzymatic  reactions  for  (A)  pectin  lyase  and  (B)  pectin  methyl  esterase.
According  to  the  here  present  models  the  loadings  in  mode  C
(ﬁngerprint  mode)  identify  spectral  bands  which  change  during
the  course  of  the  enzymatic  reactions,  while  the  components  in
B  (kinetic  mode)  represent  the  time-resolved  shape  of  those  ﬁn-
gerprint  changes.  As  a  consequence  the  scores  in  mode  A  (sample
mode)  describe  the  abundance  of  the  underlying  spectral  evolu-
tions,  derived  from  mode  B  and  C.  This  was  described  in  more  detail
in  [8]
Xijk=R/summationdisplay
r=1airbjrckr+  eijk (1)
2.2.2.  TUCKER3
TUCKER3 is a  multiway  tensor  decomposition  method  [15]
which  decomposes  a  three  way  array,  e.g.,  X  (I  ×  J  ×  K)  into  three
loading  matrices,  A  (I  ×  P),  B  (J  ×  Q)  and  C  (K  ×  R)  and  a  core  ten-
sor,  G  [16,17] .  The  model  does  not  result  in  a  mathematical  unique
solution  and  has  therefore  rotational  freedom.  TUCKER3  can  be
expressed  as  given  in  Eq.  (2),  where  aip,  bjqand  ckrare  elements
of  the  loading  matrices,  gpqrare  elements  of  the  core  array  and  eijk
are  the  individual  residuals.
xijk=P/summationdisplay
p=1Q/summationdisplay
q=1R/summationdisplay
r=1aipbjqckrgpqr+  eijk (2)
Unlike in  PARAFAC  analysis,  the  core  tensor  G,  is  not  super-
diagonal  and  enables  possibilities  to  analyze  interaction  between
the  different  modes.  Decomposition  of  multiway  arrays  into  load-
ing  matrices  which  may  have  different  individual  ranks  can
Fig.  3.  The  data  cube  X  is  decomposed  into  A  (sample  mode),  B  (kinetic  mode)  and  C
(ﬁngerprint
 mode).  E  refers  to  the  residuals.  (A)  Schematic  illustration  of  PARAFAC
and
 TUCKER3  decomposition.  While  in  PARAFAC  the  core  tensor  G  is  superdiagonal
(containing
 ones  along  the  dashed  diagonal  and  zeros  in  the  other  positions)  in
TUCKER3
 the  core  tensor  G  can  contain  values  deviating  from  zero  in  the  positions
outside
 the  dashed  diagonal.  (B)  Schematic  illustration  of  N-PLS  (multiway  PLS)
regression.
 The  major  difference  to  unsupervised  tensor  decomposition  methods  as
PARAFAC
 or  TUCKER3  is  that  N-PLS  is  guided  by  information  of  accepted  known
values
 (Y)  to  ﬁnd  suitable  projections  for  calibration.therefore  be  analyzed.  Alternatively,  the  TUCKER3  decomposition
can  be  written  as  in  Eq.  (3),  where  ⊗  denotes  the  Kronecker  prod-
uct.  A,  B  and  C  are  linked  to  sample,  kinetic  and  ﬁngerprint  mode
as  described  for  PARAFAC.
X  =  AG(C  ⊗  B)T+  E  (3)
2.2.3. N-PLS  [18]
Multilinear  Partial  Least  Squares  regression  can  be  described
quite  similarly  to  bilinear  PLS,  where  both  matrices  X  and  Y  are
simultaneously  decomposed  while  ﬁnding  maximal  covariance  of
the  scores  of  both  decompositions  [19].  Detailed  elaboration  on
the  mathematical  description  of  N-PLS  and  its  algorithms  were
described  by  Bro  in  [20].  Unlike  in  PARAFAC  and  TUCKER3  N-PLS
uses  accepted  known  reference  values  (Y)  to  ﬁnd  suitable  projec-
tions for  calibration  modeling  and  therefore  comprises  a  risk  of  over
ﬁtting.  PLS  models  are  usually  validated  by  cross  validation  [21]  and
tested  on  prediction  sets.
3.  Materials  and  methods
3.1.  Reagents
Pectin  lyase  EC  4.2.2.10  family  PL1  was  a  cloned  enzyme  from
Aspergillus aculeatus and expressed as a  recombinant  enzyme  in
Saccharomyces
 cerevisiae ;  the  enzyme  was  a  gift  from  Novozymes
A/S  (Bagsværd,  Denmark)  [22].  Pectin  methyl  esterase  EC  3.1.1.11
family  CE8  was  also  cloned  from  A.  aculeatus  as  described  in
[23]. The monocomponent,  recombinant  enzyme  was  a  gift  from
Novozymes A/S  (Bagsværd,  Denmark).  Pectin  from  citrus  peel  with
a degree of  esteriﬁcation  around  80%  was  donated  from  Dupont,
Brabrand,  Denmark.
3.2.  FTIR
All  spectra  were  obtained  using  a  MilkoScanTMFT2  (FOSS
ANALYTICAL,  Hillerød,  Denmark).  The  instrument  consists  of  a
FTIR  interferometer  that  scanned  the  full  infrared  spectrum,  was
equipped  with  an  automatic  ﬂow-through  system  apparatus  and
worked  semi-automated.  The  optical  system  was  hermetically
sealed  and  pressure  and  humidity  controlled.  The  path  length  of
the  cuvette  was  50  /H9262m.  The  temperature  was  equilibrated  at  42◦C
using  heat  exchangers.
All  spectra  have  been  measured  against  an  aqueous  blank.  After
each  measurement  the  ﬂow-through  system  was  cleaned  automat-
ically  (with  water).  The  time  required  to  measure  one  spectrum
accounted 16.6  s  resulting  in  11  min  acquisition  time  for  one  evo-
lution  proﬁle  containing  40  spectra.18 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23
3.3.  Conventional  enzymatic  assays
The  accepted  known  enzyme  activities  of  PL  and  PME  have  been
determined  by  conventional  assays  as  described  below.
3.3.1.  Pectin  lyase
Pectin lyase  activity  was measured on  10  g  L−1pectin  by  incu-
bating  in 50  mM  sodium acetate Buffer  at  pH  5.0  and  42◦C.  The
increase  in absorbance was determined  at  235  nm  during  4  min
in an Inﬁnite200 microplate reader  (Tecan,  Salzburg,  Austria);  the
data  collection  was  controlled  by  the  program  Tecan  i-control  ver-
sion  1.5.14.0.  The  extinction  coefﬁcient  used  was  5.5  mM−1L−1.  The
activity  of PL was deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  releasing  1  /H9262mol
of  product per  minute calculated using  the  molar  absorption  coef-
ﬁcient  5500  M−1L−1[9,24,25] .
3.3.2.  Pectin  methyl  esterase
PME cleaves  esters  into  alcohols  and  its  corresponding  acid
(Fig. 2). The PME  activity  was  measured  using  an  autotitrator.  A
10
 g  L−1pectin  solution  was  prepared  in  50  mM  sodium  acetate
buffer at pH 5.0 and  42◦C  and  0.1  M  sodium  hydroxide  was  added
continuously to  maintain  pH  5.0  during  the  enzymatic  reactions.
The activity of PME was  deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  necessary
to release  1  /H9262mol  of  methanol  per  minute  as  estimated  from  the
consumed sodium hydroxide  equivalents  during  the  autotitration
[10,26] .
3.4. Chemometric  methods
After calibration  data  acquisition  the  data  were  exported  to  Mat-
lab  (The  Mathworks  Inc.,  MA,  USA)  where  they  were  treated  using
designated  scripts.  PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS  analysis  were
performed  using  PLS  Toolbox  6.0.1  (Eigenvector  Research  Inc.,  WA,
USA)
3.4.1.  Data  structure
The three-way  array,  X,  indicated  the  dimensions  of  56
samples  ×  131  wavenumbers  ×  40  time  points  (I  ×  J  ×  K).  Before
decomposition  of  the  tensor  the  data  were  preprocessed.
3.4.2.  Data  preprocessing
Variables selected  for  the  analysis  throughout  the  paper  have
been  wavenumbers ranging from  1018  to  1507  cm−1.  The  spec-
tra  have  been  scaled  using  Standard  Normal  Variate  (SNV)  along
the  spectral  axis.  To  do  so  the  tensor  was  unfolded  and  normal-
ized  slabwise  across  the  sample  mode  as  described  in  Eqs.  (4)–(6)
[13,27]
¯Xik=/summationtextJ
j=1xijk
J(4)
Wi=/radicalBigg/summationtextK
k=1/summationtextJ
j=1(xijk−¯xik)2
KJ −  1(5)
xSNV
ijk=xijk
wi(6)
Additionally the  data  cube  was  consecutively  double  centered
across  the  sample  and  the  kinetic  mode  [27].  Multiway  centering,
e.g.,  for  the  sample  mode  can  be  understood  as  unfolding  the  tensor
to  a  I  ×  JK  matrix  and  proceeding  as  in  usual  two-way  analysis  (Eq.
(7)):
xcent
ijk=  xijk−/summationtextI
i=1xijk
I(7)3.4.3.  Validation
In  this  paper  the  data  were  split  into  two  sets.  Random  two  thirds
of  the  samples  were  used  to  generate  models  using  leave-one-out
(loo)  cross  validation  and  the  remaining  set  of  one  third  of  the
samples  was  used  as  a  test  set  to  check  for  goodness  of  prediction.
Strategies  for  evaluation  of  prediction  errors  are  usually  given
by  ﬁgures  of  merit  in  multivariate  analysis.  In  this  paper  the  root
mean  square  error  of  prediction  (RMSEP)  was  used  to  describe  the
degree  of  agreement  between  predicted  values  yiand  the  accepted
known  values ˆyiof  the  test  set  using  a  total  model  derived  from  the
calibration  set.  Those  values  are  calculated  as  shown  in  Eq.  (8).
RMSEP  =/radicalBig/summationtextn
i=1(yi−ˆyi)2
n(8)
3.4.4. Calibration  accuracy  and  precision
Besides evaluation  of  the  RMSEP  calibration  accuracy  was  deter-
mined  by calculating the linear  regression  coefﬁcient  R2of  model
predicted enzyme  activity  against  accepted  known  enzyme  activity
as described in Eq.  (9).
R2=/summationtext
(ˆy  −¯y)2
/summationtext
(yi−¯y)2(9)
The  variables ˆy  and ¯y  represent  the  predicted  value  using  deter-
mined  slope and intercept of  the  linear  regression  and  the  mean  of
y, respectively,  while  yirepresents  the  actual  observed  value.
The  precision is a  measure  of  repeatability  and  can  be  under-
stood  as  of  how  much  replicates  of  the  same  accepted  known
enzyme  activity  differ  in  prediction.  This  span  deﬁnes  the  precision
of  the  individual  calibration  and  is  usually  expressed  using  standard
deviation.  However,  if  several  calibration  points  indicate  different
numbers  of  replicates  the  pooled  standard  deviation  spgives  an
improved  estimate  of  the  experimental  precision  as  described  in  Eq.
(10).  Hereby,  s1,  s2,.  .  .,  skrepresent  the  standard  deviations  of  the
individual  calibration  points  while  n1,  n2,.  .  .,  nkdenote  the  amount
of  replicates  at  every  calibration  point.
sp=/radicalbig
(n1−  1)s2
1+  (n2−  1)s2
2+  ·  ·  ·  +  (nk−  1)s2
k
n1+  n2+  ·  ·  ·  +  nk−  k(10)
0 2 4 6 80510152025
Pectin Lyase activity [U]Pectin Methyl Esterase activity [U]
Fig. 4.  Experimental  design:  red  samples  deﬁne  calibration  ranges,  while  black  sam-
ples
 are  randomly  placed  to  create  a  normally  distributed  sampling  scenario.  (For
interpretation
 of  the  references  to  color  in  this  ﬁgure  legend,  the  reader  is  referred
to
 the  web  version  of  this  article.)A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23 19
Fig.  5.  Spectral  evolutions  (11  min  each)  for  the  two  simultaneously  proﬁled  enzymatic  reactions  of  pectin  lyase  and  pectin  methyl  esterase.  A  shows  a  substrate  blank  (no
signiﬁcant
 spectral  change)  while  B  and  C  show  spectral  evolutions  for  PL  (8.07  U)  and  PME  (25.53  U),  respectively.  D  shows  a  mixed  spectral  evolution  of  both  enzymes
(4.04
 U  PL  and  12.77  U  PME)  while  E  shows  spectral  evolution  for  an  enzyme  mixture  of  8.07  U  PL  and  25.53  U  PME.  Spectra  are  displayed  as  difference  spectra,  meaning  that
the
 initial  spectrum  has  been  subtracted  from  the  whole  series  to  eliminate  constant  background  signals.20 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23
1100 1200 1300 1400 1500-0.2-0.100.10.20.30.40.50.6
wavenumber [cm-1]fingerprint modefingerprint loading PME
fingerprint loading PL
final difference spectrum PME
final difference spectrum PL
1100 1200 1300 1400 1500-0.3-0.2-0.100.10.20.30.40.5
wavenumber [cm-1]fingerprint modefingerprint loading P ME
fingerprint loading PL
final difference spectrum PME
final difference spectrum PL
1100 1200 1300 1400 1500-0.3-0.2-0.100.10.20.30.40.50.6
wavenumber [cm-1]fingerprint modefingerprint loading PME
fingerprint loading PL
final difference spectrum PME
final difference spectrum PLA) PARAFAC B) TUCKER3 C) N -PLS
Fig.  6.  Fingerprint  mode  loadings  for  (A)  PARAFAC,  (B)  TUCKER3  and  (C)  N-PLS.  The  PARAFAC  ﬁngerprint  mode  loadings  highly  deviate  from  the  other  two  model  loadings  in
the
 spectral range between 1400  and  1500  cm−1.  Final  difference  spectra  of  PL  and  PME  reactions  are  displayed  in  dashed  style  to  highlight  PL  and  PME  reaction  character.
In  the  present  study  replicates  did  not  indicate  constant  enzyme
activity ratios (Fig.  4).  However,  the  experimental  acquisition  of
evolution  proﬁles  toward  the  same  enzymatic  reaction  has  been
found  to be highly  reproducible  as  it  was  published  previously  in  a
related  study  [8].
3.4.5.
 Experimental  design
To build  two  calibration  models,  one  for  each  enzyme,  PL  and
PME,  an  appropriate  experimental  design  was  necessary  [28].  Each
sample  represents  spectral  information  which  results  from  overlap
of  the  two  individual  enzymatic  evolution  proﬁles.  A  superimposed
“spectral  landscape”  which  contains  information  related  to  both
enzyme  amounts  can  therefore  be  expected  (as  in  Fig.  1C).  Samples
with  one  particular  PL  activity  can  be  superimposed  by  PME  activ-
ities  which  span  from  zero  to  a  certain  maximum  value  and  vice
versa.  To  guaranty  robust  calibration  models  all  possible  degrees  of
interference  had  to  be  considered.
To  achieve  exactly  this  goal  nine  samples  have  been  deﬁned  by
mixing enzyme  activities  (with  20  mL  of  10  g  L−1substrate  solution)
as  illustrated  in  Fig.  4  by  red  points.  Those  samples  deﬁne  the  cal-
ibration  range  wherein  additional  47  samples  (black  points)  were
randomly  placed.
4.  Results
Evolution  proﬁles  of  two  control  mixtures  have  been  acquired.
One  control  contained  only  the  substrate  without  enzyme(s)
(Fig.  5A).  Buffer  was  added  instead  of  the  enzyme  solution.  The
second control  contained  only  enzyme(s)  and  no  substrate  (not
shown).  Instead  of  substrate  solution  only  buffer  was  added.  The
evolution  proﬁles  of  both  controls  did  not  show  signiﬁcant  spectral
change  in  time.  That  step  is  especially  important  to  ensure  that  the
observed  spectral  evolution  is  due  to  enzyme  activity  and  not  due
to  altering  circumstances  like  temperature  changes,  precipitation,
denaturation,  mutarotation,  etc.
Various  evolution  proﬁles  were  acquired  using  equal  substrate
concentrations  and  different  enzyme  activities.  Measurements
were  carried  out  in  random  order  to  prevent  from  systematic  biases.
Replicates  have  been  measured  according  to  the  described  experi-
mental  design  (Fig.  4).
Some  selected  evolution  proﬁles  using  different  enzyme  activi-
ties  of  PL  and  PME  are  displayed  in  Fig.  5.  Fig.  5A  shows  no  signiﬁcant
spectral  change  due  to  absent  enzymes,  while  Fig.  5B  and  C  shows
evolution  proﬁles  concerning  pure  added  enzyme  amounts  of  PLand  PME,  respectively.  Fig.  5D  and  E  shows  combined  evolution  pro-
ﬁles using mixed  activities  of  both  enzymes.  An  additive  character
of  both  individual  evolution  proﬁles  can  be  recognized,  although
being  difﬁcult to observe  clearly.  To  achieve  a  better  understand-
ing  of  the  underlying  spectral  patterns  the  multiway  models  were
approached.  The  tensor  was  decomposed  using  three  multiway
methods,  namely  PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS.  The  obtained  data
were  then  compared  in  order  to  identify  the  best  multiway  method
for  the  purpose.
4.1. PARAFAC
A  two  component  model  using  PARAFAC  was  obtained.  The  rank
of  the  tensor  was  validated  to  be  two  after  appropriate  chemomet-
ric preprocessing.  Without  the  used  multiway  preprocessing  a  rank
three  system  would  have  been  expected.  This  can  be  explained  by
the  fact  that  three  spectral  changes  occurred,  namely  one  for  the
substrate  consumption  and  one  for  each  of  the  product  formations
for  the  enzymatic  reactions  of  PL  and  PME,  in  total  three.  Since  the
substrate  depletion  can  be  expressed  as  linear  dependent  of  the
two  spectral  changes  of  product  formation  the  overall  rank  shall  be
two  after  multiway  centering  the  tensor  across  the  kinetic  mode
(removes  the  offset  due  to  constant  background  signals).
The  ﬁngerprint  mode  loadings  are  presented  in  Fig.  6A,  where
the  blue  ﬁngerprint  indicates  the  PL  reaction  and  the  green  ﬁn-
gerprint  the  PME  reaction,  respectively.  Noticeably  both  spectral
ﬁngerprints  indicated  signals  in  the  spectral  range  between  1400
and  1550  cm−1,  although  the  PL  reaction  did  not  show  any  signiﬁ-
cant  spectral  changes  in  this  range.  This  will  be  a  reason  for  poorer
calibration  performance  of  PARAFAC  as  it  will  be  discussed  later.
The  sample  mode  scores  were  correlated  against  the  accepted
known  enzyme  activities  and  the  retrieved  calibrations  have  been
used  to  predict  individual  enzyme  activities  using  leave-one-out
cross  validation  as  the  result  is  presented  in  Fig.  7.  Accepted  known
enzyme  activities  have  been  determined  by  conventional  enzyme
activity  assays  as  described  in  Section  3.3.
Both  PARAFAC  calibrations  in  Fig.  7  showed  poor  linear  cor-
relation  according  to  the  regression  coefﬁcients  R2
PL=  0.67  and
R2
PME=  0.52  for  calibration  and  R2
PL=  0.48  and  R2
PME=  0.70  for  the
prediction  test  set  samples,  respectively.  Precision  of  both  calibra-
tions  was  rather  dissatisfying  as  it  can  be  seen  from  the  relatively
large pooled  standard  deviations  (Table  1)  or  prediction  deviations
in  Fig.  7.A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23 21
0 2 4 6 8-10-5051015
PL activity [ U]predicted PL activity [U]
0 2 4 6 8-2-10123456789
PL activ ity [U]predicted PL activity [U]
0 2 4 6 8-2-10123456789
PL activity [U]predicted PL activity [U]
0 5 10 15 20 25-10-5051015202530
PME activity [U]predicted PME activity [U]
0 5 10 15 20 25-50510152025
PME activity [U]predicted PME activity [U]
0 5 10 15 20 25-50510152025
PME activity [U]predicted PME activity [U]A) PARAFAC B) TUCKER3 C) N -PLS
Fig.  7.  PL  and  PME  calibrations  using  multiway  scores  derived  from  PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS  models.  Top:  PME,  bottom:  PL;  the  blue  points  indicate  leave-one-out
cross
 validated  calibration  samples  while  red  triangles  indicate  predictions  for  the  test  set  samples.  (For  interpretation  of  the  references  to  color  in  this  ﬁgure  legend,  the
reader
 is  referred  to  the  web  version  of  this  article.)
4.2.  Tucker
As  shown  in  Fig.  8  the  PARAFAC  loadings  for  the  kinetic  mode
are  not  very  different  from  each  other.  That  can  be  explained  by
the  fact  that  both  reaction  rates  were  changing  similarly  (close  toinitial  reaction  rate)  and  therefore  had  comparable  shape.  In  fact
this  suggested  that  the  rank  of  the  tensor  in  the  second  mode
could  be  reduced  to  one.  The  N-PLS  kinetic  mode  indicated  that
both  loading  shapes  should  indeed  be  very  similar.  A  tucker  model
with  the  rank  [212]  was  therefore  calculated.  TUCKER3  kinetic  and
Table  1
Regression
 coefﬁcients  for  calibration  and  prediction  set  samples  are  given  together  with  pooled  standard  deviation  spand  root  mean  square  error  of  prediction  RMSEP.
PARAFAC TUCKER3  N-PLS
PL  PME  PL  PME  PL  PME
R2
cal0.67  0.52  0.92  0.88  0.95  0.89
R2
pred0.48  0.70  0.96  0.89  0.96  0.89
Sp 1.10  U  1.62  U  0.26  U  1.19  U  0.24  U  1.10  U
RMSEP
 3.60  U  5.31  U  0.62  U  2.72  U  0.70  U  2.85  U22 A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23
0 2 4 6 8 10 12-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
time [min]kinetic mode
0 2 4 6 8 10 12-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
time [min]kinetic mode
0 2 4 6 8 10 12-0.4-0.3-0.2-0.100.10.20.3
time [min]kinetic modeA) PARAFAC B) TUCKER3 C) N -PLS
Fig. 8.  (A)  PARAFAC  kinetic  mode  loadings  for  both,  PL  (blue)  and  PME  (green),  (B)  TUCKER3  kinetic  mode  loading.  The  rank  in  the  TUCKER3  kinetic  mode  was  one  as  only
one
 loading resulted  from  the  analysis.  (C)  N-PLS  kinetic  mode  loadings  for  both,  PL  (blue)  and  PME  (green).  (For  interpretation  of  the  references  to  color  in  this  ﬁgure  legend,
the reader  is  referred  to  the  web  version  of  this  article.)
ﬁngerprint  mode  loadings  are  shown  in  Figs.  8B  and  6B,  respec-
tively.  The  enzyme  activity  calibrations  resulting  from  the  sample
scores are  shown  in  Fig.  7B.
The  TUCKER3  model  showed  much  better  accuracy  than  the
PARAFAC  model,  as  the  regression  coefﬁcients  were  R2
PL=  0.92  and
R2
PME=  0.88  for  calibration  samples  and  R2
PL=  0.96  and  R2
PME=  0.89
for  the  prediction  test  set  samples,  respectively.  Interestingly  the
ﬁngerprint  mode  loading  for  the  second  component  did  not  show
any  signiﬁcant  peaks  in  the  range  between  1400  and  1500  cm−1as
it  was  expected  for  PL.
4.3.  N-PLS
N-PLS  modeling  has  been  done  using  leave-one-out  cross  vali-
dation.  The  results  are  presented  in  Fig.  7C.  Regression  coefﬁcients
of  the  linear  correlations  between  the  accepted  known  enzyme
activity  and  the  predicted  values  were  R2
PL=  0.95  and  R2
PME=  0.89
for  calibration  samples  and  R2
PL=  0.96  and  R2
PME=  0.89  for  the  pre-
diction  test  set  samples,  respectively.  Kinetic  mode  and  ﬁngerprint
mode  loadings  are  presented  in  Figs.  8C  and  6C.  They  are  similar  to
the  TUCKER3  loadings  in  both  cases.
The  cross  validation  showed  that  only  one  latent  variable  was
needed  to  calibrate  the  system  for  each  enzyme,  as  one  expects
only  one  underlying  evolution  proﬁle  for  each  enzyme.  This  could
be  veriﬁed  by  the  RMSECV  value  which  did  not  decrease  for  more
than  one  latent  variable.  The  calibration  performances  of  the  N-PLScalibrations  were  comparable  to  the  TUCKER3  model  calibration
performances  (Fig.  7)  in  accuracy  and  precision  as  it  can  be  seen
from  RMSEP  values  and  pooled  standard  deviations  in  Table  1  and
Fig. 9.  The  N-PLS  ﬁngerprint  mode  loadings  were  also  more  com-
parable to  the  TUCKER3  loadings  (Fig.  6).  PARAFAC  showed  quite
some  deviations  in  that  case.
5.  Discussion
Three  multiway  models  have  been  investigated  to  determine
enzyme  activities of PL and PME  simultaneously,  namely  PARAFAC,
TUCKER3 and  N-PLS.  Kinetic  mode  loadings  as  well  as  spectral  ﬁn-
gerprint  loadings have been presented  in  Figs.  8  and  6.  While  it  was
possible to  establish  enzyme  activity  assays  using  all  three  multi-
way  methods deviations between  the  models  occurred,  especially
in  the  spectral  ﬁngerprint  mode.  In  particular  the  PARAFAC  ﬁn-
gerprint  loading of PL indicated  spectral  changes  which  were  not
present in  the  actual  spectral  evolution.  This  led  to  decrease  of  cal-
ibration  performance  in  terms  of  accuracy  and  precision  as  it  can
be  seen  in  Table  1  and  Fig.  9.  In  Fig.  9  the  pooled  standard  deviation
spof  the  calibration  samples  and  the  RMSEP  (prediction  samples)
have  been  normalized  over  the  activity  calibration  ranges  of  PL  and
PME, respectively,  to  make  them  comparable.  When  comparing
accuracy  and  precision  of  the  PARAFAC  model  with  TUCKER3  and
N-PLS  performance,  PL  clearly  performed  worse  than  PME  due  to
the  given  reasons.  Overall,  precision  and  accuracy  of  the  TUCKER3
Fig. 9.  Pooled  standard  deviation  sp(experimental  precision)  and  root  mean  square  error  of  prediction  RMSEP  (accuracy)  are  given  for  (a)  pectin  lyase  and  (b)  pectin
methyl
 esterase  comparing  the  three  multiway  models.  Both  parameters  have  been  normalized  over  calibration  range.  Accuracy  and  precision  have  been  worst  for  PARAFAC
considering
 both enzymes.  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS  performance  was  comparable.A.  Baum  et  al.  /  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  790 (2013) 14 – 23 23
model  were  comparable  to  the  N-PLS  models  which  are  generally
more  acceptable  since  they  result  from  supervised  regression.
While  N-PLS  performed  slightly  better  for  cross  validated  cali-
bration  set,  TUCKER3  was  even  a  bit  superior  when  predicting  the
test  set  (RMSEP).  However,  the  deviations  are  not  likely  to  be  sig-
niﬁcant  since  the  sample  size  was  not  big  enough  to  draw  evident
conclusions  from  it.
Nonetheless,  it  is  surprising  that  TUCKER3  performed  so  well,
even  in  comparison  to  N-PLS  since  it  is  a  non-supervised  regression
method.  This  has  clear  advantages  since  PLS  methods  may  cause
over  ﬁtting  under  certain  conditions.  This  cannot  occur  when  using
TUCKER3  (or  PARAFAC).
6.  Conclusion
The  present  study  has  shown  that  spectral  evolution  proﬁling
using  FTIR  in  combination  with  chemometric  multiway  analysis
provides  a  useful  and  feasible  approach  to  quantify  enzyme  activ-
ity of two co-acting enzymes simultaneously.  When  comparing  the
three
 multiway  models,  i.e.  PARAFAC,  TUCKER3  and  N-PLS,  mainly
TUCKER3 surprises with its  outstanding  performance.  As  both,
accuracy  and  precision  were  comparable  to  the  regression  results
from  N-PLS, although  resulting  from  an  unsupervised  analysis;  it
shows  clearly  that  TUCKER3  has  great  potential  when  analyzing
kinetic data. This  is  especially  valuable  when  PARAFAC,  as  an  alter-
native  unsupervised  analysis,  struggles  to  resolve  the  underlying
phenomena  as  it  could  be  seen  during  this  study.
The  methodology  shows  major  advantages  due  to  its  uni-
versal  applicability  which  shall  be  tested  further  in  the  near
future.  In  addition,  it  offers  the  possibility  to  be  implemented  in
high-throughput  instrumentation  which  paves  the  road  to  indus-
trial  implemented  solutions.  Since  many  enzymatic  reactions  still
rely  on  monitoring  only  one  substrate  or  product  the  here  pre-
sented  approach  enables  much  better  observation  of  the  whole
reaction  pattern.  This  is  particularly  important  when  enzyme  kinet-
ics  is  to  be  investigated  on  genuine  substrates  where  two  (or
more)  enzymes  act  concerted  on  the  same  substrate.  At  present
those  reactions  can  hardly  be  monitored  by  univariate  measure-
ment  principles  as  they  result  in  very  complex  reaction  patterns.
Time-resolved  multivariate  analysis  as  well  as  FTIR  spectroscopy
therefore  inaugurates  new  possibilities  to  monitor  such  reactions
to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  their  complex  underlying  nature.Acknowledgements
This work  was  partially  ﬁnanced  by  the  7th  Framework  Pro-
gram  via  the  Marie  Curie  Initial  Training  Network,  LeanGreenFood
(EU-ITN  238084).  Further  acknowledgement  shall  be  given  to  Ras-
mus  Bro  for  the  continuous  constructive  support  during  the  project
work.
References
[1]  P.  Nagaraja,  H.  Krishna,  A.  Shivakumar,  A.K.  Shrestha,  Clin.  Biochem.  45  (2011)
139–143.
[2]  F.  Li,  C.K.  Lim,  T.J.  Peters,  Biomed.  Chromatogr.  2  (2005)  164–168.
[3]  J.  Øbro,  I.  Sørensen,  P.  Derkx,  C.T.  Madsen,  et  al.,  Proteomics  9  (2009)  1861–1868.
[4]  H.A.  Gavlighi, A.S. Meyer,  J.D.  Mikkelsen,  Biotechnol.  Lett.  35  (2013)  205–212.
[5]  C.  Adina,  F.  Florinela,  T.  Abdelmoumen,  S.  Carmen,  Rom.  Biotechnol.  Lett.  15
(2010) 5739–5744.
[6]  K.  Karmali,  A.  Karmali,  A.  Teixeira,  M.J.M.  Curto,  Anal.  Biochem.  333  (2004)
320–327.
[7] K. Karmali, A.  Karmali,  A.  Teixeira,  M.J.M.  Curto,  Anal.  Biochem.  331  (2004)
115–121.
[8]  A.  Baum,  A.S.  Meyer,  J.L.  Garcia,  M.  Egebo,  et  al.,  Anal.  Chim.  Acta  778  (2013)
1–8.
[9] L.V. Thomassen, D.M. Larsen, J.D.  Mikkelsen,  A.S.  Meyer,  Enzyme  Microb.  Tech-
nol.
 49  (2011)  289–297.
[10]  H.C.  Buchholt,  T.M.I.E.  Christensen,  B.  Fallesen,  M.-C.  Ralet,  et  al.,  Carbohydr.
Polym.  58  (2004)  149–161.
[11] R. Bro, Ph.D. Thesis, Faculty  of  Science,  University  of  Copenhagen,  1998.
[12]  R.  Bro,  Crit.  Rev.  Anal.  Chem.  36  (2006)  279–293.
[13] R.  Bro,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  38  (1997)  149–171.
[14]  H.  Abdollahi,  S.  Sajjadi,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  103  (2010)  144–151.
[15] L.R. Tucker, Contrib. Math.  Psychol.  (1964)  109–127.
[16] R.  Henrion,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  25  (1994)  1–23.
[17]  P.M.  Kroonenberg,  J.  De  Leeuw,  Psychometrika  45  (1980)  69–97.
[18]  C.  Durante,  M.  Cocchi,  M.  Grandi,  A.  Marchetti,  et  al.,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.
83 (2006) 54–65.
[19]  S.  Wold,  M.  Sjöström,  L.  Eriksson,  Chemom.  Intell.  Lab.  Syst.  58  (2001)  109–130.
[20]  R.  Bro,  J.  Chemometr.  (1996)  47–61.
[21]  M.W.  Browne,  J.  Math.  Psychol.  44  (2000)  108–132.
[22]  N.Q. Khanh, E. Ruttkowski,  K.  Leidinger,  H.  Albrecht,  M.  Gottschalk,  Gene  106
(1991) 71–77.
[23]  S.  Christgau,  L.V.  Kofod,  T.  Halkier,  L.  Andersen,  et  al.,  Biochem.  J.  319  (1996)
705–712.
[24] L.A. van den Broek, E.D.  den  Aantrekker,  A.G.  Voragen,  G.  Beldman,  et  al.,  J.  Sci.
Food Agric. 75  (1999)  167–172.
[25] R.  Edstrom,  H.  Phaff,  J.  Biol.  Chem.  239  (1964)  2403–2408.
[26]  S.-H.  Yoo,  M.L.  Fishman,  B.J.  Savary,  A.T.  Hotchkiss  Jr.,  J.  Agric.  Food  Chem.  51
(2003) 7410–7417.
[27] R. Bro,  A.K.  Smilde,  J.  Chemometr.  17  (2003)  16–33.
[28] W.T.  Federer,  Experimental  Design,  1955.