 
 
 
University of Groningen
Fatal methylene blue associated serotonin toxicity
Top, W. M.C.; Gillman, P. K.; de Langen, C. J.; Kooy, A.
Published in: 
Netherlands Journal of Medicine
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version 
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publication date: 
2014
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA): 
Top, W. M. C., Gillman, P. K., de Langen, C. J., & Kooy, A. (2014). Fatal methylene blue associated
serotonin toxicity. Netherlands Journal of Medicine , 72(3), 179-181. 
https://njmonline.nl/article.php?a=1435&d=949&i=171
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the 
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum. 
Download date: 29-08-2024179
april 2014, vol. 72, no 3© Van Zuiden Communications B.V. All rights reserved.aBstraC t
This is the first report of a fatal outcome from serotonin 
toxicity, precipitated by an interaction between methylene 
blue and venlafaxine. Methylene blue-associated serotonin 
toxicity has been described before but usually as mild toxicity. Its presentation after general anaesthesia may be 
atypical and therefore more difficult to diagnose. However, 
the syndrome is completely preventable if serotonin 
re-uptake inhibiting agents are stopped beforehand.
KeY W o r d s 
Serotonin toxicity, serotonin syndrome, methylene 
blue, methylthioninium chloride, 5HT-2A antagonism, 
hyperthermia, fatalintrod UCtion
Methylene blue (methylthioninium chloride) is, among 
other indications, used in parathyroid surgery to facilitate visualisation of the parathyroid glands.
1 It is administered 
intravenously shortly before surgery and is quickly 
absorbed into the pathological tissues with a resulting blue discoloration.
Methylene blue is commonly regarded as an inert dye, 
but has recently been shown to act as a potent reversible 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor with a strong 
preference for MAO-A inhibition.2 Because the inhibition 
constant is in the nanomolar range, even small doses of 
methylene blue (less than 1 mg/kg) may exert clinically 
relevant MAO inhibition.3 This effect is enhanced because 
methylene blue is rapidly absorbed in nervous tissue where, in rat models, it reaches brain concentrations ten 
times higher than in serum.4 
Therefore, methylene blue can lead to serious side effects. 
Because MAO inhibition increases the intrasynaptic 
l e v e l s  o f  s e r o t o n i n  ( 5 - H T ) ,  s e r o t o n i n  t o x i c i t y  i s  t o  b e  
expected, especially when methylene blue is combined with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). This report 
is the first of a fatality precipitated by probable serotonin toxicity, involving methylene blue and a SNRI.
Case reP ort
A 70-year-old female was diagnosed with primary 
hyperparathyroidism and scheduled for surgery under 
general anaesthesia. Her past medical history was 
significant for diabetes, an ischaemic CVA and a mood 
disorder for which she used venlafaxine 75 mg twice daily. 
On the morning of her surgery, the patient took her last 
dose of venlafaxine and one hour before induction of letter to t He editor
fatal methylene blue associated  
serotonin toxicity
W.M.C. Top1*, P.K. Gillman2, C.J. de Langen3, A. Kooy4
1Department of Internal Medicine, Bethesda Hospital - Care Group Leveste Middenveld, Hoogeveen, 
the Netherlands, 2PsychoTropical Research, Bucasia, Queensland, Australia, Departments of 3Neurology, 
4Internal Medicine, Bethesda Hospital - Care Group Leveste Middenveld, Hoogeveen, the Netherlands, 
*corresponding author: tel.: +31(0)528-286222, fax: +31(0)528-286299, e-mail: top.m@bethesda.nl
What was known on this topic ?
Methylene blue has been associated with severe 
central nervous system toxicity and has subsequently 
been shown to act as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
and can give rise to serotonin toxicity.
What does this add ?
Methylene blue-associated serotonin toxicity can 
be fatal and its presentation may be atypical after 
general anaesthesia. 180
april 2014, vol. 72, no 3Top et al. Fatal methylene blue associated serotonin toxicity.anaesthesia, 1 gram of methylene blue (9 mg/kg) was given 
intravenously. Anaesthesia was performed with propofol 
induction and sevoflurane maintenance and atracurium 
was used for muscle relaxation. After surgery, in the 
recovery room, the patient suddenly became agitated. 
Hypoglycaemia was ruled out and symptomatic treatment 
instituted with droperidol and midazolam. However, her 
mental status deteriorated for which the neurologist and internist were consulted. The neurological examination 
showed agitation, reduced consciousness, pupillary 
dilatation, ocular clonus, dysarthria, neuromuscular 
hyperactivity and hyperreflexia, predominantly in the 
lower limbs. The temperature was 36 °C. A relevant 
hypocalciaemia or hypercalciaemia and a haemorrhagic 
cerebrovascular accident (CT scan) could be excluded. 
Because of further neurological deterioration with profuse 
sweating, hypersalivation, opisthotonus and a bilateral 
pyramidal syndrome, the patient was transferred to 
the intensive care unit with a differential diagnosis of 
malignant neuroleptic syndrome, ischaemic brainstem 
infarction or epileptic insults with postictal status (for 
which valproic acid was started). On admission she 
had normal vital functions but after nine hours her 
temperature rose to 39 °C (figure 1) . The patient became 
respiratory and haemodynamically unstable and she 
needed intubation and mechanical ventilation. Cooling 
was instituted with infusion of 2 litres of cold fluids and 
application of a fluid filled cooling blanket. Because of 
worsening hyperthermia, dantrolene (1.8 mg/kg) was 
given. Maximum temperature was 43.1°C. Although the 
temperature decreased after dantrolene administration, 
the patient died from circulatory collapse not responding 
to volume resuscitation, inotropes and vasopressors. 
Permission for autopsy was not granted.dis CUssion
Methylene blue-associated neurotoxicity has been 
incidentally reported since 2003 and the association with 
serotonin toxicity was made in 2006. Ramsay showed that 
methylene blue is a potent MAO-A inhibitor.2 Low doses of 
0.7-1 mg/kg methylene blue intravenously may already give 
rise to clinically relevant MAO inhibition.3,5 
Two retrospective surgical series describe postoperative 
encephalopathy in 17 of 325 patients (5%) after parathyroid 
surgery with the use of methylene blue.6,7 All of them used 
SRI agents. Additionally, 15 cases have been reported with 
serotonin toxicity during the use of methylene blue.8,9 
Our patient, however, is the first fatality from probable 
serotonin toxicity described in the literature. We reported the case to the relevant authorities.
Serotonin toxicity or serotonin syndrome consists of a clinical 
trial of changed mental status, autonomic stimulation 
and neuromuscular excitation. Mono-intoxication with 
SRI agents only leads to moderate toxicity (without severe hyperthermia), for severe toxicity concurrent use of a MAO 
inhibitor is required.8 Diagnostic criteria have been proposed 
and the Hunter criteria focus on specific neuromuscular signs in the context of SRI agents, such as a rapid onset, 
hyperreflexia, tremor and inducible or spontaneous (ocular) 
clonus, with symptoms often more pronounced in the lower 
limbs.10 
Our patient showed most of these discriminating signs, 
except the rapid onset. This may be explained by her 
general anaesthesia which, in animals, induces preferential 
brain hypothermia and therefore may lead to a protracted 
course and atypical presentation of serotonin toxicity.11 
In our case, clinical symptoms arose 4.5 hours after 
administration of methylene blue, but hyperthermia was 
only observed after 15 hours.
Treatment is based on two key points: discontinuation of 
the implicated drugs and aggressive supportive therapy. 
Agitation can be controlled with benzodiazepines. 
Moderate and severe toxicity may benefit from serotonin 
receptor 2a (5-HT2A) blockade with cyproheptadine tablets 
or parenteral chlorpromazine most often cited. There 
are, however, also other potent 5-HT2A antagonists such as olanzapine and ketanserin.
12,13 Ketanserin does have 
the benefit of intravenous availability and a lack of effect on dopamine receptors which makes it a safer choice if neuroleptic malignant syndrome cannot be excluded. 
Hyperthermia should be treated with cooling therapy 
including sedation and muscle relaxation. The use of 
dantrolene in hyperthermic syndromes apart from the 
classical malignant hyperthermia is not well defined. 
Dantrolene may be of additive value because it modulates 
not only peripheral muscle ryanodine receptors but 
also cerebral ryanodine receptors. This modulates the 
dopaminergic system which may be involved in the figure 1. Temperature course
34
32
-5 4.5 6 0 79 14 20191817 11 15 2121.5384044
42
36Temperature (deg C)
Time (hrs)Methylene Blue (9 mg/kg)Agitation & Droperidol (3.75 mg iv)Admission ICUOpisthotonus
Neuromuscular 
paralysis, 
active coolingDantrolene
35.736.7 36.437.237.639.240.741.34241.943.1
42.4181
april 2014, vol. 72, no 3Top et al. Fatal methylene blue associated serotonin toxicity.pathogenesis of some centrally mediated hyperthermic 
syndromes.14 
In conclusion, serotonin toxicity is a predictable and hence 
preventable side effect if methylene blue is combined 
with SRI agents. Routine use in parathyroid surgery is not advised and there are better alternatives available for 
intraoperative localisation. If methylene blue is applied, 
stopping SRI agents five half-lives before administration of 
methylene blue is sufficient to prevent serotonin toxicity. Therefore, a drug withdrawal of two weeks is needed for 
most SSRIs and of five weeks for fluoxetine. 
Because of the wide use of SRI agents, the existence of other indications for methylene blue outside parathyroid 
surgery (table 1)  and the unawareness of the diagnosis of 
serotonin toxicity in general, we think the real prevalence 
of methylene blue-induced serotonin toxicity is greater than 
reported and needs clinical attention.referen Ces
1. Dudley NE. Methylene blue for rapid identification of the parathyroids. 
Br Med J. 1971;3:680-1. 
2. Ramsay RR, Dunford C, Gillman PK. Methylene blue and serotonin 
toxicity: inhibition of monoamine oxidase A (MAO A) confirms a 
theoretical prediction. Br J Pharmacol. 2007;152:946-51. 
3. Schwiebert C, Irving C, Gillman PK. Small doses of methylene blue, 
previously considered safe, can precipitate serotonin toxicity. Anaesthesia. 
2009;64:924[single page] 
4. Peter C, Hongwan D, Kupfer A, Lauterburg BH. Pharmacokinetics and 
organ distribution of intravenous and oral methylene blue. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2000;56:247-50. 
5. McDonnell AM, Rybak I, Wadleigh M, Fisher DC. Suspected serotonin 
syndrome in a patient being treated with methylene blue for ifosfamide 
encephalopathy. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2012 doi: 10.1177/1078155211433231
6. Sweet G, Standiford SB. Methylene-blue-associated encephalopathy. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2007;204:454-8. 
7. Kartha SS, Chacko CE, Bumpous JM, Fleming M, Lentsch EJ, Flynn MB. 
Toxic metabolic encephalopathy after parathyroidectomy with methylene 
blue localization. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006;135:765-8. 
8. Gillman PK. CNS toxicity involving methylene blue: the exemplar for 
understanding and predicting drug interactions that precipitate serotonin 
toxicity. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25:429-36. 
9. Heritier Barras AC, Walder B, Seeck M. Serotonin syndrome following 
Methylene Blue infusion: a rare complication of antidepressant therapy. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010;81:1412-3. 
10. Dunkley EJ, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, Dawson AH, Whyte IM. The Hunter 
Serotonin Toxicity Criteria: simple and accurate diagnostic decision rules 
for serotonin toxicity. QJM. 2003;96:635-42. 
11. Kiyatkin EA, Brown PL. Brain and body temperature homeostasis during 
sodium pentobarbital anesthesia with and without body warming in rats. 
Physiol Behav. 2005;84:563-70. 
12. Boddy R, Dowsett R, Jeganathan D. Sublingual Olanzapine for the 
Treatment of Serotonin Syndrome. Clinical Toxicology. 2006;44:439-40. 
13. Catafau AM, Danus M, Bullich S, et al. Characterization of the SPECT 
5-HT2A receptor ligand 123I-R91150 in healthy volunteers: part 
2--ketanserin displacement. J Nucl Med. 2006;47:929-37.
14. Oyamada T, Hayashi T, Kagaya A, Yokota N, Yamawaki S, Effect of 
dantrolene on K+- and caffeine induced dopamine release in rat striatum 
assessed by in vivo microdialysis Neurochem Int. 1998;32:171-6.table 1.  Clinical indications or active recruiting studies 
with the use of methylene blue
Methylene blue dose st 
reported
Methemoglobinaemias 1-2 mg/kg IV No
Ifosfamide-induced 
encephalopathy50 mg IV every four hours till symptoms resolveYes
5
Treatment of vasoplegic syndrome2 mg/kg IV No
Parathyroid imaging 3-7.5 mg/kg IV Yes
6,7
Treatment of malaria 10 mg/kg twice a day orally for three daysNo
Colonic diagnostic staining 200mg orally single gift No
PTSD treatment adjunct 260 mg orally for 6 days No
Ptsd = post-traumatic stress syndrome; st = serotonin toxicity.