DK3011_half 6/24/05 5:21 PM Page 1 
Environmental
Soil-Landscape
Modeling
Geographic Information
Technologies and PedometricsBOOKS IN SOILS, PLANTS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Editorial Board
Agricultural Engineering Robert M. Peart, University of Florida, Gainesville
Crops Mohammad Pessarakli, University of Arizona, Tucson
Environment Kenneth G. Cassman, University of Nebraska, Lincoln
Irrigation and Hydrology Donald R. Nielsen, University of California, Davis
Microbiology Jan Dirk van Elsas, Research Institute for Plant 
Protection, Wageningen, The Netherlands
Plants L. David Kuykendall, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Beltsville, Maryland
Kenneth B. Marcum, Arizona State University, Tempe
Soils Jean-Marc Bollag, Pennsylvania State University, 
University ParkTsuyoshi Miyazaki, University of Tokyo, Japan
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 1, edited by A. D. McLaren 
and G. H. Peterson
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 2, edited by A. D. McLaren and J. Skujins
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 3, edited by E. A. Paul and A. D. McLaren
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 4, edited by E. A. Paul and A. D. McLaren
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 5, edited by E. A. Paul and J. N. Ladd
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 6, edited by Jean-Marc Bollag 
and G. Stotzky
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 7, edited by G. Stotzky 
and Jean-Marc Bollag
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 8, edited by Jean-Marc Bollag 
and G. Stotzky
Soil Biochemistry, Volume 9, edited by G. Stotzky 
and Jean-Marc BollagDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 1Organic Chemicals in the Soil Environment, Volumes 1 and 2,
edited by C. A. I. Goring and J. W. Hamaker
Humic Substances in the Environment , M. Schnitzer and S. U. Khan
Microbial Life in the Soil: An Introduction , T. Hattori
Principles of Soil Chemistry , Kim H. Tan
Soil Analysis: Instrumental Techniques and Related Procedures , 
edited by Keith A. Smith
Soil Reclamation Processes: Microbiological Analyses and
Applications , edited by Robert L. Tate III and Donald A. Klein
Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation Technology , edited by Gerald H. Elkan
Soil-–Water Interactions: Mechanisms and Applications , Shingo Iwata
and Toshio Tabuchi with Benno P . Warkentin
Soil Analysis: Modern Instrumental Techniques, Second Edition , 
edited by Keith A. Smith
Soil Analysis: Physical Methods , edited by Keith A. Smith 
and Chris E. Mullins
Growth and Mineral Nutrition of Field Crops , N. K. Fageria, 
V. C. Baligar, and Charles Allan Jones
Semiarid Lands and Deserts: Soil Resource and Reclamation , 
edited by J. Skujins
Plant Roots: The Hidden Half , edited by Y oav Waisel, Amram Eshel,
and Uzi Kafkafi
Plant Biochemical Regulators , edited by Harold W. Gausman
Maximizing Crop Yields , N. K. Fageria
Transgenic Plants: Fundamentals and Applications , edited by 
Andrew Hiatt
Soil Microbial Ecology: Applications in Agricultural and Environmental
Management , edited by F . Blaine Metting, Jr.
Principles of Soil Chemistry: Second Edition , Kim H. Tan
Water Flow in Soils , edited by Tsuyoshi Miyazaki
Handbook of Plant and Crop Stress , edited by Mohammad Pessarakli
Genetic Improvement of Field Crops , edited by Gustavo A. Slafer
Agricultural Field Experiments: Design and Analysis , 
Roger G. Petersen
Environmental Soil Science, Kim H. Tan
Mechanisms of Plant Growth and Improved Productivity: Modern
Approaches , edited by Amarjit S. Basra
Selenium in the Environment , edited by W. T. Frankenberger, Jr.
and Sally Benson
Plant–Environment Interactions , edited by Robert E. Wilkinson
Handbook of Plant and Crop Physiology , edited by 
Mohammad PessarakliDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 2Handbook of Phytoalexin Metabolism and Action , edited by M. Daniel
and R. P . Purkayastha
Soil–Water Interactions: Mechanisms and Applications, Second
Edition, Revised and Expanded , Shingo Iwata, Toshio Tabuchi,
and Benno P . Warkentin
Stored-Grain Ecosystems , edited by Digvir S. Jayas, Noel D. G. White,
and William E. Muir
Agrochemicals from Natural Products , edited by C. R. A. Godfrey
Seed Development and Germination , edited by Jaime Kigel 
and Gad Galili
Nitrogen Fertilization in the Environment , edited by 
Peter Edward Bacon
Phytohormones in Soils: Microbial Production and Function , 
William T. Frankenberger, Jr., and Muhammad Arshad
Handbook of Weed Management Systems , edited by Albert E. Smith
Soil Sampling, Preparation, and Analysis , Kim H. Tan
Soil Erosion, Conservation, and Rehabilitation , edited by 
Menachem Agassi
Plant Roots: The Hidden Half, Second Edition, Revised and
Expanded , edited by Y oav Waisel, Amram Eshel, 
and Uzi Kafkafi
Photoassimilate Distribution in Plants and Crops: Source–Sink
Relationships , edited by Eli Zamski and Arthur A. Schaffer
Mass Spectrometry of Soils , edited by Thomas W. Boutton 
and Shinichi Y amasaki
Handbook of Photosynthesis , edited by Mohammad Pessarakli
Chemical and Isotopic Groundwater Hydrology: The Applied
Approach, Second Edition , Revised and Expanded ,
Emanuel Mazor
Fauna in Soil Ecosystems: Recycling Processes, Nutrient Fluxes, 
and Agricultural Production , edited by Gero Benckiser
Soil and Plant Analysis in Sustainable Agriculture and Environment ,
edited by Teresa Hood and J. Benton Jones, Jr.
Seeds Handbook: Biology, Production, Processing, and Storage , 
B. B. Desai, P . M. Kotecha, and D. K. Salunkhe
Modern Soil Microbiology , edited by J. D. van Elsas, J. T. Trevors, 
and E. M. H. Wellington
Growth and Mineral Nutrition of Field Crops: Second Edition , 
N. K. Fageria, V. C. Baligar, and Charles Allan Jones
Fungal Pathogenesis in Plants and Crops: Molecular Biology 
and Host Defense Mechanisms , P . Vidhyasekaran
Plant Pathogen Detection and Disease Diagnosis , P . NarayanasamyDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 3Agricultural Systems Modeling and Simulation , edited by 
Robert M. Peart and R. Bruce Curry
Agricultural Biotechnology , edited by Arie Altman
Plant–Microbe Interactions and Biological Control , edited by 
Greg J. Boland and L. David Kuykendall
Handbook of Soil Conditioners: Substances That Enhance 
the Physical Properties of Soil , edited by Arthur Wallace 
and Richard E. Terry
Environmental Chemistry of Selenium , edited by 
William T. Frankenberger, Jr., and Richard A. Engberg
Principles of Soil Chemistry: Third Edition , Revised and Expanded ,
Kim H. Tan
Sulfur in the Environment , edited by Douglas G. Maynard
Soil–Machine Interactions: A Finite Element Perspective , edited by 
Jie Shen and Radhey Lal Kushwaha
Mycotoxins in Agriculture and Food Safety , edited by Kaushal K. Sinha
and Deepak Bhatnagar
Plant Amino Acids: Biochemistry and Biotechnology , edited by 
Bijay K. Singh
Handbook of Functional Plant Ecology , edited by Francisco I. Pugnaire
and Fernando Valladares
Handbook of Plant and Crop Stress: Second Edition , Revised 
and Expanded , edited by Mohammad Pessarakli
Plant Responses to Environmental Stresses: From Phytohormones 
to Genome Reorganization , edited by H. R. Lerner
Handbook of Pest Management , edited by John R. Ruberson
Environmental Soil Science: Second Edition, Revised and Expanded,
Kim H. Tan
Microbial Endophytes , edited by Charles W. Bacon 
and James F . White, Jr.
Plant–Environment Interactions: Second Edition , edited by 
Robert E. Wilkinson
Microbial Pest Control , Sushil K. Khetan
Soil and Environmental Analysis: Physical Methods, Second Edition,
Revised and Expanded , edited by Keith A. Smith 
and Chris E. Mullins
The Rhizosphere: Biochemistry and Organic Substances at the
Soil–Plant Interface , Roberto Pinton, Zeno Varanini, 
and Paolo Nannipieri
Woody Plants and Woody Plant Management: Ecology, Safety, 
and Environmental Impact , Rodney W. Bovey
Metals in the Environment , M. N. V. PrasadDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 4Plant Pathogen Detection and Disease Diagnosis: Second Edition,
Revised and Expanded , P . Narayanasamy
Handbook of Plant and Crop Physiology: Second Edition, Revised 
and Expanded , edited by Mohammad Pessarakli
Environmental Chemistry of Arsenic , edited by 
William T. Frankenberger, Jr.
Enzymes in the Environment: Activity, Ecology, and Applications ,
edited by Richard G. Burns and Richard P . Dick
Plant Roots: The Hidden Half, Third Edition, Revised and Expanded ,
edited by Y oav Waisel, Amram Eshel, and Uzi Kafkafi
Handbook of Plant Growth: pH as the Master Variable , edited by
Zdenko Rengel
Biological Control of Major Crop Plant Diseases edited by 
Samuel S. Gnanamanickam
Pesticides in Agriculture and the Environment , edited by 
Willis B. Wheeler
Mathematical Models of Crop Growth and Yield , , Allen R. Overman 
and Richard Scholtz
Plant Biotechnology and Transgenic Plants , edited by 
Kirsi-Marja Oksman Caldentey and Wolfgang Barz
Handbook of Postharvest Technology: Cereals, Fruits, Vegetables,
Tea, and Spices , edited by Amalendu Chakraverty, 
Arun S. Mujumdar, G. S. Vijaya Raghavan, and Hosahalli S. Ramaswamy
Handbook of Soil Acidity , edited by Zdenko Rengel
Humic Matter in Soil and the Environment: Principles 
and Controversies, edited by Kim H. Tan
Molecular Host Plant Resistance to Pests , edited by S. Sadasivam 
and B. Thayumanayan
Soil and Environmental Analysis: Modern Instrumental Techniques,
Third Edition , edited by Keith A. Smith and Malcolm S. Cresser
Chemical and Isotopic Groundwater Hydrology, Third Edition, 
edited by Emanuel Mazor
Agricultural Systems Management: Optimizing Efficiency 
and Performance , edited by Robert M. Peart 
and W. David Shoup
Physiology and Biotechnology Integration for Plant Breeding , 
edited by Henry T. Nguyen and Abraham Blum
Global Water Dynamics: Shallow and Deep Groundwater: Petroleum
Hydrology: Hydrothermal Fluids, and Landscaping , , edited by
Emanuel Mazor
Principles of Soil Physics , edited by Rattan Lal
Seeds Handbook: Biology, Production, Processing, and Storage,
Second Edition , Babasaheb B. DesaiDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 5Field Sampling: Principles and Practices in Environmental Analysis,
edited by Alfred R. Conklin
Sustainable Agriculture and the International Rice-Wheat System ,
edited by Rattan Lal, Peter R. Hobbs, Norman Uphoff, and David O. Hansen
Plant Toxicology, Fourth Edition , edited by Bertold Hock 
and Erich F . Elstner
Drought and Water Crises: Science, Technology, and Management
Issues , edited by Donald A. Wilhite
Soil Sampling, Preparation, and Analysis, Second Edition , Kim H. Tan
Climate Change and Global Food Security , edited by Rattan Lal,
Norman Uphoff, B. A. Stewart, and David O. Hansen
Handbook of Photosynthesis, Second Edition , edited by 
Mohammad Pessarakli
Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling: Geographic Information
Technologies and Pedometrics , edited by Sabine Grunwald
Water Flow In Soils, Second Edition , Tsuyoshi MiyazakiDK3011_series  6/24/05  5:26 PM  Page 6DK3011_title 7/18/05 2:57 PM Page 1 
Environmental
Soil-Landscape
Modeling
Geographic Information
Technologies and Pedometrics
edited by
Sabine Grunwald
A CRC title, part of the Taylor & Francis imprint, a member of the
Taylor & Francis Group, the academic division of T&F Informa plc.Boca Raton   London   New YorkAny opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect
the views of the editor or of the University of Florida. 
 
Published in 2006 by
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
1 0987654321
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-8247-2389-9 (Hardcover) 
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-8247-2389-7 (Hardcover) 
Library of Congress Card Number 2005050562
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material is
quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable effortshave been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot assume
responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com
(http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 222 Rosewood Drive,Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration
for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate
system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only
for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cata loging-in-Publication Data
Environmental soil-landscape modeling : geographic information technologies and pedometrics / 
edited by Sabine Grunwald.
p. cm. -- (Books in soils, plants, and the environment)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8247-2389-9 (alk. paper)
1. Soils--Environmental aspects--Computer simulation. 2. Geographic information systems. I. 
Grunwald, Sabine. II. Books in soils, plants, and the environment (Taylor & Francis)
S596.E58 2005
631.4'01'13--dc22 2005050562
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.comTaylor & Francis Group 
is the Academic Division of T&F Informa plc.DK3011_Discl.fm  Page 1  Friday, July 29, 2005  11:39 AM 
Foreword 
As with all natural sciences, the aim of soil science is to understand the func-
tioning of the natural world, in this case the soil. Soil scientists want to be ableto explain how soil has been formed, how it evolves, how it interacts with theother geospheres, and how and why it varies in space and time. To answer thesefundamental questions, pedologists have developed a mental model of how soilsare formed from their parent material in a particular climate over time. Thismental model entails a system of relationships that describe how geology andclimate interact with tectonics and geomorphology, by erosion, sedimentation,surface and subsurface ﬂow, in ﬁltration, weathering, soil–plant interaction,
organic matter decomposition, pedoturbation, and so on. Under the in ﬂuence of
all these processes, a soil-landscape emerges and evolves.
The development of a model of soil-landscape formation is a major under-
taking. The ﬁrst efforts date back to more than a century ago, when the Russian
pedologist V .V . Dokuchaev introduced the state factor equation. Since then, manyextensions and re ﬁnements to the original formulation have been made, but none
of these justify the claim that the mental model of soil-landscape formation hasbeen made operational. The pedological literature presents us with quasi-mathe-matical equations in which the soil is represented as a function of the soil-formingfactors, but the details of this function have only partially been revealed. We mayknow how the various processes work in principle; we may know whether feed-backs in the system are positive, negative, or absent; we may know the relativeimportance of the various processes in a given situation; but all of this knowledgeis only available in a conceptual or descriptive form. So far, we have not succeededin building a generic, quantitative, reproducible model that predicts the soil fromits controlling factors in a satisfactory way.
Why have we not managed to do so? First and foremost, this is because the
soil-landscape system is extremely complex. We do not yet suf ﬁciently under-
stand some of the mechanisms involved in soil-landscape formation and devel-opment. We also lack the means to observe the soil with suf ﬁcient resolution
and accuracy. Finally, we have long lacked the tools and computational powerto construct and apply detailed, high-resolution, quantitative soil-landscape mod-els. However, recent developments in soil science and other disciplines haveenabled us to overcome many of these impediments. For example, many inno-vative measurement techniques have been developed that allow us to observe thebehavior of the soil in a way that was not previously possible. These techniquesinclude spectromicroscopy, microarray technology, dielectric methods, and dif-fuse re ﬂectance spectroscopy. Computational power continues to double every
18 months. Geographic information systems continue to extend their function- 
ality with new capabilities, such as three-dimensional visualization and spatially
distributed dynamic modeling. Also, many new mathematical and statisticalanalysis and modeling approaches have appeared from which the developmentof predictive soil-landscape models can bene ﬁt greatly. Examples are spatial
stochastic simulation, wavelets, multiscale modeling, and space–time geostatis-tics. Many of these techniques are being developed in an active subdiscipline ofsoil science known as pedometrics, which may be characterized as the part ofsoil science that aims to develop and apply mathematical and statistical methodsfor the study of the distribution and genesis of soils.
These are exciting times for soil science. Many developments are taking place
on numerous fronts. These developments are relevant to soil-landscape modeling
and yield favorable conditions for true progress in soil-landscape modeling. But
how do we keep track of the many developments and their potential for soil-landscape modeling? This book provides a solution.
This book presents the latest methodological developments in soil-landscape
modeling. It provides a cross-section of many recently developed measurementtools, as well as computer-related and pedometric techniques that are instrumentalfor soil-landscape modeling. It also contains in-depth reviews of the history ofsoil-landscape modeling, thus presenting views from soil geography, soil genesis,and soil geomorphology. I consider this one of the strong points of this book.Quantitative soil-landscape modeling will only be successful if it is a joint venturebetween various disciplines within soil science, notably soil geography, soilgenesis, and pedometrics. It is reassuring to see work from reputable soil scientistswith such diverse backgrounds in soil science united in this book.
The editor is not only very experienced in environmental soil-landscape
modeling, but she also has a clear overview of the entire ﬁeld. Through her choice
of authors and subjects, Sabine Grunwald has created a comprehensive and well-balanced book. I am con ﬁdent that it will be a stimulus and source of inspiration
for all soil scientists working on the development of an operational model of soil-landscape evolution. 
Gerard B.M. Heuvelink 
Wageningen 
The Editor 
Sabine Grunwald 
 is an assistant professor in the Soil and Water Science Depart-
ment, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gaines-ville, U.S.A., where she teaches geographic information systems (GISs) and soil-landscape modeling. Dr. Grunwald received a Master of Science (1992) and Ph.D.(1996) in environmental science (Faculty of Agriculture) from the Justus vonLiebig University, Giessen, Germany. She is the current vice chair of the Com-mission 1.5 Pedometrics of the International Union of Soil Sciences. Her researchfocuses on GIS and remote sensing applications to assess the impact of land usemanagement on soil and water quality; the application of statistical and geostatis-tical methods for the purpose of analyzing soils distribution, variability, proper-ties, and behavior (pedometrics); and the development of quantitative spatiallyexplicit models to assess environmental quality (environmetrics). 
Contributors 
Denis Allard 
Institut National de la Recherche 
Agronomique (INRA)
Unité de BiométrieDomaine Saint PaulSite AgroparcAvignon, France 
Richard W. Arnold (Retired) 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA)
Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (NRCS)
Washington, D.C., U.S.A. 
Thomas F.A. Bishop 
Biomathematics and Bioinformatics 
Division
Rothmasted ResearchHarpenden, Hertfordshire, U.K. 
David J. Brown 
Montana State UniversityBozeman, Montana, U.S.A. 
Jean-Paul Chilès 
École des Mines de ParisCentre de GéostatistiqueFontainebleau, France 
Sabine Grunwald 
Soil and Water Science DepartmentUniversity of FloridaGainesville, Florida, U.S.A. 
Gerard B.M. Heuvelink 
Soil Science CentreWageningen University and Research 
Centre
Wageningen, The Netherlands 
Sanjay Lamsal 
Soil and Water Science DepartmentUniversity of FloridaGainesville, Florida, U.S.A. 
R. Murray Lark 
Biomathematics and Bioinformatics 
Division
Rothamsted Research Harpenden, Hertfordshire, U.K. 
Budiman Minasny 
Faculty of Agriculture, Food and 
Natural Resources
The University of SydneyNew South Wales, Australia 
Margaret A. Oliver 
Department of Soil ScienceThe University of ReadingReading, U.K. 
Carolyn G. Olson 
Soil Survey DivisionUSDA-NRCSWashington, D.C., U.S.A. 
Jeroen M. Schoorl 
Laboratory of Soil Science and Geology
Department of Environmental SciencesWageningen University and Research 
Centre
Wageningen, The Netherlands 
Scot E. Smith 
School of Forest Resources and 
Conservation
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, U.S.A. 
Judith J.J.C. Snepvangers 
Netherlands Institute for Applied 
Geosciences
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Ingrid van Cleemput 
Department of Soil Management and 
Soil Care
Ghent UniversityGhent, Belgium 
Marc van Meirvenne 
Department of Soil Management and 
Soil Care
Ghent UniversityGhent, Belgium 
Antonie Veldkamp 
Laboratory of Soil Science and GeologyDepartment of Environmental SciencesWageningen University and Research 
Centre
Wageningen, The Netherlands 
Richard Webster 
Rothamsted ResearchHarpenden, Hertfordshire, U.K. 
Richard P. Wolkowski 
Department of Soil ScienceUniversity of Wisconsin–MadisonMadison, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 
Ruifeng Xu 
Department of Soil ScienceUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 
Wei Yue 
Department of Soil ScienceUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A.  
A.-Xing Zhu 
State Key Laboratory of Resources and 
Environmental Information Systems
Institute of Geographical Sciences and 
Natural Resources Research
Chinese Academy of SciencesBeijing, ChinaandDepartment of GeographyUniversity of Wisconsin–MadisonMadison, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 
Jun Zhu 
Department of Soil ScienceUniversity of Wisconsin–MadisonMadison, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 
Contents 
SECTION I History and Trends in Soil-Landscape 
Modeling 
Chapter 1 
What Do We Really Know about the Space–Time Continuum
of Soil-Landscapes? .............................................................................3 
Sabine Grunwald 
Chapter 2 
Soil Survey and Soil Classi ﬁcation ...................................................37 
Richard W. Arnold (Retired) 
Chapter 3 
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling ....................61 
David J. Brown 
Chapter 4  
Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models.....................................105 
Carolyn G. Olson 
SECTION II Collection of Soil-Landscape Datasets 
Chapter 5 
The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology
on Soil-Landscape Modeling...........................................................127 
Sabine Grunwald and Sanjay Lamsal 
Chapter 6 
Topographic Mapping ......................................................................155 
Scot E. Smith 
SECTION III Pedometrics 
Chapter 7 
Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential 
and Uncertainty ................................................................................185 
Thomas F .A. Bishop and Budiman Minasny 
Chapter 8 
Fuzzy Logic Models ........................................................................215 
A.-Xing Zhu 
Chapter 9 
Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions..............241 
Richard Webster and Margaret A. Oliver 
Chapter 10 
Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations .........................................289 
Jean-Paul Chilès and Denis Allard 
Chapter 11 
Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at
Different Scales................................................................................323 
Marc van Meirvenne and Ingrid van Cleemput 
Chapter 12 
Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets......................343 
R. Murray Lark 
Chapter 13 
Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scienti ﬁc
Visualization of Soil-Landscapes.....................................................373 
Sabine Grunwald 
Chapter 14 
On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties..............................393 
Jun Zhu, Richard P . Wolkowski, Wei Yue, and Ruifeng Xu 
Chapter 15 
Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling.................................417 
Jeroen M. Schoorl and Antonie Veldkamp 
Chapter 16 
Space–Time Geostatistics ................................................................437 
Gerard B.M. Heuvelink and Judith J.J.C. Snepvangers 
Index 
......................................................................................................................453 
Section I 
History and Trends in 
Soil-Landscape Modeling 
3 
1 
What Do We Really 
Know about the Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes? 
Sabine Grunwald 
CONTENTS 
Abstract .................................................................................................................4
1.1 Introduction ...............................................................................................41.2 Philosophical Perspectives of Soil-Landscapes........................................51.3 What Are Soils, Landscapes, and Soil-Landscapes?................................61.4 Geographic Space .....................................................................................7
1.4.1 Crisp Soil Map Unit Model ......................................................71.4.2 Continuous Field (Pixel Model) ...............................................91.4.3 Two-Dimensional vs. Three-Dimensional
Geographic Space......................................................................9
1.5 Attribute Space........................................................................................101.6 Pedometrics .............................................................................................14
1.6.1 Jenny’s Soil Factorial Model ..................................................161.6.2 Catena Model ..........................................................................181.6.3 Prediction of a Soil Attribute from Other Soil
Attributes .................................................................................19
1.6.4 Soil Classi ﬁcation Models ......................................................20
1.6.5 Geospatial Models...................................................................221.6.6 Multivariate Geospatial Models..............................................241.6.7 Space–Time Models ................................................................26
1.7 Critical Remarks .....................................................................................29Acknowledgments ...............................................................................................31References ...........................................................................................................31 
4 
Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling 
ABSTRACT 
Growing concerns about environmental quality, degradation of ecosystems,
aforestation, and human-induced erosion and pollution lead to the necessity of
a holistic perception of soil-landscapes. From this viewpoint, soils are viewedas part of an ecosystem, stressing their important functions as buffers interfacingland use activities and water resources. Numerous qualitative and quantitativemethods have been proposed to study the distribution, behavior, and genesis ofsoils. Environmental soil-landscape modeling is a science devoted to under-standing the spatial distribution of soils and coevolving landscapes as part ofecosystems that change dynamically through time. There are slow but persistentshifts from qualitative to quantitative soil-landscape modeling providing digital,accurate, precise, and nonbiased information about soils. The philosophicalsoil-landscape paradigms rooted in empiricism, which emerged in the early20th century, are still valid, and in fact, they form the cornerstone to recon-structing soil-landscapes with pedometrics. In this chapter an overview ofholistic soil-landscape modeling techniques is given that integrates numerousenvironmental factors. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Soils vary in geographic space and through time. They are complex and dif ﬁcult
to observe. Yaloon 
1  
asked a provoking question: “Is soil just dirt, too commonplace
to study?” This textbook proves the opposite is true. There has been a multitudeof research resulting in a variety of conceptual, qualitative, and quantitative soil-landscape models. This textbook covers the history and concepts of soil-landscapemodeling. Emerging geographic information technologies and their impact onsoil-landscape modeling are given special attention. We introduce numerouspedometrical techniques to study the distribution, behavior, and genesis of soils.In this chapter relevant terminology is introduced and an overview of soil-land-scape methodology provided.
Soils are interrelated with surface attributes (e.g., topographic attributes) and
aboveground attributes (e.g., land cover and land use), and they interact dynam-ically with the lithosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere, collectivelyforming the pedosphere. The functions and relevance of soils include (1) produc-tion of food and ﬁber, (2) absorbance, storage, and release of water, (3) geomem-
brance ﬁltering and buffering solutes, (4) habitat for biota, (5) foundations for
housing, transportation, and engineering structures, and (6) cultural and aestheticpleasure. Soils can be viewed as functional units that are used for multiplepurposes (e.g., precision agriculture, urban development, recreation, etc.) by mul-tiple users. Understanding the spatial and temporal distribution of soils and soilcharacteristics is a prerequisite for optimizing economic pro ﬁts while minimizing
adverse impacts on soil and water quality. Environmental soil-landscape modelingis a science devoted to understanding the spatial distribution of soils and coevolv-ing landscapes as part of ecosystems that change dynamically through time. 
The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 
5 
1.2 PHILOSOPHICAL PERSPECTIVES OF 
SOIL-LANDSCAPES 
Perspectives of soil-landscapes are diverse and change over time. Passmore 
2 
discussed the contrasting attitudes of man toward nature and soils. Early Stoic
(Greek)-Christian doctrine assumed that “everything is made for man’s sake.”Aristotle argues that “plants are created for the sake of animals and the animalsfor the sake of men” and that “nature is at its best when it ful ﬁlls men’s needs.
So to perfect nature is to humanize it — to make it more useful for men’spurposes.” 
3 
 Kant points out that “man’s relationship with nature is not subject to
moral census.” 
4 
 Descartes’ radical philosophy suggests that “men should render
themselves the masters and possessors of nature.” 
2 
 There is a strong Judeo-
Christian Western tradition that man is free to deal with nature as he pleases,since it exists only for his sake. Soils are viewed as substrate to produce foodand are perceived as an object for mankind, purely a matter of utility. Thismetaphysical belief has lead to widespread degradation of soil-landscapes, someof which have subsequently been deemed inhabitable for many generations.
Philosophies contrasting such self-centered views of soil-landscapes empha-
size stewardship and cooperation with nature and perceive humans as managersor stewards of soil-landscapes. Socrates and Plato pointed out that it is humanity’sresponsibility to care for the welfare of resources. 
5 
 There are different traditions
of stewardship. One perceives humans as part of soil-landscapes seeking harmo-nized coexistence, whereas the other tradition perceives man as steward “todevelop land and to perfect it.” 
2 
 Eastern philosophies emphasize stewardship in
which men should take all responsible steps not to destroy any living beings ornonliving objects. Here the interdependence between everything that exists isstressed. While some deemphasize the responsibility of humans by putting thefuture of nature and soils in God’s hands, others emphasize a deep spiritualconcern for wildlife, soils, and water resources.
Growing concerns about environmental quality, degradation of ecosystems,
aforestation, and human-induced erosion and pollution lead to the necessity of aholistic perception of soil-landscapes. From this viewpoint, soils are viewed aspart of an ecosystem, stressing their important functions as buffers interfacingland use activities and water resources. More radical conservationists emphasizethe protection of natural ecosystems, excluding any kind of human interference.Others seek a balanced ecosystem where humans are an integral part of the systemwilling to make genuine sacri ﬁces to protect natural soil-landscapes. The ability
to preserve the diversity of vegetation, habitats, and wildlife species is dependenton the preservation of pedodiversity. Shifting human-centered to enviro-centeredperspectives is vital for conservation management.
Soil scientists have focused on two contrasting concepts to study soil-land-
scapes, both of which are equally important. 
6 
 The reductionist approach promotes
ever more detailed studies of soil characteristics and pedological processesderived from ﬁeld investigations in pedons, along transects and laboratory studies.
The other approach develops and enunciates an integrative, unifying point of view 
6 
Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling 
encompassing and integrating previous observations and results. With the advent
of geographic information systems (GIS), the latter approach has focused onintegrating a variety of environmental factors that correlate with soil attributes.
McKenzie and Austin 
7 
 outlined this concept of environmental correlation pre-
dicting soil characteristics (e.g., clay content) with more readily observed envi-ronmental variables (e.g., terrain attributes) as predictors. 
1.3 WHAT ARE SOILS, LANDSCAPES, AND SOIL-
LANDSCAPES? 
Soil 
 is the material that forms at the interface of the atmosphere and the lithosphere
that is capable of supporting plants. It is the unconsolidated mineral or organicmaterial on the surface of the Earth that has been subjected to and shows effectsof genetic and environmental factors of climate (including water and temperatureeffects), macro- and microorganisms, conditioned by relief, acting on parentmaterial over a period of time. 
8,9 
 A  
landscape 
 is the fundamental trait of a speci ﬁc
geographic area, including its biological composition, physical environment, andanthropogenic or social patterns. 
10 
 Ruhe 
11 
 deﬁnes landscape from a geomorpho-
logic perspective as “a collection of spatially related, natural landforms, usuallythe collective land surface that the eye can comprehend in a single view.”  
Land 
is the entire complex of surface and near-surface attributes of the solid portionof the surface of the Earth, which are signi ﬁcant to human activities. 
8 
 All land
and water resource data have a spatial and temporal dimension with variablescale, extent, and resolution. Commonly, soil-landscape datasets are managed insoil information systems (SISs) and analyzed using GISs.
The pedon serves as the mapping unit for soil taxonomic classi ﬁcations and
site-speci ﬁc pedological studies focusing on pro ﬁle dynamics. In contrast, sus-
tainable land resource management is focused on the landscape-scale balancingeconomic pro ﬁtability, stewardship of natural resources, and social equity con-
cerned with the quality of life. 
10 
 Sustainable management is important to main-
tain the functions of a soil-landscape for economic, recreational, biological,cultural, aesthetic, and social values. An integrative, synergistic ecosystemapproach is rooted in understanding system components and behavior, includingsoils. Deductive science generated extensive knowledge of how individual partsfunction (e.g., pedological processes). Yet understanding how the parts interactas a whole requires a holistic perspective. Soil-landscape modeling attempts tointegrate soils, parent material, topography, land use and land cover, and humanactivities. The goal of soil-landscape modeling is to gain an understanding ofthe spatial distribution of soil attributes, characteristics of soils, and their behav-ior through time. Soil-landscapes can be de ﬁned in terms of (1) geomorphology
and topography, the form and shape of a landscape; (2) land cover, the above-ground characteristics; (3) land use, the functions that a landscape performs; (4)soil attributes, the belowground characteristics; and (5) genesis, the formationof soil attributes due to pedological processes. According to Dijkerman, 
12 
 there 
The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 
7 
are various, sometimes overlapping purposes of soil maps and soil-landscape
models, including:
• Observational — used to sample subsets of a population of soil bodies
or to study their behavior
• Experimental — used to study the effect of controlled situations• Descriptive — used to characterize the system under study• Explanatory — used to understand relationships and behavior of the
soil system
• Predictive — used to forecast relationships, attributes, and behavior of
the soil system
• Scale — used to represent the system• Idealized — used to simplify the system• Analog — used to extrapolate and transfer knowledge 
1.4 GEOGRAPHIC SPACE 
Soils are natural bodies with attributes varying continuously in the space–time
continuum across landscapes. 
13 
 Soil attributes are variable in the horizontal and
vertical dimension, forming three-dimensional soil bodies that change over timedue to pedological processes. 
14 
 Commonly, soil attributes are anisotropic verti-
cally and laterally. Soils coevolve through the interaction of physical and chemicalweathering, erosion and deposition, lateral and vertical transport processes, andbiological processes. To capture changes of soil attributes, models have beendeveloped that segregate the soil continuum. 
15 
 Such models are formal abstrac-
tions of soil-landscape reality that formalize how geographic space is discretizedinto smaller spatial units for analysis and communication. Generally, it is neces-sary to divide geographic space into discrete spatial units, and the resultingtessellation is taken as a reasonable approximation of reality at the level ofresolution under consideration. There are two types of spatial discretization meth-ods used for soil-landscape modeling: (1) the crisp soil map unit model and (2)the continuous- ﬁeld or pixel (square grid cell, raster) model. 
1.4.1 C 
RISP 
 S 
OIL 
 M 
AP 
 U 
NIT 
 M 
ODEL 
This model has its roots in empiric observations combined with 19th-century
biological taxonomy and practice in geological survey. Traditional soil-landscapemodels use crisp map units, which are de ﬁned by abrupt changes from one map
unit to the other. 
16,17 
 Each soil map unit is associated with a representative soil
attribute set. 
18 
 Horizons of these soil map units differ from adjacent and geneti-
cally related layers in physical, chemical, and biological attributes such as texture,structure, color, soil organic matter, or degree of acidity. As such, soil horizonsand pro ﬁles of these attributes correspond to discrete, sharply delineated (crisp)
units, which are assumed to be internally uniform. A soil surveyor uses his tacitknowledge, intuition, and understanding of soils to delineate these crisp map 
8 
Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling 
units. Factors such as topography, geology, geomorphology, vegetation, and his-
toric information guide the identi ﬁcation of these so-called natural breaks, which
become map unit boundaries. Variation within the classes is acknowledged, butis described qualitatively and usually in vague terms. The rationale for employinga crisp model is that if the variation within the classes is less than that in a soilregion at large, then using the class mean of the soil attributes of interest as apredictor should be more precise than the regional mean. The model only hasmerit if the variance within the classes is less than the total variance.
Peuquet, 
19 
 Goodchild et al., 
20 
 and Burrough and McDonnell 
21 
 de ﬁne crisp
mapping units as  
entities 
 or  
objects 
 (Figure 1.1). These objects represent soil-
landscape phenomena that are de ﬁned by the geographic location (where things
are) and its attributes (what is present). On choropleth soil maps, the geographiclocations of soils are de ﬁned in reference to other geographic features (e.g., other
soils or landmarks) within geographic space. Crisp sets allow only binary mem-bership functions (i.e., true or false); an individual is a member or is not a memberof any given set as de ﬁned by exact limits. McBratney and de Gruijter 
22 
 and
Heuvelink and Webster 
23 
 pointed out that crisp sets do not allow ambiguities, and
they are too in ﬂexible to take into account genuine uncertainty. Though the crisp
data model is practical, it ignores spatial variation in both soil-forming processesand in the resulting soils. 
24 
 The validity of the crisp soil model has been questioned
and critically discussed repeatedly. 
25–28 
 Butler 
29 
 emphasized that successful clas-
siﬁcation of soils at the local level must represent what can be mapped at the
chosen scale and is determined by the local landscape. Major drawbacks of thecrisp soil model are that it ignores spatial autocorrelation within and across mapunits and assumes the same variation of attributes across space. Commonly, SISsuch as the State Soil Geographic (STATSGO) Database, Soil Survey Geographic(SSURGO) Database, and Soil Data Mart (SDM) adopt the crisp soil map unitconcept. 
30 
 Thousands of soil maps exist that are based on this model. 
FIGURE 1.1 
Models to segregate geographic and attribute space.2D 3D
Dimension
Segregation of 
geographic space
Continuous field (based on voxels)
Crisp map units Continuous fields
(based on pixels) 
Segregation of 
attribute spacecategorical, ordinal, interval, continuous, fuzzy 
The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 
9 
1.4.2 C 
ONTINUOUS 
 F 
IELD 
 (P 
IXEL 
 M 
ODEL 
) 
The continuous- ﬁeld model displays the real world as a set of pixels or voxels
(volume cells) (Figure 1.1). Burrough and McDonnell 
21 
 argue that the continuous-
ﬁeld model is adequate for modeling natural phenomena that do not show obvious
boundaries (e.g., soils). This spatial model has the potential to describe the gradualchange of soil attributes formed by a variety of pedological processes within adomain. The spatial resolution or pixel size depends on the spatial variability ofsoil attributes. Geostatistical techniques have been applied in numerous studiesto interpolate point observations and construct soil attribute pixel maps.
17,31,32  It
is challenging to optimize the density and spatial distribution of observationsacross a domain to characterize soil-landscape reality without knowing the under-lying spatial variability of soil attributes and operating pedological processes. Ifthe spatial resolution of the continuous- ﬁeld model is ﬁner than the crisp soil
map units, the former provides more detailed site-speci ﬁc information. Compar-
isons between crisp and continuous pixel-based soil models have been presentedby Heuvelink and Huisman
33 and Hengl.34 In order to bridge the gap between the
conventional crisp and the continuous- ﬁeld model, several models have been
proposed to deal with the situation in which there are discrete (abrupt) andcontinuous (gradual) spatial variations in the same area.
16,33,35–39
1.4.3 T WO-DIMENSIONAL  VS. THREE-DIMENSIONAL  
GEOGRAPHIC  SPACE
Brady and Weil40 point out that soils are three-dimensional bodies. However, soils
are commonly represented in the form of two-dimensional maps.41,42 In crisp soil
maps, each map unit is associated with attribute tables that store the soil attributedatasets and metadata (reports) that describe the soil attributes. In pixel-basedsoil maps, each grid cell carries the code of a speci ﬁc soil attribute value.
Commonly, different grid themes are used to represent different soil attributes.Other soil-landscape representations use a 2 1/2-D design superimposing landuse, soil maps, or other thematic maps over a digital elevation model (DEM) toproduce a three-dimensional view.
43,44 Since this technique describes patterns on
two-dimensional landscape surfaces rather than the spatial distribution of subsur-face attributes (e.g., soil texture, soil horizons), it fails to address three-dimen-sional soil-landscape reality. McSweeney et al.
45 pointed out that two-dimensional
soil models are lacking the ability to address three-dimensional soil-landscapereality. Only recently have three-dimensional reconstruction and scienti ﬁc visu-
alization techniques emerged to produce three-dimensional soil-landscape mod-els. For example, the Cooperative Research Center for Landscape Evolution andMineral Exploration (CRCLEME) constructed a three-dimensional regolithmodel of the Temora study area in Central New South Wales, Australia.
46 A three-
dimensional soil horizon model in a Swiss ﬂoodplain was created by Mendonça
Santos et al.47 using a quadratic ﬁnite-element method. Sirakov and Muge48
developed a prototype three-dimensional Subsurface Objects Reconstruction and10 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Visualization System (3D SORS) in which two-dimensional planes are used to
assemble three-dimensional subsurface objects. Grunwald et al.14 presented three-
dimensional soil-landscape models at different scales for sites in southern Wis-consin (Figure 1.2). Geographic reconstruction and scienti ﬁc visualization tech-
niques suitable for soil-landscape modeling were presented by Grunwald andBarak.
49 While complex, domain-speci ﬁc prototype three-dimensional soil-land-
scape models have been developed, they have not been widely adopted yet forthe following reasons: (1) input data requirements, (2) models are labor intensiveto produce, requiring specialized software and programming skills, (3) lack oftraining and education, (4) preference of users for traditional crisp soil maps, and(5) lack of realistic abstraction of soil-landscapes.
1.5 ATTRIBUTE SPACE
Soil-landscape models employ different concepts to segregate attribute space.Some models focus on soil attributes while others aggregate soil attributes to formsoil classes or taxa. The latter ones have been adopted to develop soil taxonomiesin many different countries.
50 The rationale for adopting soil classes is that the
soil cover can hardly be apprehended in its entirety. Hence, a subdivision isrequired in order to understand the different components of this continuum andto understand the relationships with the factors of their formation. There areproblems with this approach, such as the establishment and ordering of classesand the ranking according to the importance of soil characteristics from high tolow hierarchical levels, which vary widely among different soil taxonomies. TheFIGURE 1.2 Elevation and soil data were used to create a three-dimensional soil-landscape
model for a site in southern Wisconsin. (Reprinted from S. Grunwald and P. Barak, Syst.
Analy. Modeling Sim., 41, 755–776, 2001.) (See color version on the accompanying CD.)
The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 11
U.S. Soil Taxonomy is a system developed using morphogenetic indicators (diag-
nostic horizons and attributes) as class criteria.18 It is one of the most detailed soil
taxonomies, which currently consists of 12 orders, 63 suborders, 319 great groups,2484 subgroups, about 8000 families, and about 19,000 soil series in the U.S.
40,51
Dudal52 pointed out that existing soil classi ﬁcation systems enabled us to
explain and characterize soil diversity in function of different sets of soil-formingfactors. However, with the increasing demand for targeted soil information relatedto speci ﬁc sites or speci ﬁc purposes (e.g., assessment of phosphorus loads, forest
management), technical soil surveys focusing on mapping of soil attributes ratherthan aggregated soil taxa are better suited. Dudal
52 stressed that due to the
availability of GIS, there is no need to provide end users with aggregated soiltaxa datasets. Burrough
53 points out that users can extract and aggregate soil
attributes from GIS and soil datasets on demand targeting a speci ﬁc application.
In short, preference is given to raw ﬁeld observations of soil attributes stored in
a GIS rather than grouping of soil attributes to form soil classes.
Traditionally, soil mapping involves the collection of soil morphological
attributes (e.g., soil texture, structure, consistency) derived from ﬁeld observations
and physical, chemical, and biological attributes derived from laboratory analyses.Often the sample support is small and samples are referred to as point observations.Such point observations made with augers or at excavated pits are labor intensiveand costly. Emerging in situ  techniques such as ground penetrating radar,
54 elec-
tromagnetic induction (EM),55,56 pro ﬁle cone penetrometers,57,58 remote sensing,59
and soil spectroscopy60 are nonintrusive and allow for rapid data collection. While
these new techniques are typically associated with greater uncertainty, they havethe capability to complement traditional auger-based ﬁeld observations.
Realistic soil-landscape reconstruction is highly dependent on soil and ancil-
lary variable collection. The following criteria impact the soil-landscape modelingprocess:
1.Attribute type : Boolean (e.g., presence of redoximorphic features —
yes or no, hydric or nonhydric soils), categorical (e.g., soil structurecategories), ordinal (e.g., drainage classes ranging from very poordrainage to excessively well-drained soil), interval (e.g., soil texture),and continuous (e.g., bulk density in mg m
–3).
2.Content of attributes :
a.Soil attributes : Describe soil characteristics.
i.Morphological, physical, chemical, and biological attributes :
Soil attributes are variable in geographic space. Soil attributeswith a short range (small spatial autocorrelation) vary at closedistances, whereas soil attributes with long range (large spatialautocorrelation) vary over long distances. The spatial autocorre-lation of attributes is domain dependent. For example, the vari-ability of a soil attribute (e.g., soil nitrogen) observed in a loesslandscape is likely to differ from the same attribute observed ina ﬂuvial landscape.12 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ii.Soil classes : Have a speci ﬁc range in one or more particular
attributes, such as texture, structure, drainage, acidity, or other.According to Wilding et al.,
61 attributes that are measured and
closely calibrated to a standard (e.g., texture, color, pH, etc.) are
commonly less variable than qualitatively assessed attributes(soil structure, consistency, porosity, root abundance, etc.).
b.Topographic attributes : Describe terrain characteristics.
i.Primary topographic attributes : Speci ﬁc geometric attributes
of the topographic surface calculated directly from a digital ele-vation model (DEM); these include slope, aspect, upslope drain-age area, maximum- ﬂow path length, pro ﬁle curvature, plan
curvature, and others.
62
ii.Secondary topographic attributes : Secondary, or compound,
attributes involve combinations of primary attributes and consti-tute physically based or empirically derived indices that cancharacterize the spatial variability of speci ﬁc processes occurring
in landscapes.
63 Examples of secondary attributes include the
topographic wetness index, stream power index, and sedimenttransport index.
c.Topographic classes : A group of topographic attributes lumped into
classes that form land surface classi ﬁcation systems. Ruhe
11 devel-
oped geomorphic slope units in a catenary way. Huggett64 catego-
rized terrain into four different basic slope shapes based on theconvexity and concavity of the terrain. Conacher and Dalrymple
65
segregated three-dimensional units of a catena resulting in the nineland surface units based on soil morphology, mobilization, andtransport of soil constituents, and redeposition of soil constituentsby overland ﬂow and through ﬂow or by gravity as mass movement.
Pennock et al.
66 segregated terrain based on curvature, ﬂow lines,
and landscape position.
d.Parent material : The unconsolidated and more or less chemically
weathered mineral or organic matter from which the solum of soilsis formed by pedogenic processes.
e.Land cover and land use : Land cover describes the coverage of the
land surface by vegetation, structures, pavement, or others. Accord-ing to Turner and Meyer,
67 land cover is the biophysical state of the
Earth’s surface. In contrast, land use describes the function that landperforms. Land use involves both the manner in which the biophys-ical attributes of the land are manipulated and the intent underlyingthat manipulation — the purpose for which the land is used.
67
f.Time : Synoptic soil sampling provides a snapshot of the character-
istics and distribution of soils within a soil mapping region. Repeatedsoil sampling (soil monitoring) provides information about soilattribute variability through time. Commonly, stable soil attributes(e.g., soil texture, particulate phosphorus) show less variation withThe Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 13
time, whereas dynamic soil attributes (e.g., soil nitrate–nitrogen, soil
temperature, water content, hydraulic conductivity, biological activ-ity, exchangeable cations) are highly variable in time.
61
3.Sample support : The volume of material or area of a sample. Obser-
vations that are made on small volumes of material (1 cm3 to a few
cubic meters), or areas of a few centimeters to a few meters, areconsidered point observations.
17
4.Geographic extent of observations : Range from the molecular sys-
tem, peds  /aggregates, horizons, pedons, polypedons (multiple pedons),
catena, to soil regions. The organization hierarchy of soil systems wasoutlined by Hoosbeek and Bryant.
68 McBratney et al.69 provide an
overview of small- and large-scale digital soil maps categorized bycartographic scale, pixel size, nominal spatial resolution, resolution loi
du quart , and extent.
5.Total number of observations : Within the soil mapping region.
6.Density of observations : Varies from sparse to exhaustive (high-den-
sity, continuous) sampling. For example, pro ﬁle cone penetrometers
collect soil attributes (e.g., penetration resistance, soil moisture) con-tinuously in small depth increments (e.g., 1 or 0.5 cm) along soilproﬁles. Satellite images provide exhaustive datasets covering large
soil mapping regions with high spatial resolutions. For example, Land-sat Enhanced Thematic Mapper (ETM) images have a grid resolutionof 30 m. Hyperspectral images, such as NASA’s Airborne Visible/Infra-red Imaging Spectrometer (A VIRIS), with 224 contiguous spectralchannels (bands), have a spatial resolution of 20 m, and IKONOSimages have a resolution of 1 m in the panchromatic and 4 m in themultispectral resolutions. In contrast, auger-based point sampling islabor intensive and costly, and often fewer observations are collectedto represent the soil-landscape.
7.Sampling design : Brus and de Gruijter
70 discuss model-based and
design-based sampling. The design-based sampling approach is rootedin classical sampling theory where sample locations are selected by apredetermined random procedure. For example, simple random sam-pling and strati ﬁed random sampling are considered design-based sam-
pling methods. Apart from measurement error, sampling is the onlysource of stochasticity considered in the design-based approach. Thisimplies that the unknown value at any given location and time isconsidered ﬁxed, not random. In the model-based approach, the soil-
forming process that has led to the ﬁeld of values of a particular
attribute in the soil mapping region is modeled as a stochastic process.This implies that the sample does not necessarily have to be selectedby a random procedure.
Sampling schemes comprise transect, random, strati ﬁed random, clustered,
targeted, and grid sampling. Ideally, for mapping and subsequent analysis, obser-14 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
vations should be located spatially distributed over the soil mapping area. Sam-
pling schemes can take prior information into account derived from qualitativeor quantitative soil maps, earlier point observations, or sampling barriers.
71
1.6 PEDOMETRICS
Soil-landscapes are complex and diverse due to pedogeomorphological andhydrological processes acting over hundreds and thousands of years. These soil-forming and -destroying processes operate simultaneously in soils, and the result-ing pro ﬁle re ﬂects the balance of these processes — present and past. The spatial
distributions of subsurface attributes and processes in natural environments oftenvary at granularities ranging from pedons, hillslopes, to regions. Reconstructingsoil-landscapes requires an interdisciplinary holistic approach. Pedometricsattempts to integrate knowledge from numerous disciplines, including soil sci-ence, statistics, and GIS (Figure 1.3). Pedometrics  is a term coined by Alex
McBratney — a neologism, derived from the Greek words pedoz  (soil) and
metron  (measurement). Pedometrics is de ﬁned as the application of mathemat-
ical and statistical methods for the study of the distribution and genesis of soils(http://www.pedometrics.org).
Quantitative models that describe soil-landscapes are rooted in conceptual
(mental) models. These conceptual soil-landscape models have currently evolvedinto complex quantitative models that utilize advanced mathematics and statistics,emerging soil mapping techniques, and computers that are capable of processinghuge multidimensional datasets. Pivotal events that shaped soil-landscape mod-eling history are summarized in Figure 1.4.
FIGURE 1.3 Pedometrics can be considered an interdisciplinary science integrating soil
science, GIScience, and statistics (available from http://www.pedometrics.org).GIScience Statistics
CartographyQuantitative methods
Soil scienceSpatial
statisticsThe Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 15FIGURE 1.4 Pivotal events that shaped soil-landscape modeling history. Time periods and placement of events are approximate. (See color ve rsion
on the accompanying CD.)
16 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Since the 1980s, a dramatic change has taken place in our thinking about the
utilization of natural resources. There has been an increased awareness of eco-system health and environmental quality, and rate of resource consumption.
72
While soil survey in its traditional role is diminishing, the need for soil informa-tion is becoming more important in terms of sustainable land management andcycling of biogeochemicals. Pedometrics and environmetrics have grown closer.Environmetrics aims at fostering the development and use of statistical and otherquantitative methods in the environmental sciences, environmental engineering,and environmental monitoring and protection. Spatially explicit, continuous, andquantitative soil-landscape data are required to assess environmental quality.
1.6.1 J ENNY’S SOIL FACTORIAL  MODEL
Soil mapping ﬁrst relied merely on the intuition of soil surveyors to read a soil-
landscape. Soil factor equations were introduced by Dokuchaev in Glinka73 and
afﬁrmed and popularized by Jenny.74,75 Jenny’s model of soil-forming factors is
rooted in previous work by Dokuchaev and describes soil as a function of climate,biological activities, topography, parent material, and time (Figure 1.5):
S = f (cl, o, r, p, t) (1.1)
where
S = soil attribute
cl = climate factor
o = organisms (biotic factor)
r = relief (topographic factor)
p = parent material
t = time
Hudson
76 discussed the two reasons for the success of the soil factorial
concept:
1. “A large number of adherents were excited by the idea that this appar-
ently simple concept could be used as the basis for accurately locatingsoil boundaries and delineating bodies of soil anywhere in the world.”
2. “There are no details. Nothing is stated, e.g., about the mechanics how
soils vary, or which attributes vary in different climates. Lacking spe-ciﬁcs it pointed the way to a wide variety of interesting problems for
practitioners to solve.”
Jenny
77 called the factors in Equation 1.1 independent variables. Indepen-
dence inherently implies that factors change without altering other soil attributes.These independent variables de ﬁne the soil system; i.e., for a given combination
of cl, o, r, p, and t, the state of the soil system is ﬁxed (only one type of soil
exists under these conditions). In this interpretation of soil-forming factors, theThe Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 17
notions of “forming” or “acting” that connoted causal relationships have been
replaced by the less ambiguous conceptions of “de ﬁning” or “describing” ( f
stands for “function of” or “dependent on”). Jenny77 pointed out that in selecting
cl, o, r, p, and t as the independent variables of the soil system, we do not assert
that these factors never enter functional relationships among themselves. But heplaced emphasis on the fact that the soil formers may vary independently andmay be obtained in a great variety of constellations, either in nature or underexperimental conditions.
Jenny’s factorial model has been adopted in numerous soil survey programs
worldwide that rely on tacit knowledge of soil surveyors. Jenny showed that therelationship between a certain soil property and a state factor can be investigatedin a region in which one state factor is dominant compared to the combinedcontributions of the other state factors. These special cases are, depending on thedominant state factor, climo-, bio-, topo-, litho-, or chronofunctions. The concep-tual factorial model Jenny developed provides the framework to develop quanti-tative descriptions of soil-landscapes.
Knowledge of the soil attributes produced by the interaction of environmental
variables (geological, topographical, climatological, and biological variables)FIGURE 1.5 (a) Jenny’s soil factorial model. (b) Pedotransfer functions without consid-
eration of spatial autocorrelation. (c) Soil classi ﬁcation model. (d) Univariate geospatial
model acknowledging spatial autocorrelation. (e) Multivariate geospatial model acknowl-edging spatial autocorrelation and covariation.cl
r o
pt
SS=f( c l ,o ,r ,p ,t )
Soil
surface
Sai
Saj123 4 … . . n
μ
μk1μk2
μk3
μk4Sx1 Sx2
Sx3Sx4Sx5
Sx6Sx7
Sx8Sxn
Sparse primary data (points)
Dense secondary data (squares)(a)
(b)
(c)(d)
(e)
Soil samples18 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
allows for the prediction of soil characteristics. The qualitative application of the
factors of the soil formation model has been, and still is, the guiding paradigmof national soil survey programs around the world. Tacit knowledge of the soil
surveyor is the basis for delineating soil boundaries. Soil surveyors use the
qualitative model of soil-forming factors for mapping soils and rely on environ-mental factors as explanatory variables (e.g., landforms, local drainage, vegeta-tion, parent material, etc.). Soil distribution is predicted on the basis of environ-mental correlation. These mental models can be complex and have considerablepredictive power, but the results are not amenable to rigorous checking, repetition,and rational criticism by others unless the survey is repeated. It is dif ﬁcult to
distinguish between evidence and interpretation in survey reports. The quanti ﬁ-
cation of soil-forming factors has been of major interest with the advent of digitalterrain modeling and emerging mapping techniques such as remote and soilsensing. For example, Pennock et al.
78 related landform element complexes to
physical (e.g., bulk density), chemical (e.g., inorganic carbon content), and bio-chemical (e.g., soil organic carbon) soil quality indicators. Hairston and Grigal
79
investigated relationships between topographic position and soil water, soil nitro-gen, and tree growth on two regional landforms in Minnesota. Osher and Buol
41
related soil attributes to parent material and landscape position in eastern Madrede Dios, Peru, using 14 soil pro ﬁles. McKenzie and Austin
7 presented a quanti-
tative approach to medium- and small-scale surveys based on soil stratigraphyand environmental correlation in the lower Macquarie Valley in Australia. Theauthors used a generalized linear model and a comprehensive set of soil attributes(e.g., soil morphological attributes, bulk density, texture, pH, electrical conduc-tivity, cation exchange capacity) to characterize the soil region. Numerous studiesshowed that topography can be easily quanti ﬁed and used successfully as a
predictor of soil attributes. In reality, it is very dif ﬁcult to assign quantitative
values to some factors, particularly parent material and the biota. Processes ofsoil formation occur over timescales of tens to thousands of years. Hence, timeis one of the factors that is very dif ﬁcult to quantify. For example, Holzhey et
al.
80 suggested that it took between 21,000 and 28,000 years to form the thick
spodic horizons in North Carolina. Morrison and Frye81 suggest that the formation
of Churchill Geosol in Nevada can be envisaged as taking about 5000 years.
1.6.2 C ATENA  MODEL
The catena82 is a fundamental concept that explains the pattern of soils on hills-
lopes. Milne82 coined the term to describe a repeating sequence of soils that occur
from the top of a hillslope to the adjacent valley bottom. The catena conceptincludes both sur ﬁcial stratigraphy and internal hillslope structure and lithology.
Milne pointed out that soil formation along a hillslope is in ﬂuenced by the parent
material and pedological processes (e.g., erosion that redistributes soil materialdownslope). The catena is de ﬁned as a sequence of soils of about the same age,
derived from similar parent material, and occurring under similar climatic condi-tions, but having different characteristics due to variation in relief and drainage.
15The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 19
Bushnell83 coined the term toposequence , which is often used synonymously with
catena; however, the original meanings are not identical. A toposequence is asequence of related soils that differ, one from the other, primarily because of
topography as a soil formation factor. It is argued that changes in soil morphology
can be mainly attributed to elevational position and local hydrology.
Huggett
64 further developed the catena concept, proposing that the basic three-
dimensional unit of the soil-landscape is the ﬁrst-order valley basin. The func-
tional boundaries of this soil-landscape are de ﬁned as the atmosphere–soil inter-
face, the weathering front at the base of the soil, and the drainage divides of thebasin. Huggett
64 pointed out that the topographic boundaries of a drainage basin
deﬁne the physical limits and directions of the basin, and thus control geomorphic
processes such as erosion, deposition, surface runoff, and lateral subsurface ﬂow.
This conceptual model emphasizes soil hydrology and functional boundaries forsoil mapping.
Sommer and Schlichting
84 presented a methodology of grouping catenas into
three major categories: (1) transformation catenas, showing no gains or losses ofthe element or soil component under study; (2) leaching catenas, with losses inat least part of the catena and no accompanying elemental gains in other parts;and (3) accumulation catenas, showing gains in at least part of the catena but nolosses elsewhere in the catena. Catenas that cover geomorphic units of distinctlydifferent ages belong to the chronocatenas, a subcategory of either the transfor-mation, leaching, or accumulation type. Though the catena concept acknowledgesthe continuum of soils along a hillslope, typically discrete entities (pedons) areidenti ﬁed and soils are segregated into crisp entities. Park et al.
85 presented a
process-based terrain characterization model for a toposequence in southern Wis-consin. Its basic proposition is that soil distribution can be most ef ﬁciently
identi ﬁed by the separation of units where similar hydrological, geomorpholog-
ical, and pedological processes occur.
1.6.3 P REDICTION  OF A SOIL ATTRIBUTE  FROM OTHER 
SOIL ATTRIBUTES
Soil-landscape modeling history was also shaped by the theory formalized by
Fisher,86 who emphasized the importance of random selection to ensure that
estimates are unbiased. This resulted in the applications of many design-basedsoil sampling schemes. First, ordination techniques, multiple discriminant anal-ysis, and other clustering and data fragmentation techniques were introduced,rooted in classical statistical theory.
Empirical observations recognized that selected soil attributes are interdepen-
dent. For example, drainage in soils is highly dependent on soil texture, soilstructure, and bulk density. These relationships between collocated soil attributescan be identi ﬁed using a training (calibration) dataset to develop pedotransfer
functions (PTFs). Wösten et al.
87 described two types of PTF, namely, class and
continuous PTFs predicting soil classes (e.g., textural classes, horizons) andcontinuous variables (e.g., hydraulic conductivity). McBratney et al.
88 considered20 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
the variable type of the predictor and predictor variables to distinguish different
types of PTFs, ranging from hard and fuzzy classes, continuous or fuzzy variables,to mixed-class continuous variables.
Statistical methods such as multiple regressions, arti ﬁcial neural networks,
or classi ﬁcation and regression trees (CARTs) are commonly used to formalize
the relationships to predict soil attributes or soil classes (Equations 1.2 and 1.3).The functions are commonly used to predict soil attributes at unsampled loca-tions. Pedotransfer functions are attractive because they provide a way to predictsoil attributes that are costly and labor intensive to collect from a new suite ofsoil attributes that are cheap and rapid to collect. Most PTFs consider observa-tions as independent and ignore the spatial autocorrelation of soil attributes(Figure 1.5):
S
aj = f(Sai) (1.2)
Scj = f(Sci) (1.3)
where
Saj = soil attribute j
Sai = soil attributes ( i = 1, 2, …, n)
Scj = soil class j
Scj = soil classes ( i = 1, 2, …, n)
Pedotransfer functions de ﬁne relationships between different soil character-
istics and attributes, such as the moisture retention characteristics and the pressurehead–hydraulic conductivity.
89 Rawls et al.90 estimated soil water properties and
Grunwald et al.58 soil physical properties using cone index data collected with a
proﬁle cone penetrometer.
1.6.4 S OIL CLASSIFICATION  MODELS
Running parallel with, but without any formal connection, soil systematics was
developing its own course. Its origins were intuitive and its proponents weretrying to justify it, seeking to give it the same genetic respectability that biologicaland geological classi ﬁcations seemed to have achieved. The lack of efforts to
introduce statistical measures in soil survey programs is evident. For example,in current soil surveys in the U.S., no statistical techniques are used to optimizesoil sampling designs and to document collected soil data (e.g., the variation ofa soil attribute within a soil map unit). Nevertheless, soil classi ﬁcation systems
still prosper around the world, supported by national soil surveying efforts toproduce crisp soil maps.
50
Adopting the classi ﬁcatory approach, we assume that observations are taken
from a statistically stationary population (i.e., the mean and variance of thedata are independent of both the geographic location and the size of thesupport).
21 Other assumptions include that (1) the variations in the value of SThe Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 21
within the map units are random and not spatially contiguous, (2) all mapping
units have the same within-class variance, which is uniform within the poly-gons, (3) all attributes are normally distributed, and (4) the most important
changes in soil attribute values take place at boundaries, which are sharp, not
gradual. Classi ﬁcation by homogeneous polygons assumes that within-unit
variation is smaller than that between units. This conceptual model is com-monly used in soil and landscape mapping to de ﬁne homogeneous soil units,
landscape units, ecotopes, etc. The model can be formalized using the followingequation:
(1.4)
where
S(x
0) = value of the soil attribute at location x0
m = general mean of S over the domain of interest (soil mapping region)
ak = deviation between m and the mean mk of unit (class) k
e = residual (pooled within-unit) error or noise
According to Webster,91 there are three major types of classi ﬁcation models:
1. Intuitive classi ﬁcation models: The soil surveyor identi ﬁes class bound-
aries based on tacit knowledge.
2. Systematic classi ﬁcation (mathematical classi ﬁcation) models: Classi-
ﬁcation of multiple soil and environmental properties into classes, e.g.,
using multiple discriminant analysis, hierarchical clustering, or CART.
3. Spatial fragmentation classi ﬁcation models: Incorporation of the spatial
position of observations into the grouping algorithm. Problems withthe classi ﬁcatory approach include a mismatch between multivariate
and geographic space, where the geographic boundaries do not neces-sarily match with the attribute boundaries.
The value of the soil attribute classes in these models can be hard or fuzzy.
Fuzzy sets were ﬁrst introduced by Zadeh
92 and can be used to describe the
uncertainty of data and boundaries between categories. Fuzzy methods allow thematching of individuals to be determined on a continuous scale instead of on aBoolean binary or an integer scale. In contrast to crisp sets, a fuzzy set is a classthat admits the possibility of partial membership. Fuzzy c-means partition obser-vations in multivariate space into relatively stable, naturally occurring groups.
93
Fuzzy set theory provides a rich framework to describe the vagueness of (spatial)data and information. McBratney and Odeh
94 provided an overview of applica-
tions of fuzzy sets in soil science that includes a numerical classi ﬁcation of soil
and mapping, land evaluation, modeling and simulation of soil processes, fuzzysoil geostatistics, soil quality indices, and fuzzy measures of imprecisely de ﬁned
soil phenomena.Sxk ()0 =+ +μ22 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
1.6.5 G EOSPATIAL  MODELS
Geospatial models predict soil attribute values at unsampled locations using soil
attribute observations that are spatially distributed throughout the soil mapping
domain. Global interpolation methods use all available observations to providepredictions for the whole area of interest, while local interpolators operate withina small zone around the point being interpolated to ensure that estimates are madeonly with data from locations in the immediate neighborhood.
Trend surfaces are the simplest geospatial model that requires ﬁtting some
form of polynomial equation through soil (or environmental) attribute values.These are least square methods that model the long-range spatial variation. Suchmodels assume that the spatial coordinates are the independent variables and S
(attribute of interest) is the dependent variable (Equation 1.5).
91 As trend surfaces
are simpli ﬁed representations of reality, it is dif ﬁcult to ascribe any physical
meaning to complex, higher-order polynomials. Therefore, the main use of trendsurface analysis is not as an interpolator, but as a way of removing broad featuresof the data prior to using some complex local interpolator. The concept is basedon partitioning the variance between trend and the residuals from the trend.
(1.5)
where
a
u = unknown coef ﬁcients to be found by analysis
fu = known functions of spatial position ( x0)
e = uncorrelated error term
Local, deterministic interpolation methods focus on modeling short-range
(local) variations. The interpolation involves (1) de ﬁning a search neighborhood
around the point to be interpolated, (2) ﬁnding the observations within this
neighborhood, (3) choosing a mathematical function to represent the variationover this limited number of points, and (4) evaluating it for the point on a regulargrid. The procedure is repeated until all the points on a grid have been computed.
21
Local interpolation methods such as nearest neighbors (Thiessen or V ornonoipolygons), inverse distance weighting (IDW), and splines are described in Bur-rough and McDonnell.
21 Splines (local ﬁtting functions) estimate values using a
mathematical function that minimizes overall surface curvature, resulting in asmooth surface that passes exactly through the observation points, while at thesame time ensuring that the joins between one part of the curve and another arecontinuous. Local interpolators in their simplest form are based on a linearinterpolator, in which the weights are computed from a linear function of distancebetween sets of data points and the point to be predicted (Equation 1.6). Theassumption of IDW is that the value of an attribute at an unsampled location isSx af xuu
uU
() ()00
0=+
=∑The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 23
a distance-weighted average of data points occurring within a local neighborhood
surrounding the unvisited point:95
(1.6)
where
 = predicted soil attribute value at unsampled location x0
li = weights
S(xi) = observed soil attribute value at locations xi
Mercer and Hall in Webster91 in 1911 at Rothamsted, UK, discovered that
soil attributes show two distinct sources of variation: an autocorrelated componentand a random one. The advent of computers and software starting in the 1960sand regionalized variable theory formalized by Matheron
96 resulted in the expo-
nential growth in geostatistical applications applied to soil science. This spatialarea evolved from variogram analysis, ordinary kriging, indicator kriging, anduniversal kriging to more advanced multivariate geostatistical applications, suchas cokriging, regression kriging, and spatial stochastic simulations.
91,97 It was
recognized that more complex spatial patterns could be modeled by treating soilvariables as regionalized variables (Figure 1.5).
Since the environment and its component attributes, such as soil, result from
many interactive physical, chemical, and biological processes that are nonlinearor chaotic, the outcome is so complex that the variation appears to be random. 
If we adopt a stochastic view, then at each point in geographic space there
is not just one value for an attribute, but a whole set of values. Thus, at a locationx
0 a soil attribute, S, is treated as a random variable with a mean ( m), variance
(s2), and cumulative distribution function (cdf). The set of random variables,
S(x1), S(x2), … S(xn), constitutes a random function or a stochastic process.17
Regionalized variable theory assumes that the spatial variation of any variable Z
can be expressed as the sum of three major components (Equation 1.7)21: (1) a
structural component, having a constant mean or trend that is spatially dependent;(2) a random, but spatially correlated component, known as the variation of theregionalized variable; and (3) a spatially uncorrelated random noise or residualterm. The deterministic component m is dependent on some exogenous factors
such as the cl, o, r, p, and t factors and can be described by a trend model, e.g.,
via universal kriging.
(1.7)
where
Z(x
0) = value of a random variable at x0ˆ() * ( )Sx Sxii
in
0
1=
=∑ i
in
=
=∑1
1
ˆ()Sx0
Zx mx x() () ()00 0 =++24 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
m(x0) = deterministic function describing the structural component of Z at x0
e¢(x0) = stochastic, locally varying but spatially dependent residual from m(x0) 
— the regionalized variable
e≤ = a residual, spatially independent noise term having zero mean and 
variance
x0 = geographic position in one, two, or three dimensions
Observations obtained close to each other are more likely to be similar than
observations taken further apart from each other. This spatial autocorrelation ofe¢(x
0) is described by the semivariance g. If g is plotted as a function of the lag
distance h, the semivariogram g(h) is obtained. In Equation 1.8, one implicit
assumption is that the semivariance depends only on the separation distance h
and not on the positions x0 and x0 + h (stationarity assumption). g(h) is estimated as
(1.8)
where
g = semivariance
h = distance (lag)
N = total number of datapairs
Regionalized variable theory is described in detail by Goovaerts,31 Webster
and Oliver,17 and Chilès and Del ﬁner.32 The semivariogram provides input for
kriging, which is a weighted interpolation technique to create continuous (soil)prediction maps. Major limitations of the univariate geostatistical technique ofkriging are due to the assumptions of stationarity, which are not often met by theﬁeld-sampled datasets and the large amount of data (>100 observations; better,
>150 observations) to de ﬁne the spatial autocorrelation.
1.6.6 M ULTIVARIATE  GEOSPATIAL  MODELS
Jenny’s factorial soil-landscape model inherently acknowledged relationships
between soils and cl, o, r, p, and t factors. Univariate geostatistical models
recognize spatial autocorrelation. We can unify both concepts to develop multi-variate geospatial models considering spatial covariation and autocorrelation,forming complex models that describe soil-landscape reality (Figure 1.5).
McBratney et al.
69 expanded Jenny’s model by explicitly introducing the
spatial position n [x, y coordinates] and soil attributes ( s) to predict a soil attribute
(Sa) or soil class ( Sc). They stressed the quanti ﬁcation of factors in Equations 1.9
and 1.10 using DEMs, remote sensing, soil sensing, and other emerging soilmapping techniques:()()[( ) ( ) ]()
hNhZx Zx h
iNh
=+
=∑1
2002
1The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 25
Sa[x, y, ~t] = f(s[x, y, ~t], cl[x, y, ~t], o[x, y, ~t], r[x, y, ~t],
p[x, y], a[x, y], n) (1.9)
Sc[x, y, ~t] = f(s[x, y, ~t], cl[x, y, ~t], o[x, y, ~t], r[x, y, ~t],
p[x, y, ~t], a[x, y], n) (1.10)
where
Sa = soil attribute
Sc = soil class
s = soils, other attributes of the soil at a point
a = age, the time factor
n = space, spatial position de ﬁned by the  x coordinate (easting) and y 
coordinate (northing)
McBratney’s model includes soil as a factor because soil can be predicted
from its attributes, or soil attributes from its class or other attributes. The factors can be derived from a prior map, remote sensing, proximal sensing, or expert
knowledge. Implicit in the SCORPAN model are the spatial coordinates x, y and
an approximate or vague time coordinate ~ t. This time coordinate can be
expressed as “at about some time t.” McBratney et al.
69 stress that Equations 1.9
and 1.10 are empirical in nature; i.e., there has been evidence of relationshipsbetween factors. They caution that the direction of causality is not de ﬁned. For
example, vegetation is dependent on soil while soil is also dependent on vegeta-tion. Another issue of using an empirical rather than a deterministic model is thenonuniqueness of S
c and Sa. For example, the soil attribute Sa at a speci ﬁc
geographic location and time might be explained by different factor combinationsof s, cl, o, r, p, and a.
Below the SCORPAN model is extended to represent soil classes and
attributes in three-dimensional geographic space considering the depth coordinate(z) explicitly:
S
c[x, y, z, ~t] = f(s[x, y, z, ~t], cl[x, y, z, ~t], o[x, y, z, ~t],
r[x, y, z, ~t], p[x, y, z, ~t], a[x, y, z], [x, y, z]) (1.11)
Sa[x, y, z, ~t] = f(s[x, y, z, ~t], cl[x, y, z, ~t], o[x, y, z, ~t],
r[x, y, z, ~t], p[x, y, z, ~t], a[x, y, z], [x, y, z]) (1.12)
This three-dimensional SCORPAN model was adopted to reconstruct soil-
landscape models in three dimensions in southern Wisconsin14 (Figure 1.2) and
for a space–time simulation of water table dynamics in a ﬂatwood landscape in
northeast Florida.98 We can extend the three-dimensional SCORPAN model even
further by including scaling behavior of factors. Multiscale soil-landscape modelsdo exist, but they are dif ﬁcult to reconstruct with the present soil mapping
technology and knowledge.26 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Hybrid modeling applications combine environmental correlation and geosta-
tistics.93 Hybrid techniques assume that soil variation is composed of deterministic
and stochastic (empirical) components. With the advent of high-resolution andhigh-quality proximal sensing techniques of soil, land use/land cover, and topo-graphic attributes such as electromagnetic induction (EM), soil video imagingsystems, time domain re ﬂectrometry, airborne gamma-radiometry, and multispec-
tral remote sensing, we are capable of rapidly collecting and integrating multipleexogenous variables to predict soils. For example, Odeh et al.
99 used a DEM to
predict soil attributes (depth to solum, depth to bedrock, topsoil gravel content,subsoil clay content) comparing multilinear regression, ordinary kriging, globaluniversal kriging using restricted maximum likelihood, cokriging, and regressionkriging. The latter methods are multivariate geostatistical hybrid techniques.
Cokriging is a multivariate extension of kriging that often combines a sparsely
measured primary variable (or target variable) with a denser set of a secondaryvariable that is spatially cross-correlated (Figure 1.5).
100 Typically, the more
expensive-to-measure target soil variable is predicted using the cheaper-to-mea-sure soil, vegetation, topographic, or other variables. For example, soil texture(target variable) is predicted using slope or other topographic attributes derivedfrom a high-resolution DEM.
Regression kriging is a hybrid method that uses multiple regressions,
regression trees, generalized linear models, or others to describe the determin-istic component in Equation 1.7. The residuals are modeled as the spatiallyvarying but dependent component. Regression kriging was employed by Knot-ters et al.
101 to predict soil layer depths and by Carré and Girard102 to predict
soil types. According to Odeh et al.,103 regression kriging performed better than
multilinear regression, ordinary kriging, universal kriging, and isotopic andheterotopic cokriging to predict depth of solum, depth to bedrock, topsoilgravel, and subsoil clay.
Kriging with an external drift uses an ancillary variable to represent the trend
m(x
0) in Equation 1.7, which is modeled as a linear function of a smoothly varying
secondary (external) variable instead of a function of the spatial coordinates. Thismethod requires that the relation between primary trend and secondary variableis linear and makes physical sense.
97 Other multivariate geostatistical techniques
are described in Goovaerts,31 Chilès and Del ﬁner,32 and Wackernagel.100
1.6.7 S PACE–TIME MODELS
Other soil-landscape models stress the time component. Simonson’s process
model explained soil formation by the interaction of four processes: additions,removals, translocations, and transformations.
104 This model stresses pedological
processes rather than the resulting soil attributes. For example, the eluviation ofaluminum and iron from top O, A, and E horizons and the immobilization ofthese metals in short-range-order complexes with organic matter in the underlyingB horizon is a process known as podzolization. Other conceptual pedogenicprocess models are based on a mass balance approach considering the accumu-The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 27
lation of gains and losses of elements or tracers within a soil-landscape with
deﬁned boundaries.105,106 Both models provide an important conceptual frame-
work for understanding soil formation. However, neither model establishes func-tional boundaries for segregating the soil continuum into natural landscape units.
Since the 1990s, models that explicitly include time have been developed,
including time series analysis (Equation 1.13), state–space modeling, space–timegeostatistics, and spatial state–space approach, the last one based on physicallaws and observations.
23 Time series analysis is based on an empirical statistical
approach. In the simplest case, the measured series is treated as the realizationof a stationary random process Z(t):
(1.13)
where
Z(t) = realization of a stationary random process
m = global mean
t = temporally autocorrelated random residual with a mean of zero and
variance characterized by its autocovariance function C(s) =
Cov[(t), (t + s )], where s denotes the lag and t is time
Several methods have been proposed to integrate both spatial and temporal
variability into one model (Equation 1.14). Hoosbeek et al.
107 treated time as a
third dimension added to two-dimensional space. They plotted a spatiotemporalsemivariogram of leaching simulated with a mechanistic model (decision supportmodel for agrotechnology transfer [DSSAT]) . Journel
108 discussed possible prob-
lems associated with integrating spatial and temporal dimensions into one semi-variogram model and pointed out that although some directional dependence(anisotropy) may exist, spatial phenomena in general show no ordering, whereasa notion of past, present, and future exists for temporal phenomena. Measured datamay represent a unique realization for the past and present, but in the case of thefuture, a truer stochastic dependence exists. Because of this inequality, the additivespace–time model cannot be used for interpolation. However, it is useful fordescribing and depicting the combined spatial and temporal variability of soil data:
(1.14)
where
Z(x
0, t) = random variable dependent on location x0 and t
m(x0, t) = deterministic trend (in the simplest case a constant equal to a global 
mean)
The linkage between hydrology and soil formation has been acknowledged
in numerous studies.109, 110  Though the conceptual soil-landscape models recog-Zt m t() () =+
Z xt m xt xt(, ) (, ) (, )00 0 =+28 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
nize dynamic hydrologic ﬂow as a major soil-forming factor, the attempt to
segregate soils rather than to address their continuity has resulted in numeroussoil classi ﬁcation systems. Since almost all hydrologic models use stochastic or
mechanistic methods to describe water ﬂow, the development of pedology and
hydrology has split into different directions.
Pedodynamic-deterministic modeling of soil processes is focused on predict-
ing future conditions of the soil. Heuvelink and Webster
23 pointed out that cali-
bration and validation of these models are delicate and scale dependent. Equation1.15 formalizes the concept of process-based deterministic models:
(1.15)
where
f(t) = physical-deterministic part of the model
Quantitative soil process models, also referred to as pedodynamic models,
are de ﬁned by “the quantitative integrated simulation of physical, chemical, and
biological soil processes acting over short time increments in response to envi-ronmental factors.”
111 Quantitative simulation models are based on the assumption
that the state of each system at any moment can be quanti ﬁed, and that changes
in the state can be described by rate or differential equations. State variables arevariables such as soil organic matter and have dimensions of length, number,volume, weight, energy, or heat content. Driving variables quantify the effect ofexternal factors on the system and are not in ﬂuenced by processes within the
system. Their values must be monitored continuously (e.g., meteorological vari-ables). Rate variables indicate the rate at which state variables change. Theirvalues are determined by the state and driving variables according to equationsthat are based on process knowledge.
107 Hoosbeek and Bryant111 developed the
ORTHOD model, which simulates hydrology and pedologic processes (e.g.,solute movement, microbial decomposition or organic matter, mineral dissolution,adsorption, ion exchange, and the precipitation of amorphous aluminum silicates),which lead to the formation of Typic Haplorthods. This model is speci ﬁcally
focused on one soil type out of thousands of others. A rudimentary mechanisticmodel for soil production and landscape development was proposed by Minasnyand McBratney.
112 Their quantitative soil process model was constrained to the
processes weathering and erosion.
Quantitative soil process models are computationally complex. The deter-
ministic modeling approach requires a complete understanding and mathemat-ical formulation of pedogenesis. In addition, the interaction between processesoccurring over long periods has to be understood before such models can bedeveloped. More research is necessary to unravel the mysteries of soil phenom-ena through time.
The time dimension is different from the space dimension because time has
a direction, it moves forward only, processes take place in a sequence, andZt ft() () =The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 29
phenomena are almost never isotropic in the space–time domain. In the real world,
the assumption of temporal stationarity is never a trivial one, and in manyinstances, it cannot be simply modeled by direct applications of kriging (inter-
polation) in the space–time domain. In contrast, mechanistic models often fail
because we lack (1) a complete understanding of the physical, chemical, andbiological ecosystem processes; (2) an appreciation for proper scaling issues; and(3) adequate input data to run our models. No matter how complex the mechanisticmodel structure, typically there are deviations between model predictions andindependent observations. Alternative models are mixed pedodynamic-determin-istic/stochastic models (Equation 1.16) where partial process knowledge is inte-grated with a stochastic component:
23
(1.16)
Even more complex models acknowledge that the state at time t depends on state
at time t – 1, which is considered in the Kalman ﬁltering113 state–space approach.
The strength of the state–space approach lies in its ability to merge the formulationof pedodynamic-deterministic models with observations.
23 Applications of soil-
landscape models that consider the variation of soil attributes in space and throughtime are still rare due to data input requirements.
1.7 CRITICAL REMARKS
In many countries around the world soil survey programs are still actively employ-ing the factorial soil-landscape paradigm using tacit knowledge of soil surveyors.At the same time, many issues related to environmental quality, site-speci ﬁc farm
management, and land resource management have emerged that cannot beaddressed successfully with available two-dimensional crisp soil taxa maps. Thedemand for quantitative soil-landscape models that focus on the prediction of soilproperties rather than soil classes is increasing. There are slow but persistentshifts from qualitative to quantitative soil-landscape modeling providing digital,accurate, precise, and nonbiased information about soils. The philosophical soil-landscape paradigms rooted in empiricism, which emerged in the early 20thcentury, are still valid, and in fact, they form the cornerstone to reconstructingsoil-landscapes with pedometrics.
In this chapter numerous quantitative soil-landscape modeling techniques
have been presented that use a holistic approach to integrate numerous environ-mental factors. Hence, the term environmental soil-landscape modeling  was pro-
posed to emphasize that soil predictions are interdependent on environmentalfactors such as cl, o, r, p, and t. In addition, we can incorporate knowledge of
how soil attributes behave in space and through time to improve reconstructingsoil-landscapes.
While soils and soil attributes generally vary continuously across soil-land-
scapes and change through time, we measure the soil at only a ﬁnite number ofZt ft t() () () =+30 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
geographic locations and at times with only small supports. Predictions are made
from observation datasets to predict soil attributes at unsampled geographiclocations. Because no measurement and model is perfect, uncertainties exist that
need to be quanti ﬁed. An inherent goal is to reduce prediction errors and uncer-
tainty of quantitative soil-landscape models.
Recently, soil proximal and remote soil mapping techniques have improved
greatly. Soil information systems are slowly migrating from entity to raster-basedimplementations. Hardware and software no longer impose limitations on devel-oping quantitative soil-landscape models. Advanced statistical and mathematicaltechniques are available to test and compare conceptual soil-landscape modelsusing stochastic simulations.
33 Virtual soil-landscapes and space–time applica-
tions can be implemented lending techniques developed in computer science.14
Phillips114 argues that aggregate or probabilistic predictions are possible, but
not deterministic predictions of individual soils. This implies that we currentlycannot predict individual soil attributes accurately; instead, we can only predictbroad-scale general behavior. In short, despite the fact that no two pedons areexactly alike, similarities do exist and commonalities can be identi ﬁed. Phillips
showed that intrinsic variability within homogeneous landscape units is moreimportant in determining the pedodiversity of the study area than is the extrinsicvariability associated with measurable differences in topography, parent material,and vegetation/land use. Despite the fact that our soil mapping techniques haveimproved tremendously, a completely deterministic approach to reconstruct soil-landscapes seems to be currently out of reach.
Although generic relationships between soil attributes and environmental
factors have been identi ﬁed, they are domain dependent. The relationship between
soil and slope might be strong in one landscape setting but weak in another.Similarly, many soil attributes are nonstationary; their spatial variation and cova-riation with exogenous environmental attributes are domain dependent and poten-tially change through time. Therefore, no universal equation exists that ﬁts all
soil-landscapes. Rather, we have to strengthen our efforts to develop quantitativesoil-landscape models that are customized based on our observations. Compara-tive studies that test different statistical and mathematical modeling techniquesare desirable to improve our understanding of soil-landscapes.
Scaling behavior of soil and environmental factors confounds quantitative
relationships between factors. Scale-dependent characteristics include (1)attributes and processes emerge at different scales, (2) nonlinear behavior ofprocesses, (3) threshold dependency to trigger a process, (4) nonsimilarity of soilattributes and processes at different scales, (5) varying dominant processes atdifferent scales, and (6) response to external disturbances interrelated to intrinsicprocesses. It is too simple to assume that we can describe soil regions by aggre-gating pedon descriptions.
The predicament entailed by the complexity of soil-landscapes requires a
synergistic approach, integrating knowledge not only from pedology, but alsogeography, mathematics, computer science, ecology, hydrology, and others. Inter-The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 31
disciplinary collaboration will be key to reconcile deductive and inductive science
to take soil-landscape modeling to the next level.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Florida Agricultural Experiment Station andapproved for publication as Journal Series R-10601.
REFERENCES
1. DH Yaloon. Down to earth. Nature  407: 301, 2000.
2. J Passmore. Man’s Responsibility for Nature . Duckworth Publ., London, 1980.
3. WD Ross. Aristotle , 5th ed. Methuen, London, 1949.
4. RC Solomon, KM Higgins. A Short History of Philosophy . Oxford University
Press, New York, 1996.
5. WKC Guthrie. Greek Philosophy . Methuen, London, 1950.
6. DH Yaalon, RW Arnold. Attitudes towards soils and their societal relevance: then
and now. Soil Sci 165: 5–12, 2000.
7. NJ McKenzie, MP Austin. A quantitative Australian approach to medium and
small scale surveys based on soil stratigraphy and environmental correlation.Geoderma  57: 329–355, 1993.
8. SSSA (Soil Science Society of America). Glossary of Soil Science Terms . SSSA,
Madison, WI, 1997. Available at http://www.soils.org.
9. SW Buol, FD Hole, RJ McCracken, RJ Southard. Soil Genesis and Classi ﬁcation .
Iowa State University Press, Ames, 1997.
10. A Young. Land Resources: Now and for the Future . Cambridge University Press,
London, 1998. Available at http://www.land-resources.com.
11. RV Ruhe. Quarternary Landscapes in Iowa . Iowa State University Press, Ames, 1969.
12. JC Dijkerman. Pedology as a science: the role of data, models and theories in the
study of natural soil systems. Geoderma  11: 73–93, 1974.
13. DJ Mulla, AB McBratney. Soil spatial variability. In Handbook of Soil Science ,
ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 2000.
14. S Grunwald, P Barak, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Soil-landscape models at dif-
ferent scales portrayed in Virtual Reality Modeling Language. Soil Science , 165:
598–614, 2000.
15. DA Wysocki, PJ Schoeneberger, HE LaGarry. Geomorphology of soil-landscapes.
In Handbook of Soil Science , ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 2000, pp.
E5–E72.
16. M V oltz, R Webster. A comparison of kriging, cubic splines and classi ﬁcation for
predicting soil attributes from sample information. J Soil Sci  31: 505–524, 1990.
17. R Webster, MA Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists . John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 2001.
18. Soil Survey Staff. Keys to Soil Taxonomy , 8th ed. U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce,
Washington, DC, 1998.
19. D Peuquet. Presentations of geographic space: towards a conceptual synthesis.
Ann Assoc Am Geogr 78: 375–394, 1988.32 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
20. M Goodchild, G Sun, S Yang. Development and test of an error model for
categorical data. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  6: 87–104, 1992.
21. PA Burrough, RA McDonnell. Principles of Geographical Information Systems:
Spatial Information Systems and Geostatistics . Oxford University Press, New
York, 1998.
22. AB McBratney, JJ de Gruijter. A continuum approach to soil classi ﬁcation by
modi ﬁed fuzzy k-means with extragrades. J Soil Sci  43: 159–175, 1992.
23. GBM Heuvelink, R Webster. Modeling soil variation: past, present, and future.
Geoderma  100: 269–301, 2001.
24. PA Burrough, PFM van Gaans, R Hootsmans. Continuous classi ﬁcation in soil
survey: spatial correlation, confusion and boundaries. Geoderma  77: 115–135, 1997.
25. R Webster, HE De La Cuanalo. Soil transect correlograms of North Oxfordshire
and their interpretation. J Soil Sci  26: 176–194, 1975.
26. S Nortcliff. Soil variability and reconnaissance soil mapping: a statistical study
in Norfolk. J Soil Sci 29: 403–418, 1978.
27. DJ Campbell, DG Kinninburgh, PHT Beckett. The soil solution chemistry of some
Oxfordshire soils: temporal and spatial variability. J Soil Sci  40: 321–339, 1989.
28. WD Nettleton, BR Brasher, G Borst. The tax adjunct problem. Soil Sci Soc Am
J 55: 421–427, 1991.
29. BE Butler. Soil Classi ﬁcation for Soil Survey . Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1980.
30. Soil Survey Staff. Soil taxonomy: a basic system of soil classi ﬁcation for making
and interpreting soil surveys. In USDA-SCS Agric. Handbook , V ol. 436. U.S.
Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1999.
31. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation . Oxford University
Press, New York, 1997.
32. JP Chilès, P Del ﬁner P. Geostatistics: Modeling Spatial Uncertainty . Wiley-Inter-
science Publ., New York, 1999.
33. GBM Heuvelink, JA Huisman. Choosing between abrupt and gradual spatial
variation? In Quantifying Spatial Uncertainty in Natural Resources: Theory and
Applications for GIS and Remote Sensing , HT Mowrer, RG Congalton, Eds. Ann
Arbor Press, Chelsea, MI, 2000, pp. 111–118.
34. T Hengl. Pedometric Mapping: Bridging the Gap between Conventional and
Pedometric Approaches. Ph.D. thesis, Wageningen University, Netherlands, 2003.
35. A Stein, M Hoogerwerf, J Bouma. Use of soil-map delineations to improve (co)-
kriging of point data on moisture de ﬁcits. Geoderma  43: 163–177, 1988.
36. BGM Heuvelink, MFP Bierkens. Combining soil maps with interpolations from
point observations to predict quantitative soil attributes. Geoderma  55: 1–15, 1992.
37. AS Rogowski, JK Wolf. Incorporating variability into soil map unit delineations.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  58: 403–418, 1994.
38. P Goovaerts, AG Journel. Integrating soil map information in modeling the spatial
variation in continuous soil attributes. Eur J Soil Sci 46: 397–414, 1995.
39. GBM Heuvelink. Identi ﬁcation of ﬁeld attribute error under different models of
spatial variation. Int J GIS  10: 921–935, 1996.
40. NC Brady, RR Weil. The Nature and Attributes of Soils , 13th ed. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002.
41. LJ Osher, SW Buol. Relationship of soil attributes to parent material and landscape
position in eastern Madre de Dios, Peru. Geoderma  83: 143–166, 1998.The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 33
42. EN Bui. Soil survey as a knowledge system. Geoderma  120: 17–26, 2004.
43. A Su, SC Hu, R Furuta. 3D Topographic Maps for Texas, 1996. Available at
http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/~su/topomaps/.
44. M Hogan, K Laurent. Virtual Earth Science at USGS (U.S. Geological Survey),
1999. Available at http://virtual.er.usgs.gov/.
45. K McSweeney, PE Gessler, BK Slater, RD Hammer, GW Peterson, JC Bell.
Towards a new framework for modeling the soil-landscape continuum. In Factors
in Soil Formation , SSSA Special Publication 33. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1994.
46. CRCLEME (Cooperative Research Center for Landscape Evolution and Mineral
Exploration). Annual Report, 1999. Available at http://leme.anu.edu.au.
47. ML Mendonça Santos, C Guenat, M Bouzelboudjen, F Golay. Three-dimensional
GIS cartography applied to the study of the spatial variation of soil horizons in aSwiss ﬂoodplain. Geoderma  97: 351–366, 2000.
48. NM Sirakov, FH Muge. A system for reconstructing and visualizing three-dimen-
sional objects. Comput Geosci  27: 59–69, 2001.
49. S Grunwald, P Barak. The use of VRML for virtual soil-landscape modeling. Syst
Anal Model Simulation  41: 755–776, 2001.
50. H Eswaran, T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart. Soil Classi ﬁcation: A Global Desk
Reference . CRC Press, New York, 2003.
51. USDA-NRCS (United States Department of Agriculture–Natural Resources Con-
servation Service). 2003 Keys to Soil Taxonomy , 9th ed. USDA-NRCS, Washington
D.C., 2003.
52. R Dudal. How good is our soil classi ﬁcation? In Soil Classi ﬁcation: A Global
Desk Reference , H Eswaran, T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart, Eds. CRC Press, New
York, 2003, pp. 11–18.
53. PA Burrough. The technologic paradox in soil survey: new methods and techniques
of data capture and handling. Enschede ITC J  3: 15–22, 1993.
54. TJ Gish, WP Dulaney, KJ Kung, CST Daughtry, JA Doolittle, PT Miller. Evalu-
ating use of ground-penetrating radar for identifying subsurface ﬂow pathways.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 1620–1629, 2002.
55. JA Doolittle, ME Collins. A comparison of EM induction and GPR methods in
areas of karst. Geoderma  85: 83–102, 1998.
56. DJ Inman, RS Freeland, JT Ammons, RE Yoder. Soil investigations using elec-
tronmagnetic induction and ground-penetrating radar in southeast Tennessee. Soil
Sci Soc Am J  66: 206–211, 2002.
57. B Lowery, RT Schuler. Duration and effects of compaction on soil and plant
growth in Wisconsin. Soil Tillage Res  29: 205–210, 1994.
58. S Grunwald, DJ Rooney, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Development of pedotransfer
functions for a pro ﬁle cone penetrometer. Geoderma  100: 25–47, 2001.
59. JR Jensen. Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Resource Perspective .
Pearson Education, New York, 2000.
60. HW Siesler, Y Ozaki, S Kawata, HM Heise. Near-Infrared Spectroscopy . Wiley
VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2002.
61. LP Wilding, J Bouma, DW Goss. Impact of spatial variability on interpretive
modeling. In Quantitative Modeling of Soil Forming Processes , SSSA Special
Publication 39, RB Bryant, RW Arnold, Eds. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1994.
62. JP Wilson, JC Gallant, Eds. Terrain Analysis: Principles and Applications . John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000.34 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
63. ID Moore, RB Grayson, AR Ladson. Digital terrain modeling: a review of hydro-
logical, geomorphological, and biological applications. Hydrological Processes
5: 3–30, 1991.
64. RJ Huggett. Soil landscape systems: a model of soil genesis. Geoderma  13: 1–22,
1975.
65. AJ Conacher, JB Dalrymple. The nine-unit land surface model: an approach to
pedogeomorphic research. Geoderma  18: 1–154, 1977.
66. DJ Pennock, BJ Zebarth, E deJong. Landform classi ﬁcation and soil distribution
in hummocky terrain, Saskatchewan, Canada. Geoderma  40: 297–315, 1987.
67. BL Turner, WB Meyer. Global land use and land cover change: an overview. In
Changes in Land Use and Land Cover: A Global Perspective , WB Meyer, BL
Turner II, Eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994, pp. 3–10.
68. MR Hoosbeek, RB Bryant. Towards the quantitative modeling of pedogenesis: a
review. Geoderma  55: 183–210, 1992.
69. AB McBratney, ML Mendonça Santos, B Minasny. On digital soil mapping.
Geoderma  117: 3–52, 2003.
70. DJ Brus, JJ de Gruijter. Random sampling or geostatistical modeling? Choosing
between design-based and model-based sampling strategies for soil. Geoderma
80: 1–44, 1997.
71. JW van Groeningen, W Siderius, A Stein. Constrained optimization of soil sam-
pling for minimization of the kriging variance. Geoderma  87: 239–259, 1999.
72. AR Mermut, H Eswaran. Some major development in soil science since the mid-
1960s. Geoderma  100: 403–426, 2001.
73. KD Glinka. The Great Soil Groups of the World and Their Development . Edwards
Bros., Ann Arbor, MI, 1927 (translated from German by C.F. Marbut).
74. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation . McGraw-Hill, New York, 1941.
75. H Jenny. EW Hillgard and the Birth of Modern Soil Science . Farallo Publ.,
Berkeley, CA, 1961.
76. BD Hudson. The soil survey as paradigm-based science. Soil Sci Soc Am J 56:
836–841, 1992.
77. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation: A System of Quantitative Pedology . Dover
Publ., New York, 1992.
78. DJ Pennock, DW Anderson, E de Jong. Landscape-scale changes in indicators of
soil quality due to cultivation in Saskatchewan, Canada. Geoderma  64: 1–19, 1994.
79. AB Hairston, DF Grigal. Topographic variation in soil water and nitrogen for two
forested landforms in Minnesota, USA. Geoderma  64: 125–138, 1994.
80. CS Holzhey, RB Daniels, EE Gamble. Thick Bh horizons in the North Carolina
coastal plain. II. Physical and chemical attributes and rates of organic additionsfrom surface sources. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  39: 1182–1187, 1975.
81. RB Morrison, JC Frye. Correlation of the Middle and Late Quarternary Succes-
sions of the Lake Lahontan, Lake Bonneville, Rocky Mountain, Southern GreanPlains, and Eastern Midwest Areas, Nevada Bureau of Mines Report 9. NevadaBureau of Mines, 1965, 45 p.
82. G Milne. Normal erosion as a factor in soil pro ﬁle development. Nature  138:
541–548, 1936.
83. TM Bushnell. Some aspects of the soil catena concept. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  7:
466–476, 1942.
84. M Sommer, E Schlichting. Archetypes of catenas in respect to matter: a concept
for structuring and grouping catenas. Geoderma  76: 1–33, 1997.The Space–Time Continuum of Soil-Landscapes 35
85. SJ Park, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Identi ﬁcation of the spatial distribution of soils
using a process-based terrain characterization. Geoderma  103: 249–272, 2001.
86. RA Fisher. Statistical Methods for Research Workers . Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh,
Scotland, 1925.
87. JHM Wösten, PA Finke, MJW Jansen. Comparison of class and continuous pedo-
transfer functions to generate soil hydraulic characteristics. Geoderma  66:
227–237, 1995.
88. AB McBratney, B Minasny, SR Cattle, RW Vervoort. From pedotransfer functions
to soil inference systems. Geoderma  109: 41–73, 2002.
89. JHM Wösten, CHJE Schuren, J Bouma, A Stein. Functional sensitivity analysis
of four methods to generate soil hydraulic functions. Soil Sci Soc Am J  54:
832–836, 1990.
90. WJ Rawls, DL Brakensiek, KE Saxton. Estimation of soil water properties. Trans
ASAE  1316–1320, 1982. 
91. R Webster. The development of pedometrics. Geoderma  62: 1–15, 1994.
92. LA Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Inf Control  8: 338–353, 1965.
93. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh, TFA Bishop, MS Dunbar, TM Shatar. An overview
of pedometric techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
94. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh. Application of fuzzy sets in soil science: fuzzy logic,
fuzzy measurements and fuzzy decisions. Geoderma  77: 85–113, 1997.
95. E Isaaks, RM Srivastava. An Introduction to Applied Geostatistics . Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York, 1989.
96. G Matheron. Les variables régionalisées et leur estimation. Une application de
la théorie de functions aléatoires aux scienes de la nature . Masson, Paris, 1965.
97. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics in soil science: state-of-the-art and perspectives. Geo-
derma  89: 1–45, 1999.
98. V Ramasundaram, S Grunwald, A Mangeot, NB Comerford, CM Bliss. Develop-
ment of an environmental virtual ﬁeld laboratory. J Comput Educ 45: 21–34.
99. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Spatial prediction of soil attributes
from landform derived from a digital elevation model. Geoderma  63: 197–214,
1994.
100. H Wackernagel. Multivariate Geostatistics . Springer, Berlin, 2003.
101. M Knotters, DJ Brus, JH Oude V oshaar. A comparison of kriging, co-kriging and
kriging combined with regression for spatial interpolation of horizon depth withcensored observations. Geoderma  67: 227–246, 1995.
102. F Carré, MC Girard. Quantitative mapping of soil types based on regression
kriging of taxonomic distances with landform and land cover attributes. Geoderma
110: 241–263, 2002.
103. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Further results on prediction of
soil properties from terrain attributes: heterotopic cokriging and regression-krig-ing. Geoderma  67: 215–226, 1995.
104. RW Simonson. Outline of a generalized theory of soil genesis. Soil Sci Soc Am
Proc  23: 152–156, 1959.
105. GH Brimhall, WE Dietrich. Constitutive mass balance relations between chemical
composition, volume, density, porosity, and strain in metsomatic hydrochemicalsystems: results on weathering and pedogenesis. Geochim Cosmochim Acta  5:
567–587, 1987.
106. OA Chadwick, RC Graham. Pedogenic processes. In Handbook of Soil Science ,
ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 1999, pp. E41–E72.36 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
107. MR Hoosbeek, RG Amundson, RB Bryant. Pedological modeling. In Handbook
of Soil Science , ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 2000, pp. E-77–E-111.
108. AG Journel. Geostatistics, models and tools for the earth sciences. Math Geol  18:
119–140, 1986.
109. AL Steinwand, TE Fenton. Landscape evolution and shallow groundwater hydrol-
ogy of a till landscape in central Iowa. Soil Sci Soc Am J  59: 1370–1377, 1996.
110. ME Sumner, Ed. Handbook of Soil Science . CRC Press, New York, 2000.
111.MR Hoosbeek, RB Bryant. Developing and adapting soil process submodels for
use in the pedodynamic orthod model. In Quantitative Modeling of Soil Forming
Processes , SSSA Special Publication 39, RB Bryant, RW Arnold, Eds. SSSA,
Madison, WI, 1994.
112. B Minasny, AB McBratney. A rudimentary mechanistic model for soil production
and landscape development. Geoderma  90: 3–21, 1999.
113. RE Kalman. A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction problems. Trans
Am Soc Mech Eng J Basic Eng  82D: 35–45, 1960.
114. JD Phillips. Contingency and generalization in pedology as exempli ﬁed by texture-
contrast soils. Geoderma  102: 347–370, 2001.372Soil Survey and Soil 
Classiﬁcation
Richard W. Arnold (Retired)
CONTENTS
Abstract ...............................................................................................................38
2.1 Introduction .............................................................................................38
2.1.1 What Is Soil?...........................................................................392.1.2 Implications of a Basic Premise .............................................392.1.3 Major Dilemmas......................................................................39
2.2 Soil Survey..............................................................................................41
2.2.1 Landscape Distribution ...........................................................412.2.2 Mapping Legends....................................................................42
2.2.3 Descriptions of Major Soils ....................................................422.2.4 Map Unit Interpretations.........................................................43
2.2.5 Descriptive Soil-Landscape Models .......................................432.2.6 Phases ......................................................................................442.2.7 Soil Survey Maps ....................................................................442.2.8 Generalized Soil Maps............................................................452.2.9 Special Soil Resource Inventories ..........................................46
2.3 Soil Classi ﬁcation ...................................................................................47
2.3.1 Hierarchical Structure .............................................................482.3.2 Keys to Classi ﬁcation Schemes ..............................................48
2.3.3 Importance of Soil Series........................................................482.3.4 Soil Taxonomy ........................................................................492.3.5 Diagnostic Horizons and Features ..........................................49
2.4 Accomplishments ....................................................................................50
2.4.1 Maps ........................................................................................502.4.2 Databases.................................................................................502.4.3 Soil Survey Standards .............................................................512.4.4 Correlation...............................................................................512.4.5 Soil-Landscape Models...........................................................522.4.6 Map Units Test Models...........................................................52
2.5 Opportunities...........................................................................................53
2.5.1 Search for Unifying Concepts ................................................5338 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
2.5.2 Standardizing Landscapes.......................................................54
2.5.3 Geometry of Delineations .......................................................542.5.4 Landscapes of Soil Series .......................................................54
2.5.5 Composition of Delineations ..................................................55
2.5.6 Application of Geostatistics....................................................552.5.7 Criteria De ﬁnitions..................................................................55
2.5.8 Series as Taxa..........................................................................562.5.9 Allowable Errors .....................................................................562.5.10 Soil-Landscape Anthology ......................................................56
2.6 Conclusions .............................................................................................57References ...........................................................................................................57
ABSTRACT
The basic functional relationships of factors, processes, and soil properties enableus to recognize and delineate unique combinations as soil-landscapes. In the U.S.,soil survey models of landscapes have commonly been unwritten qualitativeexplanations of ﬁeld observations linked to abstract concepts of classi ﬁcation
through soil series. The catena concept has been a useful tool to predict occurrenceof soils in many landscapes. A concern with soil maps is a lack of quantitativeinformation about map unit composition and details of soil property distributions.The fact that soil maps are prepared at different scales reinforces the lack of asatisfactory continuum model linking spatial scales of soil-landscape observa-tions. Classi ﬁcation schemes have embraced quantitative diagnostic soil horizons
and features, but variations among systems have hindered global correlation ofdeﬁned taxa. There is a solid foundation of qualitative soil-landscape models
based on tacit knowledge and supported by quantitative taxa based on well-described pedons. New pathways and techniques to understand functionallyrelated soil-landscapes build on this foundation and give rise to fresh insightsinto the nature and behavior of the pedosphere.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
When pedologists talk about reading a landscape, they refer to how our sensesinterpret the scenery around us. What we learn about soil-landscapes dependslargely upon the kinds of questions we ask. Hole and Campbell
1 provided a
comprehensive review of concepts and studies of soil-landscape analysis in the U.S.
Many soil-landscape explanations that evolved in the 1950s and 1960s were
based on concepts of geomorphologists like W.M. Davis, W. Penck, L.C. King,and W.D. Thornbury and soil scientists like B.E. Butler and R.V . Ruhe. It wasnot a true paradigm shift for soil science; however, it was a major revolution ofthinking, looking, seeing, and comprehending soil-landscapes for a new genera-tion of ﬁeld soil scientists.Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 39
2.1.1 W HAT IS SOIL?
Our ancestors thought of soil as something plants grew in, and that there were
good soils and poor soils for speci ﬁc plants. Soils could also be dug to create
canals or make embankments or even burial mounds. These were utilitarianconcepts associated with use. During investigations of soils for taxation purposesin Russia in the late 1870s, V .V . Dokuchaev concluded that soils should be thoughtof as independent natural entities whose features resulted from the interaction ofclimate, biota, relief, and parent rock over time.
2 In 1936, C.E. Kellogg3 proposed
a functional relationship for soils in which he used the term age, instead of time,
but it was not until H. Jenny’s 1941 treatise4 that American scientists rapidly
accepted the concept of soils as functionally related to climate, organisms, relief,parent materials, and time. Time, for many scientists, is necessary for processesand so is not a factor like the others. However, if one considers age as it relatesto time, then it seems appropriate to let it remain. The simple format S = f(cl, o,
r, p, t) is, in retrospect, the basic premise of soil science as we know it today.
2.1.2 I MPLICATIONS  OF A BASIC PREMISE
The relationship of factors Æ processes Æ properties has often been called the
paradigm of soil science because many relationships, models, hypotheses, andconcepts are derived from the factorial equation and its connection of factorsand properties.
The main implication for landscape modeling is that each soil-forming factor
has geographic expression through time. Because a soil serves as an integratorand recorder of the events and processes of its evolution, the complex historyand explanations of changes in a soil are to be obtained from the soil itself.Landscapes are therefore the keepers of functional relationships that give credi-bility to the soil survey.
Patterns of the overlap of soil-forming factors are imprinted on landscapes.
Where the patterns remain suf ﬁciently long, changes in soil morphology occur
and are recorded, and repeating sets of properties are recognized as kinds of soils.It is a matter of learning to read the landscape.
2.1.3 M AJOR DILEMMAS
The basic premise of soil science is a simply stated relationship. It is apparentthat much of the complexity of soils is derived from the ambiguity of conceptsand terms used to specify the components involved. For example, how shouldthe soil-forming factors be subdivided? What do we mean by climate? Is itexternal and part of the atmosphere? Is it internal in a soil, with soil air, soiltemperature, and soil moisture as necessary criteria?
What is parent material of a soil? In going from regions to local areas there
is a tendency to have more options for de ﬁnitions of parent materials. At each40 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
larger scale of observation more variability is recognized to separate features in
the landscape of interest.
Within a soil pro ﬁle there often is evidence of variations of materials that
inﬂuence, or have in ﬂuenced, the development of the pro ﬁle. Lithologic discon-
tinuities usually are associated with environmental changes, but biomantles suchas tree throw and termite mounds may also produce changes equivalent to thoseof sediment differences.
As soils are observed in landscapes, differences in soil morphology are
associated with landscape positions. At what scale do these changes occur? Ifobservations are generalized, what features become inclusions? Competent ﬁeld
soil scientists throughout the world recognize very similar sets of variations atmap scales from 1:1000 to 1:15,000. At smaller scales all delineations are com-binations of several kinds of soils. The implication of scale dependency is thatsoil-landscapes are also scale dependent, yet very little attention has been givento this perspective as far as modeling is concerned.
Depending on the property being recognized, changes may occur over a few
decimeters, meters, or even tens of meters, and mentally varying widths ofboundaries can be visualized. Sharp boundaries are usually represented fairlywell on maps, but variable-width boundaries have no standards for representation.Fridland
5 summarized concepts related to size and shape of map unit delineations,
including indices of properties of delineation boundaries.
Each de ﬁnition carves a piece out of a universe and creates two classes: those
entities that are included in the de ﬁnition and those that are excluded. When we
deﬁne soils we create soils and not-soils. When we de ﬁne Chernozems, we create
Chernozems and not-Chernozems. A class has two important features: a centralconcept of the class and the boundaries with other classes. The central conceptis usually a cluster of narrowly ranging soil properties that de ﬁne and, in part,
describe the entity of interest. All classes share this concept. The criteria used torecognize an entity become the de ﬁnition of that class and establish a range
suitable for the purpose of the classes. In mutually exclusive schemes, the bound-aries among classes are rigidly ﬁxed; thus, membership is either yes or no. When
ranges of multiple properties that overlap are acceptable, boundaries becomeﬂexible and joint membership can be considered. Such membership is often
expressed as percent of degree of belonging in each of the overlapping classes.This concept is commonly referred to as fuzzy logic-based classi ﬁcation.
Landscapes are variable in space and in time. Less attention has been given
to de ﬁning soil-landscapes than soil pro ﬁles; consequently, standards for central
concepts and associated boundaries are less well established. De ﬁnitions are
therefore major sources of dilemma as soil-landscapes are deciphered. The train-ing and experience of soil-landscape observers become important considerationsin understanding patterns.
Spatial variability exists at all scales, and its representation on maps indicates
that processes of generalization have been employed. Some features are empha-sized and even exaggerated, whereas others are minimized or ignored, dependingon the purpose of preparing and presenting information in the form of maps.Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 41
A classic example of generalization6 considers the products of grouping the
delineations or the legend, or both, to obtain generalized soil maps. We learnthat if a detailed map legend is generalized to reduce the number of units, it may
or may not be possible to generalize a map. It depends on the geographic
association of the detailed components. On the other hand, if a detailed map isgeneralized to create larger areas on the map, it may or may not be possible togeneralize the legend. Again, it depends on the kinds of components that aregeographically associated. To produce a generalized map with a generalizedlegend, a tremendous amount of information must be discarded or kept only assupporting data.
By design, the detailed soil surveys in the U.S. generally show landscapes
that emphasize soil types as speci ﬁc subdivisions of soil series. There are numer-
ous variations of the kind and detail of soil map units used throughout the U.S.,including units of nonsoil components used to present a more comprehensiveview of the geosphere, and not only the pedosphere.
Modeling soil-landscapes is a complex process, and specifying the purposes
and de ﬁnitions of the classes being used is critical to evaluating the adequacy
and utility of such landscape models. We are sometimes unsure of not only whatto measure, but also which tools to use for measuring. Soil-landscapes are scaledependent; consequently, some tools and techniques may be more appropriatefor one range of scales than another. The lack of standard protocols, terms, andtechniques tends to reduce the consistency of interpretations among studies oflandscapes. Whether soil-landscapes are conceptual or de ﬁned geographic bodies,
quanti ﬁed diagnostics and methods of measurement are needed for consistency
and eventual correlation of soil-landscapes.
With all measurements there are concerns about accuracy and precision.
Precision implies that a set of observations of the same phenomena will clusterclosely around a given value (whether accurate or not), and accuracy implies thatthe cluster of observations includes to some degree an acceptable value thatrepresents the real entity or central concept of the entity of interest.
2.2 SOIL SURVEY
2.2.1 L ANDSCAPE  DISTRIBUTION
Soil surveys portray a perspective of the geography of soil morphology of certain
kinds of soil pro ﬁles and provide information about landscape features at various
spatial scales.
In 1927 Prof. Bushnell7 commented that the odds were greatly against the
soil surveyor to know the facts. Soil mapping, he noted, was possible only becausemen could examine a pro ﬁle at one point and successfully predict its occurrence
where surface indications were similar. He observed that the surveyors couldseldom map pro ﬁles; rather, they separated map units as slight depressions, low
ﬂats, convex rises, slopes, light and dark surfaces of soils, and other features of
the landscape. Thus, the majority of soil-landscapes are delineated using external42 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
features of topography and location, and the naming depends on the relationship
of soil morphology to landscape features.
To a ﬁeld soil scientist the ﬁrst hole or observation of a soil is a reference
— a starting point relating observed soil features of a pro ﬁle to a point in space.
Using the genetic model, it is assumed that similar soil pro ﬁles will radiate from
this point until some combination of factors and the processes they in ﬂuence are
strong enough to create a change that can be recognized as different soils. Domap unit delineations represent soil-landscapes? Assume for the moment thatthey do.
What is the distribution of soil-landscapes in a survey area? Delineations
have neighbors with degrees of contrast, in addition to angles and distancesbetween delineation centroids. If some frequencies of spatial distribution arerandom, how does one develop a meaningful model of pedogenesis? Traditionally,these aspects of modeling have not been employed in soil science. However, inthis textbook a variety of emerging techniques to map soil patterns are addressed.
2.2.2 M APPING  LEGENDS
In the U.S., soil series were traditionally the basic units of soil delineations.Within a county, or similar area of interest, the kinds of parent materials arelimited by the local geologic events and landforms, as are the types of vegetationcommunities. Superimposed on combinations of vegetation and materials aredifferent degrees of wetness, and when combined together with pro ﬁles, the basis
for a mapping legend of soil series becomes apparent. Field mapping legendswere very powerful and useful models of soil-landscapes. In fact, they were atthe heart of pedogenesis as understood at the time of their development and use.
In most surveys components of the whole landscape (geosphere) are delin-
eated and named. Many nonsoil features are mapped, such as mine spoil and saltslicks, rock talus, urban areas, and special point features, including schools,churches, and so forth.
2.2.3 D ESCRIPTIONS  OF MAJOR SOILS
Standardized descriptions of soil pro ﬁles are a fundamental contribution to soil
science and soil-landscape analysis.8 They can be read, understood, and inter-
preted by competent soil scientists everywhere. As technology improved, Munsellcolors replaced qualitative terms, ﬁeld and lab pH values were added, and stan-
dardized terminology of texture, structure, consistency, and the presence of spe-cial features such as roots, concretions, coarse fragments, clay coating, carbon-ates, and so forth, were systematized. The National Cooperative Soil Survey(NCSS) standards for soil pro ﬁle descriptions are provided in the Soil Survey
Manual  and the Field Book for Descriptions  and are available online.
9 Of ﬁcial
soil series descriptions9 represent the central concepts of the soil series in the
U.S.; however, the soil series described in a survey area report represent thecentral concepts of the series in that survey area.Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 43
Combinations of soil series with or without nonsoil components are also
described. Very few measurements of proportions of actual components are made.However, guidelines suggested limiting inclusions that would behave differently
to less than 15%. In many reports statements were given about the assumed kind
and amount of inclusions in speci ﬁc map units in a survey area. As such, they
now serve as starting points for re ﬁnement regarding accuracy and precision of
soil variability.
2.2.4 M AP UNIT INTERPRETATIONS
Soil survey interpretations, as information technology, evolved over the years andbecame the centerpiece of each report. The accumulated knowledge about thecommon behavior of soils of an area for major kinds of uses in ﬂuenced the design
of mapping legends and the format of the interpretations of the map units.
Because the earlier published surveys used soil series as landscape units, the
interpretations were given for soil series. The commonly adapted crops were dulynoted as well as the expected average yields when several levels of managementwere employed. In the 1960s, engineering practices related to drainage, irrigation,and road and building construction were considered to be important enough toprovide estimates of soil suitability for a number of localized practices, includingseptic tank use. In the 1950s, a land capability classi ﬁcation was developed
10 and
became one of the most popular and widely recognized interpretations of soil-landscapes. With the emphasis on soil erosion in the U.S., the series map unitswere modi ﬁed to more appropriately re ﬂect ﬁeld conditions of susceptibility to
erosion, as well as to show actual conditions, such as areas with slight, moderate,and severe erosion. The kinds of interpretations for map units of a modern surveyare provided in the National Soil Survey Handbook  of NCSS, maintained by
USDA and available online.
9
2.2.5 D ESCRIPTIVE  SOIL-LANDSCAPE  MODELS
Physiography can be used to stratify landscapes and to organize soil observationsby river and stream valleys, slopes, undulating uplands, and depressions. Addi-tional subdivisions are provided by landforms such as ﬂoodplains, terraces and
alluvial fans in the valleys, and shale-, sandstone-, and limestone-derived parentmaterials in the uplands.
Soil survey legends for mapping were locally derived and implemented.
Details of kinds of parent materials, vegetation types and their transitions, markedclimate variations, and degrees of expression of horizons and other featuresdiffered enough from place to place so that legends for ﬁeld use varied from area
to area. Field legends were designed to help surveyors easily recognize the mainfeatures of soils in their landscapes and consistently provide the same name ornumber to each relationship.
A catena is a chain-like topographic continuum linking uplands to lowlands.
The concept was adapted in the U.S. to refer to drainage members in the same44 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
parent material.11 The concept was accepted by the National Soil Survey, and
where appropriate, it was readily used. The catena concept recognized the con-tinuity of wetness in landscapes, but techniques to handle the transitional nature
of this continuum were either not available or inadequate for consistent applica-
tion by ﬁeld personnel.
12 Catenary soil-landscape relationships have been one of
the more powerful tools of soil-landscape modeling, especially in the humid andsubhumid areas, where use and management of land are commonly dependenton moisture conditions.
2.2.6 P HASES
In the U.S., soil survey was initiated in the Department of Agriculture to identifysoils suitable for major crops and for specialty crops like tobacco and grapes.Soon it was apparent that landscape features were important to the managementof land, mainly water management. Water and wind erosion became the drivingforces for new national conservation policies in the U.S. during the 1930s, anda different type of soil survey was undertaken by the newly created Soil Conser-vation Service.
13
By convention, phases are attributes of soils not usually considered as criteria
within a classi ﬁcation system. For example, stoniness and rock outcrops are not
part of soil by de ﬁnition, yet these features are important to the management
and use of soils. Slopes as they in ﬂuence water movement and erosion are
important considerations, but seldom are they part of formal classi ﬁcation. Phases
are vital to provide additional information of interest to users. Classes of condi-tions that may be considered for phases are described in the Soil Survey Manual
of the NCSS.
9
2.2.7 S OIL SURVEY  MAPS
Traditionally, soil maps have been made to show the distribution of soils tofacilitate the transfer of technology, mainly agricultural, and to portray patternsof order in nature. Because soils are multicomponent systems having numerousproperties, delineations of soil bodies also represent distributions of included soilproperties to varying degrees. Pro ﬁle textures, nature of parent materials, drainage
or wetness conditions, and kinds and arrangements of horizons can often berelated to speci ﬁc soil map units.
Land use objectives for which soil surveys are used differ widely in both
kinds and levels of generalization. Some objectives are to predict soil performancefor speci ﬁc plants, like corn or cotton. Others require prediction of soil abilities
for general land use classes, such as cropping, range, or forestry, and some requireevaluation of alternative uses in land use planning. Each soil use objective has aset of limiting soil attributes that are critical.
There are practical limits to the number and minimum size of delineations
on maps relative to the legibility of identi ﬁcation symbols and colors, importance
of features and soils to be separated, and levels of spatial accuracy that can beSoil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 45
achieved. In the U.S., a national map accuracy standard for maps of 1:20,000 or
smaller is that not more than 10% of well-de ﬁned location points should be in
error by more than 0.5 mm.14 A line width of 0.3 mm (a common pen or pencil
line on a 1:24,000 scale map) is about 7 m on the ground, and a location error
of 0.5 mm represents 12 m on the ground. Errors of location and internal com-position increase markedly as delineation size decreases or complexity (amountof dissection) of a delineation increases.
Thus, decisions about map scales depend on purpose of the survey, degree
of precision of boundaries for locations, maximum amount of permissible delin-eation error, minimum size with an acceptable error of boundary placement, andthe degree to which the minimum area of interest is acceptable to the user.Modeling soil-landscapes for pedogenesis and modeling those for land use ormanagement practices generally require different map scales.
It is useful to consider two kinds of map unit variability, whether spatial or
temporal. One kind is systematic and its pattern of occurrence is recognizableand mappable; the other appears to be random, unpredictable and unmappable.This is, in part, due to scale where similarities are included yet not all contrastscan be delineated because either the scale of the base map is too small or theexact location on the map is uncertain.
Random variability, once recognized, can be described as occurring in a soil-
landscape unit. However, it is not possible to accurately predict its occurrence.An interesting question is: Does the complexity or dissection of a delineation ofa map unit convey useful information about the composition of variability withinthe delineation?
Numerous maps showing the distribution patterns of interpretations derived
from basic soil maps are available. Perhaps the most famous are the land capabilitymaps that were included in farm and ranch plans. The green-yellow-red traf ﬁc
light colors were used to emphasize risks and limitations of land use management.
2.2.8 G ENERALIZED  SOIL MAPS
When relevant features are abstracted to produce a smaller-scale map from alarger-scale map, that is generalization. For example, the soil survey of Chinadone between 1979 and 1997 (C.F. Xi, personal communication) mapped urban-ized areas at scales of 1:100 to 1:5000 and the adjacent lands at 1:10,000. Thisinformation was generalized and combined with landscapes mapped at 1:50,000to produce a huge set of maps for the country. A correlation procedure and furthergeneralization provided maps of 1:200,000. The objective of the decreed “GreatPlan” was to produce a 1:1 M soil map of China and a set of derivative mapsrelating to potential and utilization of soil resources. Generalized maps at scalesof 1:1, 1:2.5, and 1:4 M were planned for publication.
In the U.S., the agricultural areas have modern detailed maps published at
scales from 1:12,000 to 1:24,000. This compilation of maps is called SSURGO(Soil Survey Geographic) database
9 and is being digitized and georeferenced at
a scale of 1:24,000. Currently, SSURGO is transformed into an updated geodata46 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
format called Soil Data Mart. Each of the map units identi ﬁed in SSURGO and
Soil Data Mart can be composed of up to three components, some of which areunknown. Most modern published surveys include a generalized soil association
map showing major physiographic areas at 1:150,000 to 1:300,000.
A nationally consistent set of generalized soil maps at a scale of 1:250,000
is called STATSGO (State Soil Geographic) database,
9 and the maps have been
digitized. The composition of delineations was estimated from transects drawnacross published SSURGO maps. A generalized version of STATSGO, known asNATSGO (National Soil Geographic) database is currently used as a base mapfor many national-level soil-based interpretive maps. Procedures for generalizingmaps are probably less familiar than how to describe soils or do laboratoryanalyses for soil characterization.
2.2.9 S PECIAL  SOIL RESOURCE  INVENTORIES
Two rather unique surveys are the Canadian Biophysical Resource Inventorysurveys and the Australian Land System surveys.
Jasper and Banff National Parks in Canada were mapped by a group of
natural resource scientists including wildlife biologists, plant ecologists, soilscientists, geomorphologists, and parkland managers.
15 The initial landform
delineations were modi ﬁed based on suggestions of the specialists and the inven-
tory mapped on air photos at a scale of 1:24,000. Biophysical surveys in Quebecand other provinces were at smaller map scales, but the integration of knowledgein the legend designs greatly enhanced the utility of these resource inventoriesfor many users.
Innovative reconnaissance surveys were the land system schemes designed
to evaluate sparsely populated terrain in Australia.
16 Landscape (terrain) provinces
at 1:250,000 were successively divided into patterns, units, and components atlarger scales. Air photos served as a basic tool for separating and delineatingterrain taxa.
A modi ﬁcation of the land system approach was used in Victoria, Australia,
17
to evaluate land capability, mainly for agriculture. Classes of the highest category,
land zones, are divided into land systems, land units, and land unit components.Components have a limited range of values appropriate for some features, but aninde ﬁnite range for other features not related to the sequence. It was stated that
covariance of features in a sequence was more important than the range of values.
Special-purpose surveys of landscapes all use models of the landscape. Some
are written down; others are carried in the minds of the surveyors. Recent attemptsto reconstruct the mental models of surveys using statistics and geographicinformation systems (GIS) layers to provide environmental elements have beenonly partially successful, indicating the value of recording models for futureusers.
18,19 This textbook introduces numerous studies that successfully used digital
spatial datasets and pedometric techniques to describe soil-landscapes.
A study of soil resource inventories20 identi ﬁed ﬁve kinds of information that
would be necessary to predict soil performance in an on-site appraisal:Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 47
• The level of detail of information that would be required to evaluate
soil resources for that objective
• The soil properties that would be critical for the projected land use• The land use objective for which the soil resources are to be evaluated• The degree of limitations that critical soil properties would impose on
that use
• The effects of the geographic distribution of limiting soil conditions
of the projected use
The information needed to predict soil performance from inventories is obvi-
ously the same as that required for on-site investigations. In addition, the studyaddressed three additional criteria: quality of the base map, including groundcontrol; legibility of the map; and reliability of the recorded data of both the mapand associated text. A sound basis for appraisal is provided in the report.
14
2.3 SOIL CLASSIFICATION
At the First World Congress of Soil Science, W.W. Weir21 made the point that
because soil classi ﬁcation is wholly within the realm of thought and is governed
by the laws of identity, it follows that we create the concepts indicated by thecategories. He believed that we created soils as a universal concept, and that wedid the same for soil series. He further commented that in the world of things, soilsexist as real physical objects, but in classi ﬁcation we deal with them as thought
entities called categories or classes. And to summarize this philosophy, Weir con-cluded that a category in soil classi ﬁcation, representing a general concept, may
be de ﬁned, whereas an individual soil as a natural object may only be described.
Classi ﬁcation schemes readily handle mutually exclusive classes and system-
atically produce clean and tidy boxes of information, whereas nature hasresponded to a quite different set of guidelines. As dif ﬁcult as de ﬁning a soil may
seem, de ﬁning and modeling soil-landscapes also presents numerous challenges.
A classi ﬁcation is no better or no worse than the purpose for which it was
designed. The adequacy of a system is judged by how well it satis ﬁes its stated
objectives or purpose.
A representative pro ﬁle based on a set of ﬁeld observations is the central
concept for a soil. Insofar as each concept represents different genetic soils, theyare the objects that are organized and arranged in a scheme of classi ﬁcation. The
purpose is to show relationships among and between the many kinds of soilsrecognized by the designers of a system. Such a scheme reveals order in natureas perceived and described by the authors. There have been many schemes toclassify soil pro ﬁles (pedons), and most are reasonably consistent with the
intended purpose.
Because morphogenetic systems are derived from the basic premise of soil
science about the soil-forming factors, it follows that the real objects are geo-graphic bodies; however, no comprehensive system has yet been implemented toclassify soil-landscape bodies over large areas.48 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
2.3.1 H IERARCHICAL  STRUCTURE
The sheer number of kinds of recognized soils is so large that a nested or
hierarchical scheme is the most common way to accommodate them. Although
concepts of individual soils at the ﬁeld level can consistently be placed together
into ever larger more inclusive groups, once a scheme is developed, it can onlyoperate from the higher categories to the lower ones to separate the universe ofsoils into ever smaller, more detailed groups.
22
All morphogenetic classi ﬁcations have a genetic thread holding the categories
together. The highest level is the most comprehensive, abstract, and is unstated;it is the universe of soils. The recorded highest category is an abstraction of theconcepts of soils, usually different pathways of formation and evolution of soils.The soil features used to recognize each category are thought to be the result ofprocesses, and they differ according to the concepts of how different kinds ofsoils develop. Classes are the subdivisions at each categorical level.
2.3.2 K EYS TO CLASSIFICATION  SCHEMES
The human mind automatically classi ﬁes everything to simplify the complexity
of the environment in which it lives, including ideas and thoughts. Keys are anexpedient way to focus on the essential information needed to classify soils. Akey is a tool of exclusion and is most ef ﬁcient with yes–no decisions. Is this soil
composed of dominantly mineral or organic materials? If mineral, exclude allfurther information about organic soils. Is this set of properties the result of soil-forming processes? On and on, one asks the questions looking for the yes–noanswers and moving on through the keys searching for the ﬁrst placement.
All soils are important in their geographic locations; however, in the structure
of a key, soils are abstractions of mental models, and choices are made aboutimportance. It is possible to note which constraints to soil development werethought to be more important to the designers of the system.
Keys may not tell us as much about soil-landscape models as we might hope
for, but nevertheless, they are important because of the strong in ﬂuence they have
on soil surveyors using them to identify soils. They channel thinking and thoughtprocesses in rather rigid ways by focusing attention on selected soil properties.
2.3.3 I MPORTANCE  OF SOIL SERIES
Soil series have been recognized for more than 100 years in the U.S.23 The soil
series were divided into soil types based on the overall texture of the pro ﬁle
generally associated with kinds of parent material or geologic deposit. Becausesoil series represented soil-landscapes, they had fairly wide ranges of properties,but very little information of actual ranges was available. Boundaries betweensoil series were not ﬁxed, and as long as surveys were at widely scattered
locations, there was little dif ﬁculty recognizing different series. When great soil
groups were recognized, the soil series were placed in appropriate groups; how-Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 49
ever, the lack of precise de ﬁnitions of boundaries meant that the placement of
many series was uncertain.
The correlation of soil descriptions and data for correct placement was a
major task of the soil survey. As new soils were detected, they were set up as
provisional or tentative series, and as more information was obtained, they wereﬁnally recognized as of ﬁcial soil series. The survey program relied mainly on
descriptions and properties of soil series to support the mapping and interpretationof soils throughout the country.
Are soil series soil-landscapes? Of course. Are soil series conceptual entities
in a classi ﬁcation system? Of course. There has always been some ambiguity with
the term soil series  because it is used to name soil map units, is the name of an
ideal mutually exclusive entity of classi ﬁcation, and is both singular and plural.
2.3.4 S OIL TAXONOMY
The adoption of Soil Taxonomy9 was slow because lots of testing was required to
make sure it satis ﬁed its objectives. The soil series were the testing blocks; if classes
at higher categorical levels split a series, either the criteria of a higher-level classwas changed or the soil series was reexamined and modi ﬁed accordingly.
Models of soils guided the development of Soil Taxonomy . The order level
consists of soils whose properties are thought to result from major courses ofdevelopment; the suborders are soils of the order classes whose additional prop-erties are thought to be major controls of the current soil-forming processes; thegreat groups have additional properties that affect current processes; and so onthrough the de ﬁnitions of the categories.
22 The subgroups reveal intergrades
between other classes and also extragrades not related to other speci ﬁc taxa; the
family category provides information about the capacity for further change andserves as the bridge between the abstractions of higher-level genetic conceptsand the series, the basic units of this system of soil classi ﬁcation.
There are assumptions that classes of the higher categories represent large
land areas and that successively lower levels represent smaller land areas. Classesat each categorical level have central concepts of properties and assumed land-scapes; consequently, the scheme re ﬂects many qualitative aspects of soil-land-
scape models.
Because the classes are considered to be mutually exclusive with ﬁxed bound-
aries, the massive job of adjusting the of ﬁcial descriptions of all soil series was
undertaken. This step ﬁnally separated the soil series as landscape mapping units
from the conceptual entities of classi ﬁcation used to name the map units. The
thoughts of W.W. Weir became reality once again. At present, there is no taxon-omy of soil-landscapes in widespread use.
2.3.5 D IAGNOSTIC  HORIZONS  AND FEATURES
Quanti ﬁed diagnostics are essential to modern classi ﬁcation schemes. Emphasis
is given to setting the boundary limits of classes in order to facilitate placement50 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
of descriptions and data into mutually exclusive classes. Often the central concept
of a class is not clearly described and must be constructed from knowledge ofthe limits.
Crucial to applying class boundaries is the issue of boundary errors. Mea-
surements are made on samples, whether depths and colors in the ﬁeld, or lab
measurements of physical, chemical, and biological properties. All measurementsare approximations of true values, and so variability becomes important in clas-sifying information. There are limits for depths, horizon thickness, and percentclay, sand, and coarse fragments. There are limits of colors, textures, cationexchange capacity, and soluble compounds. If every measurement is an approx-imation, how can we know with certainty the proper placement of soils whoseproperties are very near the arbitrary limits of classes?
Although studies demonstrate that a composite of four or more lateral samples
in a horizon signi ﬁcantly reduces probable error of many properties,
24 seldom is
this information reported for routine characterization data. With single samplesthe boundary errors of many properties are commonly ±2 to 6%, and even withcomposite sampling the errors are commonly ±2 to 3%. Guidelines generallyhave been qualitative, suggesting that good judgment should be used.
2.4 ACCOMPLISHMENTS
2.4.1 M APS
Soil surveys in the U.S. dating from about 1980 are on digital base maps. The
county-level maps or equivalent are the SSURGO maps, the 1:250,000 scalecorrelated set of maps are the STATSGO maps, and the national maps and itsderivatives are the NATSGO maps. Because the maps are digitized, the publica-tion scales or computer-generated ones may be at any scale appropriate andcompatible with the databases.
The FAO-UNESCO (Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations) set of world maps
25 was published in the late 1970s at a scale of 1:5 M
and were the only widely accepted maps covering the world. Russia and the U.S.also compiled world maps, but these were never as widely circulated or used asthe FAO set of maps. As the availability of maps and databases increased, so didthe production of maps for regions of the world. As map scales became smaller,soil patterns of larger areas re ﬂected climatic zones and major physiographic
regions, recalling again the zonal soil concepts of Dokuchaev and his colleagues.
2.4.2 D ATABASES
The databases for early surveys consisted mainly of pro ﬁle descriptions, a little
characterization data, and general information about the use of soils in the surveyarea. The extent of the map units gave an idea of the dominance and distributionof kinds of soils in the survey.Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 51
In the 1980s, a new system in the U.S. to store and manage soil data was
initiated. Patterned somewhat after the Canadian system, CANSIS, it was calledNASIS (National Soil Information System)
9 and has evolved and grown into a
complex, multifaceted system for maintaining map information, map unit infor-
mation, soil description data, laboratory data, and numerous soil interpretationrecords for all map units. Standardization caused some state data and data fromolder formats to be excluded, as it was not possible to provide adequate correla-tions with data generated by different or updated technologies. The capability toextract or build soil-landscape models has not been emphasized and remains achallenge for the future.
In the late 1980s, an effort to develop an international standard database was
started, and SOTER,
26 a soil terrain system, was tested in several parts of the
world. Eventually, FAO provided support and ISRIC (International Soil ReferenceInformation Center) in Wageningen became the caretaker. The European SoilBureau adopted it for use within the European Union. SOTER databases relatemore to classi ﬁcation taxa; however, some landscape parameters are included.
2.4.3 S OIL SURVEY  STANDARDS
In a soil survey, standards are agreed-on items. The U.S. Soil Survey Manual  of
the NCSS is primarily a book of standards. Soil description terms are de ﬁned as
are classes of many properties, such as particle size, texture, consistency, acidity,boundary thickness, and so forth.
Soil Taxonomy , another major book of standards, provides de ﬁnitions of the
various categories and taxa of the classi ﬁcation scheme used to identify and name
soils and map units. A series of Keys to Soil Taxonomy as updates of the systemwere designed for ﬁeld use; consequently, only the bare minimum of explanation
was provided. A second edition of Soil Taxonomy  was published in 2000 and
provided updated de ﬁnitions and concepts used in the soil survey.
A laboratory manual gives the details of characterization methods used in the
U.S. by the NCSS, and another guide provides interpretations of lab data asapplied in the soil survey. Most standards have been put on CDs and are alsooffered online from the Information Technology Center in Ft. Collins, CO.
The day-to-day operations of the National Soil Survey program are described
and standards set forth in the National Soil Survey Handbook . It is a complex set
of documents maintained by the soil survey staff of the Natural Resources Con-servation Service, and it is also available online. It is unfortunate that a glossaryof terms for all of the standards does not exist in one document; consequently,there may be ambiguity in the use and explanation of some terms and standards.
2.4.4 C ORRELATION
The key to success of the U.S. soil survey program has been correlation. It is theprocess of applying standards to obtain and maintain consistency of concepts, of52 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
data collection and interpretation, of technologies used to support the program,
and even in publishing the results.
Correlations are not foolproof; they are biased by participants as well as by
the designers of standards. A lot of information about soil variability has been
lost, misplaced, and perhaps misrepresented at times, although unintentionally.Soil-landscape modeling has not been subjected to standardization and correla-tion; thus, there are few records of coordinated or comprehensive pedogenicmodels in the U.S.
2.4.5 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  MODELS
Pedologists think in terms of soil pro ﬁles, their horizonation, and the movement
of water. Individual properties such as carbonates or redoximorphic mottles areusually visualized in the context of a pro ﬁle. Pedologists have learned to respect
and trust geomorphological features because the story of parent materials is there.
Geomorphology seems to respond as though the self-similarity of fractal
theory determines the patterns at all scales of observation. Rivers do the samethings over and over, alluvial fans build up in similar fashion everywhere, evenin roadside ditches, and mass movement teases sur ﬁcial soils down slope. Pedi-
mentation is perhaps the dominant process that slowly molds the pedopshere intoshapes and sizes that are recognized as soil-landscapes.
27 The stories of stepped
land surfaces and landscape inversion are written in soils even though a page ortwo is missing here and there.
28
Why do we know so little about the soil-landscape models of pedologists?
Field soil surveyors develop working hypotheses from a collection of observations;they conceptualize relationships that exist in landscapes; they predict occurrencesbased on these models; and they test, evaluate, and re ﬁne the models suf ﬁcient
to support reasonable maps of a landscape with delineations that can be relatedto conceptual central concepts of soils.
29–31 It is good science without the ability
to control any of the variables of the experiments. Their task has been to recognizeand delineate the patterns of soil formation expressed as soil-landscapes. Writtenrecords of their conceptual models were seldom required or shared.
How do you work in a multiproperty continuum whose properties are not
necessarily coincident and ﬁnd the stories that have been recorded? Daniels and
Hammer
32 suggest beginning with stratigraphy, hydrology, and geomorphology
to support what has been recorded in a soil pro ﬁle.
2.4.6 M AP UNITS TEST MODELS
Field mapping is the constant testing of the correspondence of pedogenic
models and landscape segments. It is a double relationship — one between ataxonomy and a landscape, and another between an identi ﬁed landscape and a
predicted response.
There are two uncertainties associated with this desire to predict the
unknown. One is the correctness of prediction, and the other is the chance ofSoil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 53
being wrong in the prediction. There are trade-offs between the chances of being
wrong (that chance associated with variability) and the degree of correctness (thevariability of measurement). The experiments of soil surveyors have very little
control; the variability in a landscape is ﬁxed, so the task is to decipher it as well
as possible given existing constraints. There is a risk for surveyors as well asusers of their information.
33
An evaluation of air photo interpretation (API) vs. ﬁeld mapping34 found that
in a simple area, API correctly delineated soil series 66% vs. 84% for ﬁeld
mapping. Drainage class, parent material, and land use capability were also lessfor API. In a complex area, API was considerably less accurate for the abovedeterminations. Studies of this kind con ﬁrmed that air photo interpretation is a
wonderful tool to assist soil mapping, but it could not replace the ﬁeldwork.
In a study to examine whether soil features could be combined in such a way
that mappable soil bodies are the result,
35 point pro ﬁle data for surface thickness,
surface layer organic matter, sand in the subsoil, and clay in the subsoil in a 2-m grid system were used to determine pattern complexity. When the number ofclasses of each property was increased to increase class homogeneity, the patterncomplexity also increased. Starting with categorical classes too narrowly de ﬁned
resulted in a geographic pattern so complex that a simple pattern of slightly moreheterogeneous units was missed entirely. It was possible to set statistical toleranceintervals on some properties and produce map units that were 75 or 90% purewith a 90% probability. The relevance of such statistical measures for decisionmakers is as yet unknown.
2.5 OPPORTUNITIES
Compared to the extensive coverage of qualitative soil-landscape mapping, thereis little known about the mapping of quantitative soil-landscape models. Theexcitement in basic soil science is not simply in surveying the different kinds ofvariability in space and time, but also in determining the fundamental mechanismsfor variability.
36 There are opportunities in soil survey and in soil classi ﬁcation.
2.5.1 S EARCH  FOR UNIFYING  CONCEPTS
There is a long-standing belief that the patterns we see at one scale are related
in some manner to patterns at other scales. Pedologists have not solved thequestion of unifying laws with their numerous trials of making maps of the samearea at different scales. Preliminary studies show that delineations of the samemap unit in a survey have fractal dimensions that commonly increase as unitsizes get larger or boundaries become strongly convoluted.
37 If a distribution of
fractal dimensions of a map unit were composed of several self-similarity rela-tionships, it might suggest that processes over small areas are not the same asfor large areas and might lead to new ways of understanding soil-landscapes.
As yet we do not know enough to test and evaluate this part of chaos theory
to determine if it may be a unifying concept, or even if it is relevant to our54 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
understanding of soil-landscapes. Databases of digitized soil surveys contain data
on the length of perimeters and the areas of map unit delineations. A fractaldimension is twice the value of the slope of a plot of log P (perimeter) vs. the
log A (area) of delineations, that is, P = A
0.5D. It should be possible now to evaluate
hundreds of soil-landscapes of interest, an exercise not previously possible.
2.5.2 S TANDARDIZING  LANDSCAPES
By most de ﬁnitions, a landscape is what lies before us or in our line of sight. It
seems worthwhile to develop a set of descriptions and eventual de ﬁnitions for
many soil-landscapes. A common scale in the U.S. could be 1:24,000, as oneU.S. Geological Survey (USGS) topographic series exists at that scale and digi-tized soil surveys can be overlain at this scale.
2.5.3 G EOMETRY  OF DELINEATIONS
We have many map products yet know very little about the cartographic featuresof the map units delineated on the maps. Geologists, cartographers, and even soilscientists have used perimeter–area ratios to evaluate roundness, dissection, orconvolutions and to classify sizes and shapes of delineations.
5,38 It is thought that
wherever a change in the factors, or degree of interaction, in ﬂuenced the processes
that resulted in this soil, there would be a constraint and likely a boundaryseparating differences among soils.
If the area of delineation is compared with the area of a circle having the
same perimeter as the delineation, it can be interpreted as a measure or degreeof constraint imposed in that landscape. This can be called a complexity index
38
and is equivalent to CI = P2/4 PA, where P and A are the perimeter and area of
a map unit delineation, respectively. The digitized soil survey data used to cal-culate fractal dimensions could also be used to calculate complexity indices.
2.5.4 L ANDSCAPES  OF SOIL SERIES
Local patterns of a soil series can be seen on maps of a county survey, but whatis the pattern throughout the extent of a soil series? In most instances, we do nothave good knowledge about the spatial extent of a soil series; however, withSTATSGO the general limits could be estimated and soils surveys within theselimits examined for patterns.
Plant ecologists and geographers have used a number of characteristics of
spatial relationships, including the number of near neighbors and distances toand angles between these near neighbors.
39 Frequencies of these properties can
be compared with theoretical random distributions.
Another technique is to produce a map of centroids and compare the distri-
bution of empty and ﬁlled cells with those generated by various random gener-
ators. The question of interest is whether or not there is some scale at which thespatial distribution is similar to a random frequency. Other models considerlandscape patterns as deterministic; however, the rates, locations, and times ofSoil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 55
occurrence are not predetermined and might produce features that are indistin-
guishable from random ones.
A preliminary test of ﬁve map units of glacial till- and outwash-derived soils
evaluated three random frequencies for three cell sizes. Overall, the chi square test
accepted 2 of 15 Poisson frequencies, 6 of 12 double Poisson frequencies, and 5of 10 negative binomial frequencies. How do frequencies that can be generatedrandomly affect our pedogenic models of soil-landscapes? Do they suggest that atsome scale processes affecting landscapes are indistinguishable from our assump-tions of cause-and-effect relationships?
2.5.5 C OMPOSITION  OF DELINEATIONS
Most pedologists had been taught that although soils were parts of a continuum, theycould not readily handle soil information that way. The concept of continua has alwaysbeen a part of pedology, but not the techniques to apply to soil survey, soil classi ﬁ-
cation, or making interpretations for use and management of soil resources. Statisticalmethods associated with agriculture dealt with discrete entities, and only the variabil-ity of measurements was treated as a limited continuum. The variability of soilproperties, and even sets of properties, like pro ﬁles, was observed, but not described
very well, and only occasionally was it quanti ﬁed. This is rapidly changing.
40
2.5.6 A PPLICATION  OF GEOSTATISTICS
The mathematics of geostatistics appear overwhelming to most pedologists
whose careers have revolved around qualitative concepts and models. In glaci-ated areas it is dif ﬁcult to grasp a 300-m range based on a kriging technique
because other studies reveal spatial patterns within patterns within patterns, anda 300-m range seldom makes sense.
Rethinking a continuum is like seeing the visible portion of the electromag-
netic spectrum with new eyes. The reds and yellows and blues actually grade intoone another, and a wavelength can be used to identify points along that continuum.This book is about some aspects of what lies ahead.
To understand how soils will react to changes, it is essential that process
models, whether simulating pedogenic evolution or other dynamic changes inbiosphere components, collect the correct spatial and temporal distributions ofsoil attributes in soil-landscapes.
41 In detailed soil surveys there is little informa-
tion about attribute distributions as continua; however, at smaller scales theinformation from detailed surveys has many of the features of spatially distributedattributes. The problem of data for modeling processes is therefore partly a matterof scale. Another concern has been the lack of techniques to obtain and presentattribute distributions that are appropriate and adequate for modeling processes.
2.5.7 C RITERIA  DEFINITIONS
Throughout Soil Taxonomy  there are different de ﬁnitions for properties of some
differentiating criteria. This ambiguity for terms such as humic , aquic , and content56 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
of organic carbon  is confusing for most users. The implication is that there are
many more diagnostics in Soil Taxonomy  than tacitly assumed, causing undue
attention to de ﬁnitions and specifying which criteria are actually being used.
Cleaning up the de ﬁnitions and reducing ambiguity should facilitate computer-
assisted classi ﬁcation of soils.
2.5.8 S ERIES AS TAXA
When soil series were rede ﬁned to be in compliance with the class limits imposed
by the hierarchy of Soil Taxonomy  they no longer were landscape map units.
They assumed the role of providing identity only to pedons. This facilitatedcomparisons among and between soil classi ﬁcation systems but was a step farther
away from learning how to use geographic attributes in a comprehensive classi-ﬁcation of soil-landscapes.
The existence of repeating horizon variations over short distances prompted
the creation of a variable-width pedon to include half of the distance of eachvariation with a maximum of 3.5 m. This concept is valid genetically; however,it has failed in application, so that the reasonable solution is to use a ﬁxed-size
pedon and de ﬁne new kinds of complexes as standard map units in soil-landscapes.
2.5.9 A LLOWABLE  ERRORS
There are many class limits in classi ﬁcation, but there are few rules or even
guidelines to assist classi ﬁers in being consistent in their decisions. It is often
assumed that the mean values of properties are also the expected values and thatthe data can be placed in the correct classes. When this assumption is less certain,joint class memberships are possible, but guidelines for placement and for pre-sentation of such information have not been adequately implemented.
Allowable errors are not about mistakes; they are statistical expressions of
measured variability. Acceptable and allowable are judgments, and they bene ﬁt
science when they follow agreed-on standards. Field-determined textures havewider ranges of variability than laboratory determinations. Colors estimated withMunsell color charts have less accuracy than those measured with a spectropho-tometer. Soil-landscapes described as part of soil survey operations have lots ofvariability. Guidelines are needed for applying fuzzy set theory to situations whereone or more attributes of a soil lie beyond class limits. Individual properties maybe amenable to continuum representation, but what about the whole set that wecall a soil pedon?
2.5.10 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  ANTHOLOGY
Our literature is full of fragments of soil-landscape models. Hundreds of theseshave been written about studies of soil-landscape segments, and many have neverbeen published. We are awash in a sea of ignorance, ﬂooded by unknown infor-
mation. We are all guilty of this oversight, but it could be changed. There is nosingle source or repository of our knowledge of soil-landscapes in the U.S., eitherSoil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 57
qualitative or quantitative. As technologies have changed, so have perceptions of
soil genesis and the evolution of soils in their landscapes. Imagine a CD setcontaining the anthology of American soil-landscape models.
2.6 CONCLUSIONS
It is dif ﬁcult to know what you do not know when information is very fragmented.
I believe this to be the case for soil-landscape models; nevertheless, soil sciencehas made a lot of progress during the past century, and here is what I conclude:
1. There is a solid background and legacy of soil-landscape models in
the U.S. Many details are in unpublished research studies, and descrip-tive models are implied but seldom stated in the thousands of publishedsoil surveys in the U.S. and elsewhere. Some reconstruction is possible.
2. People working in soil survey programs became so busy and pressured
for products that knowledge of soils as landscapes became more andmore dispersed. Real encouragement to document models and save theknowledge has never been implemented, but reconstruction of manymodels may be possible.
3. The U.S. is very fortunate to have had a continuous correlation effort
in the National Cooperative Soil Survey. This meant de ﬁning standards
for all aspects of soil survey and then following through with theapplication of the standards. Regardless of the glitches, errors, and anyoversights, the results have provided remarkable consistency through-out the country. It is truly a major accomplishment.
4. The collective experience and wisdom of the NCSS concerning uncer-
tainty in nature, in science, and in the human mind suggest that thetruth of soil-landscapes cannot be discovered. However, there appearto be many potential pathways to understand relationships in the envi-ronments of which we are a part. How fortunate we are.
REFERENCES
1. FD Hole, JB Campbell. Soil Landscape Analysis . Rowman and Allanheld Publ.,
Totowa, NJ, 1985, pp. 42–82.
2. IA Krupenikov. History of Soil Science . Amerind Publ. Co., New Delhi, 1992,
pp. 156–174 (translation of 1981 Russian edition).
3. CE Kellogg. Development and Signi ﬁcance of the Great Soil Groups of the United
States , USDA Miscellaneous Publication 229. U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce,
Washington, DC, 1936.
4. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation: A System of Quantitative Pedology . McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1941, pp. 1–20.
5. VM Fridland. Pattern of the Soil Cover . Keter Publ. House, Jerusalem, 1976, pp.
15–41 (translated from 1972 Russian version).58 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
6. AC Orvedal, MJ Edwards. General principles of technical grouping of soils. Soil
Sci Soc Am Proc  6: 386–392, 1941.
7. TM Bushnell. To what extent should location, topography or physiography con-
stitute a basis for differentiating soil into units or groups? First Int Congr Soil Sci
(Washington, DC) IV: 158–163, 1927.
8. CF Marbut. The contribution of soil survey to soil science. Soc Promot Agric Sci
Proc  41: 116–142, 1921.
9. Soil Survey Division, Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department
of Agriculture. Technical references. Online access to Soil Taxonomy , Keys to Soil
Taxonomy, Of ﬁcial Series descriptions, Field Book for Descriptions , Soil Survey
Manual , National Soil Survey Handbook , lab methods, NASIS tools, national
instructions, and technical notes. Available at http://soils.usda.gov/technical,accessed September 2, 2003.
10. AA Klingebiel, PH Montgomery. Land capability classi ﬁcation. In USDA Hand-
book 210 , 1961 (reprinted 1973). Online access as part 622 of the National Soil
Survey Handbook . Available at http://soils.usda.gov.
11. TM Bushnell. Some aspects of the soil catena concept . Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  7:
466–476, 1942.
12. SA Romero. A Study of Soil Variability at Mt. Pleasant. MS thesis, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY , 1944.
13. EA Norton. Soil Conservation Survey Handbook , USDA Miscellaneous Publica-
tion 352. USDA, Washington, DC, 1939.
14. Soil Resource Inventory Group. Soil resource inventories and development plan-
ning. In SMSS Technical Monograph 1 . SCS, USDA, Washington, DC, 1981, pp.
271–364.
15. WD Holland, GM Coen, Eds. Ecological (Biophysical) Land Classi ﬁcation of
Banff and Jasper National Parks , V ol. I, Summary , Alberta Institute of Pedology
Publication M-83-2. University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1983.
16. GD Aitchison, K Grant. Terrain evaluation for engineering. In Land Evaluation ,
GA Stewart, Ed. Sydney: Macmillan of Australia, 1968, pp. 125–146.
17. FR Gibbons, JCFM Haans. Dutch and Victorian Approaches to Land Appraisal,
Soil Survey Paper 11. Netherlands Soil Survey Institute, Wageningen, 1976, pp.23–32.
18. EN Bui, A Loughhead, R Corner. Extracting soil-landscape rules from previous
soil surveys. Aust J Soil Res  37: 495–508, 1999.
19. B Zhou, R Wang. Knowledge-based classi ﬁcation in automated mapping. Pedo-
sphere  13: 209–218, 2003.
20. MG Cline. Objectives and rationale of the Cornell study of soil resource inven-
tories. In SMSS Technical Monograph 1 . SCS, USDA, Washington, DC, 1981, pp.
7–14.
21. WW Weir. What is the relative weight that should be given ﬁeld and laboratory
data in the de ﬁnition of several categories in a comprehensive scheme of soil
classi ﬁcation? First Int Congr Soil Sci  (Washington, DC) IV: 113–121, 1927.
22. H Eswaran, T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart, Eds. Soil Classi ﬁcation: a Global
Desk Reference . CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2003, pp. 27–42, 101–200.
23. RW Simonson. 
Historical Aspects of Soil Survey and Soil Classi ﬁcation . SSSA,
Madison, WI, 1987.Soil Survey and Soil Classiﬁcation 59
24. LP Wilding, LR Drees. Spatial variability and pedology. In Pedogenesis and Soil
Taxonomy. LP Wilding, GF Hall, NE Smeck, Eds. Elsevier Sci. Publ., Amsterdam,
1983, pp. 83–116.
25. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO-UNESCO). Soil
Map of the World , 1:5 M, V ol. 1, Legend . UNESCO, Paris, 1974.
26. FAO-ISRIC-ISSS. Global and national soils and terrain digital database (SOTER).
In Procedures  manual. ISRIC, Wageningen, 1995.
27. RV Ruhe. Geomorphic surfaces and the nature of soils. Soil Sci 82: 441–455, 1956.
28. VO Targulian. Soil as a biotic/abiotic natural system: a reactor, memory and
regulator of biospheric interactions. Eurasian Soil Sci  29: 30–41, 1995.
29. RW Arnold. Multiple working hypothesis in soil genesis. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
29: 717–724, 1965.
30. RW Scully, RW Arnold. Soil-geomorphic relationships in postglacial alluvium in
New York. Soil Sci Soc Am J 43: 1014–1019, 1979.
31. WE Hanna, LA Daugherty, RW Arnold. Soil-geomorphic relationships in a ﬁrst-
order valley in central New York. Soil Sci Soc Am J  40: 89–92, 1975.
32. RB Daniels, RD Hammer. Soil Geomorphology . John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1992, pp. 1–23.
33. RW Arnold. Soil survey reliability: minimizing the consumer’s risk. In Data
Reliability and Risk Assessment in Soil Interpretations , SSSA Special Publication
47, WD Nettleton, A Hornsby, RB Brown, TL Coleman, Eds. SSSA, Madison,WI, 1996, pp. 13–20.
34. JA Pomerening, MG Cline. The accuracy of soil maps prepared by various meth-
ods that use aerial photograph interpretation. Photogrammetric Eng  19: 809–817,
1953.
35. IJ Jansen, RW Arnold. De ﬁning ranges of soil characteristics. Soil Sci Soc Am
Proc  40: 89–92, 1976.
36. G Sposito, RJ Reginato, Eds. Opportunities in Basic Soil Science Research . SSSA,
Madison, WI, 1992, pp. 1–7.
37. RW Arnold. Fractal dimensions of some soil map units. Trans 14th Int Congr Soil
Sci (Kyoto) V: 92–97, 1990.
38. PA Piech. Selected Concepts of Soil Map Delineations. MS thesis, Cornell Uni-
versity, Ithaca, NY , 1980.
39. RW Arnold. Spatial Analysis of Soil Map Units , Agronomy Mimeo 78-5. Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY , 1978.
40. MJ Mausbach, LP Wilding, Eds. Spatial Variabilities of Soils and Landforms ,
SSSA Special Publication 28. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1991.
41. PA Burrough. The technologic paradox in soil survey: new methods and techniques
of data capture and handling. In Soil Survey: Perspectives and Strategies for the
21st Century , ITC Publication 21, JA Zinck, Ed. ITC, Enschede, The Netherlands,
1993, pp. 15–22.613A Historical Perspective 
on Soil-Landscape Modeling
David J. Brown
CONTENTS
Abstract ...............................................................................................................62
3.1 Introduction .............................................................................................623.2 Geologists, Geological Surveys, and Soil Mapping...............................64
3.2.1 Geologic Understandings of Soil–Geology
Relationships ...........................................................................64
3.2.2 The Use of Geology in the U.S. National Cooperative 
Soil Survey ..............................................................................67
3.2.3 Soil Survey of Southeastern England .....................................69
3.3 von Humboldt, Dokuchaev, and Soil Geography...................................70
3.3.1 Humboldt and Russian Soil Geography .................................713.3.2 Other Geographic In ﬂuences in Pedology..............................74
3.3.3 Russian Soil Mapping Techniques, circa 1900 ......................753.3.4 Use of the Factorial Approach in the NCSS (U.S.) ...............76
3.4 Milne’s Soil Catena Concept ..................................................................77
3.4.1 The Origin and De ﬁnition of the Catena Concept .................77
3.4.2 Challenging the Zonal Soils Tradition....................................803.4.3 Catena Concept vs. Soil Association......................................833.4.4 Applications of the Catena Concept (or Association) ............85
3.5 Linnaeus, Darwin, and Marbut’s Soil Anatomy.....................................87
3.5.1 The Roots of Late-19th-Century Morphology .......................873.5.2 Marbut’s Soil Anatomy ...........................................................883.5.3 Marbut’s Reign, 1913–1933....................................................903.5.4 Three-Dimensional Soil Bodies..............................................91
3.6 The Introduction of Aerial Photography, 1927–1952 ............................923.7 Summary and Contemporary Relevance ................................................94
3.7.1 Historical Summary.................................................................943.7.2 Contemporary Relevance ........................................................96
References ...........................................................................................................9762 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ABSTRACT
Over the past several decades, a number of new and powerful technologies have
been applied to soil-landscape modeling: satellite remote sensing, geographic
information systems (GISs), global positioning systems (GPSs), and digital ele-vation models (DEMs). However, the key soil-landscape theories underlying theseapplications were proposed and developed by scientists and surveyors from theearly 19th to the mid-20th centuries. Soil-landscape modeling has its origins in19th-century geological surveying before soil surveyors broke away to createtheir own discipline around the turn of the 20th century. The Russian geologist-geographer V .V . Dokuchaev introduced a climatic-geographical approach to soilmapping in the late 19th century, drawing on the ideas of the German scientistAlexander von Humboldt and merging geological and geographical ideas in theformulation of the ﬁve factors of soil formation known today. In the early 20th
century, through the work of Dokuchaev disciple Glinka and the U.S. NationalCooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) leader Curtis Fletcher Marbut, a predominantlyclimatic, zonal concept came to dominate soil-landscape modeling. Against thisbackground, an unknown British scientist working in East Africa named GeoffreyMilne challenged the dominant zonal paradigm in pointing to dramatic changesin soil properties and formation from hilltop to valley bottom within a singleclimate zone. To address this regular and repeating soil-topography relationship,Milne coined the catena concept to describe a complex map unit with associated
hillslope hydrologic processes of formation. The U.S. soil survey communitydistorted and confused Milne’s catena, and only through the work of Robert Ruhein the 1950s and 1960s was the concept saved from scienti ﬁc obscurity. The
dominant paradigm in the NCSS (U.S.) and much of the soil survey world forthe past century has been Marbut’s soil anatomy, based on a 19th-century bio-logical metaphor with the primary objective of constructing a hierarchical, naturalsoil classi ﬁcation system. While geological surveying, Humboldt’s plant geogra-
phy, Dokuchaev’s geology–geography synthesis, and the catena concept have allcontributed to the development of modern, quantitative soil-landscape modeling,soil anatomy has hindered progress by diverting intellectual resources and prestigeaway from soil mapping.
3.1 INTRODUCTION
The scienti ﬁc discipline of pedology grew out of soil surveys that were initiated
in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to produce soil maps and related man-agement interpretations. The fundamental problem in soil mapping has been theneed to construct soil maps over large areas based upon a relatively limited numberof soil observations. To solve this problem — to interpolate or extrapolate froma few soil observations to the Earth’s surface — scientists and surveyors haveconstructed soil-landscape models: theoretical, empirical, graphical, verbal, qual-itative, quantitative, explicit, and tacit. This chapter addresses the history of soil-landscape models, focusing on developments from the early 1800s to the 1950s.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 63
Given the centrality of soil-landscape modeling for both soil surveys and
pedology, it seems surprising that so little attention has been paid to the historyof this science. Simonson
1–3 and Gardner4 have written extensively on the history
of soil survey activities in the U.S., but the bulk of their work addresses admin-
istrative issues, classi ﬁcation, and underlying soil pro ﬁle concepts, with relatively
little attention paid to how surveyors have actually drawn lines on a map andhow soil-landscape theories have informed this work. Similarly, Taylor
5 discusses
mapping practices only as part of a general history of Australian soil surveyactivities. Ef ﬂand and Ef ﬂand
6 chronicle the history of soil-geomorphology stud-
ies in the U.S., but stop short of demonstrating how this work has actually beenapplied to soil mapping. The explanation for the relative dearth of histories onsoil mapping science is quite simple. Soil-landscape modeling has historicallybeen left to the proverbial “ ﬁeld man,” and soil surveyors’ theories — until quite
recently — have rarely been made explicit.
7,8 Accordingly, the history  of the
science of soil-landscape modeling has been as tacit as the science of soil-landscape modeling itself.
Tandarich
9,10 has traced the genealogy of soil investigations and made the
case that pedology is fundamentally interdisciplinary with historical ties to geol-ogy, agricultural chemistry, biology, and geography. While undoubtedly true, thisclaim begs the question: How speci ﬁcally  have these disciplines contributed to
the development of pedology and soil-landscape modeling? Given the internaldiversity of disciplines like geology, geography, and biology, changes in thosedisciplines over time, and their relatively recent emergence from the primordialsoup of natural history, it would be instructive to know what particular ideas,metaphors, methods, problems, questions, and answers have been inherited bythe newer science of soil-landscape modeling from its more established relatives.
I make the case that four major scienti ﬁc traditions, concepts, or metaphors
have impacted the development of soil-landscape science as we know it today:(1) soil characterization in 19th-century geological surveys, (2) Alexander vonHumboldt’s early 19th-century plant geography, (3) Geoffrey Milne’s soil catenaconcept, published in 1935, and (4) late-19th-century biological morphology.*The integration of Quaternary geology and geomorphology into soil-landscapemodeling in the 1950s and 1960s,
6 while important, lies beyond the scope of this
chapter. It would be a mistake to view these themes as completely distinct orhegemonic. Paradigm shifts in the history of science are like waves washing upona beach, with a great deal of mixing from one wave to the next. Nonetheless,identifying and analyzing key ideas in the history of soil mapping can helpdistinguish their relative importance in contemporary soil-landscape modeling.In addition to sections on these theoretical concepts, I review the introduction ofaerial photography in soil survey work, of great practical importance to develop-ments in soil-landscape modeling. A brief discussion of contemporary relevance
* Morphology, in this instance, refers to the study of the form, structure, and development of biological
organisms.64 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
closes out the chapter. A timeline of important events, ideas, and publications
with associated scientists is provided as a guide in Table 3.1.
3.2 GEOLOGISTS, GEOLOGICAL SURVEYS, AND 
SOIL MAPPING
The earliest soil surveyors, soil mappers, and what we now might call soil-
landscape modelers were geologists. William Smith’s 1815 geological map ofEngland, Wales, and part of Scotland “that changed the world”
11,12 includes a
claim in the legend to exhibit the “varieties of soil, according to the variationsin the substrata” (Figure 3.1). Smith did not recognize soil pro ﬁles as they are
known to soil surveyors today, nor did he devote appreciable attention to thestudy of unconsolidated surface materials. Rather, he constructed a seminal geo-logic map using fossils to identify strata — then assumed for his publication arelationship between soil variability and variability in the rocks below. Therelevance of this map to the history of soil-landscape modeling is that (1) geol-ogists, from the outset, produced maps; (2) many early geologists like WilliamSmith were landscape scientists trained to read landscapes in the ﬁeld and utilize
surveying equipment
11,12; and (3) most 19th-century geological surveys included
soil investigations, albeit of variable quality.4,14–16
3.2.1 G EOLOGIC  UNDERSTANDINGS  OF SOIL–GEOLOGY  
RELATIONSHIPS
Simonson17 and other U.S. soil survey workers/historians4,18 have claimed that
prior to the initiation of the NCSS (U.S.) program in 1899, geologists simplymapped surface geology and assumed a perfect correspondence between geologyand soils. Early in the 19th century, this was for the most part true. Amos Eaton,who conducted some of the earliest studies of agricultural geology, wrote in1818 that
all soils, excepting what proceeds from decomposed animal and vegetable matter,
are composed of the broken fragments of disintegrated rock. From this fact it isnatural to infer that the soil of any district might be known by the rocks out ofwhich it is formed. (Quoted in Gardner, 1998)
According to Gardner4 (p. 8), this statement “was to characterize ﬁeld studies
in soils and geology for nearly a century.” However, by the late 1800s mostgeologists had attained a relatively sophisticated understanding of the variousrelationships between rocks and soils. For example, the U.S. Geological Survey(USGS) scientist Israel Russell
19 studied precipitation and temperature in ﬂuences
on rock weathering and the production of secondary clays. Russell19 (p. 27)
observed that “the soil formed by the decay of a great variety of rocks is a redclay, which, in the more advanced stages of decomposition, is strikingly similar,A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 65
both in appearance and in constituents, the world over.” The warmer and more
humid the climate, he argued, the greater the degree of weathering, with aconsequent soil reddening due to the production of dehydrated ferric oxides. Ina prominent 1904 treatise on Rocks, Rock-Weathering and Soils , the geologist
George Perkins Merrill
20 (p. 360) stated:TABLE 3.1Timeline Showing the Dates of Signiﬁcant Publications, Ideas, or 
Applications with Associated Scientists
Decade
Starting Signiﬁcant Publication, Idea, or Event with Associated Scientist
1730 Systema Naturae , 1st ed., 1735; Carl von Linné or Linnaeus  (1707–1778), Swedish 
botanist, naturalist, and taxonomist
…
1800 Scienti ﬁc journey through the Americas, 1799–1804; Alexander von Humboldt  
(1769–1859), climatic theory of plant geography
1810 Paper on isothermal lines, 1817; Alexander von Humboldt
Geologic map of England and Wales, 1815; William Smith  (1769–1838)
1820 Scienti ﬁc journey through Russia, 1829; Alexander von Humboldt
1830 State geological surveys initiated in U.S.18401850 Origin of Species , 1859; Charles Robert Darwin  (1809–1882), proposed theory of 
biological evolution
1860 Birth of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 186918701880 Russian Chernozem, 1883; Vasilii Vasilevich Dokuchaev  (1846–1903), Russian 
geologist-geographer, ﬁve factors of soil formation
1890 Relations of Soil to Climate , 1892; Eugene W. Hilgard  (1833–1916), U.S. agricultural 
geologist/chemist
1900 Birth of the U.S. National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS), 18991910 Treatise on Soil Science , 1914; Konstantine Dimitrievich Glinka  (1867–1927), Russian 
student of Dokuchaev
Soil anatomy, ca. 1916–1920; Curtis Fletcher Marbut  (1863–1935), NCSS (U.S.) 
leader, 1913–1933
1920 Experiments with aerial photography in 1923 and 19271930 1st county mapped with aerial photography in 1930; Thomas M. Bushnell , leader of 
Indiana survey, 1922–?; aerial photography adopted by NCSS in 1935
Catena concept, 1935; Geoffrey Milne  (1898–1942), British soil chemist, East Africa
1940 Debates over catena concept, 1942–1945; Thomas M. Bushnell
Little soil survey activity due to WWII
1950 Soil Survey Division and Soil Conservation Survey (SCS) merged, reorganization
Initiation of NCSS Soil-Geomorphology program in 1953; led by Robert V . Ruhe , U.S. 
Quaternary geologist and pedologist
Source:  Compiled from a variety of references cited in this chapter.66 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 3.1 William Smith’s 1815 geological “map that changed the world.”12 The leg-
end indicates that the map expresses “varieties of soil according to the variations in thesubstrata,” a common approach in the early 19th century. (Reprinted from Schneer, C.J.,William “Strata” Smith on the Web, 2004, available at http://www.unh.edu/esci/wmsmith.html.
13) (See color version on the accompanying CD.) 
  
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 67
That, however, a rock contains all the desired materials, is no certain indication as
to character of its decomposition product, since in this process of decompositionmuch desirable matter may have become lost. Nevertheless most soils retain whatwe may call inherited characteristics and a direct comparison whenever possible isby no means uninteresting.
Merrill discussed the fact that some soils formed on limestone were devoid
of lime while, other soils formed on rocks other than limestone were found tohave signi ﬁcant amounts of lime — a perplexing observation that was explained
by reference to Hilgard’s
21 theories on the in ﬂuence of climate, precipitation, and
proﬁle leaching. The type and degree of soil inheritance from the rock below was
acknowledged to be conditional on a number of factors.
For the most part, 19th-century geological surveyors published soil informa-
tion in reports attached to geological maps.4,22,23 Even where independent soil
maps were published,14 soil distributions were based heavily on geological
maps.15,16 This indicates that for the most part, geological surveyors used geologic
relationships to delineate  map units (just as surveyors today use topography and
surface re ﬂectance from aerial photographs). However, surface and subsoils
within map units were described (particularly color and texture), and sampleswere frequently taken back to laboratories for mechanical and chemical analy-ses.
22–24 The development of a more sophisticated understanding of soil–geology
relationships within geology followed decades of describing and analyzing soilson a wide variety of formations and deposits.
This discussion has focused for the most part on the use of geology to map
soils, but it should also be noted that geologists use soils to map geology in areaswhere outcrops are lacking
25 and have done so for at least a century.26,27 Just as
soil surveyors came to use vegetation and topography for soil mapping becausethese landscape attributes were readily visible at the surface, so geologists haveused soils to map geology because they can be readily sampled at the surface.“In regions which are not covered by glacial deposits … or by thick sheets oftransported materials … the soils will usually indicate the nature of the underlyingsolid rocks”
27 (p. 281). At the dawn of the 20th century, geologists were aware
that there was no exact correspondence between soils and geology, and on slopinglands the ﬁeld geologist was instructed to be wary of colluvial soil transport that
might obscure bedrock stratigraphy. But surveyors found that sandstones did tendto produce sandy soils, shales and marls produced clays, etc.
27 The study of soil-
geology relationships, then, has long been of mutual bene ﬁt for both soil and
geologic surveyors.
3.2.2 T HE USE OF GEOLOGY  IN THE U.S. N ATIONAL  
COOPERATIVE  SOIL SURVEY
When the U.S. soil survey program was initiated in 1899 within a relatively new
Department of Agriculture, the ﬁrst nationally funded soil survey program in
the world, the federal agency hired surveyors almost exclusively from agricul-68 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
tural colleges.4,28 This unof ﬁcial policy held even when the “Ag” colleges were
not held in high academic regard and there were few quali ﬁed candidates receiv-
ing degrees from such colleges28 (p. 29). Many of the cooperating institutions
at the state level were geological surveys,14 but this seems to have been avoided
when possible. For example, when the Bureau of Soils entered into a cooperativeagreement for a reconnaissance soil survey with the Washington State GeologicalSurvey rather than the Washington State Experiment Station in 1908 at theinsistence of the state legislature, this caused some controversy within theNCSS
28 (p. 82). It was only later in the 20th century that geologically trained
scientists like Mark Baldwin and James Thorp, who trained under Allen D. Holeat Earlham College, joined the soil survey.
10 Geologists and geologic surveying
had a great deal to offer the new U.S. soil survey program initiated in 1899 —expertise in Quaternary geology, physiography, reading landscapes, and basicsurveying skills in addition to decades of soil studies — but this expertise waslargely ignored.
When Curtis Fletcher Marbut (Figure 3.2), leader of the NCSS (U.S.) from
1913 to 1933, joined the survey in 1910, it seemed to some soil surveyors thathe “still regarded soil as an interesting geologic formation”
30 (p. 47). In his early
years with the survey, Marbut was responsible for re ﬁning a systematic soil
classi ﬁcation based on physiographic provinces and geologic parent material —
a classi ﬁcation that became the soil survey standard for the second decade of the
20th century.31 In a stunning intellectual reversal, the origins of which are not
clear, sometime around 1916 Marbut switched from being the disliked geologistFIGURE 3.2 Curtis Fletcher Marbut (1863–1935), the geologist turned antigeologist who
led the U.S. National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) from 1913 to 1933 and promotedthe soil anatomy concept. (From Krusekopf, H.H., Ed., Life and Work of C.F . Marbut , Soil
Science Society of America, Columbia, MO, 1942.
29 With permission.)
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 69
to an extreme antigeologist.4 Like Saul struck down on the road to Damascus,
the man who a few years earlier had designed a geological and physiographicclassi ﬁcation scheme for soils in the U.S. now claimed that “these [soil] features
have no harmonious relation whatever to the features of the parent geological
material”
32 (p. 18). His rejection of geology was so complete and zealous that he
was almost removed as leader of the soil survey.33 It would take almost half a
century — with the work of Robert Ruhe and the soil-geomorphology projectsinitiated in 1953
6 — for geology to once again make signi ﬁcant contributions to
soil survey work in the U.S.
Having soil, geologic, and topographic surveying under one scienti ﬁc and
administrative roof in the U.S. — something that almost happened in the late19th century — would likely have led to a very different history of soil-landscapemodeling. In the late 1880s, the agricultural geologist/chemist E.W. Hilgard atthe University of California and the USGS director John Wesley Powell maderepeated attempts to get an “agricultural” or soil survey established within theUSGS. Powell, who already incorporated topographic surveying into the USGS,was interested in expanding the size and relevance of his agency, and evenconsidered moving the USGS into the new Department of Agriculture. Hilgard,in the end, turned down an opportunity to lead the new survey because he didnot want to move to Washington, D.C., and the initiative subsequently failed.
34
3.2.3 S OIL SURVEY  OF SOUTHEASTERN  ENGLAND
Hall and Russell,35 two distinguished British agricultural chemists, conducted one
of the most involved and scienti ﬁcally rigorous studies of soil-geology relation-
ships through the ﬁrst half of the 20th century in their Report on the Agriculture
and Soils of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex . More importantly, for this discussion, they
also published an explicit account of how this map was constructed,35 which
provides a window into early-20th-century theories of soil-geology relationships.
The essential problem that Hall and Russell35 faced was to ﬁnd some means
of correlating soils to existing or readily obtainable data.
As it would be almost out of the question to construct a soil map on a basis of
analysis only, examining for example ﬁeld by ﬁeld along the common boundary of
two types of soil in order to draw that boundary, some guiding principle must besought for, and this in the area in question has been provided by the GeologicalSurvey. It was a matter of experience that within the district there was a generalcorrelation between soils and geological outcrop, and at the outset a number ofdeterminations were made to ascertain if the outcrop lines laid down on the geo-logical map would also serve as boundary lines between two soil types. (pp.185–186)
Detailed hard rock and drift (surface deposit) maps were obtained from the
Geological Survey at a scale of 1 inch to 1 mile. Soils and subsoils at selectedlocations were analyzed for both particle size distribution and major elementcomposition (e.g., silica, alumina, potash, etc.). Additionally, farmers were inter-70 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
viewed to ascertain the yields, land use history, and management problems asso-
ciated with selected ﬁelds. For the time, the soil and geology data were excep-
tionally detailed and allowed for the rigorous comparison of the two.
Hall and Russell were well aware that climate, vegetation, and topography
could also control soil variability35 (pp. 182–186). Citing Tulaikoff,36 they
acknowledged that the Russian climatic approach might be important at thecontinental scale, but argued that it was not relevant for the study at hand giventhe relative uniformity of climate across southeastern England. Given the longcropping history in England, they believed that most native vegetation in ﬂuences
were not only dif ﬁcult to discern, but the effects were likely to have been oblit-
erated from the soil by human management. Hall and Russell were also clearlyaware that geologic materials might be redistributed across the landscape andsampled to avoid such complications — explicitly avoiding steep slopes, hollows,and streambeds. The goal was to establish general soil relationships with geologythat were intended to be interpreted “in the light of local conditions, such asclimate, water-supply and drainage”
35 (p. 182).
By no means did Hall and Russell assume soil-geology relationships, but
they examined and tested correlations in great detail. Some of the geologicalformations examined (relatively few) were found to have very tight and regularrelationships with speci ﬁc soil types. More commonly, the lithology of geological
formations gradually changed according to the mode and pattern of sedimentdeposition preceding lithi ﬁcation. Nonetheless, Hall and Russell were still able
to employ soil-geology relationships to characterize soil properties across theseformations using predictable geographic patterns of lithological variation. Forexample, they found that the Hythe Beds were comprised of a clayey limestoneto the east, then a calcareous sandstone further west, and an infertile (noncalcar-eous) sandstone at the western edge of the district. In the Lower Wealden forma-tion with alternating clay and sand, they found the clays to be consistently lowin alumina and potash and dif ﬁcult to ﬂocculate, translating into soils with a lack
of structure irrespective of texture.
Hall and Russell demonstrated that geological survey information, used care-
fully, could assist in the construction of soil maps. Though they conducted oneof the more explicit early studies of soil-geology relationships, these agriculturalchemists were building on a century of work in geological surveys. For largerregions, as Hall and Russell acknowledged, climatic variables might play a moreimportant role in controlling soil variability, a topic we turn to next.
3.3 VON HUMBOLDT, DOKUCHAEV, AND SOIL 
GEOGRAPHY
The richness of science no longer lies in the abundance of facts but in their linkage.
— Attributed to Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859)37 (p. 151)A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 71
Alexander von Humboldt (Figure 3.3) made major contributions to 19th-century
natural history. Humboldt attended lectures given by the famous geologist A.G.Werner, but made his name largely on the basis of a 5-year scienti ﬁc journey
through South America and Mexico (1799–1804), which provided the observationsfor decades of scienti ﬁc publishing. Major contributions from this work included,
among many accomplishments, new insights into the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, vol-
canism, meteorology, astronomy, natural philosophy, and plant geography.
38,39
Humboldt’s development of plant geography bears the greatest relevance to
the history of soil-landscape modeling. Whereas the 18th-century botanist Lin-naeus focused on identifying, naming, and classifying individual plants, Hum-boldt was more interested in vegetation types such as a rain forest, grassland, orheath. With a strong experimentalist bent, he developed instruments to makemeteorological measurements, quanti ﬁed correlations between climate and veg-
etative forms, and used the understanding gained from these studies to delineateclimate-vegetation zones.
39,40
3.3.1 H UMBOLDT  AND RUSSIAN  SOIL GEOGRAPHY
At the height of Humboldt’s international fame in 1829, he was invited as a guestof the Russian tsar to conduct a tour of mines in Siberia and the Urals, and usedthis trip as an opportunity to study the natural history of that continent. At theclose of this trip, Humboldt convinced the Russian government to establish anetwork of meteorological stations.
38 Having given talks all through Russia and
met most of the prominent Russian scientists of that period, Humboldt’s ideasFIGURE 3.3 Self-portrait of Alexander von Humboldt, pencil drawing of 1814.
(Reprinted from Kellner, L., Alexander von Humboldt , Oxford University Press, London,
1963.)
72 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
and methods would certainly have been included in the training of a young
Russian scientist named Vasilii Vasilevich Dokuchaev (1846–1903), who isregarded as the father of modern pedology.
2 The clearest evidence of Humboldt’s
inﬂuence on Dokuchaev can be found in the design of the latter’s ﬁrst soil map.
In 1817, Humboldt published a paper on isotherms, or geographic lines of con-stant temperature, and went on to promote all kinds of isolines for geographicrepresentation and analysis.
41 Dokuchaev employed this same technique in his
isohumus map (Figure 3.4) to illustrate the results of his seminal Russian Cher-nozem* study published in 1883.
42
Dokuchaev42 (p. 14) referred to his soil studies as “geologic–geographic
investigations,” and though he did not mention von Humboldt by name, “geog-raphy” in the late 19th century referred to Humboldtian science. Limited by fundsand only able to make a few traverses through the large region in question,
Dokuchaev was able to construct the ﬁrst coherent map of Chernozem humus
accumulation using Humboldt’s geographic principle of climatic correlation ,FIGURE 3.4 V .V . Dokuchaev’s 1883 “Schematic Map of the Chernozem Zone of Euro-
pean Russia” with isohumus lines following and demonstrating a familiarity with Alex-ander von Humboldt’s plant geography. (Reprinted from Dokuchaev, V .V ., Russian
Chernozem , V ol. 1, Kaner, N., Trans., Israel Program for Scienti ﬁc Translations, Jerusa-
lem, 1967.)
* Chernozems are grassland soils with thick, dark organic surface horizons and typically calcareous
subsoils.
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 73
predicting humus accumulation at unknown locations based upon the availability
of climate data and soil-vegetation-climate relationships. The network of mete-orological stations that Humboldt proposed in 1829 provided the data necessary
for the construction of Dokuchaev’s map of Russian Chernozems.
Dokuchaev did not believe that climate and vegetation were the only factors
inﬂuencing soil formation. He clearly understood and wrote extensively about
the importance of geology, geomorphology, topography, hydrology, and landsurface age on soil formation and mapping. Dokuchaev
42 (p. 338) argued, for
instance, that
favorable rock composition is one of the most important prerequisites for the
formation of Russian chernozem.… However, favorable parent rock is not the onlyprerequisite for chernozem formation, since chernozem results from the combinedeffects of climate, country age, vegetation, topography and parent rock.
Accordingly, though Dokuchaev mapped Chernozems in geographic belts,
he also noted that the soil type was not really as continuous as represented, stating“the chernozem zone is interrupted by forest area, bogs, hilly areas, river valleys,sands and solonetses”
42 (p. 314). In sampling to construct the isohumus map,
Dokuchaev carefully selected sites to avoid local variability — selecting soils onﬂat surfaces or in the middle of gentle slopes — but took care to note the
limitations thus imposed on the ﬁnal product.
The ﬁve factors of soil formation as proposed by Dokuchaev can be parti-
tioned into (1) the geological and physiographic factors, which included parentrock, country age, and topography, and (2) geographic factors, which were com-prised of Humboldt’s climate and vegetation. The brilliance of Dokuchaev cameﬁrst from hypothesizing a soil-climate relationship analogous to well-established
vegetation-climate correlations. Dokuchaev then synthesized geologic and geo-graphic perspectives into a single coherent theory describing the nature anddistribution of soil humus accumulation, which was later expanded to encompassa wide variety of soils across Russia and the world.
15
In contrast to the combined geological and geographical approach of
Dokuchaev, his disciple Konstantine Dimitrievich Glinka (1867–1927) articulateda purely geographic or climatic theory of soil formation and distribution.
43 In the
introduction to his 1914 treatise, Glinka wrote that topography, vegetation, andparent rock in ﬂuenced soil variation by modifying soil microclimates (e.g., mois-
ture regimes in lowlands, vegetation and shade, rock color and insolation, etc.),and could therefore be considered subsidiary climatic factors — unifying thefundamental control of climate on soil formation. He acknowledged only oneparent material in ﬂuence on soil formation, devoting just 5 pages in a 674-page
book to a discussion of the association of rendzina soils with calcareous parentrocks
43 (p. 513–517). This prompted the Russian editor Polynov to insert a note
in a later addition stating that “there is no doubt that quartzite, quartz sandstone,and quartz sand — as parent rocks — also exert a considerable in ﬂuence on the
corresponding soils”
43 (p. 517). Moreover, Glinka recast the importance of land74 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
surface age in biological terms, arguing that soils evolved over time with changing
conditions, as did organisms. All together, this proved, according to Glinka, thatsoils were “geographically conditioned” like plants in Humboldt’s geography
43
(pp. 4–15). “This provides suf ﬁcient justi ﬁcation for singling out the soils as a
particular group of natural bodies, with which a special branch of science shouldbe concerned”
43 (p. 5).
The U.S. soil survey leader Curtis Marbut brought Glinka’s climatic soil
geography ideas into the U.S. circa 1916–19204 and later translated Glinka’s
1914 German text into English.44 With a series of lectures in 1928, Marbut45 (p.
19) argued:
When we superpose over a soil map, maps of the various kinds of climatic forces,
and the various kinds of natural vegetation, we ﬁnd certain de ﬁnite relationships.
When, however, we superpose over a soil map of mature  soils, a geological map,
we ﬁnd no relationship between the general broad, predominant characteristics
of the soils and the characteristics of the geologic formations. In the same waywhen we superpose a topographic map over a map of mature soils we do not ﬁnd
a relationship.
Whereas Glinka justi ﬁed a climate-dominated approach in terms of how other
factors modi ﬁed soil climate, Marbut argued that poorly drained and geologically
inﬂuenced soils were simply immature expressions of mature climatic, zonal soil
types. The Glinka–Marbut zonal soil concept came to dominate pedology in theearly 20th century.
3.3.2 O THER GEOGRAPHIC  INFLUENCES  IN PEDOLOGY
Dokuchaev was not the only late-19th-century scientist to recognize the impor-tance of geography in soil formation and distribution. The agricultural geolo-gist/chemist Eugene Hilgard
21 (p. 59) also independently came to recognize “that
there must exist a more or less intimate relation between the soils of a regionand the climatic conditions that prevail, or have prevailed therein”
21 (p. 9).
Hilgard46 also devoted considerable attention to soil-vegetation relationships, in
particular examining — both in the ﬁeld and in the laboratory — the relationships
between tree species and the carbonate content of soils in Mississippi.
It is needless to say that these presumptions were quickly submitted by me to the
test of chemical analysis, which, while corroborating the general induction, yet soonshowed the need of quali ﬁcations, corollaries, and conditions to be ful ﬁlled, in order
that the hypothesis might stand.
46 (p. 610)
Hilgard, like his late-19th-century Russian counterpart Dokuchaev, also iden-
tiﬁed and employed relationships between soils and geology or landforms where
useful.34,46 The fact that both Hilgard and Dokuchaev arrived at similar geologic-
geographic theories of soil formation in the late 19th century suggests that theywere in ﬂuenced by the same developments in geological surveys, geography, andA Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 75
the 19th-century establishment of meteorological networks in both Russia and
the U.S.
3.3.3 R USSIAN  SOIL MAPPING  TECHNIQUES , CIRCA 1900
According to Dokuchaev’s student Sibirtsev,15 Russian soil surveyors at the turn
of the 20th century constructed soil maps in two explicit stages: (1) data collectionand (2) spatial interpolation. In addition to obtaining or constructing a topographicmap with roads, hills, valleys, etc., soil surveyors were encouraged to gather asmuch information as possible about the soil-forming factors — particularly geol-ogy and vegetation. Using this information, traverse routes were selected tocapture variability in soil-forming factors. In addition to describing and samplingnatural soil exposures, pits and boreholes were excavated as topography or surfacesoil morphology changed.
More detailed soil investigations necessitate a clear notion of the topography, and
soils should be traced according to the forms and changes of the relief. In otherwords, the area under investigation should be subdivided into de ﬁnite parts, for
instance: ﬂat hummock, plain, gentle slope, steep slope, low-lying land at the foot
of the slope, closed depression, etc., and the soil should be sampled on every suchpart.
15 (p. 205)
Every pro ﬁle described was located on the base map as accurately as pos-
sible. Combining ﬁeld descriptions with laboratory characterization, all of the
pro ﬁles examined were then classi ﬁed in preparation for the construction of the
ﬁnal map.15
The ﬁnal map was constructed by interpolating between known points on the
map using what we would now call environmental correlation:
At ﬁrst glance, it may appear that this working stage involves many arbitrary choices,
especially in drawing the boundaries of patches or strips. However, as alreadypointed out many times, every soil occupies a speci ﬁc area and its occurrence is
necessarily related to de ﬁnite causes which must be determined by the investigator.
Most often, the soil patches and strips correspond to the topographic features(patches on hummocks, hills, depressions or strips along slopes), which should beindicated on the cartographic bases, or else the investigator himself may mark themfollowing a visual or instrumental survey.
15 (p. 328)
As a check, correlations between soil formers and soil types were studied
carefully for regularity. In areas where regular relationships could not be workedout, soil surveyors were required to take a systematic approach, sampling on aregular grid if this could be afforded. At least ideally, Russian soil surveyorsmarked point pro ﬁle locations (not polygons) on base maps, and employed and
tested explicit soil factor correlations to draw map unit boundaries around andbetween those points. The topographic factors — both relief and landscapeposition — played a major role in local soil surveys.76 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
3.3.4 U SE OF THE FACTORIAL  APPROACH  IN THE NCSS (U.S.)
Relative to their Russian counterparts, early-20th-century U.S. soil surveyors had
little scienti ﬁc guidance on how to assess the spatial variability of soils. In the
1904 Instructions to Field Parties47 there were instructions on everything from
alidade plane table techniques to laundry procedures — but absolutely no mentionof how to delineate soils in the ﬁeld. By 1906, a procedure for ﬁnding and mapping
soil boundaries was established that required a large number of systematic boringsand empirical interpolation between sampling locations.
48 In 1920, a publication
titled The Value of the Soil Survey  proclaimed that soil surveyors “carefully inspect
every forty acres and show soil variations on the map as small as from ﬁve to
ten acres.”49 And in his personal reminisces on soil survey work during the ﬁrst
four decades of the NCSS, Macy Lapham stated that soils were “examinedsystematically by means of frequent borings”
28 (p. 245). Individuals might have
had personal theories that helped them identify changes in soil materials, but theywere not part of any of ﬁcial procedure or science of soil surveying. “Every man
will go about the work somewhat differently, and any discussion of the methodsemployed must necessarily be taken largely from a man’s personal experience,”a surveyor wrote in 1909
50 (p. 186).
It was not until 1914 that the Instructions to Field Parties  included a small
but explicit acknowledgment that soil surveyors might use landscape features tomap soils:
Often slight depressions or elevations, a change of the color of the surface material,
or a change of the character of the surface or of the vegetation will indicate to theexperienced soil man a change of soil conditions to be investigated or veri ﬁed by
an examination with his soil auger.
51 (pp. 69–70)
Physiography, depositional processes, and parent rock were employed in soil
classi ﬁcation, but were not presented as a tool for map unit delineation. The NCSS
did not publish another ﬁeld manual until 1937, when the Soil Survey Manual
included one paragraph in a 135-page document on topography and vegetation,“external features which assist in the sketching of boundaries after they have beenlocated”
52 (p. 101). The British ﬁeld manual53 published in 1936 was only slightly
more detailed in the discussion of ﬁeld mapping, with the author listing changes in
ﬁve circumstances that could indicate a change in soil properties: (1) lithology, (2)
topography, (3) vegetation, (4) surface color, and (5) the sound and feel of the soilunderfoot. How much of a change and of what type indicated a change in soilcharacteristics? “At this point the ﬁeld man only may decide, and this is only possible
after experience on the spot and cannot possibly be described here”
53 (p. 110).
Marbut’s mimeographed translation of Glinka’s treatise was published in
1927,44 around the time that the factors of soil formation were ﬁrst taught in U.S.
soil science courses.1 The ﬁrst explicit discussion of the ﬁve factors of soil
formation in a U.S. government publication can be found in the annual U.S.Department of Agriculture (USDA) Yearbook of Agriculture for 1938, titled SoilsA Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 77
and Men ,54 and the ﬁrst soil survey report to include an explicit discussion of all
ﬁve factors of soil formation (climate, organisms, relief, parent material, and soil
age) was issued in January 1940.55 A year later, NCSS soil scientist James Thorp
published a paper on the use of environmental factors in soil mapping,56 and Hans
Jenny proposed a pseudoexperimental approach to quantify Dokuchaev’s factorsof soil formation.
57 In the 1940s and 1950s, boilerplate discussions of the ﬁve
soil-forming factors became a standard feature of U.S. county survey reports.
3.4 MILNE’S SOIL CATENA CONCEPT
Over large areas where local variation in topography were regularly repeated, a
given colour on any map ﬁnally produced (on any but an impracticably large scale)
would have to be interpreted as indicating the occurrence not of a single soil butof a sequence of soils occurring generally over the area, to be worked out on theactual ground in each instance according to topography and other local in ﬂuences.
— W.S. Martin, 1932, as reported by Geoffrey Milne
58 (p. 5)
The inspiration for the soil catena concept came from W.S. Martin, a British soil
chemist based in Uganda58 (p. 5). However, it was the Tanganyika-based soil
chemist Geoffrey Milne (1898–1942) (Figure 3.5) who formally de ﬁned,
expanded, and promoted this soil-topography concept both within and beyondEast Africa.
60–63 Despite Milne’s relative isolation in Africa and the confusion
that resulted when U.S. scientists reinterpreted the catena to ﬁt existing soil-
topography concepts,54,64,65 the catena has become a central concept in soil-
landscape modeling,66,67 inspired a namesake journal Catena , and been the subject
of numerous book chapters and reviews.68–71
3.4.1 T HE ORIGIN AND DEFINITION  OF THE CATENA  CONCEPT
In 1928, Geoffrey Milne arrived at the East African Agricultural Research Stationin Amani, Tanganyika, with training that included a B.Sc. and M.Sc. in chemistryand agricultural chemistry, respectively, and 8 years of lecturing experience inthe latter subject.
59 The ﬁrst and primary task assigned to Milne was to coordinate
the construction of a soil map for the region.72 Toward that end, in May 1932, a
meeting of soil chemists from Uganda, Kenya, Tanganyika, and Zanzibar wasconvened at Amani to discuss, among other things, mapping the soils of EastAfrica.
58 A central problem for this project was the need to construct a map for
two con ﬂicting purposes: (1) a detailed (large-scale) map for agricultural advising
and (2) a regional (small-scale) map for inclusion in both a world soil map anda British Association geographical project. Highlighting the scale problem, Martinbrought a sequence of soil monoliths from Uganda to illustrate dramatic changesin pro ﬁle morphology from hilltop to valley bottom and suggested that the group
use complex map units to capture soil-hillslope variability. Mapping units basedon soil-topography relationships arose from the very practical scale issues of the78 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
project at hand: “the soils of a large piece of country are to be mapped on a small
piece of paper”60 (p. 191).
Milne followed up on Martin’s idea by coining the term catena  (chain) to
characterize a regularly repeating soil-topography sequence. This idea was ﬁrst
circulated in a memo to the other soil chemists in early 1933,73 then published
formally in a relatively obscure Soil Research paper.60 Milne proposed two
clearly distinct ideas: (1) the fasc (Latin for “bundle”) as a taxonomic grouping
intermediate between the series and great soil groups, and (2) the catena  concept
as a “composite unit of mapping”60 (p. 193). The catena name itself was
“intended to serve as a mnemonic, the succession of different soils correspondingto the links in a hanging chain” in a progression from one hilltop to the next
63
(p. 16).
The catena concept as ﬁrst proposed in 1933 and published in Soil Research
was a simple soil-topography map unit. However, in a paper presented at Oxfordfor the Third International Congress of Soil Science in conjunction with thepresentation of the Provisional Soil Map of East Africa in 1935, Milne expanded
his concept.
61 First, he suggested that there be two different types of catenas,
those formed from uniform parent rock and those formed on more complexgeology, where geology–topography relationships also contributed to soil–topog-raphy relationships. The original Buganda catena was included in the secondFIGURE 3.5 Photograph of Geoffrey Milne who coined the soil catena concept to describe
complex soil map units with regularly repeating soil-topography relationships. Milne alsooutlined the hydrologic processes responsible for the differentiation of soils on hillslopes,an early expression of what we now know as process geomorphology. (Reprinted fromMilne, K., in Geographers: Biobibliographical Studies , V ol. 2, Freeman, T.W. and
Pinchemel, P., Eds., Mansell, London, 1978, pp. 89–92.)
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 79
category, with upland soils forming on ferricrete-capped hilltops and lowland
soils forming on younger incised bedrock. Second, he provided a concise discus-sion of processes leading to catena formation:
Soil differences are brought about by differences of drainage conditions, combined
with some differential reassortment of eroded material and the accumulation at lowerlevels of soil constituents chemically leached from higher up the slope.
61 (p. 346)
With this single sentence, Milne proposed an entirely new dimension for soil-
landscape modeling, what we now recognize as hillslope hydrology, processgeomorphology, and landscape geochemistry. Milne followed with a letter toNature  discussing the in ﬂuence of ﬂuvial erosion and deposition on soil-landscape
formation,
63 proposing that erosion be considered a soil-forming process (rather
than a geologic process) if the removal and addition of materials was incrementaland proceeded in parallel with other soil-forming processes. In so doing, Milnebrought an experimental scientist’s perspective to a natural historian’s project,something Jenny
57 later proposed at the soil pro ﬁle scale with his quantitative
factorial approach.
While soil scientists in the 1930s and 1940s did not acknowledge the process
dimension of the catena, Ruhe cited Milne’s work extensively in his seminal“Elements of the Soil Landscape” paper and strongly objected to the “distor-tion” of the catena by the U.S. soil survey community
74 (p. 166). In a later
review of a soil–geomorphology textbook based on the factorial approach,Ruhe
75 (p. 177) argued:
[The catena concept] not only integrates the factors in explaining soil differences,
but it also focuses on past history of the land surface, geohydrology, erosion,sediment transport, and pedogenic processes.
Milne’s applications of the catena concept for soil studies in East Africa,
published posthumously,76 were very much in the soil-geomorphology spirit later
articulated by Ruhe. The nine-unit soil-landscape model of Conacher andDalrymple
77 was also based explicitly on the catena, providing a more detailed
discussion of speci ﬁc processes, discrete landscape units, and soil relations.
While the catena concept referred to an abstract soil–topography relationship
with associated formation processes, Milne also proposed that a catena refer toa landscape soil ﬁeld unit analogous to the vertical soil pro ﬁle (Figure 3.6).
To the geomorphologists, geologist or engineer, the pro ﬁle of the ground would be
the outline of my diagram. To the pedologist the pro ﬁle is what he ﬁnds in depth
at a selected point. The language of soil description lacks a suitable term having across-country dimension, and the want of it is felt as soon as soils are discussed inrelation to the lie of the land.… To help in such discussions the word catena hasbeen adopted … to describe a topographic complex of soils such as is representedin my example.
62 (p. 549)80 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
The catena could either refer to a speci ﬁc soil-landscape transect studied in
the ﬁeld, or if that transect were representative of a region, the catena would then
acquire a symbolic status representing regional soil–topography relationships —the catena as map unit. In actual use, Milne and his assistant often employed thecatena as a three-dimensional soil mantle over a small watershed,
76,78 an extension
later articulated explicitly by Huggett.79
3.4.2 C HALLENGING  THE ZONAL SOILS TRADITION
The idea that soil formation and spatial variability could be related to topographyor relief was hardly a novel concept in the 1930s. Both Dokuchaev and his studentSibirtsev discussed soil-topography relationships in the late 19th century.
15,42 As
discussed earlier, Russian soil surveyors were utililizing soil–topography rela-tionships in detailed soil mapping by the end of the 19th century.
15 In the U.S.,
Indiana survey leader Thomas Bushnell pointed out the importance of topographyfor soil mapping in 1927.
80 The prominent British pedologist Gilbert W. Robinson
wrote in his 1932 textbook81 (p. 335):
There are areas even in Britain, where relatively simple geology and topography
under a uniform climate result in extensive tracts of soil which, if not actuallyconstant in character, exhibit variation which can be easily related to topographicalconditions.
That soil varied with topography was a widely accepted fact by the early
1930s, and the immediate acceptance of the catena concept was in large partdue to the fact that Milne provided an interesting name for this commonlyrecognized phenomenon. But in several important ways, Milne’s catena con-cept also challenged and expanded existing ideas regarding soil–landscaperelationships.
Within the zonal framework, soil-topography relationships were acknowl-
edged and described, but only as subsidiary  to the primary climatic control.
Both Dokuchaev
42 and Sibirtsev15 discussed the topography-related effects ofFIGURE 3.6 Geoffrey Milne’s graphical two-dimensional representation of a catena, with
the typical soils found at each landscape position identi ﬁed by the numbers 1 to 7. This
representation was used to highlight the role of erosion-deposition processes in soil-landscape formation and published in 1936. (Reprinted from Milne, G., Nature , 138,
548–549, 1936. With permission.)
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 81
insolation, drainage, erosion-deposition processes, uneven surface age, and
chemical leaching, but largely as side discussions to explain why “soils are notalways normal in constitution”
42 (p. 343). For Marbut, soils on lower landscape
positions were not even full- ﬂedged soils, but immature siblings of upland soils
within their assigned climate zone.45 In 1915, the Russian soil geographer
Neustruev proposed that soil-climatic zones consisted of zonal complexes.82
This basic idea was developed further into a ﬁeld classi ﬁcation system, brought
into the U.S. by C.C. Nikiforoff in the early 1930s (Figure 3.7) and published
by the Canadian soil scientist and surveyor J.H. Ellis.83 Within this system,
soils were hierarchically  classi ﬁed according to (1) climate zone, (2) physiog-
raphy, (3) parent material, (4) relief/drainage, and (5) other factors, like localvegetation, wind, or stones. As can be seen in Figure 3.7, soil associations  were
deﬁned as groups of soils with differing drainage on uniform parent material
within the same climate and physiographic zones. Nikiforoff’s soil associationﬁt comfortably within the climatic zonal framework, as topography was con-
sidered the least important soil-forming factor,
83 a belief echoed by several U.S.
soil survey workers.54,80CHART 1 THE NIKIFOROFF SYSTEM
KEY FOR FIELD CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS
IN A UNIT AREA
Soils in the zone of ............................... the determined by common morphological characters
of the phytomorphic (well-drained) associates, or
the typical normal soils of the zone.
A. 
Combination of soils in a given physiographic regionB. Associations 
differentiated on the basis of parent material (geological)C
1. 
Oromorphic (eroded on locally arid)C
2. 
Phytomorphic (well drained)C
3. 
Hydromorphic (poorly drained or locally humid)
D
1 D2 etc.
*Subdivided into phases as 
they occurD
1 D2 etc.
*Subdivided into phases as 
they occurD
1 D2 etc.
*Subdivided into phases as 
they occur
B
1
B2
B3
B4
B5 etc.* A phase is a variation or modi ﬁcation of an associate which 
differs in some characteristic but with other associate characteristics in common. Associates and phases, further differentiated according to textural classes.
FIGURE 3.7 The hierarchical Nikiforoff ﬁeld classi ﬁcation system with the oromorphic,
phytomorphic, and hydromorphic associates for different landscape positions. Note thatthis association ﬁts comfortably within the zonal soil concept. (From Ellis, J.H., Sci. Agric. ,
12, 338–345, 1932. With permission.)Associates82 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
In challenging the hierarchical, climate-dominated approach, Milne pointed
to soils “whose pro ﬁles and conditions of formation differ fundamentally” from
hilltop to valley bottom, geographically associated soil sequences that cut acrossthe great soil groups
61 (p. 345) — a radical proposition at the time.
We are not entitled to classify a black clay as a youthful red loam, nor to represent
it as red loam on the map when in its own very different character it occupies animportant proportion of the land surface. The soils of the bottomlands constitutejust as much of the truth about soil conditions in these parts of Uganda as do thered loams of the ridges or the murram soils met with in between.
60 (p. 193)
In both his catena papers and in previous work on the importance of geologic
provenance,58,84 Milne issued a direct challenge to the zonal soils concept, though
that challenge was not fully appreciated at the time.
Milne also felt that zonal soil maps were insuf ﬁciently grounded in empirical
data. Early in the Soil Map of East Africa  project, he expressed dissatisfaction
with Marbut’s 1923 U.S. soil map, arguing that
assumptions about soils from knowledge … of climate, topography, and other
external factors should henceforth be veri ﬁed on the actual ground, at least for a
few points in every area, before being put into the new map. This view would implythat the mapping of sample areas in some detail must come ﬁrst, before the possi-
bilities of generalizing by broad strokes could be estimated.
58 (p. 3)
With a large area to map and few resources, even before the ﬁrst meeting of
soil chemists Milne outlined a creative, systematic program for soil survey inEast Africa based on (1) occasional soil traverses over large areas while on safari,(2) detailed studies in particular areas where there was a demand for soil analysisto solve an immediate management problem, (3) site descriptions, pro ﬁle dia-
grams, and intact samples sent in by various colonial of ﬁcers, and (4) systematic
local surveys at representative locations. In systematic local surveys, Milne andhis colleagues sampled pro ﬁles on a tight grid over approximately 100 acres (40.5
ha), to both characterize local variability and relate that variability to localconditions such as topography and drainage.
72
For the ﬁnal Soil Map of East Africa  (Figure 3.8), Milne completely ﬁlled
well-studied areas, used broken coloring for areas with incompletely veri ﬁed soil
information, and left unsampled areas blank, as he was unwilling to extrapolatesoil-environment relationships into regions without ground truth.
63 Milne also
devised an innovative “pajama striping” scheme for cartographically representingcatenas, which was employed on the ﬁnal map (Figure 3.9). This was the ﬁrst
regional-scale soil map with an explicit representation of uncertainty and within-map-unit variability, something that even today is rarely available in publishedsoil survey maps. Underneath the abstract, theoretical catena concept, Milnepursued a rigorously empirical and explicit soil mapping project utilizing cate-nary principles.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 83
3.4.3 C ATENA  CONCEPT  VS. SOIL ASSOCIATION
When Milne ﬁrst proposed the new catena term, W.S. Martin opposed the idea
in part because he believed that the existing suite  coined by G.W. Robinson would
do as well.73 Robinson’s suite referred to a combined classi ﬁcation and mappingFIGURE 3.8 Geoffrey Milne’s 1935 Soil Map of East Africa . Note the “pajama striping”
for the catenas and large land areas left blank or partially blank where soil investigationswere absent or incomplete. (Reprinted from Milne, G. et al., A Provisional Soil Map of
East Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika and Zanzibar) with Explanatory Memoir , Amani
Memoir 31, East African Agricultural Research Station, Amani, Tangayika, 1936.) (Seecolor version on the accompanying CD.)
84 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
term for a set of differing soils formed from a common parent material.81 But
Milne rejected the suite as inappropriate for use in the East Africa mapping projectbecause (1) soils within a suite could vary for a number of reasons other thantopography, (2) the uniform parent material requirement was not always met forsoil-topography relationships in East Africa, and (3) the use of a term for bothmapping and classi ﬁcation would result in confusion and ambiguity.
60 Unfortu-
nately, the latter two problems were realized despite Milne’s best intentions whenU.S. survey workers reinterpreted the catena as equivalent to the existing soilassociation concept.
By 1938, the catena was rede ﬁned in the U.S. as “all the soils in a region
developed from the same parent material but differing relief and in degree andcharacter of pro ﬁle development,” what had been previously termed an associa-
tion in the U.S. Unfortunately, this de ﬁnition limited the utility of the catena as
a mapping concept, as it depended “on the uniformity of the factors other thanrelief”
54 (p. 989). Milne’s soil mapping and landscape formation model that cut
across the zonal soil paradigm was reduced to a drainage-based, ﬁeld classi ﬁcation
unit similar to those already in use (e.g., Figure 3.7),83,85 leading one prominent
pedologist to suggest that Milne’s concept be termed a macrocatena , with the
U.S. version more aptly termed a microcatena56 (p. 42).* In 1945, Bushnell65
justi ﬁed this new de ﬁnition by publishing a handwritten note from Milne sug-
gesting that it might be okay to limit the catena concept to the type I variety only(similar parent rock), though Milne was quite clear in the note that soil-topographyFIGURE 3.9 Map legend for the 1935 Soil Map of East Africa  showing the graphical
representation for compound map units. (Reprinted from Milne, G. et al., A Provisional Soil
Map of East Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika and Zanzibar) with Explanatory Memoir ,
Amani Memoir 31, East African Agricultural Research Station, Amani, Tangayika, 1936.)
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 85
sequences on different parent materials  would still be considered a type I catena
— a distinction lost on Bushnell. Since Milne passed away suddenly in 1942,59
he was not in a position to contribute directly to the debate. Ironically, the U.S.
rede ﬁnition meant that the original Ugandan soil-topography sequences no longer
quali ﬁed as catenas.86
The catena came to be used in the U.S. primarily “as a means of facilitating
the logical grouping of soil units and for remembering their characteristics andrelationships”
54 (p. 989), or in other words, the catena was used as a ﬁeld
classi ﬁcation device. Following the publication of Jenny’s Factors of Soil For-
mation  in 1941,57 Bushnell tried to reconcile the factorial approach with his own
ﬁeld keys and the catena concept by proposing a radically new soil classi ﬁcation
based upon the ﬁve factors, with the catena as a taxonomic  unit.64,65 A debate
ensued as to whether the catena should be considered a geographic associationor taxonomic grouping of soils
54,64,65,87 — a confusing situation Milne expressly
tried to avoid by coining the catena term instead of using the existing suite . As
a result, by 1951 the catena was dropped from the of ﬁcial U.S. soil survey
lexicon, and in yet another ironic twist, Milne’s original catena — minus theexplicit landscape process components — came to be known as an association
comprised of “regularly geographically associated” soils
88 (pp. 302–306). Only
in the tropics did soil surveyors continue to use the catena concept and term asoriginally de ﬁned.
68
3.4.4 A PPLICATIONS  OF THE CATENA  CONCEPT  
(OR ASSOCIATION )
The 1938 USDA yearbook, Soils and Men ,89 included a nominal soil association
map in the sense of Milne’s catena “with a characteristic pattern of distribution”54
(p. 989). In map unit descriptions, however, soil-landscape relationships wereincompletely de ﬁned and compiled from existing county soil survey reports that
did not include soil associations.
89 The ﬁrst county soil survey report to include
the explicit use of soil associations (in the catena sense) was a Tennessee surveypublished in 1948, with the survey actually initiated in 1939.
90 A few county
surveys initiated in 1938 and 1939 employed the association concept, and by1952 this had become standard survey practice.
91 At the same time, U.S. soil
surveyors began to publish their soil-landscape theories explicitly in the form ofthree-dimensional association diagrams. One of the earliest association diagramsresembling those of today (Figure 3.10) was published in a glossy Taylor County,IA, report released in 1954.
92 However, U.S. surveyors were still supposed to
identify all soil boundaries in the ﬁeld and sample every soil body. The association
concept helped guide ﬁeld sampling, but augmented rather than replaced tradi-
tional detailed survey protocols.88,91
* In contemporary terms, a toposequence might also be considered a microcatena, as all factors other
than topography must be held constant, though in practice the toposequence term is often incorrectlyemployed as equivalent to the catena.86 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
In the 1940s, Australian soil surveyors used the catena concept to replace  detailed
soil mapping, allowing them to survey large land areas with limited resources:
The procedure was to select small areas of 100–500 ac typifying representative
landscape with characteristic topography, vegetation, microrelief, and surface drain-age, and to carry out detailed surveys on them. From these was de ﬁned the array of
soil types likely to be encountered in similar areas in the whole survey project andthus the common associations of soil types were formulated. These could be recog-nized in the landscape along the lines of traverse and the whole area could be mappedrapidly, in fact at about ten times the speed of the earlier detailed surveys.
5 (p. 16)
Australian soil surveyors used the term association  rather than catena , as the
later term had been rede ﬁned by the U.S. survey,86 but the sense was very much
the same. It was along these lines that in 1950 Kellogg proposed that tropicalsoils be mapped as associations.
93
In 1946, approximately in parallel with the development of soil association
mapping in the Australian soil survey, the ﬁrst “land systems” survey was con-
ducted by Christian and Stewart.94 These surveys involved teams of scientists,
usually including a pedologist, geologist, and botanist/ecologist, and set out tomap the combined geological, soil, and vegetation landscape relationships (landsystems) over large remote areas. The region surveyed was broken into smallerunits with relatively consistent soil–geology–topography–vegetation relation-FIGURE 3.10 Three-dimensional soil association block diagram published in the 1954
survey of Taylor County, IA, report. This is one of the earliest three-dimensional associ-ation block diagrams, closely resembling diagrams found in contemporary U.S. soil surveyreports. (Reprinted from Scholtes, W.H. et al., Taylor County, Iowa, Soils , Soil Survey
Series 1947, No. 1, USDA-SCS, Washington, DC, 1954.)
A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 87
ships, and a schematic diagram constructed to illustrate the relevant relationships
for each of these land system units (Figure 3.11). These land systems diagramswere clearly analogous to Milne’s catena diagram (Figure 3.6), though the objec-tive was to map all landscape components (soils, vegetation, and geology), notjust use vegetation, geology, and topography to map soils.
3.5 LINNAEUS, DARWIN, AND MARBUT’S 
SOIL ANATOMY
Biology was a new, ascendant, and rapidly growing ﬁeld in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. Consequently, biological metaphors based on an evolutionaryor life cycle concept of development were foundational in a number of 19th- andearly-20th-century sciences, including Spencer’s 19th-century sociology,
95,96
Clementian ecology,97 and the geographic cycle of William Morris Davis.98 As
was discussed earlier, Marbut was inspired by Glinka’s climatic, zonal soil geog-raphy. But Marbut also formulated a new concept in soil studies, soil anatomy ,
18
built on an explicit biological metaphor.99,100 In contrast to 19th-century geological
surveying, Humboldtian science, or Milne’s catena concept, this metaphor lackedan explicit geographic dimension.
3.5.1 T HE ROOTS OF LATE-19TH-CENTURY  MORPHOLOGY
As a boy growing up in rural Missouri, Curtis Marbut carried around Gray’s
Manual , a popular ﬁeld guide for plant identi ﬁcation and classi ﬁcation.101* AsFIGURE 3.11 Mullaman land systems diagram from the survey of Katherin-Darwin in
Australia. (Reprinted from Christian, C.S. and Stewart, G.A., General Report on Survey of
Katherin-Darwin Region, 1946 , Land Research Series, No. 1, CSIRO, Melbourne, 1953.)
* Asa Gray was a prominent 19th-century Harvard botanist who played a central role in the devel-
opment of plant taxonomy for the U.S.
88 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
with most natural historians of his era, Marbut was trained in a hierarchical
taxonomy for ﬂora and fauna, which descended from the natural system of 18th-
century Swedish scientist Carl von Linné (1707–1778), or Linnaeus as he isknown in English-speaking countries. Linnaeus published the ﬁrst edition of his
biological taxonomy Systema Naturae  in 1735, in many ways de ﬁning the 18th-
century project of collecting, naming, and classifying the natural world. Linnaeussought not just to ﬁnd a convenient and utilitarian classi ﬁcation system, but
believed that a scienti ﬁc classi ﬁcation system should represent a fundament order
in nature. Taxonomy was, in his view, the highest calling of a scientist andrevealed the very essence of nature.
102,103  Through the 18th and early 19th cen-
turies, collectors were furiously ﬁnding, describing, naming, and ordering the
natural world, but in the late 18th century interest turned to comparative anatomy ,
with the goal of establishing a more fundamental basis for a natural classi ﬁcation.
In the 19th century attention turned from the examination of mature organismsto embryology and the study of life cycle development.
103,104
In the late 19th century, what was then known as morphology  (the study of
comparative anatomy and embryology) shifted to encompass the evolutionproject proposed by Darwin’s Origin of Species , ﬁrst published in 1859. Mor-
phologists had earlier pursued the idea that lower organisms in the order of lifecould be discerned in the early life stages of higher organisms. With a surge ofinterest in developing an evolution-based taxonomy, morphologists began com-parative studies of embryonic development in the belief that the evolutionaryhistory of organisms could be determined from their contemporary life cycledevelopment — ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny (Figure 3.12).
103,104 Though
the “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” theory has since been discredited, therelevant point for this discussion is that at the turn of the 20th century, biologicaltaxonomy, anatomy, embryology, and evolution were inextricably linked in theﬁeld of morphology.
3.5.2 M ARBUT ’S SOIL ANATOMY
Soil surveys have created a new branch of soil science — soil anatomy.
— Curtis Fletcher Marbut, 192118 (p. 141)
NCSS staff scientist George Coffey, who studied and published on the genetic
classi ﬁcation approach of Sibirtsev, was emphatic that the ideal classi ﬁcation
should be based upon “differences in the soil itself” that result  from the effects
of climate and geology — not based directly on either climate (as he viewed theRussian system) or parent rock (the early U.S. system)
105 (p. 34). By 1916,
Marbut106 had adopted this ideal as his own, a mantra repeated through all of his
later writings.18,32,45,107 In practice, it has proved dif ﬁcult to classify soils without
reference to climate both in Marbut’s time4 and today,108 but an involved discus-
sion of soil classi ﬁcation lies beyond the scope of this chapter.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 89
To construct a scienti ﬁc framework for the study and classi ﬁcation of the soil
itself, Marbut turned to biology. Pro ﬁle horizons were equivalent to animal limbs,
and changes in the pro ﬁle over time were another representation of the life
cycle.18,107 To understand Marbut’s soil anatomy, we need only look at the diagram
in Figure 3.12 and imagine different soil pro ﬁles in stages of progressive devel-
opment replacing the tortoise, chick, rabbit, and man. As with biological mor-phology, Marbut’s soil anatomy inextricably linked pro ﬁle description, develop-
ment studies, and classi ﬁcation. Following Linnaeus, Marbut insisted that the
development of a hierarchical soil taxonomy was “fundamentally scienti ﬁc in
nature” and the highest calling for the survey
4,32 (p. 2). Consequently, from 1920
until his death in 1935, Marbut’s single-minded objective was to develop a soilclassi ﬁcation system comparable to biological taxonomy.
4FIGURE 3.12 Biological morphology served as a metaphor for Curtis Marbut’s 20th-
century soil anatomy concept. In the late 19th century, Ernst Heinrich Haeckel argued thatontogeny, the development of the individual, recapitulated phylogeny, the evolutionaryhistory of the species. Morphologists studied embryonic development as a tool for recon-structing evolutionary relationships. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, biologicalmetaphors were applied to many different disciplines, including sociology, geomorphol-ogy, ecology, and pedology. (George John Romanes, after Ernst Heinrich Haeckel, 1892,from Coleman, W., Biology in the Nineteenth Century: Problems of Form, Function, and
Transformation , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1977. With permission.)
90 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Curtis Fletcher Marbut was a product of his time, a time in which biological
metaphors were applied in a variety of ﬁelds. As a consequence of this choice
of metaphors, however, Marbut came to view soil surveyors as the equivalent of18th-century biological collectors sent out to the corners of the Earth to ﬁnd,
describe, and bring back samples to name and order in a natural taxonomicsystem. At the 1923 American Association of Soil Survey Workers meeting, thegeographer P.S. Lovejoy discussed various utilitarian and theoretical justi ﬁcations
for soil survey work, to which Marbut responded:
[Mr. Lovejoy] begins by stating that one point of view “regards soil surveys as
primarily intended to do for soils what Gray, for instance, did for our native plants,etc.” We who are doing the soil survey work wonder why he says that is one pointof view, implying that there are others. We know that to be the
 point  of view.109
(p. 59)
The construction of maps and development of land use interpretations were
to Marbut utilitarian and therefore secondary objectives for the survey.4
3.5.3 M ARBUT ’S REIGN, 1913–1933
There was a tendency to consider the ﬁeld man as a mere mechanic who mapped
the soil units as he encountered them, while the more interesting problems of soildevelopment and of the classi ﬁcation and correlation of soils were left to the
inspectors and the supervising and administrative of ﬁcers in Washington.
— Macy Lapham, re ﬂecting on soil survey work under Marbut, 1945
110 (p. 349)
Soil Survey — apparently intended to imply a 50-50 balance between the Soil and
the Survey — It is about like Mutt’s rabbit hash — 50-50 mixture of rabbit andhorse — 1 horse and one rabbit. In our Association the soil study has grown to thesize of a ton horse and the survey has shrunken to the size of a small cotton-tail.
— Thomas Bushnell, 1929
111 (p. 23)
The quotations above from ﬁeld surveyor Macy Lapham and the leader of the
Indiana survey, Thomas Bushnell, clearly illustrate the decline in status of U.S.soil mapping in the 1920s and 1930s. Marbut, who led the U.S. soil surveyprogram from 1913 to 1933, was cognizant of the principles of environmentalcorrelation and even suggested that the development of an improved taxonomysystem would facilitate the study of such correlations.
18 But he devoted little
attention to this problem because mapping simply was not important within hissoil anatomy paradigm.
4,33 In the early 1930s, survey staff pushing (unsuccess-
fully) for funds to begin using aerial photography complained that “the funda-mental concern of the Soil Survey is the ﬁeld study and classi ﬁcation of soils,”
despite the fact that the agency was obligated to produce soil maps. While mostof the NCSS personnel (particularly at the state level) were engaged in mapping,A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 91
the survey leadership assigned the highest priority and intellectual prestige to
pro ﬁle studies and classi ﬁcation. After Marbut died in 1935 and Charles Kellogg
was put in charge of the soil survey,* mapping and interpretations began toreceive more attention from Washington.
4 However, for the 20 years from 1915
to 1935 there were virtually no advances in soil mapping within the U.S. soilsurvey program.
4
Marbut’s impact on the intellectual development of soil studies in the U.S.
lasted far beyond his reign as soil survey leader. In 1936, the Soil Science Societyof America (SSSA) was created by merging the American Soil Survey Associationinto the Soils Section of the American Society of Agronomy. Section V of thisnew scienti ﬁc organization was named Soil Genesis, Morphology, and Cartogra-
phy, but the focus was described as follows:
Studies in which the soil is considered primarily as an individual entity, to be
dissected and classi ﬁed on the basis of its inherent characteristics shall be presented
before Section V .112 (p. 506)
Mapping is not mentioned in this description, and the use of the word
dissected  in this formal subdisciplinary de ﬁnition clearly re ﬂects Marbut’s bio-
logical metaphor. In 1951, Section V was renamed “Soil Genesis, Morphology,and Classi ﬁcation,”
113 which remained the section name until 1994, when Ped-
ology was adopted.114 Following Marbut, the intellectual  focus of U.S. pedology
for the better part of a century has been the dissection and classi ﬁcation of soil
pro ﬁles — modeled on 19th-century biological morphology. The application of
this metaphor has led to the development of a complex, hierarchical taxonomyanalogous to biological taxonomy.
108 However, a negative consequence of this
focus has been a relative lack of interest in the scienti ﬁc advancement of soil-
landscape modeling.
3.5.4 T HREE-DIMENSIONAL  SOIL BODIES
Beginning in the late 1920s and particularly in the 1930s to 1950s, a number ofU.S. soil survey workers extended Marbut’s soil anatomy metaphor to soil map-ping with the theoretical construction of a three-dimensional soil body. The kernelof the three-dimensional soil body was ﬁrst proposed during Marbut’s tenure
when Bushnell
80 (p. 158) argued:
An area of any soil type is a body of three dimensions and as such can not be
completely de ﬁned on the basis of a two dimensional vertical pro ﬁle. The vertical
proﬁle does reveal most soil characters because, by de ﬁnition of a type, the layers
are uniform in horizontal directions, but it fails to show the surface form, ortopography which may well be regarded as a true soil character, in even the mostscienti ﬁc classi ﬁcations.
* Kellogg was acting chief from 1933 to 1935, but it is unclear to what extent he was free to implement
change with Marbut looking over his shoulder.92 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
By Marbut’s de ﬁnition, soils had to be classi ﬁed according to their charac-
teristics — not external factors such as climate, geology, or topography. Withan ingenious twist of logic, Bushnell proposed that topography be considered a
soil characteristic so that classi ﬁcation might better address local variability.
Soil surveyors, Bushnell argued, mapped variations in topography and landscapeposition as much as changes in pro ﬁle horizons, due to the practical limitations
on the ability to sample pro ﬁles. In considering topography a soil characteristic,
Bushnell reconciled Marbut’s soil classi ﬁcation theory with the actual practices
of soil mapping. While Bushnell employed this idea for his Indiana soil keys,
85
it failed to gain traction in the survey as a whole as long as Marbut remainedin charge.
Kellogg, in his 1937 Soil Survey Manual , embraced the idea that soils were
three-dimensional bodies with both “internal features,” like horizons, and “exter-nal features,” such as topography and vegetation
52 (p. 101). For taxonomy pur-
poses, these bodies were eventually termed pedons and polypedons.115 Francis
Hole, the in ﬂuential pedologist and geographer at the University of Wisconsin,
extended the three-dimensional soil body concept still further with his approachto soil-landscape analysis.
116 In 1953, Hole117 ﬁrst proposed that external soil
features like slope, landscape position, drainage, etc., be described in a manneranalogous to the description of pro ﬁle features (Figure 3.13). Later, he coined
the term soilscape  to describe three-dimensional soil-landscape bodies that occu-
pied speci ﬁc habitats, much like biological organisms.
116
While the three-dimensional soil bodies of Bushnell, Kellogg, and Hole might
look super ﬁcially like Milne’s catena concept60 or Dokuchaev’s soil geography,42
there are two fundamental differences: (1) pedons, polypedons, and soilscapes
are fundamentally discrete, whereas Dokuchaev and Milne saw soil-landscapesas spatially continuous; and (2) Milne and Dokuchaev viewed environmentalfactors as separate from  but correlated with  soil properties, whereas NCSS work-
ers saw slope, vegetation, etc., as part of soil units to be described. The differences
between these scienti ﬁc traditions are subtle but important.
3.6 THE INTRODUCTION OF AERIAL 
PHOTOGRAPHY, 1927–1952
Aerial reconnaissance in World War I (1914–1919) led to the development of
aerial photography, and soon after the USGS began using and re ﬁning this new
tool for topographic survey work.118 The ﬁrst account of the use of air photos and
aerial observation for soil survey came in the early 1920s,119 but it was not until
the late 1920s that Bushnell and NCSS scientist Mark Baldwin began systematicexperiments on the use of aerial photography for soil surveys. After working withonly a few scattered air photos obtained at minimal cost from other agencies,Bushnell
111 (p. 28) proclaimed: “I am unwilling to map another square mile
without the aid of aerial photos.” He reported running a small experiment, withtwo different experienced surveyors covering the same area with alidade planeA Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 93
table traverses and producing two radically different maps. Soil maps produced
with air photos, Bushnell argued, offered both signi ﬁcantly better spatial precision
and time savings, as there was no need to construct a base map. In 1930, Jennings
County was completely mapped using commercially obtained air photos, with
four other counties completed by 1931.120 The state of Michigan had also begun
to use aerial photography, and reported the ﬁrst use of a mirror stereoscope for
terrain mapping.121 Despite the pleadings of Bushnell and many others,122 despite
a detailed cost analysis in Indiana demonstrating that reduced ﬁeld costs more
than balanced photo purchase expenses,123 and despite obvious bene ﬁts in spatial
accuracy, the NCSS as a whole did not adopt this technique until around 1935,when inexpensive photographs became available from the new Soil ConservationService, which used aerial photography to map soil erosion and land use.
4,110,123–126
Even as late as 1937, the use of aerial photography was considered a secondarytechnique with plane tabling still the basic mapping approach.
52
Initially, aerial photography was used simply as a direct substitute for the
plane table survey — a base map and ﬁeld locator.111,120 As early as 1932, however,
soil surveyors in Michigan began using air photos to identify soil external featuresFIGURE 3.13 Francis Hole’s scheme for describing soil bodies as three-dimensional
landscape entities. Note the similarity of this ordinal approach and contemporary schemesfor describing soil pro ﬁle features like structure and acidity. (From Hole, F.D., Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Proc. , 18, 131–135, 1953. With permission.)
94 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
like vegetation, surface re ﬂectance (for bare soils in agricultural areas), and, using
a mirror stereoscope, topography. Soil boundaries were thus identi ﬁed and slope
phases determined over particularly dif ﬁcult, heavily vegetated terrain where
ground transect surveys would have been arduous.121 The practice of using air
photo interpretation  for rugged areas continued into the early 1950s.
In rough or heavily wooded country, the ﬁeld worker has great dif ﬁculty in observing
soil boundaries throughout their course. In such areas, the soils are identi ﬁed, and
their boundaries that coincide with land-form boundaries, drainage lines, or vege-tation pattern are projected from the line of traverse as far as they can be seen andbeyond that left hanging. Then in the of ﬁce the stereoscope is used to connect the
boundaries not connected in the ﬁeld. Thus the scientist is able to “observe these
soil boundaries throughout their course” without having actually seen them on theground.
127 (p. 741)
According to of ﬁcial NCSS policy into the early 1950s, in situations where
changes in vegetation, surface soil, and topography could  be observed on the
ground, they were  to be observed on the ground. Only in rough or densely
vegetated terrain or in reconnaissance surveys was air photo interpretation tobe relied upon.
88,128,129  Every single map unit identi ﬁed was to be sampled and
characterized in the ﬁeld using an auger or soil pit. Despite the introduction of
aerial photography in 1935 for base map compilation, the person-days requiredto map a square mile did not decline, though maps became considerably moredetailed.
91 In contrast, the Australian Land Systems Surveys of the 1940s
employed air photo interpretation of topography and vegetation to systemati-cally and extensively identify and map soil–vegetation–geology associations.Land systems surveyors were the ﬁrst to map extensively by interpreting
changed in topography and vegetation using stereo aerial photography, withﬁeld transects employed only to ground truth photos.
94 Mapping by means of
extensive stereo air photo interpretation is now standard practice in the U.S.soil survey program.
130
3.7 SUMMARY AND CONTEMPORARY RELEVANCE
3.7.1 H ISTORICAL  SUMMARY
Nineteenth-century geologists and geological surveyors were the ﬁrst soil-land-
scape modelers. Within this tradition, maps were delineated according to geologicformation, lithology, and type of sur ﬁcial deposit. Soil information was usually
provided in an accompanying map report, though sometimes independent soilmaps were constructed based upon the geologic map. At the start of the 19thcentury, most geologists believed that soil properties at the Earth’s surface directlycorrelated with the rock or deposits from which they formed. Geologists did,however, examine soils in both the ﬁeld and lab in the course of their survey
work, leading to a more sophisticated understanding of contingent soil–geologyrelationships by the end of the century.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 95
To the geological tradition of soil-landscape modeling, the late-19th-century
naturalist V .V . Dokuchaev added the climatic plant geography of Alexander vonHumboldt, creating a new ﬁeld of soil geologic-geographic investigations that we
now know as the ﬁve factors of soil formation: the geologic/physiographic factors
of parent rock, topography, and land surface age together with the geographicfactors of climate and vegetation. In the early 20th century, Dokuchaev’s discipleGlinka and the U.S. soil survey leader Marbut emphasized the geographic-climaticdimension to the neglect of geology and physiography, and soil-landscape mod-eling became dominated by what was known as the Russian zonal concept.
Though topography had been used by surveyors from the late 1800s forward,
an unknown soil chemist working in East Africa, Geoffrey Milne, asserted a moreprominent theoretical role for this factor of soil formation with the publicationin 1935 of his catena concept. The catena concept posited that topography-associated changes in soil properties and formation cut across zonal soil groups.The catena was therefore proposed as a compound map unit that representedrepeating soil-topography relationships for an area rather than a dominant soiltype. Milne also discussed the role of geology, hillslope hydrology, and masstransport in shaping soil-topography patterns. In the U.S., however, soil surveyorsused the catena term to label an existing soil association  concept — a ﬁeld
classi ﬁcation of soils in one climate zone on uniform parent material with dif-
fering drainage, what one soil scientist termed a microcatena
56 (p. 42). The
association term was conversely employed in the sense of Milne’s catena —though without the explicit formation processes. Despite this confusion in thesoil survey community, the original catena concept was resurrected by RobertRuhe in 1961,
74 and in the late 20th century has been cited as the fundamental
theory for both quantitative soil-landscape modeling67 and soil geomorphology.66
In 1920, Curtis Marbut introduced a new concept for soil surveys, what he
called soil anatomy18 (p. 141). Marbut’s soil anatomy was explicitly modeled on
biology, in particular the 19th-century biological subdiscipline of morphology,which encompassed comparative anatomy, embryology, evolution, and taxonomy.According to Marbut, the primary objective for the U.S. soil survey program wasnot to produce soil maps, but rather to construct a hierarchical, natural (or genetic)
classi ﬁcation comparable to biological taxonomy. Unlike the scienti ﬁc paradigms
and traditions discussed previously, soil anatomy as originally formulated lackeda strong spatial or geographic dimension. After Marbut, U.S. soil scientistsextended soil anatomy with the concept of soils as discrete, three-dimensionalbodies with internal (horizons) and external (slope and vegetation) features.
Pedologists like to state that they study “soils as natural bodies”
131 (p. 3),
with the belief that this concept embraces Dokuchaev, Glinka, Marbut, and Jenny.9
As the historical analysis presented in this chapter demonstrates, there are fun-damental differences between Milne’s, Marbut’s, Glinka’s, and Dokuchaev’s nat-ural body concepts, differences that do not indicate the progressive developmentof a central idea. These different soil concepts, though not always made explicit,continue to shape questions, methods, and priorities in contemporary soil studiesand soil-landscape modeling.96 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
3.7.2 C ONTEMPORARY  RELEVANCE
The great new thing in professional science in the ﬁrst half of the 19th century
was Humboldtian science, the accurate, measured study of widespread but inter-connected real phenomena in order to ﬁnd a de ﬁnite law and a dynamical cause.
40
(p. 105)
The core concept in contemporary soil-landscape modeling — what we now call
environmental correlation132 — can be traced back to the early-19th-century
quantitative plant geography and climatology of Alexander von Humboldt.Dokuchaev applied this concept to soils and extended this correlative approachto include not just climate and vegetation, but also geologic and physiographicfactors — the combined environmental factors that are most commonly employedtoday. In many ways, Geoffrey Milne reclaimed the geology-geography environ-mental correlation of Dokuchaev that had been lost with the climatic focus ofthe early 20th century, but he also shifted the theoretical focus of soil-landscapemodeling from continental-scale problems to hillslope-scale variability — thetheoretical basis for contemporary digital soil-terrain modeling.
67 The hydrologic
process dimension of Milne’s catena concept also provides a link to contemporaryprocess geomorphology in the Gilbert tradition.
99 Contemporary soil-landscape
modeling, which grew out of a rich mapping tradition in geologic surveying,could bene ﬁt from a closer relationship to academic geologists and 21st-century
geological surveys. There are many ideas, paradigms, and traditions from the pastthat still have great relevance for cutting-edge soil-landscape modeling today.
The development of GIS tools has undoubtedly played a major role in the
revival of soil-landscape modeling, but it would be wrong to conclude that therelative lack of interest in prior years was due solely to the lack of spatialdatabases and modern computing power. Humboldt was quantifying climate-vegetation relationships in the early 19th century. Dokuchaev produced aregional, quantitative map of soil humus content in 1883.
42 Hilgard21,46 studied
soil-vegetation and soil-climate correlations in the late 19th century. Milne exam-ined soil-topography relationships in pre-WWII East Africa lacking even the aidof reasonable topographic maps. With the ready availability of stereo aerialphotography from the mid-1930s forward and relatively generous support forsoil surveys from the 1930s to the 1970s, there has been ample opportunity forsoil scientists to expand and re ﬁne soil-landscape modeling theories and tech-
niques. However, academics and survey leaders have often been content to letﬁeld surveyors work out soil-landscape models on their own.
8 This is the root
cause behind the general lack of explicit, published, and tested soil-landscapemodels. Prior to the introduction of GIS, soil-landscape modeling was not a highacademic priority.
While 19th-century geological surveys, Humboldt’s plant geography,
Dokuchaev’s factorial model, and Milne’s catena concept have all contributed tothe development of modern soil-landscape modeling, Marbut’s soil anatomy hasundoubtedly hindered the development of this science. Under Marbut’s leader-A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 97
ship, priority and prestige were given to the development of soil classi ﬁcation
and related soil pro ﬁle genesis studies. There was a short reversal of this imbal-
ance in the 1930s with Marbut’s passing, competition from a rival Soil Conser-vation Service mapping project, and the demands of New Deal social welfareprograms.
4 However, from the 1950s forward, the preoccupation of the U.S. soil
survey program and U.S. pedology community generally has been the construc-tion and ongoing revision of what we now know as Soil Taxonomy .
108 Not sur-
prisingly, U.S. soil surveying did not change appreciably from the 1950s to theend of the 20th century. Under the leadership of Robert Ruhe, a series of soil-geomorphology investigations were initiated in 1953, but the results of thesestudies have never been fully integrated into soil mapping.
6 Developments in
quantitative soil-landscape modeling have been led overwhelmingly by Europeanand Australian scientists.
133–135
Perhaps the most important lesson to take from the history of soil-landscape
modeling is that the most important ideas have come from outside the scienti ﬁc
mainstream. Both V .V . Dokuchaev in Russia and E.W. Hilgard in California werefar removed from the centers of late-19th-century geologic science, and GeoffreyMilne was even more isolated from soil survey developments in pre-WW IITanganyika. Environmental correlation was an idea borrowed from plant geogra-phy, not soil investigations. And Milne’s hillslope processes were more commonlydiscussed in the context of early-20th-century land management than in the soilformation literature. The U.S. soil survey began using aerial photography almost15 years after the USGS, 5 years after successful experimentation in Indiana, andonly then due to the availability of inexpensive photos from the rival Soil Con-servation Service. More recently, U.S. geologist Robert Ruhe and Australianscientists like Bruce Butler were largely responsible for drawing attention to theimportance of Quaternary geology and geomorphology in soil-landscape model-ing.
6,136 To the extent that history can be used as a guide for the future, 21st-
century developments in soil-landscape modeling might well spring from the farcorners of the globe and scienti ﬁc ﬁelds other than soil science and pedology.
REFERENCES
1. RW Simonson. Early teaching in USA of Dokuchaiev factors of soil formation.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  61: 11–16, 1997.
2. RW Simonson. Historical Aspects of Soil Survey and Soil Classi ﬁcation . Soil
Science Society of America, Madison, WI, 1987.
3. RW Simonson. The U.S. soil survey: contributions to soil science and its appli-
cation. Geoderma  48: 1–16, 1991.
4. DR Gardner. The National Cooperative Soil Survey of the United States . USDA,
NRCS, Res. Econ. Soc. Sci. Div. Soil Surv. Div., Washington, DC, 1998.
5. JK Taylor. The Development of Soil Survey and Field Pedology in Australia ,
1927–1967. CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia, 1970.
6. ABW Ef ﬂand, WR Ef ﬂand. Soil geomorphology studies in the United States soil
survey program. Agric Hist  66: 189–212, 1992.98 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
7. BD Hudson. The soil survey as paradigm-based science. Soil Sci Soc Am J  56:
836–841, 1992.
8. RW Simonson. Historical aspects of soil survey and soil classi ﬁcation. Part VII.
1961–1970. Soil Surv Horiz  28: 77–84, 1986.
9. JP Tandarich. The intellectual background for the factors of soil formation. In
Factors of Soil Formation: A Fiftieth Anniversary Retrospective , SSSA Special
Publication 33, R Amundson, J Harden, M Singer, Eds. SSSA, Madison, WI,1994, pp. 1–13.
10. JP Tandarich. The development of pedologic thought: some people involved. Phys
Geogr  9: 162–174, 1988.
11. JM Eyles. William Smith: some aspects of his life and work. In Toward a History
of Geology , CJ Schneer, Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1969, pp. 142–158.
12. S Winchester. The Map That Changed the World: William Smith and the Birth of
Modern Geology . Harper Collins, New York, 2001.
13. CJ Schneer. William “Strata” Smith on the Web, 2004. Available at
http://www.unh.edu/esci/wmsmith.html.
14. JP Tandarich. Wisconsin agricultural geologists: ahead of their time. Geosci Wis
18: 21–26, 2001.
15. NM Sibirtsev. Selected Works , V ol. 1, N Kaner, Trans. Israel Program for Scienti ﬁc
Translations, Jerusalem, 1966.
16. GN Coffey. The development of soil survey work in the United States with a brief
reference to foreign countries. Proc Am Soc Agron  3: 115–129, 1911.
17. RW Simonson. Historical aspects of soil survey and soil classi ﬁcation. Part I.
1899–1910. Soil Surv Horiz  27: 3–11, 1986.
18. CF Marbut. The contribution of soil survey to soil science. Soc Promot Agric Sci
Proc  41: 116–142, 1921.
19. IC Russell. Subaerial Decay of Rocks , Bulletin 52. USGS, Washington, DC, 1889.
20. GP Merrill. A Treatise on Rocks, Rock-Weathering and Soils . The Macmillan Co.,
New York, 1904.
21. EW Hilgard. A Report on the Relations of Soil to Climate , Bulletin 3. USDA
Weather Bureau, Washington, DC, 1892.
22. RT Hill. Present Knowledge of the Geology of Texas , Bulletin 45. USGS, Wash-
inton, DC, 1887.
23. JS Flett. The First Hundred Years of the Geological Survey of Great Britain .
HMSO, London, 1937.
24. DD Owen. Report of a Geological Survey of Wisconsin, Iowa and Minnesota; and
Incidentally of a Portion of Nebraska Territory . Lippincott, Grambo, Philadelphia,
1852.
25. JW Barnes. Basic Geological Mapping . The Open University Press, Milton Keyes,
U.K., 1981.
26. FH Lahee. Field Geology . Hill Publishing Co., London, 1916.
27. J Geikie. Structural and Field Geology , 4th ed. D. Van Nostrand, New York, 1920.
28. MH Lapham. Crisscross Trails . Willis E. Berg, Berkeley, CA, 1949.
29. HH Krusekopf, Ed. Life and Work of C.F . Marbut . Soil Science Society of America,
Columbia, MO, 1942.
30. TD Rice. C.F. Marbut. In Life and Work of C.F . Marbut , HH Krusekopf, Ed. Soil
Science Society of America, Columbia, MO, 1942, pp. 46–48.
31. CF Marbut, HH Bennett, JE Lapham, MH Lapham. Soils of the United States ,
Bulletin 96. USDA Bureau of Soils, Washington, DC, 1913.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 99
32. CF Marbut. A scheme for soil classi ﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Congress of Soil Science, June 13–22, 1927 , V ol. 4. American Organizing Com-
mittee, Washington, DC, 1928, pp. 1–31.
33. RS Smith. Dr. C.F. Marbut’s contribution to soil survey. In Life and Work of C.F .
Marbut , HH Krusekopf, Ed. Soil Science Society of America, Columbia, MO,
1942, pp. 50–53.
34. R Amundson, DH Yaalon. E.W. Hilgard and John Wesley Powell: efforts for a
joint agricultural and geological survey. Soil Sci Soc Am J  59: 4–13, 1995.
35. AD Hall, EJ Russell. Soil surveys and soil analysis. J Agric Sci  4: 182–223, 1911.
36. NM Tulaikoff. The genetic classi ﬁcation of soils. J Agric Sci  3: 80–85, 1909.
37. LK Nyhart. Teaching community via biology in late-nineteenth-century Germany.
Osiris  17: 141–170, 2002.
38. L Kellner. Alexander von Humboldt . Oxford University Press, London, 1963.
39. M Nicolson. Alexander von Humboldt, Humboldtian science and the origins of
the study of vegetation. Hist Sci  25: 167–194, 1987.
40. SF Cannon. Science in Culture: The Early Victorian Period . Science History
Publications, New York, 1978.
41. TL Hankins. Blood, dirt and nomograms. Isis 90: 50–80, 1999.
42. VV Dokuchaev. Russian Chernozem , V ol. 1, N Kaner, Trans. Israel Program for
Scienti ﬁc Translations, Jerusalem, 1967.
43. KD Glinka. Treatise on Soil Science  (Pochvovedenie, original title) , 4th ed., A
Gourevitch, Trans. Israel Program for Scienti ﬁc Translations, Jerusalem, 1963.
44. KD Glinka. The Great Soil Groups of the World and Their Development , CF
Marbut, Trans. Edwards Brothers, Ann Arbor, MI, 1927.
45. CF Marbut. Soils: Their Genesis and Classi ﬁcation , 2nd ed. Soil Science Society
of America, Madison, WI, 1951.
46. EW Hilgard. Soil studies and soil maps. Overland Mon  18: 607–616, 1891.
47. FE Bonsteel, WT Carter, OL Ayers. Soil Survey of the Syracuse Area, New York ,
Series 1903. USDA Bureau of Soils, Washington, DC, 1904.
48. USDA Bureau of Soils. Soil Survey Field Book . USDA, Washington, DC, 1906.
49. WJ Gieb. The Value of the Soil Survey . American Association of Soil Survey
Workers, Madison, WI, 1922.
50. EL Worthen. Methods of soil surveying. Proc Am Soc Agron  1: 185–191, 1909.
51. USDA Bureau of Soils. Instructions to Field Parties . USDA, Washington, DC,
1914.
52. CE Kellogg. Soil Survey Manual , Miscellaneous Publication 274. USDA, Wash-
ington, DC, 1937.
53. GR Clarke. The Study of Soil in the Field . Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1936.
54. M Baldwin, CE Kellogg, J Thorp. Soil classi ﬁcation. In Soils and Men , USDA
Committee on Soils, Ed. U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1938,
pp. 979–1001.
55. JA Ewell, HL Dean, F Rudolph, EW Tigges. Soil Survey of Cerro Gordo County,
Iowa , Series 1935, No. 13. USDA Bureau of Plant Industry, Washington, DC, 1940.
56. J Thorp. The in ﬂuence of environment on soil formation. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
6: 39–46, 1941.
57. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation . McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1941.
58. G Milne, Ed. Proceedings of a Conference of East African Soil Chemists, Amani,
Tanganyika Territory, May 21–26, 1932 . Technical Conferences of the East African
Dependencies, Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya, 1932.100 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
59. K Milne, G. Milne. In Geographers: Biobibliographical Studies , V ol. 2, TW
Freeman, P Pinchemel, Eds. Mansell, London, 1978, pp. 89–92.
60. G Milne. Some suggested units of classi ﬁcation and mapping, particularly for
East African soils. Soil Res  4: 183–198, 1935.
61. G Milne. Composite units for the mapping of complex soil associations. In Trans-
actions of the Third International Congress of Soil Science, Oxford, England , V ol.
1. T. Murby & Co., London, 1935, pp. 345–347.
62. G Milne. Normal erosion as a factor in soil pro ﬁle development. Nature  138:
548–549, 1936.
63. G Milne, V A Beckley, GH Gethin Jones, WS Martin, G Grif ﬁth. A Provisional
Soil Map of East Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika and Zanzibar) with Explan-atory Memoir , Amani Memoir 31. East African Agricultural Research Station,
Amani, Tangayika, 1936.
64. TM Bushnell. Some aspects of the soil catena concept. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  7:
466–476, 1942.
65. TM Bushnell. The catena caldron. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  10: 335–340, 1945.
66. GF Hall, CG Olson. Predicting variability of soils from landscape models. In
Spatial Variabilities of Soils and Landforms , V ol. 28, MJ Mausbach, LP Wilding,
Eds. Soil Science Society of America, Madison, WI, 1991, pp. 9–23.
67. ID Moore, PE Gessler, GA Nielsen, GA Peterson. Soil attribute prediction using
terrain analysis. Soil Sci Soc Am J  57: 443–452, 1993.
68. A Young. Tropical Soils and Soil Survey . Cambridge Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1976.
69. PW Birkeland. Soils and Geomorphology , 3rd ed. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1999.
70. M Sommer, E Schlichting. Archetypes of catenas in respect to matter: a concept
for structuring and grouping catenas. Geoderma  76: 1–33, 1997.
71. AE Scheidegger. The catena principle in geomorphology. Z Geomorph  30:
257–273, 1986.
72. Geoffrey Milne to the East African Directors of Agriculture, Imperial Bureau of
Soils, April 24, 1930. MSS.Brit.Emp.s.457, File 14, Items 11–14. Bodleian Libraryof Commonwealth and African Studies at Rhodes House, Oxford.
73. W.S. Martin to Geoffrey Milne, April 1933. MSS.Brit.Emp.s.457, File 14, Items
32–33. Bodleian Library of Commonwealth and African Studies at Rhodes House,Oxford.
74. RV Ruhe. Elements of the soil landscape. Trans 7th Int Congr Soil Sci  4: 165–169,
1961.
75. RV Ruhe. Review of “Pedology, Weathering and Geomorphological Research,”
by P.W. Birkeland. Geoderma  14: 176–177, 1975.
76. G Milne. A soil reconnaissance journey through parts of Tanganyika Territory. J
Ecol 35: 192–265, 1947.
77. AJ Conacher, JB Dalrymple. The nine-unit landsurface model: an approach to
pedogeomorphic research. Geoderma  18: 1–154, 1977.
78. WE Calton. The use of the catena in Tanganyika Territory. Soils Fert  15: 369–371,
1952.
79. RJ Huggett. Soil landscape systems: model of soil genesis. Geoderma  13: 1–22, 1975.
80. TM Bushnell. To what extent should location, topography or physiography con-
stitute a basis for differentiating soil into units or groups. In Proceedings of the
1st International Congress of Soil Science, June 13–22, 1927 , V ol. 4. American
Organizing Committee, Washington, DC, 1928, pp. 158–163.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 101
81. GW Robinson. Soils, Their Origin, Constitution, and Classi ﬁcation , 1st ed. Tho-
mas Murby & Co., London, 1932.
82. AN Gennadiyev, KR Olson. Pedological cooperation between Russia and the
USA, past to present. Soil Sci Soc Am J  62: 1153–1161, 1998.
83. JH Ellis. A ﬁeld classi ﬁcation of soils for use in the soil survey. Sci Agric  12:
338–345, 1932.
84. G Milne. The Extent to Which V olcanic Rocks Give Rise to Distinctive Soils,
Examined from East African Occurances, 1934. Typescript, MSS.Brit.Emp.s.457,File 13, Items 13–51. Bodleian Library of Commonwealth and African Studies atRhodes House, Oxford.
85. TM Bushnell. Taxonomic considerations in soil correlation. Bull Am Soil Survey
Assoc  XV: 110–114, 1934.
86. G ap Grif ﬁth. Catena. Soils Fert  15: 169–170, 1952.
87. E Winters. Interpretative soil classi ﬁcations: genetic groupings. Soil Sci  67:
131–139, 1949.
88. Soil Survey Staff. Soil Survey Manual . USDA, Washington, DC, 1951.
89. Soil Survey Division. Soils of the United States. In Soils and Men , USDA Com-
mittee on Soils, Ed. U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1938, pp.
1019–1161.
90. ME Austin, MH Galltin, JN Odom, F Rudolph, ME Swann, SR Bacon, MG Cline,
AJ Vessel. Soil Survey of Claiborne County, Tennessee , Series 1939, No. 5. USDA-
BPISAE Division of Soil Survey , Washington, DC, 1948.
91. RW Simonson. Lessons from the ﬁrst half century of soil survey. II. Mapping of
soils. Soil Sci  74: 323–330, 1952.
92. WH Scholtes, GD Smith, FF Riecken. Taylor County, Iowa, Soils , Soil Survey
Series 1947, No. 1. USDA-SCS, Washington, DC, 1954.
93. CE Kellogg. World food production: the role of the photogrammetrist. Photo-
gramm Eng 16: 94–100, 1950.
94. CS Christian, GA Stewart. General Report on Survey of Katherin-Darwin Region,
1946 , Land Research Series, No. 1. CSIRO, Melbourne, 1953.
95. H Spencer. The social organism. Westminster Rev  73: 51–68, 1860.
96. VL Hilts. Towards the social organism: Herbert Spencer and William B. Carpenter
on the analogical method. In The Natural Sciences and the Social Sciences , IB
Cohen, Ed. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1994, pp.275–303.
97. FE Clements. Plant Succession: An Analysis of the Development of Vegetation .
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, DC, 1916.
98. WM Davis. Geographical Essays . Ginn & Co., Boston, 1909.
99. CE Thorn. An Introduction to Theoretical Geomorphology . Unwin Hyman, Bos-
ton, 1988.
100. D W orster. Nature’s Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas , Studies in Environment
and History, AW Crosby, Ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1994.
101. LM Moomaw. Curtis Fletcher Marbut. In Life and Work of C.F . Marbut , HH
Krusekopf, Ed. Soil Science Society of America, Columbia, MO, 1942, pp. 11–27.
102. L Korerner. 
Linnaeus: Nature and Nation . Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1999.
103. LF Farber. Finding Order in Nature: The Naturalist Tradition from Linnaeus to
E.O. Wilson , Johns Hopkins Introductory Studies in the History of Science, MT
Green, S Kingsland, Eds. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2000.102 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
104. W Coleman. Biology in the Nineteenth Century: Problems of Form, Function, and
Transformation . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1977.
105. GN Coffey. A Study of the Soils of the United States , Bulletin 85. USDA Bureau
of Soils, Washington, DC, 1912.
106. CF Marbut. Report of the committee on soil classi ﬁcation. J Am Soc Agron  8:
387–388, 1916.
107. CF Marbut. Soil classi ﬁcation. Bull Am Assoc Soil Survey Workers  3: 24–33, 1922.
108. Soil Survey Staff. Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classi ﬁcation for Making
and Interpreting Soil Surveys , 2nd ed. USDA-NRCS, Washington, DC, 1999.
109. PS Lovejoy. The soil survey: present and future. Bull Am Assoc Soil Survey Workers
4: 53–59, 1923.
110. MH Lapham. The soil survey from the horse-and-buggy day to the modern age
of the ﬂying machine. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  10: 344–350, 1945.
111. TM Bushnell. Aerial photography and soil survey. Bull Am Soil Survey Assoc  10:
23–28, 1929.
112. Minutes of joint meeting. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  1: 505–526, 1937.
113. Report of the ﬁfteenth annual business meeting of the Soil Science Society of
America. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  16: 91–99, 1952.
114. Reports of SSSA divisions and committees, 1994. Soil Sci Soc Am J  59: 588–592,
1995.
115. RW Simonson, DR Gardner. Concept and function of the pedon. Trans 8th Int
Congr Soil Sci  4: 127–131, 1960.
116. FD Hole. Approach to landscape analysis with emphasis on soils. Geoderma  21:
1–23, 1978.
117. FD Hole. Suggested terminology for describing soils as three-dimensional bodies.
Soil Sci Soc Am Proc 18: 131–135, 1953.
118. HC Davey. Brief outline of aerial photographic work in the U.S. Geological
Survey. Photogramm Eng 1: 3, 1935.
119. WB Cobb. Possibilities of the airplane in soil survey work. Bull Am Soil Survey
Assoc  4: 77–80, 1923.
120. TM Bushnell. A new technique in soil mapping. Bull Am Soil Survey Assoc  13:
74–81, 1932.
121. CE Millar. The use of aerial photographs in the Michigan land economic survey.
Bull Am Soil Survey Assoc  13: 82–85, 1932.
122. M Baldwin, WJ Geib, LH Smith, WE Hearn, AT Sweet. Committee on survey
reports, maps and technique of mapping. Bull Am Soil Survey Assoc  13: 94–95,
1932.
123. TM Bushnell. Use of aerial photography for Indiana land use studies. Photogramm
Eng 17: 725–738, 1951.
124. CW Collier. Use of aerial maps in soil conservation studies. Photogramm Eng  2:
21–26, 1936.
125. MF Miller. Progress of the soil survey of the United States since 1899. Soil Sci
Soc Am Proc  14: 1–13, 1949.
126. MS Wright. The application of aerial photography to land use problems. Soil Sci
Soc Am Proc  1: 357–360, 1936.
127. JD Rourke, ME Austin. The use of air-photos for soil classi ﬁcation and mapping
in the ﬁeld. Photogramm Eng  17: 738–747, 1951.
128. RW Simonson. Use of aerial photographs in soil surveys. Photogramm Eng  16:
308–311, 1950.A Historical Perspective on Soil-Landscape Modeling 103
129. M Baldwin, HM Smith, HW Whitlock. The use of aerial photographs in soil
mapping. Photogramm Eng  13: 532–536, 1947.
130. Soil Division Survey Staff. Soil Survey Manual . USDA, Washington, DC, 1993.
131. SW Buol, FD Hole, RJ McCracken, RJ Southard. Soil Genesis and Classi ﬁcation ,
4th ed. Iowa State University Press, Ames, 1997.
132. NJ McKenzie, PJ Ryan. Spatial prediction of soil properties using environmental
correlation. Geoderma  89: 67–94, 1999.
133. PHT Beckett, R Webster. Soil variability: a review. Soils Fert  34: 1–15, 1971.
134. PA Burrough. Soil variability: a late 20th century view. Soils Fert  56: 529–562,
1993.
135. AB McBratney, MLM Santos, B Minasny. On digital soil mapping. Geoderma
117: 3–52, 2003.
136. BE Butler. Periodic Phenomena in Landscapes as a Basis for Soil Studies, Soil
Publication 14. CSIRO, Melbourne, 1959.1054Geomorphological 
Soil-Landscape Models
Carolyn G. Olson
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................105
4.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................1064.2 Conceptual Models ...............................................................................107
4.2.1 Soil Formation Concepts and Evolution...............................1074.2.2 Factor Models........................................................................108
4.3 System Dynamics and Process Models................................................110
4.3.1 Soil Development Models.....................................................1104.3.2 Mass Balance Modeling........................................................111
4.3.3 Process-Response Models.....................................................1124.3.4 Soil-Landscape Modeling .....................................................112
4.3.4.1 Hillslope Models ................................................1144.3.4.2 Quanti ﬁcation and Explicit Soil-Landscape 
Models: Spatial Analysis ....................................118
4.4 Conclusions ...........................................................................................118Acknowledgments .............................................................................................119References .........................................................................................................119
ABSTRACT
This chapter presents soil formation concepts and resulting soil-landscape modelswith an emphasis on geomorphology entailing: (i) soil factorial models includingJenny’s soil-forming factors and Runge’s energy model for soil development; (ii)system dynamics and process models including Simonson’s model for horizondifferentiation based on additions, removals, transfers, and transformations; mass-balance modeling for gains and losses of substances in soil; process–responsemodels considering both intrinsic and extrinsic thresholds and complex geomor-phic response; and (iii) geomorphically based landscape models. Milne intro-duced the concept of the catena, and numerous other hillslope models have beendeveloped highlighting the relationships among topography, landforms, hydrol-ogy, and soil formation considering the three-dimensional nature of soil-land-scapes. In little over a century we have seen a signi ﬁcant shift from the dominance106 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
of conceptual models in soils and geomorphology to spatially explicit quanti ﬁable
soil-landscape models that use regression analysis and multivariate methodsincluding spatial point systems, networks, continuous distributions, partitioning,
trend analysis, and simulation modeling. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Observation and conceptualization have been the mainstay of earth science dis-
ciplines for centuries. The earth sciences have a history rich in conceptual modelsbased on these empirical observations. There are two codependent disciplinesimportant to our core understanding of earth sciences: soil science and geomor-phology. In order to assess the state of our current progress in environmental soil-landscape modeling, it is important to have an appreciation of the historical basisfor our present position. In turn, this assessment paves the way for predictingpotentials, thus gaining the bene ﬁt of analyzing future trends. The objective of
this chapter is to provide a context for progress by examining the contributionsof a few scientists and their philosophy of soils, geomorphology, and soil-land-scape modeling.
Soil science and geomorphology, the parental disciplines of soil-geomor-
phology and soil-landscape modeling, use the scienti ﬁc method as the traditional
empirical approach to a study. Dijkerman
1 provides a detailed summary of the
scienti ﬁc approach with relevant soil science examples. He states that there are
seven stages in the scienti ﬁc method: (1) selection of the system to study, (2)
measurement of properties, (3) ordering and condensing of data, (4) developmentof hypotheses, (5) testing hypotheses with data gathered, (6) structuring con-ﬁrmed hypotheses into scienti ﬁc laws, and (7) using scienti ﬁc laws to predict
unknown phenomena. It is important to emphasize that this scienti ﬁc method
has been the framework by which we approach our science and will continue tobe for some time.
Although the scienti ﬁc method has been the foundation for scienti ﬁc inves-
tigations, it does not explain how scienti ﬁc advances come about. Many scientists
have presented their views on how science progresses. A few ideas relevant tothe development of soil-landscape modeling are presented.
Osterkamp and Hupp
2 maintain that geomorphology, soil science, and related
disciplines are complex composites of the basic sciences of physics, chemistry,and biology. They suggest that the basic sciences advance through paradigmdeﬁnitions and replacements (see Kuhn
3,4), but integrative disciplines such as
geomorphology, soil science, or soil geomorphology cannot because of theircomplexity. Instead, these disciplines have developed by principles derived fromthe basic sciences. As we shall see, two common principles that appear consis-tently and have in ﬂuenced soil scientists and geomorphologists through time are
evolution, drawn largely from the biologic sciences, and equilibrium, from chem-istry. Various permutations of these principles that have enjoyed popularityinclude process-response modeling and thresholds, dynamic equilibrium, andpunctuated equilibrium.Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 107
Why model? Models enable us to study complex systems that otherwise might
be considered intractable. Often they are an opportunity to forecast or predictinterrelationships among environmental parameters. What makes a good model?
Kirkby
5 lists several characteristics of a good model. Among these are an explicit
physical basis, simplicity, generality, richness, and potential for scaling up ordown. Most of these criteria are straightforward. Soil-landscape models are basedin the physical world. Simplicity refers to the central concept of the model, notnecessarily to the complexity of rigorous mathematical computations or relation-ships among parameters within the model. While most earth processes are com-plex, sometimes a simpler representative model is best. Simple functional systemscan be calibrated and tested while complex or sophisticated models are dif ﬁcult
to validate. Oreskes
6 cautions that the more complex a model, the more dif ﬁcult
it is to prove invalid. Kirkby’s scaling criterion provides a means of manipulatingthe model at various levels, from the microscopic to global scales. Generalityrefers to the ability of a model to be applicable when translated to a new envi-ronment, and richness refers to the information gained from applying the model.
5
The advent of fast, inexpensive computing has allowed us to study and model
even more complex issues that ordinarily cannot be studied by traditional scienti ﬁc
methods (e.g., global climate response to CO2 or soil ecosystems). Recently,
quantitative techniques for predicting the spatial and temporal distributions ofproperties to account for conceptual pedologic models are making use of vari-ability theory. The introduction and increased use of geostatistics and modernstatistical techniques in geology helped advance this particular approach in soilscience, which has been referred to as pedometrics.
7 The most recent advances
in pedometrics include the introduction of nonlinear geostatistical methods.8 Some
researchers combine these newer methods with multivariate methods to producehybrid models; see, for example, Hoosebeck.
9 McBratney et al.8 indicate that
hybrid methods will be particularly powerful at catchment and regional scales.Several chapters in this book explore these newest approaches and examine currentpedometric tools and methods.
4.2 CONCEPTUAL MODELS
4.2.1 S OIL FORMATION  CONCEPTS  AND EVOLUTION
The ﬁrst widely recognized attempts to describe soil processes were based largely
on climate and vegetation by V .V . Dokuchaev and the Russian school of soilscientists. Strzemski’s translation
10 suggests that in the 1860s and 1870s,
Dokuchaev described soil formation resulting from the combined activity ofclimate, organisms, relief, and parent rock. Climate and vegetation were consid-ered of prime importance and formed the basis for Dokuchaev’s “zonal” classi-ﬁcation. Re ﬁnements were added by other well-known scientists, including Sil-
bertsev (azonal and intrazonal soil concepts) and Glinka. Language barriershindered wide or rapid circulation of their ideas until the turn of the century.These basic ideas were carried forward from the Russian school by Glinka, who108 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
translated them into German, and by Marbut, whose work is described below, to
the English-speaking world.11,12 Hilgard,13 a U.S. geologist, ﬁrst published mate-
rial in Mississippi describing parent material, topography, and time as the mostimportant elements of soil formation. This work emphasized the signi ﬁcance that
regional climate variation and parent material have on vegetation and soil forma-tion. Strzemski,
10 Arnold,14 Smith,15 and Tandarich and Sprecher16 provide
detailed summaries of the concepts developed by these and other early scientists.
Classi ﬁcation and mapping of soils, although not speci ﬁcally central to this
chapter, are intricately woven with the history of pedologic concepts and deservebrief mention here. C.F. Marbut,
12 strongly in ﬂuenced by William Morris Davis,
his former professor, adapted a form of Davis’s erosion cycle to soil science. Oneof the major elements of Marbut’s soil classi ﬁcation system for the U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture was the concept of “mature soil” and the cyclic nature ofsoils, developing from youth to senility.
12,17 Evolution of the soil was a central
concept. As in the Davisian scheme, Marbut’s ideas did not consider process. Infact, Marbut seriously opposed the Russian genetics school, insisting that soils beclassi ﬁed by characteristics, not by reference to their genesis. Reference to this
statement appears in the introduction to Marbut’s 1927 speech to the First Inter-national Congress of Soil Science,
12 in which he outlines his scheme for classifying
soils. Marbut was not entirely successful in selling his approach during his tenureas chief of the Soils Service. C.E. Kellogg, Marbut’s successor, enlarged thenomenclature and saw to it that the details of Marbut’s system were incorporatedinto Soils and Men , the USDA yearbook.
18 However, genesis was retained in that
1938 classi ﬁcation. Kellogg also renamed Marbut’s mature soil, calling it normal
soil. Within the context of soil survey, Byers et al.19 discussed ﬁve principal factors
of soil formation: parent material, climate, biological activity, relief, and time.
4.2.2 F ACTOR  MODELS
Hans Jenny was among the ﬁrst to apply a mathematical approach to the con-
ceptual model of soil development formulated by the Russian school. Jenny20
developed his “fundamental equation of soil-forming factors” in such a mannerthat it has become a well-known conceptual or empirical deterministic model.Similar to the Russian school, he proposed that soils and soil properties were afunction of ﬁve factors, climate ( cl), organisms ( o), topography or relief ( r),
parent material ( p), and time ( t), adding unspeci ﬁed parameters, indicated by a
series of dots, to allow for locally or regionally signi ﬁcant factors such as
atmospheric dust additions.
S = f(cl, o, r, p, t…) (4.1)
Jenny overcame the issue of solving this equation by solving for one factor
at a time. Only one factor was allowed to vary while holding the others constant.For example, Jenny
20 suggested that if climate, organisms, topography, and parent
material remained constant, a soil pro ﬁle was a product of time alone.Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 109
S = f(time)cl,o,r,p (4.2)
This equation implies that soils change through time when related to the other
variables and was termed a chronofunction.20, 21 Similarly, climo-, bio-, topo-,
and lithofunctions were developed. The system is somewhat analogous to Davis’serosion cycle and Darwinian evolution.
The importance of the time dimension in the study of soils may be considered
a bias
2 or an appreciation of an essential component.22 More likely, of all the
factors, time may be considered the most independent of the variables in Jenny’sequation. The emphasis on time led to the concept of chronosequences for soils.Birkeland
23 provides an excellent discussion of the applications that geologists
have made using the chronosequence and chronofunction concept. Ecologists usechronosequences extensively because they appeal to the ecologists’ views onsuccession,
24–26 an obvious analogy to Darwinian evolution. Purists would argue
that by de ﬁnition, there are very few proven chronosequences in nature (R.V .
Ruhe, personal communication, late 1970s) because more than one soil factorusually varies with time. The ﬁve factors are not actually independent variables.
However, if one understands the constraints, the basic construct of the ﬁve factors
of soil formation remains an extremely valuable conceptual model for soil for-mation used by soil scientists, geologists, ecologists, and many others.
Runge
27 suggested that soils are too complex to be described suitably by
Jenny’s soil-forming factors. While he appeared to agree with Simonson’s28 empha-
sis on process, he stated that speci ﬁc processes controlling soil development must
be identi ﬁed independently rather than as a combination of processes in balance.
Consequently, Runge27 discusses “energy models” for soil development in terms
of potential energy vectors. Following re ﬁnements from his earlier studies with
colleagues,29–31 he examined soils in terms of columns through which water, the
primary energy source for increasing or decreasing order, ﬂowed. In the resulting
energy model, Runge27 stated that soil development ( S) is a function of organic
matter production ( o), the amount of water available for leaching ( w), and time ( t):
S = f(o, w, t) (4.3)
Organic matter was a renewing vector, and the amount of water available for
leaching was the developing vector. Amounts of water are determined by rainfallintensity and duration and produce in ﬁltration, runoff, and runon. Runge used
this relationship to suggest that climate and relief were embedded in Equation4.3, expressed by w. This is basically Jenny’s 1941 equation with factors ranked
or strati ﬁed differently. It is similar to the broader-based three-state-factor model
32
for an open system at the ecosystem level:
l, s, v, a = f(Lo,Px,t) (4.4)
where l is ecosystem properties, s is soil properties, v is vegetation properties, a
is animal properties, Lo is the initial state of the system, Px is the external ﬂux110 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
potentials, and t is the age of the system. Clearly, Runge’s energy models bor-
rowed heavily from both Jenny and Simonson. Because of this, the generalcriticism applied to Jenny’s ﬁve-factor model is also applicable to the Runge
model; both are just as dif ﬁcult to quantify mathematically.
Smeck et al.
33 discuss Runge’s energy model concept in the context of the
dynamic soil system and expand on the concepts from thermodynamics: equilib-rium and steady state. In their version, potential vectors are referred to as energyﬂuxes. They suggested that horizon differentiation is driven by energy and mate-
rial ﬂuxes. Smeck et al.
33 identify ﬂuxes occurring in several surface and near-
surface vector directions, but seem to underemphasize lateral or horizontal con-tributions within the subsoil.
4.3 SYSTEM DYNAMICS AND PROCESS MODELS
Attempts to explain the physical, chemical, and biological reactions that transformrock and other parent materials into soil and soil horizons resulted in the devel-opment of models to describe processes. Net changes were related in terms ofsoil genesis, suggesting that the basic pedologic model was a genetic model.Huggett
34 considers these types of models very different from the factor approach
ascribed to by Jenny. Huggett describes these models as a basis for the systemsapproach to pedogenic models, rather than the factorial approach. Systemsapproaches are generally process oriented and accommodate driving forces orﬂuxes of pedogenic processes to soil system dynamics.
Huggett
34 suggests that the systems approach is primarily internal to the soil,
as it describes processes occurring within the soil. The factorial approach isdescribed as external because factors can be studied individually as functions ortaken together as multiple functions. Huggett
34 suggested that verbal models were
exempli ﬁed by factorial and functional approaches, and mathematical models by
systems approaches. Even as a group, these functions do not adequately illustratethe dynamic processes occurring in the soil.
34 In addition, he suggests that the
systems approach is more versatile because it relates driving forces such as solarradiation and precipitation to soil system dynamics, whereas the factorialapproach only correlates soil-forming factors to soil morphologic properties.
4.3.1 S OIL DEVELOPMENT  MODELS
Simonson28 developed a model for horizon differentiation based on additions,
removals, transfers, and transformations. In this model, combinations of processesact in concert and the balance among them is the key to ultimate characteristicsand properties of the soil that we characterize. At the time, this concept differedfrom the traditional thought that different soils were produced from differentgenetic processes and pathways. Simonson stated that the changes occurringduring the production of soil horizonation were dependent on processes such ashydration, oxidation, solution, leaching, precipitation, and mixing. These simpleror more basic reactions common to all soils
28 were, in turn, controlled by Jenny’sGeomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 111
well-known factors of soil formation: climate, organisms, parent material, and
relief. In Simonson’s model, the emphasis was placed on the operation of pro-cesses in combination, some having a positive and some a negative in ﬂuence on
horizon differentiation. A diagram with arrows of different lengths cleverly andsimply illustrated this combination of processes (Figure 4.1). Each length repre-sented the relative importance of a single process to the entire system. Hall
35
suggests that Simonson’s model,28 although a form of a three-dimensional con-
cept, was a limited model too simplistic and compartmentalized to succeed. Hallmay have been correct, as Simonson’s model has not received the attention thatJenny’s state-factor approach has, particularly outside the soil science community.
T.C. Chamberlain,
36 credited with the development of multiple working
hypotheses, completely changed the way geologists apply the scienti ﬁc method
when examining a phenomenon. Multiple working hypotheses permit the simul-taneous examination of several explanations for an occurrence. The ﬁnal conclu-
sions are often a synthesis of the strongest concepts from several of the most
likely hypotheses. Arnold
37 borrowed from Chamberlain to illustrate sequential
models for soil development by applying multiple working hypotheses to explainobserved relationships. Using four possible scenarios for the development of siltcoats on ped faces of present-day Mollisols, Arnold integrated geomorphic pro-cesses with soil genetic processes and rates to produce evolutionary sequencesof soil pro ﬁle development. He points out that the advantage of using multiple
working hypotheses is that they allow the investigator to collect scattered dataand integrate them with genetic concepts into unifying ideas.
4.3.2 M ASS BALANCE  MODELING
Nikiforoff and Drosdoff38 present a quantitative model for gains and losses of
substances in soil. Their model seems to be among the ﬁrst to attempt a massFIGURE 4.1 Schematic of processes, each represented by a vector of differing degrees
of importance. (Modi ﬁed from Simonson, R.W., Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. , 23, 152–156,
1959. With permission.)
112 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
balance approach in soils. They clearly state that calculating a balance between
total loss and total gain can only be accomplished on a volume basis. A silt loamsoil from Oregon was used to illustrate the model. Others, particularly those with
chemistry backgrounds, have contributed similar mass balance and equilibrium
approaches. Barshad
39 presents an excellent, detailed discussion of methods for
calculating soil development based on a similar approach to net change utilizinggains and losses of primary and secondary constitutents in soil. Kirkby
40 appears
to be one of the ﬁrst to attempt a slope-compatible soil mass-balance model.
Kirkby recognized the need to integrate both soil and slope development and,more importantly, to place them on similar timescales to more accurately examinetheir interaction.
Brimhall and Dietrich,
41 Chadwick et al.,42 and Brimhall et al.43 address mass
balance in soils from an engineering geology view and add stress and strain,parameters for deformation, to the basic concepts of a mass balance model devel-oped by Barshad.
39 Similar to that of Nikiforoff and Drosdoff,38 this approach
also presents a template for performing mass balance calculations on a volumetricbasis. This model and versions of it have been applied to many recent studies(see, e.g., references 44 and 45) to assess mineral weathering and soil propertychanges on a landscape scale.
4.3.3 P ROCESS -RESPONSE  MODELS
In parallel with models developed in geomorphology (see, e.g., references 46through 48), the concept of thresholds has been applied to soil process-responsemodels (see, e.g., references 49 and 50). Hack
51,52 used dynamic equilibrium to
explain erosional landscapes. Schumm53,54 de ﬁnes both intrinsic and extrinsic
thresholds and complex geomorphic response with examples. In soil science,intrinsic thresholds are commonly described but not necessarily acknowledgedas models (e.g., clay illuviation in the presence of salts).
Building on Simonson’s 1959 model, Yaalon
22 described several categorical
processes for soils that have been modeled: (1) feedback mechanisms (see, e.g.,references 55 and 56) where systems are dampened or ampli ﬁed by negative or
positive changes, (2) dynamic equilibrium or steady state, and (3) self-terminatingprocesses where gains exceed losses or losses exceed gains. Chadwick andChorover
57 point out that feedback mechanisms control how and when thresholds
occur. For example, when reactants are depleted, feedback stops and processesare terminated. In this case, feedback mechanisms are not separate from the self-terminating processes described by Yaalon.
22 Chadwick and Chorover57 thor-
oughly discuss the concept of pedogenic thresholds and provide an extensive listof references.
4.3.4 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  MODELING
A number of early scientists made signi ﬁcant contributions to conceptual models
for geomorphic research in the latter half of the 19th century. Among these wereGeomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 113
John Wesley Powell, who developed the concept of erosion of landscapes to base
level and the polycyclical nature of landscape erosion and deposition58,59; G.K.
Gilbert, one of the ﬁrst to relate process to the origin of the landscape60; and W.M.
Davis. Of these, William Morris Davis exerted the most substantial and enduringinﬂuence on the geologic community at the turn of the 19th century,
61 in part because
of his prominence as a Harvard professor. Davis was also a strong Darwinianevolutionist in his approach to geology. Davis extracted ideas from his contempo-raries, Powell and G.K. Gilbert as well as Darwin, and integrated them into hisnow-classic theory, the “cycle of erosion.”
61 Landscapes progressed through a series
of stages from youth to maturity to old age in a time-dependent model. Landscapeseroded by downwearing. Although this evolutionary model long in ﬂuenced geo-
morphology and is still quoted today, it is critically lacking in several arenas. Itsgreatest shortcomings lie ﬁrst with the inability to explain process and slope geom-
etry, and secondarily with its two major assumptions: (1) uplift and denudation aremutually exclusive, and (2) streams have two phases of activity, rapid incision andthen dormancy.
61
Walther Penck, a German, is best known for his work on parallel retreat of
slopes, or backwearing.62 His model suggested that rapid incision produced steeper
slopes than slower downcutting. Slope denudation produces slope retreat withoutchanging the slope angle. Penck’s model is in contrast to Davis’s model and wasseverely criticized by Davis’s supporters for many years. Figure 4.2 illustrates therelative differences between the slope evolution models of Penck and Davis.
Perhaps one of the underlying reasons for the integration of soil science and
geomorphology in the U.S. is the early in ﬂuence of William Morris Davis, who
taught C.F. Marbut. As discussed earlier, Marbut proposed a soil classi ﬁcation
with elements that included the concept of soil maturity and the development ofsoils from youth to senility.
12,17 These elements create a link to Davis’s cycle of
erosion that is too strong to dismiss as coincidence.
Geomorphically based landscape models such as those of Davis and Penck
are often used to separate the Earth’s surface into discrete elements or compo-nents. Those models alone are not suf ﬁcient to describe processes that occur in
soils because processes are not independent. Processes occurring on one portionof the landscape in ﬂuence soil processes on other parts of the landscape, a concept
well understood by Milne.FIGURE 4.2 Hillslope pro ﬁle evolution. On the left is the Penckian process of slope
denudation, and on the right is the Davisian scheme. Shaded areas indicate the endpointof denudation. (From Carson, M.A. and Kirkby, M.J., Hillslope Form and Process , Cam-
bridge University Press, New York, 1972; and Davis, W.M., Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. , 43,
399–440, 1932. With permission.)
114 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Milne introduced the concept of the catena, a descriptive model in which soil
characteristics vary with distance and topography and repeat relative to each otherunder the same conditions.
63–65 The catena concept was a fundamental advance
in soil modeling, as it explained the pattern of soils on the landscape. This
hillslope model recognized that processes of erosion and the particular positionon the hillslope directly affect soil properties. Two types of catenas weredescribed. The ﬁrst was a catena in which soils on a hillslope developed on the
same parent material. Changes in soil properties along the slope curvature wereattributed to subsurface drainage and erosion and redeposition. The second typewas a catena in which the hillslope had more than one parent material. Patternswere again predictable, but increased in complexity due to stratigraphic differ-ences. Milne’s model was adopted by soil scientists in the U.S. and appeared ingovernment documents as early as 1938.
66 Today the term catena  has a more
limited de ﬁnition among soil scientists and is loosely considered a hydrologic
toposequence of related soils.
4.3.4.1 Hillslope Models
Hillslopes, one of the most ubiquitous landforms, have garnered much attention
since Milne ﬁrst introduced the catena concept and, as such, deserve a separate
section for discussion. A broad understanding of hillslopes and slope-forms beganto evolve from the early landscape models of Davis and Penck. Both continuedto write about slope development after formulating their landscape evolutionmodels. In the mid-20th century, publication of early two-dimensional hillslopeconceptual models became prevalent. Kirk Bryan, a prominent physiographer,reexamined the work of Penck with his work on slope retreat in the westernU.S.
67,68 Wood,69 also working in arid environments, provided additional elements
with the slope cycle: the waxing slope, the free face, the debris slope, and thepediment or waning slope. King
70 accepted Wood’s slope elements and called
them the “uniformitarian nature of hillslopes,” a nod to Hutton, or “the fullydeveloped hillslope,” as rede ﬁned by Ruhe.
71,72 King compared slope elements
and the effects of water movement and mass movement as part of his fullydeveloped hillslope. Ruhe
71,72 presented a two-dimensional conceptual “fully
developed hillslope” model of ﬁve units that compared well with Wood’s and
King’s (Figure 4.3).
Conacher and Dalrymple73 described a nine-unit hillslope model. This latter
model, though based on a largely temperate climate regime, attempted to integrateslope pro ﬁle components with material and water movement.
One of the ﬁrst U.S. geomorphologists to work at the regional level of the
soil-landscape was Robert Ruhe. From the 1950s to the 1980s, Ruhe and hisstudents began producing conceptual models of the soil-landscape that empha-sized process and quanti ﬁcation at scales varying from the hillslope to the drain-
age basin size (see, e.g., references 71, 72, and 74 through 81). His work andthat of his student’s on open and closed hillslope systems re ﬂected Milne’s catena
concept that processes on the landscape in ﬂuence soil processes on other portionsGeomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 115
of the landscape75,76 (see ﬁgures in Ruhe,72 pp. 111, 114, 115, 117, 118). Ruhe’s
work emphasized the sur ﬁcial processes related to landscape evolution and under-
standing the subsurface. This followed on the heels of a break from the tradition-ally descriptive sciences to the quanti ﬁcation and process approach in drainage
basin analysis during the late 1940s (see, e.g., references 82 through 86). Linearstatistical methods such as regression and analysis of variance were introducedin the early 1950s (see, e.g., references 84 and 85) to analyze erosional landforms.Within the decade, multivariate methods became available in geology, largelythrough the efforts of W.C. Krumbein (see, e.g., references 87 and 88), who hadbegun applying quantitative techniques to geology in the 1930s. By the 1960s,geomorphology began to be heavily in ﬂuenced by the changes taking place in
related disciplines such as geography, where spatial analysis was rapidly devel-oping. This led to studies in quantitative geomorphology, including spatial pointsystems, networks, continuous distributions, partitioning, trend analysis, and sim-ulation (see, e.g., references 40 and 89 through 91). Oddly, aside from drainagebasin analysis and some morphometric analysis, statistical methods and spatialmodeling of geomorphic studies did not develop as rapidly within the geomorphicand soil science communities as in the geography community. Conceptual modelsstill played a signi ﬁcant role. Chorley
90 suggested that the slow acceptance of
these methods in geomorphology may have been related to geomorphologists’preoccupation with time, a dimension not well served by those statistical methods.Among other reasons, he suggested that insuf ﬁcient mathematical skills and poor
communication among geographers and geomorphologists may have played arole. The most likely cause seems to be the lack of mathematical training amonggeomorphologists of that era, a condition that still may persist today. One of thefew examples that used analysis of variance in soil geomorphology was a studyby Daniels et al.
92 This study attempted a quantitative technique to describe
erosional and depositional surfaces in nearly level areas. As earlier pointed outby Chorley,
90 there seems to be little follow-up even today.FIGURE 4.3 The elements of a hillslope. (Modi ﬁed by Ruhe, R.V ., Trans. 7th Int. Congr.
Soil Sci.  (Madison, WI), 23, 165–170, 1960. Foreground from Wood, A, Proc. Geol. Assoc. ,
53, 128–138, 1942; and King, L.C., Trans. Edinburgh Geol. Soc. , 17, 81–102, 1957.
Modi ﬁed from Hall, G.F. and Olson, C.G., in Spatial Variabilities of Soils and Landforms ,
SSSA Special Publication 28, SSSA, Madison, WI, 1991, pp. 9–24. With permission.)
116 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
A natural progression in slope development studies was the realization of the
key linkage of water movement to geomorphic and pedologic processes. Theplanar curvature of slopes became an important factor integrated into conceptualhillslope models. Hall and Olson
93 illustrate a succession of conceptual models
that integrate hydrologic characteristics, particularly lateral ﬂow, with landscape
parameters. A few are summarized here. Aandahl94 related slope curvature to
differences in fertility status and soil morphological properties. In plot studies,Troeh
95 used quantitative descriptions of three-dimensional landform parameters
to illustrate four basic convex–concave combinations. Ruhe and Walker75 and
Walker and Ruhe76 were among the ﬁrst to develop three-dimensional conceptual
models for open and closed systems on hillslopes. Ruhe and Walker75 describe a
nine-unit geometry and Ruhe72 (see Figure 6.1, p. 100) illustrated these changes
in slope curvature with a matrix of nine basic forms, varying three components:(1) slope gradient, (2) slope length, and (3) slope width. Pennock et al.
96 added
surface ﬂow to this basic matrix of slope curvature (Figure 4.4).
Building on Troeh’s work, Huggett97 added surface ﬂow to three-dimensional
slope shapes (Figure 4.5). In a signi ﬁcant step forward, he ﬁts this model to a
larger idealized area, de ﬁned as a “soil-landscape system or valley basin.” The
surface boundaries of this system are similar to the drainage divide of a watershed,but he adds another dimension, the weathering depth, in order to include subsur-FIGURE 4.4 Hillslope elements, curvature, and ﬂow lines on seven landscape positions.
(From Pennock, D.J. et al., Geoderma , 40, 297–315, 1987. With permission.)
Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 117
face ﬂow. This neatly ties slope curvature models to hydrologic, geomorphic, and
pedologic models. Material moves on and through soils, to different soils atdifferent hillslope positions, as well as throughout the entire watershed. In acarefully documented watershed, Lanyon and Hall
98,99 developed predictive maps
of landscape instability based on a number of soil and climate properties, includ-ing slope curvature and soil moisture. With these and many similar conceptualmodels, we begin to see ﬁrst the shift toward a three-dimensional approach to a
single hillslope, and then a progression to larger, regional models that incorporatesoils and soil processes.
In the 1970s and 1980s, while still largely conceptual, increasing quanti ﬁca-
tion of portions of these models became the norm as computational methodsimproved. Dijkerman
1 observed that most of our working models had been verbal
in nature until the availability of computers became commonplace. Emphasisshifted toward mathematical models in soils in the early 1940s. Lateral movementof moisture in soil had been demonstrated early on using mathematical models
100
and was observed and measured by many (see, e.g., references 101 through 104).One of the ﬁrst examples of merging geomorphic conceptual models and quan-
titative statistical programming was published by Pennock et al.
96 They developedFIGURE 4.5 Four basic slope shapes with surface ﬂow lines. (From Huggett, R.J., Geo-
derma , 13, 1–22, 1975. With permission.)
118 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
a quantitative landform classi ﬁcation based on landform elements and slope
morphology. Their method also provided a three-dimensional aspect to that ofearlier work (see, e.g., references 71 and 105). Surface morphology, i.e., plan
curvature, pro ﬁle curvature, and gradient were the primary landform elements.
Much like other researchers (see, e.g., references 87, 95, 97, and 99), Pennocket al.
96 expressed the idea that slope plan and pro ﬁle curvature could be related
to soil moisture content. Their major contribution96 was the quanti ﬁcation of these
relationships. Numerous researchers have expanded on these relationships, whichhave become especially useful as relational datasets to those working in a geo-graphic information systems (GIS) framework.
4.3.4.2 Quantiﬁcation and Explicit Soil-Landscape Models: 
Spatial Analysis
The development of techniques for quantitative spatial prediction began early,
with the work of Speight
106 and Beven and Kirkby107 paving the way for quanti-
tative landform and watershed studies. Speight illustrated a numerical approachto land system classi ﬁcations to reduce subjectivity to a minimum. Quantitative
comparison of landscapes in different areas was shown to be possible. Beven andKirkby
107 combined channel network topology and associated contributing areas
with parametric basin models to predict hydrologic response in basins that werenot gauged. With the advent of GIS-based digital elevation modeling (DEM) andmodern computing facilities capable of large-scale calculations, the early workof these researchers has been greatly facilitated. Many researchers have expandedon their ideas (see, e.g., references 108 through 113). These researchers havetaken advantage of the nonrandom variability of terrain attributes and carried outrandomization studies to produce reliable relationships among other environmen-tal parameters. For example, hillslope summits are always summits, but samplingof these can be done randomly and quanti ﬁed.
4.4 CONCLUSIONS
Rapid and inexpensive computing has greatly improved our ability to study and
model complex systems. In little over a century we have seen a signi ﬁcant shift
from the dominance of conceptual models in soils and geomorphology to explicitquanti ﬁable models. We have learned that soils are an integral part of the land-
scape, that soils, dependent on their hillslope positions, are predictable. We havedeﬁned landscapes in three dimensions and begun to include the hydrology. Our
limitations in modeling soils and landscapes still lie with our understanding ofthe processes in their development. With these limits ﬁrmly in mind and the
increased computational speed and complexity of hardware systems availabletoday, we can focus on producing more functionally representative models of thesoil-landscape system.Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 119
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks several individuals for their critical review of this document,
including Robert Ahrens, Thomas Fenton, Lyle Steffen, and an anonymous
reviewer.
REFERENCES
1. JC Dijkerman. Pedology as a science: the role of data, models, and theories in
the study of natural soil systems. Geoderma  11: 73–93, 1974.
2. WR Osterkamp, CR Hupp. The evolution of geomorphology, ecology, and other
composite sciences. In The Scienti ﬁc Nature of Geomorphology, Proceedings of
the 27th Binghamton Symposium in Geomorphology , BL Rhoads, CE Thorn, Eds.
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996, pp. 415–442.
3. TS Kuhn. The Structure of Scienti ﬁc Revolutions , 2nd ed. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970, 210 pp.
4. TS Kuhn. The Essential Tension . The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1977,
366 pp.
5. MJ Kirkby. A role for theoretical models in geomorphology. In The Scienti ﬁc
Nature of Geomorphology, Proceedings of the 27th Binghamton Symposium inGeomorphology , BL Rhoads, CE Thorn, Eds. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1996, pp. 257–272.
6. N Oreskes. Why believe a computer? Models, measures, and meaning in the
natural world. In The Earth around Us, Maintaining a Livable Planet , JS Schnei-
derman, Ed. W.H. Freeman & Co., New York, 2000, pp. 70–82.
7. R Webster. The development of pedometrics. Geoderma  6: 1–15, 1994.
8. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh, TFA Bishop, MS Dunbar, TM Shatar. An overview
of pedometric techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
9. MR Hoosebeck. Incorporating scale into spatio-temporal variability: applications
to soil quality and yield data. Geoderma  85: 113–131, 1998.
10. M Strzemski. Ideas underlying Soil Systematics , 1971 trans., Polish ed. TT73-
54013. Foreign Scienti ﬁc Publications Department of the National Center for
Scienti ﬁc, Technical and Economic Information, Warsaw, 1975, 541 pp.
11. CF Marbut. Soil classi ﬁcation. Am Soil Surv Assoc Bull  III: 24–32, 1922.
12. CF Marbut. A scheme for soil classi ﬁcation. In Proceedings and Papers of the
First International Congress of Soil Science , Commission 5, V ol. I, 1928, pp. 1–31.
13. EW Hilgard. The Relations of Soil to Climate , Bulletin 3. USDA Weather Bureau,
Washington, DC, 1982, pp. 1–59.
14. RW Arnold. Concepts of soils and pedology. In Pedogenesis and Soil Taxonomy
1: Concepts and Interactions , LP Wilding, NE Smeck, GF Hall, Eds. Elsevier
Science Publishers, New York, 1983, pp. 1–21.
15. GD Smith. Historical development of soil taxonomy: background. In Pedogenesis
and Soil Taxonomy 1: Concepts and Interactions , LP Wilding, NE Smeck, GF
Hall, Eds. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1983, pp.23–49.120 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
16. JP Tandarich, SW Sprecher. The intellectual background for factors of soil for-
mation. In Factors of Soil Formation: A 50th Anniversary Retrospective , Soil
Science Society of America Special Publication 33, R Amundsen, J Harden, MJSinger, Eds. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1994, pp. 1–13.
17. CF Marbut. Soil of the U.S. In Atlas of American Agriculture , Part III, OE Baker,
Ed. USDA, U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1935, pp. 12–15.
18. M Baldwin, CE Kellogg, J Thorp. Soil classi ﬁcation. In Soils and Men , U.S.
Department of Agriculture Yearbook. USDA, Washington, DC, 1938, pp.979–1001.
19. HG Byers, CE Kellogg, MS Anderson, J Thorp. Formation of soil. In Soils and
Men, U.S. Department of Agriculture Yearbook. USDA, Washington, DC, 1938,
pp. 948–978.
20. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation . McGraw-Hill, New York, 1941, 281 pp.
21. H Jenny. The Soil Resource: Origin and Behavior . Springer-Verlag, New York,
1980, 377 pp.
22. D Yaalon. Climate, time and soil development. In Pedogenesis and Soil Taxonomy
1: Concepts and Interactions , LP Wilding, NE Smeck, GF Hall, Eds. Elsevier
Science Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1983, pp. 233–251.
23. PW Birkeland. Soils and Geomorphology . Oxford University Press, New York,
1999, 430 pp.
24. PM Vitousek. Factors controlling ecosystem structure and function, In Factors of
Soil Formation: A Fiftieth Anniversary Retrospective , Soil Science Society of
America Special Publication 33, R Amundson, J Harden, M Singer, Eds. SSSA,Madison, WI, 1994, pp. 87–97.
25. K Van Cleve, FS Chapin III, PW Flanagan, CT Dyrness, LA Viereck. Element
cycling in taiga forests: state-factor control. Bioscience  41: 78–88, 1991.
26. PM Vitousek, LR Walker. Colonization, succession, and resource availability:
ecosystem-level interactions. In Colonization, Succession, and Stability , A Gray,
M Crawley, PJ Edwards, Eds. Blackwell Science, Oxford, 1987, pp. 207–223.
27. ECA Runge. Soil development sequences and energy models. Soil Sci  115:
183–193, 1973.
28. RW Simonson. Outline of a generalized theory of soil genesis. Soil Sci Soc Am
Proc  23: 152–156, 1959.
29. KC Hinkley, ECA Runge, EJ Pedersen. Effect of soil on vegetation in NE Illinois.
Am Soc Agron  137, 1970. 
30. NE Smeck, ECA Runge. Factors in ﬂuencing pro ﬁle development exhibited by
some hydromorphic soils in Illinois. In Pseudogley and Gleys , Trans. Comm. V
and VI Int’l. Soc. Soil Sci., E Schlichting, U Schwertmann, Eds. Chemie Verlag,1971, pp. 169–179.
31. TM Ballagh, ECA Runge. Clay-rich horizons over limestone: illuvial or residual?
Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  34: 534–536, 1970.
32. H Jenny. Derivation of state factor equations of soils and ecosystems. Soil Sci Soc
Am Proc  25: 385–388, 1961.
33. NE Smeck, ECA Runge, EE Mackintosh. Dynamics and genetic modeling of soil
systems. In Pedogenesis and Soil Taxonomy 1: Concepts and Interactions , LP
Wilding, NE Smeck, GF Hall, Eds. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, TheNetherlands, 1983, pp. 51–81.
34. RJ Huggett. Conceptual models in pedogenesis: a discussion. Geoderma  16:
261–262, 1976.Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 121
35. GF Hall. Pedology and geomorphology. In Pedogenesis and Soil Taxonomy 1:
Concepts and Interactions , LP Wilding, NE Smeck, GF Hall, Eds. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1983, pp. 117–140.
36. TC Chamberlain. The method of multiple working hypotheses. J Geol  5: 837–848,
1897.
37. RW Arnold. Multiple working hypothesis in soil genesis. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
29: 717–724, 1965.
38. CC Nikiforoff, M Drosdoff. Genesis of a claypan soil. Soil Sci  55: 459–483, 1943.
39. I Barshad. Chemistry of soil development. In Chemistry of the Soil , 2nd ed.,
American Chemical Society Monograph 160, FE Bear, Ed. Reinhold Pub. Corp.,New York, 1964, pp. 1–70.
40. MJ Kirkby. Soil development models as a component of slope models. Earth Surf
Processes  2: 203–230, 1977.
41. GH Brimhall, WE Dietrich. Constitutive mass balance relations between chemical
composition, volume, density, porosity, and strain in metasomatic hydrochemicalsystems: results on weathering and pedogenesis. Geochim Cosmochim Acta  51:
567–587, 1987.
42. OA Chadwick, GH Brimhall, and DM Hendricks. From a black box to a grey box:
a mass balance interpretation of pedogenesis. Geomorphology  3: 369–390, 1990.
43. GH Brimhall, OA Chadwick, CJ Lewis, W Compston, IS Williams, KH Danti,
WE Dietrich, ME Power, DM Hendricks, J Bratt. Deformational mass transportand invasive processes in soil evolution. Science  255: 695–702, 1992.
44. OA Chadwick, CG Olson, DM Hendricks, EF Kelly, RT Gavenda. Quantifying
climatic effects on mineral weathering and neoformation in Hawaii. Proc 15th Int
Soil Sci Congr  8a: 94–105, 1994.
45. OA Chadwick, RT Gavenda, EF Kelly, K Ziegler, CG Olson, WC Elliot, DM
Hendricks. The impact of climate on the biogeochemical functioning of volcanicsoils. Chem Geol  202: 195–223, 2003.
46. SA Schumm. Geomorphic thresholds: the concept and its applications. Trans Inst
Br Geogr  4: 485–515, 1979.
47. WB Bull. Geomorphic thresholds as de ﬁned by ratios. In Thresholds in Geomor-
phology , D Coates, J Vitek, Eds. Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1980, pp.
259–263.
48. WB Bull, Geomorphic Responses to Climatic Change . Oxford University Press,
New York, 1991, 326 pp.
49. DR Muhs. Intrinsic thresholds in soil systems. Phys Geogr  5: 99–110, 1984.
50. EV McDonald, FB Pierson, GN Flerchinger, LD McFadden. Application of a soil-
water balance model to evaluate the in ﬂuence of Holocene climate change on
calcic soils, Mojave Desert, California. Geoderma  74: 167–192, 1996.
51. JT Hack. Interpretation of erosional topography in humid temperate regions. Am
J Sci  258A: 80–97, 1960.
52. JT Hack. Dynamic equilibrium and landscape evolution. In Theories of Landform
Development , Proceedings of the 6th Annual Binghamton Symposium, SUNY ,
Binghamton, NY , WN Melhorn, RC Flemal, Eds ., 1975, pp. 87–102.
53. SA Schumm. Geomorphic thresholds and complex response of drainage systems.
In Fluvial Geomorphology , Proceedings of the 4th Annual Geomorphology Sym-
posium Series, State University, Binghamton, New York, M Morisawa, Ed., 1973,pp. 299–310.
54. SA Schumm. The Fluvial System . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1977, 338 pp.122 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
55. J Torrent, WD Nettleton. Feedback processes in soil genesis. Geoderma  20:
281–287, 1978.
56. DA Reid, RC Graham, RJ Southard, C Amrhein. Slickspot soil genesis in the
Carrizo Plain, California. Soil Sci Soc Am J  57: 162–168, 1993.
57. OA Chadwick, J Chorover. The chemistry of pedogenic thresholds. Geoderma
100: 321–353, 2001.
58. JW Powell. Report on the Geology of the Eastern Portion of the Uinta Mountains .
U.S. Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1876.
59. JW Powell. Exploration of the Colorado River of the West (1869–1872) . U.S.
Government Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1875.
60. GK Gilbert. Report on the Geology of the Henry Mountains , U.S. Geographical
and Geological Survey of the Rocky Mountain Region. U.S. Government PrintingOfﬁce, Washington, DC, 1880.
61. Davis, W.M. The geographical cycle. Geogr J  14A: 481–503, 1899.
62. W Penck. Morphological Analysis of Landforms , KC Boswell, H Czech, Trans.
Macmillan Co., London, 1924.
63. G Milne. Some suggested units of classi ﬁcation and mapping particularly for East
African Soils. Soil Res  4: 1935. 
64. G Milne. Composite units for the mapping of complex soil associations. Trans
3rd Int Congr Soil Sci  1: 345–347, 1935.
65. G Milne. Normal erosion as a factor in soil pro ﬁle development. Nature  138:
548–549, 1936.
66. USDA, Soils and Men , U.S. Department of Agriculture Yearbook. U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1938.
67. K Bryan. Gully gravure, a method of slope retreat. J Geomorphol  3: 89–107, 1940.
68. K Bryan. The retreat of slopes. Ann Assoc Am Geogr  30: 254, 1940.
69. A Wood. The development of hillside slopes. Proc Geol Assoc  53: 128–138, 1942.
70. LC King. The uniformitarian nature of hillslopes. Trans Edinburgh Geol Soc  17:
81–102, 1957.
71. RV Ruhe. Elements of the soil landscape. Trans 7th Int Congr Soil Sci  (Madison,
WI) 23: 165–170, 1960.
72. RV Ruhe. Geomorphology, Geomorphic Processes and Sur ﬁcial Geology . Hough-
ton Mif ﬂin Co., Boston, 1975, 246 pp.
73. AJ Conacher, JB Dalrymple. The nine unit landsurface model: an approach to
pedogeomorphic research. Geoderma  18: 154 , 1977.
74. RV Ruhe, RB Daniels, JG Caddy. Landscape Evolution and Soil Formation in
Southwestern Iowa , USDA Tech Bull 1149. USDA, Washington, DC, 1967, 242
pp.
75. RV Ruhe, PH Walker. Hillslope models and soil formation. I. Open systems. Trans
9th Int Congr Soil Sci  (Adelaide, Australia) IV: 551–560, 1968.
76. PH Walker, RV Ruhe. Hillslope models and soil formation. II. Closed systems.
Trans 9th Int Congr Soil Sci  (Adelaide, Australia) IV: 561–567, 1968.
77. RV Ruhe. Quaternary Landscapes in Iowa . Iowa State University Press, Ames,
1969.
78. WJ Vreeken. Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and moisture contents in a small loess
watershed in Tama County, Iowa. Iowa Acad Sci Proc  75: 225–233, 1968.
79. HJ Kleiss. Loess distribution along the Illinois soil-development sequence. Soil
Sci 115: 194–198, 1970.Geomorphological Soil-Landscape Models 123
80. HJ Kleiss. Hillslope sedimentation and soil formation in northeastern Iowa. Soil
Sci Soc Am Proc  34: 281–290, 1973.
81. RV Ruhe, CG Olson. Soil welding. Soil Sci  130: 132–139, 1980.
82. RE Horton. Drainage basin characteristics . Trans Am Geophys Union  13: 350–361,
1932.
83. RE Horton. Erosional development of streams and their drainage basins: hydro-
physical approach to quantitative morphology . Geol Soc Am Bull  56: 275–370,
1945.
84. AN Strahler. Equilibrium theory of erosional slopes approached by frequency
distribution analysis. Am J Sci  248: 673–696, 1950.
85. AN Strahler. Equilibrium theory of erosional slopes approached by frequency
distribution analysis. Part II. Am J Sci  248: 800–814, 1950.
86. AN Strahler. Hypsometric (area-altitude) analysis of erosional topography. Geol
Soc Am Bull  63: 1117–1142, 1952.
87. WC Krumbein. The “sorting out” of geological variables illustrated by regression
analysis of factors controlling beach ﬁrmness. J Sediment Petrol  29: 575–587,
1959.
88. WC Krumbein, FA Graybill. An Introduction to Statistical Models in Geology .
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965, 475 pp.
89. AE Scheidegger. Mathematical models of slope development. Geol Soc Am Bull
72: 37–59, 1961.
90. RJ Chorley, Ed. Spatial Analysis in Geomorphology . Harper & Row, New York,
1972, 393 pp.
91. MA Carson, MJ Kirkby. Hillslope Form and Process . Cambridge University Press,
New York, 1972, 475 pp.
92. RB Daniels, LA Nelson, EE Gamble. A method of characterizing nearly level
surfaces. Z Geomorph  14: 175–185, 1970.
93. GF Hall, CG Olson. Predicting variability of soils from landscape models. In
Spatial Variabilities of Soils and Landforms , Soil Science Society of America
Special Publication 28. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1991, pp. 9–24.
94. AR Aandahl. The characterization of slope positions and their in ﬂuence on the
total nitrogen content of a few virgin soils in western Iowa. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
13: 449–454, 1948.
95. FR Troeh. Landform parameters correlated to soil drainage. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
28: 808–812, 1964.
96. DJ Pennock, BJ Zebarth, E deJong. Landform classi ﬁcation and soil distribution
in hummocky terrain, Saskatchewan, Canada. Geoderma 40: 297–315, 1987.
97. RJ Huggett. Soil landscape systems: a model of soil genesis. Geoderma  13: 1–22,
1975.
98. LE Lanyon, GF Hall. Land-surface morphology. 1. Evaluation of a small drainage
basin in eastern Ohio. Soil Sci  136: 291–299, 1983.
99. LE Lanyon, GF Hall. Land-surface morphology. 2. Predicting potential landscape
instability in eastern Ohio. Soil Sci 136: 382–386, 1983.
100. D Zaslavsky, AS Rogowski. Hydrologic and morphologic implications of anisot-
ropy and in ﬁltration in soil pro ﬁle development. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  33: 594–599,
1969.
101. RZ Whipkey. Subsurface storm ﬂow from forested slopes. Bull Int Assoc Sci
Hydrol  20: 276–288, 1965.124 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
102. RZ Whipkey. Storm runoff from forested catchments by subsurface routes. In
Floods and Their Computation , Proc. Symp. Int. Assoc. Sci. Hydrol., Leningrad,
USSR, August 1967, V ol. 2. UNESCO/IASH, Belgium, 1969, pp. 773–779.
103. DR Weyman. Measurements of the downslope ﬂow of water in a soil. J Hydrol
20: 276–288, 1973.
104. RZ Whipkey, MJ Kirkby. Flow within the soil. In Hillslope Hydrology , MJ Kirkby,
Ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1978, pp. 121–144.
105. JB Dalrymple, RJ Blong, AJ Conacher. A hypothetical nine unit landsurface
model. Z Geomorph  12: 60–76, 1968.
106. JG Speight. Parametric description of land form. In Land Evaluation , GA Steward,
Ed. Macmillan & Co., Melbourne, Australia, 1968, pp. 239–250.
107. KJ Beven, MJ Kirkby. A physically based, variable, contributing area model of
basin hydrology. Hydrol Sci Bull  24: 43–69, 1979.
108. ID Moore, EM O’Loughlin, GJ Burch. A contour-based topographic model for
hydrological and ecological applications. Earth Surf Processes Landforms  13:
305–320, 1988.
109. ID Moore, AR Ladson, R Grayson. Digital terrain modelling: a review of hydro-
logical, geomorphological, and biological applications. Hydrol Processes 5: 3–30,
1991.
110. ID Moore, PE Gessler, GA Nielsen, GA Peterson. Soil attribute prediction using
terrain analysis. Soil Sci Soc Am J  57: 443–452, 1993.
111. K McSweeney, PE Gessler, BK Slater, RD Hammer, JC Bell, GW Petersen.
Towards a new framework for modeling the soil-landscape continuum. In Factors
of Soil Formation: A Fiftieth Anniversary Retrospective , Soil Science Society of
America Special Publication 33, R Amundson, J Harden, M Singer, Eds. SSSA,Madison, WI, 1994, pp. 127–145.
112. PE Gessler, ID Moore, NJ McKenzie, PJ Ryan. Soil-landscape modeling and
spatial prediction of soil attributes. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  9: 421–432, 1995.
113. PE Gessler, OA Chadwick, F Chamran, L Althouse, K Holmes. Modeling soil-
landscape and ecosystem properties using terrain analysis. Soil Sci Soc Am J  64:
2046–2056, 2000.
114.WM Davis. Piedmont benchland and Primärumpfe. Geol Soc Am Bull  43:
399–440, 1932.Section II
Collection of Soil-Landscape 
Datasets1275The Impact of Emerging 
Geographic Information Technology on Soil-Landscape Modeling
Sabine Grunwald and Sanjay Lamsal
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................128
5.1 What Is Emerging? ...............................................................................128
5.1.1 Soil Mapping Technologies...................................................1285.1.2 Soil Mapping Paradigms.......................................................1295.1.3 Data Management .................................................................131
5.2 Emerging Soil-Landscape Mapping Technologies...............................133
5.2.1 Global Positioning Systems ..................................................1335.2.2 Geophysical Techniques........................................................134
5.2.2.1 Electromagnetic Induction..................................134
5.2.2.2 Ground-Penetrating Radar..................................135
5.2.3 Sensors...................................................................................136
5.2.3.1 Soil Sensors ........................................................1365.2.3.2 Soil Spectroscopy ...............................................1385.2.3.3 Remote Sensors ..................................................140
5.3 Geographic and Soil Information Systems...........................................141
5.3.1 Geographic Information Systems..........................................1415.3.2 Soil Information Systems......................................................145
5.4 Signi ﬁcance for Future Soil-Landscape Modeling...............................147
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................148References .........................................................................................................148128 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ABSTRACT
We provide an overview of historic and emerging soil mapping technologies, soil
mapping paradigms, and data management. Geographic information technology
(GIT), including the emergence of global positioning systems, geophysical map-ping techniques such as electromagnetic induction and ground-penetrating radar,soil sensors such as pro ﬁle cone penetrometers, soil spectroscopy, and remote
sensors, are introduced and critically discussed. Special attention is given to thelimitations of each emerging technology and the impact on environmental soil-landscape modeling. Geographic and soil information systems have served asintegrators to manage and analyze soil and other environmental datasets. TheWeb-based distribution of soil-landscape data through the Internet has enabledglobal data sharing.
5.1 WHAT IS EMERGING?
5.1.1 S OIL MAPPING  TECHNOLOGIES
Since the beginning of the systematic study of soils, various concepts have been
adopted to map soils and their properties. Emerging soil mapping techniques havehad a major impact on how we map and describe soils, resulting in a paradigmshift in pedology and soil science. Early soil surveyors used soil augers, spades,pencils, and notebooks. These were later complemented by laboratory measure-ments. The tacit knowledge of the soil surveyor to comprehend a soil-landscapewas the basis for characterizing the spatial distribution of different soils. Soilsurveying based on soil taxonomies has been focused on the mapping of mor-phological, physical, chemical, and biological properties, with less emphasis onpedogenesis. The use of aerial photographs for soil mapping, which began duringthe late 1920s and early 1930s, greatly increased the precision of plotting soilboundaries. Constraints on these hard-copy soil maps were imposed by the expe-rience of the soil surveyor and available budgets. For example, in the U.S., for astandard soil survey at a map scale of 1:24,000, an average of one auger boringper 14 ha (40 acres) has been used.
The heterogeneous nature of soils across a landscape has long been recog-
nized, and different concepts and sampling designs have been employed to modelthe variation. At large ( ﬁeld) scale, high-intensity soil surveys can be conducted.
For example, Lark
1 used intensive grid sampling (20-m intervals) and mapped
soil texture and soil depth to identify seven map units across a 6-ha ﬁeld. At
small (coarse) scale, such high-density sampling is not feasible due to limitedbudgets and time constraints. Alternative methods are in need to improve existingsoil surveys to provide high-quality and high-resolution soil maps. With theadvent of global positioning systems (GPS), geophysical soil mapping tech-niques, soil sensors, and soil spectroscopy, it has become possible to map largerareas rapidly with higher sampling densities, resembling more exhaustivedatasets for ﬁne-scale mapping. Recent technological advances offer new oppor-The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 129
tunities for spatially explicit mapping of heterogeneous soil patterns. However,
limitations still persist in terms of accurate and precise mapping of soil proper-ties. In this chapter we will discuss a variety of emerging geographic information
technologies (GIT) and their potentials and limitations in the characterization
of soil-landscapes.
5.1.2 S OIL MAPPING  PARADIGMS
The perceptions of soils and soil mapping paradigms have changed with time.Early soil mapping was in ﬂuenced by the use of soils for farming, ranching, and
forestry. In recent years the effort has shifted to acquire more quantitative andaccurate site-speci ﬁc soil data. Bouma et al.
2 pointed out that soil data are
important for precision agriculture (PA), but current soil survey data do not satisfyprecision agriculture requirements, including an appropriate level of detail andsoil property information. The PA industry explored various high-density soilmapping and geostatistical techniques to produce ﬁne-scale soil property maps.
3
Likewise, environmental assessment studies require detailed information about
the spatial and temporal distributions of soil properties. The U.S. Department ofAgriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) and itspredecessors, with local and state agencies and land grant universities, have beengenerating soil information in the U.S. for over 100 years. Although originallyfocused on the agricultural use of soil data, the mission of NRCS is now muchbroader, i.e., “to help people conserve, improve and sustain our natural resourcesand the environment.”
4 Though the need for high-quality and high-resolution soil
property maps has been recognized, we are still struggling to meet the demandsof farmers, environmental scientists, the forest industry, and others.
In order to reduce soil information to a manageable form, soils are classi ﬁed
at various levels of hierarchy (taxonomic units). The crisp geographic data modelis a well-adopted model for soil mapping at the landscape scale.
5 This entity-
based approach6 or object view7,8 deﬁnes the real world as an arrangement of
discrete, well-de ﬁned objects that are characterized by their geometrical and
topological properties and by their nonspatial attributes (Figure 5.1). It is seldom,however, that a soilscape can be adequately described and de ﬁned from one
pedon.
9 Therefore, the relationships of soils with observable landscape features
(topography, vegetation, parent material, etc.) are used to infer the variability of
FIGURE 5.1 Representations of soils: (1) polygon, entity or object view, and (2) raster,
ﬁeld view.130 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
soil properties, thereby interpolating the individual pedon properties/observations
over the study area.10 Based on such observed properties, similar soils are grouped
together and translated into soil classes.9 Soil properties are considered homo-
geneous within the map unit and sharp breaks in soil properties are assumed,
forming the polygon boundaries. This soil mapping concept has been questionedextensively.
11–13 Crisp soil mapping is practical; however, it ignores the contin-
uous spatial variation in both soil-forming processes and in the resulting soils.Burrough et al.
14 consider it a double-crisp model because the identi ﬁed soil
groups are supposed to be crisply delineated in both taxonomic space (the spacedeﬁned by the soil properties) and geographic space (de ﬁned by the map unit
boundary). Bie and Beckett
15 demonstrated that even with aerial photo identi ﬁ-
cation (API), different surveyors choose radically different boundary spacing,and not every important change in soil properties occurred at physiographicallydistinct locations.
The raster-based or ﬁeld view geographic data model
6,7 evolved as an effort
to address the digital representation of continuously varying environmental prop-erties such as soils (Figure 5.1). Commonly, geostatistical techniques
16–18 are
employed to create continuous raster-based maps that model the spatial autocor-relation of soil properties measured at georeferenced locations. Typically, deter-ministic or stochastic methods are employed to characterize soil variation alongwith the prediction uncertainty.
19,20 The spatial discretization units in continuous
maps are pixels or voxels whose size depends on the underlying spatial variability,sampling density, and survey design. McBratney et al.
21 suggested three levels of
resolutions that are of interest: >2 km, 2 km to 20 m, and <20 m, which correspondto global/national, catchment/landscape, and local extents, respectively.
An alternative approach to map soils, considering its continuous nature, is
provided by fuzzy sets, ﬁrst introduced by Zadeh.
22 Fuzziness, a concomitant of
complexity, is a type of imprecision characterizing classes that for various reasonscannot or do not have sharply de ﬁned boundaries or units. Numerous authors
23–28
describe the fundamental principles, operations, and applications of fuzzy sets to
soils. Fuzzy methods allow the matching of individuals to be determined on acontinuous scale instead of a Boolean binary or an integer scale. Contrary to crispsets that assign membership values of 0 and 1, a fuzzy set is a class that admitsthe possibility of partial membership. Hence, fuzzy sets are generalizations ofcrisp sets to situations where the class boundaries are not or cannot be sharplydeﬁned. Though numerous applications of fuzzy set theory to soil-landscape
modeling exist,
25,27–29 it has not been widely adopted. Reasons are seen in the
fact that users prefer to have one crisp output map (e.g., bulk density map), ratherthan complex fuzzy output maps, which are more challenging to interpret. Defuzz-iﬁcation has been suggested to backtransform the fuzzy output into crisp soil
data.
30 However, such a procedure opposes the paradigm of fuzzy set theory, i.e.,
the fact that our world has many shades of gray rather than being black and white.There has been extensive criticism about the development of membership func-tions for fuzzy application using soft input or subjective expert knowledge.The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 131
Past studies have clearly demonstrated that there is no single, overall soil
classi ﬁcation and mapping paradigm that can be used uncritically at all locations
and at all levels of resolution.14 Regardless of the approach employed, soil map-
ping must take into account prevailing processes of soil formation, differences
in lithology, landform, drainage, and others for delineating soil properties orclasses. Continuous maps focus on speci ﬁc soil properties, contrary to crisp maps,
where soil properties are lumped into soil classes. In this regard, continuous soilmaps are better suited to soil investigations focusing on speci ﬁc purposes (so-
called technical soil surveys), while crisp maps provide an overall picture of thesoil variation across the landscape. Few studies
31,32 have shown that crisp soil
mapping can provide predictions that are equally as good as continuous soil mapsobtained by geostatistical techniques. Rogowski
33 compared taxonomic soil sur-
vey data to continuous soil data developed using geostatistical methods at farmand watershed scales. Results showed that the variability of bulk density andhydraulic conductivity can be estimated by comparing regularized variograms ofmeasured and published values. These ﬁndings provide avenues of incorporating
crisp soil data with raster-based soil datasets, reconciling the two contrastinggeographic data models.
5.1.3 D ATA MANAGEMENT
Historically, hard-copy soil maps were produced that show crisp soil map unitsas polygons and associated legends. With the advent of geographic informationsystems (GIS) storage, management, analysis, and display of soil data havechanged tremendously. The emergence of GIS has had a pivotal impact on soilsurveying. In the early 1980s, vector-based GIS emerged, which were used torepresent crisp soil map units, while raster-based GIS were developed mainlyfor remote sensing applications. Vector and raster-based GIS eventually mergedto become hybrid GIS, providing both geographic data models within one soft-ware package.
Spatial data are stored in the form of database management systems (DBMS).
6
Modern DBMS use many methods for ef ﬁciently storing and retrieving data, but
all are based on three fundamental means of organizing information, which alsoreﬂect the logical models used for real-world structures known as the hierarchical,
network, and relational schemata. Hierarchical systems of data organization areadopted in soil taxonomies (e.g., U.S. Soil Taxonomy ).
106 Keys enable ease of
access and retrieval of data. A disadvantage of hierarchical databases is largeindex ﬁles, which have to be maintained, and certain attribute values may have
to be repeated many times, leading to data redundancy, which increases storageand access costs. The network database structure, though similar to the hierar-chical database structure, avoids redundancy and linkage problems. Most com-monly used in GIS are relational database (RDB) structures. An example of theRDB used in the Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database is given in Figure5.2. The data are stored in simple records, known as tuples, which are sets of132 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ﬁelds each containing an attribute. Tuples are grouped together in tables known
as relations. Each table or relation is usually a separate ﬁle. Identi ﬁcation codes
are used as unique keys to identify the records in each ﬁle. Data are extracted
from a relational database de ﬁning the relation that is appropriate for the query.
Advantages of RDBs are their ﬂexible structure, ease to update, and nonredun-
dancy. Disadvantages occur where the relationships between tables are complexand a number of joins are needed to produce a soil map. Such operations areerror prone. Recently, a fourth structure has been introduced to GIS, which iscalled object orientation structure.
6 Object database management systems
(ODBMS) integrate database capabilities with object programming languagecapabilities. An ODBMS makes database objects appear as programming lan-guage objects in one or more existing programming languages (e.g., C++, Java).Object database management systems extend the object programming languagewith transparently persistent data, concurrency control, data recovery, associativequeries, and other database capabilities. Object-oriented databases use abstractdata types, which add ﬂexibility to a DBMS; however, there are two constraints
that limit their application. First, the market adoption of object-oriented databaseshas been limited, despite the availability of such products for several years.Second, the Structured Query Language (SQL) is tightly coupled with the rela-tional database model. SQL is a declarative language where users only specifythe desired result rather than the means of production.
34
Burrough35 argues that GIS facilitate ﬂexible weighting of properties in accor-
dance with a speci ﬁc purpose. Hence, the boundaries in technical groupings oftenFIGURE 5.2 Spatial and nonspatial tables from SSURGO. The tables are stored in RDB
format. Attribute ﬁelds from different tables can be associated using common ﬁelds (e.g.,
map unit identi ﬁcation (MUID) attribute ﬁeld).
Nonspatial  ta ble
 Spatial ta ble Common field MUIDThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 133
cut across taxonomic subdivisions. Dudal36 points out that there is no need
anymore for data aggregation into taxonomic units to ef ﬁciently manage spatial
datasets. Databases that contain geo-referenced soil property data enable usersto select and group clusters of relevant soil property data by function of demand.
Emerging geographic information technology enables us to integrate geospa-
tial datasets of soils and other resources. It facilitates universal data sharing acrossthe Internet as outlined in the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI), whichis a concept de ﬁned as the technologies, policies, and people necessary to promote
sharing of geospatial data throughout all levels of government, the private andnonpro ﬁt sectors, and the academic community. The Federal Geographic Data
Committee (FGDC) sponsors a decentralized system of servers called the Geospa-tial Data Clearinghouse, which is a collection of over 250 data servers that havegeographic data primarily for use in GIS, image processing systems, and othermodeling software. Such a framework enables users around the globe to accessand share digital soil datasets.
5.2 EMERGING SOIL-LANDSCAPE MAPPING 
TECHNOLOGIES
5.2.1 G LOBAL  POSITIONING  SYSTEMS
Early soil surveyors recognized the importance of mapping soils in the context
of geographic space; i.e., it mattered where (at which location) a soil observationwas made and how it related to adjacent soils, topography, land use, and otherproperties. Reference systems such as the U.S. Public Land Survey Systemfeaturing relative georeferencing based on nested grids such as townships, ranges,and sections improved the capabilities to reference a soil sample to a speci ﬁed
geographic location. However, the uncertainty of georeferencing was relativelyhigh. The introduction of GPS to soil mapping was pivotal, providing accurateand precise geographic coordinates of soil observations. To characterize soil-landscapes, each soil sampling location is georeferenced using a GPS based onx (easting) and y (northing) coordinates. Global positioning systems combinedwith GIS provide a powerful toolset to build soil information systems (SIS).
Global positioning systems consist of a satellite segment, control segment,
and user segment.
37 The GPS receiver in the user segment records the radio signals
broadcasted by each satellite, which are processed to obtain its distance (range)from the satellite.
38 The distance of the receiver from a minimum of three (more
is even better) satellites de ﬁnes a unique position in two- and three-dimensional
space, respectively. An alternative to such autonomous GPS is a differential GPS(DGPS), which entails establishing a base station with a true coordinate locationdetermined using high-accuracy survey methods. The GPS-measured position forthe base station is compared to its predetermined location to de ﬁne an error vector,
which is used to correct the position measured by GPS units elsewhere, either inreal time (real-time DGPS) or after the data are collected (post-processing DGPS).134 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Each dilution of precision — positional, vertical, horizontal, timing, and
geometric — and environmental conditions contribute to the overall ﬁnal posi-
tional accuracy of the GPS measurement. The current Standard PerformanceService (SPS) published by the U.S. government is ±37 m horizontal and 77 mvertical 95% of the time.
37 With selective availability (SA) turned off, civilian
use of GPS is often much better and regularly achieves a horizontal accuracy ofabout 20 m, while having a vertical accuracy of about 50 m. Even handheld GPSunits facilitate relatively accurate mapping of geographic coordinates, whileDGPS are capable of mapping geographic locations with submeter accuracy.
5.2.2 G EOPHYSICAL  TECHNIQUES
For conservation, political, ethical, and cultural reasons, destructive auger-basedsoil sampling is not feasible at all sites
39 and prohibitive for spatially dense
sampling.40 The lack of sensitive tools to detect subtle shifts among soil prop-
erties limits the spatial delineation of soil variability.41 As an alternative, geo-
physical methods that are noninvasive and reliable can complement the soilmapping effort.
42
5.2.2.1 Electromagnetic Induction
Electromagnetic induction (EM) facilitates mapping the electrical conductivity
(EC) of soils. Electrical conductivity correlates to soil properties affecting cropproductivity, including soil texture, cation exchange capacity (CEC), drainageconditions, organic matter, salinity, and other subsoil characteristics. Other appli-cations combine EC data with sparser georeferenced point soil observations toproduce thematic soil maps. Electrical conductivity surveys are also used toprescreen a soil-landscape. Maps are then used to identify heterogeneous areasthat are targeted for more detailed auger-based soil mapping.
Traditionally, the soil paste method
43 has been used to assess soil EC, but
more recently commercial devices have become available to measure and assessbulk soil EC rapidly and economically across sites. Georeferenced in situ  esti-
mates of EC are now being made at the ﬁeld scale using both direct contact
sensors to measure resistance and noncontact sensors based upon EM technol-ogy.
44 In EM surveys, a sensor in the device measures the electromagnetic ﬁeld
induced by current inserted into the soil. The strength of this secondary electro-magnetic ﬁeld is directly proportional to the apparent electrical conductivity
(ECa) of the soil. Hartsock et al.
45 summarized the variation in soil electrical
conductivity as being attributed to multiple factors: amount and connectivity ofsoil water, bulk density, soil structure, water potential, timing of measurement,soil aggregation (e.g., cementing agents such as clay and organic matter, soilstructure), electrolytes in soil water (e.g., exchangeable ions), soil temperature,the conductivity of the mineral phase (e.g., types and quantities of minerals,degree of isomorphic substitution, exchangeable ions), and more. Despite themultiple causes of EC variability, bulk soil ECa measurements have been relatedThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 135
to individual factors that limit soil use and productivity, such as salinity,46 mois-
ture, clay content, calcium and magnesium content, depth to bedrock and fragi-pan,
45 and soil horizons.47 Yoder et al.48 predicted the movement of agrochemicals,
and Sudduth et al.49 predicted depth to topsoil using EM. We like to point out
that EC provides surrogate information, and often there are multiple causesgenerating variable ﬁelds of EC measurements. However, EM surveys facilitate
rapid mapping of soil-landscapes, generating exhaustive datasets. Hence, EC isa powerful tool to map soil variation across ﬁelds. Generally, the use of EM has
been most successful in areas having reasonably homogeneous subsurface prop-erties with a minimal sequence of dissimilar subsurface layer.
50 EM mapping
coupled with traditional soil sampling can provide a compromise between softand exhaustive, and hard (quantitative) and sparse soil data, respectively. Twoinstruments widely used for measuring bulk soil EC in situ  are the EM38 meter
(Geonics Limited, Mississauga, Ontario) and the Veris System (Veris Technolo-gies, Salina, KS). The EC meters respond to the average bulk soil EC betweenthe surface and a maximum depth of about 1 m (Veris) or 1.5 m (EM38).
5.2.2.2 Ground-Penetrating Radar
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is one of the geophysical exploration and sub-
surface delineation techniques that has proven to aid greatly in site character-ization and mapping. The GPR method has found widespread acceptance forshallow subsurface mapping because it can detect shallow underground discon-tinuity and heterogeneity,
51 covering a wide area in a short period with high
spatial resolution.52
Ground-penetrating radar information is acquired by re ﬂecting radar waves
off subsurface features. The ground-penetrating radar antenna is pulled along theground by hand or behind a vehicle. The radio waves are propagated in distinctpulses from a surface antenna, re ﬂected off subsurface features, and detected
back at the source by a receiving antenna. The travel time of the energy pulsesand the velocity change of radar waves can accurately trace the distance or depthto the subsurface feature. The electrical and magnetic properties of rocks, soils,and ﬂuids (natural materials) control the speed of propagation of radar waves
and their amplitudes. At radar frequencies, electrical properties are dominantlycontrolled by rock or soil density, chemistry, state (liquid/gas/solid), distribution(pore space connectivity), and content of water. Ground-penetrating radar mea-sures differences in the dielectric constant of subsurface features. Dielectricconstants range from 1 (air), 4 (dry sand), 5.5 (dry limestone), 6 (wet sandstone),11 (till), 23.5 (wet sandy soil), 27 (wet clay), 64 (organic soil), to 81 (water).Ground-penetrating radar waves can reach depths up to 30 m in low-conductivitymaterials such as dry sand or granite. Clays, shale, and other high-conductivitymaterials may attenuate or absorb GPR signals, greatly decreasing the depth ofpenetration to 1 m or less. The resolution is controlled by the wavelength andpolarization of the electromagnetic energy, the contrast in electromagnetic prop-erties, and the size, shape, and orientation geometry of the target. The resolution136 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
increases with increasing frequency (decreasing wavelength), but at the expense
of depth of investigation.
Although earlier GPR systems recorded the raw subsurface re ﬂections on
paper printouts, currently used GPR systems are equipped to record the re ﬂections
in digital format. Conyers and Goodman39 discussed some of the ﬁeld and post-
acquisition techniques to acquire, process, and interpret GPR data. Typically, radarantennas are moved along the ground and two-dimensional pro ﬁles of a large
number of periodic re ﬂections are created, producing pro ﬁles of subsurface fea-
tures and stratigraphy. In case data are acquired in a series of transects, and thereﬂections are correlated and processed, it is possible to create three-dimensional
models of subsurface features. Ground-penetrating radar provides higher resolu-tion of subsurface features than EM, but it is more depth restricted.
50
Gish et al.53 used georeferenced GPR data in concert with EM data to identify
subsurface restricting layers. These data were coupled with hydrological modelsin a GIS to determine potential ﬂow pathways from topographic maps of a
subsurface restricting layer. Doolittle and Collins
50 compared EM and GPR tech-
niques in areas of karst and found GPR effective in determining the thickness ofsurface layers and locations of buried solution features, while the presence ofmultiple, contrasting soil horizons and layers weakened relationships and creatednonunique interpretation for EM. In Florida, GPR is used extensively to updatesoil surveys.
42 Ground-penetrating radar is most successful in sand-rich soils (e.g.,
Florida soils), but it fails in silt-rich material due to confounding impact of soilmoisture and other factors. Successful applications of GPR include identi ﬁcation
of subsurface features and cavities,
50 identi ﬁcation of soil layers and subsurface
ﬂow channels,53 archaeological investigations,39,54 fractures and faults in geolog-
ical formations,51 and more. The integrated use of GPR and EM, supported by
ground truth veri ﬁcation, increases the con ﬁdence of subsurface feature interpre-
tations.50 However, many GPR applications are qualitative in nature, highlighting
subsurface variability. The true nature of the variability is often confounded bymany interrelated soil properties. Therefore, it is challenging to derive quantitativerelationships between soil properties and GPR measurements.
5.2.3 S ENSORS
5.2.3.1 Soil Sensors
Soils impose resistance to penetration by virtue of texture, structure, porosity,
water content, cementing agents, and compaction.55 A pro ﬁle cone penetrometer
(PCP) is an instrument in the form of a cylindrical rod with a cone-shaped tipdesigned for penetrating soils and for measuring penetration resistance expressedas cone index (CI). Two standards for PCP applications exist: the American Societyfor Testing and Materials
56 and the American Society of Agricultural Engineers57
standards, which differ mainly in the cone apex angle of 60° and 30°, respectively.Truck or all-terrain vehicle (ATV)-mounted constant-rate PCPs provide morereliable CI data than handheld push penetrometers (Figure 5.3). Clustered coneindex pro ﬁles collected on a grid with 10-m spacing on a 2.73-ha site in southernThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 137
Wisconsin are shown in Figure 5.4. The identi ﬁed four clusters were related to
soil materials. A detailed description of the study can be found in Grunwald et al.55
Among the soil characteristics that in ﬂuence penetration resistance are soil
texture, porosity, structure, water content, cementing agents, organic matter, andcompaction. Numerous authors related measured CI to soil properties. Rooneyand Lowery
58 mapped soil horizons. Correlations between particle size and pen-
etration resistance were presented by Kasim et al.,59 Kurup et al.,60 and PuppalaFIGURE 5.3 Truck-mounted PCP system. (Courtesy of Soil Science Department, Uni-
versity of Wisconsin, Madison.)
FIGURE 5.4 Cone index curves ( n = 273) were clustered into four groups and related to
soil horizons/materials. Data were collected at a 2.73-ha site in southern Wisconsin on agrid with 10-m spacing.
[bold line: mean; dashed line: standard deviation]
(cm)h Dept
1201008060402002,BB1
illlt Glaciasloesd ReworkehorizonAD C AB
Depth [cm]
Cone Index [kPa] Cone Index [kPa] Cone Index [kPa] Cone Index [kPa]6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 100001301201101009080706050403020100Cluster D (n:7)Depth [cm]
6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 100001301201101009080706050403020100Cluster C (n:30)Depth [cm]
6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 100001301201101009080706050403020100Cluster B (n:202)Depth [cm]
6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 100001301201101009080706050403020100Cluster A (n:34)138 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
et al.,61 where coarse-textured soils showed greater penetration resistance than
ﬁne-textured soils. Water content and organic matter content are inversely related
to penetration resistance,62,63 while cementing agents like carbonate, silica,
hydrous silicate, and hydrous iron oxide61 increase penetration resistance. Lowery
and Schuler64 showed that penetration resistance and bulk density increased with
increasing level of compaction. Grunwald et al.65 derived pedotransfer functions
relating cone index to soil texture, bulk density, and soil moisture content. Grun-wald et al.
55 used a pro ﬁle cone penetrometer to distinguish between glacial till
and reworked loess soil materials in a glaciated landscape in southern Wisconsin.The CI data combined with soil property and topographic data were used toreconstruct the soil-landscape using clustering and multidimensional kriging.
The advantage of rapid nonintrusive mapping using PCP is limited by the
fact that penetration resistance is the response signal to soil-factor combinations.Hence, CI represents a surrogate of soil properties such as soil moisture, soiltexture, and bulk density in varying quantities. Pro ﬁle cone penetrometer data
can be used in combination with other soil sensors or traditional soil mappingtechniques. A combination of tip and sleeve measurements and a soil moistureprobe with sparse soil observations were explored by Soil and Topography Infor-mation, LLC (Madison, WI) to make inferences on soil horizons and soil texture.A color video camera was integrated in a PCP to record soil pro ﬁles while
measuring CI
66 (Figure 5.5). Image processing techniques can be used to derive
numerous soil properties (e.g., soil color, soil texture, soil structure). For example,Schulze et al.
67 found that soil color is closely related to soil organic matter. The
integration of multiple soil sensors and traditional soil mapping techniques willprovide new and exciting avenues to generate high-resolution and quality chorop-leth soil maps in the near future.
5.2.3.2 Soil Spectroscopy
Conventional soil extraction methods of phosphorus, nitrate, carbonates, metals,
and others are labor intensive, expensive, and time consuming.
68 In addition,
dense sampling is required to adequately characterize spatial variability of a soil-landscape, making broad-scale quantitative evaluation dif ﬁcult.
69 As re ﬂectance
and emittance behavior of soil is highly dependent on its biochemical and physicalfabric,
70 the analysis of such characteristics can provide information on soil
properties. Soil spectroscopy refers to the use of sensing instruments71 to measure
the absorption, emission, or scattering of electromagnetic radiation from soil toqualitatively or quantitatively study soil properties. Diffuse re ﬂectance spectros-
copy is increasingly used for the rapid nondestructive characterization of a widerange of materials.
For soils, the basic application range consists of the visible (350 to 700 nm),
near-infrared (NIR) (700 to 2500 nm), and mid-infrared range (MIR) (2500 to25,000 nm). While NIRS has developed into a major tool for analytical determi-nations over the past two decades, the main use of mid-infrared has been forresearch or qualitative analysis involving spectral interpretation.
72 A number ofThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 139
scientists72,73 found that MIR diffuse re ﬂectance spectroscopy can be performed
with accuracy equal to or greater than that achieved using NIR spectroscopy. Forexample, soil organic matter is related to re ﬂectance in the 2.5 to 25 mm range,
but their overtones (at one half, one third, one fourth, etc. of the wavelength ofthe fundamental feature) occur in the near-infrared 0.7 to 1.0 mm and shortwave
1.0 to 2.5 mm regions.
74
Spectral re ﬂectance signature libraries of numerous material samples and
composites have been cataloged.74–76 From these libraries, unknown samples can
be interpreted for soil properties. First, the spectral signatures of soil samples arescanned with a spectroradiometer in the ﬁeld or laboratory. Soil properties are
then measured, designated to sample the variation in the spectral library, andcalibrated to soil re ﬂectance. Chemometric models to predict soil properties from
soil spectra can be built using classi ﬁcation and regression trees (CARTs), mul-
tivariate adaptive regression splines (MARSs), partial least square regression(PLSR), and other statistical methods. The resultant functions are then employedto predict the soil properties for new samples that belong to the same populationas the library soils.
74 The models are evaluated using statistical tools (e.g., cross-FIGURE 5.5 Images collected with a soil imaging penetrometer. (Courtesy of Soil and
Topography Information, LLC, Madison, WI.) (See color version on the accompanyingCD.)
140 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
validation, validation, coef ﬁcient of determination). Therefore, the success of
using spectral libraries to characterize soil properties depends primarily on theability to build robust models between measured soil properties and soil re ﬂec-
tance spectra.
Research has demonstrated the ability of re ﬂectance spectroscopy to provide
nondestructive, rapid prediction of soil physical, chemical, and biological prop-erties (e.g., calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, and potassium),
77 soil tex-
ture,78 total carbon, total nitrogen, and pH.72 Soil structure has in ﬂuence on the
reﬂectance behavior of soil, which is probably why Daniel et al.,70 Udelhoven et
al.,77 Couillard et al.,78 and Sudduth and Hummel81 found laboratory spectrometry
performed better than ﬁeld spectrometry.
Despite the tremendous scope of re ﬂectance spectroscopy to characterize
soils, there is need for research in the use of spectroscopy for soil characterizationand mapping. Considering the problems of atmospheric interferences, shade andshadow, etc., associated with remote sensing from space-based platforms,
76 soil
spectroscopy offers a reliable alternative for accurate on-the-go mapping of soilproperties. Since most satellite and airborne sensors are limited to the topsoil,spectroscopy offers rapid analysis of multiple soil properties from one soil sample.Rapid assessment of soils using spectral models will dramatically cut sampleprocessing time and cost. Reduced sample processing costs may facilitate sam-pling soils with much higher density and frequency. Research in data acquisition(e.g., instrument sensitivity) and data analysis (statistical chemometric modeling)remains an area of continuous research.
5.2.3.3 Remote Sensors
Remote sensing is a relatively cheap and rapid method of acquiring up-to-date
information over large geographical areas. Although satellite and airborne imagescontain tremendous information in various spectral bands, data transformationtechniques such as tasseled cap
80 and vegetation indices76 (e.g., normalized differ-
ence vegetation index (NDVI)) reduce the number of bands and provide a moredirect association between signal response and physical processes on the ground,highlighting users’ interest. Passive remote sensing employs sensors that measureradiation naturally re ﬂected or emitted from the ground, atmosphere, and clouds in
the visible, near-infrared, and short-wave infrared range. In contrast, active remotesensing techniques employ an arti ﬁcial source of radiation as a probe. The resulting
signal that scatters back to the sensor characterizes the atmosphere or Earth.
Various satellite systems operating within the optical range generate data on
Earth resources at different resolutions.
76 Landsat Enhanced Thematic Mapper
(ETM 7+) scenes have a grid resolution of 30 m. Hyperspectral sensors havemultiple bands (e.g., hundreds of bands) with spectral resolutions less than 20nm. Hyperspectral images, such as NASA’s Airborne Visible/Infrared ImagingSpectrometer (A VIRIS), with 224 contiguous spectral channels and approximately20-m resolution, and IKONOS multispectral images, with 1-m panchromatic and4-m multispectral resolution, provide a spatial resolution we have not seen before.The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 141
These spatial resolutions contrast readily available crisp soil survey maps derived
from few auger borings per hundreds of hectares. For example, currently SSURGOsoil maps derived at a map scale of 1:24,000 provide the most detailed soil data
in the U.S. In Florida, the average soil map unit size in SSURGO is 605,176 m
2,
which contrasts the resolution of remote sensing imagery.
Exhaustive pixel-based thematic maps can be derived from satellite imagery
that are valuable to support soil mapping efforts (e.g., the selection of represen-tative sites for ﬁeld investigations), to provide auxiliary data to predict soil
properties, assess environmental quality, and develop recommendations for landresource management. Georeferenced soil properties can be integrated withremotely sensed images and upscaled to regional scale. Remote sensing combinedwith GIS offers a powerful toolset to support soil mapping. Current limitationsof remote sensors for mapping of soil properties have been (1) the lack ofpenetration depth, which is often limited to the top centimeters of the soil, and(2) vegetation cover, which obscures the mapping of soil properties. Radar andgamma radiometry have overcome these limitations. Radar sensors are noted fortheir ability to penetrate clouds, fog, and rain, as well as an ability to providenighttime re ﬂected imaging by virtue of their own active illumination. The syn-
thetic aperture radar (SAR) aboard the European remote sensing satellites ERS-1 and ERS-2 is an imaging technology in which radiation is emitted in a beamfrom a moving sensor, and the backscattered component returned to the sensorfrom the ground is measured. These images have been used to map soil moistureand climate characteristics at landscape scale.
Remote sensing applications are manifold and include soil organic matter
mapping,
80 land cover mapping,82,83 land classi ﬁcation,84 delineation of salt-
affected areas,85 change detection of land use,86 and many more. Kasischke et
al.87 used ERS SAR imagery for monitoring surface hydrologic conditions in
wetlands of southern Florida. The results showed wide variation in ERS back-scatter in individual sites when they were ﬂooded and non ﬂooded. Surface soil
moisture was retrieved using microwave radiometry by Pardé et al.
88 using the
L-band. To date, there is no space-borne sensor measuring the microwave emis-sion of the soil surface at this frequency, although several new programs arescheduled. Hyperspectral images of A VIRIS and Hyperspectral Mapper (HyMap)were used to map expansive clay soils in Colorado, focusing on smectites, smec-tites/illites, and kaolinites.
89 Mapping of vegetation, geology, and soils using
A VIRIS imagery was conducted by Drake et al.90 in a semiarid shrubland/range-
land soil-landscape using short-wavelength infrared (2 to 2.5 mm).
5.3 GEOGRAPHIC AND SOIL INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
5.3.1 G EOGRAPHIC  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS
Geographic information systems, which help to manipulate, analyze, and present
information that is tied to a spatial location, have revolutionized the way we142 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
manage soil and other environmental datasets. Modern GIS emerged in the 1960s.
The history of GIS is unique in that it was developed nearly concurrently byseparate research teams at different locations with different backgrounds. One of
the earliest accounts of a computerized GIS is the Canada Geographic Information
System (CGIS) developed in the early 1960s. Meanwhile, the Harvard Laboratoryfor Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis (HLCGSA) created an automatedmapping application, SYMAP, which served as the training ground for many ofthe scientists that developed and created the precursors to the popular GIS pack-ages used today. For the U.S. Census study in 1966, new methods were developedincorporating topology, i.e., spatial relationships between connecting or adjacentvector features. While the 1960s served as the decade of GIS development, the1970s were years of lateral diffusion.
91 More universities and government agen-
cies became interested in the technology, expanding the user base of GIS. Sincethe early 1970s, the Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. (ESRI)became one of the dominating players providing GIS software, GIS datasets, andGIS services to a worldwide audience. While hardware became cheaper, faster,and more powerful, software evolved, providing sophisticated spatial operationsto users. For example, GIS enabled users to integrate soil-forming factor layersand relate them to soil data within a spatially explicit framework. Geographicinformation systems are versatile to provide representations in the form of crispand raster-based soil maps. They are scalable, expandable, and provide ease toupdate soil and other datasets. Soil scientists were able to implement the con-ceptual soil-landscape models developed several decades earlier within a GISenvironment. Spatial operations include overlying, extracting, and generalizingspatial data to name only a few. Complex statistical and geostatistical methodswere embedded within the GIS environment providing ease of use.
92 For example,
advanced geostatistical techniques within a GIS environment were used by Grun-wald et al.
93 to create soil quality maps that characterize the spatial distribution
of soil phosphorus. Environmental variables derived from auxiliary sources (e.g.,remote sensing, GPR, EM, etc.) can be combined with primary soil data (e.g.,soil texture) in a GIS to derive secondary/functional soil data (e.g., soil qualityindex). Spatially explicit relationships between topographic, geologic, vegetation,and soil properties can be quanti ﬁed using GIS. Soil GIS scientists have been
creative in developing predictive soil-landscape models with the support of GIS.Most important, GIS forced soil scientists to quantify previously descriptive soildatasets. To summarize, GIS has revolutionized how we manage, analyze, andpresent spatial data, including soil-landscape data. It has served as an integratorof soil and other environmental datasets, providing the platform for quantitativesoil-landscape modeling. Geographic information systems are used by state andfederal agencies, universities, consulting companies, and others, becoming ascommonplace as a pencil to a traditional soil surveyor.
To ensure the sharing of spatial data between different user groups, agencies,
applications, and platforms, a variety of spatial data standards were developed.The Spatial Data Transfer Standard (SDTS) was developed by the Federal Geo-graphic Data Committee (FGDC). In the Open GIS Consortium (OCG), numerousThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 143
private companies, government agencies, and academic institutions work side by
side to develop publicly available geoprocessing speci ﬁcations. For example, the
Open GIS Consortium developed the Geographic Markup Language (GML),which is an open standard to enable transfer of spatial data between differentvendors. The Geographic Markup Language is the geographic counterpart of theeXtensible Markup Language (XML) used for metadata documentation. GMLencodes geographic information, including both the geometry and properties ofgeographic features. The FGDC of the U.S. has de ﬁned a Content Standard for
Digital Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM) providing standardized guidelines for thedocumentation of spatial datasets. The CSDGM was adopted by the USDA NRCSto disseminate soil data via SIS. Besides these formalized spatial standards, adouble standard based on ESRI’s vector and raster data formats exists (e.g.,ESRI’s shape ﬁle data format).
In recent years, the adoption of GIS technology by soil scientists resulted in
dramatic changes. Geographic information systems developed from mainframeGIS to desktop GIS and WebGIS. WebGIS refers to the use of the World WideWeb (WWW, in short Web) as a primary means to integrate, disseminate, andcommunicate geographic information.
94,95 Spatial applications provided on the
Web include (1) data services that enable users to retrieve data from Web-basedgeodatabases and (2) map services that provide users with online display capa-bilities of thematic maps. Distributed geographic information (DGI) refers to theuse of Internet technologies to distribute geographic information in a variety offorms, including maps, images, datasets, spatial analysis operations, and reports.
96
DGI is the most encompassing framework, including both WebGIS and mobileGIS (e.g., pocket PCs with wireless connections). Peng and Tsou
97 suggest
expanding GIS data services by including the dissemination of spatial scienceknowledge and GIS output, which is commonly called GIScience. Examples ofstate-of-the-art WebGIS applications are given by Mathiyalagan et al.,
98 who
developed a WebGIS and geodatabase for Florida’s wetlands, providing data andmap services related to soil and vegetation data (Figure 5.6). The Florida Geo-graphic Data Library (FGDL) (http://www.fgdl.org/) provides a repository ofspatial data for Florida using the data service concept.
Only a few GIS-based representations of soil-landscapes are three-dimen-
sional, and even less are four-dimensional, considering changes of soil-landscapeproperties through time. Roshannejad and Kainz
99 developed a logical data
model for a space–time information system. The model considers x (easting), y
(northing), z (depth), t (time), and a (attributes). Time is considered the fourth
dimension, relegating the attribute values to the ﬁfth dimension (Figure 5.7).
Data evolution can be described by a sequence of records {( s, t, e)}, where s is
a spatial coordinate, t is a time stamp, and e is an ecosystem function representing
behavior (e.g., illuviation, mineralization, nitrate leaching). To maintain dataconsistency, spatiotemporal indexing can be used. Few prototypes of space–timeinformation systems have been presented. Abraham and Roddick
100 presented a
detailed review of spatiotemporal database concepts. Koeppel and Ahlmer101
distinguished between attribute-oriented spatiotemporal systems that track144 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
changes in spatial entities and topology-oriented spatiotemporal systems that
track changes in positional information about features and their spatial relation-ships. Peuquet and Duan
102 suggested an Event-Based Spatio-Temporal Data
Model (ESTDM) focusing on events that are represented along a temporal vectorin chain-like fashion. Yuan
103 suggested a three-domain model representing
semantics, space, and time separately and providing links between them todescribe geographic processes and phenomena. Ramasundaram et al.
104 extended
two-dimensional GIS operations to the third (space) and fourth (time) dimen-sions. They developed three-dimensional soil-landscape models and interactivespace–time hydrologic simulations for a ﬂatwood site in Florida that are dis-
seminated via the WWW. Results from a space–time GIS application usingnitrate–nitrogen data for a site in northern Florida are shown in Figure 5.8. Themodel was created using multidimensional ordinary kriging of nitrate–nitrogenFIGURE 5.6 WebGIS and geodatabase for Florida’s wetlands, including map and data
services (http://GISWetlands.ifas.u ﬂ.edu). (See color version on the accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 5.7 Logical data model. (After Roshannejad, A.A. and Kainz, W., ACSM/ASPRS
Annu. Convention Exposition Tech. Pap. , 4, 119–126, 1995.)
The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 145
at eight different time periods using EVS-PRO (CTech Development Corp.,
Huntington Beach, CA). The Spatio-Temporal Environment Mapper (STEM), aGIS system that handles time and depth of an entity in addition to mapping theentity horizontally, was presented by Morris et al.
105 They argued to treat time
and depth ( z) as a dimension rather than an attribute, which is a prerequisite to
effective multidimensional visualization and analysis. This opposes the commonview of modeling three-dimensional solid objects (e.g., representation of soilsas three-dimensional objects). Rather, the x (easting) and y (northing) coordinates
are extended by time and a depth dimension. Though concepts and prototypespace–time information systems exist, more research is necessary to develop auniversal tool that can manage, analyze, and visualize soil-landscape data inspace and through time.
5.3.2 S OIL INFORMATION  SYSTEMS
To disseminate soil data ﬂat ﬁles, hard-copy and digital maps, geodatabases, GIS,
or the WWW are used in numerous variations. Specialized geodatabases for soildata have been developed at different spatial scales, for different geographic regionsand data formats. Commonly, they are referred to as soil information systems.
At the global scale the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)–United Nations Educational, Scienti ﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) Soil Map of the World  was the ﬁrst attempt to cooperatively develop
a standardized soil map covering all continents. A uniform legend was developed,with the main objective to obtain an inventory of the world soil resources basedon integration of existing soil classi ﬁcation systems. The ﬁrst world soil map at
a scale of 1:5 million was published in 1974. Based on soil development status,material, and major geographical zones, 24 major soil groups (MSGs) and 106soil units were distinguished. The de ﬁnitions and nomenclature of the diagnostic
horizons and properties were adopted from U.S. Soil Taxonomy ,
106 but the de ﬁ-FIGURE 5.8 Nitrate–nitrogen plume at different periods ( n = 1 to 8) implemented within
a GIS (EVS-PRO). The space–time model shows change in attribute values and geometryof the plume. (See color version on the accompanying CD.)
146 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
nitions have been summarized and sometimes simpli ﬁed to serve the purpose of
the legend.107 Revised versions of the FAO-UNESCO legend of the Soil Map of
the World  were issued in 1988 that distinguished 28 MSGs and 153 soil units.108
At the global level the FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of the World  is still the only
worldwide, consistent, harmonized soil inventory that is readily available indigital format and provides a set of estimated soil properties for each mappingunit.
109 The development of the Soil Terrain (SOTER) program started in 1986
and focused on standardized mapping of areas with distinctive, often repetitivepatterns of landform, morphology, slope, parent material, and soils at a 1:1 millionscale. Each SOTER unit is linked through a GIS with a database containingattributes of landform, terrain, soils, climate, vegetation, and land use.
109 The
World Reference Base for Soil Resources (WRB) project was initiated by theInternational Soil Science Society (ISSS), FAO, and the International Soil andReference Information Center (ISRIC) to provide scienti ﬁc depth and background
to the 1988 Soil Map of the World, Revised Legend .
110 The WRB is a ﬁrst step
toward standardization of our global soil resources.111 All global soil maps are
based on the double-crisp paradigm lumping over geographic and taxonomicspace, which is due to the lack of high-resolution soil data in many nations, thedensity of soil observations, and the predominance of soil classi ﬁcation systems
around the globe.
In the U.S., three complementing soil information systems (SISs) were devel-
oped and are maintained by USDA NRCS: (1) Soil Survey Geographic Database(SSURGO, 1:15,840 to 1:31,680; typical map scale of 1:24,000; the conversionof SSURGO into a new database format called Soil Data Mart is in progress), (2)State Soil Geographic Database (STATSGO, 1:250,000), and (3) National SoilGeographic Database (NATSGO, 1:7,500,000). The SSURGO provides the mostdetailed digital soil data using a relational database management system(RDBMS) . Data mining of hard-copy soil survey maps to produce vector GIS soil
data is still ongoing across the U.S. Each map unit is assigned a unique identi ﬁer,
known as the map unit identi ﬁcation number (MUID), which links to soil attributes
stored in separate data tables. The SSURGO was intended for use by landowners,farmers, and planners at the county level. However, it lacks the capabilities forsite-speci ﬁc application (e.g., septic tank installation, site-speci ﬁc management).
The STATSGO was developed generalizing SSURGO data and is useful at theregional scale. The NATSGO was designed for national and multistate resourceappraisal, planning, and monitoring. All U.S. SIS are based on the double-crispparadigm. Many more double-crisp SIS were adopted in different nations.
112
Soil information systems that store georeferenced soil property data are
invaluable for future soil-landscape modeling projects. These data can be readilyintegrated with other spatial environmental layers, providing a valuable resourcefor various land resource applications. The U.S. National Soil CharacterizationDatabase provides morphological, chemical, physical, and biological soil prop-erties for thousands of pedons. The Hydraulic Properties of European Soils(HYPRES) is a central database having a ﬂexible relational structure consisting
of soil pedological and hydraulic properties from different institutions inThe Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 147
Europe.113 The Australian Soil Resources Information System contains over
160,000 soil pro ﬁle descriptions complemented by laboratory data. The Interna-
tional Soil and Reference Information Center has been instrumental in developingnumerous SIS, including the world inventory of soil emission potentials (WISE)international and global soil pro ﬁle dataset, the International Geosphere Bio-
sphere Programme–Data and Information System (IGBP-DIS) soil dataset forpedotransfer function development, and the ISRIC SIS, which assembles mono-liths accompanied by soil pro ﬁle descriptions, environmental data, soil reports,
and a slide collection. These and other SIS provide a valuable resource to buildsoil-landscape models.
5.4 SIGNIFICANCE FOR FUTURE SOIL-LANDSCAPE 
MODELING
Previous shortcomings in soil-landscape modeling have been related to soil map-
ping paradigms, the labor-intensive collection of soil data, and database manage-ment. Soil survey maps have been produced extensively using the double-crispsoil mapping paradigm. Such soil polygon maps and associated datasets providerepresentative soil property values for map units without providing statistics aboutthe within-unit variability and statistics such as the variance, coef ﬁcient of vari-
ation, range, and minimum and maximum values. De ﬁciencies of map unit bound-
ary placement and location-speci ﬁc mapping of map components have been
acknowledged by soil surveyors.
114 In contrast, pixel-based soil mapping is much
more data intensive and requires knowledge about quantitative spatial modelingtechniques to produce accurate soil-landscape models. Our technical progress isimpressive, encompassing how we collect, manage, and analyze soil and envi-ronmental datasets to characterize soil-landscapes. Yet there is still an urgent needto improve the training of the next generation of scientists and soil mappers. Aspointed out by the current chair of commission of 1.5 Pedometrics of the Inter-national Union of Soil Science, Gerard Heuvelink, we must introduce pedometricsin the soil science curricula of higher education. Much more emphasis has to beplaced on holistic soil-landscape modeling, integrating soil with other environ-mental datasets. This requires an education that is not limited to soil taxonomyand soil genesis, but includes GIS, remote sensing, quantitative methods, andmore. We have to learn to grasp beyond tacit knowledge of soil surveyors toproduce state-of-the-art soil-landscape models. Available geographic informationtechnology combined with mathematical and (geo)statistical methods will pro-duce the next generation of quantitative soil-landscape models.
Numerous studies have shown that it is possible to reconcile both soil mapping
paradigms using a hybrid approach. Since the demand for pixel-based soil prop-erty maps is evident, there is no doubt that shifts from the double crisp togeoreferenced soil property mapping will naturally occur. Geographic informa-tion systems have no limitation in handling hundreds of thousands of soil propertydata, which can be retrieved and combined with other environmental datasets ondemand. Rapid soil mapping devices and techniques are ﬁnding more widespread148 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
use to generate denser soil datasets. Such dense datasets provide the input for
advanced geostatistical methods to create quantitative soil-landscape models.Combinations of dense and sparse soil and environmental datasets, collected with
different sensors and techniques, and model- and design-based mapping strategies
are pivotal to create accurate, high-resolution soil-landscape models. Such modelscan be readily shared using state-of-the-art Web-based geographic informationtechnology. We are optimistic that eventually we can satisfy the demand forquantitative georeferenced soil-landscape property data using emerging geo-graphic information technologies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Florida Agricultural Experiment Station andapproved for publication as Journal Series R-10025.
REFERENCES
1. RM Lark. Variation in soil conditions and crop performance. In Precision Agri-
culture-’97 , Proc Eur Conf Precision Agric., Warwick University Conference
Center, JV Stafford, Ed. BIOS Scienti ﬁc Publishers Ltd., Oxford, 1997, pp.
127–135.
2. J Bouma, J Stoorvogel, BJ van Alphen, HWG Booltink. Pedology, precision
agriculture and the changing paradigms of agricultural research. Soil Sci Soc Am
J 63: 1763–1768, 1999.
3. AB McBratney, MJ Pringle. Estimating average and proportional variograms of
soil properties and their potential use in precision agriculture. Precision Agric  1:
125–152, 1999.
4. Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). Data Rich and Information Poor ,
Report to the Chief of the NRCS by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Natural ResourceInventory and Performance Management. USDA, Washington, DC, 1995.
5. MR Hoosbeek, RG Amundson, RB Byrant. Pedological modeling. In  Handbook
of Soil Science A , ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 2000, pp. 321–352.
6. PA Burrough, RA McDonnell. Principles of Geographical Information Systems .
Oxford University Press, New York, 1998.
7. D Peuquet. Presentations of geographic space: towards a conceptual synthesis.
Ann Assoc Am Geogr  78: 375–394, 1988.
8. M Goodchild, G Sun, S Yang. Development and test of an error model for
categorical data. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  6: 87–104, 1992.
9. SW Buol, FD Hole, TJ McCracken, RJ Southard. Soil Genesis and Classi ﬁcation .
Iowa State University Press, Ames, 1997.
10. JC Bell. Assessment, Description and Delineation of Soil Spatial Variability at
Hillslope to Landscape Scales. Paper presented at Proceedings of Pedometrics,Madison, WI, 1997.
11. S Nortcliff. Soil variability and reconnaissance soil mapping: a statistical study
in Norfolk. J Soil Sci 29: 403–418, 1978.The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 149
12. PA Burrough. Sampling design for quantifying map unit composition. In Spatial
Variabilities of Soils and Landforms , SSSA Special Publication 28, MJ Mausbach,
LP Winding, Eds. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1991, pp. 89–125.
13. GBM Heuvelink, JA Huisman. Choosing between abrupt and gradual spatial
variation? In Quantifying Spatial Uncertainty in Natural Resources: Theory and
Applications for GIS and Remote Sensing , HT Mowrer, RG Congalton, Eds. Ann
Arbor Press, Chelsea, MI, 2000, pp. 111–117.
14. PA Burrough, PFM van Gaans, R Hootsmans. Continuous classi ﬁcation in soil
survey: spatial correlation, confusion and boundaries. Geoderma  77: 115–135, 1997.
15. SW Bie, PHT Beckett. Comparison of four independent surveys by air-photo
interpretation, Paphos area (Cyprus). Photogrammetria  29: 189–202, 1973.
16. EH Isaaks, RM Srivastava. An Introduction to Applied Geostatistics . Oxford
University Press, New York, 1989.
17. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation . Oxford University
Press, New York, 1997.
18. R Webster, MA Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists . John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 2001.
19. JP Chilès, P Del ﬁner. Geostatistics: Modeling Spatial Uncertainty . John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1999.
20. P Goovaerts. Geostatistical modeling of uncertainty in soil science. Geoderma
103: 3–26, 2001.
21. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh, TFA Bishop, MS Dunbar, TM Shatar. An overview
of pedometric techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
22. LA Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Inf Control  8: 338–353, 1965.
23. PA Burrough. Fuzzy mathematical methods for soil survey and land evaluation.
J Soil Sci  40: 477–792, 1989.
24. PA Burrough, RA MacMillan, WPA van Deursen. Fuzzy classi ﬁcation methods
for determining land suitability from soil pro ﬁle observations and topography. J
Soil Sci  43: 193–210, 1992.
25. AB McBratney, JJ De Gruijter. A continuum approach to soil classi ﬁcation using
fuzzy k-means with extragrades. J Soil Sci  43: 159–176, 1992.
26. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh. Application of fuzzy sets in soil science: fuzzy logic,
fuzzy measurement and fuzzy decisions. Geoderma  77: 85–113, 1997.
27. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Soil pattern recognition with
fuzzy-c-means: application to classi ﬁcation and soil-landform interrelationships.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  56: 505–516, 1992.
28. S Grunwald, K McSweeney, DJ Rooney, B Lowery. Soil layer models created
with pro ﬁle cone penetrometer data. Geoderma  103: 181–201, 2001.
29. A-Z Zhu. A similarity model for representing soil spatial information. Geoderma
77: 217–242, 1997.
30. H Bandemer, S Gottwald. Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy Methods with
Applications . John Wiley, Chichester, U.K., 1995.
31. AK Bregt, J Bouma, M Jellinek. Comparison of thematic maps derived from a
soil map and from kriging of point data. Geoderma  39: 281–291, 1987.
32. D Leenhardt, M V oltx, M Bornand, R Webster. Evaluating soil maps for prediction
of soil water properties. Eur J Soil Sci  45: 293–301, 1994.
33. AS Rogowski. Quantifying soil variability in GIS applications. II. Spatial distri-
bution of soil properties. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  10: 445–475, 1996.150 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
34. S Shekhar, S Chawla. Spatial Databases . Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
2003.
35. PA Burrough. The technologic paradox in soil survey: new methods and techniques
of data capture and handling. Enschede ITC J  3: 15–22, 1993.
36. R Dudal. How good is our soil classi ﬁcation? In Soil Classi ﬁcation: A Global
Desk Reference , H Eswaran, T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart, Eds. CRC Press, New
York, 2003, pp. 11–18.
37. J Thurston, TK Poiker, JP Moore. Integrated Geospatial Technologies . John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 2003.
38. P Bolstad. GIS Fundamentals . Eider Press, White Bear Lake, MN, 2000.
39. LB Conyers, D Goodman. Ground-Penetrating Radar: An Introduction to Archael-
ogists . AltaMara Press, Walnut Creek, CA, 1997.
40. A Tabbagh, M Dabas, A Hesse, C Panissod. Soil resistivity: a non-invasive tool
to map soil structure horizonation. Geoderma  97: 393–404, 2000.
41. CK Johnson, JW Doran, HR Duke, BJ Wienhold, KM Eskridge, JF Shanahan.
Field-scale electrical conductivity mapping for delineating soil condition. Soil Sci
Soc Am J  65: 1829–1837, 2001.
42. GW Schellentrager, JA Doolittle, TE Calhoun, CA Wettstein. Using ground-
penetrating radar to update soil survey information. Soil Sci Soc Am J 52: 746–752,
1988.
43. JD Rhoades, NA Manteghi, PJ Shouse, WJ Alves. Estimating soil salinity from
saturated soil paste electrical conductivity. Soil Sci Soc Am J  53: 428–433, 1989.
44. J Doolittle, E Ealy, G Secrist, D Rector, M Crouch. Reconnaissance soil mapping
of a small watershed using electromagnetic induction and global positioningsystem techniques. Soil Surv Horizons  36: 86–94, 1995.
45. NJ Hartsock, TG Mueller, GW Thomas, RJ Barnhisel, KL Wells, SA Shearer. Soil
electrical conductivity variability. In Proceedings: Fifth International Conference
on Precision Agriculture , ASA Miscellaneous Publication, PC Robert, RH Rust,
WE Larson, Eds. ASA, Madison, WI, 2000.
46. E De Jong, AK Suddeth, NR Kitchen, SJ Indorante. Measurement of apparent
electrical conductivity of soils by an electromagnetic induction probe to aid insalinity surveys. Soil Sci Soc Am J  43: 810–812, 1979.
47. CLS Morgan, JM Norman, CC Molling, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Evaluating
soil data from several sources using a landscape model. In Scaling Methods in
Soil Physics , Y Pachepsky, DE Radcliffe, HM Selim, Eds. CRC Press, New York,
2003, pp. 243–260.
48. RE Yoder, RS Freeland, JT Ammons, LL Leonard. Mapping agricultural ﬁelds
with GPR and EMI to prevent offsite movement of agrochemicals. J Appl Geophys
47: 251–259, 2000.
49. KA Sudduth, NR Kitchen, ST Drummond. Soil conductivity sensing on clay pan
soils: comparison of electromagnetic induction and direct methods. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Precision Agriculture , St. Paul, MN,
1998, pp. 979–990.
50. JA Doolittle, ME Collins. A comparison of EM induction and GPR methods in
areas of karst. Geoderma  85: 83–102, 1998.
51. R Rashad, D Kawamura, H Nemoto, T Miyata, K Nakagawa. Ground penetrating
radar investigations across the Uemachi fault, Osaka, Japan. J Appl Geophys  53:
63–75, 2003.The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 151
52. JL Davis, AP Annan. Applications of ground penetrating radar to mining, ground-
water, and geotechnical projects: selected case histories. In Ground Penetrating
Radar , JA Pilon, Ed. Waterloo Center for Groundwater Research, Waterloo, Can-
ada, 1992, pp. 1115–1133.
53. TJ Gish, WP Dulaney, KJS Kung, CST Daughtry, JA Doolittle, PT Miller. Eval-
uating use of ground-penetrating radar for identifying subsurface ﬂow pathways.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 1620–1629, 2002.
54. V Basile, MT Carrozzon, S Negri, L Nuzzo, T Quarta, A V Villani. A ground-
penetrating radar survey for archaeological investigations in an urban area (Lecce,Italy). J Appl Geophys  44: 15–32, 2000.
55. S Grunwald, B Lowery, DJ Rooney, K McSweeney. Pro ﬁle cone penetrometer
data used to distinguish between soil materials. Soil Tillage Res  62: 27–40, 2001.
56. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). ASTM Standard D5778-
95: Standard test method for performing electric friction cone and piezoconepenetration testing of soils. In Annual Book of ASTM Standards . ASTM, West
Conshocken, PA, 1995, p. 576.
57. American Society of Agricultural Engineers (ASAE). ASAE Standard S313.1:
Soil cone penetrometer. In Agricultural Engineers Yearbook of Standards . ASAE,
St. Joseph, MI, 2000, pp. 832–833.
58. DJ Rooney, B Lowery. A pro ﬁle cone penetrometer for mapping soil horizons.
Soil Sci Soc Am J  64: 2136–2139, 2000.
59. AG Kasim, MY Chu, CN Jensen. Field correlation of cone and standard penetra-
tion tests. J Geotech Eng  112: 368–372, 1986.
60. PU Kurup, GZ V oyiadjis, MT Tumay. Calibration chamber studies of peizocone
test in cohesive soils. J Geotech Eng  120: 81–107, 1994.
61. AJ Puppala, YB Acar, MT Tumay. Cone penetration in very weakly cemented
sand. J Geotech Eng  121: 589–600, 1995.
62. PD Ayers, JV Perumpral. Moisture and density effect on cone index. Trans ASAE
25: 1169–1172, 1982.
63. AR Quiroga, DE Buschiasso, N Peinemann. Soil compaction is related to manage-
ment practices in the semi-arid Argentine pampas. Soil Tillage Res  52: 21–28, 1999.
64. B Lowery, RT Schuler. Duration and effects of compaction on soil and plant
growth in Wisconsin. Soil Tillage Res  29: 205–210, 1994.
65. S Grunwald, DJ Rooney, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Development of pedotransfer
functions for a pro ﬁle cone penetrometer. Geoderma  100: 25–47, 2001.
66. Earth Information Technologies Corporation (EarthIT Corp.). http://www.
earthit.com. 2004.
67. DG Schulze, JL Nagel, GE Van Scoyoc, TL Henderson, MF Baumgardner, DE
Stott. The signi ﬁcance of organic matter in determining soil color. In Soil Color ,
Soil Science Society of America Special Publication 31, JM Bigham, EJ Ciolkosz,Eds. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1993, pp. 71–90.
68. E VanRanst, M Verloo, A Demeyer, JM Pauwels. Manual for the Soil Chemistry
and Fertility Laboratory . University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 1999.
69. A Dent, A Young. Soil Survey and Land Evaluation . George Allen & Unwin
Publication, Boston, 1981.
70. K Daniel, NK Tripathi, K Honda, E Apisit. Analysis of Spectral Re ﬂectance and
Absorption Patterns of Soil Organic Matter. Paper presented at 22nd Asian Con-ference on Remote Sensing, Singapore, 2001.152 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
71. HW Siesler, Y Ozaki, S Kawata, HM Heise. Near-Infrared Spectroscopy: Princi-
ples, Instruments, Applications . Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2002.
72. JB Reeves, GW McCarty, VB Reever. Mid-infrared diffuse re ﬂectance spectros-
copy for the quantitative analysis of agricultural soils. J Agric Food Chem  49:
766–772, 2001.
73. LJ Janik, RH Merry, JO Skjemstad. Can mid infrared diffuse re ﬂectance analysis
replace soil extractions. Aust J Exp Agric  38: 681–696, 1998.
74. KD Shephard, MG Walsh. Development of re ﬂectance spectral libraries for char-
acterization of soil properties. Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 988–998, 2002.
75. RN Clark. Spectroscopy of rocks and minerals, and principles of spectroscopy.
In Remote Sensing for the Earth Sciences: Manual of Remote Sensing , V ol 3, N
Rencz, Ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999, pp. 3–52.
76. TM Lillesand, WW Kiefer. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation . John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 2000.
77. T Udelhoven, C Emmerling, T Jarmer. Quantitative analysis of soil chemical
properties with diffuse re ﬂectance spectrometry and partial least-square regres-
sion: a feasibility study. Plant Soil  251: 319–329, 2003.
78. A Couillard, AJ Turgeon, MO Westerhaus, JS Shenk. Determination of soil sep-
arates with near infrared re ﬂectance spectroscopy. J Near Infrared Spectrosc  4:
201–212, 1997.
79. L Kooistra, J Wanders, GF Epema, RSEW Leuven, R Wehrens, LMC Buydens.
The potential of ﬁeld spectroscopy for the assessment of sediment properties in
river ﬂoodplains. Anal Chem Acta  484: 189–200, 2003.
80. RJ Kauth, GS Thomas. The Tasselled Cap: A Graphic Description of Spectral-
Temporal Development of Agricultural Crops as Seen by Landsat. Paper presentedat Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Machine Processingof Remotely Sensed Data, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 1976.
81. KA Sudduth, JW Hummel. Near infrared spectrophotometry for soil property
sensing. In Proceedings of SPIE Conference on Optics in Agriculture and Forestry
No. 1836 , Bellingham, WA, 1992, pp. 14–25.
82. DR Oetter, WB Cohen, M Berterretche, TK Maiersperger, RE Kennedy. Land
cover mapping in an agricultural setting using multi-seasonal thematic data.Remote Sensing Environ  76: 139–155, 2000.
83. MA Friedl, CE Brodley. Decision tree classi ﬁcation of land cover from remotely
sensed data. Remote Sensing Environ  61: 399–409, 1997.
84. SA Sader, D Ahl, WS Lio. Accuracy of Landsat-TM and GIS rule-based methods for
forest wetland classi ﬁcation in Maine. Remote Sensing Environ  53: 133–144, 1995.
85. GI Metternicht, JA Zinck. Remote sensing of soil salinity: potentials and con-
straints. Remote Sensing Environ  85: 1–20, 2003.
86. MK Ridd, J Liu. A comparison of four algorithms for change detection in an
urban environment. Remote Sensing Environ  63: 95–100, 1998.
87. ES Kasischke, KB Smith, LL Bourgeau-Chavez, EA Romanowicz, S Brunzell,
CJ Richardson. Effects of seasonal hydrologic patterns in south Florida wetlandson radar backscatter measured from ERS-2 SAR imagery. Remote Sensing Environ
J 88: 423–441, 2003.
88. M Pardé, J-P Wigneron, A Chanzy, P Waldteufel, Y Kerr, S Huet. Retrieving
surface soil moisture over a wheat ﬁeld: comparison of different methods. Remote
Sensing Environ J  87: 334–344, 2003.The Impact of Emerging Geographic Information Technology 153
89. S Chabrillat, AFH Goetz, L Krosley, HW Olsen. Use of hyperspectral images in
the identi ﬁcation and mapping of expansive clay soils and the role of spatial
resolution. Remote Sensing Environ J  82: 431–445, 2002.
90. NA Drake, S Mackin, JJ Settle. Mapping vegetation, soils, and geology in semiarid
shrublands using spectral matching and mixture modeling of SWIR A VIRIS imag-ery. Remote Sensing Environ J  68: 12–25, 1999.
91. RF Tomlinson. The impact of the transition from analogue to digital cartographic
representation. Am Cartogr 15: 249–261, 1988.
92. PA Burrough. GIS and geostatistics: essential partners for spatial analysis. Environ
Ecol Stat  8: 361–377, 2001.
93. S Grunwald, KR Reddy, S Newman, WF DeBusk. Spatial variability, distribution,
and uncertainty assessment of soil phosphorus in a south FL wetland. Environ-
metrics J , 15: 811–825, 2004.
94. ZR Peng. An assessment framework of the development strategies of Internet GIS.
Environ Planning B Planning Design  26: 117–132, 1999.
95. S Grunwald, KR Reddy, V Mathiyalagan, SA Bloom. Florida’s Wetland WebGIS.
Paper presented at ESRI User Conference, San Diego, CA, July 7–11, 2003.
96. B Plewe. GIS Online: Information Retrieval, Mapping, and the Internet . OnWord
Press, Santa Fe, NM, 1997.
97. Z-R Peng, M-H Tsou. Internet GIS: Distributed Geographic Information Services
for the Internet and Wireless Networks . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003.
98. V Mathiyalagan, S Grunwald, KR Reddy, SA Bloom. A WebGIS and geodatabase
for Florida’s wetlands. Comput Electron Agric . 47: 69–75, 2005.
99. AA Roshannejad, W Kainz. Handling identities in spatio-temporal databases.
ACSM/ASPRS Annu Convention Exposition Tech Papers  4: 119–126, 1995.
100. T Abraham, JF Roddick. Survey of spatio-temporal databases. Geoinformatica  3:
61–99, 1999.
101. IJ Koeppel, SD Ahlmer. Integrating the Dimension of Time into AM/FM Systems.
Paper presented at Proceedings of the AM/FM XVI International Annual Confer-ence, Aurora, CO, 1993.
102. DJ Peuquet, N Duan. An Event-Based Spatio-Temporal Data Model (ESTDM)
for temporal analysis of geographical data. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  9: 7–24, 1995.
103. M Yuan 1997. Modeling semantics, spatial and temporal information in a GIS. In
Progress in Trans-Atlantic Geographic Information Research , M Craglia, H
Couleclis, Eds. Taylor & Francis, New York, 1997, pp. 334–347.
104. V Ramasundaram, S Grunwald, A Mangeot, NB Comerford, CM Bliss. Develop-
ment of a virtual ﬁeld laboratory. J. Comput Educ . 45: 21–34, 2005. 
105. K Morris, D Hill, A Moore. Mapping the environment through three-dimensional
space and time. Comput Environ Urban Syst  24: 435–450, 2000.
106. Soil Survey Staff. Soil Taxonomy , Agricultural Handbook 436. USDA Soil Con-
servation Service, Washington DC, 1999.
107. OC Spaargaren. Other systems of soil classi ﬁcation. In Handbook of Soil Science ,
ME Sumner, Ed. CRC Press, New York, 2000, pp. 137–174.
108. FAO. FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of the World, Revised Legend , World Soil Resources
Report 84. FAO, Rome, 1988.
109. FOF Nachtergaele. The future of the FAO legend and the FAO/UNESCO Soil
Map of the World . In Soil Classi ﬁcation: A Global Desk Reference , H Eswaran,
T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart, Eds. CRC Press, New York, 2003, pp. 147–156.154 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
110. FAO, ISRIC, ISSS. World Reference Base for Soil Resource , World Soil Resources
Report 84. FAO, Rome, 1988.
111. AR Mermut, H Eswaran. Some major developments in soil science since the mid-
1960s. Geoderma  100: 403–426, 2001.
112. H Eswaran, T Rice, R Ahrens, BA Stewart. Soil Classi ﬁcation: A Global Desk
Reference . CRC Press, New York, 2003.
113. JHM Wösten, A Lilly, A Names, CL Bas. Development and use of a database of
hydraulic properties of European soils. Geoderma  90: 169–185, 1999.
114. C Ditzler. Soil Survey and Soil Variability: A Literature Review and Recommen-
dations . Report presented to the deputy chief of the Natural Resource Conservation
Service, Maury Mausbach, December 3, 2003.1556Topographic Mapping
Scot E. Smith
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................156
6.1 What Are Topographic Maps? ..............................................................156
6.1.1 National Topographic Mapping Efforts ................................157
6.2 Production of Topographic Maps .........................................................160
6.2.1 Gathering Data: Ground Surveys and Aerial
Photography...........................................................................1606.2.1.1 Plane Table Surveying........................................1606.2.1.2 Ground Surveying...............................................161
6.2.2 Topographic Relief Representation.......................................162
6.2.2.1 Digital Elevation and Digital Terrain
Models ................................................................163
6.2.2.2 Triangulated Irregular Networks ........................164
6.2.3 Photogrammetry ....................................................................165
6.2.3.1 Geometry of Photogrammetric Topographic 
Mapping..............................................................166
6.2.3.2 Exterior, Interior, Relative, and Absolute 
Model Orientation...............................................167
6.2.3.3 Aerial Triangulation............................................1676.2.3.4 Analytical Photogrammetry................................1686.2.3.5 Analog Aerial Photogrammetry .........................1686.2.3.6 Digital Photogrammetry .....................................1696.2.3.7 Digital Photogrammetric Workstations ..............1706.2.3.8 Aerial Digital Cameras.......................................1716.2.3.9 Light Detection and Ranging (Lidar) ................1726.2.3.10 Radio Detection and Ranging (Radar)...............1766.2.3.11 The Space Shuttle Radar Topographic 
Mapping Experiment ..........................................177
6.3 Map Production.....................................................................................178
6.3.1 Map Compilation...................................................................1786.3.2 Map Scribing, Editing, and Printing.....................................1796.3.3 Map Accuracy Standards ......................................................1796.3.4 Digitizing Map Data .............................................................180
6.4 Summary and Conclusion.....................................................................180References .........................................................................................................181156 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ABSTRACT
Topographic mapping has been important to mankind from the start and was
practiced since ancient Egyptian times. While the world is nearly entirely mapped
topographically, large areas are barely covered in detail, and in many regionstopography undergoes rapid topographic change and must be remapped regularly.The technology of topographic mapping is also undergoing rapid change withthe advent of digital data, satellite imagery, and other rapid and accurate mappingmethods. This chapter describes (1) topographic maps, (2) means by which dataare collected for their production (i.e., plane table surveying, land surveying,photogrammetry, lidar (light detection and ranging), radar, and satellite imagery),and (3) how these data are transformed into a topographic map. Several authorshave described the relationship between soil and landscape modeling and topog-raphy.
1,2 Without an understanding of topography, soils mapping is one-dimen-
sional and limited in scope. Landscape modeling can only be accomplished witha thorough understanding of topography. Increasingly, visualization tools utilizetopography not merely as an interesting backdrop, but as an actual layer andquanti ﬁable element for analysis. This is becoming more true as the means to
produce increasingly accurate topographic maps improve and become cheaper.This chapter attempts to provide an understanding of the state of the art oftopographic mapping so that people interested in soil and landscape modelingcan incorporate it to its fullest advantage.
6.1 WHAT ARE TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS?
Maps exist in a variety of forms. They may be on paper, Mylar, or in a digitalform. They consist of simple half-tone line drawings or multidimensional andmulticolored, multilayered geographic information systems. The popularity andutility of topographic maps has remained high through time. Topographic mapsusually contain map feature information such as political boundaries, transpor-tation routes, water, and forested areas, but the feature that distinguishes topo-graphic maps from others is contour lines that portray elevation of the land.Topographic maps render the three-dimensional aspect of terrain on a two-dimen-sional surface.
15
Topographic maps usually indicate three-dimensional shape through contour
lines, which are lines drawn on a map connecting points of equal elevation. Alonga contour line, elevation is neither gained nor lost. For example, if you walk ona beach along the line where the water meets the shore, the water surface marksan elevation known as sea level , and as you follow the shoreline, your elevation
remains constant. This is, by de ﬁnition, a contour line . If you walk upslope away
from the sea, your elevation rises above sea level and you leave the contour line.If you walk into the sea, you also leave the contour line and go below sea level.
Topographic maps are usually composed of a series of contour lines separated
by a prescribed contour interval. In the margin of a map is a declaration of thecontour interval, such as “Contour Interval: 5 feet,” but the interval can also beTopographic Mapping 157
determined by looking at index contours , where the elevation is directly written
on the line. Many U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5-feet topographic mapshave a contour interval of 50 feet, although in some low-lying and ﬂat regions,
such as Florida, the interval may be 10 feet. In especially low-lying areas, where
it is critical to precisely and accurately know the topography for drainage purposes,the contour interval can be smaller. This is the case for parts of southern Florida,for example, where topographic maps with a contour interval of 0.5 feet exist.
Topographic maps are used to determine elevation, but they are also used to
visualize topography, which is useful, among other things, for recreation, plan-ning, transportation routing, defense, and aviation. The important thing is tounderstand the pattern of the contour lines and not simply the elevation theyrepresent. One of the most basic topographic observations is the gradient or slopeof the ground surface. Steep gradients occur in areas where there is a signi ﬁcant
change in elevation over a short distance, whereas gentle gradients occur wherethere is little change over the same distance.
Topographic maps do not necessarily have to contain contour lines. They are
topographic maps in the sense that they show the “lay of the land,” and so areuseful in visualizing the landscape. Examples include:
•Slope maps  that show the rate of change of elevation or the steepness
of an area
•Aspect maps  that show the direction (north, south, east, west) to which
slope is oriented
•Curvature maps  that show the curvature of the land as a measure of
the rate of change of slope
6.1.1 N ATIONAL  TOPOGRAPHIC  MAPPING  EFFORTS
Most topographic mapping exists on a national basis, although the USGS pro-duces topographic maps for the entire world. The mandate of the USGS is to bethe nation’s domestic mapping agency. For the most part, international mappingis not part of its mission, except in small study areas and on the continent ofAntarctica. The British Ordinance Survey also produces maps of areas outsidethe U.K., but at a relatively low level of detail.
There is a wide disparity of topographic mapping efforts in the world. Some
countries have had an ongoing, uninterrupted mapping program for centuries andhave mapped the topography of nearly every square meter of their territory indetail. Other regions, such as central Africa, have not been well mapped untilnow. Some countries were at one time well mapped topographically, but haveallowed their maps to become out of date.
In addition to this disparity, countries have different means of producing
topographic mapping and distributing those maps. In many cases, military agen-cies are responsible for this task. This organizational structure has made publicaccess to the data dif ﬁcult or, in some cases, impossible since the military’s ﬁrst
priority is national defense. That responsibility may preclude distribution of158 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
domestic maps of any kind. In the U.S., responsibility for mapping by national
agencies is clearly divided. The primary civilian agency responsible for domesticmapping is the USGS, whereas the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
(NGA) (http://www.geoplace.com/gw/2003/0312/0312cnf.asp) is responsible for
military and international mapping efforts. The National Geodetic Survey is apart of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration and conductstopographic and bathymetric mapping of the world’s shorelines. Therefore, it isrelatively easy to obtain topographic maps of the U.S. This ease of access hascontributed to the country’s economic and physical development. In places wheretopographic maps are not easily available, land development schemes are lesslikely to occur due to lack of basic land characteristic information.
Much of the problem will probably be alleviated in the near future as public
satellite-based topographic mapping capability improves. Public satellite imag-ery is under the United Nation’s sanctioned “open skies” policy and, as such,can be used by anyone and is not subject to national defense agencies arbitrarilyrendering the information unavailable to the public. As technologies such aslidar (light detection and ranging) are improved, detailed topographic mappingof any place on Earth will be possible, regardless of national boundaries ormilitary secrecy.
As matters stand now, however, most public topographic mapping material
is held and distributed by national (military or civilian) mapping programs.Countries can be classi ﬁed into one of three categories with respect to topographic
mapping: (1) topographically well mapped and available to the public, (2) topo-graphically well mapped, but not generally available to the public, or (3) not wellmapped. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to describe each and every nationaltopographic mapping program in the world, but examples of some nationaltopographic mapping efforts follow:
Australia : Australia has one of the most comprehensive sets of topographic
maps of any collection in the world. The maps are accurate, detailed,and widely available. The GeoScience Australia (www.geoaustralia.com)organization publishes topographic maps for the country. Maps of1:50,000 scale are available for some areas, as well as digital data.
Brazil : Detailed topographic map coverage of Brazil is not comprehensive,
but it is improving. The mountainous and coastal regions are wellmapped, but the vast pampa and Amazon regions are less well covered.The Geological Survey of Brazil (www.cprm.gov.br/ingles) is the sourceof all cartographic products for the country. Most maps are still availableonly in a paper format, but collaboration with the USGS has resulted indigitization of some regions.
Canada : Canadians pioneered many of the concepts of topographic map-
ping from aerial photography and coined the phrase geographic infor-mation systems. The government’s national mapping program has pro-duced an excellent topographic series. Due to the country’s large sizeand relatively small population, work is still being carried out for remoteTopographic Mapping 159
regions, but all major areas have been mapped and are kept up to date.
The Centre for Topographic Information (maps.nrcan.gc.ca) is the repos-itory and publisher of all Canadian topographic information. The entire
country is mapped at scales of 1:50,000 and 1:250,000, and topographic
maps are available in great detail for many areas.
China : Topographic maps of China are generally not publically available,
and little is known outside China regarding the extent of coverage. TheScience Foundation for Surveying and Mapping (www.casm.ac.cn/) isthe source for all cartographic products for China.
Germany : Germany has been mapped topographically continuously for
decades. Not all regions are mapped to the same level of detail, but theentire country (including the former East Germany) has topographicmaps at various scales. The Bundesamt für Kartographie und Geodäsieproduces and provides cartographic data for Germany, including1:100,000 and larger-scale topographic maps.
India : India was mapped by the British Ordinance Survey, and continuous
efforts to improve the maps have been made ever since. Not all of thecountry has topographic coverage, but critical areas, such as ﬂoodplains,
have been mapped in detail by the Geological Survey of India, whichis the source of all map products for the country.
Scandinavia : The government agencies responsible for topographic map-
ping of Scandinavia are the Finnish Hydrographic Of ﬁce, National Land
Survey of Iceland, Norweign Mapping Authority, and Swedish MappingAgency. All have both paper and digital products of topography for theentire region, and they are updated regularly. The National Survey andCadastre is the of ﬁcial producer of paper and digital cartographic data
for Denmark. Paper maps are available for the country at scales as largeas 1:24,000.
U.K. : The U.K. has, perhaps, the most complete set of topographic maps
of any nation on Earth. They are detailed, accurate, and regularlyupdated. Most areas are available in a digital format as well as paper.The Ordnance Survey handles maps in the U.K. There are several seriesin the Path ﬁnder/Explorer series ranging from 1:25,000. The digital
datasets include raster map images and digital height data.
U.S.: The central agency responsible for topographic mapping in the U.S.
is the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). USGS has produced a series oflarge-scale topographic maps, which includes approximately 53,000map sheets for the conterminous U.S. and is the only uniform map seriesthat covers this area at such a large scale. Most USGS topographic mapsare produced at a scale of 1:24,000, while some are produced at a scaleof 1:25,000. In addition to the 1:24,000 scale maps, complete topo-graphic coverage of the U.S. is available at scales of 1:100,000 and1:250,000. All these maps are available in both printed-paper form andscanned digital data form. The digital ﬁles are referred to as digital
raster graphics (DRGs).160 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
6.2 PRODUCTION OF TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS
6.2.1 G ATHERING  DATA: GROUND  SURVEYS  AND 
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHY
The earliest topographic maps were probably produced by Egyptians over 4000
years ago. Flood protection from the Nile River necessitated an understandingand mapping of topography, and so Egyptians produced maps showing the ﬂow
of water. From these maps dikes and other ﬂood protection devices could be
designed and built. These maps do not survive today, but an early map showingcontour lines, drawn by the Greek geographer Herodotus in the ﬁfth century 
B.C.,
showing the Nile ﬂowing toward the Mediterranean Sea, can be considered a
form of topographic map.
Henceforth, perspective maps  were produced from a high elevation (i.e., from
a hilltop), where the cartographer or artist simply drew what he could see froma high vantage point from the bottom of the hill to the horizon. Sometimes anattempt was made to incorporate perspective concepts, such as correcting forconvergence, but most of the time the maps were drawn to maintain an obliqueperspective. An example of a perspective map is shown in Figure 6.1.
6.2.1.1 Plane Table Surveying
Most of the original topographic maps produced during the 1700s and part of the
1800s were made using a cumbersome technique called plane table surveying .FIGURE 6.1 Perspective view of Anniston, AL. (Courtesy of E.S. Glover Shober and
Carqueville Lithography Company, 1888.)
Topographic Mapping 161
Plane table surveying took great skill and was backbreaking work, but produced
reasonably accurate topographic maps for the times. Carrying a plane table, whichis essentially a portable drawing board on a tripod with a sighting device, the
cartographer/surveyor would hike to the area’s best vantage point and plot on the
map those features that could be seen and measured in the ﬁeld by triangulation.
Plane table surveying remained the dominant mapping technique until the 1800s,when it gave way to ground surveying.
6.2.1.2 Ground Surveying
Ground surveying  was used for topographic map production during the 19th
century and continues today when high accuracy is required. Early surveyorsused instruments such as transits, levels, stadia, and chains. Modern surveyingemploys global positioning satellites and electronic measuring devices, but theconcepts remain the same. The objective is to produce an accurate map of naturaland cultural features of interest by precisely measuring the locations of featuresand changes in elevation.
One common process is called a topographic survey .
7 For example, transpor-
tation construction requires that accurate estimates of cut-and- ﬁll volume be deter-
mined. One way to calculate this volume is to conduct a ground topographic survey.Fieldwork for a topographic survey consists of two processes: (1) establishing anetwork of horizontal and vertical control points of known location and (2) deter-mining the horizontal and vertical locations of features near each instrument station.
Topographic control consists of two elements: horizontal and vertical. The
horizontal element locates the horizontally ﬁxed position of speci ﬁed control
points, and vertical control determines the elevations of benchmarks. This pro-vides the framework from which topographic details are determined.
Traversing, triangulation, or both are used to locate horizontal control points.
There are two levels of control: primary , where a small number of points are
located with a high degree of accuracy, and secondary , where less accurately
located control points are established within the network.
Benchmarks  serve as beginning and closing points for determining the location
of the control points. A series of permanent benchmarks exist in what is referredto as a geodetic network  in most countries of the world. Topographic maps are
tied into these marks, which in turn are to tied into other geodetic networks.
Vertical control is determined by differential leveling. When the primary ver-
tical control is required, the following four standard degrees of precision  are used:
• 0.05 foot  is used in relatively ﬂat terrain.
• 0.1 foot  is used for a contour interval of 2 feet.• 0.3 foot  is used for a contour interval of 5 feet.• 0.5 foot  is used for a contour interval of 10 feet.
distance inmiles
distance inmiles
distance inmiles
distance inmiles162 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Once vertical control has been set, it is necessary to locate horizontal and
vertical features near the control points. These are features that will eventuallyappear on the map.
How a ground survey is conducted depends on the intended use of the ﬁnal
topographic map. For high-accuracy maps, angles should be measured with atheodolite, and horizontal distances should be measured with an electronic dis-tance measurement device. Highly accurate and precise elevations are determinedwith a differential leveling device, as shown in Figure 6.2.
In summary, ground surveying is suitable for topographic mapping when the
area to be mapped is relatively small and the accuracy required is high. For manylarge-scale applications, however, ground surveying is impractical, and henceaerial photogrammetry is used.
6.2.2 T OPOGRAPHIC  RELIEF REPRESENTATION
Topographic relief can be represented on a map in a number of different ways,such as contours that de ﬁne equal elevation differences, as shown in Figure 6.3,
or a digital elevation model  (DEM) grid, as shown in Figure 6.4.
12
Digital models of maps are made in one of two formats: vector or raster.
Maps in a vector format represent spatial relationships through points, lines, andpolygons. Contour lines are represented in the vector format by inputing eachcurve as a line. The line is modeled by joining adjacent points with straight linesegments. A plotter then draws the curve by moving in straight line segmentsfrom one point to an adjacent point.
In raster format, maps are represented by grid cells, which are formed by
squares superimposed on the area to be mapped. Topographic information, suchas elevation, is stored in the grid cell. Therefore, the highest resolution dependson the size of the cell, which can be a problem for detailed maps, such as thoseFIGURE 6.2 Differential leveling schematic. (From USGS, 2001.)
Topographic Mapping 163
designed for transportaion or drainange. An example of a topographic map derived
from raster data is shown in Figure 6.5.
6.2.2.1 Digital Elevation and Digital Terrain Models
A digital elevation model (DEM) is a digital ﬁle consisting of terrain elevations
for ground positions at regularly spaced horizontal intervals. DEMs are used forthe generation of three-dimensional graphics displaying terrain slope, aspect (direc-tion of slope), and terrain pro ﬁles between selected points. DEMs have been used
in combination with digital raster graphics (DRGs), digital line graphs (DLGs),and digital orthophoto quadrangles (DOQs) to both enhance visual information fordata extraction and revision purposes and create dramatic hybrid digital images.A digital terrain model is data model that attempts to provide a three-dimensionalrepresentation of a continuous surface. They are often used to represent relief.
The USGS produces ﬁve different digital elevation products. Although all are
the same with respect to the manner in which the data are structured, each variesin sampling interval, geographic reference system, areas of coverage, and accu-FIGURE 6.3 Topographic contours. (From USGS, 2001 .)
FIGURE 6.4 DEM grid representation of topographic relief. (From USGS, 2001 .) (See
color version on accompanying CD.)
164 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
racy. The primary difference between them is the spacing interval of the data.
The ﬁve current USGS DEM products are:
• 7.5-minute DEM, 30 ¥ 30 m data spacing
•1 ∞ DEM, 3 ¥ 3 arc-second data spacing
• 2 arc-second DEM, 2 ¥ 2 arc-second data spacing
• 15-minute Alaska DEM, 2 ¥ 3 arc-second data spacing
• 7.5-minute Alaska DEM, 1 ¥ 2 arc-second data spacing
The USGS collects digital elevation data using the following ﬁve approaches:
(1) manual pro ﬁling from photogrammetric stereo models, (2) stereo model
digitizing of contours, (3) digitizing of topographic map contour plates, (4)performing autocorrelation via automated photogrammetric systems, and (5)converting hypsographic and hydrographic tagged vector ﬁles. Of these ﬁve,
vector hypsographic and hydrographic data produce the most accurate model.
15
The manner in which elevations are coded affects the accuracy of the DEM.
Coding on a single byte (8 bits) makes it possible to record 256 elevation values.The best solution would be to store elevations as four bytes so that all elevationsfrom 0 to 1000 m could be described to the nearest millimeter.
6.2.2.2 Triangulated Irregular Networks
Triangulated irregular networks  (TINs) are built up from grids. The idea is to
eliminate elevation points that do not contribute necessary information. This isdone by storing vertices of triangles with the maximum spacing possible withrespect to relief and aspect. Figure 6.6 is an example of a topographic map derivedfrom a TIN.FIGURE 6.5 Representation of topographic relief in raster format.121 146
145 160 150 131100
162 132 170 183 183 160
Raster-Based Format
Numbers in the cells represent digital numbersY
XTopographic Mapping 165
6.2.3 P HOTOGRAMMETRY
Photogrammetry  is the technique of measuring two- or three-dimensional objects
from photography.8 The imaging device may be on the ground, in an airplane, or
on a spacecraft. Targets may be as large as a ﬁeld of wheat or as small as a cancer
cell in radiometeric photogrammetry. For most topographic mapping applications,an airplane is used.
Aerial photogrammetry resulted from two technological events coming
together: (1) stable aircraft and (2) large- ﬁlm-format cameras. It began during
the early 1920s from research and development for the war effort (World War I)and resulted when the technologies matured and merged.
9
Most of the photographs used for topographic mapping today use traditional
ﬁlm media, although the popularity of aerial digital cameras is rapidly increasing.
Usually, the ﬁlm imagery is electronically stored on disk after being scanned.10
Topographic maps made from aerial photography take advantage of the prin-
ciple of stereoscopic vision. Stereoscopic vision refers to visualizing of topo-
graphic relief by using images taken at different perspectives. Stereoscopic visionis based on the idea that the brain registers an image in three dimensions whenviewing two images of the same place on the ground taken from different per-spectives.
11 Viewing images in simulated three dimensions gives image interpret-
ers an impression of topographic relief.
For topographic mapping, stereoscopic vision is a tool that uses the separate
perspective taken by two cameras to recreate three-dimensional space. Parallax(the difference in perspective) can be quanti ﬁed and measured, and from it vertical
dimensions can be determined. Four steps are needed to map topography usingstereo aerial photography:FIGURE 6.6 Example of topographic map derived from a TIN.
166 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
• Acquire photograph with a minimum 50% end lap along the ﬂight line.
• Locate control points on the ground (locations are well known and are
also visible in the photographs).
• Calculate and recreate in a stereo plotting device the geometry of the
conditions of the airplane (tilt, row, and yaw) at the moment the imageswere taken. This is called exterior orientation .
• Map elevations using a plotting device.
6.2.3.1 Geometry of Photogrammetric Topographic 
Mapping
As previously mentioned, photogrammetry is the science of measuring spatial
relationships from a photograph. This includes linear measurements, area, volume,angles, and height. When photographic images are taken, every light ray thatpasses through the camera lens and reaches the ﬁlm during exposure is interpreted
as a single point. In order to measure objects, these rays must be reconstructed.Therefore, the internal geometry of the camera (i.e., focal length, image center,lens distortion, etc.) must be known. This process is called interior orientation.
The conditions when the photograph was taken ( exterior orientation ) can be
recreated through modeling the orientation of the imaging device with controlpoints. Since the location of a point on the ground is identi ﬁed in each image in
the stereo pair, its position in three-dimensional space can be determined by theintersection or convergence of straight lines or rays of light.
Since the overlapping portion of photographs taken parallel to each other can
be viewed in three dimensions, parallax and heights can be determined, as shownin Figure 6.7.
There are three methods by which topography is derived from stereo pairs of
aerial images: (1) analog photogrammetry, (2) analytical photogrammetry, and (3)digital photogrammetry. Prior to any of these methods, however, the images mustbe oriented with respect to exterior, interior, relative, and absolute orientation.
FIGURE 6.7 Model of stereo photographs along a ﬂight line.
Topographic Mapping 167
6.2.3.2 Exterior, Interior, Relative, and Absolute 
Model Orientation
Image orientation  is the process of recreating the geometry of what happened
when the image was taken and placing everything into a vertical perspective.
Orientation parameters are determined by reconstructing the geometry of theimage when it was taken and using control points both on the ground and inthe image.
More and more direct georeferencing  is used for exterior orientation. It is a
process that establishes the on- ﬂight measurements for the exterior orientation
of each image by the global positioning systems (GPS) and inertial navigationsystems (INS). Using these instruments, the exterior orientation (the orientationof the camera with respect to its position and altitude) can be determined.
Interior orientation  is the process by which the relationship between the
position of the ﬁlm and photo coordinate system is determined. A two-dimen-
sional transformation converts pixel coordinates to photo coordinates. Convertingthe image pixel coordinate system to the image space coordinate system is donemathematically by combining information about the image center and lens dis-tortion and attenuation due to the atmosphere.
As described above in the stereoscopic vision section, three-dimensional
measurement of objects with height is possible from stereo pairs of images. Therelative orientation  is needed to form a stereo model for these measurements.
Therefore, for relative orientation, the relative positions of rays of light withrespect to each other have to be determined.
Absolute orientation  is used to transform an arbitrarily oriented model of
images into a real-world coordinate system . The coordinate system of the image
model is brought into the space of the control point coordinate system. At theend of this operation, coordinates anywhere in the image can be determined ina real-world coordinate system, such as the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM)system or state plane coordinate system.
6.2.3.3 Aerial Triangulation
Aerial triangulation  is used to (1) reduce the number of control points needed,
(2) achieve higher accuracy, (3) ensure good edge matching between images, and(4) create additional control points through control point extension.
3 Ground
control points are used to establish a geometric relationship between a set of tiepoints, with unknown ground coordinates measured on at least two images. Theseresults are used to determine overall accuracy.
The geometric relationship between adjacent and other nearby images, the
side lap between adjacent ﬂight lines, must be known for aerial triangulation and
is calculated through a bundle block adjustment (BBA). A BBA is an iterativeprocess that solves image orientations and determines locations of the perspectivecenters simultaneously as one large image block, rather than as individual images.168 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
The model of the stereo images is viewed through a stereoscope, which allows
someone to view photographs simultaneously through a magni ﬁcation device.
The intersection of light rays can be measured by the stereoscope point by pointusing a measuring dot. When viewing the stereo model, the two points fuse intoa three-dimensional point ( ﬂoating dot), which can be moved and raised until the
desired point of the three-dimensional object is found. The movements of thepoint are mechanically transmitted to a plotting device, and a map with contourlines is then drawn.
6.2.3.4 Analytical Photogrammetry
Although the ﬁrst analytical plotter was introduced in the late 1950s, it was not
until the 1970s, when fast and inexpensive computers became available, thatanalytical plotters became common. The basic concept is similar to analog instru-ments, but in analytical photogrammetry a computer determines the spatial rela-tionship between image coordinates and real-world coordinates.
The images must still be oriented in analytical photogrammetry. After recre-
ating the inner orientation, both images are also relatively oriented and thencoorections are applied for lens distortion and atmospheric attenuation. A three-dimensional model is created and an absolute orientation is done so that featurescan be measured in three dimensions.
A difference between analog plotters and analytical plotters is that the latter
draws into a computer. Analytical plotters use a computer program to calculatereal-world coordinates, and three-dimensional drawings are created that are storedin the computer. Another difference between the analog and analytical systemsis cost. Analytical stereo plotters cost several times more than analog plotters,and so in some developing countries, where labor costs are relatively low, analogplotters may still make economic sense.
20
6.2.3.5 Analog Aerial Photogrammetry
Analog aerial photogrammetry is the use of ﬁlm-based aerial photography to
measure objects on the ground. It is highly labor intensive, but results in a highdegree of accuracy for both two- and three-dimensional measurements. Theconcepts are simple and the instruments are widely available today. A drawbackto the instruments is that they are cumbersome and do not remain calibrated, andthus are expensive to maintain.
The ﬁrst attempts to make maps from photography started soon after pho-
tography was discovered in the mid-1850s. Cameras were mounted from a highperspective such as a hilltop, and an oblique image was taken. Attempts weremade to produce a planimetric perspective map from the oblique image byretracing the lines on the photograph. In terms of topographic mapping, however,it was unsuccessful.
Innovations from the World Wars and their mapping requirements for speed
and accuracy resulted in precise photogrammetry as we know it. A second impetusTopographic Mapping 169
for improvement of photogrammetry came as a result of the planning, design,
and construction of the interstate highway system in the U.S. following WorldWar II. Many photogrammetric engineers who worked for the U.S. Army Topo-
graphic Laboratory worked after the war for the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion and steadily developed the technology of analog aerial photogrammetry.
Stable aircraft, instruments, and plastic- ﬁlm (vs. glass plates) photography
all made aerial photography feasible. Cameras and planes were relatively crudecompared with today’s equipment, however, and so the metric quality of thephotographs was low. Another drawback was the fact that much of the ﬁlm used
was nitrate based. Nitrate ﬁlm was chemically unstable and prone to emulsion
deterioration over time. It was replaced by more stable emulsion and ﬁlm backing
after World War II. This is mentioned because a great deal of aerial photographywas taken with nitrate-base ﬁlm and still exists in archives. For historical studies
of topography or land use and land cover, this ﬁlm can be used, but care must
be taken in its handling and its interpretation.
Photogrammetry has two major advantages over ground-based surveying and
mapping. It reduces ﬁeldwork and can map landscapes independent of their terrain
characteristics. Photogrammetry, however, is numerically intensive and sorequires a large number of calculations. Therefore, it was inappropriate for largemapping projects until the advent of fast and affordable computers in the 1970s.
6.2.3.6 Digital Photogrammetry
Photogrammetry based on analog or photographs dominated aerial photogram-
metry until the end of the 20th century and will probably continue to do so forat least another decade. Digital cameras were introduced in the late 1990s andmay eventually replace ﬁlm cameras for topographic mapping. The primary
reason that digital photogrammetry has not yet replaced analog is due to therelatively small size of the arrays (charged couple devices) available for large-format aerial cameras. Since digital cameras have relatively small arrays, the areasensed on the ground is also small. Therefore, they require a higher number ofﬂight lines to cover the same area as can be done with a ﬁlm camera, making
them impractical for large areas.
Digital photogrammetry, therefore, is usually performed on analog aerial
photographs that have been scanned or digitized. Nearly all topographic mapsproduced today use scanned analog aerial photography as a base.
4
Scanning is usually conducted on a high-precision drum scanner with an
accuracy of up to 25 mm. Flatbed scanners can be used, but they have more optical
distortions. These distortions can be modeled out through geometric calibration,but this is an imperfect procedure. Scanners result in loss of detail.
For example, aerial photos typically have a resolution of a 40 line pairs per
millimeter (lp/mm). The relation between a line pair and pixel size is 1 line pair= 2 pixels. Therefore, 40 lp/mm corresponds to 80 pixels/mm, or a pixel size of12 mm. Expressed in dots per inch (dpi), a 12- mm pixel size corresponds to 2000
dpi, or 8- mm pixel size = 3000 dpi.170 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Contemporary scanners have a gray value resolution of 4096 gray values (12
bit). In order to conserve memory, images can be reduced to a gray value reso-lution of 256 gray levels (8 bit). A typical black-and-white 23 ¥ 23 cm aerial
image with 12- mm pixel size and 8-bit resolution requires approximately 370 Mb
of storage space. A color image requires over 1.0 Gb because  color  requires three
bands of 370 Mb each. Storage requirements for digital imagery are an importantconsideration in any large mapping effort, although this is less of an issue ascomputer memory becomes more ef ﬁcient.
6.2.3.7 Digital Photogrammetric Workstations
A digital photogrammetric workstation (DPWS) represents the state of the art
in topographic mapping instrumentation.
13 It consists of four major components:
(1) stereo viewing devices, (2) a three-dimensional mouse, (3) a PC, and (4)software.
Software packages come in four basic types: (1) database software for
vector, raster, and attribute data; (2) image-handling, compression, processing,and display software; (3) photogrammetric applications software for imageorientation and generation of digital terrain models (DTMs); and (4) user inter-face software.
Digital stereo workstations are based on exactly the same concept as analyt-
ical stereo plotters. The difference is that images are moved on a computer monitorrather than photographs on a plate. Contemporary plotters have the ﬂoating mark
ﬁxed and the images are scrolled continuously. For stereoscopic viewing, each
eye sees the adjacent images separately in time or space. The simplest methodof image separation is the use of an anaglyph (red-and-green image with greenand red eye ﬁlters). This technique is limited to black-and-white images.
For color, a technique called crystal eye, or polarized light, is commonly
used. For this technology, images are shown, one followed by the other, on acycle of 50 Hz. Crystal shutters in the form of goggles are synchronized byinfrared light, with one lens opaque and the other transparent. The left eye cansee only the left image and the right eye can see only the right image at one time.The brain remembers the previous image and forms a three-dimensional image,and the viewer perceives three dimensions.
In the polarization technique, a polarization ﬁlter is in front of the viewing
screen, which changes the polarization orientation from horizontal to vertical ori-entations back and forth on a screen. The image is viewed through polarizationﬁlters, with the left lens horizontally polarized and the right lens vertically polarized.
The principal advantage of DPWS over analytical plotters is automation.
5
Examples of automated procedures include generation of digital terrain models,extraction of tie points for relative orientation, and generation of orthophotos.Automatic image matching is also a potential advantage of DPWS, but it onlyworks well in ﬂat, featureless terrain. For many applications, however, there is
vitually no difference between results derived from a DPWS and those obtainedfrom analytical plotters.
6Topographic Mapping 171
6.2.3.8 Aerial Digital Cameras
Stereo plotters were designed to use standard 23 ¥ 23 cm size ﬁlm. Most aerial
photography is still taken with this format, but the ﬁlm is usually digitized.
Scanned imagery taken by ﬁlm camera dominates the type of imagery used in
topographic mapping since the ideal digital replacement for ﬁlm cameras would
be based on a very large area array sensor, which has not yet been built. Therewould need to be a suf ﬁcient number of pixels to be equal to or better than
precision-scanned aerial ﬁlm. A 20- mm pixel size produces 11.5 ¥ 11.5 k pixels,
so this would be the desired array to compare with a ﬁlm camera. The largest
array digital camera manufactured in 2004 was only 9 ¥ 9 k.
5
There are two manufacturers of digital cameras used in aerial topographic
mapping today: Leica Geosystems and Z/I Imaging (a joint venture between CarlZeiss Corporation and Intergraph Corporation). Leica makes the ADS-40, whichhas multiple linear arrays analogous to multispectral scanners onboard satellitessuch as Landsat. From a ﬂying altitude of 3000 m, a swath of 3.75 km is covered
with a 15-cm ground pixel size.
The Leica ADS-40 Airborne Digital Sensor is capable of delivering photogram-
metric accuracy and coverage as well as multispectral data. The ADS-40 differsfrom the older and very common RC30 ﬁlm camera in many ways. It is digital
rather than analog, with three panchromatic charged couple device lines capturingpanchromatic information in views forward, nadir, and backward from the aircraft.Photogrammetric restitution is supplemented by four multispectral lines, resultingin the simultaneous capture of seven bands of information. Raw data are recti ﬁed
using position and attitude data supplied by a position and orientation system. Thesefeatures virtually eliminate the need for image orientation.
The Leica ADS-40 has the following advantages over a conventional analog
aerial photographic camera:
• Three sensors (black and white, color, and false color)
• RGB coregistration through trichroid ﬁlter
• DTMs are automatically generated from three-line stereo sensor data• Reduced ground control requirements• No ﬁlm processing or scanning
Z/I Imaging manufactures the digital modular camera (DMC). The DMC uses
a modular design. It comprises eight synchronously operating charged coupledevice (CCD) matrix-based camera modules. Four parallel cameras can generatemultispectral imagery for color composites. Four panchromatic images fromconverging cameras are mosaicked digitally to form a single image.
DMC imagery is based on the central perspective approach, which allows the
camera to achieve, in theory, better than 2-inch ground resolution size. Therefore,it could produce the same resolution as a ﬁlm-based aerial camera system. The
DMC has an electromechanical shutter placed in the center of the lens. Theadvantage of this design is that it results in a nearly distortion-free image since172 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
all image points are exposed through the same optical path at the same moment
in time.
At full resolution (12 bits) and color mode, the DMC can capture and store
more than 2000 images, which is more than three rolls of the 500-foot ﬁlm taken
with typical camera system. Up to four multispectral channels can be mounted inthe DMC, allowing for the collection of images, for instance, in the red, green,blue, and a separate infrared channel for taking simultaneous true and false colorimages. A wide-angle relatively fast (aperature of f/4) lens is combined with a 3 ¥
2 k charged couple device chip in the camera. The ground coverage of the multi-spectral channels and the four high-resolution panchromatic channels are identical.
17
6.2.3.9 Light Detection and Ranging (Lidar)
The conventional methods of topographic data collection, as described previously,
are land surveying and aerial photography. These techniques have been time testedand result in topographic maps for which standards have been well established.Lidar is a relatively new technology that is gaining acceptance in commercialmapping as a tool for topographic measurement and mapping. The basic conceptsof lidar are similar to other active remote sensing systems, such as radar. Lidartransmits laser pulses while scanning a swath of terrain centered on and colinearwith the ﬂight path. The beam’s travel time from the aircraft to the ground is
measured and the time intervals are converted to distance or range.
The position of aircraft is determined by the global positioning system
(GPS), and rotational positions of the laser pulse direction are combined withaircraft attitude values determined with an inertial navigation system (INS).They are also combined with range measurements to obtain range vectors fromthe aircraft to ground points. When these vectors are combined with the aircraftlocation, they give the coordinates of ground points (x, y, z).
Lidar has several potential advantages over both ground-based topographic
mapping and photogrammetry for topographic mapping. They include (1) a rel-atively fast data capture rate (90 km
2/hour), (2) minimum human handling of
data, (3) ability to measure subtle changes in terrain due to the fact that it generatesup to 100,000 pulses per second, and (4) each pulse being individually georef-erenced using the onboard, and so only one GPS ground station is required forimproving the accuracy differentially.
Drawbacks to lidar are (1) accuracy on the of order of 10 to 15 cm (vertical)
and 50 to 100 cm horizontal, which is unacceptable for some topographic mappingapplications, (2) high capital cost for equipment ($1,000,000+) and high leasingrates (in the range of $3000 to $10,000/hour), and (3) critical image features suchas break lines being misinterpreted. Therefore, the imagery requires thoroughinterpretation and editing.
Points to remember when using lidar for a topographic mapping project are:
• Lidar instrument manufacturers’ published values for accuracy usually
focus on vertical accuracy, but horizontal accuracy is also very important.Topographic Mapping 173
• The accuracy of lidar-derived height varies according to the terrain.
Steep slope can be impossible to measure accurately with lidar.
• Very high re ﬂectors in the lidar’s ﬁeld of view send it away from the
geometric center of the collecting optics, which results in an erroneousrange measurement.
• Targets such as the painted centerline on a road can be misinterpreted
as a break line. Other artifacts that cause problems with the imageryare vegetation, which must be “removed” if a bare-earth model isdesired for the ﬁnal product.
Lidar now plays a complementary role to the traditional photogrammetric
processes in topographic mapping. For example, it can improve the performanceof automated point measurement for the triangulation process or of automatedDEM generation by image matching.
5
An example of applying lidar imagery to soils mapping is shown in Figure
6.8 and Figure 6.9. Figure 6.8 is a 1-m orthophotograph draped over a lidar-derived surface model of the Devil’s Millhopper sinkhole in Alachua County,Florida. Figure 6.9 shows the same data, but at a different view angle.
Figure 6.10 is a lidar-derived shaded relief surface with a 30-m DEM drape
of the Amite River Basin in Louisiana. Data were thinned to every hundredthpoint prior to creating the surface. Non-bare-earth features, such as trees andbuildings, have been removed (edited) from the southern half of the area.
Figure 6.11 is a 5-m DEM derived from lidar data of Pro ﬁt Island in the
Mississippi River Basin. It shows the drainage pattern indicative of water andwind-laid silt and so is useful for soil mapping of sediment.
Figure 6.12 is a pro ﬁle showing the interaction of a laser pulse and a forested
region. The bottom part of the image is a pro ﬁle view of lidar data collected over
a forested area along the Louisiana–Mississippi border. Shades of red representFIGURE 6.8 Orthophotograph/lidar drape of Devil’s Millhopper sinkhole in Alachua
County, Florida: View 1. (Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data Corporation .) (See color version
on accompanying CD.)
174 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
the upper tree canopy, and shades of yellow represent mid-story growth. Green
respresents the ground surface.
Figure 6.13 is a 2-m posting surface of variance draped on top of a shaded
relief model created from lidar data collected in March 1999 at an altitude of8000 feet. Areas covered with vegetation have a heavily textured appearance,FIGURE 6.9 Orthophoto/lidar image of Devil’s Millhopper sinkhole in Alachua County
Florida: View 2. (Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data Corporation .) (See color version on
accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 6.10 Shaded relief map with 30-m drape of Amite River Basin in Louisiana.
(Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data Corporation .) (See color version on accompanying CD.)
Topographic Mapping 175
while open farmland appears smooth. Variance ranges from low (cool tones) to
high (hot tones). High variance is an indication of high vegetation density or tallvegetation. Though variance analysis approximation of stand density can be made,the data can also provide insight on canopy structure, approximate age, andharvest potential.FIGURE 6.11 Five-m DEM derived from lidar data of Pro ﬁt Island in the Mississippi
River Basin. (Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data Corporation .) (See color version on accom-
panying CD.)
FIGURE 6.12 Lidar pro ﬁle of forested area. (Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data Corporation .)
(See color version on accompanying CD.)
176 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
6.2.3.10 Radio Detection and Ranging (Radar)
Radar measures the strength and time of return of microwave signals emitted
by an antenna and re ﬂected off an object. The radar antenna alternately
transmits and receives pulses at wavelengths between 1 cm and 1 m. Forimaging radar, approximately 1500 pulses per second are transmitted withspeci ﬁc pulse duration. The pulse typically has bandwidths in the range of 10
to 200 MHz.
18
Energy from the transmitted radar pulse is re ﬂected back to the antenna from
the ground and converted to a digital number. The number is recorded anddisplayed as an image. The pulse length determines resolution in the rangedirection of the radar (range resolution). Shorter pulses result in higher rangeresolution. The radar moves along a ﬂight path, building an image as the area
illuminated by the radar moves along the surface in a swath.
14 The radar’s beam
width determines its azimuth resolution with high beam widths resulting in lowerazimuth resolution.
Radargrammetry refers to measurement of objects using radar imagery.
Highly accurate height measurements of the terrain can be made from radarimages. Nonimaging radars such as altimeters can measure elevations to withincentimeters. Making a topographic map for most purposes, however, requires ahigher degree of spatial resolution than is presently available from current radarsystems. Radar images are also comparatively expensive. In 2005, the radarsatellite Terra SAR-X, with a 1-m pixel size, is scheduled for launch. If theimagery works as planned, it will prove that radar can be used for topographicmapping. Also, the cost of the imagery will be relatively low due to the fact thatit is on a satellite (vis-à-vis aircraft) platform.FIGURE 6.13 Combined lidar and aerial photograph. (Courtesy of 3001 Spatial Data
Corporation .) (See color version on accompanying CD.)
Topographic Mapping 177
6.2.3.11 The Space Shuttle Radar Topographic Mapping 
Experiment
The Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) was ﬂown in the year 2000.19
The key SRTM technology was interferometric synthetic aperature radar (IfSAR),
which compares two radar images taken at slightly different locations to obtainelevation or surface change information. The SRTM used single-pass interferom-etry, meaning that the two images were acquired at the same time — one fromthe radar antennas in the shuttle’s payload bay and the other from the radar antennasat the end of a mast extending from the shuttle. Combining the two imagesproduced a single three-dimensional image, shown in Figure 6.14.
The mission was a partnership between NASA and the Department of
Defense’s National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) . SRTM collected
radar data over nearly 80% of Earth’s land surface. Analysts are in the processof using the SRTM data to generate three-dimensional topographic DEMs. Thesedata are being systematically processed on a continent-by-continent basis, withNorth America ﬁrst. As each continent is completed, the data are delivered to the
NGA, where they are edited, veri ﬁed, and brought into conformance with National
Map Accuracy Standards. These ﬁnished data will then be returned to NASA for
distribution to the public through the USGS.
Each site covers a number of 1° latitude by 1° longitude “cells,” and each
processed dataset consists of unedited digital elevation maps, images, and ancil-FIGURE 6.14 SRTM topographic image. (From the Landmark Project, University of
Manchester, U.K.) (See color version on accompanying CD.)
IfSAR DEM - Panorama DEM (1")
IfSAR - Panorama
>30 m
11 – 30 m
6 – 20 m
2 – 5 m
–1 – 1 m
–5 – 2 m
–10 – 6 m
–30 – 11 m
<–30 m100 0 100 200 300 Kilometers178 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
liary data. As these datasets are completed, they will be made available to the
scienti ﬁc community and the general public.
6.3 MAP PRODUCTION
6.3.1 M AP COMPILATION
The following describes the process used by the USGS in its production of
topographic maps. While many of the steps have been or are in the process ofbeing automated, it is still a highly labor intensive procedure.
Map features and contour lines are traced automatically, semiautomatically,
or by hand as they appear in the stereo model. As the stereo plotter operatormoves a reference mark, the tracing is transmitted to a tracing table that producesthe map manuscript.
Figure 6.15 shows (1) a complete portion of a USGS 7.5-minute topographic
quadrangle sheet, (2) the forested area separate in green, (3) the topographiccontour layer in brown, and (4) features that have been interpreted via aerialphotography, but not yet ﬁeld veri ﬁed in purple. There are three other separate
layers in USGS topographic maps: the transportation layer (red), urban areas(pink), and water (blue).
FIGURE 6.15 Map separates. (From USGS, 2001.) (See color version on accompanying
CD.)
Topographic Mapping 179
6.3.2 M AP SCRIBING , EDITING , AND PRINTING
Prior to digital technology, map production was labor intensive and involved the
following steps. After the map manuscript was compiled, a map-size ﬁlm negative
of the compiled manuscript was made. This negative was then photographicallyreproduced on thin plastic sheets, to which a soft translucent coating had beenapplied. Using a light table, a scriber used engraving instruments to etch themap’s lines and symbols by removing the soft coating from the hard plastic guide.All features to be printed in the same color on the map, such as blue for water,were etched onto separate sheets.
Type sets for the words on the map were selected according to standards that
would ensure consistency of type sizes and styles for all maps in that series. Typewas positioned on clear plastic sheets that were overlaid on the scribed separa-tions. Photographic negatives were then made of the type for printing.
The ﬁnal step before printing was preparation of a color proof. This was
accomplished by making multiple exposures of the type negatives and scribedsheets. A press plate was made for each map color by exposing the appropriatescribed sheets and type negatives. Repeated runs of the map paper through thelithographic printing press accomplished printing with one for each color, or onerun through a press capable of printing several colors in sequence (USGS, 2001 ).
Most topographic maps in circulation today were made using these tech-
niques, but computer technology has changed everything. For example, mostmap compilation and revision is performed from digital images. Color separa-tions are plotted from digital data rather than manually scribed separations, andeven the type for words on the map is positioned and plotted from digital data.These new procedures are being introduced to mapping agencies around theworld and have made map production and updating a much faster, easier, andmore accurate process.
6.3.3 M AP ACCURACY  STANDARDS
Every mapping agency has a set of vertical and horizontal mapping accuracy stan-dards published somewhere on the map. It is critical that the user of a map understandthe accuracy limitations of each map and apply data from the map accordingly.
In order to meet U.S. National Map Accuracy Standards, the following spec-
iﬁcations must be met for USGS 1:24,000 scale 7.5-minute quadrangle topo-
graphic maps:
• Horizontal accuracy: Positions of 90% of all points tested must be
accurate within 1/50th of an inch (0.05 cm) on the map. At 1:24,000scale, 1/50th of an inch is 40 feet.
• Vertical accuracy: The elevation of 90% of all points tested must be
correct within half of the contour interval. On a map with a contourinterval of 10 feet, the map must correctly show 90% of all pointstested within 5 feet of the actual elevation.180 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
All maps produced by the USGS at 1:250,000 scale and larger are prepared
by methods designed to meet these accuracy standards and carry the statement“This map complies with National Map Accuracy Standards.” Exceptions to this
practice involve areas covered by dense woodland or obscured by fog or clouds;
in those areas, aerial photographs cannot provide the detail needed for accuratemapping. The USGS samples a suf ﬁcient number of its maps to ensure it is
producing maps that meet accuracy standards.
One disturbing activity is the marketing of maps derived from a small scale
as large-scale maps. For example, USGS 1:100,000 scale maps have been mar-keted as 1:24,000 scale maps. The map producer, in this case, simply rescaledthe 1:100,000 scale map to a 1:24,000 scale one.
The user, in this case, might think that he is getting National Map Accuracy
Standards at a scale of 1:24,000, whereas he is actually getting 1:100,000 scaleaccuracy. The accuracy standard only applies to the original scale and does notimprove if the map is simply enlarged.
6.3.4 D IGITIZING  MAP DATA
Map digitization is an ongoing process at most mapping agencies in the world.It resembles the original map scribing process in that it requires that each featureon each map separate be located, classi ﬁed, and traced. Typically, maps have 10
or more layers, such as roads, topographic contours, boundaries, surface cover,and manmade features, which require digitization. Maps can be digitized by hand,in which each map’s lines are manually traced with a cursor or automaticallytraced with scanners. Obviously, scanning is preferred to hand digitization fortime’s sake. However, scanners often miss features and have other problems thatnecessitate human intervention.
After digitizing, several editing operations must be performed. For example,
attribute codes must be added to identify what each digitized line or symbolrepresents. A variety of other tasks must be performed to ensure that informationis complete and correct, including matching features with adjoining ﬁles, match-
ing features relative to each other within the ﬁle, and controlling the accuracy of
attribute coding and positions.
6.4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Modern topographic mapping started with analog photogrammetry, continuedwith analytical photogrammetry, and now is becoming digital. Digital systems(cameras, plotters, and scanners) have several advantages, including a high degreeof automation, greater accuracy, and overall ef ﬁciency.
Film cameras have probably nearly reached the end of their logical develop-
ment with respect to optimal optics, image motion compensators, and gyro-stabilized platforms. On the other hand, digital cameras are in their formulativestages and will certainly improve in terms of resolution and speed.Topographic Mapping 181
The advent of high-resolution satellite systems such as IKONOS  and Quick-
bird will challenge airborne systems. IKONOS has a 1-m instantaneous ﬁeld of
view (the same footprint as USGS orthoquads cells), and Quickbird has a 0.67-m cell size. However, space-based mapping systems are still relatively expensivedue to high launch costs and are not currently cost competitive with aerialsystems. Also, topographic map rendering requires a stereoscopic perspective,which only one civilian satellite program (SPOT ) offers today. SPOT’s vertical
accuracy is on the order of 50 m, a tolerance not useful for many topographicmapping applications.
Other remote sensing technologies, such as lidar and radar, will complement
photogrammetric approaches to topographic mapping in the near future. Thesetechnologies will improve with time and may even eventually replace traditionalaerial photography for topographic mapping as we know it.
REFERENCES
JOURNAL  ARTICLES
1. A McBratney, I Odeh, T Bishop, M Dunbar, T Shatar. An overview of pedometrics
techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
2. G Heuvelink, R Webster. Modeling soil variation: past, present, and future. Geo-
derma  100: 269–301, 2001.
3. R Kaczynski, J Ziobro. Digital aerial triangulation for DTM and orthophoto
generation. Int Arch Photogrammetry Remote Sensing  32 (Part B4), 281–283,
1998.
4. J Fallow, K Murray. Digital photogrammetry: options and opportunities. Int Arch
Photogrammetry Remote Sensing  29 (Part B2), 397–403, 1992.
5. B Wald . The Synergies between LIDAR and Photogrammetry Lie Primarily in
Areas of Softwater and Support. Interview in GIS Development Magazine , August
2000.
6. C Dekeyne. Applications of Digital Photogrammetric Workstations: Digital Plot-
ting, OEEPE Of ﬁcial Publication 33. OEEPE, 1996, pp. 283–290.
BOOKS
7. R Davis, F Foote, J Anderson, E Mikhal. Surveying: Theory and Practice , 6th ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1981, p. 896.
8. P Wolf, B Dewitt. Photogrammetry , 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000,
p. 432.
9. T Avery, G Berlin. Fundamentals of Remote Sensing and Airphoto Interpretation ,
5th ed. Prentice Hall, New York, 1992.
10. E Mikhail, J Bethel, J McGlone. Introduction to Modern Photogrammetry . John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001.
11. A Rencz, R Ryerson, Eds. Manual of Remote Sensing , V ol. 3, Remote Sensing for
Earth Science . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999, p. 728.
12. D Maune, Ed. Digital Elevation Model Technologies and Applications . American
Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Bethesda, MD, 2001, p. 540.182 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
13. T Schenk. Digital Photogrammetry . TerraScience Publishers, Laurelville, OH,
1999, p. 428.
14. F Henderson, A Lewis, Eds. Principles and Applications of Imaging Radar . John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998, p. 896.
ELECTRONIC  PUBLICATIONS
15. USGS. http://erg.usgs.gov/isb/pubs/booklets/topo/topo.html. 2001.
16. Leica Corporation. http://www.leica-geosystems.com/products/. 2003.
17. Zeiss Imaging Corporation. http://ww2.ziimaging.com/. 2003.18. T Freeman. What Is Imaging Radar? http://southport.jpl.nasa.gov/desc/
imagingradarv3.htm. 2004.
19. NASA. http://www-radar.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/. 2001.
MISCELLANEOUS
20. H Amoyaw. Optimizing the Work ﬂow in a Hybrid Production System of Analytical
and Digital Production of Geodata from Aerial Photographs. M.S. thesis, TheInstitute for GeoInfo Systems and Earth Observations, Netherlands, 2002.Section III
Pedometrics1857Digital Soil-Terrain 
Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty
Thomas F.A. Bishop and Budiman Minasny
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................185
7.1 Basic Concepts: Digital Terrain Modeling...........................................1867.2 Soil-Terrain Modeling...........................................................................1887.3 The Impact of Spatial Resolution on Digital Soil-Terrain Models .....197
7.3.1 Introduction ...........................................................................1977.3.2 Example.................................................................................198
7.4 Uncertainty Analysis of Digital Soil-Terrain Models ..........................202
7.4.1 Introduction ...........................................................................202
7.4.2 Example.................................................................................203
7.5 Conclusions ...........................................................................................208Acknowledgments .............................................................................................208References .........................................................................................................208
ABSTRACT
Research in the past 20 years has demonstrated that digital terrain models area useful secondary information source for the prediction of soil properties andclasses. This chapter begins with a brief introduction to digital terrain modeling;in particular, the types of terrain attributes that can be calculated from a digitalelevation model (DEM) are described. The next section reviews soil-terrainmodeling, with an emphasis on the variety of prediction methods that have beenused. A summary of published soil-terrain studies is given. The second half ofthe chapter presents a case study aimed at illustrating the impact that the sourceDEM spatial resolution and uncertainty have on soil-terrain prediction models.The study site is a 74-ha ﬁeld in Australia. The datasets include a 5-m DEM
created from a carrier-phase global positioning systems (GPS) survey, a 25-m186 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
DEM created from digitized contour lines, and 111 measurements of soil clay
content. Cokriging was used to map clay content, with slope as the secondaryinformation source. The correlation between clay and slope was –0.53 for the
5-m DEM and –0.02 for the 25-m, DEM which illustrates the potential impact
that resolution has on soil-terrain modeling. Monte Carlo simulation with amodi ﬁed version of Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) was used to perform an
uncertainty analysis of the clay-slope modeling process. Maps of the mean andstandard deviation of clay content across 20 realizations were created. The valuesin the standard deviation of clay content maps were generally small (<2%) and,in most parts of the ﬁeld, less than the analytical accuracy of the hydrometer
method, which was used to measure soil clay content in the laboratory. Theimplication of the uncertainty analysis is that in this case, the DEM is accurateenough for the calculation of slope and subsequent modeling of the clay–sloperelationship for the cokriging prediction model. As the spatial resolution iscoarsened and the uncertainty increases, this may not be the case. Therefore, itis recommended that uncertainty analysis should become a routine part of anysoil-terrain modeling process.
7.1 BASIC CONCEPTS: DIGITAL TERRAIN 
MODELING
Previous chapters have discussed sources of elevation data, but a brief review of
concepts in digital terrain modeling is given below. Interested readers should referto the literature for more detail; some excellent examples include Moore et al.
1
and Wilson and Gallant.2
A digital elevation model (DEM) represents the spatial distribution of eleva-
tion across a landscape. The term digital  has been used since the 1970s, when
digital cartography replaced conventional paper cartography. Today, geographicinformation systems (GISs) are commonly used to store, display, and manipulateelevation (and other spatial) data. Analogous to a DEM, a digital terrain model(DTM) is an ordered array of numbers that represent the spatial distribution ofterrain attributes across a landscape. A DEM is the basis for calculation of surfaceattributes, which include slope, aspect, and curvature. This has also been calledparametization of the surface model or a numerical description of the continuouslandscape surface.
3,4
Terrain attributes can be parameterized from a DEM and are traditionally
divided into primary and secondary (or compound) attributes. Primary terrainattributes are calculated directly from the DEM, whereas secondary attributesare calculated from two or more primary terrain attributes.
1 Primary terrain
attributes can be further divided into those that are derived locally (using localneighborhood points) and those that are derived regionally following prescribedrules.
5 The local and regional approaches can be further divided into scale speci ﬁc
and scale invariant.
The basic and most commonly used primary terrain attributes  include surface
derivatives  or local attributes , such as slope, aspect, and curvature. Slope isDigital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 187
deﬁned as the gradient or rate of change of elevation6 and is generally measured
either in percent rise or in degrees. Aspect is de ﬁned as the azimuth of slope and
is generally measured in degrees.1 Slope may be thought of as the ﬁrst derivative
of the elevation surface down  the slope, perpendicular to the contours, and aspect
as the ﬁrst derivative of the elevation surface across  the slope, parallel to the
contours.6 Curvature is the second derivative of the elevation surface in a particular
direction; it can be thought of as the ﬁrst derivative of slope in the case of pro ﬁle
curvature, or as the ﬁrst derivative of aspect in the case of plan curvature.6 Evans7
presented an excellent summary of the interpretation of primary terrain attributes
in relation to their geomorphological meaning.
With respect to regional  attributes, upslope contributing area (also called drain-
age or catchment area) is one of the most important. It is de ﬁned as the area above
a certain pixel (or length of contour) that contributes ﬂow across that pixel (or
contour interval). To calculate upslope contributing area, a method for calculatingﬂow direction is ﬁrst needed. The simplest method for specifying ﬂow directions is
to assign ﬂow from each grid cell to one of its eight neighbors, either in the cardinal
directions or diagonally, in the direction with steepest downward slope. This widelyused method, designated D8 (for the eight ﬂow directions), was introduced by
O’Callagahan and Mark.
8 The D8 approach has disadvantages arising from the
discretization of ﬂow into only one of eight possible directions, separated by 45°.
This limitation has motivated the development of other methods, including multipleﬂow direction methods, random direction methods, and stream tube methods.
9,10
The relative merits of ﬂow direction algorithms are discussed by Tarboton.10 As an
alternative, Dobos et al.11 proposed potential drainage density (PDD), designed to
highlight relative terrain differences even on a relatively level land surface.
As mentioned previously, secondary terrain attributes  are calculated from the
combination of two or more primary terrain attributes. The purpose of secondaryterrain attributes is to model the spatial variation of hydrological, geomorpholog-ical, and ecological processes across the landscape.
12 In most cases, sophistication
is sacri ﬁced to enable the representation of spatial variability across a landscape.1
The most widely used secondary terrain attribute in soil science and hydrol-
ogy is the topographic wetness index (TWI), or the compound topographicindex (CTI):
(7.1)
where
w = TWI  or CTI
A
s = speci ﬁc catchment area
b = slope
TWI originated from studies in hydrological modeling.13 Large TWI values
indicate an increased likelihood of saturated conditions; the larger values are=lntanAs188 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
usually found in the lower parts of watersheds and convergent hollow areas
associated with soils with small hydraulic conductivity or areas of small slope.14
Other secondary attributes that can be derived for speci ﬁc catchment areas
are stream power index (SPI) and sediment transport index (STI).1,15 In addition,
Wilson and Gallant2 provided routines for the calculation of erosion index, solar
irradiation, and dynamic wetness index.
7.2 SOIL-TERRAIN MODELING
Topography (or relief) is one of the ﬁve factors of soil formation as described by
Jenny16:
S = f(C, O, R, P, T) (7.2)
where
S = soil
C = climate
O = organisms
R = relief
P = parent material
T = time
Ever since Jenny ﬁrst presented this equation, soil scientists have attempted
to build quantitative predictive models of soil formation based on topography ( S
= f(R)) with ever-increasing complexity in terms of prediction methods ( f) and
terrain variables ( R). Aandahl17 related the distribution of soil nitrogen to slope
length in what is possibly the ﬁrst published attempt to quantitatively model soil-
terrain relationships. Another early example was that of Walker et al.,18 where
slope, curvature, aspect, and distance from the local summit in combination withmultiple linear regression were used to predict soil morphological properties suchas A-horizon depth and depth to mottling and carbonates.
Until the 1980s, a major limitation to soil-terrain modeling was the concurrent
availability of elevation data, computing power to create two-dimensional mapsof terrain attributes and algorithms to calculate contextual area (e.g., upslopearea), dispersal area, and secondary terrain attributes (e.g., topographic wetnessindex). Chapter 6 provides a detailed review of the history of topographic mappingand availability of elevation data. Today, the lack of elevation data is generallynot a problem for anything but ﬁne-resolution soil mapping, though the quality
of elevation data may vary greatly.
In the 1980s, elevation data became more readily available, geographic infor-
mation systems (GIS) rose in prominence, and algorithms improved for calculat-ing terrain attributes. This has resulted in GIS-based studies that have relateddigital terrain attributes to soil observations, thus resulting in the term digital
soil-terrain modeling . Soil observation points are intersected with layers of terrainDigital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 189
attributes, a model is ﬁtted to predict soil variables at the observation points, and
then the model is used to predict soil variables for all other locations on the raster.
Rather than using primary terrain attributes (e.g., slope, curvature), many of
studies have used secondary terrain attributes, which indirectly represent soil and
hydrological processes. Such attributes have often been found to be more usefulthan primary terrain attributes for soil prediction purposes. Examples include:
• Upslope contributing area (used by McBratney et al.
19 to predict clay
content)
• Topographic wetness index (used by Gessler et al.20 to predict A-
horizon depth)
• Stream power index (used by Moore et al.15 to predict extractable P)
• Drainage proximity index (used by Bell et al.21 to predict A-horizon
depth)
• Accumulated ﬂow index (used by Bell et al.21 to predict depth to
carbonates)
Furthermore, the prediction methods have increased in complexity as
researchers have shifted away from multiple linear regression (MLR). Examplesinclude modern regression techniques such as generalized linear models(GLMs),
20 generalized additive models (GAMs),22 and regression and classi ﬁca-
tion trees (RT/CTs).23 These techniques are described extensively in Hastie et
al.,24 and a summary of the most widely used statistical techniques is given in
Table 7.1 and Table 7.2.
Multivariate geostatistical methods such as kriging with external drift25 and
cokriging26 have also been used in combination with terrain information. In
addition, hybrid methods have been used where MLR,27 GLMs,22 GAMs,22 and
RTs19 were employed to model the deterministic component of soil variation
when regression kriging was performed.
McBratney et al.28 proposed the inclusion of soil ( S) and spatial information
(N) as predictors in addition to Jenny’s ﬁve soil-forming factors. They called the
resultant function the SCORPAN spatial soil prediction function. Spatial infor-mation may be simply represented as eastings or northings, or a linear or nonlinear(nonaf ﬁne) transformation of the original spatial coordinates. For example, rela-
tive position in the landscape has been found to be related to soil properties, andalso to be useful for characterizing landform. Gessler et al.
20 found elevation
above local stream, distance to local stream, and distance to local drainagewayto be good predictors of soil attributes. Moran and Bui
29 similarly found distance
downhill to channels and distance downhill from hilltops to be good predictorsof soil classes for coarse resolution mapping (250-m pixel size). It is arguablewhether such predictor variables are N or R SCORPAN factors. S factors may be
crude proximal sensors, e.g., electromagnetic induction instruments,
30 which are
increasingly used for ﬁeld-extent soil mapping or soil class maps for regional
soil mapping.190 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
TABLE 7.1
Statistical Methods for Soil-Terrain Modeling
Multiple linear regression 
Multiple regression analysis typically assumes a linear relationship between several independent 
variables or predictors and a dependent or predicted variable. Multiple regression analysis ﬁts a 
straight line (or plane in an n-dimensional space, where n is the number of independent variables) 
to the data.
Discriminant analysis
A procedure for the determination of the group to which an individual belongs based on the 
characteristics of the individual. Discriminant analysis investigates the differences among multivariate classes, to determine which attributes discriminate between the classes, and to determine the most parsimonious way to distinguish among classes.
k-means clustering
Clustering is a method for grouping multivariate data into clusters where k-means clustering is a 
method for nonhierarchical clustering of multivariate data. Data are grouped into clusters, each having its means or centroid. The membership of an individual to each class is determined by the relative distance of its attributes to the centroid of that class. Hard k-means only allows an individual to lie in one mutually exclusive class, while fuzzy k-means allows for an individual to lie as bridges between classes.
Generalized linear model (GLM)
This term describes a class of models that arises from a natural generalization of ordinary linear 
models. Values for the transformed dependent variable values are predicted from (or are linked to) a linear combination of predictor variables; the transformation is referred to as the link function. Also, different distributions can be assumed for the dependent variable values.
Generalized additive model (GAM)
These are models that use smoothing techniques to identify and represent possible nonlinear 
relationships between the predictor and predicted variables. GAM is a generalization of GLM where the linear function of the predictor is replaced by an unspeci ﬁed (nonparametric) function (e.g., 
splines).
Artiﬁcial neural network
These describe a mathematical structure modeled after the functioning of the human nervous system. 
The essential feature is a network of simple processing elements joined together by weights.
Classiﬁcation and regression tree
A classi ﬁcation tree is a rule for predicting the class of an individual from the value of its predictor 
variables, while a regression tree predicts continuous data. Rather than ﬁtting a model to the data, 
a tree structure is generated by dividing the sample recursively into a number of groups, each division being chosen so as to maximize some measure difference in the predicted variable in the resulting two groups. The resulting structure provides easy interpretation, as variables most important for 
prediction can be identi ﬁed quickly.
Compiled from Everitt, B.S., The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics , Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K., 2002; Upton, G. and Cook, I., A Dictionary of Statistics , Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2002; and StatSoft Statistics Glossary , available online at http://www.statsoftinc.com/text-
book/glosfra.html.Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 191
Table 7.3  presents examples from the literature of the use of terrain attributes
to predict soil classes or soil variables for mapping purposes, arranged in chro-nological order. From the table, we can see that terrain attributes have been usedto predict soil classes and soil attributes. Terrain attributes predict soil taxonomicand drainage classes quite well. Continuous soil attributes can also be predictedwith reasonable accuracy; soil horizon depth/thickness, clay content, organicmatter content, cation exchange capacity (CEC), and phosphorus have all beensuccessfully predicted. Recently, it has also been suggested that terrain attributescan be used to predict not only basic soil properties, but also other, more expensivesoil physical properties, i.e., soil-water retention.
31–33
Quantitative soil spatial prediction models have not been restricted to terrain
as the predictor variable; other variables in Jenny’s state-factor equation havealso been exploited (Equation 7.2). McBratney et al.
28 surveyed published soil
mapping studies and found that a DEM was the most common source of secondaryinformation; furthermore, in 80% of the studies a terrain attribute was used inthe ﬁnal soil prediction model. From this it can be concluded that digital terrain
information is the most useful (or at least the most readily available) secondaryinformation source for digital soil mapping. For interested readers, McBratneyet al.
28 thoroughly reviewed digital soil mapping and the emerging paradigm shift
based on quantitative prediction methods and geospatial technologies.
The usefulness of digital terrain attributes for soil mapping is largely depen-
dent on the landscape (does topography have a major impact on soil variation?)TABLE 7.2Comparison of Different Statistical Prediction Models
FeatureLinear
Models GLM  GAMClassiﬁcation and
Regression TreeNeural
Net
Ease of use ☺☺☺☺/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface☺☺☺☺/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface
Parsimony ☺☺☺☺/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface☺☺☺☺/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface
Interpretability ☺☺☺☺/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface☺☺☺☺/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface
Nonlinearity /frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺
Prediction of qualitative data 
(e.g., soil classes)/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺
Handling of mixed data type 
(both qualitative and quantitative)/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface
Computational ef ﬁciency (for 
large datasets)☺☺☺☺☺☺☺☺/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface☺☺☺☺/frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface
Predictive power /frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface☺☺☺☺
Note:  ☺☺☺☺ = good; /neutralface/neutralface/neutralface/neutralface = fair; /frownface/frownface/frownface/frownface = poor.
Adapted from Table 10.1 in Hastie, T. et al., The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
Inference and Prediction , Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001.192 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 7.3
Examples of the Use of Terrain Features to Predict Soil Classes or Soil Variables for Mapping (Arranged in 
Chronological Order)
Ref. Predicted Soil Variables Terrain Attributes as PredictorsDEM
Resolution
(m)Other Soil-Forming 
Factors Used as Predictors Fitting ModelStudy Area
(km2)
36 Soil drainage classes Slope, curvature Linear regression
18 Soil thickness, subsoil 
mottling, depth to mottlingElevation, slope gradient, slope 
length direction, slope length curvature, slope width curvature, 
distance from local summit 10 Linear regression 0.007
37 Soil classes Elevation, slope, aspect 500 Geology, lithology Principal component 
analysis624
38 Thickness of A-horizon, 
depth to CaCO
3Elevation, slope, curvature 10, 50 Discriminant analysis, linear 
regression
26, 39 Soil morphological, physical 
and chemical propertiesGradient, pro ﬁle and plan 
curvatures, upslope distance, upslope area10 Ordination technique, linear 
regression, kriging0.26
40, 41 Soil units Slope, wetness index, terrain 
position10 Aerial photograph Bayesian and expert system 1
21, 42 Soil drainage classes Slope, slope–curvature ratio, 
elevation above local stream, gradient to local stream, distance to local stream, distance to local drainageway30 Geology Discriminant analysis 0.26Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 19343 Clay content, CEC, 
electrical conductivity (EC), pH, bulk density, water content at –10 and –1500 kPaSlope, relief, slope position, 
landform100 Air photo Ordination technique, GLM 500
15 A-horizon thickness, 
organic matter content, pH, extractable P, silt and sand contentsSlope and wetness indices 15 Linear regression 0.05
44 Soil series, A-horizon 
thicknessElevation, aspect, curvature 30 Landsat TM, geology map Fuzzy logic 36
45 Organic matter, clay content Distance from upstream 1000 Climate data Linear regression 5000
20 A-horizon depth, solum 
depth, presence of E-horizonPlan curvature, TWI 20 Linear regression
31 Available water capacity TWI 100 Linear regression 260046 Soil drainage classes Elevation, aspect 10 Airborne Visible/Infrared 
Imaging Spectrometer (A VIRIS) normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI)Classi ﬁcation tree 24194 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 7.3 (Continued)
Examples of the Use of Terrain Features to Predict Soil Classes or Soil Variables for Mapping (Arranged in 
Chronological Order)
Ref. Predicted Soil Variables Terrain Attributes as PredictorsDEM
Resolution
(m)Other Soil-Forming 
Factors Used as Predictors Fitting ModelStudy Area
(km2)
47 Soil classes Elevation from river, slope, 
curvature, distance from the nearest drainage axis and river bank50 Geology Classi ﬁcation tree 35
48 Pro ﬁle darkness index 
(hydromorphic features)Slope, pro ﬁle curvature, elevation 
above local depression10 Geology Linear regression
49 Topsoil clay Elevation, slope, plan curvature, 
stream power index, wetness index5 Fuzzy k-means 0.2
50 B- and C-horizon depth Slope, aspect, mean, horizontal, and 
vertical curvatures, speci ﬁc 
catchment area, TWI, SPI11, 8, 5, 4 Linear regression 63.7
51 Soil classes Aspect, slope, curvature 250 Geology Decision tree, Bayesian 
model1300
52 Presence of a noncalcareous 
clay-loamSlope and aspect 20 Flow path, solar radiation, 
wind intensityGLM 0.16
53 Water content at two depths, 
soil mineral N in the subsoilSlope, pro ﬁle curvature, plan 
curvature5 Fuzzy k-means 0.06Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 19523 Soil pro ﬁle depth, total 
phosphorus, total carbonElevation, slope, aspect, speci ﬁc 
catchment area, TWI, ﬂow 
direction, dispersal area, stream power index, erosion index25 Geology map, climate data, 
gamma radiometricsRegression tree, GLM 500
54 Soil depth Elevation, depth, slope, upslope 
catchment area50 Discriminant analysis 1.5
55 Soil types Altitude, slope, aspect, pro ﬁle and 
plan curvature, distance to the thalweg50 Discriminant analysis 60
56 Hydromorphic index Elevation above stream bank, slope, 
speci ﬁc catchment area, TWI10 Linear regression, kriging 0.02
11, 57 Soil types PDD, slope, elevation 1000 Advanced very high 
resolution radiometer (A VHRR)Linear regression 9200
58 Soil organic C Flow direction, ﬂow accumulation, 
slope, pro ﬁle and plan curvature, 
TWI2, 4, 6, 8, 10 Linear regression
19 Clay content, CEC Elevation, slope, curvature, TWI 2, 200, 500 Crop yield data, ECa GLM, GAM, regression 
tree, neural networks, kriging0.42, 1100,
45,600
59 Soil depth, C, P, available 
water capacityElevation, slope, aspect, curvature, 
contributing area, dispersal area, stream power index, erosion index10, 25 Landsat TM, climate data, 
gamma-radiometricsRegression tree, linear 
regression2.7, 484
60 CEC Elevation, slope, curvature, TWI 5 Aerial photograph, Landsat 
TM, crop yield, EM inductionGAM, regression tree, 
regression kriging0.74
61 Thickness of soil horizon Elevation, slope, aspect, curvature, 
surface curvature, upslope 
contributing area, wetness index10 Linear regression 0.9196 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 7.3 (Continued)
Examples of the Use of Terrain Features to Predict Soil Classes or Soil Variables for Mapping (Arranged in 
Chronological Order)
Ref. Predicted Soil Variables Terrain Attributes as PredictorsDEM
Resolution
(m)Other Soil-Forming 
Factors Used as Predictors Fitting ModelStudy Area
(km2)
32 Soil water retention 30 Slope, pro ﬁle and tangential 
curvatureLinear regression with 
correlated residual0.2
62 Soil drainage classes Slope, aspect, curvature, TWI, 
stream power index, slope-aspect 
index25 Landsat TM Logistic regression 589
29 Soil classes Upslope contributing area, distance 
downhill to channels, distance downhill from hilltops250 Landsat TM, lithology map Boosted classi ﬁcation tree 1300
63 Silt content, CEC, total 
exchangeable bases, MnSlope, aspect, curvature, upslope 
area, wetness index10 Vegetation map, soil map Arti ﬁcial neural network 
(ANN), regression tree, GLM0.03
33 Water retention curve Elevation, slope, aspect, curvature, 
distance from middle stream, ﬂow 
path length, speci ﬁc contributing 
area, TWI, solar radiation25 Linear regression 32
64 Soil drainage classes Elevation, slope 10 Landsat TM, IKONOS, 
aerial photographSupervised classi ﬁcation 0.06Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 197
and the quality of the digital elevation model. Quality can be expressed in terms
of the spatial resolution (is the DEM too coarse to represent topographic vari-ability?) or in terms of uncertainty in the DEM. Therefore, the next two sections
will consider separately (1) the impact of DEM spatial resolution and (2) the
propagation of DEM uncertainty into soil prediction models.
7.3 THE IMPACT OF SPATIAL RESOLUTION ON 
DIGITAL SOIL-TERRAIN MODELS
7.3.1 I NTRODUCTION
Scale and resolution of DEM signi ﬁcantly affect the terrain attributes. For exam-
ple, slope will generally decrease with increasing scale or coarser resolution.Thus, the correlation between soil and terrain depends on the scale or resolutionof interest. For small scale (D1–3 surveys with resolution of <100 m, as describedby McBratney et al.
28), local terrain attributes (slope, aspect, curvature) are found
to be good predictors of soil variability. A ﬁne-resolution DEM provides a more
accurate representation of terrain’s shape and can be justi ﬁed by mechanistic soil
formation models.65,66 The in ﬂuence of elevation, slope, and curvature is illus-
trated by a mechanistic soil-landscape model66 in Figure 7.1, where elevation is
the driving force behind soil erosion processes, and the transport of soil materialin the landscape is a function of slope. Aspect plays an important role in soilformation, as it creates microclimatic and vegetation differences.
67 For resolutions
of >100 m, the local terrain attributes sometimes are no longer relevant, especiallyin physiographical complex areas
57; e.g., slope at a coarse resolution is associated
FIGURE 7.1 Models of landscape evolution based on elevation and curvature. (Modi ﬁed
after Pollack, H.N. Four Corners Geological Society Guidebook , 1969.)∂Z=−kZ
∂t
D∂Z ∂2Z=∂t ∂x2Rate of landscape lowering is proportional 
to elevation.Higher regions are more severely eroded.
Rate of landscape lowering is proportional
to profile curvature.
Lateral transport proportional to slope.198 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
with broad-scale relief. In this case, the position in the landscape appears to be
a more important predictor for soil attributes.29,45 Nevertheless, the success of the
local topographic variables as soil predictors depends on the terrain.
In terms of spatial resolution, it is important to have a DEM with suf ﬁcient
detail that can characterize the topographic variability that impacts on soil for-mation and variation (Figure 7.1). Thompson et al.
69 compared the predictive
performance of terrain attributes for soil mapping of two DEMs at resolutions of10 and 30 m. While the 30-m terrain attributes were actually generalizations ofthe 10-m terrain attributes, the predictive performance of each for A-horizon depthwas similar. In this case, both DEMs represented those surface features thatcontrolled soil formation and variation. A similar example is presented next.
7.3.2 E XAMPLE
One dataset will be used for illustrative purposes in this chapter. The study siteis a 74-ha ﬁeld, East Creek, on a farm located 25 km east of Moree in northern
New South Wales, Australia (Figure 7.2). In April 1999, 113 soil cores were takenwithin the ﬁeld to a depth of 90 cm. For this study, the clay content of the 30-
to 90-cm soil layer was used for comparing prediction models. The hydrometermethod was used to measure clay content.
70
In December 1999, elevation was surveyed using two Ashtech GG-24 carrier-
phase GPS units. One GPS unit was used as a base station, and the other unitwas mounted on a four-wheeled all-terrain vehicle, which was driven across theﬁeld mapping elevation at a logging rate of one measurement per second. The
raw elevation information was postprocessed using proprietary software,PNA V ,
71 which outputs the measured elevation with an associated root mean
square error (RMSE).
FIGURE 7.2 Location of study site.SiteResearch 
selaWhtuoSweN
ainamsaTyrotirreTnrehtroN
ailartsuAnretseW
ailartsuAhtuoS
airotciVdnalsneeuQ
Moree
Sydney30 S
34 S146 E 150 E
km0 200Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 199
The point elevation data were rasterized to a 5-m digital elevation model
using the TOPOGRID tool in Arc Info,72 which is an earlier version of ANU-
DEM.73 The RMSE data were interpolated onto the same grid as the DEM, using
kriging with local semivariograms.74 In addition, the spot heights and contour
lines of a 1:50,000 topographic map sheet were digitized and TOPOGRID wasused to create a 25-m DEM of the same ﬁeld. Figure 7.3 and Figure 7.4 present
the 5- and 25-m DEM; both represent the general trend of elevation rising fromwest to east ( r
pearson  = 0.81 between each), but the 25-m DEM does not adequately
represent the sharp drop in elevation along the northern boundary of the ﬁeld
where a seasonal creek is located. Slope was calculated for each DEM usingthe method described by Evans
75 using code written in S-PLUS.76 The slope
map based on the 5-m DEM (Figure 7.5) clearly shows the steeper slopes alongthe northern edge of the ﬁeld. The linear features running approximately
north–south are human-made contour banks aimed at controlling erosion (Figure7.5). Other local primary terrain attributes exhibited poor relationships with clayFIGURE 7.3 DEM of East Creek (5 m raster).
FIGURE 7.4 DEM of East Creek (25 m raster).
Elevation 
(m)              < 384.0 
384.0 – 386.0  
386.0 – 388.0  
388.0 – 390.0  
390.0 – 392.0  
392.0 – 394.0  
394.0 – 396.0  
396.0 – 398.0  
> 398.0  
500 meters 
Elevation (m)              
< 384.0 
384.0 – 386.0  
386.0 – 388.0  
388.0 – 390.0  
390.0 – 392.0  
392.0 – 394.0  
394.0 – 396.0  
396.0 – 398.0  
> 398.0  
500 meters 200 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
and were not included for the rest of this study. Regional primary and secondary
terrain attributes were not included as the elevation of the entire catchment wasnot measured.
Table 7.4 presents the partial correlation matrix between clay and the terrain
attributes. There is a weak relationship between clay and elevation in this ﬁeld
for both DEMs. The clay-slope relationship is strong for the 5-m DEM, with theprincipal reason being that ﬁne topsoil materials have been eroded along the
northern boundary of the ﬁeld where the slope is greatest, bringing the coarser
subsoil closer to the surface in this portion of the ﬁeld. The change in texture is
directly related to the slope (Figure 7.5). The clay-slope relationship for the 25-m DEM is nonexistent as the slope at that resolution is not representative of theﬁeld. For example, the 25-m slope map (Figure 7.6) shows a large linear depres-
sion running diagonally through the ﬁeld. This is an artefact and illustrates the
importance of examining the DEM quality before use. One method for doing thisis to calculate terrain attributes, as any errors are accentuated and easily spottedin the ﬁrst and second derivatives of an elevation surface.
77
To examine the impact of DEM resolution on the soil-terrain prediction
models, cokriging was performed for three soil-terrain combinations: 25-m clay-slope, 5-m clay-slope, and 5-m clay-DEM. In addition, ordinary kriging (OK)FIGURE 7.5 Slope of East Creek (5 m raster).
TABLE 7.4
Partial Correlation Matrix
Clay DEM, 5 m DEM, 25 m Slope, 5 m Slope, 25 m
Clay 1.00
DEM, 5 m 0.18 1.00DEM, 25 m 0.20 0.88 1.00Slope, 5 m –0.53 0.02 0.03 1.00Slope, 25 m –0.05 –0.09 –0.23 –0.01 1.00
Slope (degrees)
< 0.2 
0.2 – 0.6  
0.6 – 1.0  
1.0 – 1.4  
1.4 – 1.8  
1.8 – 2.2  
2.2 – 2.6  
2.6 – 3.0  
> 3.0  
500 meters Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 201
was performed to test whether incorporating secondary information, i.e., terrain
attributes, into the prediction models improved the prediction quality. Full detailsconcerning the geostatistical methods can be found in Chapter 9. The geostatis-tical analyses were performed using ISATIS,
78 and cross-validation was used as
the validation method. The results are shown in Table 7.5.
The CK 5-m slope model is marginally the best, but neither of the 25-m
prediction models surpassed the prediction quality of OK. This example illustratesa few points: DEMs are only useful if they are related to soil variability, and inthis example, terrain was a dominant soil-forming factor along the northern edgeof the ﬁeld. Other SCORPAN factors are related to the clay variability for the
rest of the ﬁeld. Second, the DEM resolution has to be suf ﬁcient to characterize
the terrain surface. In this study area, the 25-m DEM is too coarse, especiallyfor representing a drop in elevation along the northern boundary, which turnedout to be the main contributor to the clay-terrain–slope relationship. Within 5years, the elevation of much of the Earth’s surface will have been mapped at aspatial resolution of 10 to 30 m via remote sensing missions (Chapter 6). In ﬂat,
undulating landscapes, as shown in this example, it is questionable whether suchelevation will have suf ﬁcient resolution to be useful for ﬁne-resolution soil map-FIGURE 7.6 Slope of East Creek (25 m raster).
TABLE 7.5
Quality of Prediction Models
Prediction ModelRMSE
(%)ME
(%)Variance
Explained
(%)
OK 7.5 –0.2 49.1
CK, 5-m slope 7.3 0.0 56.1CK, 25-m slope 7.8 –0.4 49.5CK, 25-m DEM 7.5 –0.3 43.2
Slope (degrees)
< 0.2 
0.2 – 0.6  
0.6 – 1.0  
1.0 – 1.4  
1.4 – 1.8  
1.8 – 2.2  
2.2 – 2.6  
2.6 – 3.0  
> 3.0  
500 meters 202 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ping. Only resolution was considered in this example; the next section deals with
DEM attribute uncertainty.
7.4 UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS OF DIGITAL 
SOIL-TERRAIN MODELS
7.4.1 I NTRODUCTION
Uncertainty in spatial information and its effect on spatial modeling has become
an increasingly important research issue during the last decade.79,80 The data
models implemented within GIS contain various errors, and frequently, inexpe-rienced users are able to perform complex analyses without adequately consid-ering issues of data quality. Uncertainty analysis provides the means to quanti-tatively examine the impact of input ( e
i) and model error ( em) on the error ( e) in
the outputs of a modeling process:
e = em + ei (7.3)
When calculating slope from a DEM, a quadratic trend surface is usually
ﬁtted to the local neighbors (Figure 7.7), such as75
(7.4)
Slope ( G) is calculated using ﬁnite differences:
(7.5)
where
(7.6)FIGURE 7.7 Analysis window for calculation of primary terrain attributes ( w = grid
spacing or raster size).z1 z2
z5
z8z3
z6
z9z4
z7 
zrx tys x yp xq yu =+ + + + +22
22
Gp q =+22
pzzzzzz
w=++369147
6Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 203
and
(7.7)
The model’s uncertainty is mainly a function of how well the quadratic
function ﬁts the real surface and the approximation of the ﬁnite differences to
estimate p and q (Equations 7.4 to 7.7). The input uncertainty constitutes the
uncertainty in the DEM. At present, most research in the uncertainty analysis ofdigital terrain modeling has focused on DEM input uncertainty rather than modelerror. While studies have attempted to compare methods for calculating terrainattributes, the major obstacle is obtaining estimates of true values: for example,how do we measure the true upslope area of a point? Therefore, the uncertaintywithin a DTM is dependent on the algorithm used to calculate a particular terrainattribute and the uncertainty of the DEM.
In soil-terrain modeling and other soil mapping research using SCORPAN
factors, most of the emphasis has been on improvements in prediction that can bemade by improvements in the quality of f and the associated SCORPAN factors
(Equation 7.2). Little or no research has considered the propagation of errors basedon uncertainty in the SCORPAN factors. This is increasingly important when sec-ondary information sources, each with an associated uncertainty, are now commonlyused for soil mapping. The following example illustrates the propagation of DEMuncertainty via the soil mapping process using the best prediction model from theprevious example, the cokriging 5-m slope model for mapping clay content.
7.4.2 E XAMPLE
A program called Digeman was used to estimate the propagation of uncertaintyin the DEM during the calculation of slope.
81 As mentioned previously, a map
of RMSE of the elevation estimate derived from the raw GPS elevation data wasavailable for each raster cell (Figure 7.9). For the estimation of input uncertainty,it was assumed that ME = 0 and that the uncertainty had a Gaussian distribution;therefore, the RMSE was equal to the standard deviation of the uncertainty.Monte-Carlo simulation with a modi ﬁed version of Latin hypercube sampling
(LHS) was used to create spatially correlated uncertainty ﬁelds (Figure 7.8).
82
Twenty realizations of the slope surface were generated; the standard devia-
tion of the slope is shown in Figure 7.10. Table 7.6 and Table 7.7 present summarystatistics of the slope uncertainty and important bivariate relationships.
Distributions of the RMSE, slope, and standard deviations (SDs) of the slope
were strongly positively skewed. Therefore, the median and interquartile range(IQR) were reported rather than the mean and SD. The median and IQR of theslope uncertainty indicate that the DEM is of suf ﬁcient quality for the calculation
of slope. Previous research has been mixed when considering the relationshipbetween slope magnitude and corresponding errors in slope. Studies have foundqzzzzzz
w=++123789
6204 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
that larger errors occur on steeper slopes,85,86 whereas Carter87 found that absolute
values of slope RMSE were similar for all slopes, but in relative terms (in termsof the magnitude of slope), the steeper slopes had the least errors. Alternatively,Davis and Dozier
88 found that slope errors were greatest where there was a rapid
change in elevation. In this study, visual trends indicate that as slope increases,so does the uncertainty (Figure 7.5 and Figure 7.10). Further evidence of this isthe moderate correlations (Table 7.7). The reality is that the DEM RMSE hadthe greatest effect on the standard deviation of slope ( r
pearson  = 0.64). While stating
the obvious, this implies that when creating DEM, maximum effort must be madeto reduce uncertainty in the ﬁnal DEM.
The spatial variation in RMSE is generally due to variations in satellite
visibility or geometry and to problems with line of sight between the GPS roverFIGURE 7.8 Latin hypercube sampling (LHS).
FIGURE 7.9 RMSE of East Creek DEM (5 m raster).1-
Probability x1
Probability x280. .6 400. .2 001
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0Probability Cumulative
x22 01 -1 -21
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0Probability Cumulative
x12 101- -21
0.80.6
0.4
0.2
0
RMSE elevation (m)    
< 0.04
0.04 – 0.08
0.08 – 0.12
0.12 – 0.16
0.16 – 0.20
0.20 – 0.24
0.24 – 0.28
0.28 – 0.32
> 0.32
500 metersDigital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 205
and the GPS base station. The base station GPS receiver was placed approximately
400 m north of East Creek when the elevation was surveyed. This explains thelinear transect of large RMSE (dark gray colors) on the western side of the ﬁeld.
This transect actually corresponds to a contour, behind which line of sight withthe base station was poor. The larger RMSE values along each contour bank areprobably due to a combination of two factors, the elevation changing sharplyover a short distance and too fast a vehicular speed, both resulting in the GPSreceiver updating its position too slowly and also inaccurately. The same reasonsFIGURE 7.10 Standard deviation of the slope (5 m raster).
TABLE 7.6
Summary Statistics of Slope Uncertainty Analysis
Attribute Median IQR Minimum Maximum
DEM RMSE 0.04 0.03 0.01 0.35
Slope 0.75 0.71 0.00 9.14SD slope 0.06 0.10 0.00 3.02
TABLE 7.7
Partial Correlation Matrix of Slope 
Uncertainty Statistics
Slopea DEM RMSE SD Slope
Slope
RMSE 0.26/0.27SD slope 0.24/0.43 0.64/0.61
aNumbers to the left of each slash are Pearson’s
correlation coef ﬁcients and numbers to the right are
Spearman’s correlation coef ﬁcients.
500 meters500 metersSlope (degrees)        
< 0.1
0.1 – 0.2
0.2 – 0.3
0.4 – 0.5
0.5 – 0.6
0.6 – 0.7
0.7 – 0.8
0.8 – 0.9
> 0.9Slope (degrees)        
< 0.10.1 – 0.2
0.2 – 0.3
0.4 – 0.5
0.5 – 0.6
0.6 – 0.7
0.7 – 0.8
0.8 – 0.9
> 0.9206 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
explain the larger RMSE values along the northern boundary of the ﬁeld, where
the elevation drops sharply toward a creek. In addition, poor line of sight withthe base station may explain the larger RMSE in this area. Other interestingfeatures include the linear patterns where the RMSE value is greater than thatfor the surrounding area. This probably corresponds to sampling transects whereeither satellite geometry or rover base station–satellite communication was poor.Improvements to future surveys and subsequent terrain modeling results should(1) ensure good line of sight with the base station over the entire survey area and(2) reduce vehicular speed in areas where the elevation changes rapidly.
For each of the 20 slope realizations, cokriging of clay was performed in
ISATIS
78; Figure 7.11 to Figure 7.14 present the results. Figure 7.11 shows the
plot of mean slope at each soil sampling location vs. the clay content, in additionto the histogram of Pearson’s correlation coef ﬁcients for clay vs. slope for each
of the 20 realizations. Figure 7.12 is the mean clay-slope cross-semivariogrammodel, with associated 95% con ﬁdence intervals based on the 20 realizations.
These ﬁgures indicate that both the statistical and spatial correlation between clay
and slope are quite stable between realizations.FIGURE 7.11 Stability of the clay–slope relationship.
FIGURE 7.12 Stability of clay–slope cross-semivariogram.
731
0 300 600
Lag distance (m)Cross-semi variance 95% CI cross-semi variogram model estimation
mean
lower & upper 95% CI
Spherical ModelC0Mean = 0.310, SD = 0.099, C1Mean = –6.0 85, SD = 0.244
–7–31
731
300 600
 distance (m)-semi variance 95% CI cross-semi variogram model estimation
mean
lower & upper 95% CI
Spherical ModelC0Mean = 0.310, SD = 0.099, C1Mean = 6.0 85, SD = 0.244Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 207
Figure 7.13 and Figure 7.14 present the mean clay content map and standard
deviation of clay across all realizations. Figure 7.13 indicates that the smallerclay contents along the northern edge of the ﬁeld are due to erosion caused by
larger slopes. The dark gray colors, particularly along the southern boundary, areassociated with the heavy-textured Grey Vertosols.
89 In terms of uncertainty, the
majority of the ﬁeld has an uncertainty that is less than the analytical accuracy
of the actual method used to measure clay content, ~1% (Figure 7.14).70
The implication of the uncertainty map of clay content is that in this case,
the DEM is accurate enough for the calculation of slope and subsequent modelingof the clay-slope relationship for the cokriging prediction model. It would beexpected that if the 25-m DEM were used to cokrige clay content, the uncertaintyvalues would be larger, as the DEM uncertainty would be greater. The sameapproach could not be used for the 25-m prediction models because no corre-sponding estimates of the uncertainty were available.FIGURE 7.13 Mean clay content (5 m raster).
FIGURE 7.14 Standard deviation clay content (5 m raster).
Clay (%)             
< 34.0
34.0 – 38.0
38.0 – 42.0
42.0 – 46.0
46.0 – 50.0
50.0 – 54.0
54.0 – 58.0
58.0 – 62.0
> 62.0
500 meters
Clay (%)             
< 0.250.25 – 0.50
0.50 – 0.75
0.75 – 1.00
1.00 – 1.25
1.25 – 1.50
1.50 – 1.75
1.75 – 2.00
> 2.00
500 meters208 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
7.5 CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter digital terrain modeling has been reviewed with particular reference
to soil-terrain modeling. Examples have been presented to illustrate two important
concepts in soil-terrain modeling: the impacts of both DEM spatial resolutionand uncertainty on the quality of soil-terrain models. As the use of terrain (andother SCORPAN  factors) becomes more commonplace in soil prediction models,
more research is needed to examine the propagation of errors in the modelingprocess. A major impediment to research in this area is the paucity of quantitativeinformation on the spatial distribution of error in GIS data layers used as inputsinto the soil prediction models. It is no longer suitable to provide only predictionestimates, for it is equally important to estimate the uncertainty of those predic-tions. To conclude, a quote from the philosopher Vroomfondel seems appropriate:
We demand rigidly de ﬁned areas of doubt and uncertainty!
— Douglas Adams, Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge Prof. A.B. McBratney at the University of Sydney as
this chapter developed from research carried out under his supervision. ThomasBishop acknowledges S. Grunwald for the portion of this work conducted at theSoil and Water Science Department, University of Florida.
REFERENCES
1. ID Moore, RB Grayson, AR Ladson. Digital terrain modelling: a review of hydro-
logical, geomorphological, and biological applications. Hydrol Process  3: 3–30, 1991.
2. JP Wilson, JC Gallant, Eds. Terrain Analysis: Principles and Applications . John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000.
3. RJ Pike. The geometric signature: quantifying landslide terrain types from digital
elevation models. Math Geol  20: 491–511, 1988.
4. J Wood. The Geomorphological Characterisation of Digital Elevation Models.
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Leicester, U.K., 1996. (Available online athttp://www.soi.city.ac.uk/~jwo/phd.)
5. PA Shary, LS Sharayab, A V Mitusov. Fundamental quantitative methods of land
surface analysis. Geoderma  107: 1–43, 2002.
6. JC Gallant, JP Wilson. Primary topographic attributes. In Terrain Analysis: Prin-
ciples and Applications , JP Wilson, JC Gallant, Eds. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2000, pp. 51–85.
7. IS Evans. What do terrain statistics really mean? In Land Monitoring, Modelling
and Analysis , SN Lane, KS Richards, H Chandler, Eds. John Wiley, Chichester,
U.K., 1998, pp. 119–138.Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 209
8. JF O’Callagahan, DM Mark. The extraction of drainage networks from digital
elevation data. Comput Vision Graphics Image Process  28: 323–344, 1984.
9. MC Costa-Cabral, SJ Burges. Digital elevation model networks (DEMON): a
model of ﬂow over hillslopes for computation of contributing and dispersal areas.
Water Resour Res  30: 1681–1692, 1994.
10. DG Tarboton. A new method for the determination of ﬂow directions and con-
tributing areas in grid digital elevation models. Water Resour Res  33: 309–319,
1997.
11. E Dobos, L Montanarella, T Negre, E Micheli. A regional scale soil mapping
approach using integrated A VHRR and DEM data. Int J Appl Earth Obs Geoinf
3: 30–41, 2001.
12. JP Wilson, JC Gallant. Secondary topographic attributes. In Terrain Analysis:
Principles and Applications , JP Wilson, JC Gallant, Eds. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2000, pp. 87–131.
13. K Beven, MJ Kirkby. A physically based, variable contributing area model of
basin hydrology. Hydrol Sci Bull  24: 1–10, 1979.
14. K Beven, EF Wood. Catchment geomorphology and the dynamics of runoff
contributing areas. J Hydrol 65: 139–158, 1983.
15. ID Moore, PE Gessler, GA Nielsen, GA Peterson. Soil attribute prediction using
terrain analysis. Soil Sci Soc Am J  57: 443–452, 1993.
16. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation: A System of Quantitative Pedology . McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1941.
17. AR Aandahl. The characterization of slope positions and their in ﬂuence on the
total N content of a few virgin soils in Western Iowa. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  13:
449–454, 1948.
18. PH Walker, GF Hall, R Protz. Relation between landform parameters and soil
properties. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc 32: 101–104, 1968.
19. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh, TFA Bishop, MS Dunbar, TM Shatar. An overview
of pedometric techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
20. PE Gessler, ID Moore, NJ McKenzie, PJ Ryan. Soil-landscape modelling and
spatial prediction of soil attributes. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  9: 421–432, 1995.
21. JC Bell, CA Butler, JA Thompson. Soil-terrain modelling for site-speci ﬁc agri-
cultural management. In Site-Speci ﬁc Management for Agricultural Systems , PC
Robert, RH Rust, WE Larson, Eds. ASA-CSSA-SSSA, Madison, WI, 1994, pp.209–228.
22. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, BK Slater. Predicting soil properties from ancillary
information: non-spatial models compared with geostatistical and combined meth-ods. In Geostatistics Wollongong ’96 , V ol. 2, EY Baa ﬁ, NA Scho ﬁeld, Eds. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 1997, pp. 1008–1019.
23. NJ McKenzie, PJ Ryan. Spatial prediction of soil properties using environmental
correlation. Geoderma  89: 67–94, 1999.
24. T Hastie, R Tibshirani, J Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data
Mining, Inference and Prediction . Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001.
25. H Bourennane, D King, P Chery, A Bruand. Improving the kriging of a soil
variable using slope gradient as external drift. Eur J Soil Sci  47: 473–483, 1996.
26. IOA Odeh, PE Gessler, NJ McKenzie, AB McBratney. Using attributes derived
from digital elevation models for spatial prediction of soil properties. In Resource
Technology ’94 , Melbourne, Australia, 1994, pp. 451–463.210 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
27. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Further results on prediction of
soil properties from terrain attributes: heterotopic cokriging and regression-krig-ing. Geoderma  67: 215–225, 1995.
28. AB McBratney, ML Mendonça Santos, B Minasny. On digital soil mapping.
Geoderma  117: 3–52, 2003.
29. CJ Moran, EN Bui. Spatial data mining for enhanced soil map modelling. Int J
Geogr Inf Sci  16: 533–549, 2002.
30. J Trianta ﬁlis, AI Huckel, IOA Odeh. Comparison of statistical prediction methods
for estimating ﬁeld-scale clay content using different combinations of ancillary
variables. Soil Sci  166: 415–427, 2001.
31. D Zheng, ER Hunt, SW Running. Comparison of available soil water capacity
estimated from topography and soil series information. Landscape Ecol  11: 3–14,
1996.
32. YA Pachepsky, DJ Timlin, WJ Rawls. Soil water retention as related to topographic
variables. Soil Sci Soc Am J  65: 1787–1795, 2001.
33. N Romano, M Palladino. Prediction of soil water retention using soil physical
data and terrain attributes. J Hydrol  265: 56–75, 2002.
34. BS Everitt. The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K., 2002.
35. G Upton, I Cook. A Dictionary of Statistics . Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2002.
36. FR Troeh. Landform parameters correlated to soil drainage. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc
28: 808–812, 1964.
37. JP Legros, P Bonneric. Modelisation informatique de la repartition des sols dans
le Parc Naturel Régional du Pilat. Annales de l’Université de Savoie , Tome 4,
Sciences Naturelles , 63–68, 1979.
38. DJ Pennock, BJ Zebarth, E De Jong. Landform classi ﬁcation and soil distribution
in hummocky terrain, Saskatchewan, Canada. Geoderma  40: 297–315, 1987.
39. IOA Odeh, DJ Chittleborough, AB McBratney. Elucidation of soil-landform inter-
relationships by canonical ordination analysis. Geoderma  49: 1–32, 1991.
40. AK Skidmore, PJ Ryan, W Dawes, D Short, E O’Loughlin. Use of an expert
system to map forest soils from a geographical information system. Int J Geogr
Inf Sci 5: 431–445, 1991.
41. AK Skidmore, F Watford, P Luckananurug, PJ Ryan. An operational GIS expert
system for mapping forest soils. Photogrammetric Eng Remote Sensing  62:
501–511, 1996.
42. JC Bell, RL Cunningham, MW Havens. Calibration and validation of a soil-
landscape model for predicting soil drainage class. Soil Sci Soc Am J  56:
1860–1866, 1992.
43. NJ McKenzie, MP Austin. A quantitative Australian approach to medium and
small scale surveys based on soil stratigraphy and environmental correlation.Geoderma  57: 329–355, 1993.
44. AX Zhu, LE Band. A knowledge-based approach to data integration for soil
mapping. Can J Remote Sensing 20: 408–418, 1994.
45. D Arrouays, I Vion, JL Kicin. Spatial analysis and modeling of topsoil carbon
storage in temperate forest humic loamy soils of France. Soil Sci  159: 191–198,
1995.Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 211
46. AT Cialella, R Dubayah, W Lawrence, E Levine. Predicting soil drainage class
using remotely sensed and digital elevation data. Photogrammetric Eng Remote
Sensing  63: 171–178, 1997.
47. P Lagacherie, S Holmes. Addressing geographical data errors in a classi ﬁcation
tree soil unit prediction. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 11: 183–198, 1997.
48. JA Thompson, JC Bell, CA Butler. Quantitative soil-landscape modeling for
estimating the areal extent of hydromorphic soils. Soil Sci Soc Am J  61: 971–980,
1997.
49. S De Bruin, A Stein. Soil-landscape modeling using fuzzy c-means clustering of
attribute data derived from a digital elevation model (DEM). Geoderma  83: 17–33,
1998.
50. IV Florinsky, HA Arlashina. Quantitative topographic analysis of gilgai soil mor-
phology. Geoderma  82: 359–380, 1998.
51. EN Bui, A Loughhead, R Corner. Extracting soil-landscape rules from previous
soil surveys. Aust J Soil Res  37: 495–508, 1999.
52. D King, H Bourennane, M Isambert, JJ Macaire. Relationship of the presence of
a non-calcareous clay–loam horizon to DEM attributes in a gently sloping area.Geoderma  89: 95–111, 1999.
53. RM Lark. Soil-landform relationships at within- ﬁeld scales: an investigation using
continuous classi ﬁcation. Geoderma  92: 141–165, 1999.
54. W Sinowski, K Auerswald. Using relief parameters in a discriminant analysis to
stratify geological areas with different spatial variability of soil properties. Geo-
derma  89: 113–128, 1999.
55. AL Thomas, D King, E Dambrine, A Couturier, A Roque. Predicting soil classes
with parameters derived from relief geologic materials in a sandstone region ofthe V osges mountains (northeastern France). Geoderma  90: 291–305, 1999.
56. V Chaplot, C Walter, P Curmi. Improving soil hydromorphy prediction according
to DEM resolution and available pedological data. Geoderma  97: 405–422, 2000.
57. E Dobos, E Micheli, MF Baumgardner, L Biehl, T Helt. Use of combined digital
elevation model and satellite radiometric data for regional soil mapping. Geoderma
97: 367–391, 2000.
58. PE Gessler, OA Chadwick, F Chamron, K Holmes, L Althouse. Modeling soil-
landscape and ecosystem properties using terrain attributes. Soil Sci Soc Am J  64:
2046–2056, 2000.
59. PJ Ryan, NJ McKenzie, D O’Connell, AN Loughhead, PM Leppert, D Jacquier,
L Ashton. Integrating forest soils information across scales: spatial prediction ofsoil properties under Australian forests. For Ecol Manage  138: 139–157, 2000.
60. TFA Bishop, AB McBratney. A comparison of prediction methods for the creation
of ﬁeld-extent soil property maps. Geoderma  103: 149–160, 2001.
61. SJ Park, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Identi ﬁcation of the spatial distribution of
soils using a process-based terrain characterization. Geoderma  103: 249–272,
2001.
62. P Campling, A Gobin, J Feyen. Logistic modeling to spatially predict the proba-
bility of soil drainage classes. Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 1390–1401, 2002.
63. SJ Park, LG Vlek. Prediction of three-dimensional soil spatial variability: a com-
parison of three environmental correlation techniques. Geoderma  109: 117–140,
2002.212 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
64. W Peng, DB Wheeler, JC Bell, MG Krusemark. Delineating patterns of soil
drainage class on bare soils using remote sensing analyses. Geoderma  115:
261–280, 2003.
65. RJ Huggett. Soil landscape systems: a model of soil genesis. Geoderma  13: 1–22,
1975.
66. B Minasny, AB McBratney. A rudimentary mechanistic model for soil production
and landscape development. II. A two-dimensional model. Geoderma  103:
161–179, 2001.
67. PW Birkeland. Soils and Geomorphology . Oxford University Press, New York,
1999.
68. HN Pollack. A numerical model of Grand Canyon. In Four Corners Geological
Society Guidebook . Geology and Natural History of the Fifth Field Conference,
Powell Centennial River Expedition, 1969, pp. 61–62.
69. JA Thompson, JC Bell, CA Butler. Digital elevation model resolution: effects on
terrain attribute calculation and quantitative soil-landscape modeling. Geoderma
100: 67–89, 2001.
70. PR Day. Particle fractionation and particle-size analysis. In Methods of Soil Anal-
ysis, Part 1, CA Black, Ed. American Society of Agronomy, Madison, WI, 1965,
pp. 545–567.
71. Ashtech. Ashtech ‰ Precise Differential GPS Navigation (PNAV) Trajectory Soft-
ware , Version 2.1. Ashtech, Sunnyvale, CA, 1994.
72. ESRI. Arc Info 7.2.1 . ESRI, Redlands, CA, 1998.
73. MF Hutchinson. A new procedure for gridding elevation and stream line data with
automatic removal of spurious pits. J Hydrol  106: 211–232, 1989.
74. B Minasny, AB McBratney, BM Whelan. VESPER , Version 1.0 (1999). Australian
Centre for Precision Agriculture, McMillan Building A05, The University ofSydney, NSW 2006. (Available online at http://www.usyd.edu.au/su/agric/acpa.)
75. IS Evans. An integrated system of terrain analysis for slope mapping. Z Geomorph
36: 274–295, 1980.
76. StatSci. S-PLUS 2000 . Statistical Sciences, Seattle, 2000.
77. MF Hutchinson, JC Gallant. Digital elevation models and representation of terrain
shape. In Terrain Analysis: Principles and Applications , JP Wilson, JC Gallant,
Eds. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000, pp. 29–50.
78. Geovariances. ISATIS . Geovariances, Avon Cedex, France, 2002.
79. GM Foody, PM Atkinson, Eds. Uncertainty in Remote Sensing and GIS . John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, U.K., 2002.
80. J Zhang, M Goodchild, Eds. Uncertainty in Geographical Information . Taylor &
Francis, London, 2002.
81. B Minasny, TFA Bishop. Uncertainty Analysis of Digital Terrain Modelling. Paper
presented at Pedometrics 2003, International Conference of the IUSS WorkingGroup on Pedometrics, Reading University, Reading, U.K., September 11–12,2003.
82. RL Iman, WJ Conover. A distribution-free approach to inducing rank correlation
among input variables. Commun Stat  B11: 311–334, 1982.
83. ML Stein. Large sample properties of simulations using Latin hypercube sampling.
Technometrics  29: 143–151, 1987.
84. EJ Pebesma, GBM Heuvelink. Latin hypercube sampling of Gaussian random
ﬁelds. Technometrics  41: 303–312, 1999.Digital Soil-Terrain Modeling: The Predictive Potential and Uncertainty 213
85. PV Bolstad, T Stowe. An evaluation of DEM accuracy: elevation, slope, and
aspect. Photogrammetric Eng Remote Sensing  60: 1327–1332, 1994.
86. KC Sasowsky, GW Petersen, BM Evans. Accuracy of SPOT digital elevation
model and derivatives: utility for Alaska’s North Slope. Photogrammetric Eng
Remote Sensing  58: 815–824, 1992.
87. JR Carter. The effect of data precision on the calculation of slope and aspect using
gridded data. Cartographica  29: 22–34, 1992.
88. FW Davis, J Dozier. Information analysis of a spatial database for ecological land
classi ﬁcation. Photogrammetric Eng Remote Sensing  56: 605–613, 1990. 
89. RF Isbell. The Australian Soil Classi ﬁcation . CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia, 1996.2158Fuzzy Logic Models
A.-Xing Zhu
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................216
8.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................2168.2 Basics of Fuzzy Set Theory..................................................................216
8.2.1 Set and Crisp Set...................................................................2168.2.2 Fuzzy Set...............................................................................217
8.2.2.1 De ﬁnition 1: Fuzzy Set ......................................217
8.2.3 Simple Fuzzy Set Operations................................................220
8.2.3.1 De ﬁnition 2: Intersection....................................220
8.2.3.2 De ﬁnition 3: Union ............................................220
8.2.3.3 De ﬁnition 4: Complement..................................220
8.2.4 Possibility and Probability ....................................................221
8.3 Soil as a Continuum and Presentation of Soils under
Boolean Logic.......................................................................................221
8.4 Representation of Soils under Fuzzy Logic .........................................223
8.4.1 Fuzzy Representation of Soils ..............................................2238.4.2 Membership Determination and Membership Maps
of Soil Classes.......................................................................2258.4.2.1 De ﬁnition of Class Centroid ..............................225
8.4.2.2 Membership in Classes: Membership
Functions.............................................................227
8.4.2.3 Fuzzy Membership Maps...................................229
8.4.3 Use of Fuzzy Membership....................................................230
8.5 Recent Applications of Fuzzy Set Concepts (or Fuzzy Models) 
in Soil Survey ........................................................................................2328.5.1 Limitations of the Conventional Approach to
Soil Survey ............................................................................232
8.5.2 Overcoming the Limitations: Coupling Fuzzy Logic
with Raster GIS Model .........................................................234
8.5.3 Populating the Similarity Model...........................................234
8.6 Challenges and Future Directions.........................................................236Acknowledgments .............................................................................................238References .........................................................................................................238216 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ABSTRACT
This chapter provides an introduction to the application of fuzzy set theory to
soil science with an emphasis on how it helps scientists to better represent soil
as a continuum in both the spatial and attribute domains. After the basic intro-duction to the fundamental concepts of fuzzy set theory and the notion of soil asa continuum, this chapter focuses on the discussion of how fuzzy logic (fuzzyset theory) can help to address the two basic limitations currently faced bypractitioners in representing soils: generalization of soils in the spatial domainand generalization of soil in the attribute domain. Through the SoLIM (Soil LandInference Model) example, this chapter illustrates how fuzzy set theory can becombined with the fundamental concepts and theories in geographic informationsystems (GIS) and arti ﬁcial intelligence to map the spatial distribution of soils
as a continuum in both the spatial and attribute domains. The chapter concludeswith remarks on the current challenges and possible future research directions.
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Lofti Zadeh introduced fuzzy logic in his 1965 paper in Information Control .1 The
conception of fuzzy logic brought many changes in the way information is repre-sented, processed, and presented. Many even went as far as saying the arrival offuzzy set caused paradigm shifts in many ﬁelds. The widespread use of fuzzy logic
concepts and their applications in many ﬁelds are not accidental. Fuzzy logic
provides a very viable alternative to Boolean logic for many problems. The fun-damental difference between fuzzy logic and Boolean logic is that the former dealswith similarity between objects and the latter addresses occurrence of objects.
In recent years many researchers have explored the use of fuzzy logic concepts
within soil science and have found it to be a powerful tool for soil classi ﬁcation,
2,3
soil information retrieval and soil interpretation of design and ratings, and soil
resource inventory.4 This chapter provides the basics of fuzzy set theory and
highlights the application of fuzzy logic within the ﬁeld of soil science. In the
next section, the basic concepts of fuzzy logic are introduced, followed by theexplanation of soil as a continuum. This will shed some light on why fuzzy logicis an appropriate and powerful asset for soil classi ﬁcation, soil interpretation, and
related works. Based on discussions provided in these two sections, Section 8.4presents soil information representation under fuzzy logic. Section 8.5 providesan overview of recent applications of fuzzy logic in soil survey. Section 8.6highlights the challenges and possible future research directions.
8.2 BASICS OF FUZZY SET THEORY
8.2.1 S ET AND CRISP SET
A set is a group of objects that share a common list of properties or attributes.
For example, an Olympic team for a given nation is a set because all of itsmembers meet the set selection criteria through internal competition, and theyFuzzy Logic Models 217
are the best athletes from that nation. We often use “she or he is on the Olympic
team” to refer to individual members of this particular group. By doing so, weacknowledge the unique properties or status of this group. Another example would
be the concept of “tall people,” although it is a bit hard to de ﬁne how tall is tall.
Nevertheless, it is a set (group) of people considered to be tall, however it isdeﬁned. A soil type (or class) is also a set. For example, “Miami silt loam” is a
set containing all soil individuals that share the same soil properties de ﬁned to
represent Miami silt loam, although we know that not every individual soil pro ﬁle
classi ﬁed as Miami silt loam exactly matches the typical soil properties/pro ﬁle
of the class perfectly.
A crisp (Boolean) set is a type of set whose members must share the properties
deﬁned for the set perfectly (exactly). In other words, in order to be a member
of a given set, the object (individual) needs to meet the criteria of the set fullyor 100%. Once assigned to the set, an individual will have full membership inthat set. Just like being a member of a club, once you pay the dues (one quali ﬁ-
cation or criteria), you will have full access (membership) to the facilities of theclub. For example, the “national Olympic team” set is one that can be describedusing the concept of crisp set because a person is either quali ﬁed or not quali ﬁed
for the Olympic team. There is no halfway about this. Once on the team for agiven Olympic sport, the person can compete at the Olympics.
However, there are set concepts that cannot be described appropriately using
the concept of crisp set. For example, the concept of “tall people” is dif ﬁcult to
be described using the crisp set concept because the de ﬁnition of tall is vague.
Would a 180-cm tall person be considered tall? If so, what about a person of 179cm? Furthermore, what about a person that is 200 cm tall? Would this person beconsidered the same as that of 180 cm? Often we use a threshold (a cutoff value)to de ﬁne a set (crisp set), but we ignore the differences among the individuals
that meet the cutoff value and exaggerate the differences between members ofthe set and those that do not meet the cutoff value (nonmembers).
8.2.2 F UZZY SET
Fuzzy logic is an in ﬁnite-valued logic, which is different from the classic two-
valued (yes or no) logic (Boolean logic or crisp logic). Membership in a set underfuzzy logic is not characterized by yes (1) or no (0), but is more adequatelyconsidered in terms of degrees (often referred to as grade of membership). Inother words, a fuzzy set is a set whose elements share the properties de ﬁned for
the set at certain degrees, which can range from 0.0 to 1.0, with 0.0 meaning nomembership in the set and 1.0 full membership. Thus, a fuzzy set is characterizedby a set of membership values, each of them is de ﬁned as a real number in the
interval [0, 1]. A formal de ﬁnition of fuzzy set is given as follows.
8.2.2.1 Deﬁnition 1: Fuzzy Set
5
If X is a collection of objects denoted generically by x, then a fuzzy set Ã in X
is a set of ordered pairs:218 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
(8.1)
where x is an object that belongs to the set of objects X, mÃ(x) is the degree of
membership, and mÃ() is the membership function of x in Ã, which maps X to
the membership space M.
To illustrate the concept of a fuzzy set, let us use “tall people” as an example.
The fuzzy set of tall people is de ﬁned by a function mapping individual’s heights
into membership space. Let us assume that there are six individuals whose heightsand fuzzy membership in “tall people” are listed in Table 8.1 and the membershipis calculated using the function given in Equations 8.2 through 8.4:
 for x £ 165 cm (8.2)
 for 165 £ x £ 185 cm (8.3)
 for x > 185 cm (8.4)
The fuzzy set of tall people for the set of objects (individuals) can be written
as { (165, 0.0), (170, 0.25), (175, 0.5), (180, 0.75), (185, 1.0), (190, 1.0)}. The
important aspect of a fuzzy set is its membership value, which tells us the levelor degree of belonging. This degree of belonging provides us information aboutthe certainty (or uncertainty) associated with assigning the object to the set (aclass). For different objects, the degrees of belonging can be different and theirrespective uncertainty values in the given set (class) are known, which is impos-sible under crisp set (logic) (see row 4 of Table 8.1). Information on certainty(or uncertainty) is very important in risk assessment and decision making.
There are times when we need to identify members of a fuzzy set whose
membership values exceed a certain level. This is accomplished by the idea of
TABLE 8.1Heights of People, the Fuzzy Set of “Tall People,” 
and Its Boolean Counterparts
Object 1 2 3 4 5 6
Height (cm) 165 170 175 180 185 190
Membership 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1Boolean set 0 0 0 1 1 1
Note:  Considered tall if x >180 cm under the Boolean counterparts.A=x  x  xXA {, () } μ
μ
Tallx ~() =0
μ
Tallxx
~() =165
20
μ
Tallx ~() =1Fuzzy Logic Models 219
an a-cut of a fuzzy set. An a-cut set is a set of individuals whose membership
values exceed a prede ﬁned threshold, a. For example, the a-cut set of tall people
for the subjects listed above is {(175, 0.5), (180, 0.75), (185, 1.0), (190, 1.0)}
when a is 0.3. The a-cut is often used to provide a ﬁner control on the classi ﬁ-
cation of objects.
The most important part of a fuzzy set is its membership function, because
that determines the membership value of an object in the given fuzzy set. Inother words, a fuzzy set is de ﬁned once its membership function is de ﬁned. There
are three basic forms of membership functions that are often used in fuzzymathematics (Figure 8.1): the bell-shaped, Z-shaped, and S-shaped curves. Thebell-shaped curve describes that there is an optimal attribute value or range overwhich membership in the set is at unity (1.0), and as the attribute of the objectdeviates from this value or range, the membership value decreases. For example,the concept of moderately thick A -horizon can be captured using this membership
function. The Z-shaped curve describes the scenario that there is a thresholdvalue for the attribute of an object, smaller than which the membership is atunity (1.0) and greater than which the membership decreases. Thin A-horizoncan be expressed using this function (the thinner the A-horizon, the higher themembership). The S-shaped curves de ﬁne the relationships opposite to those
characterized by the Z-shaped curves. The concept of thick A-horizon can bedepicted using the S-shaped membership function (the thicker the  A-horizon, the
higher the membership).
Membership functions are domain speci ﬁc as well as set speci ﬁc. For exam-
ple, the membership function for tall people will be different from that for shortpeople. The functions used for de ﬁning height concepts will be different from
those de ﬁning other concepts. Even for the same concept, there may be different
functions used, depending on the application domain or the perception of theseconcepts. For example, the concept for tall people in the ordinary sense, whichmight be captured well using Equations 8.2 through 8.4 (dashed line in Figure8.2), would be different from that in the context of basketball players, underFIGURE 8.1 Three basic forms of membership functions.
220 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
which a person with a height of 185 cm is not considered as tall at all. A better
membership function for the latter version of tall people could be that portrayedby the solid line in Figure 8.2. Section 8.4.2.2 provides different ways of de ﬁning
membership functions in soil science.
8.2.3 S IMPLE FUZZY SET OPERATIONS
Because membership function is a crucial component of a fuzzy set, fuzzy setoperations are de ﬁned via their membership functions. There are many ways to
deﬁne the fuzzy set operations,
6 and it is not within the scope of this paper to
discuss them all. Here we discuss the basic fuzzy set operations.
8.2.3.1 Deﬁnition 2: Intersection
The membership function of the intersection (logical “and”) set of fuzzy
sets Ã and Õ is de ﬁned by
(8.5)
8.2.3.2 Deﬁnition 3: Union
The membership function of the union (logical “or”) set of fuzzy sets Ã
and Õ is de ﬁned by
(8.6)
8.2.3.3 Deﬁnition 4: Complement
The membership function of the complement (logical “not”) set of fuzzy
set Ã is de ﬁned byFIGURE 8.2 Two different membership functions for tall people: one for common people
and the other for basketball players. For common people, a person with a height of 185cm will have full membership (1.0) as tall, but for a basketball player, membership in tallis only about 0.5.00.20.40.60.81
150 155 160 165 170 175 1 801 85 190 195 200
Height (cm)Mem bershipCommon people
F
00.20.40.60.81
150 155 160 165 170 175 1 801 85 190 195 200
Height (cm)Mem bershipCommon people
For basket ball players
Nx μ()
NÕx   x  x  xX μμ μ() m i n { () , () } ,ˆ=
Mx μ()
MÕx   x  x  xX μμ μ() m a x { () , () } ,ˆ=
Cx μ()Fuzzy Logic Models 221
(8.7)
Equations 8.5 and 8.6 are referred to as the fuzzy minimum and maximum
operators, respectively. There are many extensions to the above min–max de ﬁ-
nition to the fuzzy set operations.5 These fuzzy set operations are often used in
soil predictions.7,8
8.2.4 P OSSIBILITY  AND PROBABILITY
The fundamental difference between possibility theory and probability theory is
that possibility theory is about similarity between objects or quality of a givenobject when compared to a prototype, while probability deals with the chance ofthe occurrence of an event. For example, there is a major difference between thefollowing two statements: “It is possible that we can have another passenger onthe bus” and “It is probable that we can have another passenger on the bus.” Theformer addresses the issue of whether the bus can hold another passenger, whilethe latter states whether there will be another passenger coming to take this bus.The following two statements will make this distinction even more clear: “Thereis little chance that it will rain” and “It will rain a little.” The former is a probabilitystatement stating whether it will rain or not, while the latter is a possibilitystatement describing the intensity of rain, not about whether it will rain.
Fuzzy logic is about possibility, and crisp logic (Boolean logic) is about
probability. Possibility is more appropriate for classifying soils. For example, thestatement “The soil at this site is about 70% similar to the prototype  of Miami
silt loam” is more appropriate than “There is a 70% chance the soil at this siteis the prototype  of Miami silt loam.” The reason is that the soil already exists at
that site. In classi ﬁcation, we want to know which class the local soil belongs to
by comparing the properties of the local soil with those of the prototype of thecandidate class. It is not the issue of which soil class occurs at the given site.Soil classi ﬁcation is based on possibility, not probability. It is inappropriate to
use probability to measure possibility, even though we have been doing it for along time and are very much used to the idea.
8.3 SOIL AS A CONTINUUM AND PRESENTATION 
OF SOILS UNDER BOOLEAN LOGIC
Soil is a continuum both in spatial (geographic) domain and in attribute (property)
domain. Soil is a result of the interaction of its formative environment factors, suchas geology, climate, topography, and organism, over time, as outlined byDokuchaiev
9 and Hilgard.10,11 The continuous spatial variation of many of these
factors causes soil to vary continuously over space, although abrupt changes ofsoil over space do exist at times. This spatial variation of soil causes the propertyvalues to be continuous in their attribute (property) domain. In other words, thevalues of a soil property are also continuous over the domain of that property.Cx   x  xX μμ() { () } ,ˆ=1222 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Thus, soil classi ﬁcation and soil mapping must treat soil as a continuum in both
spatial and attribute domains.
Traditional methods in soil classi ﬁcation and soil mapping take a Boolean
approach and treat soil as distinct and discrete entities, rather than as a continuum.In classi ﬁcation, ﬁeld observations on soils are grouped into types (classes)
according to their diagnostic properties.
12 The outcome of this process is a list
of classes (sets) with their respective boundaries de ﬁned. There are two contra-
dicting issues associated with the classes so de ﬁned. First, each of these soil
classes does not represent a pure concept with a de ﬁnitive set of properties; rather,
it is often a collection of soil objects with varying soil properties. As a result, thedeﬁnition for each of these classes is given in terms of ranges of property value
(Figure 8.3a).  Thus, the concept of the given class cannot be represented by a
single prototype (pedon). In fact, there can be many prototypes (pedons) for agiven class. In other words, the concept of a given class is not represented as asingle point in an m-dimensional property space (where m is the number of
properties used to de ﬁne class). Rather, it is presented by an m-dimensional cube
(Figure 8.3a). The phenomenon of mixed objects in a single class is a typicaldrawback of classi ﬁcation under crisp set, as was discussed in Section 8.2.1.
The second issue is that in many applications each of these classes is actually
treated as a distinct entity characterized by typical property values (the means orthe modes of property values). Once a soil object is assigned to a class, it willbe labeled with the typical property values of this class; thus, there is no differencein property values among the soil objects assigned to this class. Therefore, thetypical soil property values are the only means of characterizing these soil classesin the soil property domain. In other words, we treat each of these classes as apure concept or as a point in m-dimensional property space when we use the
information of the class for real-world applications (such as deriving propertymaps for hydroecological modeling applications).
13
These two contradicting issues result in the limited power in describing the
changes of soil property values (attribute resolution) in the property domain.FIGURE 8.3 Discretization of soil-landscape in the attribute space. (a) Dots represent the
locations of soils in the attribute space; rectangles represent the boundaries of soil classesin the attribute space. (b) Dots represent the centers of soil classes; the intervals betweenthe projected centers on the respective axes represent the attribute resolution on theseproperty axes. 
Property 1
Property 2......
.
...... B
CA ...
..
(a)Property 1
Property 2......
.
...... B
CA ...
..
(a)  Property 1
Property 2.
.B
CA .
(b)V1A
V1B
V1C
V2B V2C V2AProperty 1
Property 2.
.B
CA .
(b)V1A
V1B
V1C
V2B V2C V2A
 Fuzzy Logic Models 223
Changes in soil property are only limited to the intervals of the typical values of
two adjacent soil classes (Figure 8.3b). Intermediate soil property values betweentwo typical values of two adjacent classes often cannot be obtained. This reductionof soil attribute resolution is a drawback of soil classi ﬁcation based on Boolean
logic and prevents the continuous variation of soils to be captured and represented(see Section 8.5 for further discussion).
8.4 REPRESENTATION OF SOILS UNDER 
FUZZY LOGIC
8.4.1 F UZZY REPRESENTATION  OF SOILS
The continuous spatial variation of soil over space naturally leads itself to the
employment of fuzzy logic in its representation. Under fuzzy logic a soil objectat a given location ( i, j) could bear partial membership ( m
ijk or sijk) in a class and
bear different membership values in different classes (Figure 8.4). These differentmembership values in different classes can be captured and represented as an n-
dimensional vector, S
ij (Sij1, Sij2, …, Sijk, …, Sijn), where n is the number of classes
considered.  In this way, subtle differences between soil objects can be re ﬂected
by difference in membership values in different soil classes. Table 8.2 shows thechange of membership values along a transect in the Lubrecht study area ofwestern Montana.
26 Two observations can be made about what is presented in
this table. The ﬁrst is that the change of soil from one class to another is not
sudden, but rather is very mild. For example, soils at points 13 and 14 havehighest membership in different classes, the soil at point 13 in Ovando and atpoint 14 in Elkner, but the difference in membership between the two sites isrelatively small. This re ﬂects the mild but important gradation of soil from one
class to another over space. If we were to use Boolean logic to classify the soils,we would say Ovando for point 13 and Elkner for 14 and oversimplify the spatialFIGURE 8.4 Representation of soils under fuzzy logic.Soil Series 1,  Soil Series 2, …,  Soil Series k, …, Soil Series n
Local Soil at ( i,j)...
Fuzzy Membership Vector ( Sij)
(Sij1, Sij2, …, Sijk, …, Sijn)
Sijk: fuzzy membership value bet ween the soil at point ( i,j) and soil series k
expressed
asSimilar to
at S
ij1Similar 
toat 
S
ij2Similar to
at Sijk
Similar toat SijnSoil Series 1,  Soil Series 2, …,  Soil Series k, …, Soil Series n
Local Soil at ( i,j)...
Fuzzy Membership Vector ( Sij)
(Sij1, Sij2, …, Sijk, …, Sijn)
Sijk: fuzzy membership value bet ween the soil at point ( i,j) and soil series k
expressed
asSimilar to
at S
ij1Similar 
toat 
S
ij2Similar to
at Sijk
Similar toat Sijn224 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
gradation of soils. With the membership vector, we are able to capture and
represent the mild but important gradation.
The second observation is that soils belonging to a same class vary subtly
over space. For example, soils at points 2 and 3 have the highest membershipvalues in Ambrant soil series, but the membership distribution in the vector isdifferent, which can be used to re ﬂect the subtle and gradual change of soil
within a class over space. For another example, soils at points 9 and 10 have thehighest membership values in Elkner, but soil at point 9 is more of an intergradebetween Ambrant and Elkner, while soil at point 10 is more of an intergradebetween Elkner and Ovando. This nature of in-between types (known in Soil
Taxonomy  as intergrades) cannot be captured without the use of a fuzzy mem-
bership vector.TABLE 8.2Fuzzy Membership Values along a Transect in 
Lubrecht, Montana
Field PointSoil Seriesa
Ambrant Rochester Elkner Ovando
1 0.2644 0.0210 0.3541 0.3605
2 0.4595 0.0000 0.1746 0.36593 0.3824 0.0669 0.2467 0.30404 0.1617 0.0281 0.3630 0.44725 0.1250 0.0000 0.4928 0.38226 0.5239 0.3947 0.0310 0.05047 0.0296 0.0000 0.5389 0.43148 0.7156 0.0000 0.2844 0.00009 0.3953 0.0363 0.4628 0.1054
10 0.1898 0.1017 0.4647 0.243711 0.4958 0.5025 0.0011 0.000612 0.4901 0.4257 0.0402 0.043913 0.0403 0.0000 0.4406 0.519214 0.0708 0.0000 0.6273 0.3020
Note:  Points are about 180 m apart. Obtained via a knowledge-
based inference approach.
7
aAmbrant, coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, frigid Lamellic Hap-
lustepts; Rochester, sandy-skeletal, mixed, frigid Typic Ustorthents;Elkner, coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive Lamellic Eutrocryepts;Ovando, sandy-skeletal, mixed Lamellic Cryporthents.
Source: Soil Survey Staff, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Series Classi ﬁcation
Database, available at http://soils.usda.gov/technical/classi ﬁcation/
osd/index.html.Fuzzy Logic Models 225
8.4.2 M EMBERSHIP  DETERMINATION  AND MEMBERSHIP  MAPS OF 
SOIL CLASSES
The grade of membership in a soil class depends on two things: the de ﬁnition of
the given class and the membership function that measures the similarity betweenthe local soil object and the class de ﬁnition. A collection of membership values
in a soil class across a given area forms a membership map for that soil class.This section discusses the basic ideas and approaches in de ﬁning soil classes,
membership computation, and derivation of membership maps.
8.4.2.1 Deﬁnition of Class Centroid
Under the notation of fuzzy logic, each class has a central concept or centroid.
14
The central concept of a class may not be a real individual but an imaginary
model entity. There might be an individual that most resembles the centralconcept, but may not be the central concept itself. This individual is referred toas the exemplar (also known as the prototype, typical or representative soil pro ﬁle,
or pedon). This approach is commonly used in soil surveys. The de ﬁnition of
class central concept has been a challenge to practitioners in soil science due tothe gradual yet complex variation of soils over space. One common approach todetermination of the central concept is to use the means or modal or typical valuesof attributes representing the class. This approach is suited for classes with well-deﬁned properties.
The other approach in determining central concepts is based on some version
of fuzzy c -means (FCM) classi ﬁcation.
15,16 This approach is suited for situations
when prede ﬁned soil classes are not applicable. FCM is a classi ﬁer that ﬁrst
optimally partitions a collection of individuals (such as a set of soil pro ﬁles) into
a given set of classes.16 It identi ﬁes the centroids of classes by minimizing the
fuzzy partition error as given in Equation 8.8:16
Jm(U, v) = (8.8)
where Jm is the fuzzy partition error and can be described as a weighted measure
of the squared distance between individuals and class centroids, so it is a measureof the total squared errors as minimized with respect to each cluster
17,18; Jm
decreases as the clustering improves (meaning that pixels tend to be overall closer
to their respective centroids); Y is the data (such as a set of soil pro ﬁles), and yi
is the ith feature vector; n is the number of objects (pro ﬁles) in Y; c is the number
of clusters (classes) in Y; v is a vector of cluster centers; vk is the center of cluster
k; U is a fuzzy c-partition of Y; m is a weighting exponent that determines the
degree of fuzziness (with m = 1 being nonfuzzy); A is a weighting matrix that is
based on the norm under which the distance is measured; and  mik is the member-
ship of the ith object ( yi) belonging to the kth cluster and is computed as follows:in
kc
ikm
ikyv
==∑∑
112()μ A226 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
(8.9)
Once the number of classes is determined, the centroid of each so-derived
class is treated as the central concept of the derived class. In most cases, onedoes not know the number of classes that best describe the structure in the dataset.To judge the effectiveness of the clustering results generated using the abovefuzzy c-means algorithm, two cluster validity measures (partition coef ﬁcient (F)
and entropy (H)) are de ﬁned as
16
(8.10)
(8.11)
The partition coef ﬁcient F will take the values of 1/ c to 1, while entropy H
ranges from zero to loga(c).17 F measures the amount of overlap between clusters
and is inversely proportional to the overall average overlap between pairs of fuzzysets.
17 H, conversely, is a scalar measure of the amount of fuzziness in a given
fuzzy partition U.15 The best fuzzy c-partition, e.g., the number of classes that
best describe the structure in the dataset, is thus the c-partition that realizes thehighest  and the lowest . Note that both H and F will reach maxima
and minima, respectively, at the same points, and in this sense they are essentiallyequivalent.
15 It is often the case that F increases and H decreases as the number
of classes decreases. To determine if a fuzzy clustering can be considered optimal,the improvement in entropy or partition coef ﬁcient over adjacent partitioning is
examined. If there is a signi ﬁcant improvement, the current partition of Y is
considered to be the optimal partition of the dataset.
de Gruijter and McBratney
19 and McBratney and de Gruijter20 noted that there
is an insuf ﬁciency in identifying class centroids using the regular FCM.15,16 The
insuf ﬁciency is related to the existence of extragrades. Extragrades are those
individuals falling far outside of the convex hull of class centroids20 (Figure 8.5).
These extragrades should be distinguished from the intragrades (those fallinginside or close to the convex hull), but are not separated from intragrades underthe regular FCM.
20,21 In order to improve the separation of extragrades from
intragrades, de Gruijter and McBratney19 and McBratney and de Gruijter20 deﬁned
an extragrade class by modifying the FCM objective function:μil il
ik
kcyv
yv=
∑2
2A
A
Fnc
in
kc
ik(ˆ)( ˆ) μμ =
==∑∑
112/
Hncik
aik
kc
in
(ˆ)( ˆlog ( ˆ)) μμ μ =
= =∑∑/
1 1
Fc(ˆ)μ Hc(ˆ)μFuzzy Logic Models 227
 Jm(U, v) = a  +
(1 – a) (8.12)
where mi* is the membership value of an individual i in the extragrade class and
a is the parameter determining the mean value of mi*.
8.4.2.2 Membership in Classes: Membership Functions
Once class centroids are de ﬁned, membership in each class can be determined
in two basic ways: one based on natural grouping and the other based on knowl-edge of prede ﬁned classes.
3 The former again uses the results from optimizing
the FCM objective function. The results consist of three outcomes: the numberof naturally occurring groups (the number of classes), the set of centroids for theset of classes, and the membership values of individuals in the set of the classes.Membership values of individuals in each of the ﬁnal classes are computed using
Equation 8.9.
Membership computation based on expert knowledge of prede ﬁned classes
is more and more widely used in application of fuzzy set theory in soil sci-ence.
3,22–25 This group of approaches can be referred to as the semantic import
model (SI).23 The basic idea is that a membership function is de ﬁned with expert
knowledge of class speci ﬁcation and class behavior in the attribute space. Class
behaviors describe how membership value changes with respect to changes ofsoil attributes within the attribute space. These knowledge-based membershipfunctions are of the three basic forms shown in Figure 8.1, but the exact shapeis determined by the knowledge in the application domain. Burrough
2 and Bur-FIGURE 8.5 Extragrades and intragrades in relation to class centroids (A, B, C): points
1, 2, and 3 are intragrades, while points 4 and 5, which are way outside of the convexhull, are extragrades.Property 1
Property 2.A
.C B.+P1+P2+P3 +P4
+P5Convex HullProperty 1
Property 2.A
.C B.+P1+P2+P3 +P4
+P5Property 1
Property 2.A
.C B.+P1+P1+P2+P2+P3+P3 +P4+P4
+P5+P5Convex Hull
 
(ˆ) μikm
ik
kc
in
yv
= =∑∑2
1 1A
(ˆ)*μim
kc
ik
kc
yv
==∑∑
12
1A228 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
rough et al.23 use the following function to depict a symmetrical bell-shaped
membership function:
(8.13)
where x is the attribute value of a soil entity, b is the attribute value representing
the central concept, and d is one half of the width of the bell-shaped curve between
the two crossover points (the upper and lower values where the membershipvalues are at 0.5) (Figure 8.6). This function can be modi ﬁed to represent the
other two membership curves (Z-shaped and S-shaped) outlined in Figure 8.1.Z-shaped curves can be captured using Equations 8.14 and 8.15, and S-shaped
with Equations 8.16 and 8.17:
 for x > b (8.14)
=1 for x £ b (8.15)
 for x < b (8.16)FIGURE 8.6 Metrics of a membership function.00.51
00 . 5 11 . 52
Soil AttributeMembershipCentral concept
Value of bLower crossover point Upper crossover poin t
Width (d) Width (d)
00.51
00 . 5 11 . 52
 tiMembershipCentral concept
Value of bLower crossover point Upper crossover poin t
Width (d) Width (d)Central concept
Value of bLower crossover point Upper crossover poin t
Width (d) Width (d)
μfuzzyx
xb
d() =
+1
12
μfuzzyx
xb
d() =
+1
12
μfuzzyx()
μfuzzyx
xb
d() =
+1
12Fuzzy Logic Models 229
=1 for x ≥ b (8.17)
Zhu25 developed an approach using domain expert knowledge to de ﬁne mem-
bership functions for fuzzy concepts. The approach is based on personal constructtheory and allows the domain experts to focus on the de ﬁnition of one concept
at a time. The membership function for a given concept is de ﬁned by focusing
on the determination of critical attribute points. For a given attribute, the expertﬁrst determines the curve type (bell-shaped or Z-shaped or S-shaped) that best
describes the concept and then determines the critical attribute values for thistype of curve. For example, if a bell-shaped curve is used to capture the concept,the expert will need to provide the attribute value or range of values over whichthe membership is at unity (1.0), the attribute values at the upper and lowercrossover points, and the values (upper and lower values) at which the member-ship reaches zero. These critical points are then linked via a spline function toform a continuous curve. This approach was successfully applied in eliciting theknowledge of soil experts in de ﬁning the relationships between soil classes
(series) and key environmental factors (soil-forming factors), which were thenused to map the spatial distribution of soils under fuzzy logic.
4,25–27
8.4.2.3 Fuzzy Membership Maps
Membership maps of soil classes can be produced using either a combination of
fuzzy classi ﬁcation and spatial interpolation techniques28 or a knowledge-based
approach.4,7,26 As an illustration of the former approach, Odeh et al.28 derived
fuzzy membership maps by combining FCM with kriging. They ﬁrst use the
modi ﬁed fuzzy c -means (FCM) algorithm20 to partition the pedons sampled from
the ﬁeld into intragrade and extragrade classes. Membership values of these
pedons in each of the derived classes computed from the FCM classi ﬁer were
then used to construct the semivariogram for each class. These semivariogramswere then used in kriging to interpolate the membership distribution of differentclasses over the study area. The approach does not require a set of prede ﬁned
soil classes, but does require the availability of a large collection of well-distrib-uted ﬁeld observations. Thus, it is more suited for soil mapping in small areas
with intensive sampling.
Zhu and his colleagues developed a knowledge-based approach, Soil Land
Inference Model (SoLIM), for deriving membership maps of soil series acrosslandscape (see detailed discussion in Section 8.5). The SoLIM approach usesgeographical information processing techniques
26,27 to characterize the soil for-
mative environment and employs arti ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
techniques25,30–32 to capture the relationships between soil and its formative envi-
ronment. A set of inference techniques constructed under fuzzy logic combinesthe environmental data with the extracted knowledge to produce membershipmaps of soil classes across an area.
7 Figure 8.7 shows fuzzy membership maps
for two soil classes in Wisconsin: Dorerton (loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, mesicμfuzzyx()230 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Typic Hapludalfs) and Elbaville ( ﬁne-loamy, mixed, superactive Glossic Haplu-
dalfs). Elbaville occurs on steep back slopes, while Dorerton occurs on nose slopepositions. The transition from Elbaville on steep back slopes to Dorerton on nosepositions is clearly captured and depicted with the gradation of derived fuzzymembership values. This knowledge-based approach for fuzzy membership der-ivation has proven to be successful and practical in soil survey over large areas,where expert knowledge of soil-environment relationships is available for allmapped soil series (or classes) (see Zhu and Band
7 and Zhu et al.33 for discussion
on evaluation).
8.4.3 U SE OF FUZZY MEMBERSHIP
The application of fuzzy sets in soil science has been rather recent, and researchersare still studying the use and interpretation of fuzzy membership of soils, partic-ularly the use and interpretation of fuzzy membership maps of soil classes.
3
Current use of fuzzy membership maps has been mainly in the following threeareas: land suitability analysis, derivation of continuous maps of soil attributes,and characterization of uncertainty in soil mapping. Land suitability analysisbased on fuzzy membership maps allows practitioners to make ﬁner distinctions
about different levels of suitability, rather than just the suitable vs. nonsuitabledivision. These ﬁner distinctions provide users ﬂexibility to control the quality
of the ﬁnal selection using an a-cut strategy. Chang and Burrough
22 applied fuzzy
logic to compute suitability for apple production over an area in northeast China.Burrough
2 and Burrough et al.23 interpret fuzzy membership as land suitability
for various purposes. Dobermann and Oberthur24 used a combination of fuzzy
membership functions with Monte-Carlo simulation to produce maps of mem-bership values for three soil fertility classes and two multivariate soil fertilityqualities. These pieces of information were then assessed for suitability forintensive rice production.
Zhu et al.
33 proposed using fuzzy membership values as weights in computing
soil property values intermediate to the typical or modal values prescribed to soilFIGURE 8.7 Fuzzy membership maps for soil series Elbaville (a) and Dorerton (b) over
a study area in Wisconsin with a size of 1.6 ¥ 2.2 km. Light tone indicates high membership
values, while dark tone indicates low membership values. Elbaville occurs on steep backslope, while Dorerton occurs on noses. The spatial gradation of these two soils is clearlycaptured and depicted with the gradation of membership values over space.
Fuzzy Logic Models 231
classes. They assume that the soil property value at a given point ( i, j) can be
estimated from a membership-weighted combination of typical values for the pre-scribed soil classes. As a ﬁrst approximation, they used a linear and additive function
to estimate soil property values at a given point:
(8.18)
where V
ij is the speci ﬁc soil property value at site ( i, j), Sijk (used interchangeably
with mijk in this chapter) is the membership of soil at location ( i, j) in soil class
k, vk is the prescribed soil property value of soil series (soil type) k, and n is the
total number of prescribed soil series (soil types) in the area. Using thickness ofsoil A-horizon in ponderosa pine/Douglas ﬁr stands of the Lubrecht Experimental
Forest of western Montana as an example, Zhu and his colleagues
33 found that
the thickness map derived from fuzzy membership maps using the above equationis better in capturing the spatial variation of A-horizon depth than that derivedfrom the conventional soil map of the area (Figure 8.8).
Zhu
34 illustrated the use of the fuzzy membership maps for portraying the
uncertainty associated with assigning local soils to individual soil classes. Heconceived two different types of uncertainty associated with the assignment. Theﬁrst is the exaggeration uncertainty, which occurs when a local soil is assigned
to a class to which the local soil does not fully belong. In other words, themembership of the local soil in that class is being exaggerated. The second typeof uncertainty is the ignorance uncertainty, which occurs when a local soil isassigned to a class while potential membership in other classes is ignored. Bothtypes of uncertainty can be estimated from the membership vector, S
ij (Sij1, Sij2,
…, Sijk, …, Sijn), at the point. Using Lubrecht as an example, he showed that the
uncertainty measures are useful in portraying uncertainty related to the classFIGURE 8.8 Soil A-horizon depth maps in Lubrecht of western Montana with a size of
4.8 ¥ 7.5 km. (a) Derived from fuzzy membership maps using the SoLIM approach. (b)
Derived from the conventional soil map.
Vsv
sijijkk
kn
ijk
kn=•
=
=∑
∑1
1232 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
assignment, and spatial variation of classi ﬁcation uncertainty can be effectively
depicted using this approach.
8.5 RECENT APPLICATIONS OF FUZZY SET 
CONCEPTS (OR FUZZY MODELS) IN SOIL SURVEY
Application of fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic in soil science has experienced
tremendous growth in recent years. Examples of applications range from fuzzyclassi ﬁcation of soil pedons, to fuzzy set-derived soil interpretations, to land
suitability evaluations to information retrieval to fuzzy geostatistics, to the pro-duction mode of soil survey. McBratney and Odeh
3 have provided an excellent
survey of applications of fuzzy logic and fuzzy set theory in soil science. Thissection focuses on one of the recent applications of fuzzy set in soil survey. Thediscussion is focused around the SoLIM approach recently developed by Zhuand his colleagues.
4,7,25–27,31,32 We will ﬁrst examine the issues facing the tradi-
tional approach to soil survey and then examine how fuzzy logic helps to addressthese issues.
8.5.1 L IMITATIONS  OF THE CONVENTIONAL  APPROACH  TO 
SOIL SURVEY
Soil survey can be considered a process of realizing a soil classi ﬁcation in
geographic space (geographic domain). The conventional (traditional) approachto soil survey employs the area-class model
35 for capturing and representing soil
spatial distribution. There are two limitations associated with soil mapping usingthe area-class model: the class assignment generalization and spatial generaliza-tion. Class assignment generalization, also referred to as generalization of soilsin attribute space, is related to the assignment of local soils to prescribed soilclasses under Boolean logic. Under Boolean logic, soil at a given point can belongto one and only one soil class, and that soil is assumed to have the soil propertiesof the soil class to which the soil is assigned. Under this notion, the differencein soil properties between two neighboring soil objects can either be exaggeratedto be the difference of the two soil classes (when these two soil objects areassigned to two different classes) or be completely ignored (when the two soilobjects are assigned into a single class) (Figure 8.9).
Spatial generalization, also referred to as generalization of soils in geographic
space, is related to the map scale and the cartographic techniques employed forproducing soil maps. At a certain scale, only soil objects larger than a certainsize (scale dependent, called minimum map unit size) can be delineated on soilmaps. Soil objects smaller than the minimum map unit size are either omittedcompletely or merged into the surrounding soil objects (Figure 8.10). Soil unitsB, C, and D in Figure 8.10a are too small to be represented in Figure 8.10b. Soilunit A in Figure 8.10b is a mixed unit consisting of soil units A, B, C, and D.Fuzzy Logic Models 233
This inclusion may be noted in the map unit legend as a percentage of an inclusion,
but the locations of these included units are completely lost on small-scale maps.Therefore, the spatial resolution of a soil map is the minimum mapping size,which can be a few hectares on large-scale maps to hundreds of hectares or moreon small-scale maps.
Due to these two generalizations of soils, as results of the crisp logic employed
and the limitation of map scales, soil spatial information produced from conven-
tional soil survey is often incompatible with other environmental data derived
from digital terrain analysis and remote sensing techniques. This incompatibilitycould have important implications to the interpretation of results from hydroeco-logical models and for resource management decision making. It may be truethat soil experts know the existence of the gradual gradation of soil propertiesover space and the inclusion of different soil objects in soil mapping units, butthese cannot be mapped on soil maps due to the crisp logic employed andlimitations of map scale and cartographic techniques used. Therefore, soil scien-tists’ knowledge of soil variation cannot be fully expressed by soil maps con-structed under crisp logic with the conventional cartographic techniques.FIGURE 8.9 Generalization of soils in attribute space.
FIGURE 8.10 Generalization of soils in geographic space.Property (V)
dV
Distance
dV = 0
VAdV = VBVA
VAVBIgnored ExaggeratedProperty (V)
dV
Distance
dV = 0
VAdV = VB–VA
VAVBIgnored Exaggerated
 
234 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
8.5.2 O VERCOMING  THE LIMITATIONS : COUPLING  FUZZY LOGIC 
WITH RASTER GIS M ODEL
Zhu27 developed a soil similarity model to overcome the two generalizations faced
with the area-class model. This similarity model consists of two components,with each designed to overcome one of the two generalizations: a raster datamodel to minimize spatial generalization and a soil similarity vector to mitigateattribute generalization. The raster data model is better suited to representingsmooth, continuous geographic features and phenomena than a vector data model.The level of gradation captured by the raster data model depends on the spatialresolution of the raster data model and is in turn limited only by the spatialresolution of the input data, rather than by arbitrary standards imposed by carto-graphic or mapping techniques. Local soil condition can be captured at pixellevel, and information about small pockets of unique soil types is not eliminated.This minimizes the discrepancies between the spatial resolution of soil spatialinformation and other environmental data layers.
13 However, one important
assumption for using the raster data model for representing soil spatial variationis that soil within a given pixel is perceived to be homogeneous; that is, thevariation of soil properties within a pixel is so small that this variation can beignored. This assumption holds if the pixel is small enough. Otherwise, theassumption is violated and the spatial generalization problem associated with thepolygon model will also occur with the raster data model.
Soil similarity vector (the similarity representation of soils in the parameter
domain) is based on fuzzy logic.
27 Under this fuzzy representation, the soil at a
given pixel is represented by an n-element vector ( soil similarity vector  or fuzzy
membership vector ), Sij (Sij1, Sij2, …, Sijk, …, Sijn), as described in Section 8.4.1
and shown in Figure 8.4. With this similarity representation, the local soil at agiven pixel is no longer necessarily assigned to a particular class, but can berepresented as an intergrade to the set of prescribed classes. This method ofrepresentation will allow the local soil to take property values intermediate tothe modal (typical) values of the prescribed classes, and thus will largely cir-cumvent the problem of generalization in the parameter domain. By couplingthe similarity representation with a raster geographic information systems (GIS)data model, soils in an area are represented as an array of pixels, with soil ateach pixel being represented as a soil similarity vector (Figure 8.11). In this way,soil spatial variation can be represented as a continuum in both the spatial andparameter domains.
8.5.3 P OPULATING  THE SIMILARITY  MODEL
The similarity model only provides added ﬂexibility for representing soil spatial
variation. The degree of success in using this model depends on how the modelis populated or, equivalently, how the soil similarity values in the vector aredetermined at each pixel. The SoLIM approach takes advantage of recent devel-opments in geographic information science, arti ﬁcial intelligence techniques, andFuzzy Logic Models 235
the classic concept of soil-landscape relationships to compute the soil similarity
values at each pixel. The approach is based on the classic soil factor equation ofDokuchaiev
9 and Hilgard,10,11 which contends that there is a relationship between
soil and its formative environment, as shown in Equation 8.19:
(8.19)
In Equation 8.19, t is time and f1 is the relationship of soil development to
the formative environment, E, which generally includes variables describing
climate, topography, parent material, and organisms. S is meant to be a soil class
that can be expressed as a fuzzy membership value (soil similarity value). Dueto the dif ﬁculty of explicitly describing integration of soil formative environmen-
tal factors over time during the course of soil formation across landscape, t is
considered as part of E; thus, Equation 8.19 is simpli ﬁed to
(8.20)
The implementation of Equation 8.20 is shown in Figure 8.12. Data on soil
formative environmental conditions ( E) can be derived using GIS and remote
sensing techniques.
26,29,36 The soil-environmental relationships ( f) can be approx-
imated by knowledge extracted from human or nonhuman sources through a setof arti ﬁcial intelligence techniques. Interactive knowledge acquisition techniques
based on Kelly’s person-constructed theory
37 can be used to acquire knowledge
from local ﬁeld soil experts.25 For areas with abundant ﬁeld observations but no
experienced ﬁeld soil scientists, arti ﬁcial neural network (ANN) techniques can
be used to extract the relationships existing in these ﬁeld observations.30 There
might be situations under which there are no experienced ﬁeld soil scientists, nor
does there exist a large set of ﬁeld observations, but descriptions of pedons withFIGURE 8.11 The similarity model for representing detailed soil spatial information.
Sf E d t=∫1()
Sf E=()236 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
explicit spatial location information exist. Under these situations, a case-based
approach can be applied to utilize the knowledge existing in these pedon descrip-tions.
32 For areas with old soil maps that need to be updated, a spatial data-mining
approach can be applied.31 Once the knowledge is obtained through the set of
knowledge acquisition techniques, the acquired soil-environmental relationshipscan then be combined with data characterizing the soil formative environmentconditions to populate the similarity model.
7,26
Recent case studies in Wisconsin have shown that the SoLIM approach is
capable of capturing and representing detailed spatial variation of soil character-istics. Not only does the approach provide more accurate and detailed soil spatialinformation products, but it also produces products that are not available withthe conventional approach. It has been considered to be a major improvementover the traditional approach to soil survey (about 10 times faster and two thirdsless of the cost).
4
8.6 CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Much has been accomplished in applying fuzzy logic and fuzzy set theory in soilscience, but like any new ﬁeld, there are many challenges facing researchers.
These challenges, as alluded to in the above discussions, can be grouped intothree major areas: de ﬁnition of class centroids, membership de ﬁnition (member-
ship function determination), and interpretation of fuzzy membership values.
Under the notation of fuzzy logic, a class has only one central concept. It is
possible that we can use FCM or local knowledge to de ﬁne a set of centroids for
a small set of data or over a relatively small geographic area, but these approachesare either data sensitive and ad hoc  (such as FCM) or rather subjective (such as
the local knowledge-based approach). They may not be adequate for objectivelydeﬁning a set of central concepts of soil classes for an entire nation, a continent,
or for the entire world. The question of how objective our current de ﬁnitions of
soil classes are needs to be examined. Re ﬁnements to these de ﬁnitions and theFIGURE 8.12 Implementation of SoLIM.Local Experts’ Expertise
Relationships between Soil and 
Its Environment
Soil Simil arity Vector S   <=   f( E )
Inference
(under fuzz y logic)Form ative Environment
Condition s
GIS/RS
Perceived
asArtifici al Neur al Network Case-Based Re asoning Spatial Data Mining Local Experts’ Expertise
Relationships between Soil and 
Its Environment
Soil Simil arity Vector S   <=   f( E )
Inference
(under fuzz y logic)Form ative Environment
Condition s
GIS/RSArtifici al Neur al Network Case-Based Re asoning Spatial Data Mining Fuzzy Logic Models 237
creation of objective soil classes over much larger spatial scale can reduce the
subjectivity and ad hoc  nature in applying fuzzy logic in soil science. Fuzzy set
theory itself might be a tool for addressing these issues. Developments in categorytheory, particularly prototype category theory,
38,39 might be of some value in
addressing these issues.
Membership functions in soil science are still very data sensitive or ad hoc .
Membership computed from FCM will likely change as one adds more observa-tions to the pool of samples, since the algorithm looks for naturally occurringgroups in the data. In other words, the membership computed from FCM is datadependent, and thus geographic area sensitive. Most membership functions basedon expert knowledge are rather ad hoc and subjective, lacking any formal pro-
cedures for de ﬁning them, although efforts are under way to address these issues.
25
The issue of integrating knowledge from multiple experts during membership
function de ﬁnition is a challenge for researchers not only in soil science, but also
in the arti ﬁcial intelligence community as a whole. Using knowledge from non-
human sources for membership function de ﬁnition is still at its early stage,
although progress has been made.30,31 Much research is needed in this area.
Well-accepted use and interpretation of fuzzy membership maps is a major
driver for a potential widespread use of fuzzy set theory in soil science. However,many researchers are too focused on the mathematics of fuzzy set theory, so useand interpretation of the products from these mathematical studies have receivedfar less attention in the past. In particular, the use of fuzzy membership maps inassessing risk in decision making deserves much more attention.
The other research area related to the use and interpretation of fuzzy mem-
bership values is the interpretation of fuzzy membership values in the soil simi-larity vector . We really do not know what it means for a pixel to receive a
similarity value of 0.3 for soil class A and 0.6 for soil class B. What can we sayabout the soil at that pixel compared to one with a similarity value of 0.2 for Aand 0.8 for B? Is this difference (between 0.3 and 0.2 for soil class A) meaningful?If one wants to build a house on a site with a similarity value of 0.6 for Dorerton(loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, mesic Typic Hapludalfs), what does this mean ina practical sense? We need to identify pixels with an array of similarity valuesfor a particular soil series, visit them on the ground, and describe and sample thesoils to see what we can learn about these values and their relation to themorphology of the soil.
The work described in this chapter on using fuzzy membership values to
predict topsoil thickness
33 is only a trial attempting to predict a soil property at
an unsampled location. This is potentially a competitor to kriging, but substitutessoil survey landscape models for the (prohibitively) high sampling intensity andcost of model-based geostatistical strategies. If tools like SoLIM could not onlyassign a pixel to a soil class, but also predict some important soil properties atthat location, this would be a very big development in soil survey. However, giventhat soils have many properties and they vary spatially in three dimensions (N-S-E-W and with depth), the relationships between membership values and dif-ferent properties may be different, and the relationships may also vary along238 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
different dimensions. Research in this area could potentially be an enormous
undertaking but rewarding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The support provided to the author through the One Hundred Talent Program ofthe Chinese Academy of Sciences is greatly appreciated. This chapter has bene-ﬁted greatly from the three anonymous reviewers, and their comments and edits
are appreciated.
REFERENCES
1.L Zadeh . Fuzzy sets.  Inf Control 8: 338–353, 1965.
2. PA Burrough. Fuzzy mathematic methods for soil survey and land evaluation. J
Soil Sci  40: 447–492, 1989.
3. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh. Application of fuzzy sets in soil science: fuzzy logic,
fuzzy measurements and fuzzy decisions. Geoderma  77: 85–113, 1997.
4. AX Zhu, B Hudson, J Burt, K Lubich, D Simonson. Soil mapping using GIS,
expert knowledge, and fuzzy logic. Soil Sci Soc Am J  65: 1463–1472, 2001.
5. HJ Zimmermann. Fuzzy Set Theory and Its Applications . Kluwer-Nijhoff Publish-
ing, Boston, 1985, pp. 65–150.
6. GJ Klir, TA Folger. Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty, and Information . Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ, 1988, pp. 213–240.
7. AX Zhu, LE Band. A knowledge-based approach to data integration for soil
mapping. Can J Remote Sensing 20: 408–418, 1994.
8. X Shi, AX Zhu, JE Burt, F Qi, D Simonson. A case-based reasoning approach to
fuzzy soil mapping. Soil Sci Soc Am J  68: 885–894, 2003.
9. KD Glinka. The Great Soil Groups of the World and Their Development . Edwards
Bros., Ann Arbor, MI, 1927, pp. 45–57. (Translated from German by CF Marbut.)
10. H Jenny. Factors of Soil Formation . McGraw-Hill, New York, 1941, pp. 35–50.
11. H Jenny. E.W. Hilgard and the Birth of Modern Soil Science . Farallo Publication,
Berkeley, CA, 1961, pp. 45–65.
12. Soil Survey Staff. Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classi ﬁcation for Making
and Interpreting Soil Surveys , Agriculture Handbook 436. Natural Resources
Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Government PrintingOfﬁce, Washington DC, 1999, pp. 10–69.  
13. AX Zhu, DS Mackay. Effects of spatial detail of soil information on watershed
modeling. J Hydrol 248: 54–77, 2001.
14. PHA Sneath, RR Sokal. Numerical Taxonomy . W.H. Freeman and Company, San
Francisco, 1973, pp. 110–130.
15. JC Bezdek. Pattern Recognition with Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms.  Ple-
num Press, New York, 1981, pp. 89–110.
16. JC Bezdek, R Ehrlich, W Full. FCM: the fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm.
Comput Geosci  10: 191–203, 1984.
17. CW Ahn, MF Baumgardner, LL Biehl. Delineation of soil variability using geo-
statistics and fuzzy clustering analyses of hyperspectral data. Soil Sci Soc Am J
63: 142–150, 1999.Fuzzy Logic Models 239
18. TJ Ross. Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications . McGraw-Hill, New York,
1995, pp. 67–121.
19. JJ de Gruijter, AB McBratney. A modi ﬁed fuzzy k -means method for predictive
classi ﬁcation. In  Classi ﬁcation and Related Methods of Data Analysis , HH Bock,
Ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1988, pp. 97–104.
20. AB McBratney, JJ de Gruijter. A continuum approach to soil classi ﬁcation by
modi ﬁed fuzzy k-means with extragrades. J Soil Sci  43: 159–175, 1992.
21. AB McBratney, JJ de Gruijter, DJ Brus. Spacial prediction and mapping of
continuous soil classes. Geoderma  54: 39–64, 1992.
22. L Chang, PA Burrough, Fuzzy reasoning: a new quantitative aid for land evalua-
tion. Soil Surv Land Eval 7: 69–80, 1987.
23. PA Burrough, RA MacMillian, W van Deusen. Fuzzy classi ﬁcation methods for
determining land suitability from soil pro ﬁle observations and topography. J Soil
Sci 43: 193–210, 1992.
24. A Dobermann, T Oberthur. Fuzzy mapping of soil fertility: a case study on
irrigated Riceland in the Philippines. Geoderma  77: 317–339, 1997.
25. AX Zhu. A personal construct-based knowledge acquisition process for natural
resource mapping using GIS. Int J Geogr Inf Sci  13: 119–141, 1999.
26. AX Zhu, LE Band, B Dutton, TJ Nimlos. Automated soil inference under fuzzy
logic. Ecol Modeling  90: 123–145, 1996.
27. AX Zhu. A similarity model for representing soil spatial information. Geoderma
77: 217–242, 1997.
28. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Fuzzy c-means and kriging for
mapping soil as a continuous system. Soil Sci Soc Am J  56: 1848–1854, 1992.
29. JP Wilson, JC Gallant, Eds. Terrain Analysis: Principles and Applications . John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000, 527 pp.
30. AX Zhu. Mapping soil landscape as spatial continua: the neural network approach.
Water Resour Res  36: 663–677, 2000.
31. F Qi, AX Zhu. Knowledge discovery from soil maps using inductive learning. Int
J Geogr Inf Sci  17: 771–795, 2003.
32. X Shi, AX Zhu, JE Burt, F Qi, D Simonson. A cased-based reasoning approach
to fuzzy soil mapping. Soil Sci Soc Am J  68: 885–894, 2004.
33. AX Zhu, LE Band, R Vertessy, B Dutton. Deriving soil property using a soil land
inference model (SoLIM). Soil Sci Soc Am J  61: 523–533, 1997.
34. AX Zhu. Measuring uncertainty in class assignment for natural resource maps
using a similarity model. Photogrammetric Eng Remote Sensing  63: 1195–1202,
1997.
35. DM Mark, F Csillag. The nature of boundaries on ‘area-class’ maps. Cartograph-
ica 27: 65–78, 1990.
36. X Shi, AX Zhu. A similarity-based method for deriving fuzzy representation of
terrain positions. Photogrammetric Eng . Sensing. Submitted.  
37. GA Kelly. A brief introduction to personal construct theory. In Perspectives in
Personal Construct Theory , D Bannister, Ed. Academic Press, London, 1970, pp.
1–29.
38. EH Rosch. Natural categories. Cognit Psychol 4: 328–350, 1973.
39. EH Rosch. Principles of categorization. In Cognition and Categorization , E Rosch,
BB Lloyd, Eds. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1978, pp. 145–170.2419Modeling Spatial 
Variation of Soil as Random Functions
Richard Webster and Margaret A. Oliver
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................242
9.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................2429.2 Soil Classi ﬁcation .................................................................................243
9.2.1 Sampling and Estimation ......................................................244
9.3 The Geostatistical Approach.................................................................245
9.3.1 Random Variables and Random Functions...........................2459.3.2 Stationarity ............................................................................2469.3.3 Intrinsic Variation and the Variogram...................................247
9.3.4 Estimating the Variogram......................................................248
9.3.5 Models for Variograms..........................................................249
9.3.5.1 Circular ...............................................................2509.3.5.2 Spherical .............................................................2519.3.5.3 Pentaspherical.....................................................2519.3.5.4 Exponential.........................................................2529.3.5.5 Models with Reverse Curvature at the
Origin..................................................................252
9.3.5.6 Unbounded Models ............................................2529.3.5.7 Anisotropy ..........................................................253
9.3.6 Combining Trend and Random Fluctuation .........................2549.3.7 Fitting Models .......................................................................256
9.3.7.1 Complexity .........................................................2569.3.7.2 Weights ...............................................................257
9.4 Combining Classi ﬁcation with Geostatistics........................................257
9.5 Simultaneous Variation in Two or More Variables ..............................258
9.5.1 Modeling the Cross-Variogram.............................................260
9.6 Kriging: Implementing the Geostatistical Model.................................261
9.6.1 Weights ..................................................................................265
9.7 Factorial Kriging Analysis ....................................................................2669.8 Case Study: Soil Variation at Yattendon...............................................269242 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.9 Exploring the Data................................................................................270
9.10 Modeling the Variogram and Cross-Validation ....................................2709.11 Kriging ..................................................................................................276
9.11.1 Examples of Trend ................................................................280
9.12 Coregionalization ..................................................................................2849.13 Conclusion.............................................................................................285Acknowledgments .............................................................................................286References .........................................................................................................286
ABSTRACT
For many years pedologists classi ﬁed soil so as to predict its properties at unvis-
ited sites. To do so ef ﬁciently, they constructed mental models of the way soil
was distributed in the landscape. These classes later became strata within whichto sample and predict quantitatively within the framework of classical statistics.In the last 20 years, pedologists have replaced such models by ones in whichvariation is regarded as continuous, stochastic, and spatially correlated; classicalstatistics has given way to geostatistics. In the simplest cases, an actual soilvariable is regarded as the outcome of a stationary stochastic process, which isa model completely characterized by its variogram. The variogram is central topractical geostatistics. Its values must be estimated from data to give an orderedset, the sample or experimental variogram. This in turn is modeled with one ormore mathematical functions, which must be such as to guarantee nonnegativevariances when values are combined. There are a few families of simple functions;they include the familiar spherical and exponential functions and the unboundedpower function. Unknown values are predicted by kriging and then mapped. Thetechniques are illustrated with data from a recent case study in which a 23-haﬁeld in southern England was surveyed by sampling. The data are summarized
and explored, after which variograms of several variables are computed andmodeled. The soil’s magnesium content and pH behaved as realizations of sta-tionary processes; the electrical conductivity contained a long-range trend. Thevariogram of yield could be separated into short- and long-range components,and the components are mapped separately to reveal a pattern of cultivationdistinct from the regional pattern in the ﬁeld. Electrical conductivity and sand
content are shown to be coregionalized.
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The soil mantles the land more or less continuously, except where there is barerock and ice, and in a way so complex that no description of it can follow everydetail. Further, our knowledge of the soil’s properties beneath the surface isfragmentary because it derives from samples. Any representation of the mantleinvolves simpli ﬁcation and inference or prediction as to what the soil is like
between sampling points with the uncertainty that they entail.Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 243
Research in the last 40 years has provided us with quantitative descriptions
based on samples. There have been two main approaches. In the ﬁrst the soil is
divided into discrete classes that are sampled to give estimates of means andvariances of individual properties of interest. This approach may be regarded asclassical in both a pedological and a statistical sense. The other views soil as asuite of continuous variables and seeks to describe the continuity in terms ofspatial dependence. Speci ﬁcally, it treats properties as though they were the
outcomes of random processes and uses geostatistics to estimate both plausiblegenerating functions of the processes and values of the realizations at unsampledplaces. The two approaches are not mutually exclusive, and they can be combined.
In what follows, we deal brie ﬂy with soil classi ﬁcation as a model of soil
variation, partly for historical reasons and partly because of its intrinsic merit.We then devote the major part to geostatistics, which we illustrate with resultsfrom a recent case study of precision farming in the south of England. No accountof the study has been published previously, and so we describe the study and theresults from it in a single section after presenting the theory. We link them to thetheory with cross-references.
9.2 SOIL CLASSIFICATION
Formal classi ﬁcation of soil has its roots in 19th-century biological taxonomy
and practice in geological survey. Finite circumscribed regions are divided intoparcels by boundaries, which are sharp lines across which the soil changes insome sense. For any one region the outcome is a map, technically a choroplethmap, showing the region tessellated into spatial classes. These constitute ageneral-purpose classi ﬁcation. The map may purport to show the classes of some
prede ﬁned scheme of classi ﬁcation; alternatively, the boundaries on it may be
drawn where the soil changes more than elsewhere, and between which the soilis relatively homogeneous. There is no underlying mathematical model, but thepedologist who makes the map often has a mental model of the way soil variesin the landscape. Perhaps the best-known and most generally useful model isthe catena.
The soil map appears mathematically as a stepped function for any one soil
property, as in Figure 9.1a of a transect across a region. Variation within theclasses may be acknowledged, but it is not evident. The reality is more like Figure9.1b, which is the same transect, but now with all the data on pH in the subsoilmeasured at 10-m intervals.
1 Some of the boundaries can still be recognized where
there are large jumps in the data, but others are not obvious.
By the 1960s, taxonomists were putting numerical limits on the discriminating
criteria for consistency. This helped to codify description. It did nothing, however,to quantify the variation in properties that could not be assessed readily in theﬁeld. And it was unhelpful to the mapmaker who wished to place boundaries
where there were maxima in the rate of change in the landscape. Descriptionneeded a formal statistical basis, a need ﬁrst recognized by civil engineers in the
1960s (see, for example, Morse and Thornburn
2 and Kantey and Williams3).244 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.2.1 S AMPLING  AND ESTIMATION
In this approach a soil property, Z, takes values at an in ﬁnity of points,
, in a region ¬. In principle, the points could
occupy discrete positions in a third dimension (depth), but in regional survey, thedepth is so small in relation to the lateral distances that it is best treated separately.The values, , comprise the population, which has a mean, m, and variance,
here denoted as , signifying the total variance in 
¬. The region is divided into
K spatial strata or classes, , , that are mutually exclusive and
exhaustive and that are what the map displays. Each stratum has its own meanand variance, which we denote and , respectively. The region is thensampled, and the property at the N sampling points is measured to give data,
, of which n
k belong in class Rk.
If sampling is unbiased, then the mean for the kth class is estimated simply by
 (9.1)
The variance within Rk is estimated from the same sample byFIGURE 9.1 Subsoil pH along a transect. (a) A stepped function of mean values repre-
senting a soil classi ﬁcation with horizontal lines for the means within classes; the vertical
lines are the class boundaries. (b) The measured values.
xii i xx i … =,, = , , , ∞{}12 12
zi()x
T2
Rkk… K=,, ,12
μk k2
zz… zN () () ( )xx x12,, ,
k k
kin
ii k znzRk
ˆ () μ ==
=∑1
1xx forModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 245
 (9.2)
This in turn provides the variance of the mean, the estimation variance, as
(9.3)
Further, one can use the sample mean for a class as predictor for any unsam-
pled point, X0, in the same class. If X0 is chosen at random, then its prediction
variance is
(9.4)
Con ﬁdence limits on variances from small samples are wide, but one can
narrow them by making use of the pedologist’s mental model of variation. Whena soil surveyor subdivides a particular region to display the spatial distributionof the soil, he or she usually tries to create classes of the same categorical level,for example, all soil series or all soil families. Ideally, the variances within theseare equal; i.e., there is a common within-class variance:
(9.5)
Then, although each class might be represented by few sampling points and the
individual are not well estimated, is well estimated by the pooled vari-ance , which can replace in Equations 9.3 and 9.4.
9.3 THE GEOSTATISTICAL APPROACH
Imposing boundaries between classes to describe variation that is patently con-tinuous is obviously arti ﬁcial. The stepped function it creates puts into mathe-
matical form the pedologist’s mental model. Pedologists lived uncomfortablywith it for many years, partly because there seemed no practicable alternative.They considered polynomials, but such functions would have to be of a very highorder and could have no generality; the variation is too complex, perhaps evenchaotic, as Figure 9.1b shows. Such variation looks as though it might be random,and it is this idea that provides the alternative model: if the variation appearsrandom, then let us treat it as if it were so.
4 This is the basis of modern geostatistics
and its approach to describing soil variation.
9.3.1 R ANDOM  VARIABLES  AND RANDOM  FUNCTIONS
Again, a region /H5228 is regarded as comprising an in ﬁnite number of points
. Whereas in the classical approach the values of z at these pointsˆ ()kk
kin
ik i k snzz Rk
22
12 1
1== {}
=∑xx for
ss nkk k22()μ= /
ss s nkk k k2
022()X =+/
W for all22=k k
k2
W2
sW2sk2
xii…,=,, , ∞12246 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
constitute the population, in the geostatistical approach this population is assumed
to be just one realization of a random process or random function that couldgenerate any number of such populations. Then at each place x the soil property
is a random variable, Z(x) (notice the capital Z), of many values. For a continuous
variable such as the soil’s strength or pH, this number is in ﬁnite, and the whole
process may be regarded as a doubly in ﬁnite superpopulation. The random vari-
able at x has a distribution with a mean and variance and higher-order moments,
and the actual value there, z(x), is just one drawn at random from that distribution.
In these circumstances, the quantitative description of the variation involves
estimating the characteristics of what are assumed to be the underlying randomprocesses. The characteristics include the means and variances, and perhapshigher-order moments, and, most important, the spatial covariances.
The spatial covariance between the variables at any two places and is
given by
(9.6)
where and are the means at and , and E denotes the expected
value. In practice, cannot be estimated because we only ever have theone realization, and to overcome this apparent impasse we invoke assumptionsof stationarity.
9.3.2 S TATIONARITY
Starting with the ﬁrst moment, we assume that the mean, , is constant
for all x, and so we can replace and by the single value m, which we
can estimate by repetitive sampling.
Next, when and coincide, Equation 9.6 de ﬁnes the variance,
. We assume this to be ﬁnite and, like the mean, to be the
same everywhere. We then generalize Equation 9.6 so that it applies to any pairof points and separated by a vector, or lag, , so that
(9.7)
and this is also constant for any given h. This constancy of the mean and variance
and of a covariance that depends only on separation and not on absolute positionconstitutes second-order stationarity .x1 x2
CZ Z( ) () () () ()xx x x x x12 1 1 2 2,= {} { }E μμ
μ()x1 μ()x2 x1 x2
C()xx12,
μ=E[ ( )]Zx
μ()x1 μ()x2
x1 x2
μ22=E[{ ( ) } ]Zx
xi xj hx x=ij
CZ Z
ZZij i j() ( ) ( )
() (xx x x
xx,= {} {}
= {}E
Eμμ
++ {}
=h
h)
()μ2
CModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 247
Equation 9.7 shows that the covariance is a function of the lag and only of
the lag; it describes quantitatively the dependence between values of Z with
changing lag. It is readily converted to the dimensionless autocorrelation  by
(9.8)
where is the covariance at lag 0.
9.3.3 I NTRINSIC  VARIATION  AND THE VARIOGRAM
In many instances the assumption of constant mean throughout a region is unten-
able, and if the mean changes, then the variance will appear to increase inde ﬁnitely
with increasing area. The covariance cannot be de ﬁned then because there is no
value for m to insert in Equation 9.7. Faced with this situation, geostatisticians
consider the differences from place to place and their squares, as follows. Forsmall lag distances, the expected differences are zero,
(9.9)
and the expected squared differences de ﬁne the variances for those lags,
(9.10)
Equation (9.10) gives the variance of the difference at lag h. The variance
per point, , is half of this value and is known as the semivariance. Theabove two equations constitute the intrinsic hypothesis of geostatistics.
5 Like
the covariance, the semivariance depends only on the lag and not on the absolutepositions x and . As a function, is the variogram, often still called the
semivariogram.
If the process is second-order stationary, then the semivariance and the
covariance are equivalent:
(9.11)
If it is intrinsic only, then the covariance does not exist, but the semivariance
remains valid, and it is this validity in a wide range of circumstances that makesthe variogram so useful in summarizing spatial variation.() () ()hh =/CC 0
C()02=
E[ ( ) ( )]ZZxx h += 0
Ev a r22 ZZ ZZ() ( ) () ( )xx h xx h + {} =+ = (()h
()h
xh+ ()h
Z()x
() () ()hh =CC0
=21{( ) } h248 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.3.4 E STIMATING  THE VARIOGRAM
Semivariances are readily estimated from data, , by the method of
moments:
(9.12)
in which  is the number of paired comparisons at lag h. By changing h, we
obtain a sample or experimental variogram, which can be displayed as a graphof against h. The upper set of points in Figure 9.2 is an example in which the
experimental semivariances for the data in Figure 9.1b are plotted against the lagdistance, , for the one-dimensional transect.
The values of h deﬁne discrete points on the variogram, and so sampling is
best planned with regular intervals along a line in one dimension or on a grid intwo or three. Figure 9.2 is an example deriving from data recorded at regularintervals (10 m) on a line. Otherwise, where data are irregularly scattered, theactual separations have to be placed into bins, with limits in separating distanceand also in direction if there is more than one dimension (Figure 9.3). Thisintroduces an arbitrariness that is absent with data recorded at regular intervals.The practitioner must decide how wide to make the bins, and that decision willaffect the result to some degree — see the variograms of subsoil pH in Figure9.11. Narrow bins tend to give rise to erratic variograms (Figure 9.11a); wideFIGURE 9.2 Variograms of subsoil pH. The upper variogram is of the raw data shown
in Figure 9.1b; the lower curve is for the differences between the raw data and the meansin Figure 9.1a, i.e., for the residuals.•••••••••••••••••••
••••••
•••••••
zz…() ()xx12,,
()()() ( )()
hhxx hh
=+ {}
=∑1
212
mzz
im
ii
m()h
ˆ
h=| |hModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 249
bins tend to smooth and lose detail (Figure 9.11b). Inevitably, the choice is a
compromise. In particular, widening the angle of the discretization loses infor-mation on any ﬂuctuation in variance with changing direction (anisotropy) until
at 180° all information is lost.
9.3.5 M ODELS  FOR VARIOGRAMS
The underlying variogram, Equation 9.10, is a continuous function in as manydimensions as the variable . The experimental variogram estimates it at a setof points, with more or less error and point-to-point ﬂuctuation arising from the
sampling. To obtain a variogram to describe the spatial variation in R, we ﬁt a
plausible function to the experimental values.
Figure 9.2 shows the principal features of many, if not most, experimental
variograms. They are as follows.
1. The variance increases from near the ordinate with increasing lag
distance.
2. It reaches a maximum at which it remains thereafter.3. Any simple smooth line or surface placed through the points and
projected to the ordinate cuts it at some value greater than 0.
The model must also be mathematically acceptable in that it cannot give rise
to negative variances when random variables are combined. Technically, thecovariance function, if it exists, must be positive semide ﬁnite, and the variogram
must be conditional negative semide ﬁnite (CNSD) — see Webster and Oliver
6
for an explanation.FIGURE 9.3 Discretization of the lag into bins for irregularly scattered data. The quantity
w is the width of the bin and a/2 is the angular tolerance.
Z()x250 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
There are only a few families of simple functions that satisfy the above
criteria. They can be divided into those that are bounded and those that are not.In the ﬁrst group are the popular spherical and exponential models plus several
other members of this family, including the circular and pentaspherical modelsfrom Matérn’s
7 set, Gaussian and stable models, and Whittle’s8 function. We list
them and their formulae in their isotropic forms, i.e., for , and illustratethem ﬁtted to experimental values in the case study (Figure 9.10, Figure 9.17,
and Figure 9.20). They are as follows.
9.3.5.1 Circular
The circular function has the following equation:
(9.13)FIGURE 9.4 Principal features of variograms.
h=| |h
ππ() c o shcch
ah
ah
a=+ +012
1221 <≤
=>
==for
for
for0
00ha
ch a
hModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 251
Here is the semivariance at lag h, and c is the a priori  variance of the
autocorrelated process. The quantity is the intercept on the ordinate and isknown as the nugget variance , a term deriving from gold mining. The combine-
d is known as the sill of the model. These quantities are illustrated gener-
ically in Figure 9.4, and in Figure 9.10a we show the function ﬁtted to the
experimental variogram of topsoil magnesium, Mg
0.
The function has a distance parameter, a; this is its range , also known as its
correlation range. It marks the limit of spatial dependence; values at places closerto one another than the distance parameter are more or less correlated, whereasthose farther apart are not. It implies that all the variance in R is encountered
within that distance. The function gets its name from the formula for the area oftwo intersecting circles, which are of diameter a.
The semivariance at lag 0 is itself zero, and for continuous processes such as
most physical properties of the soil,  should increase gradually as h increases
from 0. In practice, we usually lack suf ﬁcient estimates of  near the ordinate
to ﬁt a model through the origin (see below), and we take the conservative
approach above. The nugget variance is therefore best regarded as embodyingvariation within the shortest sampling interval plus any measurement error.
9.3.5.2 Spherical
The equation for the spherical function is
(9.14)
in which h, c, c
0, and a have the same meanings as before. This function gets its
name from the formula for the volume of two intersecting spheres, each ofdiameter a. The function is illustrated in Figure 9.4a and is ﬁtted to experimental
values in Figure 9.2 and Figure 9.10b.
9.3.5.3 Pentaspherical
This function has the equation
(9.15)()h
c0
cc0+
()h
()h
()hcch
ah
a=+033
21
2forr
for
forha
ch a
h≤
=>
==00
()hcch
ah
ah
a=+ +03515
85
43
8≤
=>
==for
for
forha
ch a
h 00252 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
It can be thought of as the ﬁve-dimensional analog of the circular and spherical
models. Figure 9.10c shows it ﬁtted to the same experimental variogram as the
circular and spherical models.
There is also a one-dimensional analog of these models; it is the bounded
linear model, which increases linearly from its intersect on the ordinate to its sill,at which point it becomes constant. It is little used partly because it is valid(CNSD) in only one dimension. The circular model is valid in one and twodimensions, but not in three. The spherical and pentaspherical models are validin one, two, and three dimensions.
9.3.5.4 Exponential
The models above, starting with the bounded linear model, show increasingly
gradual curvature. A model that curves even more gradually is the exponentialfunction. Its equation is
(9.16)
in which c
0 and c have the same meanings as before, but now with a distance
parameter, r. The exponential model approaches its sill asymptotically and therefore
has no de ﬁnite range. A working range is often taken as , at which point the
function has reached 95% of c. This model is shown in Figure 9.4b and Figure 9.10d.
9.3.5.5 Models with Reverse Curvature at the Origin
Some variograms appear to approach the origin with decreasing gradients. These
may be represented by the general equation
(9.17)
in which . If , we have the Gaussian function. This is at the limit
of acceptability and gives rise to unstable prediction. It is best replaced by stablemodels with . Figure 9.4d shows the function with , and an examplewith is shown for elevation in the case study below (Figure 9.20a).Another recommended function to describe such variation is Whittle’s elementary
correlation ,
8 which embodies a Bessel function and derives from diffusion in two
dimensions. It is illustrated in Figure 9.4c.
9.3.5.6 Unbounded Models
Variograms of processes that are intrinsic but not second-order stationary increase
without bound as the lag distance increases. These can usually be ﬁtted by power
functions, for which the general equation including a nugget is() e x phcch
r=+0 1
=ar3
() e x phch
r=1
12<≤ =2
<2 =.17 5
=.19 5Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 253
(9.18)
The parameter w describes the intensity of the process, and the exponent,
which must lie strictly between 0 and 2 (these limits are excluded), describes thecurvature. If , then the curve is convex upwards; if it is 1, then we have astraight line; and if , then the curve is concave upwards. The curvewith is a parabola and describes a smoothly continuous process that is notrandom. Figure 9.5 illustrates the curves for several values of a.
9.3.5.7 Anisotropy
The variogram of a two-dimensional process is itself two-dimensional, and if the
process is anisotropic, then so is its variogram, which is then a function of bothdistance, h, and direction, q. In the simplest cases, the anisotropy is geometric,
meaning that it can be made isotropic by a linear transformation of the coordi-nates. The transformation is de ﬁned by reference to an ellipse:
(9.19)
where A and B are the long and short diameters, respectively, of the ellipse and
f is its orientation, i.e., the direction of the long axis (Figure 9.6). Equation 9.19
is embodied into the models as follows. For the bounded models, W replaces the
distance parameter of the isotropic variogram. So, for example, in the exponentialwe haveFIGURE 9.5 Curves of unbounded power functions with several values of exponents
between 0 and 2.
()hcw h =+0
<1
>1
=2
Ω() c o s( ) s i n( ) =+AB22 2 2254 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
(9.20)
and in the power function,
(9.21)
Figure 9.7 shows an anisotropic spherical function. Notice how the range of
the model changes with changing direction.
9.3.6 C OMBINING  TREND AND RANDOM  FLUCTUATION
The above functions describe processes that are entirely random though corre-lated. We can represent the processes by the general model
(9.22)
in which is the mean, i.e., constant in some neighborhood V, and is the
autocorrelated variance as de ﬁned in Equation 9.10. It often happens that such
models are unacceptable, either because there is an evident long-range trend acrossa region or because over short distances the variation appears smooth. In thesecircumstances cannot be treated as constant, but must be replaced by a deter-ministic term, say , that depends on the position x. The model then becomes
(9.23)FIGURE 9.6 Ellipse showing the parameters to describe geometric anisotropy.
() e x p()hc ch,= +0 1Ω
() ( )hc h,= + {} 0 Ω
ZV () ()xx =+μ
μV ()x
μV
u()x
Zu() () ()xx x =+Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 255
If  can describe the variation over the whole of R simply, then it is called
a trend. If it is local only, then it is known as a drift. In either event, it is usuallyrepresented by a low-order polynomial, so that Equation 9.23 becomes
(9.24)
in which the  are unknown coef ﬁcients and the  are known functions of
our choosing.
Trend can be gradual, such as the smooth predictable change associated with
the water table or an inclined or undulating land surface, or it can occur as abrupttransitions from one soil class to another. Gradual trend may be evident in adisplay of the data on a map. It may also be revealed in the experimentalvariogram, in which the points appear to lie on a line of ever-increasing gradient,FIGURE 9.7 Perspective diagram of a geometrically anisotropic spherical variogram.
u()x
Za f
jJ
jj () () ()xx x =+
=∑
0
aj fj()x256 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
especially if the curve ﬁtted is of a power function with exponent exceeding 2.
Figure 9.20a in the case study shows an experimental variogram that signi ﬁes
the presence of trend.
It is fairly easy, even if somewhat arbitrary, to separate any long-range trend
from the short-range apparently random ﬂuctuation, and to estimate the parameters
of the two components separately. We illustrate the procedure below with an exam-ple from the case study. It is not as easy to separate short-range drift; these circum-stances involve a full structural analysis, effectively a process of trial and error.
9
9.3.7 F ITTING  MODELS
Having described some of the mathematical functions for variograms, we nowturn to ﬁtting them to the experimental or sampling estimates. The matter is
controversial, but we cannot devote space to the controversy here. The usualapproach is to ﬁt the simplest model that looks reasonable and makes sense.
Nevertheless, there are dif ﬁculties arising largely from the following attributes:
1. The accuracy of the observed semivariances is not constant.
2. The variation may be anisotropic.3. The experimental variogram can contain a lot of point-to-point
ﬂuctuation.
4. Most of the models are nonlinear in one or more parameters.
The ﬁrst three items make ﬁtting by eye unreliable; items 1 and 2 impair
one’s intuition, and item 3 means that several plausible models might be drawnthrough the estimates. Large deviations about a model can lead to unstablemathematical solutions where nonlinear parameters must be found by iteration(item 4).
These dif ﬁculties are perhaps the most serious facing the practitioner, yet
they must be overcome because all subsequent tasks depend on the model ﬁnally
chosen. We recommend a procedure that embodies both visual inspection andstatistical ﬁtting, the latter having been tried, tested, and re ﬁned over the years
as statistical computation has advanced. So, ﬁrst inspect a graph of the experi-
mental variogram. Then choose one or more CNSD models that have shapes thatmatch the principal features of the graph. Then ﬁt each model in turn by weighted
least squares, i.e., by minimizing the sum of the squares of the deviations, suitablyweighted, between the experimental and ﬁtted values. Then draw each ﬁtted
model to check that the ﬁt does indeed seem reasonable. If all the chosen models
seem to ﬁt well, then you might ﬁnally choose the one for which the residual
sum of squares is least.
9.3.7.1 Complexity
The models we have mentioned are all simple in that they have no more than
three parameters. If none of them ﬁts well, we might try ﬁtting more complexModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 257
models, i.e., ones with more parameters. It is almost always possible to improve
the ﬁt of a model by adding parameters. One might be tempted to continue adding
parameters until the ﬁt is perfect, but that is not sensible; we need to compromise
between simplicity, or parsimony, with few parameters and close ﬁt with more
parameters. Akaike’s information criterion10 enables us to do this, and we describe
and illustrate its use in Webster and Oliver.6
9.3.7.2 Weights
Item 1 above drew attention to the fact that the are not equally reliable. In
particular, they are based on different numbers of paired comparisons, inEquation 9.12. So as a ﬁrst step, one should weight the experimental values in
proportion to m.
We also know that reliability of an estimate is in general inversely related to
the variance. This led Cressie
11 to include the ﬁtted semivariances, j =
1,2,…, in the weights. Cressie’s proposed weights are
(9.25)
This scheme tends to give more weight to estimates at the shorter lags than
weighting on pairs alone, because in most instances the variogram is an increasingfunction, and so the ﬁt is better there. This is usually desirable for kriging (see
below); it might be less desirable, however, if you want a more nearly equalweighting to estimate the distance parameters of the variograms.
A complication in Cressie’s scheme is that you cannot know the  until
you have ﬁtted the model. Therefore, you have to iterate. We have found, however,
that the ﬁtting converges rapidly and there is little change after the ﬁrst iteration.
9.4 COMBINING CLASSIFICATION WITH 
GEOSTATISTICS
In some instances neither a classi ﬁcation nor a variogram alone can represent
spatial variation in soil properties. The choropleth map implies abrupt changes,whereas the variogram is based on a model of random but continuous ﬂuctuation.
If there appear to be both kinds of variation, then the two approaches can becombined. Figure 9.2 shows such a situation. By recognizing the class boundaries,as in Figure 9.1a, and analyzing the variance (Table 9.1), we can obtain residualsfrom the class means. Their variance is the residual mean square, and a portionof this is likely to be autocorrelated and have its own variogram. The lower setof points in Figure 9.2 is an example of a within-class variogram obtained bysuperimposing the classi ﬁcation of Figure 9.1a on the data of Figure 9.1b.
The variogram of the residuals differs from the variogram of the original data
in two important respects:ˆ()h
m()h
,()hj
wmjj j Cressie() () ()hh h =/2
2()hj258 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
1. The sill of the ﬁtted model is less by an amount approximately equal
to the between-class variance, as expected.
2. The range of the model is much less. This is because the class-to-class
variation, which evidently dominated the variation over the wholetransect, has been removed to leave only the short-range correlation.
9.5 SIMULTANEOUS VARIATION IN TWO OR 
MORE VARIABLES
Any two variables, say and , may be correlated, and in particular linearly
correlated. That relation is conventionally expressed by the product–momentcorrelation coef ﬁcient:
(9.26)
i.e., the covariance of and divided by the product of their standard deviations.
It is also known as the Pearson correlation coef ﬁcient.
Two spatial random variables, and , may also be spatially  inter-
correlated in that each is spatially correlated both with itself, i.e., autocorrelated,
and with the other. The two are then said to be cross-correlated. In these circum-
stances, the two variables have in addition to their autovariograms, as de ﬁned by
Equation 9.10 and for present purposes denoted and , a cross-vari-ogram, , de ﬁned by
(9.27)
If both variables are second-order stationary with means and , then both
will have covariance functions, and , as de ﬁned in Equation 9.7,
and a cross-covariance:
(9.28)TABLE 9.1
Analysis of Variance of pH of Subsoil
Source Degrees of Freedom Mean Square F Ratio
Between classes 14 8.1456 19.27
Within classes 306 0.4228
Total 320 0.7607
zu zv
=cov
var var[]
[] []uv
uv
zu zv
Zu()x Zv()x
uu()hvv()h
uv()h
uv u u v v ZZ ZZ () () ( ) () ( )hx x h x x h =+ {} + {}1
2E
μu μv
Cuu()h Cvv()h
CZZuv u u v v() () ( )hx x h =+ {} { }E μμModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 259
There is also a cross-correlation coef ﬁcient, , given by
(9.29)
This is effectively the extension of the Pearson product–moment correlation
coef ﬁcient of Equation 9.26 into the spatial domain, and when , it is the
Pearson coef ﬁcient.
The cross-covariance is in general not symmetric, i.e.,
(9.30)
In words, the cross-covariance between and in one direction is dif-
ferent from that in the other, or expressed another way,
 (9.31)
since
One can envisage asymmetry between two soil properties at different depths
on a slope as result of creep or soli ﬂuction. The subsoil will tend to lag behind
the topsoil. Similarly, irrigation by ﬂooding always from the same end of a ﬁeld
might distribute salts differentially in the direction of ﬂow. Asymmetric covari-
ances have not been reported in the soil literature as far as we know, however.
The cross-variogram and the cross-covariance function (if it exists) are
related by
(9.32)
This quantity contains both and and, in consequence, loses any
information on asymmetry; it is an even function, i.e., it is symmetric:
 
Cross-semivariances can be estimated in a way similar to that of the autosemi-
variances,uv
uvuv
uu vvC
CC()()
() ()hh=
00
h=0
EEZZ ZZuu v v vv u() ( ) ()xx h x +≠ {} { } { } μμ μ (()xh+ {} μu
Zu()x Zv()x
CC CCuv uv uv vu() ( )  () ()hh h h ≠≠ or equivalently
CCuv vu() ( )hh =
uv uv uv uv CC C () () () ( )hh h =+ {} 01
2
Cuv()h Cuv()h
uv vu() () hh h = for all260 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
(9.33)
and the sample cross-variogram is formed simply by incrementing h. There is an
equivalent formula for computing the cross-covariances. Notice that there mustbe numerous places where both  and  have been measured.
9.5.1 M ODELING  THE CROSS-VARIOGRAM
The cross-variogram can be modeled in the same way as the autovariogram, andthe same restricted set of functions is available. There is one additional constraint.Any linear combination of the variables is itself a regionalized variable, and itsvariance cannot be negative. This is assured by adopting the linear model of
coregionalization . In it the variable  is assumed to be the sum of indepen-
dent (orthogonal) random variables ,
(9.34)
in which the superscript k is an index, not a power. There is a similar assumption
for . If the assumptions hold, then the pair of variables has a cross-variogram:
(9.35)
The products in the second summation can be replaced by  to give
(9.36)
The quantities are the variances and covariances, e.g., nugget and sill variances,
for the independent components of a spherical model. For two variables there arethe three nugget variances , , and , and similarly, three sills of the correlatedvariances. The coef ﬁcients for all k, and for each matrix of coef ﬁcients,
must be positive de ﬁnite. Since the matrix is symmetric, it is suf ﬁcient
that and , and that its determinant is positive or zero; this leads toˆ()()() ( ) (()
uv
im
ui u vimzz z hhxx h xh
=+ {}
=∑1
21))( ) + {} zvxh
zu zv
Zu()x
Yjk()x
Za Yu
kK
jk
ujk
jk
u () ()xx =+
==∑∑
11μ
Zv()x
uv
kK
jk
ujk
vjkkaag () ()hh =
==∑∑
11
buvk
uv
kK
uvkkbg () ()hh =
=∑
1
buu1bvv1buv1
bbuvk
vuk=
bb
bbuuk
uvk
vuk
vvk
buuk≥0 bvvk≥0Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 261
This is Schwarz’s inequality.
Any number of regionalized variables may be embodied in the linear model
of coregionalization. If there are V of them, then the full matrix of coef ﬁ-
cients, , will be of order V, and its determinant and all its principal minors
must be positive or zero.
Schwarz’s inequality has the following consequences:
1. Every basic structure, , present in the cross-variogram must also
appear in the two autovariograms; i.e., and if .As a corollary, if a basic structure is absent from either autova-riogram, then it may not be included in the cross-variogram.
2. Structures may be present in the autovariograms without their appear-
ing in the cross-variogram; i.e., may be zero whenor .
Parameters of the linear model of coregionalization with the above constraints
can be ﬁtted by iteration. One usually obtains the distance parameters ﬁrst by
ﬁtting models independently to the experimental variograms and choosing good
compromise values from these. Then with the distance parameter ﬁxed, the values
of the are found to minimize the sums of the squares of the residuals, subjectto the condition that the solution guarantees nonnegative variances, i.e., is CNSD.One can check the validity of the resulting model by plotting it on a graph of theexperimental cross-semivariances plus the limiting values that would hold if thecorrelation between the variables were perfect. These limits constitute the hullof perfect correlation, which is obtained from the coef ﬁcients  and  by
The line should ﬁt close to the experimental values for the model. It must
also fall within the hull to be acceptable. If it lies close to the hull, then the cross-correlation is strong; if in contrast it is far from the bounds, then the cross-correlation is weak. This is illustrated below in the case study by the coregion-alization between the soil’s apparent electrical conductivity, EC
a, and topsoil sand,
sand0 (Figure 9.24).
9.6 KRIGING: IMPLEMENTING THE 
GEOSTATISTICAL MODEL
Although the emphasis in this contribution is on modeling the spatial variation in
soil, we should remember that the force driving the development of geostatisticsbb b b kuvk
vuk
uuk
vvk=≤ 
[]bijk
gk()h
buuk≠0 bvvk≠0buvk≠0
gk()h
buvkbuuk>0
bvvk>0
buvk
buukbvvk
hull ( ) ( ) hh =±
=∑
kK
uuk
vvkkbbg
1262 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
was economic. In Russia, meteorologists wanted to interpolate atmospheric vari-
ables from sparse recording stations; in South Africa, miners wanted to estimatethe gold contents of ores locally from drill cores; elsewhere, petroleum engineers
wished to estimate oil reserves from logged boreholes; and all wanted their esti-
mates to be unbiased with minimum variance. Kolmogorov
12 worked out the theory
for doing these in the 1930s, but without a computer, no one could implement it.The advent of computers gave mining and petroleum engineers the opportunity.This combination of theory and technology was also the breakthrough that soilscientists had sought; it enabled them to predict spatially without having to classifythe soil ﬁrst, with all the controversy and dissatisfaction that incurred.
Spatial prediction with the above properties of unbiasedness and minimum
variance is termed kriging  by geostatisticians in recognition of the pioneering
work by D.G. Krige in the South African gold ﬁelds.
13 It can take several forms.
In the simplest cases, the estimator is a linear sum of data, a weighted average:
 (9.37)
In this sum, are the measured values of z at places
, and the are the weights. The weights sum to 1 to ensure unbi-
asedness,
(9.38)
and the expected error is . The prediction variance is
(9.39)
where is the semivariance of Z between sampling points and ,
and is the semivariance between the ith sampling point and the target
point .
More generally, we may want to predict the average value of Z in a block B
that is larger than the support of the data. The ordinary kriged estimate is still aweighted average of the data,Zz
iN
ii () ( )xx0
1=
=∑
zz… zN () () ( )xx x12,, ,
xx x12,, ,…N i
iN
i
=∑=
11
EZZ() ()xx00 0=
var E Z ZZ
iN() () () x xx02
00
12= {}
=
=∑ ii
iN
jN
ij i j () ()xx xx,,
==∑∑ 0
11
()xxij, xi xj
()xxi,0
x0Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 263
 (9.40)
but now with variance
(9.41)
The quantity is the average semivariance between the ith sampling point
and the target block B, and is the average semivariance within B, the
within-block variance.
Equation 9.39 for a target point leads to a set of equations in
unknowns:
(9.42)
This is the ordinary punctual kriging system, in which the quantity is a
Lagrange multiplier. The system can be represented in matrix form as follows:
(9.43)
In matrix notation it is simply
(9.44)ZB z
iN
ii () ( ) =
=∑
1x
var E ZB ZB ZB
iN
i() () () = {}
=
=∑2
12 (() ( ) ( )xx xi
iN
jN
ij i j BB B,, ,
==∑∑
11
()xiB,
()BB,
N +1 N +1
iN
ii j j
iNj
=
=∑,+ = ,
100
1() ( ) ( ) xx x xx for all
∑∑=i1
()x0
() () ( )
()()xx xx xx
xx xx11 12 1
21 221 ,, ,
,,N
()
() ()xx
xx xx2
121 ,
,,N
NN (()xxNN, 1
11 1 01
2
N
()()
(
xxx
x
010
2
=,
,,
,x
xx0
0
1)
()N
Ab =264 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
where A is the augmented matrix of semivariances among the data points on the
left-hand side of Equation 9.43, b is the augmented vector of semivariances
between the data points and the target, and llll is the vector of weights and the
Lagrange multiplier. One solves the equation by inverting matrix A and postmul-
tiplying the inverse by b to obtain the kriging weights:
(9.45)
The weights, , are then inserted into Equation 9.37 to give the estimate
of at . The estimation variance (prediction variance or speci ﬁcally kriging
variance) is
(9.46)
and it is obtained from the matrix equation as
(9.47)
If a target point, , happens to be one of the data points, say , then 
is minimized when  and all of the other weights are 0. In fact,
, and by inserting the weights into Equation 9.37, we obtain the
recorded value, , as our estimate of . Punctual kriging is thus an exactinterpolator.
The equivalent kriging system for blocks is
(9.48)
with the associated variance obtained as
(9.49)=Ab1
i
Z x0
2
0
100 () ( ) ()xx x x =, +
=∑
iN
ii
ˆ()2
0xb =T
x0 xj2
0()x
()xj=1
2
00 ()x =
zj()x z()x0
iN
ii j j
iNBB j
=
=∑
∑,+ = ,
1
1() ( ) ( ) xx x for all
ii=1
2
1() ( ) () ( )BB B B B
iN
ii =, + ,
=∑xModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 265
The only differences between it and the punctual kriging system is in the
right-hand side vector, which is now
and the additional within-block variance appears in the expression for the kriging
variance:
(9.50)
Long-range trend need not complicate the analysis because the kriging is
done in fairly small neighborhoods centered on each or B in turn. However,
if one wants to adhere to the random model, then one can ﬁrst remove the trend,
compute and model the variogram of the residuals from the trend, krige with thatmodel and the residuals, and ﬁnally add the trend back to the kriged estimates.
This combination is illustrated in the case study for EC
a, with results in Figure
9.19 and Figure 9.20. The estimates will be unbiased, but the kriging varianceswill be for the residuals and not the estimation variances. More advanced tech-niques are needed to obtain them and are beyond the scope of this chapter.
9.6.1 W EIGHTS
When the kriging equations are solved to obtain the weights, , in general, theonly large weights are those of the points near to the point or block to be kriged.The nearest 4 or 5 might contribute 80% of the total weight, and the next nearest10 almost all of the remainder. The weights also depend on the con ﬁguration of
the sampling. We can summarize the factors affecting the weights as follows:
1. Near points carry more weight than more distant ones. Their relative
proportions depend on the positions of the sampling points and on thevariogram: the larger is the proportion of the nugget variance to thetotal variance, the smaller are the weights of the points nearest to targetpoint or block.
2. The relative weights of points also depend on the block size: as the
block size increases, the weights of the nearest points decrease andbx
x
x=,
,
,()
()
()1
2
1B
B
BN
ˆ() ( )2BB B =,bT
x0
i266 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
those of the more distant points increase, until the weights become
nearly equal.
3. Clustered points carry less weight individually than isolated ones at
the same distance.
4. Data points can be screened by ones lying between them and the target.
These effects are all intuitively desirable, and the ﬁrst shows that kriging is
local. They also have practical implications, perhaps the most important of whichis that because only the nearest few data points to the target carry signi ﬁcant
weight, matrix A in the kriging system need never be large and its inversion will
be swift. We can replace  in Equations 9.42 and 9.48 by some much smallernumber, say . Typically is enough.
9.7 FACTORIAL KRIGING ANALYSIS
We mentioned above that some experimental variograms are best ﬁtted by a
combination of two or more simple models. Figure 9.17a, for example, of yield,shows a variogram ﬁtted by two isotropic spherical functions plus a nugget. The
full model is
(9.51)
where and are the a priori  variances of the two spatially dependent compo-
nents of the models, and are the corresponding ranges, and is the nuggetvariance.
The above equation effectively describes the variance of a random process,
of range a
1, nested within another of longer range, a2, plus the variance of a
spatially uncorrelated process, the nugget variance. It is an example of a generalsituation in which the variogram of is a combination of, say, S individual
variograms; thus,
(9.52)
where the superscripts refer to the component variograms. If we assume that the
processes represented by these components are uncorrelated, then we can writeEquation 9.52 asN
nN n=20
()hcch
ah
ach=+ +01
1123
21
23
2aah
aha
ccc221
0121
20<≤
=+ +for
33
21
22212
0h
ah
aah a
cc<≤
=+for
112 2
00+>
==ch a
hfor
for
c1 c2
a1 a2 c0
Z()x
() () () ()hhh h =++ +12 SModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 267
(9.53)
where is the kth basic variogram function and is a coef ﬁcient that mea-
sures the relative contribution of the variance of to the sum.
The components on the right-hand side of Equation 9.53 correspond to S
random functions that in sum form ; thus,
(9.54)
in which is the mean of . Each has expectation zero, and the squared
differences are
= 0 otherwise (9.55)
The last component, , may be intrinsic only, so that in Equation 9.53
is unbounded with a gradient .
Equation 9.55 expresses the mutual independence of the random functions
in Equation 9.54. Together they de ﬁne the linear model of regionalization, which
we may see as a model of the real world of the soil, in which factors such asrock type, tree-throw, burrowing animals, and farmers’ divisions of land intoﬁelds each operates on its own characteristic scale and with its particular form,
independent of the others.
The model also enables the values of the contributing processes to be esti-
mated separately by factorial kriging analysis, a technique devised by Matheron.
14
Each spatial component is estimated as a linear combination of the obser-vations, :
 (9.56)
As in ordinary kriging, is usually replaced by much smaller points near to .
The are weights assigned to the observations, but now they sum to 0, not
to 1, to accord with Equation 9.54. Subject to this condition, they are chosen tominimize the kriging variance, and this leads to the kriging system() ()hh =
=∑
kS
kkbg
1
gk()h bk
gk()h
Z()x
ZZ
kS
k() ()xx =+
=∑
1μ
μ Z()x Zk()x
1
2EZZ Z Z b gkk k k k() ( ) () ( )xx h x x h + {} + {} =kkkk () h if =
ZS()x gS()h
bS
S
Zk()x
zi … Ni()x ,=,, ,12
ˆ() ( )Zzk
iN
ik
i xx0
1=
=∑
N n x0
ik268 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
 (9.57)
The quantity is the Lagrange multiplier.
The above system of equations is solved for each spatial component, k, to
ﬁnd the weights , which are then inserted into Equation 9.56 to estimate that
component. Figure 9.18a and b shows the long- and short-range components of
yield mapped separately, based on the respective distance parameters, and ,of the ﬁtted variogram function.
We need to krige the local mean at , which is again a linear combination
of the data:
 (9.58)
The weights for this are obtained from the following system:
(9.59)
We again have a Lagrange multipler, .
Estimating the long-range component can be affected by the size of the
moving neighborhood — see Galli et al.
15 To estimate a spatial component with
a given range, the distance across the neighborhood should be at least equal tothat range. However, it usually happens that sampling must be dense for a short-range component to be distinguished in the variogram. When the data are sub-sequently used for kriging, only a small proportion of them are retained for akriging system, and those are all near to the target. Although we could makelarge, and even include all  data in modern computers, the inversion of suchlarge matrices can be unstable and is not recommended. Further, only the nearestfew data to the target would contribute to the estimate because they would screenthe more distant data; it would mean kriging in an effective neighborhood smallerthan the neighborhood speci ﬁed, so that the range of the component estimatedjn
jk
ijkk k
i bg
=∑,= ,
100 ()( ) () xx x xx for all ii… n
jn
jk=,, ,
=
=∑12
0
1
k()x0
jk
a2 a1
x0
μ() ()xx0
1=
=∑
jn
jjzmean
jn
ji jkk
i bg
=∑,= ,
100mean meanf () ( ) () xx x xx oor all
meani… n
jn
j=,, ,
=
=∑12
1
1
mean()x0
n
NModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 269
would be smaller than the range determined from the structural analysis. Galli
et al.15 suggested a way of overcoming the shortcoming by selecting only a
proportion of the data within the speci ﬁed neighborhoods. Such a selection is
arbitrary, and Jaquet16 proposed what seems a better alternative. His proposal
involves adding to the estimated long-range component the estimate of the localmean; this is the solution that we have adopted — see Oliver et al.
17 and below.
9.8 CASE STUDY: SOIL VARIATION AT YATTENDON
We illustrate the most important aspects of the theory with results from a recentcase study. No description of the study has been published previously, and theresults are new. Therefore, we devote a section to the background, the samplesurveys planned to obtain data at a suitable intensity, and the exploration of thosedata before analyzing them formally.
The study was part of a project on precision farming for the British Home
Grown Cereals Authority.
18 Its aim was to explore factors in the soil and in the
environment more generally that might cause variation in cereal yield withinindividual ﬁelds. The particular ﬁeld, National Grid Reference SU 458174, covers
23 ha on the Yattendon Estate. It is part of the Chalk hill country  of southern
England and has the typical undulating topography of this region. The soil is aLuvisol, its texture varies from sandy loam to clay loam, and it is moderately towell drained. The parent material is the Reading Beds, comprising sediments ofvaried particle size of Tertiary age, which rest on the Upper Chalk (soft limestoneof Cretaceous age).
Several surveys were done during 2002; they included observations of the
following:
1. Attributes of the topsoil (0 to 15 cm) and subsoil (30 to 60 cm); Table
9.2 lists the ones analyzed here.
2. Electromagnetic induction (EMI) in which the apparent electrical con-
ductivity (EC
a) of the soil was measured at ﬁeld capacity.
3. Attributes of the growing crop (winter wheat).
Yield data from previous crops of winter wheat (1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001)
were used to guide the initial soil sampling. The variograms of yield were allbounded and could be modeled as combinations of two spatial components, onewith an average range of about 40 m and the other of about 100 m. Based on thisinformation, we sampled as follows: at the nodes of a 30 m ¥ 30 m grid, with
additional observations at 15-m intervals along short transects from randomlyselected grid nodes. In this way, we ensured that the variation apparent in the yielddata would be represented adequately and ef ﬁciently. In addition, we aimed to
have at least 100 sampling sites to ensure that our variograms would be reliable.
19
From the full set of data we have selected the variables listed in Table 9.2
for illustration.270 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.9 EXPLORING THE DATA
Table 9.2 summarizes the data. The distributions of all but two of the variables
are fairly symmetric; the two exceptions are the soil’s apparent electrical con-ductivity, EC
a, and subsoil magnesium, Mg30, for which the skewness coef ﬁcients
exceed 1. These large coef ﬁcients were not caused by outliers, and we might
have transformed the data to their common logarithms to make the distributionsmore nearly normal and stabilize the variances. This transformation would havediminished the skewness to 0.43 for EC
a and to –0.32 for Mg30. In the event, we
have done the analyses on the original data for ease of interpretation.
Experimental variograms were computed by Equation 9.12 in four directions
to reveal any anisotropy in the variation. The results for topsoil magnesium, Mg0,
are shown in Figure 9.8 as an example for the directions 0 ∞, 45 ∞, 90 ∞, and 135 ∞.
There is little divergence among the different directions, and we can treat thevariation as isotropic. Likewise, there was no evidence of anisotropic variationin the other properties.
The shapes of the variograms of several properties suggest the presence of
regional trend in the variation, for example, that of EC
a (Figure 9.20a). In these
circumstances computed from the data by Equation 9.12 does not estima-te of the random residual. The experimental values follow a curve that isconcave upwards, and this is the form that several computed variograms had. Wereturn to the example below.
9.10 MODELING THE VARIOGRAM AND 
CROSS-VALIDATION
The experimental variogram may be computed to any desired lag, provided there
are suf ﬁcient comparisons, and one must choose a suitable maximum lag toTABLE 9.2
Summary Statistics of Properties Recorded at Yattendon
VariableNumber
of Sites Mean Minimum Maximum VarianceStandard
Deviation Skewness
ECa/mS m–1 3275 21.1 6.5 82.5 9.354 87.5 2.25
Log10ECa 3275 1.290 0.813 1.916 0.166 0.028 0.43
Elevation/m 3555 92.2 84.0 113.0 35.05 5.92 0.03Leaf area index 195 1.79 0.35 3.60 0.371 0.609 0.40Mg
0/mg kg–1230 67.3 12.8 136.4 524.63 22.9 0.29
Mg30/mg kg–1122 53.18 14.73 146.3 455.32 21.3 1.47
Log10Mg30 122 1.693 1.168 2.165 0.029 0.171 –0.32
pH30 122 7.176 6.140 8.220 0.241 0.491 0.35
Sand0/% 230 50.84 14.00 83.00 207.41 14.4 0.02
Yield/t ha–1 5896 7.08 1.50 11.8 4.273 2.07 –0.52
ˆ()h
()hModeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 271
which to ﬁt the model. We illustrate this with the variogram of Mg0 computed
to 400 m (Figure 9.9). The sample values lie close to a monotonic nondecreasingcurve, compatible with second-order stationarity to about 300 m. Thereafter, thesample values increase markedly. A simple bounded model ﬁtted to the whole
set of values clearly cannot represent the upturn beyond 300 m. We could forcea ﬁt with a circular model (Figure 9.9), but it is a poor representation of the
whole sequence.FIGURE 9.8 Experimental variogram of topsoil magnesium, Mg0, computed in four dirc-
tions, 0 ∞, 45 ∞, 90 ∞, and 135 ∞.
FIGURE 9.9 Experimental variogram of topsoil magnesium, Mg0, computed to lag 400 m
and the best- ﬁtting circular function.•••••
•••••
•••
•
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••272 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
We know from experience that the semivariances at the longer lags become
increasingly unreliable as the number of comparisons from which they are com-puted decreases. Table 9.3 shows that the number of paired comparisons startsto decrease at the distance at which the semivariances start to increase. If wewant the ﬁtted model for kriging, then usually the form of the variogram at the
long lag distances is of no consequence.
By limiting the experimental variogram to a maximum lag distance of 300 m,
we could ﬁt several of the simple bounded models, as Figure 9.10 shows; Table
9.4 lists the parameters of four plausible models and the residual mean squares(RMSs). The RMS is least for the exponential function (Figure 9.10d), whichprovides the best ﬁt in this sense. In addition, the table gives the percentage of
the variance accounted for by each model; it is 93.7% for the exponential function.The function has a smaller nugget variance than the other models (Table 9.4 andTABLE 9.3Number of Pairs of Comparisons for Each Lag 
Interval on the Experimental Variogram for Topsoil Mg
Lag Counts Lag Counts Lag Counts 
15.7 88 164.4 1014 313.8 838
31.0 522 179.6 1354 330.1 102843.0 410 194.5 1412 345.6 74962.9 1192 212.0 1403 362.1 72777.2 345 224.0 987 375.3 49391.5 1300 241.0 1673 390.3 582
107.0 780 256.3 979 404.4 388122.5 1256 272.2 1343135.2 910 285.0 767151.3 1343 300.1 1112
TABLE 9.4
Parameters of Models Fitted to the Experimental Variogram of 
Topsoil Mg at Yattendon
Model TypeVariances Distance Parameters
RMSaPercentage of
Variance c0 ca /m r/m 
Circular 226.7 271.5 99.5 1.178 91.3
Spherical 215.6 282.8 110.0 1.145 91.6Pentaspherical 205.3 293.5 130.0 1.107 91.9Exponential 103.2 400.3 35.7 0.911 93.7
aRMS is the residual mean square.Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 273
Figure 9.10d); it is approximately half. This has implications for kriging because
the larger the nugget variance is, the greater is the smoothing of the predicted values.The distance parameter of the function is 35.7 m, giving an effective range of spatialdependence of 107 m, which is similar to the ranges of the three other models.
We mentioned above that the size of bins and the lag interval affect the form
of the experimental variogram computed from irregularly scattered data. We showhere how that carries through to the modeling. Figure 9.11a shows the experi-mental variogram of subsoil pH, pH
30, with a lag interval and bin width of 15 m
and the best- ﬁtting pentaspherical function, which accounted for 95.5% of the
variance. Figure 9.11b shows the experimental variogram computed afresh witha lag interval and bin width of 30 m. In this instance, the exponential functionﬁtted best, accounting for 94.3% of the variance. Notice that the experimental
semivariances increase in a smoother progression with wider bins, but that thesill variance and effective range are much the same. The pentaspherical modelhas a substantially larger nugget variance, and one might wonder whether thiswould have an important effect on subsequent kriging. A comparison by cross-validation shows there to be little difference in the accuracy of the predictionsmade with them (Table 9.5). The mean error, mean squared error, and MSDR  are
very similar for the two models. The MSDR, mean-squared deviation ratio, isthe mean of the squared errors divided by the kriging variances,
6 and a value of
1 indicates a well-chosen model for kriging. Provided the experimental variogramFIGURE 9.10 Experimental variogram of topsoil magnesium, Mg0 and ﬁtted models: (a)
circular, (b) spherical, (c) pentaspherical, and (d) exponential, which ﬁts best.••••••••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••••(a) (b)
(c) (d)274 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
is reliable (this one was computed from 122 values) and the model ﬁts well, the
initial lag interval selected does not appear to have much effect even though thenarrower bins produced a more irregular variogram. Further, the similarity of thepredictions is evident in the maps (Figure 9.15a and b).
We ﬁtted the following functions to the variograms of other variables: circular
to Mg
30 (Figure 9.12a) and spherical to topsoil sand (Figure 9.12b); Table 9.6
lists their model parameters. The stable exponential function was ﬁtted to the
variogram of elevation computed on the residuals from a linear trend, which wasﬁtted by standard least squares regression. Figure 9.22a shows it. The model
approaches the origin in an upwardly concave way, but the exponent must be lessthan 2. It expresses smooth local variation that is not predictable, as in the caseof local trend or drift. A power function was ﬁtted to the residuals from a linear
trend for leaf area index (LAI) (Figure 9.23a). This function is intrinsic only andexpresses the increase in variance as the area studied increases.
The experimental variogram for yield (1995) was ﬁtted by a double spherical
function (Figure 9.17a). The nugget and short- and long-range components ofthe model are also shown separately. If the components are assumed to beindependent, so that we have a linear model of regionalization, then their contri-butions can be estimated separately by factorial kriging analysis, as describedFIGURE 9.11 Experimental variogram of subsoil pH, pH30. (a) Computed with bins 15 m
wide and ﬁtted with a pentaspherical function. (b) Computed with a bin width of 30 m
and ﬁtted with an exponential model.
TABLE 9.5
Results of Cross-Validation for Subsoil pH
Model Type Mean ErrorMean Squared
ErrorMean Squared
Deviation Ratio
Exponential –0.01449 0.1495 1.045 
Pentaspherical –0.01374 0.1492 1.006 •••••••••••••
••••
••••
••••••Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 275
FIGURE 9.12 Experimental variograms and ﬁtted models of (a) subsoil magnesium, Mg30
(circular), and (b) topsoil sand, sand0 (spherical).
TABLE 9.6
Parameters of Models Fitted to Experimental Variograms at Yattendon
Variable Model TypeSills Distance Parameters
c0 c1 c2 a1/m a2/m r/m 
Bounded Variances
ECares Exponential 9.15 41.1 26.9
Elevationres Stable* 0 9.54 95.9
Mg0 Exponential 103.2 400.3 35.7
Mg30 Circular 221.9 278.4 250.3
pH30 Pentaspherical 0.0796 0.160 154.4
pH30 Exponential 0.0466 0.200 49.70
Sand0 Spherical 17.68 107.5 120.1
Yield Double spherical 0.6176 1.022 1.003 31.13 108.8
Unbounded Variances
c0Intensity
(w) Exponent
(a) 
Leaf area 
index Power function 0 0.0410 0.389 
Note:  The superscript res means residuals from a ﬁtted trend function.
* The exponent of the stable model is 1.965.•••••
••••••
•••••••••••276 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
above. We show the results in Figure 9.18, after illustrating ordinary kriging at
the end of the following section.
9.11 KRIGING
We have used the models ﬁtted to the experimental variograms (Table 9.6) with
the data to krige at unsampled places and have mapped the results. The examplesillustrate the commonly used models, and the maps of the kriged predictionsshow the kinds of patterns that these models describe. Predictions were made byordinary kriging over blocks of 10 m ¥ 10 m at the nodes of a 5 m ¥ 5 m grid.
Figure 9.10d shows the experimental variogram and the exponential model
ﬁtted to Mg
0. The parameters of the model were used to krige the values, which
were then mapped (Figure 9.13a). The irregular shape and size of the patches oflarge and small values express the randomness of the exponential process inspace; the structures have what appear to be random extents. The maximumdistance across the ﬁeld is about 600 m. The average extent of the patches is a
measure of the approximate distance across the patches and of the extent of spatialdependence of about 100 m (Table 9.6).
FIGURE 9.13 Block kriged map of (a) topsoil Mg and (b) its associated map of the
kriging variances. (See color version on accompanying CD.)() =ar3
N
Above   85
75 – 8565 – 75
55 – 65
45 – 55
Below   45Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(a)
N
Above   210
185 – 210
160 – 185
135 – 160110 – 135
Below   110Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 277
Figure 9.13b is the map of the kriging variances. The large variances around
the ﬁeld margins and the copse in the central part of the ﬁeld show the edge
effects, where there were fewer data from which to predict. The dark linearpatches in the center are of the small kriging variances where the sampling wasmore intensive on the short transects.
Figure 9.12a shows the experimental variogram and the ﬁtted circular model
of Mg
30. The range of spatial variation for subsoil Mg is more than twice as long
as that for the topsoil. This is expressed clearly in the kriged map (Figure 9.14a),where the spatial structures have a much larger extent than those for topsoil Mg.They are also more regular, though the two variables have similar variances.Figure 9.14b is the map of kriging variances — there were fewer parts of theﬁeld with more intensive sampling in the subsoil.
Figure 9.12b shows the experimental variogram and the ﬁtted spherical model
to topsoil sand content, sand
0. This has a range of spatial dependence similar to
that of topsoil Mg. The kriged map of sand0 (Figure 9.16) shows a similar pattern
of variation to that of Mg0, but with large values where the sand content is small.
The spatial structures in the map of sand0 are more regular than those for Mg0;
the patchiness in the variation is distinct.FIGURE 9.14 Maps of (a) kriged estimates of subsoil magnesium, Mg30, and (b) the
associated kriging variances. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
N
Above   85
75 – 85
65 – 7555 – 65
45 – 55
Below   45Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(a)
N
Above   125
105 – 125
85 – 105
65 –  85 
45 –  65 
Below     45Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)278 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
For properties that have two spatial scales of variation, factorial kriging can
be used to explore them separately. Figure 9.17a shows the double sphericalfunction ﬁtted to the variogram of the yield for 1995. The function was used for
ordinary kriging ﬁrst; Figure 9.17b is the map of predictions. The pattern of
variation appears complex because of the long- and short-range components ofFIGURE 9.15 Subsoil pH, pH30, map of block kriged predictions using (a) the penta-
spherical model and (b) the exponential function. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 9.16 Block kriged map of topsoil sand. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
N
Above   7.6
7.4 - 7.6
7.2 - 7.4
7.0 - 7.2
6.8 - 7.0
Below   6.8Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers
(a)458.2 458.0 457.8
N
Above   7.6
7.4 - 7.67.2 - 7.47.0 - 7.26.8 - 7.0
Below   6.8Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers
(b)458.2 458.0 457.8
N
Above   65
58 – 6550 – 58
43 – 50
35 – 43
Below   35Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 279
variation present. These were then extracted separately and predicted by factorial
kriging. The map of the long-range predictions (Figure 9.18a) is similar to thatfrom ordinary kriging, except that it is less noisy. The regions with large andsmall yields are clear in both maps. In the southwest, north, and southeast of theﬁeld, there is an inverse relation between yield and topsoil sand content (Figure
9.16), but the relation changes in the northeast and central parts of the ﬁeld. The
map of the short-range prediction (Figure 9.18b) shows a much smaller scale ofvariation with a strong regular pattern. This component of the variation appearsto relate to the lines of management in the ﬁeld. These were in a northeast-to-
southwest direction, and the larger values are probably in the zones between thetramlines, where the soil has suffered less compaction from machinery. There isalso some evidence of variation perpendicular to these lines, perhaps the effectsof operations in a different direction. These management effects were not evidentin the map of ordinary kriged predictions.FIGURE 9.17 (a) Variogram of yield in 1995 ﬁtted, with nugget and short- and long-
range components shown separately. (b) Map of ordinary kriged predictions made withthis model. (See color version on accompanying CD.)•••••••••••••••
(a)
N
Above   9
8 – 9 
7 – 8 6 – 7 5 – 6 
Below    5Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)280 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.11.1 E XAMPLES  OF TREND
Figure 9.19a is a map of the raw values of ECa. The linear feature with large ECa
crossing the ﬁeld diagonally is where a pipeline was placed some 6 years previ-
ously. Otherwise, the values have a patchy distribution, and there is no clearindication of the presence of trend. The semivariances computed from these dataincrease monotonically following an approximately exponential form to a lag ofabout 125 m (Figure 9.20a), and thereafter increase more markedly. This behavioris symptomatic of trend, though not conclusive evidence of it. Practitioners shouldnot assume that trend can be detected from the appearance of the variogram alone.They should realize that the estimated semivariances at long lags can be unreli-able, as in Figure 9.9, which behaves similarly.
Linear and quadratic trend functions were ﬁtted on the coordinates of EC
a;
they accounted for 18 and 42%, respectively, of the variance. The latter percentageis strong evidence for a quadratic trend. The variogram of the residuals from thetrend (Figure 9.20b) differs substantially from that of the raw data; it is nowFIGURE 9.18 Maps of yield made by factorial kriging. (a) Predictions based on the long-
range component of the variogram, a2. (b) Predictions based on the short-range component
of the variogram, a1. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
N
Above    9.0
8.0 – 9.07.0 – 8.06.0 – 7.05.0 – 6.0
Below    5.0Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(a)
N
Above    1.0
0.5 – 1.00.0 – 0.5
–0.5 – 0.0
–1.0 – –0.5
Below   -1.0Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 281
FIGURE 9.19 Pixel maps of apparent electrical conductivity of the soil, ECa, of (a) raw
values and (b) the quadratic trend. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 9.20 (a) Experimental variogram of the measured ECa. (b) Experimental vari-
ogram of the residuals from the quadratic trend and the ﬁtted model.
N
Above   35
30 – 35
25 – 3020 – 25
15 – 20
Below   15Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(a)
N
Above   35
30 – 35
25 – 3020 – 2515 – 20
Below   15Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)
•••••••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••••••
(a) (b)282 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
bounded, and it can be ﬁtted by an exponential function. Table 9.6 lists the
parameters of the model.
The quadratic trend in ECa is evident in Figure 9.19b, in which the residuals
have been removed. It shows an upwardly convex surface with small values oneither side of the central zone of large values. This surface relates to both thephysiography of this ﬁeld (Figure 9.22b) and the soil texture (Figure 9.16, the
map of sand
0).
Kriging was done on the residuals from the quadratic trend with the param-
eters of the ﬁtted exponential function (Table 9.6). Figure 9.21a shows the
contour map of the kriged residuals. Unlike the map of the raw data, this mapshows the patchy deviations from the trend, which is as we should expect fromthe bounded variogram.
To map EC
a on its original scale of measurement, we added the quadratic trend
surface to the predicted residuals. Figure 9.21b shows the interpolated map of ECa.
The large values are on the plateau, where the soil contains more clay. The largevalues associated with the pipeline are still evident. The pattern of variation hasremained patchy, but it no longer resembles that of the map of the residuals.FIGURE 9.21 (a) Map of block kriged residuals of ECa from the quadratic trend surface.
(b) Map of block kriged predictions with the trend added back. (See color version onaccompanying CD.)
N
Above    5
3 – 5
0 – 3
–3 – 0
–5 – –3
Below    -5Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(a)
N
Above    32
27 – 3222 – 27
17 – 22
12 – 17
Below    12Kilometers174.4
174.2
174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 283
The same approach was applied to predict elevation. More than 68% of its
variation was accounted for by a linear trend surface. Figure 9.22b shows thekriged map of elevation; the residuals were kriged and the linear trend was addedback to the predictions. The map shows the smoothly undulating topography ofthis ﬁeld. It also shows some similarity with the quadratic trend surface ﬁtted to
the EC
a data, which suggests that the trend in those data might be linked to the
ﬁeld’s physiography.
For leaf area index (LAI) more than 36% of its variation was accounted for
by a linear trend surface. The map of kriged predictions (with the trend addedback) shows that the variation is not patchy — there is continuous change fromlarge to small values across the ﬁeld (Figure 9.23b). This is what we should
expect from an unbounded model; it shows that the full extent of the variationhas not been encompassed and that the variance would continue to increase ifwe were to increase the extent of our study.FIGURE 9.22 Elevation. (a) Experimental variogram and ﬁtted stable model with expo-
nent 1.965 for the residuals from a linear trend. (b) Map of kriged predictions made withthis model with the trend added back. (See color version on accompanying CD.)••••••••••••
(a)
N
Above   103
99 – 103
95 –  99 91 –  95 
87 –  91
Below     87Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)284 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
9.12 COREGIONALIZATION
Finally, we use the data from the case study to illustrate coregionalization. The
electrical conductivity, ECa, and the sand content of the topsoil, sand0, are
inversely correlated; the Pearson correlation coef ﬁcient is –0.67. We analyzed the
data to see whether this correlation extends spatially in that the geographicdistributions are similar. We computed the experimental cross-variogram of thetwo properties with Equation 9.33, in addition to the two autovariograms. Wethen ﬁtted the linear model of coregionalization (Equation 9.34) to them. Figure
9.24 shows the three variograms with the ﬁtted spherical model with the common
range 96.6 m. The sill values are listed in Table 9.7. In the graph of the cross-variogram we have added the hull of perfect correlation. The cross-variogramlies about halfway between the zero of the variance scale and the hull, showingthat the moderate correlation represented in the Pearson coef ﬁcient extends into
the spatial domain.FIGURE 9.23 Leaf area index. (a) Experimental variogram and ﬁtted power function for
the residuals from a linear trend. (b) Map of kriged predictions made with this model withthe trend added back. (See color version on accompanying CD.)••••••••••
(a)
N
Above   2.8
2.4 – 2.8
2.1 – 2.4
1.8 – 2.1
1.4 – 1.8
Below   1.4Kilometers174.4
174.2174.0
Kilometers458.2 458.0 457.8
(b)Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 285
9.13 CONCLUSION
Geostatistics now has a huge repertoire, and a single chapter cannot cover every-
thing. Here we concentrate on the basic linear techniques and their underlyingtheory to enable a practitioner to get started. Our recent investigation at Yattendonillustrates the techniques in action. It also shows that those techniques cannot beFIGURE 9.24 Model of coregionalization with autovariograms of the quadratic residuals
of ECa and topsoil sand, and the cross-variogram and ﬁtted model; the dashed lines in the
bottom graph form the hull of perfect correlation.
TABLE 9.7
Model Parameters of the Auto- and Cross-
Variograms for the Coregionalization of ECares 
and Topsoil Sand
Variable c0 c
ECares 5.253 18.46
ECares ¥ Sand0 3.550 –31.21
Sand0 3.801 115.8
Note:  The basic variogram is spherical with a range of 96.6 m.••
•••••••••••••••••••
•••
•••••••••••286 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
applied automatically, but rather, a situation needs a lot of thought, an exploration
of the data, and understanding. Only then should the data be analyzed formallyfor local estimation and mapping.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The results described in the case study were from a project funded by the U.K.’sHome Grown Cereal Authority (HGCA Project 2298), and we thank it for itssupport. We also thank Dr. Z.L. Carroll and Dr. S.J. Baxter for their work on thisproject and the resulting data analysis.
REFERENCES
1. R Webster, HE de la Cuanalo. Soil transect correlograms of north Oxfordshire
and their interpretation. J Soil Sci  26: 176–194, 1975.
2. RK Morse, TH Thornburn. Reliability of soil units. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering , V ol. 1.
Dunod, Paris, 1961, pp. 259–262.
3. BA Kantey, AAB Williams. The use of soil engineering maps for road projects.
Trans South Afr Inst Civ Eng  4: 149–159, 1962.
4. R Webster. Is soil variation random? Geoderma  97: 149–163, 2000.
5. G Matheron. Les variables régionalisées et leur estimation . Masson, Paris, 1965.
6. R Webster, MA Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists . John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, U.K., 2001.
7. B Matérn. Spatial variation: stochastic models and their applications to problems
in forest surveys and other sampling investigations. Meddelanden från Statens
Skogforskningsinstitut  49: 1–144, 1960.
8. P Whittle. On stationary processes in the plane. Biometrika  41: 434–449, 1954.
9. RA Olea. Optimum Mapping Techniques Using Regionalized Variable Theory ,
Series in Spatial Analysis 2. Kansas Geological Survey, Lawrence, 1975.
10. H Akaike. Information theory and an extension of maximum likelihood principle.
In Second International Symposium on Information Theory , BN Petrov, F Csáki,
Eds. Akadémia Kiadó, Budapest, 1973, pp. 267–281.
11. N Cressie. Fitting variogram models by weighted least squares. Math Geol  17:
563–586, 1985.
12. AN Kolmogorov. Sur l’interpolation et l’extrapolation des suites stationaires. C
R Acad Sci Paris  208: 2043–2045, 1939.
13. DG Krige. Two-dimensional weighted moving average trend surfaces for ore
evaluation. J South Afr Inst Mining Metall  66: 13–38, 1966.
14. G Matheron. Pour une analyse krigeante de données régionalisées , Note N-732
du Centre de Géostatistique. Ecole des Mines de Paris, Fontainebleau, 1982.
15. A Galli, F Gerdil-Neuillet, C Dadou. Factorial kriging analysis: a substitute to
spectral analysis of magnetic data. In Geostatistics for Natural Resources Char-
acterization , G Verly, M David, A Journel, A Marechal, Eds. D. Reidel, Dordrecht,
Netherlands, 1984, pp. 543–557.Modeling Spatial Variation of Soil as Random Functions 287
16. O Jaquet. Factorial kriging analysis applied to geological data from petroleum
exploration. Math Geol  21: 683–691, 1989.
17. MA Oliver, R Webster, K Slocum. Filtering SPOT imagery by kriging analysis.
Int J Remote Sensing  21: 735–752, 2000.
18. MA Oliver, ZL Carroll. Description of Spatial Variation in Soil to Optimize Cereal
Management , project report 330. London, HGCA, 2004.
19. R Webster, MA Oliver. Sample adequately to estimate variograms of soil proper-
ties. J Soil Sci  43: 177–192, 1992.28910Stochastic Simulation of 
Soil Variations
Jean-Paul Chilès and Denis Allard
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................290
10.1 Introduction and De ﬁnitions .................................................................290
10.1.1 De ﬁnition of Conditional Simulations..................................292
10.1.2 Importance of the Spatial Distribution .................................29210.1.3 Use of Conditional Simulations............................................29410.1.4 Outline of the Chapter ..........................................................294
10.2 Simulation of a Continuous Variable....................................................295
10.2.1 Gaussian Transformation.......................................................295
10.2.2 Sequential Gaussian Simulation ...........................................29610.2.3 Conditioning by Kriging .......................................................297
10.2.4 Turning Bands .......................................................................29810.2.5 Generalizations ......................................................................300
10.2.5.1 Simulation in the Presence of a
Nugget Effect......................................................300
10.2.5.2 Simulating Nested and Anisotropic
Covariances.........................................................300
10.2.5.3 Simulation with a Change of Support ...............30010.2.5.4 Intrinsic Random Functions with an 
Unbounded Variogram........................................301
10.2.5.5 Multivariate Simulations ....................................302
10.2.6 Other Models.........................................................................303
10.3 Simulation of a Categorical Variable....................................................303
10.3.1 Sequential Indicator Simulation............................................305
10.3.1.1 Simulation of a Single Indicator Variable..........30510.3.1.2 Generalization to a Categorical Variable ...........306
10.3.2 Truncated Gaussian Simulation ............................................30610.3.3 Object-Based Simulation: Boolean Models..........................307
10.3.3.1 Poisson Point Process.........................................30810.3.3.2 Boolean Random Set..........................................30910.3.3.3 Conditional Simulation of a Boolean
Random Set.........................................................310290 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
10.3.3.4 Extensions...........................................................310
10.3.4 Simulation from Training Images.........................................311
10.4 Application to a Soil Dataset................................................................311
10.4.1 Introduction ...........................................................................311
10.4.2 Gaussian Transformation.......................................................31510.4.3 Conditional Cosimulation .....................................................31610.4.4 Results ...................................................................................318
References .........................................................................................................319
ABSTRACT
Conditional simulations are a means for representing the vertical and lateralvariations of soil properties in a stochastic framework. Used as input to a Monte-Carlo approach, they also allow the prediction of nonlinear functionals such asthe exceedance of a concentration threshold or a breakthrough time. Severalmethods can be used to simulate variables with a Gaussian distribution. They canbe generalized to simulate other continuous variables that can be consideredtransforms of Gaussian variables. Varied models and methods are used to simulateindicator or categorical variables such as soil type: sequential indicator simulation,truncated plurigaussian simulation, Boolean model, etc. The basic methods canbe extended to more general situations: simulation of block values, multivariatecase, and nonstationarity. The general presentation of the methods is followed byan illustration of conditional simulations to model the variability of the watercontent and mineral nitrogen of a soil, as part of a precision agriculture project.
10.1 INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Soil properties vary vertically and laterally in a complex fashion, so that astatistical approach is often used to describe them.
1 Geostatistics proposes tools
for characterizing that spatial variability and deriving optimal linear interpolatorsand predictors from scattered data, as shown in Chapter 9. Here we presentmethods for visualizing that spatial variability and predicting nonlinear function-als of the variables under study by Monte-Carlo techniques.
In this chapter we consider a variable z depending on a location with coor-
dinate vector x in the two- or three-dimensional space or, in practice, in a bounded
domain of that space. Typical variables are variables with a continuous distribu-tion, such as soil thickness, yield, nutrient content, metal concentration, or salinity,and categorical variables such as soil type. To make its dependence on locationexplicit, we call it a regionalized variable and denote it as z(x). This function is
known at a ﬁnite number of data points, denoted as x
a, a = 1, …, N, and we are
interested in z at other locations or in quantities that are functions of z. We consider
situations where the spatial variability of the variable is too complex to bedescribed analytically, so that probabilistic models are more appropriate. Theregionalized variable z(·) is thus considered a realization of some random functionStochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 291
Z(·), and predictors developed for Z are applied to z, as shown in Chapter 9.
Kriging is an easy answer to the interpolation or prediction of a series of quan-tities: value at an unsampled location, average value in a given block or domain,
gradient at a given point, and, more generally, any linear functional of Z(·). An
easy answer because kriging considers linear predictors and thus only requiresknowledge of second-order moments of Z(·) — in practice, in the framework of
a global or local stationary model, the covariance function, or the variogram —which is not very demanding. Moreover, the associated kriging variance providesa measure of the magnitude of the prediction error.
But problems do exist that cannot be expressed by linear functionals of Z.
A simple one is the determination of the probability that Z(x
0) exceeds a given
threshold s. The answer requires more information about the random function Z
than its sole variogram. A solution is to notice that the problem amounts to theprediction of the indicator function I(x) = 1
Z(x)>s, and to work with this indicator
function rather than with Z(x). But I(x) carries much less information than Z(x).
For example, if we have a sample point x1 close to x0, we expect a large
probability for Z(x0) to exceed s if Z(x1) is much larger than s, and a medium
probability if Z(x1) is only slightly larger than s. When working with the indicator
I(x), we will make no distinction between these two situations, and hence obtain
a less accurate answer.
We can have suitable answers to the question of exceedance of a threshold
in speci ﬁc situations, such as for Gaussian random functions with known mean.
In such a case, simple kriging (see Section 10.2.1) coincides with the conditionalexpectation and the kriging error is a Gaussian random variable, so that we have
where Z
0 stands for either an unknown point value Z(x0) or a weighted average
of Z(·), Z* is its simple kriging estimator, z* its value conditional on the data
values,  the corresponding kriging variance, and G the standard normal cumu-
lative distribution function. A more general answer, at least in the stationary case,is given by disjunctive kriging, which only requires knowledge of the bivariatedistributions of pairs of values.
2
A more complex problem is to know whether or not there is some connectivity
between zones with high values, which will, for example, de ﬁne ﬂow paths if Z
represents hydraulic conductivity — or on the contrary, if there are low conduc-tivity ﬂow barriers. Such problems are highly nonlinear and cannot be solved by
disjunctive kriging. In such situations, conditional simulations come into play.They are the tool of choice to evaluate the impact of spatial uncertainty on theresults of complex procedures, such as numerical modeling of a dynamic systemPr | ( ) , , ( ) Pr |**Zs Z z Z z Zzs z zNN 01 1 0>= = {} => xx**
*
K{}
=1Gsz
K2292 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
or economic optimization of the development of a natural resource. The ﬁrst
application domain was the design of mining exploitation scenarios.3 They are
now increasingly used in soil science applications, for example, to analyze theland use suitability for pasture,
4 to rationalize the classi ﬁcation of panels of an
industrial site as polluted or not,5 to evaluate the soil remediation cost,6,7 or to
estimate the spatial uncertainty of topsoil texture.8
Another use of conditional simulations is to obtain realistic pictures of spatial
variability. In fact, the structure of a kriged map re ﬂects both the structure of the
phenomenon and the density of the data: in areas with numerous data, the krigedmap gives a quite good representation of reality (the kriging variance is low); inthe presence of scarce data only, the kriged map interpolates smoothly betweenthe few data points and does not re ﬂect the small-scale variations of reality (the
kriging variance is large).
10.1.1 D EFINITION  OF CONDITIONAL  SIMULATIONS
What exactly is a (conditional) simulation? To explain it, we have to go back tothe above sentence: z(·) is considered a realization of some random function Z(·).
Indeed, a random function can be considered a collection of possible outcomes,named realizations. To make the dependency on the realization apparent, we canrepresent the random function as a function Z(x, w), where w represents the
outcome. Reality is considered a particular outcome for some value w
0 of w:
z(x) = Z(x, w0). A (nonconditional) simulation of the random function Z(·) is
simply a realization Z(x, w) for a value w randomly selected in the set W of all
possible outcomes.
Usually the random function Z has an in ﬁnite number of realizations. Among
them, some assume at the sample points the same values as those observed, andthus can be considered to better represent the regionalized variable z(x). They
will be called conditional simulations. A conditional simulation is therefore arealization randomly selected from the subset of realizations that match thesample points. Equivalently, it is a realization of a random function with aconditional spatial distribution.
10.1.2 I MPORTANCE  OF THE SPATIAL  DISTRIBUTION
The counterpart of this very powerful technique is that it requires full knowledgeof the spatial distribution of the random function, i.e., of all ﬁnite-dimensional
distributions, information that we cannot fully characterize from a limited dataset.Indeed, we usually have a single realization and measurements at scattered samplepoints { x
a: a = 1, …, N}. We assume stationarity so that statistical characteristics
can be obtained by considering similar point con ﬁgurations (e.g., all pairs of
points with a given separation vector to get a sample variogram value). If bivariatedistributions can be obtained in that way, multidimensional distributions attachedto n-points con ﬁgurations, n > 2, can hardly be inferred from the data. An excep-
tion is the situation of image analysis, where the complete image is available andStochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 293
allows, to some degree, an inference of the multivariate distributions. We will
thus have to choose a random function model from limited statistics. Fortunately,we usually have some guidance from the physics of the phenomenon under study,
and geostatistical data analysis tools facilitate this choice and enable its validation.
To stress the importance of a correct choice of the random function model,
Figure 10.1 shows nonconditional simulations of two very different stationaryrandom functions, which share the same histogram and the same covariancefunction. There is no need to be an expert to understand that the conclusionsdrawn with regard to connectivity, for example, will not be the same for thesetwo simulations.
FIGURE 10.1 Simulations showing the same histogram and the same exponential cova-
riance: (a) Gaussian RF, (b) mosaic RF with Gaussian marginal (tessellation by Poissonpolygons). (See color version on accompanying CD.)
294 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
10.1.3 U SE OF CONDITIONAL  SIMULATIONS
If we consider a stationary ﬁeld in a domain that is much larger than the correlation
length, the local variations in two distant subdomains evolve independently. A
single simulation over the whole domain can thus give a view of a variety ofpossible local situations. This is often suf ﬁcient, for example, to assess an agri-
cultural practice scenario, depending on the local variability of soil properties.Conversely, when studying a nonstationary ﬁeld such as a local contamination,
or a global problem such as a breakthrough time, a single simulation provides asingle answer in terms of volume of plume or ﬂow and transport. It is then
necessary to build several simulations if we want to assess the range of thepossible results (typically 100 simulations may be needed).
These simulations are often ranked on the basis of a regional quantity
computed from the realization (e.g., the volume of contaminated soil or thebreakthrough time) to obtain the quantiles of the distribution of that regionalquantity. Since the simulations represent independent drawings from the mul-tivariate conditional distribution, the regional quantities obtained from the sim-ulations are a representative sample of the conditional distribution of theregional quantity. And since the distribution of the ranks is by de ﬁnition uni-
form, conditional simulations are often said to be equally probable or equallylikely when one looks for quantiles. But of course, realizations correspondingto percentiles P5 or P95 usually look extreme by comparison with an averagerealization like P50.
10.1.4 O UTLINE  OF THE CHAPTER
Generating a simulation means choosing a random function model, at leastimplicitly, and a simulation algorithm. Whereas a huge variety of random func-tion models can be de ﬁned, a limited number of models are used in practical
applications, and we will focus on them. There are often several algorithms togenerate a nonconditional simulation of a given model. Again, we will not tryto be exhaustive and simply present those that are most used or most ef ﬁcient.
The interested reader is referred to Chilès and Del ﬁner
2 and Lantuéjoul9 for a
thorough presentation.
Conditional simulations are applied to two main kinds of variables: (1) those
that have a continuous distribution, such as grade, moisture content, and hydraulicconductivity, which can take on any real value between a minimum and a max-imum, and (2) categorical variables, namely, discrete variables representing ele-ments of a classi ﬁcation, such as soil types. Simulation algorithms are rather
different in the two cases, even if there are some bridges. The next two sectionsconcern these two types of variables. They are followed by a section describingan application to the modeling of soil properties.
For the sake of simplicity, we will focus on stationary random functions and
simply mention extensions to intrinsic random functions. In what follows we willabbreviate random function by RF and stationary random function by SRF.Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 295
10.2 SIMULATION OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE
Among stationary random functions, Gaussian SRFs constitute the prototype of
RFs with a continuous marginal distribution. The ﬁnite-dimensional distributions
of a Gaussian SRF are all normal and completely de ﬁned by the mean and the
covariance function — or the variogram — of the SRF, which makes the statisticalinference easy. There are a series of algorithms to generate a simulation of aGaussian SRF. Moreover, phenomena resulting from the addition of a largenumber of independent and identically distributed perturbations tend to be Gaus-sian by virtue of the central limit theorem. Last, transforming a Gaussian SRFY(x) into Z(x) = j(Y(x)) yields a non-Gaussian SRF, thus extending the scope of
Gaussian SRFs. We will therefore focus our presentation on the simulation of(possibly transformed) Gaussian SRFs and simply mention extensions and othermodels at the end of the present section.
10.2.1 G AUSSIAN  TRANSFORMATION
Few variables conform to a Gaussian spatial distribution, and even simply to aGaussian marginal. But if the SRF of interest Z(·) has a continuous marginal
cumulative distribution function (cdf) F(z), it can be transformed into an SRF
Y(·), with a Gaussian marginal cdf. Indeed, denoting the standard normal cdf as
G(y), the RF de ﬁned by Y(x) = G
–1(F(Z(x))) has a Gaussian marginal distribution.
Hence, G–1(F(·)) is called the normal-score transform . Its inverse, namely, the
back-transform j(·) = F–1(G(·)), transforms a Gaussian variable into a variable
with the marginal cdf of interest. Notice that these transformations simply amountto relating y and z values corresponding to the same quantile: F(z) = G(y).
So the methods presented hereafter can be applied to variables that are not
Gaussian, but can be considered transforms of a Gaussian SRF. To this end, thedata are transformed into Gaussian data at the beginning of the study, and theback-transformation j is applied at the end of the simulation process.
The transform j is determined once the distribution F is known. In practice,
it can be de ﬁned by a graphical ﬁtting of F on the empirical distribution (the
cumulative histogram of the data). It can also be expressed by an expansion withHermite polynomials whose coef ﬁcients derive from the empirical distribution.
The Gaussian transformation only guarantees that the marginal distribution
of Y is Gaussian. To be a Gaussian SRF, Y must also have normal ﬁnite-dimensional
distributions. It is thus advisable to at least check that the bivariate distributionsof pairs ( Y(x), Y(x¢)) are normal and, in the negative case, consider other simulation
algorithms.
10,11 A simple and global control consists in checking that the sample
variogram, which is an average of squared increments, is proportional to the squareof the order one variogram, de ﬁned as an average of absolute increments.
Note that the speci ﬁcation of the transform j implies knowledge of the
marginal distribution of Z, and consequently of its mean. Similarly, Y is an SRF
with known mean, more speci ﬁcally a zero mean. As will be seen hereafter,
conditional simulation algorithms for a Gaussian SRF Y include a kriging step.296 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
This kriging is slightly different from the ordinary kriging, or kriging with
unknown mean, presented in Chapter 9. Since Y has zero mean, there is no need
to introduce the constraint that the weights sum up to 1 to ensure unbiasedness.Conversely, the covariance C(h), and not solely the variogram g(h), shall exist.
Simple kriging, or kriging with a known mean, in the case of a zero mean is theestimator
where the weights l
a are solutions of the simple kriging system:
The simple kriging variance is then
Below in this section, the preliminary Gaussian transformation, if necessary,
is assumed to have been done, and Z denotes a Gaussian SRF.
10.2.2 S EQUENTIAL  GAUSSIAN  SIMULATION
For a Gaussian RF with known mean , kriging coincides with conditional expec-
tation. The distribution of Z(xN+1) conditional on Z(xa) = za, a = 1, …, N is thus
Gaussian, with mean z* and variance , where z* is the simple kriging estimate
associated with the kriging estimator Z* of Z(xN+1) from the Z(xa) values, and
the associated kriging variance. Simulating Z(xN+1) conditionally on the data thus
amounts to selecting a random value in the normal distribution with mean z* and
variance .
By repeating this algorithm, it is possible to sequentially simulate Z at M
new locations. The algorithm is the following:
1. Compute the simple kriging estimate z* of Z(xN+1) from Z(x1) = z1, …,
Z(xN) = zN, and the corresponding kriging variance .
2. Select a random value Y with standard normal distribution.
3. Assign z* + sK Y to Z(xN+1).YYN
*() =
=∑x
1
CC NN
( ) ( ) , ...,xx xx ==
=∑
10 1
K () ( )2
0
1=
=∑CCN
0x x
K2
K2
K2
K2Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 297
4. Include this outcome in the conditioning dataset by increasing N by 1
and decreasing M by 1.
5. If M > 0, go to step 1.
The statistical properties of the simulation are independent of the order in
which the M new points are scanned. This method is perfect for small grids, but
equivalent algorithms need less computing time because they are based on asingle decomposition (e.g., a Cholesky decomposition) of the global covariancematrix of the N + M variables Z(x
a).
The sequential Gaussian simulation method requires approximations for
medium and large grids, for it is not possible to solve the kriging system in asatisfactory manner when N + M is large (the upper limit is about 5000, but in
practice, due to computing time, it is much lower). In this situation, each krigingis performed from a subset of the data (true data plus already simulated points).The choice of the scanning sequence of the simulated points then becomes critical,as well as the selection of the subsets.
12
10.2.3 C ONDITIONING  BY KRIGING
In the rest of this section several simulation algorithms are presented. Most ofthem do not provide conditional simulations, but only nonconditional simulations,that is, realizations that reproduce spatial variability as modeled by the covariance,but otherwise do not honor the data. Fortunately, a procedure based on krigingallows us to pass from a nonconditional simulation S(·) to a conditional simulation
T(·) that, while retaining the structural features of the former, is calibrated on the
sample data.
Its principle, due to G. Matheron, is quite simple. Consider an RF Z(·) known
at N sample points x
a, a = 1, 2, …, N. Let Z*(x) denote the kriging estimator of
Z(x) at the point x based on the data Z(xa), and let us start from the trivial
decomposition
Z(x) = Z*(x) + [Z(x) – Z*(x)]
The kriging error Z(x) – Z*(x) is of course unknown since Z(x) is not known.
Let us now assume that we have a nonconditional simulation S(·) independent of
Z(·), with the same covariance as Z (·). Now consider the same equality as above
for S(x), where S*(x) is the kriging estimator obtained as if the simulation were
known only at the sample points xa:
S(x) = S*(x) + [S(x) – S*(x)]
Since the nonconditional simulation can be computed everywhere, the true
value S(x) is known and so is the error S(x) – S*(x). Hence, the idea of substi-
tuting, in the decomposition of Z(x), the unknown error by the simulation of this
error; this gives T(x) de ﬁned by298 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
T(x) = Z*(x) + [S(x) – S*(x)]
Since kriging is an exact interpolator, at a sample point we have
Z*(xa) = Z(xa) and S*(xa) = S(xa), so that T(xa) = Z(xa). And because the kriging
estimator and the kriging error are not correlated, T(·) preserves the covariance
of Z(·) and S(·).
The proof that the substitution of errors preserves the covariance is valid for
kriging with a global neighborhood. If the number of data is too large, it isnecessary to use local neighborhoods. A careful design of the neighborhoodsearch algorithm is needed to avoid the introduction of spurious discontinuitiesdue to neighborhood changes.
When considered conditional on the Z(x
a), T(·) is no longer stationary. The
method of construction entails that the mean of a large number of independentconditional simulations at a given point tends to the kriging estimate, and theirvariance tends to the kriging variance. In ﬁgurative terms, a conditional simulation
“vibrates” in between the data points within an envelope de ﬁned by the kriging
standard error.
A conditional simulation is meant to behave like the real ﬁeld, but not to
estimate it. As an estimator of Z(x), a simulation T(x) would perform very poorly:
it is easily shown that the corresponding estimation variance, namely, the varianceof T(x) – Z(x), would be twice the kriging variance.
We now have to examine how to generate nonconditional simulations. These
have to be computed at the location of the points where the ﬁnal simulation is
requested and at the location of the data points. So, we need algorithms able tosimulate at any location within a domain encompassing all these points. 
10.2.4 T URNING  BANDS
Some covariance models may be simulated directly in the plane. But it is oftensimpler to use the turning bands method, which enables the construction ofsimulations in plane from simulations on lines.
13 This method consists of adding
up a large number of independent simulations de ﬁned on lines scanning the plane.
More speci ﬁcally, consider a system of nD lines emanating from the origin
of space and scanning the plane regularly; the angle between two adjacent linesis p/n
D. We denote by qt Œ [0, p] the angle of the line Dt with the x-axis; by ut
the unit vector of Dt, with components cos qt and sin qt; and by st the abscissa
on Dt, centered at the origin.
Independent zero-mean nonconditional simulations St(st) with covariance
C1(h) are generated on the lines Dt. Let us consider a point x = (x, y) in the plane.
Its projection on Dt is a point with abscissa
st = <x, ut> = x cos qt + y sin qt
The simulation at x is then de ﬁned byStochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 299
The elementary simulations being independent and with the same covariance
C1(h), the covariance of S(x) is
If the number of lines is large enough, the simulation is approximately
Gaussian and the discrete sum expressing C2(h) is an approximation of the integral
with r = |h|. C2 is an isotropic covariance. In practice, C2 is given and we have
to use the inverse relation that gives C1 as a function of C2; that is, for h ≥ 0,
Gneiting14 derives C1 explicitly for the most commonly used covariances C2.
Notice that when C2 has a ﬁnite range, this is not necessarily the case for C1. The
turning bands method can be generalized to the three-dimensional space (andeven to any dimension). The covariance C
3 obtained is isotropic. The relationship
between C1 and C3 is much simpler than between C1 and C2:
In particular, if C3 has a ﬁnite range, C1 has the same range, a property that
can be useful for some simulation algorithms. So, it can be easier to consider atwo-dimensional simulation as a planar section of a three-dimensional simulation.This, of course, assumes that the covariance to simulate in two-dimensional spaceis a valid model in three-dimensional space, which is the case in most applications.
In practice, the simulations along each line are often discretized so that the
same value S
t(st) is assigned to a whole band perpendicular to Dt and containing
st. Hence, the name turning bands is given to the method.
The remaining problem is now to simulate SRFs on lines with the given
covariance C1(h). A number of methods are available for that, but none is bothS
nSs
Dtt
tnD
() ( )x =
=∑1
1
CnC
Dt
tnD
21
11() ( , )hh u =< >
=∑
Cr Cr d21
01( ) ( cos ) =∫ππ
Ch C hdC
dhhd122
02
0 () () ( s i n)/
=+ ∫π
CrrCud u Crd
drrC rr
31
0131() () () () ==∫300 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
fully general and always ef ﬁcient. The sequential Gaussian method, for example,
is general, but it requires a discretization on the lines and is not ef ﬁcient if the
number of discretization points becomes large. Some simulation algorithmsdirectly generate a Gaussian SRF, but many others can be used because theaddition, properly scaled, of a large number of independent simulations of a non-Gaussian SRF tends to a Gaussian SRF. Speci ﬁcally, if S
1(·), S2(·), …, is a
sequence of independent zero-mean, ﬁnite-variance simulations with the same
spatial distribution, by virtue of the central limit theorem the spatial distributionof the random function T
k(·) de ﬁned by
tends to a Gaussian RF with the same mean and covariance as the Si as k Æ μ.
10.2.5 G ENERALIZATIONS
10.2.5.1 Simulation in the Presence of a Nugget Effect
The basic simulation methods do not include a possible nugget effect. This can
be easily simulated separately since it is an independent and purely randomcomponent. Since the nugget effect represents measurement errors or microscaleﬂuctuations, we are often not interested in reproducing it. If we intend to use a
method with a separate conditioning, we must nevertheless simulate the nuggeteffect at the simulated data points so that the simulated data have the samestatistical characteristics as the true data; kriging shall be replaced by a cokrigingthat ﬁlters the nugget effect (also known as factorial kriging ). If a Gaussian
transformation is used, remember, however, that this transformation is de ﬁned
from data that include the nugget effect component.
10.2.5.2 Simulating Nested and Anisotropic Covariances
The sequential Gaussian algorithm can be used with any covariance model, but
the turning bands algorithm provides simulations with isotropic covariances. Themain types of anisotropy can be handled easily. For example, a geometric anisot-ropy can be reduced to the isotropic case by means of a linear transformation ofthe coordinates (see Chapter 9).
The covariance we want to simulate is often modeled as a sum of several
basic models. Some methods for generating nonconditional simulations can beapplied directly to the global model. Others require the independent generationof a simulation of each component and the summing of them.
10.2.5.3 Simulation with a Change of Support
We may be interested in simulating the average value of Z in a block B that is
much larger than the support of the data. If Z is a Gaussian SRF, this can beTSS
kkk()() ()xxx=++1Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 301
easily done because the block value is also Gaussian and we remain within a
multivariate Gaussian framework. It suf ﬁces, for example, to generate a noncon-
ditional simulation of the block value and to condition it by block kriging (seeChapter 9).
This was an upscaling problem. We may also be interested, like Kumar,
15 in
a downscaling problem: simulate point-support values, or average values in smallblocks, from data with different supports, for example, point-support data, averagevalues in 20 ¥ 20 m units, and pixels of remote sensing observations. In the
Gaussian case, the solution is similar to that of the upscaling problem.
These problems call for more complex solutions if Z is not a Gaussian SRF
but the transform of a Gaussian SRF. The block values are then consideredtransforms of SRFs, but the transform j
B for the block B is not the transform j
for the point-support data: a change-of-support model, for example, the discreteGaussian change-of-support model, is used to determine j
B and all the necessary
covariances from j and the covariance function associated with the point support.2
10.2.5.4 Intrinsic Random Functions with an 
Unbounded Variogram
As shown in Chapter 9, there are phenomena that do not have a central value
like the mean and display unbounded variations, but can be represented byintrinsic random functions (IRFs). Such random functions are characterized byan unbounded variogram g(h), the prototype being the power variogram
g(h) = b |h|
a, 0 < a < 2, b > 0, and among this family the linear variogram
g(h) = b |h|.
The various methods presented above for simulating Gaussian SRFs have
extensions to Gaussian intrinsic functions:
• Conditioning by a separate kriging shall be done with ordinary kriging;
it preserves the variogram as well as the joint distribution of increments.
• The turning bands formulas relating C1 to C2 or C3 remain valid with
variograms instead of covariances. As a consequence, the turning bandsoperator does not alter a power variogram, but simply affects its mul-tiplicative constant.
• The basic nonconditional simulation methods have extensions to
intrinsic random functions. In particular, a one-dimensional GaussianIRF with a linear variogram is a Brownian motion, whose simulationis straightforward.
The main difference with SRFs is that it is not possible to de ﬁne the marginal
distribution (the histogram) of an IRF because it is de ﬁned by its increments.
In particular, its mean is de ﬁned up to a constant (IRF with a bounded vario-
gram), or simply does not exist (IRF with an unbounded variogram). So theGaussian transformation presented for SRFs has no counterpart with IRFs, sothat the simulation method is limited to Gaussian IRFs. An ad hoc  solution, if302 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
a Gaussian transformation is necessary and the data are representative of the
study domain, is to consider the IRF as an SRF with a very large sill and a verylarge range.
16
The conditioning procedure can be extended as well to nonstationary models
with a trend, for example, to the universal kriging model, where the RF isconsidered the sum of an IRF and a polynomial drift with unknown coef ﬁcients.
10.2.5.5 Multivariate Simulations
We often have to simulate several correlated variables. Let us denote as Z
i,
i = 1, …, p the various SRFs, which we will assume Gaussian (after a possible
transformation). A simple case is the intrinsic model or proportional covariance
model , where all direct and cross-covariances are proportional:
Cij(h) = Cov( Zi(x), Zj(x + h)) = bij C(h)
This model is valid provided that the matrix B = [bij] is positive de ﬁnite. In
that case, the Gaussian SRFs Zi can be expressed as linear combinations of at
most p independent Gaussian SRFs Yj with the same covariance C(h):
The coef ﬁcients aij must of course satisfy
or in matrix terms, A AT = B, where A is the matrix of the aij and AT is the
transpose of A (there are solutions because B is positive de ﬁnite). A noncondi-
tional simulation of Zi is then derived from a nonconditional simulation of the
factors Yj, which is simply a set of p independent nonconditional simulations with
covariance C(h). The conditioning step shall then be done by cokriging instead
of series of krigings.
The intrinsic model is somewhat restrictive. A more general model is the
linear model of coregionalization , which is simply a sum of independent propor-
tional covariance models (see Chapter 9, Equation 9.34 to Equation 9.36, orChilès and Del ﬁner
2 and Wackernagel,17 for a more detailed presentation). Its
nonconditional simulation is obvious since it amounts to adding independentsimulations of the various proportional covariance models, and again the condi-tioning step can be done by cokriging.Zx a Yxii j j
jp
() () =
=∑
1
aa b i j pik jk
kp
ij
=∑==
11, , ...,Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 303
10.2.6 O THER MODELS
Gaussian RFs have the property to maximize entropy: among RFs sharing the
same covariance, their realizations are those where the zones with high values
present the lowest continuity. The same observation applies to zones with lowvalues. If the simulated variable represents permeability, this implies a poorconnectivity of the low permeability zones as well as of the high permeabilityzones, which can be a desirable property for a porous medium, but would notadequately represent a medium with ﬂow barriers or conduits such as faults. Since
the use of a Gaussian transform would not change these observations, there isclearly a need for other random function models than Gaussian ones.
Random tessellations  (e.g., V oronoi polygons or Delaunay triangles associ-
ated with a random point process, or Poisson polygons) are the basis of mosaicrandom functions that have a constant value in nonoverlapping cells subdividingthe space, and independent values in distinct cells. Figure 10.1b is a realizationof a tessellation by Poisson polygons valued according to a normal distribution(the marginal distribution of the random function is normal, but not its multi-variate distributions).
Boolean random functions  generalize the Boolean model, presented hereafter
by assigning to random objects a value that is not necessarily 0 or 1, nor aninteger value, but a real value, or even some (random) function whose supportcoincides with the object.
Émery
10 proposes an extension of the sequential simulation algorithm to
nongaussian random functions with isofactorial bivariate distributions, i.e., mod-els that are intermediate between Gaussian RFs and mosaic RFs based onrandom tessellations.
10.3 SIMULATION OF A CATEGORICAL VARIABLE
The simplest categorical variable is one that only assumes the values 0 or 1, thatis, the indicator of a set, which we consider here as random. But the covariancefunction is an extremely poor tool for describing the geometric properties of thesevery special random functions. For example, the covariance does not give anyinformation on the connectivity of the medium. In fact, the covariance is the samefor the random set considered and its complement (e.g., grains and pores), whiletheir connectivities are generally very different. Figure 10.2 shows simulationsof three very different indicator RFs, which share the same mean 1/2 and thesame exponential covariance. Figure 10.2a is obtained by thresholding a Gaussianrandom function. This is not the case for Figure 10.2b, which derives from atessellation by Poisson polygons.
Richer tools than the covariance have been developed in mathematical mor-
phology, but these can be determined only if we have a large continuous imageof a realization of the random set. We refer the reader to the literature onmathematical morphology and stochastic geometry.
18,19 This presentation is lim-
ited to basic random-set models that can be of use for geostatistical simulations304 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 10.2 Simulations of indicator RFs with the same mean and the same exponential
covariance: (a) truncated Gaussian RF, (b) mosaic RF with Gaussian marginal,(c) sequential indicator simulation. (a) 
 (b) 
(c) Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 305
and to simple generalizations allowing for the representation of m-valued indi-
cators ( m > 2; e.g., soil types).
Conversely, some indicator simulation methods derive from standard geo-
statistical methods, since they involve an underlying continuous variable. This
continuous variable can have a physical meaning, for example, when we studythe indicator associated with a given concentration threshold. It can also be aconventional feature of the model; for example, nested indicators (e.g., litholog-ical facies) can be obtained by slicing a Gaussian variable at successive levels.
It is generally easy to simulate a random set once its type and parameters are
selected. However, there is no general method for conditioning a simulation ofa random set. The conditioning problem must be examined case by case. In thissection, we ﬁrst consider the sequential method, as adapted to indicators, which
allows a direct construction of conditional simulations.
10.3.1 S EQUENTIAL  INDICATOR  SIMULATION
10.3.1.1 Simulation of a Single Indicator Variable
The sequential indicator simulation algorithm20,21 is similar to the sequential
Gaussian Simulation  algorithm in Section 10.2.2. Let us consider the case of a
binary variable I(·) with mean p, variance s2 = p (1 – p), and covariance C(h),
which is known at N points, N ≥ 0, and shall be simulated at M other points. The
algorithm is the following:
1. Compute the simple kriging estimate I * of I(xN+1) from I(x1), …, I(xN).
2. Select a random value Y with Bernoulli distribution with mean I * (i.e.,
Y = 1 with probability I *, and Y = 0 with probability 1 – I *).
3. Assign Y to I(xN+1).
4. Include this outcome in the conditioning dataset by increasing N by 1
and decreasing M by 1.
5. If M > 0, go to step 1.
It can be shown, in the case of a known mean p, that this algorithm reproduces
the mean and the indicator covariance, provided that kriging produces estimatesthat always lie in the interval [0, 1]. This is, however, not the case, except forsome very speci ﬁc situations (e.g., a pure nugget effect), so that the covariance
is not reproduced exactly. This is due to the fact that, contrary to the Gaussiancase, I
 * does not coincide with the conditional expectation of I. It is often a very
poor approximation of that conditional expectation, so that the sequential indi-cator algorithm performs poorly.
11 The approximation seems not so bad for a
mosaic model. However, the simulation shown in Figure 10.2c, obtained with thesequential indicator algorithm, does not really look mosaic. So it is not easy tosay when the sequential indicator algorithm can be recommended.306 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
10.3.1.2 Generalization to a Categorical Variable
The method can easily be extended to a categorical variable Z(x) that can take
on the integer values 1, 2, …, p by working with the nested indicators
Ii(x) = 1Z(x) £ i. The categorical variable can correspond to slices between succes-
sive thresholds of an underlying continuous variable, or to a subdivision in faciesor soil types without reference to any other variable. Nested indicators satisfythe order relation
0 £ I
1(x) £ I2(x) £ … £ Ip(x) £ 1
They can be estimated at the point xN+1 by cokriging. Their estimates de ﬁne
an approximation to the cumulative distribution function for Z(xN+1), from which
the value of the simulation can be drawn.
The method has some advantages: the possibility to represent a more contin-
uous spatial structure of the extreme values of the categorical variable than of themedium values, and the possibility to make use of soft information representedby indicator data between 0 and 1.
21,22 The status of the simulated random function
is not clearer than that of a unique indicator function. Being nonparametric, themethod is supposed to be able to reproduce the behavior of the categorical variable,and, for example, to reproduce a mosaic behavior where transitions are observedfrom any value to any other, as well as a diffusive behavior where transitions arepossible only from one value to the preceding or the next one. But nothing in thealgorithm can guarantee one of these behaviors to be honored exactly.
This method is sometimes used to simulate a continuous variable whose
variation range has been divided in several classes, but that approach cannot berecommended in general — see a comparison of that approach with sequentialGaussian simulations for simulating soil texture in Druck Fuks and V oltz.
8
10.3.2 T RUNCATED  GAUSSIAN  SIMULATION
Consider an indicator or a series of indicators that originate from applying oneor more thresholds to a standard Gaussian SRF Y(x),
In most applications the indicators represent geological facies or soil types,
but the RF Y does not correspond to an actual regionalized variable. The thresholds
y
i are thus chosen so as to match the proportions pi of the various facies:Iy y y yiy Y y i iii()() xx =∞ = < < < < <≤<11 01 1 with <<= + ∞ym
yG p i mi j
ji
==
=∑1
111 ( ) , ...,Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 307
Once the thresholds are ﬁxed, the direct and cross-covariances of the various
indicators derive from the correlogram r(h) of the underlying Gaussian Y(x), but
the relations cannot be easily inverted. In applications, r(h) is chosen such that
the theoretical variograms of the indicators deduced from r(h) ﬁt the sample
variograms well.
The simulation of Ii reduces to that of Y. Figure 10.2a was obtained by
thresholding a Gaussian simulation at y = 0.
The nonconditional case is thus straightforward. In the conditional case, we
do not know the exact value of Y at data point xa, but simply to which interval
[yi-1, yi] belongs Y(xa). Let Ba denote that interval. The construction of a condi-
tional simulation of Y is performed in two steps:
1. Simulation of the Y(xa) conditional on the intervals Ba.
2. Simulation of the whole grid conditional on these simulated Y(xa).
The second step is an ordinary conditional simulation, so only the ﬁrst
step needs to be addressed here. An exact iterative method has been proposedin Freulon and de Fouquet,
23 which is a direct application of the Gibbs sampler
method.24 An initial state, consistent with the data but not with the spatial
structure, is obtained by assigning a value within Ba for each site xa. The
spatial structure is progressively introduced by iterating the followingsequence:
1. Select a site x
a (randomly or by scanning these sites).
2. Ignore the value at this site, and estimate it by kriging from the values
at all the other sites; also compute the corresponding kriging variance.
3. Replace the value at this site by the kriged value, plus a Gaussian
residual with variance equal to the kriging variance, randomly selectedso that the new value belongs to the interval B
a.
This method can be generalized to nonstationary models where the propor-
tions of the different facies, and thus the corresponding thresholds, vary in space.25
Truncated Gaussian simulations are of diffusive type, in the sense that the faciesi can be surrounded only by facies i – 1 and i + 1, as shown in Figure 10.3a. The
method has been extended to facies that do not follow one another in a ﬁxed
order by using two Gaussian SRFs, independent or correlated, to de ﬁne the facies,
as shown in Figure 10.3b: truncated plurigaussian simulations.
26,27 Finally, there
are adaptations for including connectivity constraints.28
10.3.3 O BJECT-BASED SIMULATION : BOOLEAN  MODELS
We are considering here models obtained by combining objects  placed at random
points. These models can also be considered marked point processes , in the sense308 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
that they are based on a point process and marks (here the objects) attached to
the points of the process.19
10.3.3.1 Poisson Point Process
The Poisson point process in  corresponds exactly to the intuitive idea of
points distributed in space at random. The Poisson point process with intensity
l (l > 0) is characterized by the following properties:
1. The number N(V) of points inside a domain V is a Poisson random
variable with parameter l |V|, where | V| represents the measure of V
(length, surface, or volume):
2. If Vi, i = 1, 2, …, p, are disjoint domains, the random variables N(Vi)
are mutually independent.
The Poisson point process has an important conditional property that corre-
sponds to the notion of random points: given that the number of points N(V)
inside the domain V is equal to n0, these points are independently and uniformly
distributed over V.FIGURE 10.3 Examples of simulation of three soil types: (a) truncated Gaussian simu-
lation (two thresholds applied to the same Gaussian RF — the brown and green soil typescannot be in contact); (b) truncated plurigaussian simulation (two Gaussian RFs, each onewith its own threshold — each soil type can be in contact with the other two).
n
Pr ( )()
!NV k eV V
kk
= {} =
E( )V a r( )NV NV V ==Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 309
Thus, a Poisson point process with intensity l can be simulated within a
bounded domain V as follows:
1. Draw the number of points n0 from a Poisson distribution with mean
l |V|.
2. Draw the n0 points independently from a uniform distribution within V.
10.3.3.2 Boolean Random Set
A Boolean random set corresponds to the intuitive idea of the union of randomly
located objects. Two independent ingredients are required for its construction:
1. A set of germs Xi in , i = 1, 2, …, corresponding to a Poisson point
process with intensity l
2. A family of independent and identically distributed random objects
Ai, i = 1, 2, … (e.g., discs in two dimensions, or balls in three dimen-
sions, with random diameters)
The union of the Ai shifted to points Xi constitutes by de ﬁnition a Boolean
random set X:
where th denotes the operator of translation by a vector h. The space  is thus
divided into two phases: the union of objects X and its complement, the back-
ground. The appearance of a Boolean set depends considerably on the intensityand the shape of the objects, as shown in Figure 10.4.
Sometimes observations are done through cross-sections, whereas reality is
three-dimensional, or through scan lines, whereas reality is two- or three-dimen-sional. A useful property of Boolean random sets is that their intersection by aline or a plane is still a Boolean random set (the reverse is not true). A numberof results are available about the properties of Boolean models and the inference
FIGURE 10.4 Realizations of Boolean random sets.n
XAXi
ii=
n
310 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
of their parameters, especially from images or scan lines.18,19,29 In particular, the
mean and covariance of the indicator of X are
where K(h) = E | A « A–h| is the mean geometric covariogram of the primary
objects (in particular K(0) is their mean volume). Another interesting property
is that when the objects are convex, the distribution of background interceptsis exponential.
10.3.3.3 Conditional Simulation of a Boolean Random Set
An iterative Markov procedure gives a general solution provided that the objects
have a strictly positive surface (two-dimensional simulation) or volume (three-dimensional) and the number of conditioning points, known to belong to thebackground or the objects, is ﬁnite.
9 To simplify the presentation, we consider
the generation of a simulation in a bounded domain VS in the case where the
objects, before being shifted to the Xi, are all enclosed in a sphere with radius R.
Let V denote the domain, including VS and all points at a distance of VS shorter
than R. Any point belonging to V can be the germ of an object intersecting VS.
In the generation of the simulation we will thus consider the restriction of thePoisson process to V, rather than a restriction to V
S. The expected number of
germs in that domain is n = l |V|.
Clearly a Boolean random set is the union of a Poisson number (with mean
value n) of independent objects centered in V. The principle of the algorithm is
the following:
1. Start with a pattern of objects that is simply compatible with the data
(but does not claim to represent a Boolean random set); denote thenumber of objects by N.
2. Add a random object at a random location with probability n/(n + N),
or remove an existing object — randomly selected — with probabilityN/(n + N); keep this new pattern if it remains consistent with the data
and update N; otherwise, forget it.
3. Go to step 2.
Any means can be used to achieve the ﬁrst step. Lantuéjoul
9 provides an
iterative algorithm, with a ﬁnite number of operations, for that. The second step
of the algorithm tends to equalize N with n: when N < n, objects are added more
often than removed, and the other way around when N > n. The main algorithm
never ends but, in practice, must be stopped after a ﬁnite number of iterations.
10.3.3.4 Extensions
There are a lot of extensions of this simple model. Let us mention two of them:pe C h e eKK K== () 112 () () ()()00 hStochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 311
• Extension to other point processes: Regionalization of the Poisson
intensity, cluster process, hard-core models, etc.
• Boolean random function: This makes it possible to simulate several
soil types. A categorical variable Yi that can take on the values 1, 2,
…, p is assigned to each object Xi: this variable can be a deterministic
function of the object (e.g., the type of the object Xi if the objects are
selected among several types), or an independent random variable, orany intermediate situation. A categorical random function is thenobtained by assigning at any point x the value 0 if x belongs to the
background, or the largest Y
i among those associated with objects
overlapping x.
Conditional simulation algorithms have been developed for these models
too.9,30,31
10.3.4 S IMULATION  FROM TRAINING  IMAGES
When we have training images, a shortcut to the modeling of the RF is to usethe sample multivariate distributions of the images. The method, very similar tosequential indicator simulation, is presented by Strebelle.
32 When simulating at
xN+1 conditional on the values at x1, …, xN, instead of kriging the indicator function
and selecting in the corresponding Bernoulli distribution, we search in the trainingimages for all con ﬁgurations similar to the present one — i.e., geographical
con ﬁguration identical to that of x
1, …, xN, xN+1, up to a translation, and same
values z1, …, zN. These con ﬁgurations de ﬁne an experimental conditional distri-
bution for ZN+1, which is used to simulate its value. The training images must be
large enough so that these experimental conditional distributions capture theessence of the phenomenon rather than anecdotic situations. These images canalso be simulations of unconditional realizations of models that go beyond asimple covariance for characterizing spatial structure, for example, stochasticprocess-based models — cf. Lopez
33 for the three-dimensional simulation of
meandering channels.
10.4 APPLICATION TO A SOIL DATASET
10.4.1 I NTRODUCTION
In this section, we illustrate the use of conditional simulations for continuous soil
variables. The data considered here were collected in an agricultural ﬁeld (ca.
10 ha) in Chambry, Northern France, in February 2001, as part of a precisionagriculture project.
34 Precision agriculture aims at de ﬁning location-dependent
management within an agricultural ﬁeld, for nitrogen fertilization, for example.
For assessing the soil variability, permanent variables (proportions of sand, siltand clay, Ca content) were sampled once, in the year 2000. From these samples,soil maps were hand drawn by soil scientists. Nonpermanent variables (water312 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
content and mineral nitrogen) were sampled two to three times a year, according
to agricultural practice. At each node of a grid, given some economical andenvironmental criterion, the local optimal nitrogen fertilization amount is then
computed according to the local value of these variables using a plant growth
model. The mesh of the grid on which these variables must be provided dependson the mechanical properties of the devices used for the fertilization.
The aim of the geostatistical study is thus to model the spatial variability of
these two variables and to provide maps of their local values as input values ofthe plant growth model for studying agriculture scenarios.
The dataset contains 152 sampling points, among which 84 belong to a
pseudoregular grid with a 36-m mesh. The remaining 68 points belong to foursampling crosses that were located in the four main soil types, as depicted inFigure 10.5a. Soil water content (WC, measured in equivalent mm of water) andmineral nitrogen (N, in kg/ha) were measured on soil cores up to 120 cm. Eachsoil sample is itself a mixture of three cores taken at 50 cm distance. WC rangesfrom 135 to 463 mm; its average is 337 mm and its standard deviation is 60 mm.Nitrogen ranges from 15 to 68 kg/ha, with an average of 36 kg/ha and a standarddeviation of 11 kg/ha. The correlation ( r = 0.71) between the two variables is
good, but the cross-plot (Figure 10.5b) shows that their relationship is not linear.Their histograms (Figure 10.5c and d) are not Gaussian distributed.
The experimental variograms (Figure 10.6) show a signi ﬁcant nugget effect
for nitrogen (about 20% of the variance) and a negligible one for water content,which is usual in agricultural datasets. A linear model of coregionalization (seeChapter 9) is ﬁtted with two structures: a nugget effect and an exponential
structure with a scale parameter of 50 m (i.e., a practical range of 150 m)(cf. Equation 9.16 in Chapter 9). The sills are estimated using a weighted leastsquares procedure, as described in Goulard and V oltz.
35 The ﬁtted model is
gWC,WC  (h) = 6 nug + 3955 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
gWC,N (h) = –11 nug + 464 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
gN,N (h) = 19 nug + 83 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
where nug represents a unit nugget effect component, equal to 0 if h = 0 and to
1 otherwise. Note that the nugget effect on the cross-variogram is negative,indicating a slightly larger correlation between WC and N at distinct locations(r(h) = 0.81 when | h| >> 50 m) than at the same location ( r(0) = 0.71).
Ordinary cokriging of these two variables on a 5 ¥ 5 m grid is displayed in
Figure 10.7. In accordance with the model above, the same long-range structuresare visible on both maps: values are generally higher in the top of the image anda zone of very low values of both WC and N is visible near the right border of
the ﬁeld. This zone corresponds to a very different soil type than the rest of the
ﬁeld. It is a summit sandy area where chalk and silt have been eroded: water andStochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 313
nitrogen are thus drained. Notice that these two maps are very smooth, a typical
property of kriging. They do not re ﬂect the true variability of the soil, and hence
are not suitable for the purpose of simulating plant growth at a small scale. Forreproducing small-scale variability, it is thus necessary to provide maps of sim-ulated values instead of maps of interpolated values. Because it is important tohonor the correlation between WC and N, the variables will be cosimulated. Inaddition to the variograms, these maps must of course honor the data at the samplepoints, and thus we will perform conditional simulations. Figure 10.5c and d hasshown that the data are not Gaussian distributed. Since most of the availablealgorithms for simulating random ﬁelds end up simulating Gaussian SRFs, weFIGURE 10.5 (a) Location of the data in the agricultural ﬁeld. Four sampling crosses are
located in the main soil types. (b) Cross-plot of nitrogen vs. water content. (c) Histogramof WC. (d) Histogram of N.
 
  
 (a) (b) 
 
 
 
(c) (d)  314 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 10.6 Variogram ﬁtting of raw data. Thin line, experimental variogram; thick
line, ﬁtted model; dashed line, variance or covariance value; dashed curves, envelope of
authorized cross-variogram models.
FIGURE 10.7 Kriging maps of (a) WC and (b) N. (See color version on accompanying
CD.)
 
Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 315
will ﬁrst perform a Gaussian transformation of each variable, then conditionally
cosimulate the transformed ﬁelds on a grid, and at the end back-transform the
images for providing conditional cosimulations of the raw variables. We nowdetail and illustrate the different steps.
10.4.2 G AUSSIAN  TRANSFORMATION
The ﬁrst step is to perform a Gaussian transformation of the data and to check
the bigaussian hypothesis on the transformed variables. The Gaussian transfor-mation is performed for each variable as explained in Section 10.2.1. The trans-forms j
WC and jN are modeled by expansions with Hermite polynomials.
Let YWC and YN denote the transformed variables corresponding to WC and
N. By de ﬁnition, they have a Gaussian marginal distribution. Since we intend to
build simulations with algorithms designed for Gaussian random functions, it isadvisable to at least check the Gaussian character of the distributions of pairs ofvalues such as ( Y
WC(x), YWC(x¢)), (YN(x), YN(x¢)), or ( YWC(x), YN(x¢)). The cross-
plot of YWC(xa) vs. YN(xa) at the same data point, depicted by Figure 10.8a, shows
that the pair of variables can be marginally modeled as a bigaussian vector.Concerning the bigaussian character of pairs of values at separate locations, weuse the simple and global way of checking based on the comparison of the order-one variogram with the usual variogram. Indeed, if the SRF Y is Gaussian, its
order-one variogram,
is proportional to the square root of its usual variogram (which can be considered
a variogram of order 2). Figure 10.8b and c depicts the ratio as afunction of | h|, for both variables. In the Gaussian case this ratio should be
constant and equal to . This condition is well veri ﬁed for N, but there
are some small variations for WC. The general shape of the curve, however, isnot far from being a constant. The variograms of ( Y
WC, YN) are modeled using a
linear model of coregionalization with the same structures as for the raw data,namely, a nugget effect component and an exponential model (Figure 10.9). Itsparameters are
g
YWC,YWC (h) = 0.09 nug + 0.91 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
gYWC,YN (h) = 0.70 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
gYN,YN (h) = 0.01 nug + 0.99 [1 – exp(–| h|/50)]
In the bigaussian case, it is possible to compute the variogram of Z corre-
sponding to a given variogram for Y using the function j.2 The variograms
obtained for ZWC and ZN should ﬁt the variograms computed on the raw data.11
2() E ( ) ()hx h x =+ YY
() / ()hh1
π=17 7.316 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
This provides an additional way for checking the validity of the bigaussian model.
On the data, the agreement is good, but in order to save place, the correspondingﬁgures have not been reported here. In conclusion, we can consider that the
transformed variables conform to a bigaussian model, and we make the assump-tion that multipoint statistics are also Gaussian, so that ( Y
WC, YN) is a Gaussian
pair of stationary random functions.
10.4.3 C ONDITIONAL  COSIMULATION
We are now ready to perform one or several conditional cosimulations of theGaussian pair ( Y
WC, YN). Each cosimulation necessitates a nonconditional cosim-FIGURE 10.8 (a) Cross-plot of the Gaussian-transformed variables ( YWC, YN). (b) Plot
of as a function of | h| for WC. (c) Same plot for N.
 () / ()hh1Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 317
ulation followed by conditoning by cokriging. Conditional simulations of the raw
variables (WC, N) will then be obtained by back-transformation of the simulationsof (Y
WC, YN).
The speci ﬁcity of a cosimulation of two or more variables by comparison
with separate simulations of each variable is to reproduce the cross-structures.In the present case, a nonconditional simulation of the pair of variables ( Y
WC, YN)
is easy. Let us begin with the continuous component (with an exponential vari-ogram). Starting from two independent Gaussian simulations Y
1 and Y2 with zero
mean, unit variance, and an exponential variogram with a parameter scale of50 m, we obtain correlated simulations with exponential direct and cross-vario-grams by linear combinations of the form
S
1(x) = a11 Y1(x) + a12 Y2(x)
S2(x) = a21 Y1(x) + a22 Y2(x)FIGURE 10.9 Variogram ﬁtting of the transformed variables. Thin line, experimental
variogram; thick line, ﬁtted model; dashed line, variance or covariance value; dashed
curves, envelope of authorized cross-variogram models.
318 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
The sills of these variograms being a112 + a122 for g1(h), a11 a21 + a12 a22 for
the cross-variogram g12(h), and a212 + a222 for g2(h), it suf ﬁces to select a11, a12,
a21, and a22 so that these sills equate 0.91, 0.70, and 0.99, respectively, for S1(x)
and S2(x) to represent nonconditional simulations of the continuous component.
Here we simulate Y1 and Y2 by using the turning bands algorithm (with 500 bands).
The nuggets of YWC and YN are independent, since the cross-variogram of YWC
and YN has no nugget effect; so they can be simulated as two independent Gaussian
white noises e1(x) and e2(x) with variances 0.09 and 0.01, respectively. A non-
conditional simulation ( SWC, SN) of ( YWC, YN) is then obtained by adding the nugget
and the exponential components:
SWC(x) = S1(x) + e1(x)
SN(x) = S2(x) + e2(x)
Note that the method presented here can be easily generalized to any linear
model of coregionalization with several variables and several variogram compo-nents, as explained in Section 10.2.6.4.
A conditioning by cokriging followed by a back-transformation then provides
a conditional cosimulation of WC and N, which are a consistent image of theirpossible spatial variations.
10.4.4 R ESULTS
Figure 10.10a and b shows a conditional simulation of WC and N, respectively .
Clearly, the conditional simulations show small-scale variability that was not inthe kriging maps, but the same large-scale patterns are still. Figure 10.10c and ddepicts the histogram of N and the cross-plot (WC, N). One can see that they arevery similar to the same ﬁgures computed on the data.
It is of course possible to perform as many independent realizations as desired.
This allows us to explore the variability of different scenarios for nitrogen fertil-ization and more generally for crop management.Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 319
REFERENCES
1. GBM Heuvelink, R Webster. Modelling soil variation: past, present, and future.
Geoderma  100: 269–301, 2001.
2. JP Chilès, P Del ﬁner. Geostatistics: Modeling Spatial Uncertainty . Wiley, New
York, 1999.
3. AG Journel. Geostatistics for conditional simulation of orebodies. Econ Geol  69:
673–687, 1974.
4. MFP Bierkens, PA Burrough. The indicator approach to categorical soil data. II.
Application to mapping and land use suitability analysis. J Soil Sci  44: 369–381,
1993.FIGURE 10.10 Conditional simulations of (a) WC and (b) N. (c) Histogram of WC.
(d) Cross-plot of simulated N vs. WC. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
320 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
5. PC Kyriakidis. Selecting panels for remediation in contaminated soils via stochas-
tic imaging. In Geostatistics Wollongong ’96 , V ol. 2, EY Baa ﬁ, NA Scho ﬁeld,
Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1997, pp. 973–983.
6. MJ Broos, L Aarts, CF van Tooren, A Stein. Quanti ﬁcation of the effects of
spatially varying environmental contaminants into a cost model for soil remedia-tion. J Environ Manage  56: 133–145, 1999.
7. P Goovaerts. Geostatistical modelling of uncertainty in soil science. Geoderma
103: 3–26, 2001.
8. S Druck Fuks, M V oltz. Comparison of geostatistical simulation approaches for
estimating the spatial uncertainty of soil texture. In geoENV III: Geostatistics for
Environmental Applications , V ol. 1, P Monestiez et al., Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
Netherlands, 2001, pp. 463–474.
9. C Lantuéjoul. Geostatistical Simulation: Models and Algorithms . Springer, Berlin,
2002.
10. X Émery. Conditional simulation of non-Gaussian random functions. Math Geol
34: 77–100, 2002.
11. X Émery. Simulation conditionnelle de modèles isofactoriels. Ph.D. dissertation,
E.N.S. des Mines de Paris, Paris, 2004.
12. JJ Gómez-Hernández, EF Cassiraga. Theory and practice of sequential simulation.
In Geostatistical Simulations , M Armstrong, PA Dowd, Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
Netherlands, 1994, pp. 111–124.
13. G Matheron. The intrinsic random functions and their applications. Adv Appl Prob
5: 439–468, 1973.
14. T Gneiting. Closed form solutions of the two-dimensional turning band equation.
Math Geol  30: 379–390, 1998.
15. P Kumar. Multiple scale conditional simulation. In Scaling Methods in Soil Phys-
ics, Y Pachepsky, DE Radcliffe, HM Selim, Eds. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
2003, pp. 179–192.
16. CV Deutsch, AG Journel. GSLIB: Geostatistical Software Library and User’s
Guide , 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, New York, 1998.
17. H Wackernagel. Multivariate Geostatistics , 3rd ed. Springer, Berlin, 2003.
18. J Serra. Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology . Academic Press, London,
1982.
19. D Stoyan, WS Kendall, J Mecke. Stochastic Geometry and Its Applications , 2nd
ed. Wiley, Chichester, U.K., 1995.
20. F Alabert. Stochastic Imaging of Spatial Distributions Using Hard and Soft Infor-
mation. M.Sc. dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 1987.
21. AG Journel. Imaging of spatial uncertainty: a non-Gaussian approach. In Geo-
statistical, Sensitivity, and Uncertainty Methods for Ground-water Flow and Radi-onuclide Transport Modeling , BE Buxton, Ed. Battelle Press, Columbus, OH,
1989, pp. 585–599.
22. AG Journel, F Alabert. Non-Gaussian data expansion in the earth sciences. Terra
Nova  1: 123–134, 1989.
23. X Freulon, C de Fouquet. Conditioning a Gaussian model with inequalities. In
Geostatistics Tróia ’92 , V ol. 1, A Soares, Ed. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands,
1993, pp. 201–212.
24. G Casella, EI George. Explaining the Gibbs sampler. Am Stat  46: 167–174, 1992.Stochastic Simulation of Soil Variations 321
25. G Matheron, H Beucher, C de Fouquet, A Galli, D Guérillot, C Ravenne. Condi-
tional Simulation of the Geometry of Fluvio-Deltaic Reservoirs, SPE paper 16753,Society of Petroleum Engineers, Richardson, TX, 1987.
26. A Galli, H Beucher, G Le Loc’h, B Doligez, Heresim Group. The pros and cons
of the truncated Gaussian method. In Geostatistical Simulations , M Armstrong,
PA Dowd, Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1994, pp. 217–233.
27. M Armstrong, A Galli, G Le Loc’h, F Geffroy, R Eschard. Plurigaussian Simu-
lations in Geosciences . Springer, Berlin, 2003.
28. D Allard. Simulating a geological lithofacies with respect to connectivity infor-
mation using the truncated Gaussian model. In Geostatistical Simulations , M
Armstrong, PA Dowd, Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1994, pp. 197–211.
29. G Matheron. Éléments pour une théorie des milieux poreux . Masson, Paris, 1967.
30. MNM Van Lieshout. Markov Point Processes and Their Applications . Imperial
College Press, London, 2000.
31. A Brix, WS Kendall. Simulation of cluster point processes without edge effects.
Adv Appl Prob  34: 267–280, 2002.
32. S Strebelle. Conditional simulation of complex geological structures using multi-
point statistics. Math Geol  34: 1–22, 2002.
33. S Lopez. Modélisation de réservoirs chenalisés méandriformes: approche géné-
tique et stochastique. Ph.D. dissertation, E.N.S. des Mines de Paris, Paris, 2003.
34. B Mary, N Beaudoin, JM Machet, C Bruchou, F Ariès. Characterization and
analysis of soil variability within two agricultural ﬁelds: the case of water and
mineral N pro ﬁles. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Precision
Agriculture , G. Grenier, S. Blackmore, Eds., Montpellier, France, 2001,
pp. 431–436.
35. M Goulard, M V oltz. Linear coregionalization model: tools for estimation and
choice of multivariate variograms. Math Geol  24: 269–286, 1992.32311Pedometrical 
Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales
Marc van Meirvenne and Ingrid van Cleemput
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................323
11.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................32411.2 Characterizing Soil Texture Variability from within Field to a 
Regional Scale.......................................................................................325
11.3 Soil Texture Mapping at a Regional Scale...........................................329
11.3.1 Regional Scale.......................................................................32911.3.2 Study Area.............................................................................32911.3.3 Dataset, Strati ﬁcation, and Variograms.................................330
11.3.4 Interpolation ..........................................................................331
11.3.4.1 Ordinary Kriging ................................................33111.3.4.2 Ordinary Kriging with Integrated Properties 
of Map Delineations ...........................................333
11.3.4.3 Compositional Ordinary Kriging .......................33411.3.4.4 Results.................................................................33511.3.4.5 Sensitivity Analysis of Soil Texture
Classi ﬁcation.......................................................337
11.4 Conclusions ...........................................................................................339References .........................................................................................................340
ABSTRACT
Soil texture is a key property in ﬂuencing most soil processes. Therefore, it has
been characterized and mapped intensively. Traditionally, soil texture, being adistribution of grain sizes, was classi ﬁed twice: in soil textural fractions and in
textural classes. The consequence was the introduction of boundaries betweengrain sizes and on maps. With pedometrical techniques we can avoid the last.324 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
However, maps are scale dependent, so this chapter focuses on methods to map
soil texture fractions continuously at different scales. First, we considered a nestedsampling with spatial intervals between observation ranging from a few meters to
several tens of kilometers. The resulting variogram displayed three levels with a
very low nugget effect, illustrating the increasing variance as the spatial scale ofthe investigation increased. Second, soil texture was mapped on a regional scale.Therefore, an area of approximately 3000 km
2 in Belgium was used. A database
of 4887 textural analyses taken inside this area was available. The area wasstrati ﬁed and ordinary kriging of each textural fraction independently was com-
pared with compositional ordinary kriging of the three fractions simultaneously,guaranteeing that their sum equals 100, by taking the nature of the boundaries intoaccount. The three resulting layers, representing the textural fractions clay, silt,and sand, form three basic geographic information systems (GIS) layers, whichcan be used to produce classi ﬁed maps according to any texture classi ﬁcation. We
illustrated this by applying the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) texturaltriangle as an alternative to the Belgian triangle, which was used during the Belgiansoil survey. This analysis was completed by a sensitivity analysis, resulting in anindication of the mapping quality of the resulting maps. This chapter illustrates anew use of existing data, mapping texture as texture fractions rather than classes.In this way, one of the two classi ﬁcations of soil texture can be avoided.
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Soil texture is one of the most important soil properties in ﬂuencing most physical,
chemical, and biological soil processes. Hence, it is a key property for soilmanagement. Ever since soil has been characterized, some indication of soiltexture has been included. But since grain sizes of soil particles can vary widelyat any location, the most complete way to characterize soil texture would be touse a particle-size frequency distribution.
1 However, determining the full (equiv-
alent) soil particle diameter distribution is a cumbersome activity that was hardlypossible until recently, when more sophisticated measurement methods, like laserdiffractometry,
2 became available. As a result, soil scientists turned to the use of
classes. Texture classes were de ﬁned on the basis of three textural fractions: clay,
silt, and sand. Today, the most widespread delineations of these fractions are 0to 2 mm for clay, 2 to 50 mm for silt, and 50 to 2000 mm for sand. Particles larger
than 2 mm are not considered to belong to the ﬁne earth, although their impact
on soil management can be substantial if they are common. The three texturalfractions can be presented as a three-dimensional graph, but due to the limitationthat their sum must be 100%, this graph reduces to a triangle. Within this triangletexture classes are de ﬁned by covering a certain proportion of the area of the
triangle. Most countries have a national soil texture triangle with national textureclasses, but internationally the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) soiltexture triangle is most widely used, including by international institutions suchas the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
3Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 325
The double classi ﬁcation into texture fractions and texture classes made soil
survey a lot more feasible. However, it introduced another simpli ﬁcation of
reality: boundaries and soil map polygons. This approximation was considereda price soil scientists had to pay to reduce and manage natural complexity.
With the advance of data management technology and the development of
pedometrical techniques, we are now in the position to turn one step back to thenatural occurrence of soil texture: mapping textural fractions numerically andavoiding the use of texture classes and their mapping boundaries. However, weare just at the beginning of exploring the possibilities of mapping the soil particlediameter distributions in a spatially continuous way. Only then will we haveavoided the simpli ﬁcations and boundary problems associated with classi ﬁcation
of a continuous phenomenon, both in spatial and in attribute dimensions.
4
This chapter focuses on some of the pedometrical techniques (like variogram
analysis and compositional ordinary kriging) we currently have at our disposalto map soil textural classes in a spatially continuous way over a range of scales.We illustrate how these layers of information can be used to characterize soilspatial variability over different scales and to obtain maps of soil textural classeson a regional scale in East Flanders, Belgium. We also evaluated the sensitivityof such a classi ﬁcation.
11.2 CHARACTERIZING SOIL TEXTURE VARIABILITY 
FROM WITHIN FIELD TO A REGIONAL SCALE
Soil, as we encounter it at a given instant in time and space, is the result of several
soil-forming processes, each of which acts at a speci ﬁc rate and spatial scale
(resolution or grain). Climatological factors can be very dynamic in time, buttheir average properties usually behave quite uniformly over large areas. Biolog-ical effects, on the other hand, can be extremely local (e.g., the effect of burrowinganimals). The same is true for soil properties: some are very variable in time andspace (e.g., nitrate–nitrogen), whereas others are quite permanent and vary in amore structured way over a landscape (e.g., thickness of a windblown sediment).As a result, the spatial structure of soil variation can be very complex, and inturn, this structure can be time-dependent.
The structure of the spatial variability is typically characterized by the vari-
ogram,
5 calculated as
 
with  being the variogram for the spatial vector h, separating observations
z(xa) and z(xa + h) ( a = 1, …, N), N being the total number of observations of
soil property Z, and N(h) is the number of couples separated by h.() =1
2( ){( ) ( + ) }
=1()
2hhxx hh
NzzN
∑
()h326 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
The sill parameter of the variogram model approximately re ﬂects the total
variation encountered by the observations, whereas the nugget parameter repre-sents the unstructured (random) part of it. The spatial scale over which the
structure extends is given by the range. The latter is an important parameter to
analyze the spatial dimension over which two observations are interrelated (auto-correlated). Although the variogram can be bounded at one spatial scale, it mightbecome nested when the extent of the investigation increases, as more soil-forming factors contribute as other scales are included. Thus, variograms are scaledependent (i.e., investigation speci ﬁc), despite the somewhat misleading inter-
pretation given to the range (and sill), as if it delineated a ﬁxed extent of in ﬂuence
of an observation.
Soil texture is the result of physicochemical processes acting on rocks and
minerals ( in situ or after transportation), in ﬂuenced by external factors like cli-
mate, topography, and living organisms. Within a time frame relevant to soilmanagement, texture can be considered to be time invariable, making it aninteresting property to map.
To investigate the scale dependency of soil textural fractions, we combined
three sampling schemes and analyzed the sand fraction. The ﬁrst sampling cov-
ered an entire geomorphological unit: the polder area in the northwest of EastFlanders, Belgium (Figure 11.1). It covers 6840 ha and consists of 32 poldersrecovered from the sea, mostly during the 16th century. The topsoil is dominantlyloamy, but the texture of the area is known to display a large variation.
6 At this
scale, representing a sampling interval on the order of 100 to 1000 m, 115 topsoilsamples were taken.
FIGURE 11.1 Polder area showing the three sampling schemes of topsoil sand: entire
area (below), transect with nested sampling (top right), and 1-ha ﬁeld with clustered
samples (top left), indicating the number of samples taken in each scheme ( n). 
 
0 5000 10000 15000 20000
m01 0 0 0 2 0 0 0
Distance (m)1000 1050 1100
0.901 0 0
m0100
n = 50
n = 115n = 75Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 327
Near to the center of this polder area, a 2-km-long transect was sampled
according to a nested design (Figure 11.1). The basic sampling distance was 100m, but ﬁve intervals of 50 m were sampled at 5-m intervals. Additional samples
were taken at 25 m, resulting in 75 samples in total. These samples cover a spatialscale ranging from 5 to 100 m.
Within the area crossed by the transect, a 1-ha part of an agricultural ﬁeld
was sampled at 50 locations, with a minimum interval of 2.5 m (Figure 11.1).These locations were obtained from a random selection out of 247 grid pointsused to monitor nitrogen leaching.
7 This sampling covers a spatial scale between
2.5 and 10 m.
When the variogram is calculated for each of these three sampling schemes,
it shows a leveling off and a bounded variogram model could be ﬁtted (Figure
11.2). When all data points were pooled (240 data items), a nested model witha nugget effect and three simple models was used to model the increasing spatialvariability with increasing spatial dimensions:
with:FIGURE 11.2 Nested variogram model of the three sampling schemes in Figure 11.1
combined (curve d) and the nugget effect (a) and the two models of the ﬁeld and transect
sampling (b and c, respectively). 0 2000 4000 6000 8000
Lag(m)050100150200250Semivariance (da g kg-1)2Sand
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
() =( )  + () + () ()12hh hh h03+
0
000
0() =  hh
Chif
if=
>
1 1
11() =3
21
20 <3
hCh
ah
ahha≤1
1 1 () =   > hC ha1328 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
with C0 the nugget effect (intercept on Y-axis), C1, C2, and C3 the structured
components of the three spherical models, C0 + C1 + C2 + C3 the total sill (plateau
value), a1, a2, and a3 the three ranges of spatial autocorrelation corresponding to
the sills of every model, respectively, and h the spatial lag (separation vector) for
which the variogram  is calculated. For the ﬁtted model, C0 = 1.5%2, C1 =
34%2, C2 = 90%2, and C3 = 90%2, so the sill is 215.5%2 of which the random,
unstructured variability represents only 0.7%. This indicates that as the separationdistance reduces, the nugget effect approaches zero, its theoretical value. Theﬁtted ranges are a
1 = 90 m, a2 = 990 m, and a3 = 3500 m, showing the increasing
nature of the spatial scale as the extent of the sampling area increases, and eachlevel contributes in a signi ﬁcant amount to the total variation encountered at the
largest scale. It could be hypothesized that if we extend the sampling further, tocover increasingly larger areas, new levels of variation could be added, resultingin new sill values. The tendency of the variogram to increase can also be observedby taking the logarithm of both axes of Figure 11.2; the result is shown in Figure11.3. It illustrates the almost log-linear increase of spatial variation as the spatialdimension increases. Therefore, one could wonder, as McBratney
8 did: “Does the
variogram really have a sill (or a range)?”
FIGURE 11.3 Nested variogram of Figure 11.2 shown on logarithmically transformed axes.2 2
22() =3
21
23
hCh
ah
ah≤aa2
2 2 () =  > hC ha2
3 3
33() =3
21
23
hCh
ah
ah≤aa3
3 3 3 () =  > hC ha
()h
1 10 100 1000 10000
Lag(m1101001000Semivariance (da g kg-1)2 Sand
 Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 329
11.3 SOIL TEXTURE MAPPING AT A REGIONAL 
SCALE
11.3.1 R EGIONAL  SCALE
We de ﬁne a regional scale as a resolution that is commonly used to map at a
scale of 1:50,000 to 1:100,000. This is the scale at which most national soilmaps have been produced, although in some countries, like Belgium, a moredetailed scale was used (mostly 1:20,000 to 1:25,000). The advantage of aregional scale is that it produces both a geological overview and agronomicdetail. Regional soil maps mostly have soil texture as one of the central soilproperties in their legends.
11.3.2 S TUDY AREA
The application of pedometrical techniques is illustrated on an area covering3000 km
2 located in Belgium: the province of East Flanders (Figure 11.4). This
area was selected because a regional soil texture map was available at a scale of1:100,000 covering variable soil parent materials (from north to south): twopolder areas, a medium sand area, a ﬁne sand area, a sandy loam area, and a
silty area (Figure 11.5). Within these areas alluvial deposits associated with themajor rivers are found. The sediments of the polders and river alluvia weredeposited by water; all other material was wind transported (eolian sediments).Figure 11.5 shows a simpli ﬁed regional soil texture map derived from a more
detailed map made by Van Ruymbeke and colleagues in 1965.
9 More details can
be found in Van Cleemput.10
The limitations associated with a polygon soil map representing soil texture
classes of soil texture fractions are as follows:FIGURE 11.4 The study area (province of East Flanders) within Belgium. 
330 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
1. The discrete model of spatial variation, in which soil units are repre-
sented as polygons that are internally homogeneous with abrupt bound-aries, is conceptually outdated.
2. Due to the classi ﬁcation using the Belgian soil texture triangle, reclas-
siﬁcation into, e.g., the internationally accepted USDA texture triangle
is impossible. This creates problems of interchangeability betweenneighboring countries.
3. The map legend provides qualitative information, whereas increasingly
quantitative information is required to be analyzed in geographic infor-mation systems (GIS)-related models and pedotransfer models.
4. No information about the accuracy of the map is provided.
For these reasons, a need existed to construct a new soil texture inventory of
the area.
11.3.3 D ATASET , STRATIFICATION , AND VARIOGRAMS
Within the study area we had access to 4887 topsoil (0- to 30-cm) samples, ofwhich the three textural fractions — sand, silt, and clay (according to the de ﬁ-
nition given above) were analyzed using the conventional sieve-and-pipettemethod. The samples were distributed quite evenly over the province (Figure11.6), but some areas (like the silty area in the south and the alluvial area) wereless frequently sampled than the others. In some parts, detailed short-distancesamples were available (like the transect sampling discussed above), allowing thecharacterization of the spatial structure over short intervals.
Based on the simpli ﬁed soil texture map, these data were strati ﬁed according
to the seven different soil texture areas presented in Figure 11.5. For each of thethree strati ﬁed textural fractions, variograms were calculated and modeled by a
double, triple, or spherical model. Figure 11.2 and Figure 11.7 show the vario-FIGURE 11.5 Generalized soil map of province of East Flanders.
Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 331
grams only for the sand fraction, and Table 11.1 contains their model parameters.
The variograms of the other fractions are given in Van Cleemput.10
All variograms contain spatial structures extending over several kilometers,
ranging from 3.24 km (medium sand area) to 10.4 km (alluvial deposits), illus-trating the far-reaching spatial correlation of this textural fraction. Moreover, allvariogams had a zero nugget, except for the NW polders, where the relativenugget effect was very small (0.7%).
11.3.4 I NTERPOLATION
11.3.4.1 Ordinary Kriging
In its basic form, kriging calculates weights given to neighboring measurement
points in order to predict the value of the investigated property at an unvisitedlocation through the following general kriging equation:
with l
a, the unknown weights given to the n(x0) measurements z(xa) at locations
x, used to interpolate Z at the unknown location x0: Z*(x0), m(xa) can represent
anything between a spatial trend and a global stationary mean. How m(xa) is
considered determines the version of kriging that is used. The most commonFIGURE 11.6 Localization of the 4887 topsoil texture data available within East Flanders,
Belgium.
Zm Z mn
*()
() ()xx x xx
00
10
= () ()
=∑332 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 11.7 Omnidirectional variograms of six strata for the textural fraction sand (the
variogram of the stratum NW Polder given in Figure 11.2).
TABLE 11.1
Variogram Parameters of the Double (Triple for the Polders) 
Spherical Models of the Sand Data of the Seven Strata
StratumC0 C1 a1 C2 a2 C3 a3
(%2)( %2)( m )( %2)( m )( %2)( m )
NW polders 1.5 34 90 90 990 90 3500
NE polders 0 307 800 58 5120 214.5 8000Medium sand area 0 25.8 780 9.8 3240Fine sand area 0 26.1 900 23 6240Sandy loam area 0 90 368 235 4800Silty area 0 129.6 1800 19.8 4800Alluvial deposits 0 396 400 200 10,400
Note: See text for de ﬁnitions of symbols.Alluvial deposits 
 NE Polders 
Medium sand area 
 Fine sand area 
Sandy loam area 
 Silty area 
Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 333
version is ordinary kriging (OK), where m(xa) is considered to be locally sta-
tionary, i.e., constant within the neighborhood around x0. As a result, we can
eliminate m from the equation, which is an advantage since we rarely know it.
In order to be unbiased, the system also requires that the sum of the weights add
to 1:
Solving this OK system requires knowledge of the variogram, but it has a
unique solution obtained through matrix algebra and by introducing a Lagrangeparameter. Ordinary kriging also allows a measure of the interpolation precision,the kriging variance. More details can be found in standard textbooks, likeGoovaerts.
5
11.3.4.2 Ordinary Kriging with Integrated Properties of 
Map Delineations
As mentioned before, the boundaries on soil maps represent abrupt discontinuities
delineating internally homogeneous areas. However, soils rarely have abruptboundaries; nevertheless, discontinuities may occur. Therefore, Boucneau et al.
11
presented criteria to identify four different types of map boundaries and developedmodi ﬁcations of OK in respect to the nature of these map boundaries. Their aim
was to incorporate information provided by soil map boundaries into the inter-polation of point data using OK.
In this chapter we identi ﬁed two types of boundaries on the regional soil
texture map (Figure 11.5): abrupt and gradual boundaries. Figure 11.8a representsthe situation where the data are not strati ﬁed, so OK used all observation points
within the neighborhood to interpolate at x
0. In the case where a soil map is being
used to stratify an area, the map boundaries could be considered to be abrupt(Figure 11.8b) or gradual (Figure 11.8c). In the ﬁrst case, the boundary separates
two strongly different soil populations. In this case, OK is not allowed to usedata points located at the opposite side of the boundary, and so we used strati ﬁed
OK. In the second situation, a gradual boundary between two types of soil occursso that OK must be allowed to use all data, as well as the ones at the other sideof the boundary. However, these two types of soil might still display a differentinternal structure of spatial variance, as modeled by their variograms. Conse-quently, when the area
 that is interpolated ( x0) is located within area A, the
variogram model of that soil type must be used, even for the data points locatedwithin area B, and the reverse. Therefore, in this case the boundary is not used
to separate the observation points, but it is used to delineate the areas where adifferent variogram is used.
The regional soil texture map (Figure 11.5) contains eight boundaries, of
which the boundaries separating two eolian sediments (for example, the onesZZOKnn
=== () = ∑∑()() ()
xxxx
0
1100
1 with334 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
between the medium sand area and the ﬁne sand area, or between the sandy loam
area and the silty area) were found to be gradual. So in the vicinity of theseboundaries, OK was performed with a strati ﬁcation of the variograms only (Figure
11.8c). The boundaries between alluvial and eolian sediments (for example, theones between the polders and the medium sand area or between the river alluviaand the areas around them) were abrupt; therefore, in the vicinity of these bound-aries OK was used with a strati ﬁcation of both data and variograms (Figure 11.8b).
11.3.4.3 Compositional Ordinary Kriging
Ordinary kriging is an univariate interpolation method; thus, each textural fraction
is considered independently from the other two. However, the sum of the threetextural fractions must be 100 in order to be able to classify them with a texturaltriangle. This is not guaranteed by using OK. Therefore, we used compositionalOK (COK), which considers all three fractions simultaneously by minimizingthe sum of their prediction error variances and by taking the unbiasedness,nonnegativity, and constant sum constraints into account.
12 Assume that there areFIGURE 11.8 Illustration of the three interpolation conditions corresponding to the dif-
ferent types of map delineations: (a) ordinary kriging, (b) strati ﬁed ordinary kriging with
an abrupt boundary, (c) ordinary kriging with a gradual boundary used for variogramstrati ﬁcation (arrows connect observations used for the interpolation with the location
where Z has to be interpolated). (From G. Boucneau, M. van Meirvenne, O. Thas, and G.Hofman. Eur. J. Soil Sci., 49: 213–229, 1998. With permission.)zz z
B l)4x(z ll )5x()3x(z l)6x(zml)2x(z zx*(0) l)1x(z A
(c)B l)4x(z ll )5x()3x(z l)6x(zml)2x(z zx*(0) l)1x(z A
(b)S l)4x(z ll )5x()3x(z l)6x(zm)2x(z zx*(0) l)1x(z
(a)lPedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 335
K variables Zk (k = 1, …, K) that we want to interpolate simultaneously, then the
interpolation of variable Zk is obtained from its neighboring measurements by the
COK estimator:13
As with OK, solving the COK system requires knowledge of the variograms of
all K variables and the introduction of K2 Lagrange parameters. It also provides K
kriging variances. As with OK, COK can be performed on a point basis or produceestimates for a given area or volume, termed block B.
11.3.4.4 Results
To evaluate the interpolation using COK compared to OK, applying the same
strati ﬁcation and using the same boundary types, we performed a cross-validation,
i.e., estimating each measurement in turn from the remaining observations. Table11.2 contains the results in terms of the root mean-square error (RMSE) summa-rized for all strata. The average predictive quality of COK is similar to OK despitethe additional conditions.
Since the global predictive quality does not suggest preference of COK over
OK, we used OK to predict the three textural fractions separately and checked
TABLE 11.2Average Root Mean Square Estimation Error 
(RMSE) Obtained by a Cross-Validation Using OK Three Times (for Each Textural Fraction Independently) and COK for all Strata Combined (4887 Data Points)
Textural FractionOK COK
RMSE (%) RMSE (%)
Clay 4.88 4.90
Silt 8.19 8.17Sand 10.33 10.32ZZCOK k k kn
kk
,,()
,()
=
== () ∑xxx
0
1
10
withnn
kkn
kKk
kk
Z()
,()x
x
x0
01
100
1 1∑
∑=
() =
= =and ∑∑336 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
if their sum was equal to 100 using again a cross-validation procedure. Table
11.3 shows the results for the seven strata separately, indicating the number of
observation points per stratum, the overall mean of the sum of the three fractions,and the minimum and maximum sums encountered. Although the overall mean
sum is close to 100 for all strata, the extremes sometimes depart as much as 11%from 100. Obviously, interpolating the three fractions independently is not a validoption if the results need to be combined for further analysis or classi ﬁcation into
texture classes. The latter is done here.
We used strati ﬁed compositional ordinary block kriging to interpolate simul-
taneously the three average textural fractions of 47,454 blocks of 250 by 250 m(being a reasonable compromise between the number of blocks and the resolu-tion), taking into account the nature of the boundaries used for strati ﬁcation.
Figure 11.9 shows the map of the sand fraction. Similar maps were obtained forclay and silt, while the sum of the three maps equals 100 for every pixel. Figure11.9 shows that in some cases (e.g., between the polders and the neighboringsandy area), the boundaries represent major textural discontinuities, but in othersituations, the within-stratum variation seems even larger than the variationbetween neighboring strata (e.g., the silty area).
The three textural maps represent the three basic layers of a GIS database
about soil texture in this province. They could be used as input into regionalmodeling of soil processes (such as erosion) or into a pedotransfer function toobtain information about other soil properties (such as the soil moisture retentioncurve). We used them as input into a soil texture classi ﬁcation. In principle, any
texture triangle could be used, but we preferred the USDA soil texture triangle
3
because it is the one that is most often internationally used (Figure 11.10). Sucha map has never been produced before, since in Belgium a national soil texturetriangle is mostly used. It is an indication for the textural variation of the studyTABLE 11.3Sum of the Three Textural Fractions as Obtained 
Independently from a Cross-Validation Using Stratiﬁed OK
Stratum nm Minimum Maximum
%% %
Alluvial deposits 372 100.01 91.85 107.40
NE polders 199 99.93 94.51 103.54NW polders 365 99.96 95.56 104.56Medium sand area 557 100.04 98.97 101.69Fine sand area 1394 100.01 93.67 106.08Sandy loam area 1444 100.02 88.57 106.63Silty area 556 99.76 89.71 106.37
Note:  n = number of data; m = mean.Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 337
area that of the 12 textural classes of the USDA texture triangle, 11 occur on the
map (only the class sandy clay is absent).
11.3.4.5 Sensitivity Analysis of Soil Texture Classiﬁcation
Since every interpolation of each of the three textural fractions is uncertain, this
uncertainty propagates through the classi ﬁcation. Therefore, one might be inter-
ested in the sensitivity of the classi ﬁcation for this uncertainty. Since the inter-
polation uncertainties vary over the map (depending on the sampling con ﬁgura-
tion and the variograms of the strata), the sensitivity of the texture classi ﬁcation
has to be mapped as well.
The procedure we followed was based on the assumption that the global
interpolation error follows a normal (Gaussian) distribution with two parameters:a mean value provided by the interpolated value and a variance equal to thekriging variance. Other, nonparametric techniques exist to obtain the local inter-polation error numerically, like indicator kriging, Bayesian maximum entropy, orconditional simulations, but we did not want to overload this analysis by methodsthat are too advanced.
At each location, a Latin hypercube sampling
14 of 50 values of two of the
three texture distributions was performed and combined. No correlation betweenFIGURE 11.9 Topsoil sand content obtained by strati ﬁed compositional ordinary block
kriging (block dimensions: 250 ¥ 250 m) taking into account the nature of the boundaries
used for strati ﬁcation (lines). (See color version on accompanying CD.)
338 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
the three fractions was assumed, which is a conservative assumption, resulting
possibly in some in ﬂation of the uncertainty. The third textural fraction was
obtained by subtracting the sum of the two sampled fractions from 100, yielding2500 possible values of the three textural fractions.
This procedure was repeated for each of the three combinations of two textural
fractions (clay–silt, silt–sand, and clay–sand). This yielded 7500 possible texturalcompositions at each location. These values were classi ﬁed and the frequency of
obtaining the same class as the predicted texture was taken as an indicator of thesensitivity of the classi ﬁcation ( Figure 11.11). Thus, large frequencies indicate a
stable classi ﬁcation, and the reverse.
One can observe that the lowest frequencies occur in the alluvial areas and
the NE polders, both containing the most heterogeneous soils. Very stable clas-FIGURE 11.10 Soil texture classes according to the USDA texture triangle of East
Flanders, Belgium. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 339
siﬁcations were found in the sandy and silty areas. Lower frequencies were also
found in areas with a texture near to a class boundary, causing linear patterns,often parallel to the stratum boundaries.
11.4 CONCLUSIONS
Mapping soil texture still receives a lot of attention in soil science since it is akey property guiding soil use and management. Soil texture refers to the distri-bution of grain size, but in practical soil survey, it is classi ﬁed twice: ﬁrst intoFIGURE 11.11 Frequency of obtaining the same texture class as predicted by COK
(Figure 11.10) with the Latin hypercube sampling of the three textural distributions (using7500 samples). Large frequencies indicate a stable classi ﬁcation. (See color version on
accompanying CD.)
340 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
texture fractions (mostly clay, silt, and sand) and second into texture classes
(according to a texture triangle).
To avoid the second classi ﬁcation, we can use pedometrical techniques to
build quantitative spatial data layers of textural fractions, which represent the
basic layers about soil information in a soil information system. This contributionillustrated a sequence of steps that allows such layers to be constructed at differentscales and shows how this variation can change from one scale to another. Theregional mapping of soil texture accounted for two modi ﬁcations:
1. The strati ﬁcation was based on a general soil texture map delineating
zones of different parent materials. However, the nature of the bound-aries of this map was taken into account: abrupt boundaries were usedto stratify data and variograms, and gradual boundaries strati ﬁed only
the variograms, allowing much smoother transition zones betweenneighboring strata.
2. Compositional ordinary kriging was used to guarantee that the sum of
the three textural fractions returned to 100. This condition was not metwhen the three fractions were interpolated independently.
The resulting data layers could serve many purposes; the one illustrated here
was the classi ﬁcation according to a different texture triangle than the one used
previously. Another outcome is the analysis of the quality of the classi ﬁed map,
represented by a sensitivity analysis based on the kriged values and their krigingvariances.
It should be stressed that the data and background information used here
originate mainly from the 1960s and 1970s. Only the methods of data analysiswere developed more recently. This indicates the power of pedometrical tech-niques to retrieve new information from existing data, thus upgrading existingdatabases within a soil information system.
REFERENCES
1. MD Fredlund, DG Fredlund, GW Wilson. An equation to represent grain-size
distribution. Can Geotech  37: 817–827, 2000.
2. CC Muggler, Th Pape, P Buurman. Laser grain-size determination in soil genetic
studies. 2. Clay content, clay formation, and aggregation in some BrazilianOxisols . Soil Sci 162: 219–228, 1997.
3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Guidelines for
Soil Pro ﬁle Description . FAO , 1977, p. 26.
4. PA Burrough, PFM van Gaans, R Hootsmans. Continuous classi ﬁcation in soil
survey: spatial correlation, confusion and boundaries. Geoderma  77: 115–135,
1997.
5. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation . Oxford University
Press, New York, 1997, p. 28.Pedometrical Techniques for Soil Texture Mapping at Different Scales 341
6. M Van Meirvenne, G Hofman, J Van Hove, M Van Ruymbeke. A continuous
spatial characterization of textural fractions and CaCO3 content of the topsoil of
the polder region of northwest East-Flanders, Belgium. Soil Sci  150: 710–716,
1990.
7. M Van Meirvenne, G Hofman. Spatial variability of soil nitrate nitrogen after
potatoes and its change during winter. Plant Soil  40: 103–110, 1989.
8. A McBratney. Some considerations on methods for spatially aggregating and
disaggregating soil information. Nutrient Cycling Agroecosyst  50: 51–62, 1998.
9. M Van Ruymbeke, L De Leenheer, F Appelmans, J Van Damme. La texture de la
couche arable en ﬂandre orientale. Pedologie  15: 255–340, 1965.
10. I Van Cleemput. Computercartogra ﬁe van bodemtextuurfracties van Oost-Vlaan-
deren (in Dutch). M.Sc. thesis, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, 2002.
11. G Boucneau, M Van Meirvenne, O Thas, G Hofman. Integrating properties of soil
map delineations into ordinary kriging. Eur J Soil Sci  49: 213–229, 1998.
12. JJ De Gruijter, DJJ Walvoort, PFM van Gaans. Continuous soil maps: a fuzzy set
approach to bridge the gap between aggregation levels of process and distributionmodels. Geoderma  77: 169–195, 1997.
13. DJJ Walvoort, JJ De Gruijter. Compositional kriging: a spatial interpolation
method for compositional data. Math Geol  33: 951–966, 2001.
14. EJ Pebesma, GBM Heuvelink. Latin hypercube sampling of Gaussian random
ﬁelds. Technometrics  41: 303–312, 1999.34312Analysis of Complex 
Soil Variation Using Wavelets
R. Murray Lark
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................343
12.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................34412.2 Theory ...................................................................................................346
12.2.1 General Principles .................................................................34612.2.2 The Discrete Wavelet Transform ..........................................34912.2.3 Multiresolution Analysis .......................................................351
12.3 Statistical Developments.......................................................................352
12.3.1 Wavelet Variance and Change Detection..............................352
12.3.2 Wavelet Covariance and Change Detection..........................354
12.4 Case Study.............................................................................................356
12.4.1 The Data ................................................................................35612.4.2 Multiresolution Analysis .......................................................35912.4.3 Uniformity of the Variance ...................................................36112.4.4 Covariation with Soil Carbon Content .................................365
12.5 Conclusions ...........................................................................................368Acknowledgments .............................................................................................369References .........................................................................................................369
ABSTRACT
We can use the wavelet transform to express the spatial variation of data in termsof a set of coef ﬁcients, each of which describes local variation at different spatial
scales. It therefore requires no assumption that the variability is uniform in space.This is different from geostatistical methods that are commonly and fruitfullyused for the analysis of spatial data on the soil. In this chapter the wavelettransform is introduced, focusing on the maximal overlap discrete wavelet trans-form as adapted for the analysis of relatively small datasets. It is possible toidentify segments of a one-dimensional dataset within which the variance of the344 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
analyzed variable appears to be uniform at particular spatial scales by analysis
of the wavelet coef ﬁcients. This may give insight into the complex causes of
spatial variation in the soil-landscape. We can also analyze the covariation of twovariables using their wavelet coef ﬁcients, to quantify how they are related at
different spatial scales of generalization and to detect parts of the soil-landscapewithin which they may be related differently at different spatial scales. Theseideas are illustrated with data on the organic carbon content and CO
2 emission
rates of topsoils on a transect over farmland at Silsoe in England. The wavelettransform can be used to show how the variability of CO
2 emissions changes
from one part of the landscape to another. It is also shown that, at one spatialscale, the organic carbon content of the soil and the rate of CO
2 emission are not
uniformly related in space, but are strongly correlated in certain soils and uncor-related elsewhere.
12.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of computing is insight, not numbers.
— R.W. Hamming1
Most quantitative methods used to study soils in the landscape are designed to
solve practical problems. Geostatistical methods have proven particularly usefulfor this. We may apply kriging to predict the value of a soil property over a blockor at an unsampled site, so that the farmer or engineer can decide how best tomanage the soil to grow a crop or to build a road or to protect the water in anunderlying aquifer.
When we use geostatistics we make assumptions. Speci ﬁcally, we assume
that our observation of soil property z at location x, , is a realization of a
random function, , that is intrinsically stationary. This is a weak form ofsecond-order stationarity and is met if two conditions hold. The ﬁrst is that
, (12.1) 
where h is a separation in space, the lag. The second is that the variance of the
differences,
, (12.2)
depends only on h and not on x. The function is the semivariogram.
These assumptions also extend to the multivariate case, where we may use
cokriging to estimate a soil property that is spatially correlated with a cheaplymeasured surrogate variable such as a remote sensor image.z()x
Z()x
E[ ( ) ( )]ZZxx h x += 0
22() [ {() ( ) } ]hx x h =+EZZ
()hAnalysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 345
Soil scientists, educated in the biological, chemical, and physical processes
that together form the soil, may have reservations about treating soil propertiesas random processes. Does random  not mean uncaused? Matheron
2 shows that
the use of random models may be defended as a pragmatic but philosophically
respectable response to complexity. Random models may one day be supersededin a particular area of science by mechanistic description. Indeed, a successfulgeostatistical analysis of the soil often combines a physical description of somecomponents of the variation with a probabilistic description of other elementstoo complex, or perhaps chaotic,
3 to yield to physics. See, for example, the
combination of kriging with a process model in Saito and Goovaerts’s4 analysis
of the distribution of pollutants in soil.
There are other reasons why the soil scientist may have reservations about
using geostatistics to analyze properties of the soil. These are centered on theplausibility of the intrinsic hypothesis stated above. Equation 12.1 implies sta-tionarity of the mean of the process, which may be implausible when there is astrong trend. A trend that is explicable in terms of a mechanistic process may beeliminated if a process model is incorporated. Otherwise, the methods of universalkriging
5 or intrinsic random functions of order greater than zero6 may be used.
A less tractable problem is posed when our soil variable does not appear to beuniform in the variance. This is inconsistent with the second component of theintrinsic hypothesis, Equation 12.2.
It is not dif ﬁcult to imagine a soil-landscape in which it is implausible to
assume that soil properties are generated by a random process with uniformvariance. The author learned much of his ﬁeld soil science near Wytham in
Oxfordshire. As you walk from the Thames to the top of Wytham Wood, alluviumwith gravels and sands from braided streams gives way to terrace gravels overlaidby soli ﬂuction deposits from the Oxford Clay. The Oxford Clay itself dominates
the hillslope, and a spring line marks the edge of the calcareous grit, a Coralliansandstone. The hill is capped by Coral Rag, an Upper Jurassic limestone. In partsof the hilltop, the relief is very marked with hillocks of Coral Rag surroundedby the Kimmeridge Clay, which overlies it in the local stratigraphy. It is clearthat the variation of clay content of the soil, for example, will change along thisnotional transect. At the top of the hill, clay content will vary sharply accordingto the mesotopography at scales of around 10 m. Clay content of the soil on mostof the hillslope will be large and fairly uniform, although marly deposits near thestreamline, fragments of the calcareous grit, and drift of varying composition willimpose short-range variation in the composition of the topsoil. Complex patternsof texture then emerge on the terrace gravels, and another pattern again on theﬂoodplain. We may compute a semivariogram of clay content along this transect,
but it is not clear that it characterizes a random function that we could plausiblyassume to be realized anywhere on it.
The reader could take a similar imaginary walk along a familiar soil-landscape
of her choice and probably note the implausibility of the intrinsic hypothesis inthe case of at least a few soil properties. Cases are also found in the literature.Webster and de la Cuanalo
7 describe a 3-km transect across central England that346 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
they sampled at 10-m intervals. This crosses contrasting outcrops with more or
less regular boundary spacing. Lark and Webster8 and Webster3 showed how the
variance of clay content and pH computed within a moving window ﬂuctuates
along the transect in response to changes in the geology.
There are pragmatic solutions to such problems when our goal is geostatistical
prediction. One approach, suitable when we have many data, is to compute localsemivariograms within a moving window (e.g., Walter et al.
9). This approach has
drawbacks, as we shall see, particularly if we want our spatial analysis to givesome insight into the variation of the soil at different spatial scales. What wewant ideally is a method to analyze the spatial variation of soil that does notmake assumptions of stationarity in the variance. This is the reason why there isgrowing interest in the wavelet transform as a statistical tool to analyze soil dataand cognate variables.
8
Wavelets are analyzing functions with mathematical properties that make
them particularly suited to the study of complex spatial variation. In particular,a speci ﬁc wavelet function responds only to the variation of a variable at a precise
spatial scale in a local region. This makes the wavelet transform a powerful toolto analyze variation that is nonstationary in the variance. In this chapter the basicproperties of the wavelet transform are considered and show how the transformcan be used to analyze and elucidate the variation of soil properties and processes,through both univariate and multivariate analysis. Readers wanting more detailsare referred to papers by Lark and Webster
8,10 and to the articles of Kumar and
Foufoula-Georgiou11 and Mallat.12
12.2 THEORY
12.2.1 G ENERAL  PRINCIPLES
We start our discussion in one dimension. Let us represent our soil variable as a
function of x, the location in space, . The wavelet transform is an integral
transform. That is, it is a transform of a function by means of an integration witha second, a basis function , to generate a coef ﬁcient so that in general,
. (12.3)
One familiar example of the integral transform is the Fourier transform.
If is a complex sinusoidal function of x of frequency t, then is a
Fourier coef ﬁcient that characterizes the variation of at frequency t. The
Fourier basis function is complex, and so the coef ﬁcient is also complex and can
convey two pieces of information: the amplitude and the phase of the variationin at frequency t.
Since a sinusoidal function has uniform amplitude over the range  to ,
Fourier analysis of soil data will have similar problems as geostatistical analysisfx()
kx() K()
Kf x k x x() ()( ) =|
∞+∞∫d
kx() | K()
fx()
fx()
∞ +∞Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 347
when a variable is not stationary in the variance; i.e., the apparent amplitude of
variations at a particular frequency change in space. A Fourier transformationcan always be computed, but the coef ﬁcients are unlikely to generate much insight
into a soil variable unless it shows more or less uniform periodic variation. Thus,Webster
13 found the Fourier transform a useful tool to study soil variation in the
special case of regularly patterned Gilgai terrain in Australia, but the method hasnot been widely used in pedometrics.
Wavelets do not have these drawbacks. A wavelet oscillates locally like a
wave, but it also damps rapidly to zero on either side of its center. This meansthat the coef ﬁcient derived from an integral transform with a wavelet describes
local variation within the interval where the wavelet takes nonzero values. Wedenote the basic wavelet function, or mother wavelet, by . Some examplesof wavelet functions are given in Figure 12.1.
The mother wavelet is not an arbitrary function, but must satisfy three
conditions:
1. Its mean is zero, i.e.,
(12.4)
2. Its squared norm is 1, i.e.,
(12.5)
3. It has a compact support; that is, it damps rapidly to zero and so
operates very locally.
In order to generate a complete analysis of a set of data, the mother wavelet
is transformed by two parameters. One of these is a scale parameter, l. If the
scale parameter is changed this either dilates or shrinks the wavelet; i.e., it expandsFIGURE 12.1 Some commonly used wavelet functions.–0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
–4 –2 0 2 4 
xΨ(x)
–0.8 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
–4 –2 0 2 4 
xΨ(x)
–1.5 –1 –0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 
–4 –2 0 2 4 
xΨ(x)
Daubechiesís16
wavelet with two vanishing
momentsMexican hat wavelet Morlet wavelet with real 
part (solid line) and imaginary 
part (broken line)
()x
∞∞∫= () .xxd0
∫|| =() .xx21 d348 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
or contracts the interval over which the function responds to variation in the data
and so changes the scale at which the wavelet coef ﬁcient describes the data.
Figure 12.2 shows two dilations of the Mexican hat wavelet, obtained with dif-ferent values of the scale parameter. As well as dilating the wavelet we maytranslate  it, i.e., move it over the transect in order to analyze the soil variation
at different locations. The dilated and translated wavelet functions are denotedby , where the parameters l and x respectively de ﬁne the scale and
location represented by a particular wavelet function, and w is a displacement of
position. The mother wavelet is dilated and translated by
(12.6)
where denotes the set of real numbers.
The integral transform of with thus generates a wavelet coef ﬁ-
cient that describes the variation of in the locality of x at a spatial
scale determined by the parameter l:
(12.7)
If we reduce the scale parameter then the transform returns a wavelet coef-
ﬁcient that describes ﬁne-scale variation about the location x; increasing the
parameter dilates the wavelet and returns a wavelet coef ﬁcient that describes
variation around x at a coarser scale. This is the key advantage of the wavelet
transform over methods that attempt to analyze local variation within a ﬁxed
window (e.g., Walter et al.
9). In the wavelet transform the window is adapted toFIGURE 12.2 Two dilates of the Mexican hat wavelet function, achieved by changing
the scale parameter l.–0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 
–4 –2 0 2 4 
xψ(x)
–0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 
–4 –2 0 2 4 
x(x)ψ
,xw()
, =, > ,xwwxx () ,10
fx(),x
Wf x(), fx()
Wf x f w w w
fwwxx ( ) () ()
(),=
=∞∞
,
∞∞∫
∫d
1dw.Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 349
the spatial frequencies (equivalent to scale) that are analyzed, while in the other
windowing methods all frequencies are analyzed within a more or less arbitrarilychosen window.
In Equation 12.7, scale and location are continuous. A function may be
analyzed by a continuous wavelet transform, but data are always discontinuousat the limit, measured at discrete locations. Nonetheless, we may approximate toa continuous wavelet transform (CWT) of data. Lark and McBratney
14 show an
example of the analysis of soil data with a continuous wavelet transform, andSi
15 gives another example. However, most wavelet applications use the discrete
wavelet transform or developments of this (wavelet packets), and that is the focusin the present chapter.
12.2.2 T HE DISCRETE  WAVELET  TRANSFORM
In the discrete wavelet transform we discretize the scale parameter and thelocation by which the mother wavelet is dilated and translated. The scale param-eter is increased dyadically so that
. (12.8)
By convention,  is set to 2. The ﬁnest-scale parameter is therefore twice
the basic interval between discrete data values. The location is incremented inscale-dependent steps:
. (12.9)
where  is conventionally set to 1, the unit interval between discrete samples.
On the basis of these conventions, the discrete wavelet function is given by
(12.10)
Under the conventions that  and , Equation 12.10 becomes
(12.11)=, = , ,0 12jj…
0
xn x n …j=, = , ,00 12
x0
jnjj
j
jjxxn x
,
/=
=()
(1
000
0
02
0xxn x0).
02= x01=
jnjj
j
jjxxn
xn,
/=
=()
() .1
22
2
222350 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Thus, the discrete wavelet coef ﬁcient for the nth translation of the jth dilation
of the mother wavelet is , an inner product:
(12.12)
If the mother wavelet function is appropriately chosen16 then the set of dilates
and translates under the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) constitute a complete
orthonormal basis for all functions, , of ﬁnite variance. This means that we
may approximate any data sequence of ﬁnite variance to any level of precision
from the DWT coef ﬁcients by multiplying them by the corresponding wavelet
and summing the products. Thus,
. (12.13)
The ﬁrst summation is over scales, and the second is over translations. In
essence, if we were to exclude all wavelet coef ﬁcients from the approximation
with a scale parameter less than some threshold value, then the result would bea smoothed approximation to the original data since components represented atﬁner scales than the threshold have been ﬁltered out. This is discussed below in
the context of multiresolution analysis.
In practice, the DWT is applied with the pyramid algorithm.
17 The DWT can
be thought of as a convolution of the data with the scaled wavelet ,the output of the convolution then being subsampled at interval . The pyramidalgorithm achieves this ef ﬁciently. The details are not considered here, but in
effect the ﬁlter elements are unchanged while the data are downsampled by a
factor of 2 in successive steps, so that the data are shrunk relative to the waveletand coef ﬁcients of successively large scale are extracted.
One obvious problem in the practical implementation of the DWT is the
inﬁnite range of the translations in Equation 12.13. In practice this means that
when the data are convolved with a wavelet function, we have a problem nearthe start or end of the sequence where the ﬁlter overlaps the end of the data. One
solution is to wrap around, in effect to treat the data as if they are in a circle.This is appropriate for some wavelet applications, but not for the analysis ofspatial data. After all, we are interested in wavelets because they allow localizedanalysis of variation. It would be perverse to use wavelet coef ﬁcients that are
partly derived from local data and partly from data at the other end of the transect.Another solution is to use adapted wavelet ﬁlters that only operate over a ﬁnite
interval. The adapted wavelet coef ﬁcients proposed by Cohen and colleagues
18
have been applied to the analysis of soil variation,10 and Figure 12.3 shows the
adapted version of the Daubechies16 wavelet in Figure 12.1.Dmn,
Df f x x n xjn jnjj
,,/=, = ∫ 222() ( ) . d
fx()
fx f x
jnjn jn () () =,
=∞∞
=∞∞
,, ∑∑
fx()jx,0()
nj
02Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 351
12.2.3 M ULTIRESOLUTION  ANALYSIS
Equations 12.12 and 12.13 show how we can conduct a wavelet transform of
data, and then invert this to reconstruct the data. If, after a forward transform,we set to zero all wavelet coef ﬁcients with a scale parameter equal to 2
1, then on
inverse transformation we would generate a smooth approximation to the data inwhich the components of variation at this spatial scale have been ﬁltered out. If
the ﬁltered data are transformed, then the coef ﬁcients corresponding to scale
parameter 2
2 are set to zero before another inverse transformation, and we would
create a version of the data that is smoother again.
At each dilation j we may compute a detail component, the difference between
the smooth version of the data at this scale parameter and the less smooth versionat scale parameter . We may obtain these detail components by transformingthe original data, setting to zero all the coef ﬁcients other than those corresponding
to the scale of interest, and then back-transforming. Because of the orthogonalityof the DWT, the resulting components are additive components of the originaldata, and we call this partition of the data into scale-speci ﬁc components a
multiresolution analysis. An example of a multiresolution analysis of soil data isgiven in the case study.
A more rigorous account of multiresolution analysis is given by Mallat
12
and Lark and Webster.8 One point worth noting is that we can think of each step
in the scale parameter of the multiresolution analysis as a projection of theoriginal data onto a scale-speci ﬁc subspace of the set of all vectors of real
numbers. This subspace is nested within the subspaces for all smaller-scaleparameters. Within a particular subspace, say for scale parameter 2
j, our repre-
sentation of the data is the direct sum of two orthogonal subspaces; the compo-nent in one of these is the detail representation of the data at scale , and theother is the smooth version of the data at this scale. The basis of the ﬁrst subspace
is the wavelet function dilated by . The basis of the second subspace is aso-called scaling function, a smoothing function of norm 1, which is a uniquecomplement to any wavelet.FIGURE 12.3 Adapted versions of Daubechies’s16 wavelet with two vanishing moments,
after Cohen et al. (1993). Shown are the adapted ﬁlter for the left-hand side of the transect,
the center (unadapted), and the right-hand adapted ﬁlter.–0.3 –0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
xΨ (x)
21j
21j+
=2j352 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
12.3 STATISTICAL DEVELOPMENTS
12.3.1 W AVELET  VARIANCE  AND CHANGE  DETECTION
The DWT decomposes a set of data into additive components of different spatial
scales. The variance of the data is similarly partitioned into scale-speci ﬁc com-
ponents. The variance of data on variable at scale parameter with  DWTcoef ﬁcients is estimated by
, (12.14)
Percival
19 calls this the sample wavelet variance.
Percival and Guttorp20 deﬁned a maximal overlap discrete wavelet transform
(MODWT). This is similar to the DWT, except that locations are incremented insteps of 1 at all scales. This means that, in effect, the MODWT coef ﬁcients are
obtained by a convolution of the data with a dilated wavelet function, but whilethe pyramid algorithm for the DWT subsamples the ﬁltered values in steps of ,
all the values from the convolution are retained in the MODWT. Percival andGuttorp
20 showed that it is more ef ﬁcient to estimate the wavelet variance from
MODWT coef ﬁcients, since these retain information that is discarded by the
DWT. However, the MODWT coef ﬁcients are not orthogonal, and so there are
fewer effective degrees of freedom than there are coef ﬁcients.20
Lark and Webster10 proposed an adapted MODWT (AMODWT), using the
adapted wavelet ﬁlters of Cohen et al.18 in order to return MODWT coef ﬁcients
near the ends of a transect. As they showed, this introduces some bias into waveletvariance components, especially at the beginning of a transect at scale parame-ters and . Relatively little information is lost if these affected coef ﬁcients
are deleted.
If is the nth AMODWT coef ﬁcient for scale parameter , then the
AMODWT wavelet variance for this scale, at which there are coef ﬁcients, is
(12.15)
Con ﬁdence limits may be calculated for this wavelet variance (see Lark and
Webster
10).
The wavelet variance is a useful tool to describe scale-speci ﬁc variation, but
since it is a measure of variability pooled over all locations (by the summationin Equation 12.15), it is directly comparable to the power spectrum or the semi-variogram. That is, its interpretation requires some stationarity assumption. How-ever, our interest in wavelets is motivated by the observation that soil variabilityN u 2jnj
uj j
jnn
jnnDj
,
=, = ∑2
12 1
2
2j
2122
jnd , 2j
nj
uj j
jnn
jnndj
,
=, = ∑2
12 1
2.Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 353
is not itself uniform. Each wavelet coef ﬁcient is a local scale-speci ﬁc measure
of variability, and we should use this information to characterize how the vari-ability of a soil property changes in space. Whitcher
21 showed that changes in
variance at a particular scale can be detected from DWT coef ﬁcients. For
coef ﬁcients we de ﬁne
(12.16)
If a variable has uniform variance, then is expected to increase linearly
with k. If the variance changes at a particular location, then there will be a break
of slope in the plot of against k. Breaks of slope may be detected by de ﬁning
. (12.17)
When we compute B from a set of DWT coef ﬁcients, then location k, which
gives rise through Equation 12.17 to the value of B, is the location such that the
variances on either side are most different. It is a candidate change point.Whitcher
21 used Monte-Carlo methods to compute a sample distribution of B
under the null hypothesis that the wavelet coef ﬁcients have uniform variance.
This entailed the assumption that the DWT coef ﬁcients are independent random
variables. This assumption is reasonable for DWT coef ﬁcients of certain classes
of processes, but it does not hold for MODWT or AMODWT coef ﬁcients.
In the case study below, a similar approach is used, but AMODWT coef ﬁcients
were used throughout. The B statistic was computed from all n AMODWT
coef ﬁcients for scale parameter in Equation 12.17. The AMODWT coef ﬁcients
cannot be assumed to be independent, so I obtained a sample distribution for theB statistic by Monte-Carlo simulation. The B statistic was computed for each of
5000 sets of n AMODWT coef ﬁcients of simulated data transects with the same
semivariogram as the basic data. The simulations were generated by sequentialGaussian simulation with the routine SGSIM in the GSLIB library.
23 If the
computed B statistic for the data exceeded the 95th percentile of the Monte-Carlo
values, then the null hypothesis that the real data have uniform variance over thesequence of n value that is of interest, and at the scale parameter that has been
speci ﬁed, was rejected. The location of the change in variance is l, where the
value of at (see Equation 12.16) gives rise to the value of the B statistic
in Equation 12.17.
This method is ﬁrst applied to all locations at a particular scale parameter.
If a signi ﬁcant change in variance was detected at location l, then the procedurenj
SD
Dk… nkmk
jm
mn
jmjj,= , , ,=,
=,∑
∑12
1212 1 .
Sk
Sk
Bknk
nS
j jk≤≤maxmax
11 1,≤≤max
111
1 knSk
njk
j
2j
Skkl=
jn354 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
was repeated for the segments and . Once a particular
segment was judged to be uniform according to the B statistic, then no further
change points were sought. I therefore proceed in the search for change pointsuntil the transect is divided into segments that are all judged uniform.
12.3.2 W AVELET  COVARIANCE  AND CHANGE  DETECTION
Lark and Webster10 proposed, after Whitcher and colleagues,22 that a scale-speci ﬁc
component of the covariance of properties u and can be estimated from
AMODWT coef ﬁcients; this is the AMODWT covariance given by
(12.18)
where and are respectively the nth AMODWT coef ﬁcients of variables u
and for scale parameter .
If we standardize the wavelet covariance for a particular scale by the wavelet
variances of and v, we obtain a scale-speci ﬁc wavelet correlation, :
. (12.19)
This expresses the correlation of and speci ﬁcally for scale parameter . In
order to obtain con ﬁdence limits for this estimate, it is transformed by Fisher’s
z transformation:
(12.20)
The transformed estimate of the correlation is distributed approximately
normally with a variance of , where the correlation is derived from n
independent observations. Now the wavelet correlation is not derived fromindependent observations. The ordinary discrete wavelet functions (all dilationsand translations) are orthogonal, and the resulting wavelet coef ﬁcients are uncor-
related for several classes of processes, but these DWT coef ﬁcients are a sub-
sampled set of the AMODWT coef ﬁcients, every th. Whitcher and colleagues
22
therefore suggested that n be set to when calculating sample variances for
wavelet correlations (where N is the total number of data). Lark and Webster10
calculated effective degrees of freedom for the AMODWT wavelet correlation
by Monte-Carlo analysis. The effective degrees of freedom were more than ,especially for small j. This shows that Whitcher et al.’s
22 approach is conservative.12,,…l ll… nj +, + , ,12
v
uv j j
jnn
jnu
jnvCnddj
,,
=,, = ∑1
21
djnu
, djnv
,
v 2j
uj
juv j
uj vjC=,,
,,
u v 2j
hjj() = () tanh .1
13/()n
jnj
2j
Nj/2
Nj/2Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 355
The wavelet correlation measures the overall scale-speci ﬁc correlation
between two variables. In this way, it is comparable to the codispersion coef ﬁcient
from geostatistics24 or the cross-spectrum in spectral analysis. Like these mea-
sures, it is an overall statistic obtained from all the local information contained
in the wavelet coef ﬁcients. As noted above in the discussion of wavelet variance,
the motivation for wavelet analysis of soil data is to exploit the localized natureof the information in wavelet coef ﬁcients, so we cannot be satis ﬁed with the
wavelet correlation as a statistical descriptor of spatial covariation. Lark andWebster
10 showed how changes in the covariance of two variables, at a particular
scale parameter, may be detected by examining the cumulative sum of productsof wavelet coef ﬁcients. The wavelet correlations on either side of the candidate
change point may then be compared statistically.
This method uses a normalized cumulative sum of products statistic computed
from the AMODWT coef ﬁcients for variables and for each scale parameter.
This statistic is directly analogous to the cumulative sum of squares, , de ﬁned
in Equation 12.16:
(12.21)
Under a null hypothesis that the covariance over all locations is uniform,
is expected to increase linearly with k. As in the detection of changes in the
variance, breaks of slope in the plot of against k are found by identifying the
location k that gives rise to the value :
.
(12.22)
This k is a candidate change point. The wavelet correlations are then computed
on each side of the change point, and the absolute difference between them iscompared with critical values of the distribution of this statistic, for randomvariables of uniform correlation, obtained by a Monte-Carlo simulation. If thecorrelations on either side of the change point are found to differ signi ﬁcantly
(p < 0.05), then this procedure is repeated for each of the two segments de ﬁned
by the change point; otherwise, the search for change points is stopped. If thisprocedure is iterated, the transect is divided into segments within which thewavelet correlation (at a speci ﬁed scale) is uniform.u v
Sk
Sdd
ddkkuv mk
jmu
jmv
mn
jmu
jmvj, =,,
=,,=, = ,∑
∑1
11……nj , 1.
Skuv,
Skuv,
Buv,
Bknk
nSuv
j jkuv ,,
≤≤maxmax
11 1,,≤≤max
111
1 knSk
njkuv
j356 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
12.4 CASE STUDY
12.4.1 T HE DATA
The data presented in this chapter were collected as an adjunct to a study on
nitrous oxide emissions from the soil.25 This study is to be published elsewhere,
but here we examine data on CO2 emissions measured at the same time, since
these usefully illustrate how the wavelet transform can give insight into complexspatial variability of soil properties and processes.
The gas ﬂux measurements were made on soil cores that had been collected
in the ﬁeld and refrigerated. This was because I wanted to use a range of wavelet
analysis tools on the data, and this requires that the number of data is an integerpower of two. It was decided to collect data from 256 locations; this precludesdirect measurement of gas ﬂuxes in the ﬁeld, since to obtain measurements from
256 sites by in situ  measurements without confounding spatial variation with
variation over a substantial time interval is not feasible.
The 256 sites were sampled on a linear transect at 4-m intervals. The transect
crossed farmed ﬁelds and some waste ground at Silsoe Research Institute in
England. The transect spans four ﬁelds: Cashmore ﬁeld (positions 1 to 50)
Banqueting ﬁeld (positions 57 to 76), Obelisk East ﬁeld (positions 80 to 152),
and Bypass ﬁeld (positions 154 to 256). Intervening positions were in grassed
waste ground. Cashmore ﬁeld had been drilled with a winter barley crop 14 days
before the soil was sampled, and Bypass and Obelisk East ﬁelds with winter
wheat 12 days before. Banqueting ﬁeld was in wheat stubble.
Cashmore ﬁeld is over the Lower Greensand to the north and Gault Clay to
the south (both Cretaceous formations). The geological boundary is betweenpositions 30 and 40 on the transect. The Gault Clay underlies all the sample sitessouth of Cashmore ﬁeld. The measurements in this study were made on topsoil
samples, the properties of which are determined by super ﬁcial deposits. Deposits
of glacial drift of variable texture are important,
26 derived mostly from Jurassic
clays and Gault Clay, but also in ﬂuenced by the Lower Greensand. At all locations
over the Lower Greensand there are super ﬁcial deposits. The Gault Clay occurs
at the surface in some parts of this landscape, but at most locations drift overliesit. Around the lowest-lying position on the transect is a narrow ditch, spannedby sample positions 50 and 51. The topsoil here is derived from alluvium thatvaries in texture from clay to ﬁne loam. Peat lenses are also found in the soil in
this part of the landscape.
This variability in the solid and drift geology in ﬂuences the properties of the
surface soil. The following description uses the textural classes of the Soil Surveyof England and Wales.
27 The lightest-textured soils, sandy loam, occur at the top
of the transect in drift over the Lower Greensand. Sandy clay loams and sandyclays are formed in drift over the Gault Clay in Cashmore ﬁeld, and clay loams
and clays occur near the ditch at position 51. South of the ditch the transectcrosses two low ridges, the break of slope between these occurring near theboundary between Bypass and Obelisk East ﬁelds. The soils of the northernmostAnalysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 357
ridge (Obelisk East and Banqueting ﬁelds) are all clays in the topsoil, while the
soils of the second ridge are more variable in texture; sandy clay loams, sandyclays, clay loams, and clay occur, the latter at the end of the transect. The keyfeatures of the transect are summarized in Figure 12.4.
All the soil samples were collected within a period of 7 hours. At each site
four cores of 44 mm diameter for 0 to 150 mm depth were collected with a gougeauger. The cores at each site were collected from as close together as possible.The cores were taken with minimum delay to a 4 ∞C cold room and were kept at
this temperature until they were analyzed.
One core from each location was selected randomly, and its fresh weight and
length were recorded. Cores were preincubated at 15 ∞C for 17 to 24 hours in a
1-l Kilner jar, with the jar lids positioned but without a rubber gasket or clamp.This prevented desiccation, but allowed some gas transfer from the jar. The jarswere then ﬂushed with laboratory air and resealed, but this time with a rubber
gasket and clamp in position so that they were gas tight. An initial sample (20ml) of the gas headspace was collected and injected into an evacuated vaco tube.The jars were incubated at 15 ∞C for 24 hours, then two further 20-ml samples
from the headspace were collected and each injected into vaco tubes. Within afew days, the gas samples in the vaco tubes were collected in a 20-ml syringeand injected into an Ai93 gas chromatograph, which analyzed CO
2 by a thermal
conductivity detector (TCD). Standards for CO2 were also injected to calibrate
the instrument. From the change in concentrations of CO2 in the headspace, the
rate of gas emission was determined. The moisture content of the core was thenFIGURE 12.4 Summary of variation along the transect used in the case study. Shown are
(top) textural classes (27) for the topsoil at 40-m intervals (the key is at the bottom of theﬁgure), ﬁeld boundaries and names, solid geology, and a general description of super ﬁcial
deposits. The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order, 1 to256. These are at sites separated by 4-m intervals.-25 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
PositionTextural
class
Sandy Loam
Sandy Clay
LoamSandy Clay
Clay LoamClayField
RockCashmoreBan-
quetingObelisk East Bypass
Lower                                     Gault Clay
Greensand
Surface
materialDrift
and
colluviumAlluvium Heavy-textured drift Drift of variable texture358 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
determined by oven drying a sample to constant weight at 105°C. The rate of
emission was then expressed per unit weight of dry soil.
Other analyses were done on the soil. For the present discussion, we are
interested in soil organic carbon content. This was determined for an air-driedsubsample passed through a 2-mm sieve. The determination was done by com-bustion in a Leco analyzer. This instrument uses a version of the Dumas diges-tion method described by Tabatabai and Bremner.
28 A correction was made for
the carbonate content, which was determined by Williams’s29 water- ﬁlled cal-
cimeter method.
Table 12.1 shows summary statistics of the CO2 emission rates and the total
carbon contents and of the same variables transformed to natural logarithms. Bothvariables were strongly skewed before transformation, but log transformationreduced the coef ﬁcient of skew to less than 1. The remaining analyses were done
with the log-transformed data.
Figure 12.5 and Figure 12.6 show the log-transformed CO
2 emission rate and
soil carbon content plotted against position on the transect. There are similarTABLE 12.1Summary Statistics of the Data on Soil Variables
CO2 Emission
mg kg–1 day–1CO2 Emission
ln mg kg–1 day–1Total Organic
Carbon %Total Organic
Carbon ln %
Mean 5315.1 8.37 2.49 0.88
Median 4085.5 8.32 2.47 0.90Standard deviation 5261.4 0.58 0.72 0.26Skewness 5.07 0.90 2.16 0.19
FIGURE 12.5 Measured CO2 emissions along the transect, transformed to natural loga-
rithms. The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order, 1 to256. These are at sites separated by 4-m intervals.6 7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 
PositionCO 2 emission/ln ( μg/kg/day)Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 359
trends in the data and two peaks at corresponding positions (over the alluvium
near the ditch at position 50 and near position 75 in the stubble on Banquetingﬁeld). There is another peak in CO
2 emission in the heavy-textured drift over
Obelisk East ﬁeld. The overall correlation coef ﬁcient between the two log-trans-
formed variables is 0.65. A wavelet analysis can elucidate the trends and short-range variability, and more information will emerge about local and scale-depen-dent relationships between these variables.
12.4.2 M ULTIRESOLUTION  ANALYSIS
A multiresolution analysis was performed on the CO2 emission rates with
Daubechies’s16 wavelet with two vanishing moments, as adapted to the ﬁnite
interval by Cohen et al. (1993) (Figure 12.3). I used the shift-averaging methodproposed by Lark and Webster
8 after Coifman and Donoho.30 The wavelet trans-
form is conducted in a moving window of length 4 m. Detail componentsare computed within the window for scale parameter 4 m, 4 m.The window is then shifted by one position and the procedure is repeated. Theresulting series of detail components are then averaged. This procedure was ﬁrst
proposed by Coifman and Donoho
30 to avoid artifacts in the multiresolution
analysis due to aliasing of features on a transect with the tiling of the transectinto sections of units.
Figure 12.7 shows the detail components of log CO
2 emission rates computed
in this way for the scales 8 to 128 m. Figure 12.8 shows the smooth representationof the data at scale 128 m (detail components for all scales up to 128 m ﬁltered
out), and with each detail component added in turn up to scale 16 m (if the 8-mdetail component is added, this simply reconstructs the original data).
The smooth representation at scale 128 m shows a simple trend in the CO
2
emissions. There is a sharp decline at the top of the transect to the lowest valuesFIGURE 12.6 Measured soil total carbon content along the transect, transformed to
natural logarithms. The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers inorder, 1 to 256. These are at sites separated by 4-m intervals.0 0.5 1 1.5 2 
0 50 100 150 200 250 
PositionOrganic C/ln (%)
27
=21…,25
2j360 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
near the center of Cashmore ﬁeld, then an increase to largest values over the
alluvium and heavy-textured drift from near positions 50 to 75. There is a smalldecline beyond position 75, although CO
2 emission rates for the cores from the
Gault Clay are all larger than the rates over the Lower Greensand.
It is notable that peaks in CO2 emission near positions 50 and 75 appear at
scale parameter 128 m (detail) (see Figure 12.7 and Figure 12.8). Further variationoccurs here at ﬁner scales, but this may obscure the presence of structure at
relatively coarse scale at these locations. By contrast, the strong peak at position110, the largest emission rate on the transect, only appears at scale parameters16 and 8 m. This implies that the ﬁrst two peaks are related to broader-scale soil
variations (increases in soil wetness and organic content, which promote CO
2FIGURE 12.7 Detail components from multiresolution analysis of CO2 emissions. The
numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order, 1 to 256. Theseare at sites separated by 4-m intervals.
FIGURE 12.8 Smooth representations from multiresolution analysis of CO
2 emissions.
The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order, 1 to 256. Theseare at sites separated by 4-m intervals.–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 
0 50 100 150 200 250 8 m
–0.8 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
0 50 100 150 200 250 16 m–0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 
0 50 100 150 200 250 32 m
–0.3 –0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 
0 50 100 150 200 250 64 m
PositionCO2/ln(mg/kg/day)
–0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
0 50 100 150 200 250 128 m
7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 +16 m
7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 +32 m7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 +64 m
7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 +128 m
Position7 8 9 10 11 
0 50 100 150 200 250 128 m, smoothCO2/ln(mg/kg/day)Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 361
production) over alluvium and stubble over clay, while the latter represents a
strongly localized hot spot of soil respiration. The identi ﬁcation of such features
is particularly facilitated by the wavelet-based multiresolution analysis.
12.4.3 U NIFORMITY  OF THE VARIANCE
Figure 12.9 shows the sample AMODWT wavelet variances computed withEquation 12.15, and with 95% con ﬁdence limits. These show a decline in the
variance with increasing scale parameter; i.e., most of the variation in CO
2
emissions is associated with spatial variations at the ﬁnest scale. This interpreta-
tion is straightforward insofar as the CO2 emissions can be treated as realizations
of a process stationary in the variance at all scales.
When we examine the detail components in Figure 12.7, it seems clear that
the variance of these is not uniform. At scale parameter 32 m, for example, thevariation seems much larger at positions up to around 75 than on the rest of thetransect. One way to examine this nonuniformity of the variance is to computethe local components of variance at each scale. The component at position n for
scale parameter is calculated by
. (12.23)
These components can then be plotted. This is done for log CO
2 emissions
in Figure 12.10. This is a layered plot; i.e., the thickness of the lowest layer atany position is equal to the local variance component at that scale, obtained withEquation 12.23. Layers representing ﬁner scales are then stacked on top of this,
so that the overall height of the graph at any position is the sum at this positionof components for all scales.FIGURE 12.9 Sample AMODWT wavelet variances of CO2 emissions with 95% con ﬁ-
dence intervals. The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order,1 to 256. These are at sites separated by 4-m intervals.0.05 0.10 0.15 Wavelet variance
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Scale parameter exponent     0
2j
jn
jd ,2
2362 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
This graph shows, for example, the very large variation at the ﬁner scales
around the hot spot at position 110 (note the truncated scale). It also shows ageneral reduction in the importance of coarser-scale components of variance atpositions after around 75.
Graphs such as Figure 12.10 are useful tools for visualizing changes in the
variance of a variable at different spatial scales. However, we need a method toidentify changes in variance that appear to be signi ﬁcant — that is, to test the
change against a null hypothesis of an underlying stationary process. This wasdone with the methods described in Section 12.3.1.
For each scale parameter I computed the normalized cumulative sum of
squared AMODWT coef ﬁcients, , described in Equation 12.16. A plot of this
is shown in Figure 12.11 (for a scale parameter of 32 m). The B statistic
(Equation 12.17) identi ﬁes position 77 as the one where the plot deviates most
from the straight-line expectation under the null hypothesis that the underlyingprocess has uniform variance.FIGURE 12.10 Local components of wavelet variance by scale parameter.
FIGURE 12.11 Plot of normalized cumulative sum of squared AMODWT coef ﬁcients of
CO2 emissions against k (position on the transect) for a scale parameter of 32 m.0 1 Variance component
0 50 100 150 200 250
Position
256 128 64 32 16 8Scale
parameter/3
//
 meters
Sk
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
0 50 100 150 200 250 
kSkAnalysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 363
Table 12.2 shows the steps in identifying change points in the variance for
a scale parameter of 32 m with the procedure described above. The overallconclusion is that there are three segments with different variance: from the startof the transect to position 76, where the variance is largest; from position 77 to222, where the variance is small; and then from 223 to the end, where thevariance is larger again. This latter change point corresponds to the position onthe transect where topsoils in textural class clay reappear after lighter-textureddrift (see Figure 12.4).TABLE 12.2Detecting Changes in Variance in 
Log-Transformed CO
2 Emission Rates
Positions Wavelet Variance B
Order of Division 1
Candidate Change Point: Position 77
Segment 1 1–76 0.095Segment 2 76–256 0.032 0.26*
Order of Division 2
Candidate Change Point: Position 8
Segment 1 1–8 0.28Segment 2 9–76 0.073 0.22 NS
Candidate Change Point: Position 222
Segment 1 77–221 0.018Segment 2 222–256 0.09 0.35 **
Order of Division 3
Candidate Change Point: Position 135
Segment 1 77–134 0.011Segment 2 135–221 0.023 0.16 NS
Candidate Change Point: Position 246
Segment 1 222–245 0.048Segment 2 246–256 0.180 0.34 NS
Note: These results are for a scale parameter of 32 m. The
B statistic was compared to percentiles of a distribution
obtained by Monte-Carlo simulation. The evidence againsta null hypothesis that the variance is uniform is presentedat four levels: p > 0.05 (NS), p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**),
and p < 0.001 (***).  364 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Figure 12.12 shows the segments of different variance for the three scales (8,
32, and 64 m) at which signi ﬁcant changes were detected. This analysis of the
variance of CO2 emissions into scale-dependent localized components shows two
patterns of variation in the process. At the ﬁnest scale, there are two small regions
of elevated variance. One of these (with the largest variance) is associated withthe hot spot identi ﬁed by the multiresolution analysis. The ﬁrst is over the
alluvium where short-range variation in CO
2 production due to the presence of
discrete peat lenses is expected. At the coarser scales, the variance is largest over
FIGURE 12.12 Wavelet variances of regions of the transect within which these are uni-
form for the three scale parameters where signi ﬁcant change points were found.0 0.5 1 Variance
0 50 100 150 200 250 λ= 8 m
0 0.05 0.1 Variance
0 50 100 150 200 250 λ= 32 m
0 0.05 0.1 Variance
0 50 100 150 200 250 
Positionλ = 64 mAnalysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 365
the ﬁrst 76 positions, then declines, increasing again near the end of the transect
at scale 32 m. These changes in variation probably arise from patterns of variationin parent material and recent cultivations. To elucidate the factors driving changesin the soil process requires analysis of the joint variation of CO
2 emission rates
with soil properties, and this is now illustrated with the data on soil carbon content.
12.4.4 C OVARIATION  WITH SOIL CARBON  CONTENT
The (log-transformed) data on soil carbon content are shown in Figure 12.6. Itwas noted above that the two transformed variables have a correlation coef ﬁcient
of 0.65. A positive correlation between organic carbon content and CO
2 produc-
tion is expected because soil carbon is the basic substrate for microbial respirationand is a basic driver of microbial activity in the soil. Figure 12.13 shows thedetail components in the multiresolution analysis of soil carbon content. Thereare some common features with the analysis on CO
2 emission, notably the peak
near position 50 that appears at scale parameters 16, 64, and 128 m.
The top graph in Figure 12.14 shows the wavelet variances of soil carbon
content. Unlike CO2 emission, the variance increases with the scale parameter,
so while there are short-range variations in carbon content, longer-range variationsare more important overall. The middle graph shows the AMODWT waveletcovariances of soil carbon content and CO
2 emissions, computed with
Equation 12.18. These also increase with the scale parameter and are all positive.The wavelet correlations are shown in the lower graph. These increase with scaleparameter to around 0.8 or larger at the three coarsest scales. The correlation atthe ﬁnest scale is not signi ﬁcantly different from zero.
The wavelet correlation analysis suggests that broad-scale variations in CO
2
emissions may be driven by corresponding trends in soil carbon content, but thatshort-range variations are not. However, this assumes stationarity in the spatialcovariation of the variables. Therefore, the method described in Section 12.3.2FIGURE 12.13 Detail components from multiresolution analysis of soil carbon content.
The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample numbers in order, 1 to 256. Theseare at sites separated by 4-m intervals.–0.3 –0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
0 50 100 150 200 250 8 m
–0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
0 50 100 150 200 250 16 m–0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
0 50 100 150 200 250 32 m
–0.15 –0.1 –0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 
0 50 100 150 200 250 64 m
Position–0.1 –0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 
0 50 100 150 200 250 128 mC /ln(%)366 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
was used to look for changes in the correlation at each scale. The results are
shown in Figure 12.15. This shows regions of the transect within which the waveletcorrelation of the two variables is uniform and signi ﬁcantly different from zero.
This analysis shows that overall wavelet correlations may sometimes obscure
interesting features of spatial covariation. At a scale parameter of 16 m the overallwavelet correlation is small, although signi ﬁcantly different from zero. The localFIGURE 12.14 AMODWT wavelet variances for soil carbon content (top), and wavelet
covariances (middle) and wavelet correlations (bottom) for soil carbon content and CO2
emission.0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 Wavelet variance
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0
–0.005 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 Wavelet co variance
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0
–0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Wavelet correlation
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Scale parameter exponentAnalysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 367
analysis shows that the variables are signi ﬁcantly correlated at this scale from
the beginning of the transect to just beyond position 75 (i.e., over the LowerGreensand and alluvial soils and just onto the clay drift). In the soils on the restof the transect, formed in drift over the Gault Clay, the variables are not correlatedat this scale. The implication of this is that variations in CO
2 emissions at this
spatial scale may re ﬂect variations in carbon content of the soil (e.g., differences
due to within- ﬁeld variations in primary production and inputs from crop resi-
dues), but this is not the case under all soil conditions. The multiresolutionanalysis in Figure 12.7 shows that there are ﬂuctuations at this spatial scale (16
m) in the CO
2 emissions from the soil formed in drift over the Gault Clay, but
the local analysis of the wavelet correlations indicates that some factor other thanthe organic content of these soils causes these variations.
In summary, how does wavelet analysis allow the soil scientist to extract more
information on the covariation of these variables than is contained in the overallcorrelation coef ﬁcient? At the coarsest four scales the correlation of the variables
is signi ﬁcant, and spatially uniform across the transect. At scales of 64 m and
coarser the correlations are larger than 0.7. The broad trends in soil carbon contentacross the whole of this landscape appear, as expected, to drive the variation atcomparable scale in CO
2 emission from the soil; the relationships between these
trends are similar over contrasting soil conditions and are more strongly associ-ated than the ordinary correlation coef ﬁcient would suggest. By contrast, the
wavelet correlation at the ﬁnest scale (8 m) is small and not signi ﬁcant, and this
is true at all locations in the transect. This indicates that some factor other thanthe soil carbon drives the ﬁnest-scale variations in CO
2 emission, and this is the
case over all the soil conditions in the transect. The occurrence of strong peaksin CO
2 emission at single sites, in contrast with neighboring sites, cannot be
explained simply from the presence of a local peak in soil organic carbon. TheFIGURE 12.15 Regions of uniform and signi ﬁcant wavelet correlations between soil
carbon content and CO2 emission. The numbers on the abscissa are (dimensionless) sample
numbers in order, 1 to 256. These are at sites separated by 4-m intervals.0 50 100 150 200 250 
PositionScale
parameter/meters
256
128
64
32
16
80.580.570.730.84
0.74368 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
wavelet correlations at 16 m are small overall (although signi ﬁcantly positive).
At this scale we ﬁnd evidence that variations in soil carbon content may determine
variations in CO2 emissions at the same scale, but this only pertains in some parts
of the landscape, and not in the soils formed in drift over the Gault Clay.
12.5 CONCLUSIONS
It has been shown that wavelet analysis is a powerful mathematical technique to
examine variation and covariation of soil properties and processes at differentspatial scales, free of any assumptions of stationarity in the variance. The casestudy illustrates the potential of the methods. In a relatively simple soil-landscapethe spatial variation of an important soil process, CO
2 emission, and its covariation
with a soil property has been shown to be complex, scale dependent, and local(i.e., nonstationary). The wavelet analysis gives more insight into the variationand covariation of soil properties and processes than do statistics that ignorespatial scale (e.g., the simple correlation) or those that assume variation is uniformin space. It is clear that the relationship between CO
2 emission and soil carbon
content is not spatially uniform at all spatial scales and that this re ﬂects differences
in soil conditions along the transect.
There is more to be said about existing wavelet techniques than can be
achieved within the constraints of an introductory discussion. This discussion hasfocused on the analysis of data on transects, but the DWT is readily generalizedto two dimensions. In a two-dimensional DWT the detail is obtained with threewavelet functions: one that responds to variation along the columns of the dataarray, one that responds to the rows, and one that responds to variation on thediagonals. The adaptation to the ﬁnite interval is a harder problem in two dimen-
sions, and the methods for inference about change in variance and covariancethat are described above do not generalize simply from the one-dimensional case.Nonetheless, it is clear that the two-dimensional and maybe higher-dimensionalwavelet transforms are likely to prove as useful tools for soil scientists in thefuture, and an example is given by Lark and Webster.
31
Wavelet packet analysis is also likely to emerge as a useful tool to study
spatial variability. In effect, this is a way to adapt the DWT method to obtain aﬁner-resolution analysis in the scale domain. This is likely to prove a more fruitful
technology for this purpose than continuous wavelet transforms.
There is also interest in the application wavelets to simulate processes with
nonstationary behavior. This has been done in signal analysis,
32 and there is an
example in soil science.25
The principal drawbacks of wavelet analysis in soil science are probably due
to the availability of data in suitable numbers and spatial con ﬁgurations. In order
to make fullest use of the wavelet transform, we require data sampled on regulargrids or transects, and we need a lot of data. In the case study we had 256 samplepoints, and this constrained the data collection to laboratory rather than in situ
measurements of gaseous emissions. Adequate datasets, sampled regularly, arerelatively rare in soil science.Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 369
Two observations may be made here. First, it is likely that wavelets will
come into their own for the analysis of soil data collected with sensors ratherthan with an auger or spade. These data may be very dense and collected more
or less regularly. Lark and colleagues
33 showed how multiresolution analysis of
data on the electrical conductivity of the soil obtained with a Wenner array couldgive insight into its spatial variability and improve the predictions of soil prop-erties made from the data. Other sensor data such as remote sensor data mightusefully be analyzed with wavelet transforms. The analysis will give insight intothe spatial variability of the measured variables that may be treated as proxyinformation on the variability of certain soil properties, and used to plan howbest to sample these.
Second, there are some developments in the wavelet analysis of data that are
not sampled regularly.
34 These may prove useful in the analysis of soil data,
although it should be noted that the full partition of variation over discrete scalesstill requires regular sampling.
Geostatistics serves pedometricians well, but geostatistical tools have their
purposes and their limitations. They are not well suited to aid the interpretationof complex soil variation across landscapes where the assumption of an under-lying intrinsically stationary process is clearly implausible. In these conditionsthe wavelet transform may come into its own, particularly if we remember thewords of R.W. Hamming
1 that preface this chapter.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The developments presented in this chapter were made in work funded by theU.K. Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) throughits core grant to Silsoe Research Institute and through Grant MAF12269. Thislatter grant also funded the collection of the data reported here. I am grateful tocollaborators in that funded project at Rothamsted Research for their permissionto use these data, and to Síle O’Flaherty, Colin Webster, and Steven Francis, whodid the laboratory work.
REFERENCES
1. RW Hamming. Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers . McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1962.
2. G Matheron. Estimating and Choosing . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.
3. R Webster. Is soil variation random? Geoderma  97: 149–163, 2000.
4. H Saito, P Goovaerts. Accounting for source location and transport direction into
geostatistical prediction of contaminants. Environ Sci Technol  35: 4823–4829,
2001.
5. G Matheron. Le krigeage universel , Cahiers du Centre de Morphologie Mathé-
matique 1. Ecole des Mines de Paris, Fontainebleau, 1969.
6. G Matheron. The intrinsic random functions and their applications. Adv Appl
Probab  5: 439–468, 1973.370 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
7. R Webster, HE de la Cuanalo. Soil transect correlograms of north Oxfordshire
and their interpretation. J Soil Sci  26: 176–194, 1975.
8. RM Lark, R Webster. Analysis and elucidation of soil variation using wavelets.
Eur J Soil Sci 50: 185–206, 1999.
9. C Walter, AB McBratney, A Douaoui, B Minasny. Spatial prediction of topsoil
salinity in the Chelif valley, Algeria, using ordinary kriging with local variogramsversus a whole-area variogram. Aust J Soil Res  39: 259–272, 2001.
10. RM Lark, R Webster. Changes in variance and correlation of soil properties with
scale and location: analysis using an adapted maximal overlap discrete wavelettransform. Eur J Soil Sci  52: 547–562, 2001.
11. P Kumar, E Foufoula-Georgiou. Wavelet analysis in geophysics: an introduction.
In Wavelets in Geophysics , E Foufoula-Georgiou, P Kumar, Eds. Academic Press,
New York, 1994, pp. 1–43.
12. SG Mallat. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet repre-
sentation . IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell  11: 674–693, 1989.
13. R Webster. Spectral analysis of gilgai soil. Aust J Soil Res  15: 191–204, 1977.
14. RM Lark, AB McBratney. Wavelet analysis. In Methods of Soil Analysis , Part 4,
Physical Methods , JH Dane, C Topp, Eds. Soil Science Society of America,
Madison, WI, 2002, pp. 184–195.
15. B Si. Scale and location dependent soil hydraulic properties in a hummocky
landscape: a wavelet approach. In Scaling Methods in Soil Physics , Y Pachepsky,
D Radcliffe, H Magdi Selim, Eds. CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 2003, pp.169–187.
16. I Daubechies. Orthonormal bases of compactly supported wavelets. Commun Pure
Appl Math  41: 909–996, 1988.
17. WH Press, SA Teukolsky, WT Vetterling, BP Flannery. Numerical Recipes (For-
tran) , 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1992.
18. A Cohen, I Daubechies, P Vial. Wavelets on the interval and fast wavelet trans-
forms. Appl Comput Harmonic Anal 1: 54–81, 1993.
19. DP Percival. On estimation of the wavelet variance. Biometrika  82: 619–631, 1995.
20. DB Percival, P Guttorp. Long-memory processes, the Allan variance and wavelets.
In Wavelets in Geophysics , E Foufoula-Georgiou, P Kumar, Eds. Academic Press,
New York, 1994, pp. 325–344.
21. BJ Whitcher. Assessing Nonstationary Time Series Using Wavelets. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Washington, Seattle. 1998. Available at www.cgd.ucar.edu/staffwhitcher/papers/thesis.ps.gz.
22. BJ Whitcher, P Guttorp, DB Percival. Wavelet analysis of covariance with appli-
cation to atmospheric time series. J Geophys Res Atmos  105: 14941–14962, 2000.
23. CV Deutsch, AG Journel. GSLIB Geostatistical Software and User’s Guide .
Oxford University Press, New York, 1992.
24. P Goovaerts, R Webster. Scale-dependent correlation between topsoil copper and
cobalt concentrations in Scotland. Eur J Soil Sci  45: 79–95, 1994.
25. RM Lark, AE Milne, TM Addiscott, KWT Goulding, CP Webster, S O’Flaherty.
Analysing spatially intermittent variation of nitrous oxide emissions from soilwith wavelets and the implications for sampling. Eur J Soil Sci  55, 601–610, 2004. 
26. DW King. Soils of the Luton and Bedford District , Special Survey 1. Soil Survey
of England and Wales, Harpenden, U.K., 1969.
27. JM Hodgson, Ed. Soil Survey Field Handbook , 2nd ed., Soil Survey Technical
Monograph 5. Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, U.K., 1976.Analysis of Complex Soil Variation Using Wavelets 371
28. MA Tabatabai, JM Bremner. Automated instruments for determinations of total
carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur in soils by combustion techniques. In Soil Analysis:
Modern Instrumental Techniques , 2nd ed., KA Smith, Ed. Marcel Dekker, New
York, 1991, pp. 261–286.
29. DE Williams. A rapid manometric method for the determination of carbonate in
soil. Soil Sci Soc Am Proc  25: 248–250, 1949.
30. RR Coifman, DL Donoho. Translation-invariant denoising. In Wavelets and Sta-
tistics , Lecture Notes in Statistics 103,  A Antoniadis, G Oppenheim, Eds. Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1995, pp. 125–150.
31. RM Lark, R Webster. Analysing soil variation in two dimensions with the discrete
wavelet transform. Eur J Soil Sci  55, 777–797, 2004. 
32. J Iyama, H Kuwamura. Application of wavelets to analysis and simulation of
earthquake motions. Earthquake Eng Struct Dyn  28: 255–272, 1999.
33. RM Lark, SR Kaffka, DL Corwin. Multiresolution analysis of soil electrical
conductivity data using wavelets. J Hydrol  272: 276–290, 2003.
34. I Daubechies, I Guskov, P Schröder, W Sweldens. Wavelets on irregular point
sets. Phil Trans R Soc London Ser A 357: 2397–2413, 1999.37313Three-Dimensional 
Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization of Soil-Landscapes
Sabine Grunwald
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................374
13.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................37413.2 Space and Time Concepts.....................................................................37813.3 Reconstruction and Scienti ﬁc Visualization .........................................380
13.4 Applications ..........................................................................................382
13.4.1 Soil-Landscape Model 1 .......................................................382
13.4.1.1 Physical Universe ...............................................38213.4.1.2 Logical and Representation Universe ................382
13.4.1.3 Implementation Universe ...................................38313.4.1.4 Cognitive Universe .............................................383
13.4.2 Soil-Landscape Model 2 .......................................................385
13.4.2.1 Physical Universe ...............................................38513.4.2.2 Logical and Representation Universe ................38513.4.2.3 Implementation Universe ...................................38513.4.2.4 Cognitive Universe .............................................386
13.4.3 Space–Time Simulation of Water Table Dynamic ...............386
13.4.3.1 Physical Universe ...............................................38613.4.3.2 Logical and Representation Universe ................38613.4.3.3 Implementation Universe ...................................38713.4.3.4 Cognitive Universe .............................................388
13.5 Final Remarks .......................................................................................388Acknowledgments .............................................................................................389References .........................................................................................................389374 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
ABSTRACT
An approach to reconstruct and visualize virtual soil-landscape models and
space–time simulations based on ontological modeling comprising the physical,
logic/representation, implementation, and cognitive universes were presented.The modeling process was disaggregated into conceptualization, reconstruction,and scienti ﬁc visualization. The ontological modeling concept was employed to
produce three- and four-dimensional virtual models integrating soil, land use, andtopographic datasets for soil-landscapes in southern Wisconsin and northeasternFlorida. Spatially and temporally explicit modeling of robust soil properties (e.g.,bulk density) as well as dynamic soil properties (e.g., water level) was demon-strated. Ordinary kriging and cokriging were used to reconstruct the soil-land-scapes, and Virtual Reality Modeling Language to render virtual objects. Toengage users, interactive functions were programmed in Java and ExternalAuthoring Interfaces. Scienti ﬁc visualization combined with quantitative recon-
struction techniques has the potential to translate real soil-landscapes and eco-system processes into a transparent format to enhance our understanding of real-world phenomena and complex environmental systems. Web-based virtual soil-landscape models and space–time simulation models facilitate the exploration,analysis, synthesis, and presentation of georeferenced environmental datasets.Combining multimedia elements (e.g., Internet, interactivity, three-dimensionalscienti ﬁc visualization) can produce insight that would not arise from use of the
elements alone.
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Scientists have focused on two contrasting concepts to study soil-landscapes andecosystem processes, which are both equally important. The reductionist approachpromotes ever more detailed studies of distributions, soil classes, events, andprocesses, followed by their interpretation. The other approach develops andenunciates an integrative, unifying point of view encompassing and integratingprevious observations and results. Both concepts have been employed for quan-titative spatially explicit modeling of soil-forming factors evolving through time.
Different kinds of models have been used to translate real soil-landscapes
and ecosystem processes into virtual environments. Hoosbeek and Bryant
1 pro-
vided an overview of pedogenetic models using the following criteria: (1) therelative degree of computation (qualitative vs. quantitative models), (2) complex-ity of the model structure (functional vs. mechanistic models), and (3) level oforganization (soil region, pedon to molecular scale). Modeling is about choosingthe appropriate metaphor or analogy with which to better understand a phenom-enon, e.g., the spatial distribution of soils and their behavior and relationship toother environmental factors. In this sense, we create media about phenomena tobridge the gap between what we do not know and what we are trying to com-prehend. Media such as slides, maps, animations, three-dimensional virtualworlds, and digital libraries are models. Although one might talk of absolutesThree-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 375
such as reality and truth, all we have at our disposal are models, which mediate
the world for us. Transcending real into virtual soil-landscapes depends on the(1) space domain, (2) time domain, (3) spatial and temporal scale, (4) ecosystem
conditions, (5) spatial and temporal variability, (6) interrelationships between
environmental factors and soil properties, and (7) causal linkages and behaviorof the system. The modeling process itself can be disaggregated into (1) concep-tualization, i.e., de ﬁning the model structure and design; (2) reconstruction, i.e.,
describing and quantifying underlying conditions and behavior using mathemat-ics; and (3) scienti ﬁc visualization (SciVis), i.e., abstracting real soil-landscapes
into a format that we can comprehend and that helps us to understand thecomplexity of soil-landscapes.
Real soil-landscapes are complex, consisting of an inextricable mix of sys-
tematic and random patterns of environmental variables (e.g., soils, topography,land use) varying continuously in the space–time continuum. Soils and parentmaterial show gradual variations in the horizontal and vertical planes, formingthree-dimensional bodies that are commonly anisotropic. There is no real begin-ning and endpoint in real soil-landscapes because environmental conditions aredynamically changing through water ﬂow and biogeochemical processes. In addi-
tion, human activities confound naturally occurring patterns and processes.
Transforming real into virtual soil-landscapes is based on model predictions
and estimations. Estimations use sample data to make an inference about apopulation, whereas predictions refer to a statement about the future or reasoningabout the future. Methods used in science for the derivation of predictions ofunknown facts from known facts include (modi ﬁed after Bunge
2):
1. Logical inference that includes deduction, induction, and abduction,
the latter one referring to the generation of hypotheses to explainobservations
2. Structural laws that help predict new properties from the known prop-
erties of material or formal structures
3. Phenomenological laws that predict phenomena on the basis of known
constant associations
4. Functional laws that infer functional properties of a system from
knowledge of the functional role of the parts and their interconnections
5. Statistical laws that help derive collective properties of classes of events
from an analysis of such classes
6. Mechanical laws that extrapolate future (or past) states on the basis of
known current states and relations (e.g., Newtonian laws)
Recently, much attention has been given to transform what Egenhofer and
Mark
3 called the naïve geography, a body of knowledge that captures the way
people reason about geographic space and time, into complex geographic ontol-ogies and semantics.
4 Since ontology is the means to discover the structures and
generalities in reality that (metaphysical) realism predicts, ontology is a crucialpart of the science world. An ontology is a formal, explicit speci ﬁcation of a376 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
shared conceptualization. Conceptualization  refers to an abstract model of phe-
nomena in the world by having identi ﬁed the relevant concepts of those phenom-
ena. Explicit  means that the type of concepts used, and the constraints on their
use, are explicitly de ﬁned. Formal  refers to the fact that the ontology should be
machine readable. Shared  reﬂects that ontology should capture consensual knowl-
edge accepted by the communities. Since most ontological schemes use spatialand temporal concepts, GIScience often serves as an ontological precursor to thedesign or discovery of phenomena in scienti ﬁc investigations.
5 Fonseca et al.6
proposed an ontology-driven geographic information system (ODGIS) that acts
as a system integrator independently of the model. The idea is to build a next-generation GIS that entails a systematic collection and speci ﬁcation of geographic
entities, their properties, and relations. Smith
7 suggests a terminological distinc-
tion between referent or reality-based ontology ( R-ontology ) and elicited or epi-
stemological ontology (E-ontology ). R-ontology is a theory about how the whole
universe is organized, and corresponds to the philosopher’s point of view. E-ontology, on the other hand, ﬁts the purposes of software engineers and informa-
tion scientistis, and is de ﬁned as a theory about how a given individual, group,
language, or science conceptualizes a given domain.
Smyth
8 and Davis9 suggest domain-speci ﬁc ontologies that are based on the
following ontological elements:
{content/entities + time + geometry + physics + logic}
These ontological components, in turn, can be modeled computationally as
objects, spatial representation, temporal representation, numerical models, andknowledge base and inference systems, respectively. Applied to soil-landscapemodeling, content  can be modeled, e.g., as soil attributes, soil classes, or other
environmental attributes. Typically, hierarchical trees can be built that representan ontological component, e.g., a catena composed of soil types, soil attributesthat distinguish soil types, soil horizons that de ﬁne soil types, soil attributes that
deﬁne horizons, etc. This is in analogy to a hierarchical model that allows the
identity of individual trees to be subsumed by a forest; it makes sense to seeeither the individual trees or the forest. Similarly, we can create soil-landscapesnapshot models that represent either the spatial distribution of soil horizons orone speci ﬁc soil attribute (e.g., soil phosphorus content). There may be several
time and geometrical  representations of the same underlying entity. For example,
the geometry  to represent soil characteristics (e.g., silt content) can be a two-
dimensional polygon, three-dimensional polyhedron, pixel (two-dimensional ras-ter cell), or voxel (three-dimensional cell). According to Davis,
9 physics  refers to
the rules of interaction between or among entities typically expressed as mathe-matical formulas. A logic  allows new facts to be deduced about a (soil-landscape)
world for a given con ﬁguration.
To understand the role of ontologies in geographic data modeling, Gomes
and Velho
10 suggested the four-universes paradigm for modeling a digital (virtual)
representation. The four universes are:Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 377
1. The physical universe , which comprises the objects and phenomena of
the real world that will be modeled and transcended into a virtual world.
2. The mathematical universe  or logical universe , a formal de ﬁnition of
these objects and phenomena.
3. The representation universe , which uses metaphoric (symbolic) or
mirror real-world descriptions of the elements de ﬁned in the mathe-
matical universe. For example, a soil pro ﬁle might be represented as
a dot on a map (symbolic representation) attached with a label/legend,or set of multiple polyhedrons that represents soil attributes, soil hori-zons, and the shape of the soil pro ﬁle.
4. The implementation universe , which is used to map the elements from
the representation universe into data structures implemented in a com-puter language.
Fonseca et al.
6 added the cognitive universe , which captures what people
perceive about the physical universe. Figure 13.1 characterizes the different uni-verses for a soil-landscape in southern Wisconsin using soil horizons and soilcharacteristics (e.g., bulk density), crisp objects and voxels, geostatistical methodsto reconstruct the soil and terrain features mathematically, and Virtual RealityModeling Language (VRML) to visualize the soil-landscape models (Figure 13.1).
FIGURE 13.1 Schematics of universes used to model a soil-landscape in southern
Wisconsin. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
Physical  universe
Logical universe
Representation universe
Implementation universe
Cognitive universeSoils defined 
by soil horizonsSoils defined by 
attributes (themes)
Crisp objects Field model
(pixels, voxels)
3D kriging;
VRMLOrdinary kriging
of soil layer depths;
Virtual Reality Modeling Language 
(VRML)
378 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
13.2 SPACE AND TIME CONCEPTS
Conceptions of space and time have profoundly in ﬂuenced our notion of how we
observe, describe, and perceive soil-landscapes. Generally, it is necessary to divide
geographical space into discrete spatial units, and the resulting tessellation is takenas a reasonable approximation of reality at the level of resolution under consid-eration. Peuquet,
11 Goodchild et al.,12 and Burrough and McDonnell13 propose
two contrasting spatial discretization methods: (1) crisp irregular two-dimensionlpolygons or three-dimensional polyhedrons and (2) regular-shaped pixels or vox-els. In essence, both methods discretize Euclidean geographic space that has aconstant zero curvature; i.e., it is a plane and has one and only one parallel to aline passing through a given point. Conceptually there is a slight difference, butcomputationally a large difference, between both discretization methods. This canbe explained by the fact that vector and raster data types are encoded differently,where the former one encodes nodes and vertices of geographic features as wellas the topology explicitly, whereas the latter one is based on a much simplermatrix representation. Many different spatial algorithms have been developed andcustomized to accommodate either vector or raster data in a GIS environment.
Frank
14 and Raper et al.5 provide an overview of time models. Newtonian
time is focused on a succession of phenomena along a linear time coordinate,providing the simplest time concept characterized by causal inertness. Time isviewed as a neutral framework against which independently unfolding events areprojected, sorted, and measured. Newton argued that time is absolute, implyingthat the universe has a single universal clock capable of determining that twooccurrences are simultaneous. The present moment, which is changing constantly,forms the center point . Backcasting and forecasting models predict past and future
events (e.g., formation of Spodosols, land use change) with exponentially increas-ing prediction errors from the present moment. Other soil-landscape models aresnapshot models that are limited to describe current environmental conditions.Frank
14 proposed alternative time concepts, such as cyclic time, branching time,
transaction time, and event-driven time. Other time concepts remain in the phe-nomenological realm, such Husserl’s human subjective time, Minkowski’s lightcone of time, and Einstein’s relative time.
Almost all existing soil-landscape simulation models are based on Newtonian
time that is well suited to represent physical and chemical processes. However,the modeling of anthropogenic-driven events (e.g., land use change, sometimesirrational decisions by land stewards) or chaotic climatic events modeled withina Newtonian framework poses problems. Characteristics of real time include thatevents are nonrepeatable, sometimes structured and at other times chaotic. Realtime is relative and depends on the context of previous events and expected future.More generally, the timing of an event changes its nature to the extent that theunique context of other events within which it occurs affects its role in thedetermination of subsequent events. No two instants can be the same, each onerelating to a different set of preceding and succeeding moments and their remem-bered or anticipated contents.Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 379
Space–time domains curved or warped by the presence of mass and energy
within them revolutionized our thinking, unifying space and time in the generaltheory of relativity. Such epistemological space–time concepts have been
adopted to represent reality but they are dif ﬁcult to implement. Much simpler
space–time models have been adopted for soil-landscape modeling. Hayes
15
proposed the concept of histories, reasoning that no two histories may overlapin space–time and that a history may be projected onto a point in space–time.Roshannejad and Kainz
16 suggested the logical data model shown in Figure 5.8.
The geographic coordinates are described by x, y, and z coordinates representingeasting, northing, and depth from the soil surface, respectively. Time is consid-ered the fourth dimension, relegating attribute values to the ﬁfth dimension.
Deterministic event models describe the change of ecosystem states in a chain-like fashion according to mathematical algorithms. The result is a spatio-tem-poral thematic object triplet describing data evolution. Hence, data evolution isdescribed by a sequence of records {( s, t, e)}, where s is a spatial coordinate, t
is a time stamp, and e is an ecosystem function (= behavioral function, e.g.,
mineralization, leaching of nitrate).
The linkage between space and time conceptualization is through the process
to be described. Conventionally, simulating ecological processes correspond to asequence of events with an orderly structure, where one event occurs after theother (deterministic view). Each process that is in focus provides its own contextand conceptual frame for the cognition of space and time. Change must be seenas a composite of processes (and interactions between those processes) that occuron a wide band of timescales in the atmospheric, biological, geological, andhuman domains. Chrisman
17 and others suggested treating time as an axis, a
dimension of measurement similar to the spatial case — simply spatializing time.
McSweeney et al.18 pointed out that soil-landscapes are three-dimensional
systems and should be represented using geographic information technology.Burrough and McDonnell
13 argue that the term three-dimensional  is usually (and
properly) reserved for situations in which an attribute varies continuously througha three-dimensional spatial frame of reference, e.g., soil system, whereas landuse, land cover, and topography are surfaces and can be represented as two-dimensional geographic features in three-dimensional view. Timeless two-dimen-sional space concepts will continue to be useful to represent soil-landscapes. Yetrecently there have been major advances in computational capabilities, geostatis-tical analyses, and SciVis, resulting in striking multidimensional soil-landscaperepresentations. Such models will revolutionize how we comprehend soil-land-scape systems.
Some soil-landscape studies are limited to one speci ﬁc period of data collec-
tion,
19 others to two dimensions,20,21 and few are dynamic, addressing changes over
time.22 The development of three- and four-dimensional models has been hampered
in the past by the large amount of input data required and the complexities of soil-forming and ecosystem processes. Models that are highly specialized describe thespatial distribution of one property explicitly, such as digital terrain models,
23 land
cover layers,24 or soil maps.21 There are fewer models that infuse above- and380 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
belowground properties to reconstruct soil-landscapes and environmental systems
in three-dimensional geographic space.25–27 Numerous studies present techniques
for three-dimensional visualization.28–30 However, they do not extend their approach
below the soil surface to address a three-dimensional ecosystem. Even fewer studies
attempt four-dimensional space–time modeling of soil and landscape properties.31
Since soil-landscapes are truly three-dimensional, undergoing continuous evolutionof their components (e.g., due to soil formation, water table dynamics), adequatecomputerized techniques are needed to reconstruct and visualize these multidimen-sional and multicategorical environmental systems.
Currently, no universal spatio-temporal modeling and information system
exists, but there are a variety of prototypes. Abraham and Roddick
32 presented a
comprehensive review on conceptualizations of spatio-temporal databases. Koep-pel and Ahlmer
33 distinguish between attribute-oriented spatio-temporal databases
that track changes in information about spatial entities, while topology-orientedspatio-temporal databases track changes in positional information about featuresand their spatial relationships. Whigham
34 proposed a dual-ordered hierarchical
structure where time and events are represented in their own hierarchies, placedon a spatial background reference. Hermosilla
35 argues for a temporal GIS with
reasoning capabilities based on arti ﬁcial intelligence. Peuquet and Duan36 suggest
an Event-Based Spatio-Temporal Data Model (ESTDM) focusing on events thatare represented along a temporal vector in chain-like fashion. Yuan
37 suggests a
three-domain model representing semantics, space, and time separately and pro-viding links between them to describe geographic processes and phenomena.Many of these tools are focused on database management rather than reconstruc-tion and scienti ﬁc visualization.
13.3 RECONSTRUCTION AND SCIENTIFIC 
VISUALIZATION
State-of-the-art reconstruction techniques are described throughout this textbook.
An overview is given in Chapter 1. Mathematical and statistical methods used toreconstruct soil-landscapes have been described by Goovaerts,
38 Chilès and
Del ﬁner,39 Stein,40 McBratney et al.,41 Webster and Oliver,42 and Berthouex and
Brown.43 The strengths of soil-landscape modeling lie in hypothesis testing,
understanding causal linkages between environmental factors, and their interre-lationships within a spatial and temporal explicit context.
Scienti ﬁc visualization can be implemented using programming languages
such as Java, C++, or VRML. The last one is a three-dimensional open-sourcegraphics language suitable for stand-alone or browser-based interactive viewingon the Internet and is used to render the face geometry of soil-landscape mod-els.
44,45 Within the VRML-capable browser, the user can move around VRML
worlds in three dimensions, scale and rotate objects, and view updates in realtime. Capabilities of VRML include three-dimensional interactive animations,three-dimensional worlds (scenes) comprising several different three-dimensionalobjects, scaling of objects, material properties and texture mapping (e.g., drapingThree-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 381
of photographs or bitmap art over the face of a three-dimensional object), setting
different viewpoints, and use of light sources. In short, VRML provides thetechnology that integrated two- and three-dimensional objects, text, and multi-
media into a coherent modeling framework. When these media types are com-
bined with scripting languages, an entirely new genre of interactive applicationsbecomes possible. The key elements of the VRML are nodes that describe theshapes, colors, lights, viewpoints, how to position and orient shapes, animationtimers, interpolators, etc., and their properties in a virtual world. Fields de ﬁne
attribute characteristics of a node, and every value is of a speci ﬁed ﬁeld type.
45
Object-oriented languages such as VRML, C++, and Java support the concept of
data abstraction and modularity in program design.
Troy and Czapar46 employed VRML to evaluate conservation practices. They
generated a three-dimensional environment for the Lake Spring ﬁeld watershed
in order to visualize environmental factors and to direct the planning, installation,and maintenance of conservation practices. The authors found VRML useful inthe promotion of properly placed best-management practices. Miller et al.
47 used
VRML to model rural environments and document land use changes. Theyemphasized that the virtual reality environment has the potential to aid in com-munication, decision making, and scenario testing. Lovett et al.
48 used a VRML-
based approach for sustainable agricultural management exempli ﬁed by a virtual
landscape. Grunwald et al.25 developed similar soil-landscape models imple-
mented in VRML at four different spatial scales for sites in southern Wisconsin.Models were implemented using polyhedrons to represent soil layers that wereintegrated with a digital elevation model (DEM) to describe soil-landscapes.V oxels were used to create three-dimensional soil property models for bulkdensity, soil texture, and penetration resistance.
The Internet, geographic information technology, and SciVis provide new
education and information delivery capabilities. Numerous studies have shownthat SciVis is effective for enhancing rote memorization and higher-order cogni-tive skills.
49–51 Stibbard52 found that information is absorbed best when using
more than one human sense; i.e., 10% of the information is taken in by reading,30% by reading and visuals, 50% by reading, visuals, and sound, and 80% byreading, visuals, sound, and interaction. Koussoulakou and Kraak
49 tested the
usefulness of different SciVis methods, including static maps, series of staticmaps, and animated maps, and found signi ﬁcantly better response times for
animated maps. Barraclough and Guymer
50 reported that advanced visualization
techniques served to better communicate spatial information between people indifferent ﬁelds, such as scientists, administrators, educators, students, and the
general public. Just as maps can visually enhance the spatial understanding ofphenomena, interactive spatio-temporal applications can enhance our understand-ing of complex environmental systems and the underlying transport processesdriving soil and water quality. According to Fisher and Unwin,
53 visual interfaces
maximize our natural perception abilities, improve our comprehension of hugeamounts of data, allow the perception of emergent properties that were notanticipated, and facilitate understanding of both large-scale and small-scale geo-382 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
graphic features of ecosystems. According to Gordon and Pea,54 SciVis improves
learning because it supports the thought process and methodologies practiced byscientists. These include learning from observation, developing hypotheses to
explain observations, and testing of hypotheses with datasets, thereby iteratively
developing more detailed and sophisticated analyses. Raper
55 and Morris et al.56
present innovative management of multivariate and multidimensional datasetsand display environmental data in a three-dimensional format. The developmentof immersive and desktop virtual reality techniques has been instrumental todevelop virtual soil-landscapes and environments. VRML models enhanced withJava and External Authoring Interfaces provide capabilities to display real soil-landscapes in three- and four-dimensional digital formats.
57 Characteristics of
virtual reality include (1) immersion, (2) navigation (freedom for the user toexplore), and (3) interaction.
13.4 APPLICATIONS
The following applications describe the ontological components used to imple-ment different virtual soil-landscape models.
13.4.1 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  MODEL 1
13.4.1.1 Physical Universe
The study site, a 2.73-ha ﬁeld, was located on the University of Wisconsin–Mad-
ison Agricultural Research Station, West Madison. Shallow reworked loess coverwas found on the eroded soils on shoulder and backslope positions, whereas thickreworked loess deposits were found on footslope and toeslope positions. Soilswere mapped as ﬁne-loamy, mixed, mesic Typic Argiudolls. The reworked loess
was underlain by sandy loam glacial till. Land use was a corn ( Zea mays )–alfalfa
(Medicago sativa ) rotation. Climate is temperate humid. A constant-rate pro ﬁle
cone penetrometer (PCP), described in detail in Grunwald,
58 was used to collect
cone index measurements up to a soil depth of 1.30 m at 273 locations on a 10¥ 10 m grid. Bulk density (BD) measurements were collected along soil pro ﬁles
in 10-cm-depth increments at 77 locations spatially distributed throughout thesite. The BD sampling design targeted locations that showed heterogeneousterrain patterns. Cone index measurements were dense ( n = 273), whereas bulk
density measurements were sparse ( n = 77). A Trimble 4600 LS differential global
positioning system (dGPS) (Trimble Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) with base station andbeacon differential correction was used to georeference sampling locations andcollect elevation data using a dense kinematic mapping technique.
13.4.1.2 Logical and Representation Universe
The goal was to map the spatial distribution of BD across the site in southern
Wisconsin adopting a voxel model. The soil and terrain data were fused toThree-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 383
reconstruct a coherent three-dimensional model representing terrain and soil
patterns.
13.4.1.3 Implementation Universe
Three-dimensional collocated cokriging was used to predict BD at unsampled
locations using cone index data as the secondary variable. Cokriging is an exten-sion of autokriging. It takes into account additional correlated information in thesubsidiary variables
59 according to Equation 13.1. The dataset was partially het-
erotopic. A heterotopic situation can be characterized by a variable of interestknown at a few points and an auxiliary variable known everywhere in the domain(or at least at all nodes of a given estimation grid and at the data locations of thevariable of interest):
(13.1)
where
 = estimated value
w = weights
Z(x
0) = primary random variable Z at location x0
S(x0) = secondary random variable S at location x0
xa = points used to estimate x0; a = 1, …, n
The three-dimensional bulk density voxel model was fused with elevation
data to produce a three-dimensional soil-terrain model. Virtual Reality ModelingLanguage was used to render face geometry of voxels. Each voxel represents oneestimated BD value. Models in Figure 13.2 show the spatial distribution of BDacross the study site. Cross-validation showed a mean squared estimation errorof 0.05. A scienti ﬁc visualization technique called slicing was employed to show
the variation of BD across the site (Figure 13.3).
13.4.1.4 Cognitive Universe
Soil-landscape models are Web based and provide interactivity functions to
engage users (e.g., zoom, rotate). Three-dimensional models stimulate the geo-graphic abstraction skills. Bulk density values are viewed in concert with terrainproperties, providing insight into soil-topographic relationships. Grunwald et al.
59
found that in glaciated landscapes in southern Wisconsin BD is closely relatedto soil materials such as glacial till and reworked loess. Commonly, large BDvalues ( ≥1.6 Mg m
–3) are associated with sandy loam glacial till, and medium
BD values ( ≥1.3 and <1.6 Mg m–3) are found in loess material. The presentedˆ() () ( () () )Zx wSx wZx wSxZn
S 00 0
1=+ +
=∑
ˆZ384 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 13.2 Three-dimensional model showing the spatial distribution of bulk density
values. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 13.3 Bulk density values (Mg m–3) along slices in different planes across the
Wisconsin study site. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
330 m
320DEM
NSE
xz planes
yz planes0.511.52
0 1 02 03 0
z layerbulk densityMinim um
Maxim um
Mean
Median
bottom top
xy planesW
xz planes
0.511.52
0 1 02 03 04 0
y layerbulk densityMinim um
Maxim um
Mean
Median
North to So uthyz planes
0.511.52
02 0 4 0 6 0
x layerbulk densityMinim um
Maxim um
Mean
Median
Wes t to Eastxy planesThree-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 385
models provide the foundation for sustainable land use management, optimizing
crop growth while minimizing adverse effects on the environment.
13.4.2 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  MODEL 2
13.4.2.1 Physical Universe
The study area comprised a 42-ha site in northeastern Florida with hydric and
nonhydric soils. About one third of the site was covered by cypress ( Taxodium
distichum ) and about two thirds by slash pine ( Pinus elliottii ). In 1994, three
silvicultural treatments were administered. While the southwest block was leftas a control (uncut), the southeast block was clear-cut. On the northwest blockonly the forest on the hydric soils was cut; that on the nonhydric soils was leftuntouched. Morphological and taxonomic soil data were collected at 123 loca-tions on a 100 ¥ 100 m grid. Topography was characterized by laser level and
ranged from 27 to 31 m. A detailed description of the study can be found inBliss and Comerford.
60
13.4.2.2 Logical and Representation Universe
The objective was to generate a model that displays the spatial distribution of
soil horizons across the study site. The crisp object model was adopted to repre-sent horizons focusing on soil genetic aspects of this site. The soil and terraindata were integrated to reconstruct a coherent three-dimensional model repre-senting terrain and soil patterns.
13.4.2.3 Implementation Universe
Two-dimensional ordinary kriging
42 in the horizontal plane and linear inter-
polation in the vertical plane were used to create three-dimensional facegeometry of soil layers. The output product was a stratigraphic model repre-senting soil horizons as polyhedrons or volume objects (Figure 13.4a). TheIndexedFaceSet VRML class was employed to render polyhedrons. A point-
arc geographic data model was used to create IndexFaceSets . The appearance
of volume objects was coded using the RGB (red-green-blue) color classi ﬁ-
cation system. A model showing representative soil pedons across the site usedVRML texture mapping, draping photographs of soil pro ﬁles over the face of
cylinder objects (Figure 13.4b). Cylinders were linked to quantitative datasetsusing Java Script embedded into VRML. Each soil pro ﬁle has a sensor node,
which senses the computer mouse. Once the user selects a soil pro ﬁle, an event
is sent to the Java Script through the Java External Authoring Interface andattribute data are displayed in a textbox adjacent to the three-dimensional soilmodel. Geographic objects in VRML were created using the EnvironmentalVisualization System software (EVS-PRO, CTech Development Corporation,Huntington Beach, CA).386 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
13.4.2.4 Cognitive Universe
The model was implemented using desktop virtual reality and is accessible at
http://3Dmodel.ifas.u ﬂ.edu. Employing SciVis facilitated multiple views of the
soil-landscape, which stimulates a greater understanding and insight of the ﬂat-
wood system. It is this synthesis of geographic datasets that distinguishes thevirtual environment from conventional instructional media (e.g., two-dimensionalGIS maps).
13.4.3 S PACE–TIME SIMULATION  OF WATER TABLE DYNAMIC
13.4.3.1 Physical Universe
The water table was monitored biweekly at 123 wells on the ﬂatwood site
described under Section 13.4.2 from April 1992 to March 1998. The wells were1 to 1.4 m deep and positioned on a 100 ¥ 100 m grid. Daily precipitation data
were collected for the same period and aggregated to biweekly time increments.
13.4.3.2 Logical and Representation Universe
The objective was to generate models that show the spatial and temporal distri-
butions of water table dynamics across the site. The terrain model was fused withthe water model. The ﬁrst representation model was based on voxels (space–timeFIGURE 13.4 (a) Three-dimensional soil horizon model. (b) Soil pro ﬁle model. (See
color version on accompanying CD.)
Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 387
inundation model), and the second representation model was based on objects
(space–time model of water table depth).
13.4.3.3 Implementation Universe
13.4.3.3.1 Space–Time Inundation Model (Figure 13.5a)
Hundreds of semivariograms for water table depth had to be generated, each
representing one speci ﬁc period between April 1992 and March 1998. Water table
levels were interpolated using two-dimensional ordinary kriging. The water tablesurface was sliced with the digital elevation model to distinguish inundated fromnoninundated areas. The CoordinateInterpolator  VRML node was used to pro-
duce a smooth display of water table depths between observation periods. TheIndexedFaceSet VRML class was employed to render the extent of the study site.
13.4.3.3.2 Space–Time Model of Water Table Depth 
(Figure 13.5b)
Each well was rendered using empty cubes and positioned at observed geographic
locations. After triggering the simulation, a Java program reads the measuredwater table levels, de ﬁned by their respective x, y, and z coordinates, at each well
for a speci ﬁc period. The CoordinateInterpolator  VRML node was used to inter-
polate water levels across the ﬂat-wood site. A graphical user interface was addedFIGURE 13.5 (a) Space–time models of inundation. (b) Space–time models show water
table depth and rainfall observed for different periods. (See color version on accompanyingCD.)
388 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
as front end to enable users to select the wells and period they want to display.
The cubes are ﬁlled with water on-the- ﬂy according to respective observed water
levels constrained to the subset of user-de ﬁned parameters. The simulation can
be repeated for different well locations or periods. Java Server Pages from Sun
Microsystems was used for developing this dynamic Web simulation.
13.4.3.4 Cognitive Universe
The space–time models are available at http://3Dmodel.ifas.u ﬂ.edu.  An interactive
framework was used to engage users.  Users can trigger an event by constraining
the border conditions (e.g., time period, geographic domain) of simulations.Adaptive selective simulation stimulates experimental learning through the obser-vation of ecosystem processes using a sequence of events: trigger an event,observe ecosystem process, interpret, assimilate. Causal linkages between terrainproperties, land use, soils, precipitation, and water table dynamics within a spa-tially and temporally explicit context can be described and visualized. EmployingSciVis facilitated multiple views of the content world, which stimulates a greaterunderstanding and insight of the ﬂatwood system. Desktop virtual reality, when
combined with other forms of digital media, may offer great potential for acognitive approach to research and education.
13.5 FINAL REMARKS
The use of software components extracted from ontologies is a way to shareknowledge and integrate different kinds of information. Ontological componentmodeling is structured and facilitates transparent documentation of the model-ing process. Ontologies are useful at the database, reconstruction, and visual-ization levels.
SciVis combined with quantitative reconstruction techniques has the potential
to translate real soil-landscapes and ecosystem processes into a transparent formatto enhance our understanding of real-world phenomena (e.g., water dynamics,nitrate leaching) and complex environmental systems. Limitations of the pre-sented approach are largely those due to the availability of soil and other envi-ronmental datasets used to reconstruct models and the size of the study area. Soil-landscape models that extend over large areas are challenging to visualize becausesoils are typically mapped only to a depth up to 1 to 2 m. Therefore, it is necessaryto use exaggeration factors to visualize soil pro ﬁles or properties across a land-
scape that extends over hundreds of square kilometers. Web-based virtual soil-landscape models and space–time simulation models facilitate the exploration,analysis, synthesis, and presentation of georeferenced environmental datasets.Shiffer
61 argues that users gain an improved understanding by viewing informa-
tion from several different graphical perspectives. Krygier62 notes that combining
multimedia elements (e.g., Internet, interactivity, three-dimensional SciVis) canproduce insight that would not arise from use of the elements alone. Virtual soil-landscape models are bene ﬁcial in disseminating georeferenced soil and land-Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 389
scape data to educators, researchers, government agencies, and the general public.
In the realm of education, Freudenschuh and Hellevik63 pointed out that students
should be encouraged to become active participants, rather than passive learners,by appealing to their multisensory learning ability with interactive media. Train-ing and integration of quantitative modeling and programming skills into curriculais a prerequisite to produce the next generation of interactive, virtual soil-land-scape models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank the National Council for Air and Stream Improvement (NCASI) and theU.S. Forest Service for funds that allowed the data collection at the Florida siteconducted by C.M. Comerford and C.M. Bliss. Thanks to G.W. Hurt, whoprovided photographs of soil pro ﬁles, and to A. Mangeot and V . Ramasundaram,
who assisted with programming. I also thank K. McSweeney and B. Lowery forproviding funding for the Wisconsin project and P. Barak for his stimulatingideas to move from two-dimensional to interactive three- and four-dimensionalvirtual worlds.
This research was supported by the Florida Agricultural Experiment Station
and approved for publication as Journal Series R-10602. 
REFERENCES
1. MR Hoosbeek, RB Bryant. Developing and adapting soil process submodels for
use in the pedodynamic orthod model. In Quantitative Modeling of Soil Forming
Processes , SSSA Special Publication 39, RB Bryant, RW Arnold, Eds. SSSA,
Madison, WI, 1994, pp. 111–128.
2. M Bunge. Causality . Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1959.
3. M Egenhofer, D Mark. Naïve geography. In Spatial Information Theory: A The-
oretical Basis for GIS , Lecture Notes in Computer Science 988, A Frank, W Kuhn,
Eds. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1995, pp. 1–15.
4. GJ Hunter. Understanding semantics and ontologies: they are quite simple really
— if you know what I mean! Trans GIS  6: 83–87, 2002.
5. J Raper, T McCarthy, N Williams. Georeferenced four-dimensional virtual environ-
ments: principles and applications. Comput Environ Urban Syst  22: 529–539, 1998.
6. FT Fonseca, MJ Egenhofer, R Agouris, G Câmara. Using ontologies for integrated
geographic information systems. Trans GIS  6: 231–257, 2002. 
7. B Smith. An introduction to ontology. In The Ontology of Fields , D Peuquet, B
Smith, B Brogaard, Eds. National Center for Geographic Information and Anal-ysis, Santa Barbara, CA, 1998, pp. 10–14.
8. CS Smyth. A representational framework for geographic modeling. In Spatial and
Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Information Systems , MJ Egenhofer, RG
Golledge, Eds. Oxford University Press, New York, 1998, pp. 191–213.
9. E Davis. Representations of Commonsense Knowledge . Morgan Kaufmann, San
Mateo, CA, 1990.390 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
10. J Gomes, L Velho. Abstraction paradigms for computer graphics. Visual Comput
11: 227–239, 1995.
11. D Peuquet. Presentations of geographic space: towards a conceptual synthesis.
Ann Assoc Am Geogr  78: 375–394, 1988.
12. M Goodchild, G Sun, S Yang. Development and test of an error model for
categorical data. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  6: 87–104, 1992.
13. PA Burrough, RA McDonnell. Principles of Geographical Information Systems .
Oxford University Press, New York, 1998.
14. AU Frank. Different types of “times” in GIS. In Spatial and Temporal Reasoning
in Geographic Information Systems , MJ Egenhofer, RG Golledge, Eds. Oxford
University Press, New York, 1998.
15. PJ Hayes. The second naïve manifesto. In Formal Theories of a Commonsense
World , J Hobbes, R Moore, Eds. American Association for Arti ﬁcial Intelligence,
Menlo Park, CA, 1985, pp. 1–36.
16. AA Roshannejad, W Kainz. Handling Identities in Spatio-Temporal Databases.
Paper presented at Proceedings of the ASCM/ASPRS Annual Convention andExposition,  Bethesda, MD. Technical Papers, 1995.
17. NR Chrisman. Beyond the snapshot: changing the approach to change, error, and
process. In Spatial and Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Information Systems ,
MJ Egenhofer, RG Golledge, Eds. Oxford University Press, New York, 1998, pp.85–93.
18. K McSweeney, PE Gessler, BK Slater, RD Hammer, GW Peterson, JC Bell.
Towards a new framework for modeling the soil-landscape continuum. In Factors
in Soil Formation , SSSA Special Publication 33. SSSA, Madison, WI, 1994.
19. K Verheyen, D Adriaens, M Hermy, S Deckers. High-resolution continuous soil
classi ﬁcation using morphological soil pro ﬁle descriptions. Geoderma  101: 31–48,
2001.
20. DJ Pennock, DF Acton. Hydrological and sedimentological in ﬂuences on Boroll
catenas, central Saskatchewan. Soil Sci Soc Am J 53: 904–910, 1989.
21. LJ Osher, SW Buol. Relationship of soil properties to parent material and land-
scape position in eastern Madre de Dios, Peru. Geoderma  83: 143–166, 1998.
22. B Minasny, AB McBratney. A rudimentary mechanistic model for soil production
and landscape development. Geoderma  90: 3–21, 1999.
23. JA Thompson, JC Bell, CA Butler. Digital elevation model resolution: effects on
terrain attribute calculation and quantitative soil-landscape modeling. Geoderma
100: 67–89, 2001.
24. C Domenikiotis, NR Dalezio, A Loukas, M Karteris. Agreement assessment of
NOAA/A VHRR NDVI with Landsat TM NDVI for mapping burned forested areas.Int J Remote Sensing  23: 4235–4247, 2002.
25. S Grunwald, P Barak, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Soil landscape models at different
scales portrayed in Virtual Reality Modeling Language. J Soil Sci  165: 598–615,
2000.
26. NM Sirakov, FH Muge. A system for reconstructing and visualizing three-dimen-
sional objects. Comput Geosci  27: 59–69, 2001.
27. R Marschallinger. Three-dimensional reconstruction and visualization of geological
materials with IDL: examples and source code. Comput Geosci  27: 419–426, 2001.
28. J Döllner, K Hinrichs. An object-oriented approach for integrating 3D visualization
systems and GIS. Comput Geosci  26: 67–76, 2000.Three-Dimensional Reconstruction and Scientiﬁc Visualization 391
29. M Kreuseler. Visualization of geographically related multidimensional data in
virtual scenes. Comput Geosci  26: 101–108, 2000.
30. JM Lees. Geotouch: software for three- and four-dimensional GIS in the earth
sciences. Comput Geosci  26: 751–761, 2000.
31. MFP Bierkens. Spatio-temporal modeling of the soil water balance using a sto-
chastic model and soil pro ﬁle descriptions. Geoderma  103: 27–50, 2001.
32. T Abraham, JF Roddick. Survey of spatio-temporal databases.  Geoinformatica  3:
61–99, 1999.
33. IJ Koeppel, SD Ahlmer. Integrating the Dimension of Time into AM/FM Systems.
In Proceedings of the AM/FM XVI International Annual Conference, Aurora, CO,1993.
34. PA Whigham. Hierarchies of space and time. In Spatial Information Theory: A
Theoretical Basis for GIS , Lecture Notes in Computer Science 716. Springer, New
York, 1993.
35. LH Hermosilla. A Uni ﬁed Approach for Developing a Temporal GIS with Data-
base and Reasoning Capabilities. Paper presented at Proceedings of EGIS 94, The5th European Conference and Exhibition on Geographical Information Systems,Paris, 1994.
36. DJ Peuquet, N Duan. An Event-Based Spatio-Temporal Data Model (ESTDM)
for temporal analysis of geographical data. Int J Geogr Inf Syst  9: 7–24, 1995.
37. M Yuan. Modeling semantics, spatial and temporal information in a GIS. In
Progress in Trans-Atlantic Geographic Information Research , M Craglia, H
Couleclis, Eds. Taylor & Francis, New York, 1997.
38. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation . Oxford University
Press, New York, 1997.
39. JP Chilès, P Del ﬁner. Geostatistics: Modeling Spatial Uncertainty . John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1999.
40. ML Stein. Interpolation of Spatial Data: Some Theory for Kriging , Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
41. AB McBratney, IOA Odeh, TFA Bishop, MS Dunbar, TM Shatar. An overview
of pedometric techniques for use in soil survey. Geoderma  97: 293–327, 2000.
42. R Webster, MA Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists . John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, England, 2001.
43. PM Berthouex, LC Brown. Statistics for Environmental Engineers . Lewis Publ.,
New York, 2002.  
44. L Lemay, J Couch, K Murdock. 3D graphics and VRML 2 . Sams.net Publ.,
Indianapolis, 1999.
45. Web3D Consortium. 2003. Available at http://www.web3d.org/.46. JL Troy, GF Czapar. Evaluating conservation practices using GIS and Virtual
Reality Modeling Language. J Nat Resour Life Sci Educ  31: 38–43, 2002.
47. DR Miller, RA Dunham, W Chen. The application of VR modelling in assessing
potential visual impacts of rural development. In Virtual Reality in Geography , P
Fisher, D Unwin, Eds. Taylor & Francis, New York, 2002, pp. 131–143.
48. A Lovett, R Kennaway, G Sünnenberg, D Cobb, P Dolman, T O’Riordan, D
Arnold. Visualizing sustainable agricultural landscapes. In Virtual Reality in Geog-
raphy , P Fisher, D Unwin, Eds. Taylor & Francis, New York, 2002, pp. 102–130.
49. A Koussoulakou, MJ Kraak. Spatio-temporal maps and cartographic communica-
tion. Cartogr J  29: 101–108, 1992.392 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
50. A Barraclough, I Guymer. Virtual reality: a role in environmental engineering
education?  Water Sci Technol 38: 303–310, 1998.
51. JD Hays, S Phirman, B Blumenthal, K Kastens, W Menke. Earth science instruc-
tion with digital data. J Comput Geosci  26: 657–668, 2000.
52. A Stibbard. Warwick University Forum, No. 6, 1997.53. P Fisher, D Unwin. Virtual Reality in Geography . Taylor & Francis, New York,
2002.
54. DN Gordon, RD Pea. Prospects for scienti ﬁc visualization as an educational
technology. J Learn Sci 4: 249–279, 1995.
55. J Raper. Multidimensional Geographic Information Science . Taylor & Francis,
New York, 2000.
56. K Morris, D Hill, A Moore. Mapping the environment through three-dimensional
space and time. J Comput Environ Urban Syst 24: 435–450, 2000.
57. V Ramasundaram, S Grunwald, A Mangeot, NB Comerford, CM Bliss. Develop-
ment of an environmental virtual ﬁeld laboratory.  J Comput Educ  45: 21–34, 2005.
58. S Grunwald, B Lowery, DJ Rooney, K McSweeney. Pro ﬁle cone penetrometer
data used to distinguish between soil materials.  Soil Tillage Res 62: 27–40, 2001.
 59. H Wackernagel. Multivariate Geostatistics. Springer, Berlin, 2003.
60. CM Bliss, NB Comerford. Forest harvesting in ﬂuence on water table dynamics
in a Florida ﬂatwood landscape. Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 1344–1349, 2002.
61. MJ Shiffer. Towards a collaborative planning system. Environ Plann B  19:
709–722, 1992.
62. JB Krygier. Cartographic multimedia and praxis in human geography and the
social sciences. In Multimedia Cartography , W Cartwright, M Peterson, G Gartner,
Eds. Springer, Berlin, 1999, pp. 245–256.
63. SM Freudenschuh, W Hellevik. Multimedia technology in cartography and geo-
graphic education. In Multimedia Cartography , W Cartwright, M Peterson, G
Gartner, Eds. Springer, Berlin, 1999, pp. 271–280.39314On Spatial Lattice 
Modeling of Soil Properties
Jun Zhu, Richard P. Wolkowski, Wei Yue,
and Ruifeng Xu
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................393
14.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................39414.2 Multiresolution Tree-Structured Spatial Linear Model........................397
14.2.1 The Global Variation .............................................................39814.2.2 The Local Variation...............................................................39814.2.3 The Measurement Error ........................................................40014.2.4 Statistical Inference...............................................................400
14.2.5 Model Selection and Evaluation ...........................................401
14.3 Materials and Methods..........................................................................40214.4 Results and Discussion .........................................................................404
14.4.1 Exploratory Data Analysis ....................................................40414.4.2 Model Selection and Parameter Estimation..........................40514.4.3 Model Comparisons ..............................................................40814.4.4 Prediction of Soil Properties.................................................413
14.5 Conclusions ...........................................................................................415Acknowledgments .............................................................................................415References .........................................................................................................416
ABSTRACT
Kriging methods are popular for mapping soil properties by interpolating a ﬁnite
number of samples in a ﬁeld. Although kriging is often known as the best unbiased
linear prediction in a geostatistical model, the idea of kriging can also be imple-mented in a spatial lattice model that decomposes an observation into signal plusnoise. In this chapter, we review a type of spatial lattice model, namely, amultiresolution tree-structured spatial linear model. Because of the multiresolu-tion tree structure, kriging can be conducted using a fast change-of-resolution394 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Kalman ﬁlter algorithm. We apply the methodology to obtain the best unbiased
linear prediction of soil properties in a ﬁeld in Wisconsin, while accounting for
ﬁeld conditions using a linear regression. Comparison is made among linear
regression, a traditional spatial linear model for lattice data, and the multireso-
lution tree-structured spatial linear model. The result shows that the multiresolu-tion tree-structured spatial linear model does not always ﬁt the data better, but
does offer a fast alternative for mapping soil properties.
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Observations of a soil property in a ﬁeld, such as the depth of the A horizon, soil
texture in the A and B horizons, and spatial distribution of key nutrients, can bemodeled as realizations from a spatial random process { Z(s)}, where for a given
location s, Z(s) is a random variable subject to a probability distribution, and the
location s ranges continuously over a spatial domain D. To capture different
sources of variation, the spatial random process is often decomposed into a globalvariation, { m(s)}, which consists of a deterministic mean structure, a local vari-
ation, { u(s)}, which consists of a spatially correlated zero-mean random process,
and a measurement error, { e(s)}, which consists of a zero-mean white noise
process independent of the local variation:
Z(s) = m(s) + u(s) + e(s) (14.1)
(see, e.g., Section 3.1 in Cressie
4). For example, the global variation may be
modeled by a linear regression on a set of explanatory variables, while the localvariation may be modeled by a stationary Gaussian process with an exponentialvariogram. Let
Y(s) = m(s) + u(s) (14.2)
denote the signal process that consists of both the global and the local variation.
Then the decomposition of Z(s) can be rewritten in the form of signal plus noise:
Z(s) = Y(s) + e(s) (14.3)
There are two primary objectives in spatial random process modeling. One
objective is to estimate the global variation { m(s)}, usually in relation to poten-
tial explanatory variables. Thus, the aim of modeling the local variation { u(s)}
is to capture any remaining spatial dependence after the global variation, { m(s)},
has been accounted for. Although sometimes viewed as a nuisance, modelingthe local variation is important for ensuring a valid statistical inference of theglobal variation.
The other objective is to predict the signal process, based on knowledge of
the global variation, the spatial dependence structure in the local variation, andthe measurement error. Given a set of observations, { Z(s
1), …, Z(sn)}, observedOn Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 395
at sampling locations, s1, …, sn, the best linear unbiased predictor (BLUP) of
Y(s0), at a given location s0, which minimizes the mean squared prediction error
(MSPE), can be obtained using kriging (see, e.g., Odeh et al.,12,13 Knotters et al.,9
Bourennane et al.,2 Carre and Girard3). In the absence of measurement error,
prediction of Y(s0) is the same as prediction of Z(s0), since Z(s0) = Y(s0) = m(s0)
+ u(s0). If an observation is available at s0, then the BLUP of Y(s0) is the obser-
vation Z(s0) itself. If an observation is not available at s0, then the BLUP of Y(s0)
is a weighted sum of the observations where the optimal weights are obtainedfrom a set of kriging estimation equations. Depending on the assumptions madeabout the global variation { m(s)}, some commonly used krigings include simple
kriging, where m(s) is assumed to be known; ordinary kriging, where m(s) is
unknown but is assumed to be a constant; and universal kriging, where m(s)
consists of a trend or linear regression with unknown regression coef ﬁcients. On
the other hand, in the presence of measurement error, prediction of Y(s
0) is also
a weighted sum of the observations with optimal weights obtained from a similarset of kriging estimation equations. In fact, the BLUP of  Y(s
0) at an unsampled
location is the same as that of Z(s0), since the measurement error at the unsampled
location does not affect how the underlying signal is predicted. However, depend-ing on the level of measurement error, the BLUP of Y(s
0) at a sampled location
does not need to be the same as the observation Z(s0). In the extreme case where
there is no local variation but only measurement error, Y(s0) = m(s0) is ﬁxed or
deterministic. Suppose further that m(s0) is a ﬁxed constant, then the BLUP of
Y(s0) is the average of the observations, regardless of the location s0. That is, the
optimal weights in the BLUP of Y(s0) are equal, as there is no spatial dependence
among the signal variables. More details of these issues can be found in Section3.2.1 of Cressie.
4
In the spatial statistics literature, an alternative to the aforementioned geo-
statistical approach is lattice data modeling, where a spatial random process takesplace on a regular or irregular lattice, either due to the discrete nature of datalocations or due to the aggregation of an underlying random process with con-tinuous spatial index. For instance, the soil property of interest in a spatial regionD could be modeled by a random process Y(s). Partition D into a set of N cells
{D
1, …, DN} and de ﬁne
 Y(s) ds (14.4)
as an average value of the random process aggregated over the locations in the
k-th cell Dk, where k = 1, …,  N. Instead of modeling { Y(s)} directly, a lattice
modeling approach could focus on the aggregated process { yk}. The value in each
grid cell is usually modeled as spatially correlated to its neighboring values,according to a certain neighborhood structure. Neighborhood structures may bedeﬁned in terms of proximity, direction, and contiguousness of grid cells so that
meaningful spatial correlations can be established among neighbors. For example,yDk
kDk= ∫1
||396 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
a neighborhood structure could de ﬁne two grid cells to be neighbors of each other
if they share a side in a particular compass direction (see, e.g., Upton andFingleton
14).
Despite the differences in a lattice data model speci ﬁcation from a geostatis-
tical model, some of the modeling strategies are similar. In particular, the spatialrandom process y
k is often decomposed into a global variation and a local vari-
ation:
yk = mk + uk (14.5)
where  m(s) ds and  u(s) ds are the global
variation and local variation processes, respectively, at the aggregated scale. An
observation within a cell, denoted by zk, is modeled by
zk = yk + ek (14.6)
where ek is a measurement error process. Parameter estimation of the global
variation can be obtained while accounting for the spatial dependence in the localvariation. Prediction of y
k can be obtained by minimizing the MSPE using kriging,
as in the geostatistical modeling approach. For a cell that has an observation, theBLUP of y
k is the same as the observed value zk if there is no measurement error,
but does not need to be the same as the observed value zk if there is measurement
error included in the model. Unlike in the geostatistical modeling approach,kriging in a lattice model approach often involves predicting the underlying signalprocess on the lattice, based on observations with measurement errors.
In this chapter, we consider a multiresolution tree-structured spatial linear
model (MTSLM) developed by Zhu and Yue,
15 and our main purpose is to
demonstrate the use of an MTSLM in mapping soil properties. The MTSLM isa generalization of the multiresolution tree-structured model developed by Huanget al.
6 The main features of an MTSLM include a linear regression in the global
variation, a spatial dependence structure in the local variation derived from amultiresolution tree structure, and a measurement error process. For statisticalinference, model parameters are estimated by maximum likelihood using anexpectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, while the signal process is predictedby a change-of-resolution Kalman ﬁlter algorithm. The linear regression in the
global variation allows for modeling a soil property in relation to explanatoryvariables. Moreover, because of the multiresolution tree structure, the predictionalgorithm can be implemented in one pass and is very fast.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. In Section 14.2, we
describe the MTSLM and the related statistical inference. In Section 14.3, weapply the MTSLM to map soil properties in a Wisconsin ﬁeld. Comparison is
made between the MTSLM and the traditional linear models. Discussion of theresults is given in Section 14.4, and a conclusion is given in Section 14.5.mDk
kDk= ∫1
||uDk
kDk= ∫1
||On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 397
14.2 MULTIRESOLUTION TREE-STRUCTURED 
SPATIAL LINEAR MODEL
To construct a tree structure, the spatial region D of interest is partitioned in a
nested fashion as follows. On the ﬁrst (coarsest) resolution, we partition the spatial
region D into a set of N1 cells { D1,k}, where D1,k denotes the k-th cell on the ﬁrst
resolution; k = 1, …,  N1. We further partition each cell D1,k on the ﬁrst resolution
into n1,k subcells on the second resolution, resulting in a set of 
cells { D2,k}, where D2,k denotes the kth cell on the second resolution; k=1, …,
N2. The partitioning is continued until a desired ﬁne-resolution J with a set of
 cells { DJ,k}, where DJ,k denotes the kth cell on the J-th ( ﬁnest)
resolution; k = 1, …,  NJ. For simplicity, we assume that the partition of each cell
is homogeneous, such that it gives equal-size subcells with | Dj,1| = |Dj,2| = … =
|Dj,Nj| for a given j, except for the ﬁrst (coarsest) resolution. See Figure 14.1a for
an illustration of partitioning a cell into subcells. Given these partitions, we de ﬁne
 Y(s) ds to be the average value of the signal process Y(s) in
Dj,k, aggregated over the locations in cell Dj,k, where k=1, …,  Nj, j = 1, …,  J. InFIGURE 14.1 (a) The spatial region is partitioned into four cells, each partitioned into
four subcells. (b) The multiresolution tree structure has three resolutions, one root, andfour child nodes for each node that is a parent node.
Nnk
kN
2=
=∑ 1
11
,
NnJJ k
kNJ
=
=∑ 1
11
,
yDjk
jkDjk ,
,||,= ∫1398 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
this section, we model { yj,k} by a multiresolution tree-structured spatial linear
model (MTSLM), estimate the model parameters by maximum likelihood, and
predict { yj,k} by a change-of-resolution Kalman ﬁlter algorithm with a known
level of uncertainty, based on the observations { zj,k}.
14.2.1 T HE GLOBAL  VARIATION
The MTSLM assumes that the signal process { yj,k} is decomposed into a global
variation and a local variation:
yj,k= xT
j,kbbbb + uj,k (14.7)
Here the global variation is in the form of a linear regression xT
j,kbbbb, where xj,k is
a vector of explanatory variables associated with the k-th cell on the j-th resolution
and bbbb is a vector of regression coef ﬁcients, both in p dimensions. Further, the
local variation { uj,k} has a zero mean and a spatial dependence structure that is
determined by a multiresolution tree structure. In a ﬁeld study to be shown in
Section 14.3, yj,k would be a property such as soil phosphorus (P), while the
explanatory variables would be topography such as elevation.
14.2.2 T HE LOCAL VARIATION
A multiresolution tree structure consists of a set of nodes interconnected by a setof edges directed from the coarser resolutions to the ﬁner resolutions. Let the
(j,k)-th node denote the k-th node on the j-th resolution located in the center of
the cell D
j,k. The parent  node of the ( j,k)-th node, pa(j,k), is the node on the ( j –
1)-th resolution, which has an edge directed from pa(j,k) to ( j,k), whereas a child
node of the ( j,k)-th node, ch(j,k), is the node on the ( j + 1)-th resolution, which
has an edge directed from ( j,k) to ch(j,k). We assume that the spatial resolution
is the coarsest on the ﬁrst resolution j = 1 and the ﬁnest on the last resolution j
= J. A node on the coarsest resolution does not have a parent and is called a root
node. A node on the ﬁnest resolution does not have any child and is called a leaf
node. Figure 14.1b shows a schematic plot of a three-resolution one-root quadtree, where a root node on the coarsest resolution has four child nodes on themiddle resolution, and similarly, each node on the middle resolution has fourchild nodes on the ﬁnest resolution. Here quad  refers to four child nodes per
node. Hence, the total number of resolutions is J = 3 and the numbers of nodes
on each resolution are N
1 = 1, N2 = 4, and N3 = 16.
Associating the ( j,k)-th node with the k-th cell on the j-th resolution Dj,k, we
model { uj,k} by a multiresolution tree structure:
(14.8)uu N k Njk p a jk jk jk j j,( , ) , , , ~ ( , ), , , =+ = 012,, , , ,
~( , ) ,  , ,,jJ
uN k Nk=
=2
01112
1On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 399
where uj,k is the local variation in the cell Dj,k associated with the ( j,k)-th node.
The mathematical expectation of uj,k is assumed to be zero. The term wj,k corre-
sponds to a random independent departure of uj,k on the j-th resolution from upa(j,k)
on the ( j – 1)-th resolution and is assumed to have a Gaussian distribution with
mean zero and noise variance . Thus, the value uj,k is in ﬂuenced by both the
value of its parent upa(j,k) and some independent random ﬂuctuation wj,k. A smaller
noise variance of the model would force uj,k to resemble its parent value upa(j,k)
more than a larger .
To further match the physical conditions, it is necessary that an average of
all the children’s values be equal to their parent’s value, satisfying a so-calledmass-balance property. That is ,
(14.9)
where n
j,k is the number of child nodes of the ( j,k)-th node. The MTSLM assumes
two conditions under which the mass-balance property holds:
 and  xch(j,k) = xj,k(14.10)
The spatial covariance structure of the multiresolution model is induced by
the parent–child relationship, such that the strength of the spatial structure isdetermined by how parent nodes are shared among the child nodes of the ﬁnest
resolution. Given two nodes ( j,k) and ( j,k ¢) on the j-th resolution, denote the ﬁrst
common ancestor on the j
an-th resolution as an(j,k,k ¢). If the two nodes do not
have a common ancestor, then they are descendants of two different root nodesand we let j
an = 0. If the two nodes are the same node, then jan = j. The covariance
between uj,k and uj,k ¢ is:
(14.11)
Note that the spatial covariance (or spatial correlation) between two nodes on the
j-th resolution decreases as jan of the ﬁrst common ancestor becomes smaller.
Moreover, the spatial covariance function cov(uj,k, uj,k ¢) is invariant to the geo-
graphical locations of the nodes ( j,k) and ( j¢,k¢) as long as the ﬁrst common
ancestor an(j,k,k ¢) is on the same jan-th resolution. In essence, the spatial depen-
dence structures are a result of the multiresolution tree structure, and the strengthj2
j2
j2
1
nyy
jkc h jk jkallch j k,(,) ,(,)= ∑
1
nuu
jkc h jk jkallch j k,(,) ,(,)= ∑1
njkallch j k,(,) ∑
cov( , );
,, 'uujj
jk jkan
j =++ =
++12
j2
12
aanjan
janan
annjj
j2 12
111
0=
=+; ,...,
0;400 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
of the spatial dependence is determined by the relative magnitude of the noise
variances { , ,…,,}.
Compared with a variogram model in geostatistics, the spatial dependence
structure here is simpler, primarily because the spatial domain of interest is
divided into cells and the spatial dependence is induced by the multiresolutiontree structure. However, one bene ﬁt of using a simpler model is in the computa-
tional ef ﬁciency. See also Zhu et al.
16 for examples that compare the multireso-
lution models with kriging methods. Because of the multiresolution tree structure,a one-pass change-of-resolution algorithm can be used to carry out spatial pre-diction. We note that the change-of-resolution algorithm is similar to other tools,such as the Bayesian multiscale models in Kolaczyk
10 and the wavelet character-
ization in Epinat et al.5
14.2.3 T HE MEASUREMENT  ERROR
Measurements about the soil property { yJ,k} are obtained on the J-th resolution
in a spatial region D. Within the k-th cell on the J-th resolution DJ,k, an observation,
zJ,k, is modeled by
(14.12)
Here the term eJ,k is the measurement error associated with the observation zJ,k,
which captures the random independent departure of the observed value zJ,k from
the signal value yJ,k. The measurement error eJ,k is assumed to have an independent
Gaussian distribution with mean zero and variance f2
J. In soil property mapping,
the observation zJ,k could be the k-th soil P measured in the cell DJ,k, whereas the
signal yJ,k would then be the actual soil P in the cell DJ,k and is the unknown
quantity that we would like to predict.
14.2.4 S TATISTICAL  INFERENCE
According to Equations 14.7 to 14.9 and 14.12, there are three types of unknownparameters: the regression coef ﬁcients 
bbbb, the measurement error variance f2
J, and
the noise variances of the model s2
j, j = 1, …, J. The measurement error variance
will be prespeci ﬁed based on an estimate of the nugget effect. Given the estimated
f2
J, the regression coef ﬁcients bbbb and the noise variances s2
j are estimated by
maximum likelihood using an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. TheEM algorithm also gives the variance-covariance matrix of the parameter esti-mates, which could be used for hypothesis testing and con ﬁdence intervals of the
true parameter values.
For prediction of the signal process, let Z denote the vector of all the data.
Under the Gaussian assumption, the best unbiased predictor of y
J,k, which min-
imizes the mean squared prediction error (MSPE), is E(yJ,k|Z). For the given
multiresolution tree-structured model, the estimation equations in the matrixform areJ2
J12
12
zy e eN k NJk Jk Jk Jk J J,, , , , ~ ( , ), , , =+ = 012On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 401
E(yJ,k|Z) = xT
j,kbbbb + E(uJ,k|Z) (14.13)
where E(uJ,k|Z) = cov (yJ,k, Z) var(Z)–1(Z – Xbbbb) and X is the matrix containing all
the xj,k.
In E(yJ,k|Z), we ﬁrst substitute the true regression coef ﬁcients bbbb by the max-
imum likelihood estimate bbbbMLE. Then we compute E(uJ,k|Z), where the model
parameters are replaced by the maximum likelihood estimates. Under a krigingsetup, the computation of E(u
J,k|Z) would involve an inversion of the matrix
var(Z). However, because of the multiresolution tree structure, the matrix inver-
sion can be replaced by a change-of-resolution computing algorithm, involvinga ﬁne-to-coarse-resolution ﬁltering step, followed by a coarse-to- ﬁne-resolution
smoothing step. In the ﬁltering step, the algorithm moves from ﬁne resolutions
to coarse resolutions, recursively computing the values u
j,k, based on the data on
the relevant ﬁner resolutions. Once the coarsest resolution is reached, the algo-
rithm goes back from coarse resolutions to ﬁne resolutions, recursively computing
the values uj,k on each resolution based on all the data. In the ﬁnal step of the
recursion, the prediction of uJ,k on the ﬁnest resolution and the prediction error
variance are calculated. Moreover, as a by-product, the change-of-resolutionalgorithm handles missing data automatically by replacing any unobserved (miss-ing) datum on a node with its most plausible estimator E(u
j,k|Z). The change-of-
resolution computing algorithm is an extension from the Kalman ﬁlter algorithm
for time series data (see, e.g., Meinhold and Singpurwalla11).
The main features of the MTSLM can be summarized as follows. The change-
of-resolution algorithm gives prediction of { yJ,k} on the desired ﬁnest resolution.
The computation is fast and hence feasible for practical use. Moreover, theinclusion of a linear regression enables modeling of relationships among variableswhile accounting for spatial dependence in the residuals. Hence, the model canbe used for two important purposes in practice: regression on explanatory vari-ables and prediction of the signal process.
14.2.5 M ODEL SELECTION  AND EVALUATION
Sound statistical inference, including parameter estimation and signal prediction,hinges on the careful selection of an underlying model. To use the MTSLMdescribed above for a given dataset, various choices of the model need to bemade. The linear regression mean structure depends on which explanatory vari-ables are incorporated in the model. In addition, the spatial dependence is spec-iﬁed via the tree structure and depends on several factors, such as the number of
resolutions, the partition on the coarsest resolution, and the number of childrenfor each parent node. On one hand, we favor models that ﬁt the data well according
to a certain criterion, which is the maximum likelihood here. On the other hand,more complex models (e.g., with more explanatory variables) may increase thelikelihood without substantially enhancing the explanatory or predictive powerof the model. Hence, we also favor models that are parsimonious. In this regard,Akaike’s information criterion (AIC), de ﬁned as minus twice the log-likelihood402 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
plus twice the number of parameters, is suitable for model selection.1 A smaller
AIC value is associated with a larger likelihood and a more parsimonious modelby penalizing unnecessarily complex models. We shall use AIC as a criterion for
selecting the best models. Our strategy is to ﬁrst select the best multiresolution
tree structure, given the full regression model that includes all the potentialexplanatory variables. Then given the selected multiresolution tree structure, weselect the best set of explanatory variables for a reduced regression model.
To further evaluate the MTSLM quality, we compare model ﬁtting and model
selection using a simple linear regression (SLR) model, spatial linear model(SLM), and MTSLM. The three models all assume a linear regression and aGaussian distribution in the error, but differ in the dependence structure of theerror. The SLR model assumes that the errors are independent, and hence doesnot allow for spatial dependence. Both SLM and MTSLM allow for spatialdependence in the error, but differ in the type of spatial dependence. We considerSLM with a ﬁrst-order neighborhood, such that the neighbors of a given cell
consist of the adjacent cells to the north, west, south, and east. Other choices ofthe neighborhood structures are diagonal, such that the neighbors consist of thecells in the northeast, northwest, southwest, and southeast, or second order, whichcombines the neighbors from the ﬁrst order and the diagonal neighborhood.
Moreover, we consider simultaneous autoregressive (SAR) models, which specifythe spatial dependence using a joint distribution. Other commonly used modelspeci ﬁcations are conditional autoregressive (CAR) models and moving average
(MA) models, but they do not ﬁt our data as well as the SAR model and thus
are not used. For details of the SAR, CAR, and MA models, see Chapters 6 and7 of Cressie
4 and Chapter 5 of Kaluzny et al.7
14.3 MATERIALS AND METHODS
A study of soil properties was conducted in a 57-ha ﬁeld near Arena, WI (43 ¥
15 ¢N 89 ¥93 ¢W). The soils in the ﬁeld are Sparta loamy ﬁne sand (Enthic Hapludoll)
and Dakota sandy loam (Typic Argiudoll). These soils are positioned on a gentlyrolling landscape, well drained, and developed under prairie vegetation on streamterraces in the Lower Wisconsin River Valley. The U.S. Department of Agricul-ture’s Natural Resource Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS) Soil Survey for IowaCounty, Wisconsin (USDA-SCS, 196 ), shows that the ﬁeld was historically sub-
divided and managed as various small ﬁelds. In recent years, the ﬁeld has been
managed as a single unit in a center-pivot irrigated vegetable crop rotation (mainlypotato ( Solanum tuberosum  L.), sweet corn ( Zea mays  L.), and green beans ( Phase-
olis vulgaris  L.)). Standard agronomic practices include a chisel plow/disk tillage
system and recommended pesticide and fertilization management.
2
Soil samples were taken from the ﬁeld in October 2000 using a uniform
systematic grid pattern on a 0.40-ha spacing. Eight to 10 soil cores were com-posited from the top 20 cm of the soil within a 1-m radius of a point of knownlatitude and longitude (Figure 14.2). The soil samples were analyzed by the SoilOn Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 403
Testing and Plant Analysis Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin for pH,
phosphorus (P) in ppm, potassium (K) in ppm, calcium (Ca) in ppm, and mag-nesium (Mg) in ppm.
8 Hence, the observations consist of the soil property mea-
surements and the corresponding spatial locations on the grid. In addition, variousfactors, such as topography, soil types, weather conditions, and fertilization,would affect the spatial distribution of these soil nutrients. Here we considerelevation (in m) as a possible explanatory variable.
The MTSLM was applied to analyze the data for the following purposes: (1)
examining the relation, if any, among the soil property variables, (2) assessingthe potential in ﬂuence of topography on the soil property variables, and (3)
mapping the soil property based on these relations as well as using the topographicinformation. For a given soil property variable (pH, P, K, Ca, or Mg), all othersoil property variables and elevation were used as the explanatory variables inthe regression. In this study, there were a total of 133 observations. We focusedon a 12 ¥ 12 grid of cells over the ﬁeld and used a three-resolution nine-root
quad tree (i.e., N
1 = 9, N2 = 36, N3 = 144) as the multiresolution tree structure.
Among the 144 cells, 11 cells along the edges (marked by + in Figure 14.2) werenot part of the ﬁeld and were treated as missing nodes in the multiresolution tree
structure. Given the multiresolution tree structure, we ﬁtted all possible MTSLMs
to the data using maximum likelihood and selected the best subset of explanatoryvariables using AIC.
Statistical inference was performed based on the best model for each soil
variable. The measurement error variance was estimated by the nugget effect inﬁtting an exponential variogram model to the empirical variogram. Maximum
likelihood estimates of the regression coef ﬁcients and the noise variances, along
with their corresponding standard errors, were computed using the EM algorithm.Given the estimated parameters, the change-of-resolution Kalman ﬁlter algorithmFIGURE 14.2 The sampling locations (marked by o and D) according to a uniform
systematic sampling scheme in a ﬁeld near Arena, WI. The samples marked by D are not
used in the parameter estimation, but are used in prediction. The cells marked by + arenot part of the ﬁeld.LongitudeLatitude
–89.936 –89.934 –89.932 –89.930 –89.92843.154 43.156 43.158 43.160404 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
was applied to the data for obtaining the predicted values of { yj,k}, as shown in
Equation 14.13, and the corresponding prediction standard errors.
For comparison, data analysis was performed using simple linear regression
(SLR) where the residuals were assumed to have independent and identical
Gaussian distribution. Furthermore, a spatial linear model (SLM) was consid-ered, for which the regression residuals were assumed to be spatially dependentusing a ﬁrst-order neighborhood structure. In both SLR and SLM, model selec-
tion was performed in a similar manner as in the MTSLM using AIC. Parameterestimation and model selection results were compared among SLR, SLM, andMTSLM. Because of the mass-balance property, 13 of the 133 observations onthe edge of the ﬁeld did not play a role in the parameter estimation. For a fair
comparison, we performed SLR and SLM analysis on the remaining 120 obser-vations (Figure 14.2).
For model checking, Moran’s I test was performed to determine whether the
residuals after ﬁtting an SLR, SLM, or MTSLM were spatially correlated. The
quality of the model was assessed by R-square for the SLR model and by AICfor the SLM and MTSLM.
14.4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
14.4.1 E XPLORATORY  DATA ANALYSIS
The summary statistics are given in Table 14.1, including the minimum, ﬁrst
quartile, median, mean, third quartile, and maximum of the data. Table 14.1 andthe histograms (not shown) of the data suggest that the distribution of the datais fairly symmetric, except that the distribution of Mg is somewhat skewed. Thescatter plots of all pairs of the variables are shown in Figure 14.3. There isindication of a positive relation among K, Ca, and Mg, with the sample correlationcoef ﬁcients 0.71, 0.57, and 0.73 for K and Ca, K and Mg, and Ca and Mg,
respectively. Although not as strong, there is some indication of a negative relationbetween elevation and P, K, Ca, and Mg, but a positive relation between elevationand pH. That is, as the elevation increases, the values of P, K, Ca, and Mg decrease,
TABLE 14.1Summary Statistics of the Data
PH
(ppm)P
(ppm)K
(ppm)Ca
(ppm)Mg
(ppm)Elevation
(m)
Minimum 6.0 33 40 120 50 191.00
1st quartile 6.5 63 113 855 90 191.48Median 6.7 79 159 1055 130 191.71Mean 6.718 83.31 157.0 1106 146.5 191.693rd quartile 7.0 100 199 1292 193 191.90Maximum 7.4 175 321 2210 350 192.29On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 405
although the reverse is the case with the pH. The sample correlation coef ﬁcients
between the elevation and the soil property variables are 0.38, –0.26, –0.37, –0.21,and –0.31 for pH, P, K, Ca, and Mg, respectively.
14.4.2 M ODEL SELECTION  AND PARAMETER  ESTIMATION
For each soil property variable, parameter estimation results are shown in Table14.2 based on the full MTSLM with all the explanatory variables included andin Table 14.3 based on the reduced MTSLM with only the best subset of explan-atory variables included. Reported are the estimates of the regression coef ﬁcients,
the noise variances, and the measurement error variances. Moreover, Moran’s Ivalues and the corresponding p values for testing the spatial independence among
the residuals, as well as the AIC values, are presented in Table 14.2 and Table 14.3.
First we focus our discussion on the results from the best (reduced) model
(Table 14.3). In the model for pH, K has a negative relation with pH, Ca andelevation have a positive relation with pH, and P and Mg do not have a signi ﬁcant
inﬂuence on pH. Elevation appears to have the most signi ﬁcant in ﬂuence on pH.
In the model for P, the only variable that has an in ﬂuence on P is elevation. As
the elevation increases, the level of P decreases. In the model for K, the bestmodel is the full model. That is, all the variables have an in ﬂuence on K, except
that the effect of Mg is not signi ﬁcant. The relation is positive between K and P,
Ca, while the relation is negative between K and pH, elevation. In the model forCa, K, and Mg have the strongest positive relation with Ca, as seen from theFIGURE 14.3 The pair-wise scatter plots of the variables pH, P, K, Ca, Mg, and elevation.pH40 80 120 160 500 1000 2000 191.0 191.6 192.2
6.0 6.4 6.8 7.240 80 120 180P
K
50 150 250500 1500Ca
Mg
50 150 250 350
6.0 6.4 6.8 7.2191.0 191.6 192.2
50 150 250 50 150 250 350Elevation406 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 14.2
Parameter Estimation in the Full Multiresolution Tree-Structured Spatial Linear Model (MTSLM)
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –71.70 9.51 5386.48 1626.84 5938.49 1295.34 –2024.71 5507.49 3400.71 1190.80
pH   3.596 4.444 –33.16 6.12 155.01 58.08 –24.85 9.20P 0.0002 0.0009 0.10 0.07 –0.25 0.71 –0.05 0.16K –0.0015 0.0006 0.0572 0.0161 2.80 0.39 –0.04 0.10Ca 0.0003 0.0001 –0.0082 0.0191 0.10 0.01 0.14 0.01Mg –0.0008 0.0006 0.0140 0.1178 0.02 0.11 3.00 0.35Elevation 0.41 0.05 –27.80 8.08 –29.61 6.12 6.44 25.68 –16.84 4.37f
12 0.014 0.003 11.44 19.69 79.53 24.94 7095.80 1099.29 414.79 45.99
f22 0.013 0.006 77.14 24.65 215.38 61.74 8694.47 4053.48 567.84 223.93
f32 0.013 0.006 47.03 70.17 909.00 141.02 4818.35 3220.58 253.94 131.66
f32 0.03  525.47  21.44  22,289.00  847.85
Moran’s I correlation 0.07  –0.03  0.25  0.04  –0.03p value 0.22 0.79  0.00 0.47  0.72
AIC 284.49  1215.88  14,265.80  1825.47  1564.32On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 407TABLE 14.3
Parameter Estimation in the Best Multiresolution Tree-Structured Spatial Linear Model (MTSLM)
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –73.75 3.71 5688.90 1887.63 5938.49 1295.34 –17,752.30 4574.05 5214.96 958.38
PH   –33.16 6.12P   0.10 0.07K –0.0015 0.0006 2.72 0.38Ca 0.0002 0.0001 0.10 0.01 0.13 0.01Mg   0.02 0.11 2.96 0.35Elevation 0.42 0.02 –29.24 9.85 –29.61 6.12 93.89 23.88 –27.20 5.05f
12 0.011 0.001 13.77 26.51 79.53 24.94 5067.40 874.81 347.02 51.13
f22 0.013 0.006 76.33 54.44 215.38 61.74 8933.74 4110.15 556.30 229.04
f32 0.015 0.006 50.03 66.57 909.00 141.02 6472.64 3468.00 300.08 139.46
f32 0.03  525.47 21.44 22,289.00 847.85
Moran’s I correlation 0.10  –0.02 0.25 0.05 0.00p value 0.11 0.89 0.00 0.34 0.94
AIC 274.08  1209.97 14,265.80 1819.86 1548.09408 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
pair-wise scatter plots (Figure 14.3). Although the scatter plot between Ca and
elevation indicates a negative relation, the regression coef ﬁcient of elevation is
positive. We suspect that the positive relation is unstable due to possible multi-collinearity among the explanatory variables. Finally, in the model for Mg, Cahas a positive relation, elevation has a negative relation, and the other variablespH, P, and K have no signi ﬁcant relation, all with Mg. Note that elevation is the
one variable that has a signi ﬁcant in ﬂuence on all the soil property variables: pH,
P, K, Ca, and Mg.
The full model (Table 14.2), on the other hand, has similar parameter esti-
mates as those in the best model, while including all the other nonsigni ﬁcant
variables in the model. As a result, although the log-likelihood of the full modelis higher than that of the best model, the AIC values of the best model are lower.Furthermore, for both the best models and the full models, Moran’s I tests havelarge p values (>0.10) for pH, P, Ca, and Mg, suggesting that there is no spatial
correlation left in the residuals after the spatial dependence has been accountedfor by the multiresolution tree structure. The exception is the model for K, whereMoran’s I test statistic is 0.25 and the p value is less than 0.01. The multiresolution
tree structure does not adequately describe the spatial dependence structure inthe K data.
14.4.3 M ODEL COMPARISONS
The parameter estimation results of ﬁtting the MTSLM are compared with those
of the SLR model. For each soil property variable, parameter estimation resultsare shown in Table 14.4 based on the full SLR model with all the explanatoryvariables included and in Table 14.5 based on the reduced SLR model with onlythe best subset of explanatory variables included. Reported are the estimates ofthe regression coef ﬁcients and the error variances ( s
2). Moreover, Moran’s I values
and the corresponding p values for testing the spatial independence among the
residuals, as well as the R-square values, are included in Table 14.4 and Table 14.5.
For modeling P, Ca, and Mg, the best SLR model has selected the same set
of explanatory variables as the MTSLM by AIC. For modeling pH, the best SLRmodel does not include Ca, whereas for modeling K, the best SLR model doesnot include P and Mg, while the best MTSLM does. Moran’s I tests for spatialindependence have very small p values (<0.01) in the models for pH, K, Ca, and
Mg, and a p value of 0.09 for P. That is, there is strong evidence of spatial
correlation among the residuals after ﬁtting the SLR model. As a consequence,
the statistical inferences, including parameter estimation and model selectionbased on the SLR models, are not correct. In contrast, Moran’s I tests suggestthat the spatial dependence in the residuals has indeed been accounted for by theMTSLM (except the model for K).
Similarly, the parameter estimation results of ﬁtting the MTSLM are com-
pared with those of SAR SLM. For each soil property variable, parameter esti-mation results are shown in Table 14.6 based on the full SLM with all theexplanatory variables included and in Table 14.7 based on the reduced SLM withOn Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 409TABLE 14.4
Parameter Estimation in the Full Simple Linear Regression (SLR) Model
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –55.35 20.46 4984.27 1972.52 5994.21 2703.50 –23,626.38 15,899.33 7341.79 3488.50
pH   4.9603 8.9817 –32.78 11.86 88.71 70.74 –5.35 15.77P 0.0005 0.0010 0.10 0.13 –0.46 0.74 0.04 0.16K –0.0019 0.0007 0.0544 0.0686 3.24 0.45 0.03 0.12Ca 0.0002 0.0001 –0.0074 0.0118 0.10 0.01 0.13 0.02Mg –0.0002 0.0006 0.0118 0.0534 0.02 0.07 2.64 0.34Elevation 0.32 0.11 –25.75 10.36 –29.91 14.22 121.44 83.47 –38.13 18.31f
2 0.079 695.10  1289.80 43,594.00 2138.80
Moran’s I correlation 0.32  0.08  0.25 0.28 0.32p value 0.00  0.17  0.00 0.00 0.00
R-square 0.20 0.08  0.59 0.68 0.57410 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 14.5
Parameter Estimation in the Best Simple Linear Regression (SLR) Model
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –56.21 19.32 5177.95 1706.79 6673.64 2541.29 –31,006.25 14,880.02 8165.87 3069.72
pH   –32.57 11.78P  K –0.0013 0.0005 3.11 0.44Ca   0.10 0.01 0.13 0.01Mg   2.66 0.34Elevation 0.33 0.10 –26.58 8.90 –33.42 13.39 162.95 77.50 –42.60 16.00f
2 0.075 676.40 1275.30 43,555.00 2089.00
Moran’s I correlation 0.30  0.09 0.26 0.26 0.33p value 0.00  0.13 0.00 0.00 0.00
R-square 0.19  0.07 0.59 0.68 0.56On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 411TABLE 14.6
Parameter Estimation in the Full Spatial Linear Model (SLM) with a Simultaneous Autoregression and a First-Order 
Neighborhood
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –51.64 26.22 4931.32 2170.02 3645.84 3457.07 4255.30 20,498.49 7369.40 4371.14
pH   3.2342 9.3530 –38.65 12.15 175.42 70.49 –16.80 15.80P –0.0003 0.0008 0.07 0.12 0.37 0.66 –0.04 0.14K –0.0021 0.0007 0.0528 0.0706 3.17 0.44 –0.04 0.12Ca 0.0003 0.0001 –0.0038 0.0122 0.10 0.01 0.13 0.02Mg –0.0006 0.0005 0.0022 0.0556 –0.02 0.0749 2.77 0.34Elevation 0.31 0.14 –25.43 11.39 –17.43 18.11 –27.48 107.28 –37.81 22.89r 0.16  0.04  0.14  0.15 0.14f 0.056 680.75 1049.57 33,320.68 1622.39
Moran’s I correlation –0.01  0.00  0.02  –0.02 –0.01p value 0.99  0.96  0.65  0.82 0.93
AIC 245.20  1364.00  1423.73  1841.27 1477.30412 Environmental Soil-Landscape ModelingTABLE 14.7
Parameter Estimation in the Best Spatial Linear Model (SLM) with a Simultaneous Autoregression and a First-Order 
Neighborhood
ResponsepH P K Ca Mg
EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error EstimateStandard
Error
Intercept –57.70 25.21 4781.80 2063.60 329.53 79.47 –939.42 480.96 8148.76 4101.77
pH –41.96 11.57 168.01 68.39PK –0.0021 0.0007 0.0032 0.049 3.21 0.43Ca 0.0002 0.0001 0.10 0.01 0.13 0.01Mg 2.79 0.33
Elevation 0.34 0.13 –24.54 10.75 –42.49 21.38r 0.15 0.05 0.15 0.15 0.14f
2 0.056 663.47 1020.8 33,146.14 1603.78
Moran’s I correlation 0.00 –0.00 0.03 –0.02 –0.01p value 0.94 0.95 0.60 0.81 1.00
AIC 242.58  1358.20  1419.16 1837.66 1472.50On Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 413
only the best subset of explanatory variables included. The estimates of the
regression coef ﬁcients, the spatial correlation coef ﬁcients among ﬁrst-order
neighbors ( r), and the error variances ( s2) are presented. Also presented in Table
14.6 and Table 14.7 are Moran’s I values and the corresponding p values for
testing the spatial independence among the residuals, as well as the AIC values.
For modeling pH and Mg, the best SLM has selected the same set of explan-
atory variables as the MTSLM. For modeling P, the best SLM has selected Kand elevation as the explanatory variables, but the best MTSLM has selected onlyelevation. However, the AIC value in the MTSLM is lower than that in the SLM,indicating that the MTSLM is a better ﬁt to the data. Indeed, the variable K is
not signi ﬁcant in the best SLM. For modeling K, on the other hand, the SLM
has a much lower AIC value than the MTSLM. The best SLM has selected pHand Ca as the in ﬂuential explanatory variables, whereas the MTSLM has kept all
the variables and is not able to identify the most important variables. Finally, formodeling Ca, the best SLM has selected pH, K, and Mg, whereas the best MTSLMhas selected K, Mg, and elevation. Since the AIC value of the MTSLM is lowerthan that in the SLM, the MTSLM is again a better ﬁt to the data.
Note that, for all the variables, Moran’s I tests for spatial independence have
very large p values (>0.10). That is, there is no evidence of spatial correlation
among the residuals after ﬁtting the SLM. Thus, both the SLM and the MTSLM
have accounted for the spatial dependence structure adequately. Nonetheless,there is no clear winner between the SLM and the MTSLM, according to theAIC values. For modeling pH, K, and Mg, the SLM has a lower AIC and is betterthan the MTSLM, whereas for modeling P and Ca, the MTSLM has a lower AICand is better than the SLM. Although in general the model selection and parameterestimate results are close between the two models, the models for K are excep-tional. While both the SLR model and the MTSLM do not ﬁt K well, the SLM
is much better. We have not found a plausible reason as to why the MTSLMcould not account for the spatial dependence as well as the SLM does.
14.4.4 P REDICTION  OF SOIL PROPERTIES
Based on the ﬁtted best MTSLM, the change-of-resolution computing algorithm
was implemented to predict each soil property variable in the ﬁeld. The observed
and the predicted signal values of pH, P, K, Ca, and Mg are shown in the imageplots using Splus command image (Figure 14.4).
7 In general, the predicted signals
are smoother than the observed values, as expected. The amount of shrinkage inthe predicted values seems to depend on the magnitude of the measurement errorvariances, or more importantly, the ratio of the measurement error variance tothe total variance. If the measurement error variance is large, then there wouldbe more shrinkage from the observed values to the predicted signal values, andvice versa.
For pH, the higher values are in the western, northeastern, and southern parts
of the ﬁeld. The spatial pattern of the signal values is close to that of the observed
values, but has a narrower range (shown as more pale hues), because the mea-414 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
FIGURE 14.4 The observed (top panel) and predicted (bottom panel) values of pH, P, K, Ca, and Mg in the ﬁeld. (See color version on accompanying CD.)–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.1606.0 6.6 7.2observed pH
–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.1606.0 6.6 7.2predicted pH–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 150observed P
–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 150predicted P–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 200 350observed K
–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 200 350predicted K–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.160500 1500observed Ca
–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.160500 1500predicted Ca–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 150 300observed Mg
–89.936 –89.92843.152 43.156 43.16050 150 300predicted MgOn Spatial Lattice Modeling of Soil Properties 415
surement error variance is fairly large. In contrast, the shrinkage in the signal
values is substantial for P, because the ratio of the measurement error to the totalvariance is the highest with P. For K and Ca, the higher values tend to occur in
the middle of the ﬁeld. The spatial pattern of the signal values is close to that of
the observed values, because the measurement error variance is relatively small.Finally, for Mg, there are a few patches of higher values in the north and thesouth, and the spatial patterns of the signal values and the observed values areagain close.
The corresponding prediction standard errors associated with pH, P, K, Ca,
and Mg are 0.12 ppm, 9.71 ppm, 4.59 ppm, 88.08 ppm, and 18.80 ppm at the120 locations (marked by o in Figure 14.2), and are 0.19 ppm, 11.56 ppm, 34.69ppm, 138.67 ppm, and 34.13 ppm at the 13 locations where the observationswere not used in parameter estimation (marked by D in Figure 14.2).
14.5 CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we have reviewed a type of spatial lattice model, namely, a
multiresolution tree-structured spatial linear model. Because of the multiresolu-tion tree structure, kriging can be obtained using a fast change-of-resolutionKalman ﬁlter algorithm. We have applied the methodology to obtain the best
unbiased linear prediction of soil properties in a Wisconsin ﬁeld, while accounting
for ﬁeld conditions using a linear regression. Comparison has been made among
linear regression, a traditional spatial linear model for lattice data, and the mul-tiresolution tree-structured spatial linear model. The multiresolution tree-struc-tured spatial linear model does not always ﬁt the data better, but it does offer a
fast alternative for accounting for measurement error and mapping the signalprocesses (here, the soil properties).
It is worth noting that the linearity in the spatial linear models refers to
linearity in the model parameters. Complicated nonlinear relations among vari-ables can be captured by spatial linear models, as in the case of linear regressionmodels. For more complicated relations that demand nonlinear regression models,extension of the multiresolution tree-structured spatial linear model might not beso straightforward, as computational ef ﬁciency of the change-of-resolution Kal-
man ﬁlter algorithm relies on the linear structure of the model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding has been provided for this research from the USDA Cooperative State
Research, Education and Extension Service (CSREES) Hatch project WIS04676.Data used in this study were organized with help from Christine Molling. Wethank the reviewers and the editors for constructive comments that improved thepresentation of the chapter.416 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
REFERENCES
1. H Akaike. Information theory and extension of the maximum likelihood principle.
In 2nd International Symposium on Information Theory , BN Petrov, F Csaki, Eds.
Akademiai Kiado, Budapest, 1973, pp. 267–281.
2. H Bourennane, D King, A Couturier. Comparison of kriging with external drift
and simple linear regression for predicting soil horizon thickness with differentsample densities. Geoderma  97: 255–271, 2000.
3. F Carre, MC Girard. Quantitative mapping of soil types based on regression
kriging of taxonomic distances with landform and land cover attributes. Geoderma
110: 241–263, 2002.
4. N Cressie. Statistics for Spatial Data , revised ed. Wiley, New York, 1993.
5. V Epinat, A Stein, SM De Jong, J Bouma. A wavelet characterization of high-
resolution NDVI patterns for precision agriculture. Int J Appl Earth Obs Geoinf
3: 121–132, 2001.
6. HC Huang, N Cressie, J Gabrosek. Fast, resolution-consistent spatial prediction
of global processes from satellite data. J Comput Graphical Stat  11: 1–26, 2002.
7. SP Kaluzny, SC Vega, TP Cardoso, AA Shelly.  S+SpatialStats User
¢s Manual .
MathSoft, Seattle, 1997.
8. KA Kelling, LG Bundy, SM Combs, JB Peters. Soil Test Recommendations for
Field, Vegetable, and Fruit Crops , Publication A2809. University of Wisconsin
Extensions, Madison, WI, 1998.
9. M Knotters, DJ Brus, JH Oude V oshaar. A comparison of kriging, co-kriging and
kriging combined with regression for spatial interpolation of horizon depth withcensored observations. Geoderma  67: 227–246, 1995.
10. ED Kolaczyk. Bayesian multi-scale models for Poisson processes. J Am Stat Assoc
94: 920–933, 1999.
11. J Meinhold, ND Singpurwalla. Understanding the Kalman ﬁlter. Am Stat  37:
123–127, 1983.
12. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Spatial prediction of soil properties
from landform attributes derived from a digital elevation model. Geoderma  63:
197–214, 1994.
13. IOA Odeh, AB McBratney, DJ Chittleborough. Further results on prediction of
soil properties from terrain attributes: heterotopic cokriging and regression-krig-ing. Geoderma  67: 215–225, 1995.
14. G Upton, B Fingleton. Spatial Data Analysis by Example: Point Pattern and
Quantitative Data , V ol. 1. Wiley, New York, 1995.
15. J Zhu, W Yue. A multiresolution tree-structured spatial linear model. J Comput
Graphical Stat , 14: 168–184, 2005.  
16. J Zhu, CLS Morgan, JM Norman, W Yue, B Lowery. Combined mapping of soil
properties using a multi-scale tree-structured spatial model. Geoderma  118:
321–334, 2004.41715Multiscale 
Soil-Landscape Process Modeling
Jeroen M. Schoorl and Antonie Veldkamp
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................417
15.1 General Introduction .............................................................................41815.2 The Historical Importance of the Landscape in Soil Science
and Modeling.........................................................................................41815.2.1 Soil-Landscape Modeling and Scale Issues .........................42015.2.2 The Fifth Dimension and Sustainability...............................42315.2.3 Objectives ..............................................................................424
15.3 Modeling ...............................................................................................424
15.3.1 Case Study Area for the Modeling Example........................42415.3.2 Model Introduction and Description.....................................425
15.3.3 Parameters and Assumptions ................................................425
15.4 Results and Discussion .........................................................................426
15.4.1 Spatial Patterns and Scale Effects.........................................42715.4.2 Scale Effects and Temporal Extension .................................430
15.5 Conclusions ...........................................................................................431References .........................................................................................................432
ABSTRACT
This chapter deals with the aspects of scale in soil-landscape modeling andpresents a thorough review of the importance and effect of scale, including spaceand time resolution and the extent of space and time. The introduction covers theimportance of the landscape in soil science and modeling throughout the pastcenturies, presents the aspects of soil-landscape modeling and scale issues, andbrie ﬂy discusses sustainability and human in ﬂuence, introduced as the ﬁfth
dimension. The general objective of this chapter is to illustrate the role of soilsand geomorphological processes in the multiscale soil-landscape context. Toillustrate and investigate this multiscale role, a simple model is used, with only418 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
a few parameters, which can be applied at different scales. Modeling results are
given for the effects of changing spatial extension and resolution of a digitalelevation model (DEM) and changing temporal extension (i.e., number of time
steps) for these different DEMs’ resolutions and extensions. The results are
discussed in the context of scale problems occurring in hydrological and geo-morphological modeling approaches, such as (1) emerging properties, (2) spatialheterogeneity of processes, (3) nonlinear behavior of process rates in time, (4)threshold dependency, (5) varying dominant processes, and (6) differing responsesto disturbances. The example presented in this chapter, although with only alimited set of variables, indicates a spatial and temporal scale resolution- andextension-dependent response for different DEMs to the same set of input param-eters, thus illustrating the multiscale character of the landscape and the existenceof many of the well-known scale problems within the soil-landscape context.
15.1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Soils are an essential part of and basically controlled by landscape. The centralrole of the multiscale landscape in this chapter is based on the consideration thatthe landscape is the main driving factor behind many processes at differenttemporal and spatial levels in geoenvironmental sciences. At the same time,landscape can be considered the consequence of geological evolution and theresult of geomorphological processes. Therefore, landscape can be de ﬁned in
terms of genesis (how formed, processes), geomorphology (its present form,shape), lithology/ soil (its composition), land cover (surface characteristics), landuse (its use, human function), and even land management (human factor). Con-sequently, these interrelated issues have to be considered within the multiscalesoil-landscape modeling context.
15.2 THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF 
THE LANDSCAPE IN SOIL SCIENCE AND MODELING
The role of the landscape in soil science was prominent in the early years of the
19th century when the ﬁrst systematic geomorphological and geological descrip-
tions and observations of the land surface were made. It was during this periodthat the ﬁrst geological maps appeared.
1 Meanwhile, in Russia the ﬁrst soil maps
were produced by soil scientists who discovered the relation between soil andclimate.
2,3 During these early years, mainly geologists, chemists, and agronomists
were investigating the soil. Soil science as an individual discipline establisheditself in the Netherlands from the beginning of the 20th century.
4
Soil science initially focused on soil taxonomy and mapping issues for many
years. All around the world major efforts were directed toward classifying soilsand mapping of land surfaces at different scales. During the ﬁrst half of the 20th
century the landscape still played an important role because of the widely appliedMultiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 419
physiographic mapping techniques, linking soil units to geomorphological fea-
tures.5 In addition, during this period concepts like the soil catena  and chronose-
quence  were developed, placing the soils in their logical landscape context, i.e.,
descriptions of properties in relation to surrounding topographical, hydrological,
and geomorphological processes.6
These soil survey efforts have resulted in the division of the Earth’s surface
into classi ﬁed entities and colored polygons, which culminated in the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) global soil map.7 In the early years, different
classi ﬁcation systems were developed all over the world. Later, the numbers of
systems were limited, and some standards are now more widely accepted.7,8
However, many countries still have their own national classi ﬁcation systems.
In the second half of the 20th century landscape started to lose its visibility
in soil science, mainly because of the introduction of descriptive morphometricproperties in the map legends, such as texture, structure, pedogenesis, etc.
5 The
interest in using these chemical and physical soil properties in the soil surveyswas a consequence of the more detailed mapping units that became standard inthose days (<1:50,000) and the shift of interest from mapping units to taxonomy.Consequently, the large-scale landscape perspective and cooperation between soilscience and geomorphology decreased.
9–11
Driven by the need for data in the taxonomy-oriented scienti ﬁc community,
the soil pedon obtained a central position, where pedon is de ﬁned as the smallest
three-dimensional volume that can be called a soil, large enough to permit thestudy of all horizons.
12 Soil properties were treated at this pedon scale only, and
therefore, soil science (pedology) started to study the soil pedon inch by inch.The main focus was directed toward pedon dynamics mainly in a two-dimen-sional way (top-down) — ﬁrst mainly in vertical ﬂuxes, much later also some
horizontal and lateral inputs. Consequently, soil science was focused on pro ﬁle
dynamics and the landscape around the soil pedon was reduced to a variable setof boundary conditions.
However, we have to be aware of the consequences of using soil maps with
generalized and sometimes limiting properties. In this sense, we can consider thedualistic position of geostatistics. On the one hand, it is useful and powerful indetermining and even predicting spatial variation, dependency, and variabilitybetween and within soil classes, optimizing sample strategies, predicting soilattributes, and so on.
13–15 On the other hand, it gives an apparent accuracy for
land units that may need a complete new classi ﬁcation at the ﬁrst place that
properly re ﬂects landscape processes.16 At the same time, it appears that some-
times geostatistics provides an elaborate statistical analysis for recognizing soilproperties or geomorphological features that can be distinguished by simpleobservation or physiographic mapping.
17
Another consequence of lacking a landscape component within soil-related
data could be found at the policy makers level. Modern agriculture, especiallyin Western Europe, is directed toward sustainable development within the phys-ical and social landscapes. However, many aspects of sustainability are investi-gated and evaluated at the soil pro ﬁle level, ignoring and eliminating the effective420 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
processes operating at the higher landscape level. This implies that international,
national, and regional legislation is affected by generalization, which may haveundesirable and unrealistic effects. For example, at the regional level the present-
day Dutch nitrate leaching legislation does not take into account site-speci ﬁc soil
properties or the location of a farmer in the landscape, therefore neglecting thefact that the landscape is dynamic and that even the smallest gradient will haveone farmer leaching his nitrate away to the other farmer. At the internationallevel of the European Community, price controls and subsidies, or even thewithdrawal of subsidies, increasingly control land use and land use changes.However, for example, in southern Spain subsidy-driven land use conversions,changed tillage practices, and land abandonment enhance signi ﬁcantly land deg-
radation; these are not considered to enhance sustainable development of theMediterranean landscape.
18,19
Fortunately, the landscape context (biophysical, physical, and social) sur-
rounding the soil is starting to revive and receive increasing attention again,abandoning the idea of landscape as only a two-dimensional carrier of soilinformation.
20 Now, by means of information technology, realistic four-dimen-
sional properties (space plus time) can be addressed, thus reinventing the land-scape context within the sciences of soils. Since land use management incultivated areas affects soil-landscapes through time, they should be givenspecial attention.
Recently, studies in the Netherlands have revealed the importance of the time
management factor on the soil, showing that many years of agricultural manage-ment can alter signi ﬁcantly the most important soil physical and soil chemical
properties and system functions.
21–23
Nevertheless, in many ﬁelds of environmental sciences, including soil science
and geology, the landscape context is often underestimated or even lacking at thedifferent levels of investigation (both spatial and temporal). Therefore, this chapterwill explicitly address the landscape following the issue raised by Americanscientists Jacob and Nordt
9 at the end of the last century: “the soil-landscape
paradigm is the natural path for pedology to follow.”
15.2.1 S OIL-LANDSCAPE  MODELING  AND SCALE ISSUES
Including the temporal component, landscape can be considered as having fourdimensions: length, width, height, and time. Therefore, as with all systems withmore than one dimension, scale issues or scale problems are a common point ofdiscussion in environmental sciences. In addition to the multifunctional andsometimes confusing use of the word scale  (e.g., hierarchical level, temporal and
spatial resolution, temporal and spatial extension), these problems refer to thedifferences in observation, interpretation, and calculation of processes at differentlevels of organization within the landscape. For example, we can consider herethe relationships between the detailed level of individual processes, such asinﬁltration, sediment and water redistribution, etc., as opposed to processes at
global levels, such as climate change and land use change.
24,25Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 421
Both in geomorphology and hydrology the issue of scale has been an impor-
tant topic over the past years.26,27 Different causes of scale problems can be
identi ﬁed concerning the behavior or description of processes at different scales:28
1. Emerging properties and new processes emerging at different levels
2. Spatial heterogeneity of processes in ﬂuenced by all sorts of spatial
factors, such as topography, soils, and land use
3. Nonlinear behavior of process rates in time4. Threshold dependency to trigger a process5. Varying dominant processes at different levels6. Differing responses to disturbances
Typical scale effects in geomorphology at different spatial resolutions are,
for example, the decreasing erosion rates from plot, hillslope, and catchment tobasin scale, where spatial heterogeneity of key processes, local resedimentation,sediment transport distances, and the resolution of the measuring techniques playan important role. Another type of scale effect can be found in investigationsconcerning the impacts of rainfall and ﬂooding events on soil and landscape
evolution. Here an aspect of temporal resolution-extension is introduced: themagnitude-frequency distribution. For example, at the scale of a slope, relationscan be found between hillslope erosion, parent material, and magnitude-frequencydistribution of rainfall.
29 At the catchment scale, there are still uncertainties on
the exact role of magnitude and frequency of ﬂoods, considering the impact of
large catastrophic ﬂoods with a very low frequency vs. the cumulative effect of
many minor ﬂooding events. The large catastrophic ﬂoods seem important in the
long-term evolution of the catchment, whereas the smaller ﬂoods, depending on
the timing, can have a larger cumulative impact.30
In the geological sciences, scale effects seem more accepted. For example,
geological landscape evolution is driven by three major components: climate, sealevel, and tectonics. Long-term dynamics of these components can be tracedthroughout the Earth’s history, although one could state that their temporal andspatial resolutions become coarser going farther back in time. This increasingcoarseness of geological observations and the resulting stratigraphical frameworkare in the ﬁrst place a result of preservation of sediments and fossils. Second,
even modern dating techniques show increasing coarseness in precision andvalidity. Compared with the global-to-regional character of plate tectonics, cli-mate, and sea level changes, local uplift rates are spatially much more variable,since in active areas uplift or subsidence rates often depend, in addition to thepast and present positions on the continents, on local fault systems.
Returning to the present-day landscape-forming processes, for many years,
the tendency has been to model the processes with the most detail possible, small-scale short time, and to simply aggregate results to larger areas and longer timespans. However, as stated by Beven,
26 the hydrological or geomorphological
modeler will have to accept that it is virtually impossible to model either largersystems including the smallest details or by simple aggregation. Therefore, a422 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
model must be assembled with only those effective parameters at the scale of
interest (a certain resolution and extension) where the smaller subscale detailscan safely be ignored.
31
Going back to the central landscape context, its evolution can be simulated
by combining different processes, depending on the chosen spatial and temporalresolutions. In hydrology and geomorphology, different groups of scientists areworking at different spatial and temporal scales. In hydrology, there are two majorgroups focusing on (1) slope and catchment behavior dealing with event-basedpredictions of runoff and hydrographs
32 and (2) global and regional circulation
models including climate change.33,34 The same division is found in geomorphol-
ogy, since the hydrologic behavior is one of the inputs for geomorphologicmodeling: (1) slope and catchment event-based erosion models
35–37 and (2) land-
scape evolution models including climate and tectonics.38–41
To investigate the soil in the landscape context, a spatially explicit model is
needed at the multicatchment level, where the spatial and temporal resolutionswill depend on the processes and observations involved. Contrasting modelingapproaches exist, ranging from simple empirical models (e.g., Universal Soil LossEquation (USLE) or its derivatives
42) to complex physically based process models
(e.g., the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP)32,35). Since experimental plot
data were used to develop the USLE, this model has limited use for modeling atthe landscape scale. Furthermore, there is no empirical basis for semiarid tosubhumid Mediterranean conditions, and in the previous sections on scale prob-lems, major constraints have been discussed about using plot data at any levelother than the plot itself. The decision not to use sophisticated models likeTOPMODEL  or WEPP,
32,35 in addition to the larger amount of data needed, is
the more detailed temporal spatial resolution that, for the simple examples in thischapter, is not really needed. We prefer a simple model, which requires lessparameters, variables, and input data, and which makes the modeling exercise inthis chapter more transparent and understandable.
Actual ﬁeld data are needed to calibrate and validate geomorphic landscape
process models. Traditionally, the type of ﬁeld data that is collected shows a
mixture of different spatial and temporal resolutions. These types of resolutions(level of observation, grain size) include point measurements of rainfall, pro ﬁle
data of in ﬁltration, runoff and sediment yield of various plot sizes, catchment
discharge and sediment load in ﬂumes, and so on. All these types of data have
a variable spatial and event-based temporal resolution. Consequently, modelcalibration and validation becomes a dif ﬁcult and uncertain procedure. One of
the recently developed methods that shows a coarser temporal resolution is the
137Cs technique.43–45 This technique enables the monitoring of net soil redistri-
bution over the last 30 to 40 years by measuring the soil-related redistributionof the anthropogenic 
137Cs radionuclide, deposited in the environment in the
1960s. However, the obtained rates are limited to point data and local soilpro ﬁle conditions (e.g., clay content, soil texture, absorption rates, etc.), which
need interpolation and calibration techniques to provide broad-scale data oflimited spatial resolution. Enhancing of the spatial resolution is achieved byMultiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 423
increasing the number of sample sites (transects or grids), which increases
research costs. Still, these costs are considerably lower than the costs involvedin long-term monitoring with traditional techniques to achieve the same spatial
and temporal resolutions.
15.2.2 T HE FIFTH DIMENSION  AND SUSTAINABILITY
As discussed in the previous sections, the landscape in environmental sciencesis considered to have three spatial dimensions. Together with the temporal
dimension, landscape becomes a four-dimensional entity within its biophysicalboundaries. However, at various spatial and temporal levels the human in ﬂu-
ence has become an important factor of consideration. At ﬁrst this human factor
was only considered to be important at short-term temporal and limited spatiallevels of local land use change and management practices. Recently, manyresearch efforts were directed toward the human role in past and future globalenvironmental changes.
25,46 Gradually we become aware that anthropogenic
inﬂuences may affect even geological development at regional-to-global
scales.47 Therefore, the human in ﬂuence is introduced here as the ﬁfth dimen-
sion of landscape.
Over the past years the consequences of such human impact upon the envi-
ronment have led to the need for sustainable development and the concept ofsustainability. Numerous de ﬁnitions of sustainability can be found for all the
various disciplines involved in environmental sciences. However, the FAO
48 uses
one of the most elaborate de ﬁnitions, de ﬁning sustainability as: “The management
and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technologicaland institutional change in such a manner as to ensure attainment and continuedsatisfaction of human needs for present and future generations; such sustainabledevelopment conserves water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmen-tally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and sociallyacceptable.” This de ﬁnition combines the ecological aspects of sustainability with
the economic and social aspects, emphasizing that sustainability comprises var-ious dimensions. In other words, different perceptions on sustainable developmentexist, and there is no single meaning or concept for, for example, sustainableagriculture and rural development.
It becomes clear that the concept of sustainability is not without discussion
because of the various disciplines involved, from policy maker to Earth scientist.All these disciplines have their own understanding, de ﬁnition, and implementation
of the concept. However, for the Earth scientists there are certain aspects ofsustainable development that need some attention since by nature the Earth isconstantly changing — both gradual and apparently catastrophic changes. There-fore, sustainability in the form of environmental protection and nature conserva-tion needs a framework of process rates and the interaction with the four-dimen-sional landscape. As stated by van Loon,
49 it is the task of Earth scientists to raise
awareness and to inform the public and policy makers of the spatial and temporalimpacts of this geological evolution.424 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
15.2.3 O BJECTIVES
The general objective of this chapter is to illustrate the role of soils and
geomorphological processes in the multiscale soil-landscape context. To inves-tigate this multiscale role, a simple model is used, which can be applied atdifferent scales without introducing new parameters. Consequently, multiscalestands for different spatial levels represented by different spatial resolutions ofa DEM and temporal levels (i.e., number of time steps). Examples are given,following the list of most important causes of scale problems as introduced inthe previous section, by comparing different model runs under controlledparameter conditions.
15.3 MODELING
15.3.1 C ASE STUDY AREA FOR THE MODELING  EXAMPLE
The case study area is situated in southern Spain near the village of Álora in the
river basin of the Guadalhorce, province of Málaga, Andalucía Álora (longitude04°41 ¢57 ≤W, latitude 36°49 ¢10 ≤N). This research area (see Figure 15.1) shows a
dynamic landscape of mountains and hills,
50–52 an interesting complex geological
history,41 and active landscape processes ranging from tectonics and land use
changes53,54 to land degradation.19,44,45 Soils in the studied areas range from Lep-
tosols and Regosols to Cambisols.7,55,56
The area around Álora has a summer-dry Mediterranean climate (Csa) with
a mean annual temperature of 17.5°C and a mean yearly rainfall of 534 mm,mainly in the period from October to April. However, in the Mediterranean region,annual rainfall is often variable and historical records show that the mean annualrainfall varied roughly between 250 and 1050 mm over the past 50 years.
44FIGURE 15.1 Location of the case study area, including an overview of the Chopillos
slope (lower left graph) and the Clavelinas catchment (lower right graph).
Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 425
15.3.2 M ODEL INTRODUCTION  AND DESCRIPTION
To demonstrate an example of the multiscale effects within soil-landscape mod-
eling, a simple landscape evolution model, LAPSUS,53,55,57  has been used. This
model is a basic surface water erosion model for DEMs and is based on thecontinuity equation for sediment movement.
58–60 LAPSUS evaluates the sediment
transport rate by calculating the downslope transport capacity of water as afunction of runoff and slope gradient. If the capacity is higher than the actualtransport rate, this capacity is ﬁlled by the detachment of soil particles from the
soil surface. Detachment is highly dependent on the erodibility K
es (m–1) of the
surface.61 This detachment of soil causes lowering of the surface or erosion. When
the actual transport rate exceeds the local capacity, for example, because of lowergradients, then the surplus of sediment in transport will be deposited, causing asurface heightening.
Assuming the annual transport capacity C (m
2 a–1) and the detachment capac-
ity D (m a–1) or settlement capacity T (–m a–1) remain constant within one ﬁnite
element and after integration of the continuity equation, the sediment transportrate is evaluated as follows:
58–60
(15.1)
where the sediment transport rate S (m2 a–1) along dx length (m1) of a ﬁnite element
is calculated as a function of C compared with the amount of sediment already
in transport S0 (m2 a–1). The term h (m1) refers to C/D or C/T. Dividing S by the
length of the ﬁnite element gives an expression for surface lowering (m1 a–1 or
m3 m–2 a–1), which when multiplied with the bulk density Bd gives the erosion or
sedimentation (10 ˚ kg m–2 a–1 or 101 t ha–1a–1).
The direction and distribution of the runoff and the resulting model calcula-
tions are conducted with a multiple- ﬂow algorithm to allow for a better repre-
sentation of divergent properties of the convex topography.62–64 For further details
and model application, see References 44, 45, 53, 54, and 57.
15.3.3 P ARAMETERS  AND ASSUMPTIONS
Modeling experiments for this case study have been executed for two differentextensions or subareas (Table 15.1 and Figure 15.1): (1) a segment of a hillslope(9 ha) in the Chopillos area (Chop) and (2) a single catchment (250 ha) of theClavelinas River (Clav). For both areas, multiple-resolution DEMs have beenconstructed with spatial resolutions ranging from 1 to 25 m (Table 15.1). The 1-m DEM was the result of a survey with an automated Theodolite or Total Station;the 7.5-m DEM was produced by digital processing of stereo aerial photographs(1:20,000). Both 20- and 25-m DEMs were provided by the Spanish NationalGeographical Institute and the military, respectively, produced by interpolationof contour lines from their topographic maps at the 1:50,000 scale.SC S Cedx
h =+ ()0426 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
With these different DEMs several LAPSUS runs have been executed, sim-
ulating for a period of 10 years. To compare results from different model runs,all input parameters have been kept constant and equal. In other words, rainfall,inﬁltration, and resulting runoff were the same for all grid cells as well as the
K
es factor and other model input parameters.53,54,57  Therefore, the only variable
input was the altitude information of the DEMs and the resulting gradients andﬂow routing. After each time step, a new DEM was calculated, which provided
the new gradients and ﬂow routing paths as input for the next run. To investigate
the role and in ﬂuence of the soil, two different scenarios were used (Table 15.1):
(1) transport-limited scenario A, giving the whole area a uniform soil depth of1.2 m, and (2) detachment-limited scenario B, giving the whole area a uniformsoil depth of only 0.002 m.
15.4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To discuss the results of the modeling exercise, which are given in the followingsections, we will make reference to the generally encountered scale problemsoccurring in hydrological and geomorphological modeling approaches as men-tioned in the introduction: (1) emerging properties, (2) spatial heterogeneityof processes, (3) nonlinear behavior of process rates in time, (4) thresholddependency, (5) Varying dominant processes, and (6) differing responses todisturbances. Results in the following sections are given in meters surfacelowering, means for separate grids in Figure 15.2 and Figure 15.3 (consideringdifferent grid extents), and means for the whole area in Table 15.2, Figure15.4, and Figure 15.5 (two different total extents). Expected modeling errorwill be on the order of 0.1 metric tons per hectare (see also Schoorl andcolleagues
53,54).TABLE 15.1Input DEMs and Model Parameters
DEMsResolution Area Number Sdp AaSdp Bb
(m) (m2) of cells (m) (m)
Chop01 1 85,173 85,173 1.2 0.002
Chop07 7.5 88,818.75 1579 1.2 0.002Chop20 20 87,600 219 1.2 0.002Chop25 25 89,375 143 1.2 0.002Clav07 7.5 2,522,137.5 44,838 1.2 0.002Clav20 20 2,544,000 6360 1.2 0.002Clav25 25 2,550,000 4080 1.2 0.002
aSdp A = soil depth scenario A.
bSdp B = soil depth scenario B.Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 427
15.4.1 S PATIAL  PATTERNS  AND SCALE EFFECTS
Figure 15.2 gives the resulting patterns of 1 year of soil redistribution modeling
for the area with the smallest extension (Chopillos). A general overview givessimilar patterns of areas with more and less erosion (Figure 15.2e to h). Animportant scale effect causing these patterns is spatial heterogeneity of processes.The ﬁner resolutions reveal more detail of gully formation and areas of sediment
production. However, the patterns of sedimentation reveal more differencesbetween the different resolutions (Figure 15.2a to d). The 20-m DEM especiallyshows a particular pattern of increased resedimentation at the left side of thisgraph (Figure 15.2c). A closer look at the 20-m DEM data shows several gridsin this area with approximately the same altitude. These grids at similar altitudesresult in lower slope gradients providing the drop in capacity to transport sedi-ments, therefore causing resedimentation of soil.FIGURE 15.2 Sedimentation (upper graphs) and erosion (lower graphs) patterns for the
Chopillos area after one time step (1 year) given in meters surface change for each of thefour spatial resolutions (from left to right). (See color version on accompanying CD.)
FIGURE 15.3 Erosion (left graphs) and sedimentation (right graphs) patterns for the
Clavelinas area after one time step (1 year) given in meters surface change for each ofthe three different resolutions. (See color version on accompanying CD.)
 
428 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Figure 15.3 shows sedimentation and erosion results after 1 year of soil
redistribution modeling for the Clavelinas area. Again, erosion patterns are moredetailed for the ﬁnest resolution, showing more water divides and different local
watersheds than for the other resolutions. In the 20-m erosion map (Figure 15.3c),several white grid cells or areas of no erosion are visible throughout the map.TABLE 15.2Mean Soil Loss Rates (Lost from the Area), Percentages of Change 
(Compared with the Coarsest Resolution), Percentages of Redeposition within the Area, and Comparison for Modeled Scenarios A and B
Scenario A Scenario B
Soil Loss BalaDepbRedc Soil Loss BalaDepb
(m) (t/ha) (%) (%) (%) (m) (t/ha) (%) (%)
Chop01 –7.38E-04 –11.4 –56.1 43.6 2.3 –7.21E-04 –11.1 –41.1 1.4
Chop07 –1.59E-03 –24.5 –5.4 0.8 38.7 –9.74E-04 –15.0 –20.5 1.2Chop20 –9.66E-04 –14.9 –42.5 17.7 32.2 –6.55E-04 –10.1 –46.5 24.1Chop25 –1.68E-03 –25.9 0 0.99 27.1 –1.22E-03 –18.9 0 1.3Clav07 –5.09E-03 –78.5 5.2 1.9 71.2 –1.47E-03 –22.7 –4.8 2.7Clav20 –3.57E-03 –55.0 –26.3 25.2 70.9 –1.04E-03 –16.0 –32.6 36.9Clav25 –4.84E-03 –74.7 0 7.6 68.2 –1.54E-03 –23.8 0 15.4
aRelative difference in soil loss between the coarsest resolutions.
bRedeposition of sediments within the area.
cReduction in soil loss from scenario A to B.
FIGURE 15.4 Modeled soil erosion and deposition estimations for the Chopillos DEMs
(four resolutions) over 10 years with graphs (a) and (b) under normal conditions (scenarioA) and graphs (c) and (d) under soil depth-limited conditions (scenario B).Chop
-0.001 8-0.0017-0.0016-0.0015-0.0014-0.0013-0.0012-0.0011-0.001
1234567 891 0erosion [m] .
-0.0013-0.0012-0.0011-0.001-0.0009-0.000 8-0.0007-0.0006
1234567 891 0
time [a]erosion [m] .00.00020.00040.00060.000 80.001
1234567 891 0deposition [m] .
00.000050.00010.000150.00020.00025
1234567 891 0
time [a]deposition [m] .chop07
chop01
chop25
chop20(b)
(d) (c)(a)Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 429
Checking the altitude data of the grid cells in these areas reveals that several
grids of equal altitudes can be found, providing the potential for resedimentation,as can be seen from the graph on the right (Figure 15.3d). Another major differ-ence can be found in the upper right corner of the 20- and 25-m erosion maps,where a large area of no erosion exists (Figure 15.3c and e). This large area ofno erosion is actually the location of a former river meander belt and, nowadays,a high terrace level.
41 At this resolution (both 20 and 25 m), this river terrace
consists of numerous grids giving the same altitude, which therefore have nopotentials for erosion. As can be seen from the sedimentation graphs (Figure15.3d and f), the sediment load is deposited along the edge of this terrace areawhere the change of slope gradient is most pronounced. Consequently, at theedge of this terraced area the beginning of alluvial fan formation is occurring.
In Table 15.2 the results of the modeling exercise (means of a 10-year
simulation) are given for the two scenarios (both transport limited and detachmentlimited), using the two DEM extensions and varying resolutions. Comparing theresults within each of the areas reveals major differences of mean soil loss (e.g.,total amount of soil lost from the area) between different resolutions, where the7.5- and 25-m resolutions show more soil loss than the 1- and 20-m resolutionsin both scenarios. These lower amounts of soil loss for the 1- and 20-m DEMscan be explained by the higher amounts of redeposited soil within the area atthese resolutions. Comparing the two areas (Chop vs. Clav), more elevated erosionrates were found in the Clavelinas area, where the slopes are longer and steeperthan in the Chopillos area.
Comparing the two scenarios, we found a general reduction in soil loss rates
of around 70% for the Clavelinas area and around 30% for the Chopillos area.This difference is attributed to the difference in length of slope (amount of runningFIGURE 15.5 Modeled soil erosion and deposition estimations for the Clavelinas DEMs
(three resolutions) over 10 years with graphs (a) and (b) under normal conditions (scenarioA) and graphs (c) and (d) under soil depth-limited conditions (scenario B).Clav
-0.0053-0.0052-0.0051-0.005-0.0049-0.0048-0.0047
123456789 1 0erosion [m] .
-0.0019-0.0018-0.0017-0.0016-0.0015-0.0014
123456789 1 0
time [a]erosion [m] .00.00050.0010.00150.0020.00250.003
123456789 1 0deposition [m] .clav25
clav20
clav07
00.00020.00040.00060.00080.0010.0012
123456789 1 0
time [a]deposition [m] .
(c) (d)(b) (a)430 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
water) and slope angles (the strength of the running water) between the two areas.
These types of parameters, however, are critical properties of different landscapesthroughout the world. Considering the limiting soil depth in this case as a proxy
for surface or detachment characteristics, one can state that the actual response
of such a simple parameter as soil depth is not linear, but landscape dependent.
This general decrease of 30 to 70% is not valid for the 1-m resolution, which
is only reduced by a few percent. At ﬁrst this seems remarkable; the reduced soil
depth is expected to limit the total amount of soil erosion. However, in this case,for the ﬁner resolution this means that the transport capacity is ﬁlled much more
slowly and almost no sediment is redeposited within the simulated area, whereasfor scenario A more than 43% of the sediment was redeposited within the catch-ment, so actual erosion rates have been much higher than the sediment load or soilloss given in Table 15.2. For all other DEMs, actual redeposition rates as percentageof total erosion rates are higher for the soil-limited scenario B. This means thatalthough the sediment transport rates are ﬁlled much more slowly and with less
sediments, they provide suf ﬁcient sediment for some of the depositional areas.
Furthermore, Table 15.2 gives an indication of the nonlinear and intrinsic
behavior of each of the DEMs. Expected trends, for example, increasing amountsof resedimentation with ﬁner resolutions,
6 are less pronounced due to the differ-
ences in DEM precision. In addition, soil loss rates vary considerably, indicatingthat general slope characteristics (angle and length) differ between the used DEMresolutions. Comparing both areas, the example of the soil-limited scenario indi-cates a landscape-driven scale resolution- and extension- dependent response, andtherefore a certain reduction in soil depth, as the source of sediment in transportwill lead to different nonlinear responses for different types of landscapes andresulting DEMs.
15.4.2 S CALE EFFECTS  AND TEMPORAL  EXTENSION
To investigate the temporal effects of the scenarios for the different DEM reso-lutions and extensions simulations of 10 years were executed. In Figure 15.4 andFigure 15.5 the annual mean erosion and deposition rates are given for the 10-year modeling example. Both ﬁgures indicate a variety of trends. Each of the
DEMs develops a particular response, thus indicating nonlinear behavior ofprocess rates in time. Contrary to what would be expected (less erosion, thus lessmaterials to deposit), the DEM with the lowest erosion rate does not necessarilyshow the lowest redeposition rate. In addition, the DEM with the highest erosionrate under scenario A is not the same as that under scenario B, as would beexpected since the erosion potentials (gradients) remain the same. The locationand spatial relation with other grids within the DEM determine how much thetransport capacities are ﬁlled (see Figure 15.4a and c, Figure 15.5a and c). In this
case, the original number of grids for each DEM that already is showing transport-limited erosion, even with enough supply (due to interplay of gradient anddischarge), is variable. Consequently, this modeling example, with a simpleerosion model and taking into account that many input factors and parametersMultiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 431
remained the same, indicates that the interplay of transport capacity and ﬁlling
the transport rates as a function of the slope gradient and local runoff is revealinga complex nonlinear behavior. Filling the sediment transport rates more slowly
in one area can provoke increased erosion or additional sedimentation in another
area, depending on the local discharges and gradients. All grid cells are linkedwithin the landscape system and can in ﬂuence each other’s behavior.
For the Clavelinas area, general trends of scenario A indicate slightly decreas-
ing erosion rates for the ﬁrst years, after which they tend to vary less, but never
become constant (Figure 15.5a). This indicates that the soil depth of 1.2 mthroughout the whole area provides a constant supply of sediment that is notdepleted during the simulation. In contrast, the sedimentation rates in generalshow an exponential decrease (Figure 15.5b and d). This is probably due to thelimited accommodation space for sediment within the present catchment. Sinceall model parameters are constant, no dryer or wetter year was incorporated toﬂush the system and move the deposited sediments to another location. The
system seems to be heading toward a steady state. Adding an extreme event couldprovoke the sixth scale effect, different responses of the DEMs to disturbances.However, it is still possible that after a certain period of time some of the formererosion areas are ﬂattened out and provide a new location to store local sediments,
the so-called threshold scale effect.
26 This seems, for example, the case for the
25-m DEM (Figure 15.5d), where suddenly in the third simulation year an extraamount of sediment is stored within the area.
Considering the Chopillos area (more limited extent), the general trends
(Figure 15.4) are comparable to those discussed in the previous sections for theClavelinas area (Figure 15.5), with the exception of the ﬁrst simulation years,
where both the 20- and 25-m resolutions show ﬁrst a small increase in erosion
rates. This temporal increase for the ﬁrst time steps is probably due to some
artifacts in these DEMs (originating from the interpolation techniques), whichare rapidly removed (Figure 15.4a and c). However, concerning the temporalbehavior of deposition in the Chopillos area, the most striking difference can befound in Figure 15.4b. In this case, the 1-m resolution DEM reveals a complexresponse to the changing sediment transport capacities, showing a generalincrease over 10 years, with some yearly temporal decreases. These temporaldecreases and the decreasing erosion rates in the ﬁrst few simulation years (Figure
15.4a) seem to contradict the general trends found so far. In addition, the assump-tion that if less soil is eroded, less soil would also be deposited does not holdtrue. Again, this demonstrates the complex behavior of the system, thresholdeffects, emerging properties, and varying dominant processes. Gradients, runoffproduction, and ﬂow routing provide each time step with different patterns and
areas within the DEM suitable for resedimentation of soil lost from upslope areas.
15.5 CONCLUSIONS
Besides the speci ﬁc geomorphic properties of the landscape, both resolution and
extension of the DEM (different scales) are important properties in modeling the432 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
soil-landscape continuum. Furthermore, differences in DEM precision or the
accuracy at which the landscape is digitally represented directly in ﬂuence model
behavior, outcomes, and consequently calibration and validation. The examplepresented in this chapter of the soil-limited scenario, although with only a limitedset of variables, suggests a spatial and temporal scale resolution- and extension-dependent response for different DEMs to the same set of input parameters, thusillustrating the multiscale character of the landscape and the existence of manyof the well-known scale problems within the soil-landscape context.
The modeling example given in this chapter is merely a simple and limited
exercise, with many potentials for further investigation. For example, what wasnot dealt with in this chapter, and which could be of equal interest, is the effectof changing temporal resolution by means of variable time steps. Anothercomparable exercise could be investigating the effect of upscaling of the DEMsfrom one single source, contrary to the DEMs from different sources used inthis chapter.
Depending on the goal of modeling, e.g., land use, planning, soil redistribu-
tion, or the complete landscape system, the example described in this chapterinvolves only one of many aspects, parameters, or variables that are importantwhen modeling landscapes and can cause scale effects. Therefore, to deal withall the different feedbacks and multiscale effects in soil-landscape modeling, weadvocate a modeling approach that can deal with these kinds of effects. Such amultiscale model should be able to handle the need for dynamic feedbacks andincorporate dynamic boundary conditions, modeling processes at their appropri-ate scales.
REFERENCES
1. C King, Engineer Department U.S.A. Geological and Topographical Atlas Accom-
panying the Report of the Geological Exploration of the Fortieth Parallel Madeby the Authority of the Honorable Secretary of War under the Direction of Brig.and Brvt. Major General A.A. Humphreys, Chief of Engineers U.S.A. by ClarenceKing, U.S. Geologist in Charge, 1876 . Julius Bien Lith, 1876.
2. N Sibirtzev. Etude des sols de la Russie. In Memoires presentes a 7me session
congres geologique international, 1897, St. Petersbourg , A Bittner, Ed. Petersburg,
USSR, 1897, pp. 100–110.
3. H Margulis. Aux sources de la pedologie (Dokoutchaiev-Sibirtzev) . FR: Ecole
Nationale Superieure Agronomique de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 1954, 85 pp.
4. R Felix. Bodemkartering voor 1943 het geologisch perspectief. In Van bodemkaart
tot informatiesysteem , P Buurman, J Sevink, Eds. Wageningen Pers, Wageningen,
Netherlands, 1995, pp. 1–17.
5. H De Bakker. Veertig jaar bodemkartering 1943–1983: introductie van bodemkun-
dige concepten. In Van bodemkaart tot informatiesysteem , P Buurman, J Sevink,
Eds. Wageningen Pers, Wageningen, Netherlands, 1995, pp. 18–27.
6. G Milne. Normal erosion as a factor in soil pro ﬁle development. Nature  138:
548–549, 1936.Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 433
7. FAO. FAO/Unesco Soil Map of the World, Revised Legend , World Resources
Report 60. FAO, Rome, 1989. (Reprinted as Technical Paper 20, 1988, 138 pp.)
8. USDA. Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classi ﬁcation for Making and
Interpreting Soil Surveys , 2nd ed. U.S. Goverment Printing Of ﬁce, Wasinghton,
DC, 1999, 869 pp.
9. JS Jacob, LC Nordt. Soil and landscape evolution: a paradigm for pedology. Soil
Sci Soc Am J 55: 1194–1195, 1991.
10. J Bouma. The new role of soil science in a network society. Soil Sci  166: 874–879,
2001.
11. J Bouma, AE Hartemink. Soil science and society in the Dutch context. Neth J
Agric Sci  50: 133–140, 2002.
12. Soil Survey Staff, USDA. Soil Classi ﬁcation, 7th Approximation . U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Of ﬁce, Washington, DC, 1969, 265 pp.
13. J Bouma, HWG Booltink, A Stein. Reliability of soil data and risk assessment of
data applications. Soil Sci Soc Am  47: 63–79, 1996.
14. S de Bruin, A Stein. Soil-landscape modelling using fuzzy c-means clustering
attribute data derived from a digital elevation model (DEM). Geoderma  83: 17–33,
1998.
15. A Saldana, A Stein, JA Zinck. Spatial variability of soil properties at different scales
within three terraces of the Henares River (Spain). Catena  33: 139–153, 1998.
16. RM Lark, PHT Beckett. A geostatistical descriptor of the spatial distribution of
soil classes, and its use in predicting the purity of possible soil map units. Geo-
derma  83: 243–267, 1998.
17. SJ Park, K McSweeney, B Lowery. Identi ﬁcation of the spatial distribution of
soils using a process-based terrain characterization. Geoderma  103: 249–272,
2001.
18. JL Rubio, E Bochet. Deserti ﬁcation indicators as diagnosis criteria for deserti ﬁ-
cation risk assessment in Europe. J Arid Environ  39: 113–120, 1998.
19. J de Graaff, LAAJ Eppink. Olive oil production and soil conservation in southern
Spain in relation to EU subsidy policies. Land Use Policy 16: 259–267, 1999.
20. A Veldkamp, K Kok, GHJ De Koning, JM Schoorl, MPW Sonneveld, PH Verburg.
Multi-scale system approaches in agronomic research at the landscape level. Soil
Till Res  58: 129–140, 2001.
21. P Droogers, J Bouma. Soil survey input in exploratory modeling of sustainable
soil management practices. Soil Sci Soc Am J  61: 1704–1710, 1997.
22. MM Pulleman, J Bouma, EA van Essen, EW Meijles. Soil organic matter content
as a function of different land use history. Soil Sci Soc Am J  64: 689–693, 2000.
23. MPW Sonneveld, J Bouma, A Veldkamp. Re ﬁning soil survey information for a
Dutch soil series using land use history. Soil Use Manage  18: 157–163, 2002.
24. DL Peterson, T Parker. Ecological Scale: Theory and Application . Columbia
University Press, New York, 1998, 615 pp.
25. EF Moran. News on the Land project. Global Change Newsl  54: 18–20, 2003.
26. KJ Beven. Linking parameters across scales: subgrid parameterizations and scale
dependent hydrological models. Hydrol Process  9: 507–525, 1995.
27. JD Kalma, M Sivapalan. Scale Issues in Hydrological Modelling . Wiley, Chich-
ester, U.K., 1995, 589 pp.
28. R Schulze. Transcending scales of space and time in impact studies of climate
change on agrohydrological responses. Agric Ecosyst Environ  82: 185–212, 2000.434 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
29. J De Ploey, MJ Kirkby, F Ahnert. Hillslope erosion by rainstorms: a magnitude-
frequency analysis. Earth Surf Process Landforms  16: 399–409, 1991.
30. TJ Coulthard, MG Macklin, MJ Kirkby. Modelling the impacts of different ﬂood
magnitudes and frequencies on catchment evolution. In River Basin Sediment
Systems: Archives of Environmental Change , D Maddy, MG Macklin, JC Wood-
ward, Eds. A.A. Balkema Publishers, Tokyo, 2001, pp. 285–503.
31. MJ Kirkby, AC Imeson, G Bergkamp, LH Cammeraat. Scaling up processes and
models from the ﬁeld plot to the watershed and regional areas. J Soil Water
Conserv  51: 391–396, 1996.
32. KJ Beven, MJ Kirkby, N Schof ﬁeld, A Tagg. Testing a physically based ﬂood
forecasting model (TOPMODEL) for three UK catchments. J Hydrol  69: 119–143,
1984.
33. J Alcamo. IMAGE 2.0 integrated modeling of global climate change . Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1994, 75 pp.
34. P Doll, F Kaspar, B Lehner. A global hydrological model for deriving water
availability indicators: model tuning and validation. J Hydrol  270: 105–134, 2003.
35. MA Nearing, GR Foster, LJ Lane, SC Finckner. A process-based soil erosion
model for USDA Water Erosion Prediction Project technology. Trans Am Soc
Agric Eng  32: 1587–1593, 1989.
36. MJ Kirkby. An erosion-limited hillslope evolution model. Catena Suppl  23:
157–187, 1992.
37. RPC Morgan, JN Quinton, RJ Rickson. Modelling methodology for soil erosion
assessment and soil conservation design: the EUROSEM approach. Outlook Agric
23: 5–9, 1994.
38. AD Howard. Equilibrium and time scales in geomorphology: application to sand-
bed alluvial streams. Earth Surf Process Landforms  7: 305–325, 1982.
39. LA Tebbens, A Veldkamp, JJ Van Dijke, JM Schoorl. Modeling longitudinal pro ﬁle
development in response to late Quaternary tectonics, climate and sea-levelchanges: the River Meuse. Global Planetary Change  27: 165–186, 2000.
40. GR Willgoose, GS Hancock, GA Kuczera. A framework for the quantitative testing
of landform evolution models. In Predictions in Geomorphology , PR Wilcock,
RM Iverson, Eds. American Geophysical Union, Washington DC, 2003, pp.195–216.
41. JM Schoorl, A Veldkamp. Late Cenozoic landscape development and its tectonic
implications for the Guadalhorce Valley near Alora (South Spain). Geomorphology
50: 43–57, 2003.
42. WH Wischmeier, DD Smith. Rainfall energy and its relationship to soil loss. Trans
Am Geophys Union 39: 285–291, 1958.
43. DE Walling, TA Quine. The use of caesium-137 measurements in soil erosion
surveys. In Erosion and Sediment Transport Monitoring Programmes in River
Basins  (Proceedings of the Oslo Symposium, August 1992), IAHS Publication
210, J Bogen, DE Walling, TJ Day, Eds. IAHS, 1992, pp. 143–153.
44. JM Schoorl, C Boix Fayos, RJ de Meijer, ER van der Graaf, A Veldkamp. The
137Cs technique on steep Mediterranean slopes. Part I. Analysing effects oflithology and slope position. Catena , 57: 15–34, 2004. 
45. JM Schoorl, C Boix Fayos, RJ de Meijer, ER van der Graaf, A Veldkamp. The
137Cs technique on steep Mediterranean slopes. Part II. Landscape evolution andmodel calibration. Catena , 57: 35–54, 2004. Multiscale Soil-Landscape Process Modeling 435
46. BL Turner II, D Skole, S Sanderson, G Fischer, LO Fresco, R Leemans. Land-
Use and Land-Cover Change, Science/Research Plan, IGBP Report 35, HDPReport 7. IGBP, HDP, Stockholm, Geneva, 1995, 132 pp.
47. AJ van Loon. Changing the face of the earth. Earth Sci Rev  52: 371–379, 2001.
48. FAO. The Den Bosch Declaration and Agenda for Action on Sustainable Agricul-
ture and Rural Development , report of the FAO/Netherlands conference on agri-
culture and the environment, ’s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands, April 15–19, 1991.FAO, Rome, 1992, 55 pp.
49. AJ van Loon. Towards the geological past. Earth Sci Rev  51: 203–209, 2000.
50. S de Bruin, WG Wielemaker, M Molenaar. Formalisation of soil-landscape knowl-
edge through interactive hierarchical disaggregation. Geoderma  91: 151–172, 1999.
51. S de Bruin, BGH Gorte. Probabilistic image classi ﬁcation using geological map units
applied to land-cover change detection. Int J Remote Sensing  21: 2389–2402, 2000.
52. S de Bruin. Predicting the areal extent of land-cover types using classi ﬁed imagery
and geostatistics. Remote Sensing Environ  74: 387–396, 2000.
53. JM Schoorl, A Veldkamp. Linking land use and landscape process modelling: a
case study for the Alora region (South Spain). Agric Ecosyst Environ  85: 281–292,
2001.
54. JM Schoorl, A Veldkamp, J Bouma. Modelling water and soil redistribution in a
dynamic landscape context. Soil Sci Soc Am J  66: 1610–1619, 2002.
55. JA Ruiz, E Ortega, C Sierra, I Saura, C Asensio, A Roca, A Iriarte. Proyecto
LUCDEME: mapa de suelos escala 1:100.000, Alora-1052 . ICONA, Granada,
Spain, 1993, 76 pp.
56. WG Wielemaker, S de Bruin, GF Epema, A Veldkamp. Signi ﬁcance and applica-
tion of the multi-hierarchical land system in soil mapping. Catena  43: 15–34, 2001.
57. JM Schoorl, MPW Sonneveld, A Veldkamp. Three-dimensional landscape process
modelling: the effect of DEM resolution. Earth Surf Process Landforms  25:
1025–1034, 2000.
58. MJ Kirkby. Hillslope process-response models based on the continuity equation.
In Slopes, Forms and Processes , 3rd ed., D Brunsden, Ed. Institute of British
Geographers, London, 1971, pp. 15–30.
59. GR Foster, LD Meyer. A closed-form soil erosion equation for upland areas. In
Sedimentation: Symposium to Honour Professor H.A. Einstein , HW Shen, Ed.
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 1972, pp. 12.1–12.19.
60. GR Foster, LD Meyer. Mathematical simulation of upland erosion by fundamental
erosion mechanics. In Present and Perspective Technology for Predicting Sediment
Yields and Sources  (Proceedings of the Sediment Yield Workshop, Oxford, 1972),
Anonymous, Ed. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 1975, pp.190–207.
61. D Torri, JWA Poesen, L Borselli. Predictability and uncertainty of the soil erod-
ibility factor using a global dataset. Catena  31: 1–22, 1997.
62. TG Freeman. Calculating catchment area with divergent ﬂow based on a regular
grid. Comput Geosci 17: 413–422, 1991.
63. P Holmgren. Multiple ﬂow direction algorithms for runoff modelling in grid based
elevation models: an empirical evaluation. Hydrol Process  8: 327–334, 1994.
64. P Quinn, KJ Beven, P Chevallier, O Planchon. The prediction of hillslope ﬂow
paths for distributed hydrological modelling using digital terrain models. Hydrol
Process  5: 59–79, 1991.43716Space–Time 
Geostatistics
Gerard B.M. Heuvelink
and Judith J.J.C. Snepvangers
CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................................................................437
16.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................43816.2 Characterizing Space–Time Variability ................................................438
16.2.1 Decomposition of the Space–Time Signal into a Drift 
and Stochastic Residual.........................................................439
16.2.2 Statistical Characterization of the Stochastic Residual ........440
16.2.2.1 Product-Sum Model............................................440
16.2.2.2 Bilonick Model...................................................441
16.2.3 Space–Time Kriging..............................................................441
16.3 Space–Time Interpolation of Soil Water Content in a Grassland
Plot in Molenschot, The Netherlands...................................................44216.3.1 Space–Time Variography ......................................................44416.3.2 Space–Time Kriging..............................................................447
16.4 Discussion and Conclusions .................................................................448Acknowledgments .............................................................................................450References .........................................................................................................450
ABSTRACT
Conventional geostatistics deals with variables that vary exclusively in space.However, many branches within the earth and environmental sciences, includingsoil science, frequently have to deal with variables that vary not only in space,but also in time. Recently, additional effort has been made to develop spatiotem-poral statistical models and to apply spatiotemporal kriging. This chapter reviewsthe main approaches to extending conventional geostatistical methods to thespace–time domain. Whenever possible, one should try to explain part of thetemporal variation by including drift functions that represent dynamic processknowledge. The residual may then be modeled as a realization of a stationaryrandom function, which will usually have geometric as well as zonal anisotropies.438 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Space–time interpolation is performed using standard kriging algorithms. The
theory is illustrated with an example of space–time kriging of soil water content.
16.1 INTRODUCTION
While its origins are in mining, the use of geostatistics in the earth and environ-mental sciences is by now widespread. Over the last decades geostatisticaltechniques have been successfully applied to various ﬁelds, such as hydrology,
meteorology, geology, forestry, and geomorphology.
1–3 Geostatistics is also
extensively used in soil science4,5 (also see other Chapters 1, 9, and 10 in this
book). Traditionally, geostatistics deals with static spatial attributes, which is dueto its roots in mining (geologic deposits do not change very rapidly in time).Yet, most of the new research ﬁelds do deal with attributes that change in space
as well as in time. For instance, within soil science there are numerous dynamicspatial attributes, such as soil water content, in ﬁltration rate, heat ﬂow, water
pressure, and solute concentration.
The extension of kriging (and other geostatistical techniques) to the
space–time domain is not straightforward. Incorporating time is more than justadding a third (or fourth) dimension, because the behavior of a variable over timeoften is entirely different from its behavior over space. Consequently, if a geo-statistical model characterizing the spatiotemporal behavior of an attribute is tobe of any value, then it has to take these fundamental differences into account.In recent years, progress has been made in building and applying spatiotemporalgeostatistical models.
6–16
The purpose of this chapter is to review the main approaches in space–time
geostatistics, with a focus on application to soil science. Readers that wish toknow more about the details of and speci ﬁc topics within space–time geostatistics
are referred to the literature above.
16.2 CHARACTERIZING SPACE–TIME VARIABILITY
Consider an attribute z = {z(s, t)Ùs Œ S, t Œ T} that is de ﬁned on a geographical
domain and a time interval . Let z be observed at n space–time
points ( si, ti), i = 1, …, n. These space–time observations may be a series of
observations at multiple time points at a ﬁxed spatial location, spatial samples
collected at ﬁxed points in time, any arbitrary set of space–time points, or
combinations of all these. Although the number of observations n may occasion-ally be very large (for example, for the application discussed later on in thischapter, n = 96,236), it is impossible to observe z at each and every combination
of time and space. To obtain complete space–time coverage of z requires some
form of interpolation. The objective then is to obtain a prediction of z(s
0, t0) at a
point ( s0, t0) where z was not observed. To do this, we assume that z is a realization
of a random function Z, and we capitalize on the space–time variability of Z to
predict Z(s0, t0). Sometimes knowledge about the space–time variability of Z willS2TSpace–Time Geostatistics 439
be a purpose in itself. For instance, it is instructive for the exploration, compar-
ison, interpretation, and explanation of the magnitude of temporal, spatial, andspatiotemporal variation, and it is an essential prerequisite for optimizing spa-
tiotemporal monitoring designs.
16.2.1 D ECOMPOSITION  OF THE SPACE–TIME SIGNAL  INTO A 
DRIFT AND STOCHASTIC  RESIDUAL
To characterize the space–time variability of Z, we ﬁrst decompose it into a
deterministic drift m and a zero-mean stochastic residual e:
(16.1)
The drift m is a deterministic, structural component representing large-scale
variation. The residual is a stochastic component representing small-scale, noisyvariation. It is useful to think of the drift as that part of z that can be explained
physically or empirically, using auxiliary information. The residual then is theleftover part. It is important to realize that the decomposition of Z into a drift
and residual is a subjective choice made by the modeler. There is no unique wayto decompose Z, and different modelers will come to different choices. Also,
different decompositions are made at different scales and at different levels ofauxiliary information.
In the introduction to this chapter we observed that the behavior of a variable
over time often is entirely different from its behavior over space. Dynamicprocesses govern the temporal behavior, and these processes may be very hardto capture in a statistical description of a stochastic residual. For instance, cropgrowth is causally dependent on solar radiation and water and nutrient availabil-ity. It would be unwise to ignore this information when interpolating crop growthobservations in space and time. This is not only because exploiting the informa-tion is likely to reduce the space–time interpolation errors, but also because it isvery dif ﬁcult to de ﬁne a multivariate probability distribution for the space–time
distribution of crop growth that acknowledges its complex, nonstationarydynamic behavior.
It is thus recommended to incorporate a drift in the space–time statistical
model. Ideally, the drift would be a process-oriented, physical-deterministicmodel, such as a soil water in ﬁltration model, a soil acidi ﬁcation model, a dynamic
soil erosion or sedimentation model, or a soil weathering model. However, whendeterministic modeling is not feasible due to a lack of understanding of thegoverning processes or because external forces and boundary conditions thatgovern the behavior of the target variable are unknown, one may also rely on aregression-type model relating the dependent to the explanatory variables in anempirical way.
After the drift has been selected and obtained, it may be subtracted from z
so that attention may be directed to the space–time residual e. However, in thisZt mt t(,) (,) (,)ss s =+440 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
way uncertainties in the detrending procedure would not be taken into account
in the subsequent analysis. This causes the interpolation uncertainty to appearlower than it is. This problem can be circumvented by accounting for uncertainties
in the drift coef ﬁcients, such as is done in universal kriging and in kriging with
external drift.
16,17 In this chapter we will assume that the drift is perfectly known
and directly subtracted from z.
16.2.2 S TATISTICAL  CHARACTERIZATION  OF THE 
STOCHASTIC RESIDUAL
The second-order properties of the zero-mean stochastic residual e are completely
characterized by its space–time variogram:
(16.2)
To facilitate the estimation of g(si, ti, sj, tj) from observations ( si, ti) , i = 1, …, n,
it is necessary to make some assumptions about it. One very common assumptionis second-order stationarity, which states that the variogram depends only on thedistance between the space–time points:
(16.3)
In Equation 16.3, h
s is distance in space and ht is distance in time. Note that
hs is a vector because space is multidimensional. However, if we also assume
isotropy in space, which we will do in this chapter, then the vector hs may be
replaced by the scalar hs, de ﬁned as the Euclidean distance between the two points
in space.
With these assumptions we have much simpli ﬁed the space–time correlation
structure of e, but in practice, a further simpli ﬁcation is still needed to be able to
estimate a variogram model from the observations. Two main modes of operationcan be distinguished here, which we will now discuss.
16.2.2.1 Product-Sum Model
The product-sum model
13,14 assumes that the variogram of e may be written as
(16.4)
It can be demonstrated that this is a statistically valid model, provided gS and
gT are valid variogram models and provided that the parameter a satis ﬁes certain
conditions.13 When a is zero, the product-sum model reduces to the sum model,
which is a highly unrealistic model, because it assumes complete temporal per-sistence of spatial patterns and complete spatial persistence of temporal patterns.
18(,, ,) [ ( (,) ( ,) ) ]ss s sii j j ii j jtt E t t =1
22
(,, ,) ( , ) ( , )ss s s hii j j i ji j s ttt t t h ==
(,) () () () ()hh h h a h hst Ss Tt Ss Tt =+ +Space–Time Geostatistics 441
Fitting the product-sum model to the space–time experimental variogram is fairly
easy. First, gS is ﬁtted to the experimental marginal spatial variogram (i.e., the
variogram computed from pairing observations that have no time difference).Next, g
T is ﬁtted to the experimental marginal temporal variogram (i.e., the var-
iogram computed from pairing observations that have zero separation in space).Finally, parameter a is ﬁtted by adjusting the sill of the space–time model to the
sill of the experimental variogram, in the joint space–time direction. The product-sum model has been shown to perform well in practice, in spite of its lack ofphysical support and somewhat arti ﬁcial structure.
16.2.2.2 Bilonick Model
The Bilonick model
16,19 reduces the general space–time variogram to
(16.5)
The ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand side of Equation 16.5 allow for the
presence of zonal anisotropies (i.e., variogram sills are not the same in all direc-tions). Zonal anisotropy occurs when the amount of variation in time is smalleror larger than that in space, or that in the joint space–time. The third term on theright-hand side of Equation 16.5 represents a joint space–time structure. It con-tains a geometric anisotropy ratio a to convert distances in time into distances
in space. Geometric anisotropy is needed because a unit distance in space is notthe same as a unit distance in time. For instance, if a = 20 m/day, then two points
that are 100 m separated in space and zero days in time have the same correlationas two points that are 5 days apart in time and zero meters in space, or as twopoints that are 60 m separated in space and 2 days apart in time, and so on. TheBilonick model is also termed the metric model because the third component g
3
assumes a certain metric in the joint space–time domain.
The Bilonick model makes sense physically, but its structural analysis (i.e.,
the estimation of variogram parameters) is far from easy. This is because thevariograms are exchangeable to some extent. Temporal variability is representedby both g
2 and g3, and spatial variability by g1 and g3. For the product-sum model,
variogram ﬁtting is much easier because gS is the marginal spatial variogram and
gT is the marginal temporal variogram. This is because the product term in Equa-
tion 16.4 is always zero when either hs or ht equals zero. The same does not hold
for the Bilonick model, because g3 need not be zero when either hs or ht is zero.
Fitting the parameters of the Bilonick model has so far been tried with ad
hoc trial-and-error methods8 or by relying on numerical optimization techniques.16
16.2.3 S PACE–TIME KRIGING
Once the drift has been determined and the variogram of the residual has been
speci ﬁed, space–time interpolation can be done in the usual way. The residual(,) () () ( )hh h h h hst s t s t =++ +123442 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
is interpolated using simple kriging (because its mean is known to be identical
to zero):
(16.6)
where the li are simple kriging weights obtained from solving the linear system
(16.7)
where  is the autocovariance function of e, which can be easily derived
from its variogram provided the variogram is bounded. Note that these are thestandard simple kriging equations.
4 Thus, from a statistical prediction theory
perspective, space–time interpolation is not different from spatial interpolation.
After the residual has been interpolated, it is added to the drift to obtain
predictions of the target variable z. As mentioned before, uncertainty in the drift
coef ﬁcients may be incorporated by using universal kriging or kriging with
external drift. This is also done in the usual way. Although kriging in space–timeis not very different from kriging in space, one possible difference worth men-tioning is that in the space–time situation, predictions will often be made aheadof time. When predictions for the future are based on observations in the pastand present, space–time kriging becomes an extrapolator alongside the time axis,instead of an interpolator. This has no effect on the kriging equations, but it willcause the predictions to become less accurate (i.e., a larger kriging variance),because observations come from one direction only.
16.3 SPACE–TIME INTERPOLATION OF SOIL WATER 
CONTENT IN A GRASSLAND PLOT IN MOLENSCHOT, THE NETHERLANDS
The example of space–time geostatistics given here is a condensed version of the
case study presented in Snepvangers et al.16
Knowledge of the soil water content at any given point in time and space is
useful for many purposes. It is used for monitoring dynamic processes that takeplace in the soil, such as the movement of water in the soil and the uptake ofwater by plants. It is also used to identify important soil physical properties, suchas the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity function and the moisture retentioncharacteristic.
20,21
Soil water content is traditionally determined by measuring the weight loss
after oven drying a soil sample collected in the ﬁeld.20 This measurement tech-ˆ(,) ( , ) ( ( ,sss00
11tt z ti
in
ii i
in
ii ==
==∑∑))( , ) )mtiis
ji j i j i iC t t C t t for all i == (, ) (, ) ,ss ss00 1, , n
jn
=∑
1
Ch hst(,)Space–Time Geostatistics 443
nique is laborious and destructive. In recent years, several alternative methods
have been introduced that allow cheap and nondestructive measurements of soilwater content. One method that is particularly useful makes use of time domain
reﬂectometry (TDR).
22,23 A TDR probe is inserted into the soil, after which the
soil water content is derived from the measured velocity of electromagnetic wavesin the soil. In combination with a data logger, high-resolution time series of soilwater content at one or more locations within a given area can be obtained.Alternatively, within a few hours one can manually collect measurements of soilwater content at hundreds of locations within the area of interest.
Although measuring soil water content using TDR technology is cheap,
clearly it is impossible to measure the soil water content at each and everycombination of time and space points. To obtain a complete space–time coverageof soil water content therefore requires some form of interpolation.
In the summer of 2000, an irrigation experiment was carried out on a 60 ¥
60 m grassland located in Molenschot, the Netherlands. The soil was classi ﬁed
as a Plaggept on sandy loam.
24 Sprinklers with different ranges and intensities
created a spatial pattern of soil water content on two occasions in a 30-daymonitoring period (August 16 to September 14, 2000). Drying and rewetting bynatural precipitation caused the spatial pattern to change over time. The soil watercontent was monitored with vertically installed 10-cm TDR probes, both manuallyand automatically. For the manual measurements, a probe was manually installedat each of 229 locations at every measurement time (Figure 16.1). In total, there
FIGURE 16.1 Locations of the TDR and meteorological measurements. Shades of gray
represent the irrigation pattern.
   
   Automatic TDR meas urement locationsManual TDR meas urement locationsA
B
0-m 10-m 20-m Test location
Meteorological meas urement locationIrrigation in mm
020406080444 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
were 19 manual measurement rounds (Figure 16.2). The probes for automatic
measurements remained installed throughout the whole experimental period at34 locations (Figure 16.1). These probes were connected to two computer-con-trolled measurement systems. The two systems, A and B, caused clustering ofthe automatic probes because the quality of the TDR measurements decreaseswith cable length.
23 Automatic measurements were carried out every 15 minutes.
Meteorological measurements provided information on the net precipitation. Net
precipitation was de ﬁned as the input to the topsoil from precipitation and irrigation
minus the output from the topsoil through actual evapotranspiration. The latter wascalculated using the Penman equation (for details, see Snepvangers et al.
16).
Because of the irrigation, the net precipitation varied not only in time, but
also in space. Irrigation took place on August 17 (day 230, 5:42 A.M.) and
September 1 (day 245, 4:00 A.M.). Both irrigations lasted 4 hours. We assumed
that all sprinklers of one type had the same irrigation characteristics. This allowedus to measure the distribution of irrigated water around one sprinkler per sprinklertype and translate this to a total irrigation pattern. The irrigation patterns areshown in Figure 16.1. In Figure 16.2, the course of the daily natural net precip-itation is shown together with the irrigation dates and the manual TDR rounds.
16.3.1 S PACE–TIME VARIOGRAPHY
The structural analysis and subsequent kriging considered three different cases. Inthe ﬁrst case, no drift was included and space–time ordinary kriging (ST-OK) was
employed. The second and third cases did include a drift and hence usedspace–time kriging with external drift (ST-KED). The second case (ST-KED(linear)) incorporated a drift that was a linear combination of net precipitation andtime-delayed net precipitation. In the third case (ST-KED (logarithmic)), the driftwas a linear combination of log-transformed net precipitation and its time delays.FIGURE 16.2 Course of the daily average natural net precipitation during the experiment,
displayed together with the irrigation and manual TDR measurement times.–505101520
NPnatural
Irrigation time
Manual TDR time
Julian Days in 2000mm per day0–88 mm 0–187 mm
256255254253252251250249248247246245244243242241240239238237236235234233232231230229228227226225224223222221220219218Space–Time Geostatistics 445
Figure 16.3 (top graph) shows the experimental variogram for the ST-OK
case. There are clear differences in the behavior of the variogram in the spaceand time directions. There is a strong increase in variogram value in the space
direction up to a distance of 5 m and a less pronounced increase up to 10 m. In
the time direction, a periodicity with a period of approximately 15 days is clearlyvisible. This is explained from the fact that both the irrigation days and the heavyrainstorms occurred with intervals of approximately 15 days (Figure 16.2). Thesill of the marginal temporal variogram is found at a distance of about 9 days.In the marginal variograms for ST-OK (Figure 16.4), the differences in thevariogram behavior in the space and time directions are more clearly visible. Asubstantial nugget effect is present in the space direction, whereas it is absent inthe time direction. The spatial nugget is caused by small-scale spatial variationdue to texture and vegetation differences, as well as by animal activity (amongothers, molehills).
FIGURE 16.3 Experimental variograms for ST-OK (a), ST-KED (linear) (b), and
ST-KED (logarithmic) (c).
446 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
The space–time experimental variogram was ﬁtted using the Bilonick model.
The spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal components were all included andrepresented by exponential structures. No temporal nugget was incorporated. Thisresulted in a joint variogram model for the ST-OK case that had eight parameters(ranges and sills for the spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal parts, a spatialnugget, and a space–time anisotropy ratio). To estimate these parameters, astandard Matlab subspace trust region algorithm based on the interior re ﬂective
Newton method was used.
25
For the ST-KED cases, the structural analysis was applied to the residuals
from multiple regression using net precipitation and time-delayed net precipita-tion as explanatory variables. First the experimental space–time variograms werecalculated (Figure 16.3). Similar to the ST-OK case, exponential models for thespatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal parts of the variogram model were chosen.Comparison with the ST-OK case shows that for the ST-KED cases there is astrong decrease in the temporal and spatiotemporal sills (Figure 16.3 and Figure16.4). Also, the temporal periodicity had largely disappeared due to the incorpo-ration of the net precipitation-driven drift. For the space direction, the effect ofdetrending is hardly visible. For the spatial nugget, this can easily be explainedFIGURE 16.4 Marginal experimental variograms for ST-OK, ST-KED (linear), and
ST-KED (logarithmic): space direction (a) and time direction (b).0 5 10 150.00000.00050.00100.0015
OK
KED (linear)
KED (logarithmic)
hS [m]
0 5 10 150.00000.00050.00100.0015
OK
KED (linear)
KED (logarithmic)
hT [days]ST-Semivariance ST-SemivarianceSpace–Time Geostatistics 447
because no information about small-scale spatial variability was used in the
spatiotemporal drift. With regard to the spatial sill, it must be concluded that thecontribution of the irrigation pattern to spatial variation in soil water content wasnot very strong. Apparently, there are more important sources of spatial variationin soil water content, such as soil texture, soil physical properties, and vegetation.
16.3.2 S PACE–TIME KRIGING
Space–time kriging was performed using the Gstat software.26 The top row of
Figure 16.5 gives ST-OK interpolations at three time points on August 17. Recallthat August 17 is the ﬁrst irrigation day. Due to local dryer and wetter areas,
caused by small-scale spatial variation, all three maps show some spotting. Theoverall pattern is clear, though. Most striking is that the pattern of irrigation (seeFigure 16.1) is already visible (as a darker area in the northeastern part of thearea) at 2:30 
A.M. in the morning (left), 3 hours before the irrigation started.
This physically unrealistic result is caused by the fact that in kriging, futuremeasurements in ﬂuence predictions as much as past measurements. At 12:00
A.M. (middle) and 8:00 P.M. (right), it can be seen that the irrigation caused a
strong increase in soil water content in a large part of the ﬁeld. The dry spot in
the northeastern corner of the ﬁeld is caused by a large tree, located 5 m outside
the study area. The middle and bottom rows of Figure 16.5 give the results forST-KED (linear) and ST-KED (logarithmic) interpolation, respectively. Moststriking is the clear imprint of the irrigation pattern in the time points followingirrigation. Before irrigation, at 2:30 
A.M., the interpolated map of soil waterFIGURE 16.5 Interpolated soil water content for the whole study area using ST-OK,
ST-KED (linear), and ST-KED (logarithmic) for three points in time on day 230 (August17, 2000): 2:30 
A.M., 12:00 A.M., and 8:00 P.M.
448 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
content shows a fairly even picture; this is in contrast to the ST-OK map, but in
accordance with measurements.
To examine the temporal behavior of interpolated soil water content, a test
location (x = 31.55, y = 19.00; Figure 16.1) was selected to examine how well
measured time series of soil water content could be reproduced by space–timekriging. At the test location, soil water content was observed using automatedTDR measurements. The automated TDR measurements of system B were notincluded in the interpolation because the coverage in the temporal domain is veryhigh around automated TDR locations, leaving little challenge for interpolation.In Figure 16.6, measured and predicted soil water content at the test location aredisplayed. At times without sudden precipitation, measurements and predictionsare within the uncertainty limits of plus or minus 1 standard deviation, but closeto irrigation times and heavy rainstorms, the measurements are much greater thanthe predictions. This is due to the smoothing effect of kriging.
Because all three interpolation cases used the same measurements of soil
water content, the average behavior of the ST-KED predictions closely resemblesthat of the ST-OK predictions, with a slight underestimation of the soil watercontent at the test location. It is remarkable, though, that ST-KED predictionsshow more variation in soil water content in between manual measurement roundsthan the ST-OK predictions. At some time points, even the daily cycle of soilwater content becomes clear. This may be explained from the daily ﬂuctuation
in the net precipitation-driven drift. Figure 16.6 also shows that the ST-KEDpredictions follow the sudden increases in soil water content much better thanthe ST-OK predictions.
16.4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has shown that much of the existing geostatistical theory for spatialinterpolation may also be used for space–time interpolation. The kriging itselfdoes not change. This is because in space–time interpolation the objective is tooptimally predict the value of a variable at an unobserved point from nearbyobservations, just as is the case in spatial kriging. The predictions are weighedlinear combinations of the observations, whereby the weights are chosen suchthat the expected squared prediction error is minimized, under the condition ofunbiasedness. Again, this is the same as in spatial kriging. The best linear unbiasedpredictor (BLUP) from mathematical statistics applies to both cases. However,to apply BLUP, one must specify the correlations between the variables at unob-served and observed points, and to do this realistically turns out to be a dif ﬁcult
task in the space–time setting. Approaches that ignore the fundamental differencesin spatial and temporal variation and that ﬁt isotropic stationary variogram models
to space–time variables are clearly inappropriate. It is crucially important to takethe differences between spatial and temporal variations into account. One impor-tant means of doing just that is by incorporating a (temporal) drift in the model,ideally representing dynamic process knowledge in one way or another. In theexample of soil water content presented in this chapter, this was done by includingSpace–Time Geostatistics 449
FIGURE 16.6 Measured vs. predicted soil water content for the whole time at location
(x, y) = (31.55, 19.00), using ST-OK (a), ST-KED (linear) (b), and ST-KED (logarithmic)(c). The dashed lines show the ±1 standard deviation bands.228 232 236 240 244 248 252 2560.180.220.260.300.340.380.42
Measurements
OK
– s t d
+ std
Time [Julian Days]
228 232 236 240 244 248 252 2560.180.220.260.300.340.380.42
Measurements
KED (linear)
– s t d
+ std
Time [Julian Days]
228 232 236 240 244 248 252 2560.180.220.260.300.340.380.42
Measurements
KED (logarithmic)
– 1 * s t d
+ 1*std
Time [Julian Days](b)(a)
(c)450 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
a drift driven by net precipitation, which is a driving factor behind the dynamic
behavior in soil water content.
Although incorporating a drift is an appropriate and ef ﬁcient way to capture
the speci ﬁc (causal) structure of temporal variation, this does not guarantee that
the residual resulting from the detrending will behave as isotropic. Geometricand zonal anisotropies will often occur, and it is a true challenge to de ﬁne valid
space–time variogram models that can realistically describe the space–time vari-ability at hand and whose parameters can be estimated reliably. Both modelspresented in this chapter have their weaknesses. The product-sum model is fairlyeasy to ﬁt, but it is doubtful that it represents a physically plausible and suf ﬁciently
ﬂexible structure. The Bilonick model is more realistic because it has a clear
physical interpretation, but its parameters cannot easily be estimated because thethree components are, to a large degree, dependent. Therefore, in the near futuremuch research should be devoted to improving these models or the way in whichtheir parameters may be estimated, or to developing new and better models.
Completely relying on automatic ﬁtting procedures, such as was done in the
example in this chapter, is not without risk. It would be advisable to have anexperienced geostatistician exercise control on the outcome of the ﬁtting proce-
dure, because the choice of the number and type of model structures is dif ﬁcult
to automate and because automatic ﬁts sometimes need manual adjustment.
However, this necessitates the availability of tools that allow an easy visualizationof anisotropic three-dimensional experimental variograms and the models ﬁtted
to them. Currently, some commercial packages provide considerable functionalityfor this operation (e.g., GS
+, SAGE 2001), yet further development and a more
widespread availability of these tools would be most welcome.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank three anonymous reviewers for valuable and constructivecomments.
REFERENCES
1. N Cressie. Statistics for Spatial Data , revised edition. Wiley, New York, 1993.
2. EY Baa ﬁ, NA Scho ﬁeld, Eds. Geostatistics Wollongong ’96 . Kluwer, Dordrecht,
Netherlands, 1997
3. PA Burrough, RA McDonnell. Principles of Geographical Information Systems .
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.
4. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics in soil science: state-of-the-art and perspectives. Geo-
derma  89: 1–45, 1999.
5. R Webster, MA Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists . Wiley, Chices-
ter, U.K., 2001.
6. V Comegna, C Vitale. Space-time analysis of water status in a volcanic Vesuvian
soil. Geoderma  60: 135–158, 1993.Space–Time Geostatistics 451
7. P Bogaert, G Christakos. Stochastic analysis of solute content measurements using
a regressive space/time model. Stochastic Hydrol Hydraul 11: 267–295, 1997.
8. GBM Heuvelink, P Musters, EJ Pebesma. Spatio-temporal kriging of soil water
content. In Geostatistics Wollongong ’96 , EY Baa ﬁ, NA Scho ﬁeld, Eds. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1997, pp. 1020–1030.
9. N Cressie, HC Huang. Classes of nonseparable, spatio-temporal stationary cova-
riance functions. J Am Stat Assoc 94: 1–53, 1999.
10. PC Kyriakidis, AG Journel. Geostatistical space-time models: a review. Math Geol
31: 651–684, 1999.
11. G Christakos. Modern Spatiotemporal Geostatistics . Oxford University Press,
New York, 2000.
12. PC Kyriakidis, AG Journel. Stochastic modeling of atmospheric pollution: a spatial
time-series frame-work. Part I. Methodology. Atmos Environ 35: 2331–2337,
2001.
13. L De Cesare, DE Myers, D Posa. Estimating and modeling space-time correlation
structures. Stat Probab Lett  51: 9–14, 2001.
14. L De Cesare, DE Myers, D Posa. Product-sum covariance for space-time model-
ing: an environmental application. Environmetrics  12: 11–23, 2001.
15. S De Iaco, DE Myers, D Posa. Nonseparable space-time covariance models: some
parametric families. Math Geol  34: 23–42, 2002.
16. JJJC Snepvangers, GBM Heuvelink, JA Huisman. Soil water content interpolation
using spatio-temporal kriging with external drift. Geoderma  112: 253–271, 2003.
17. P Goovaerts. Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation , Applied Geostatis-
tics Series. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1997.
18. GBM Heuvelink, R Webster. Modelling soil variation: past, present, and future.
Geoderma  100: 269–301, 2001.
19. RA Bilonick. Monthly hydrogen ion deposition maps for the northeastern U.S.
from July 1982 to September 1984. Atmos Environ  22: 1909–1924, 1988.
20. D Hillel. Fundamentals of Soil Physics . Academic Press, New York, 1980.
21. W Bouten, TJ Heimovaara, A Tiktak. Spatial patterns of throughfall and soil water
dynamics in a Douglas ﬁr stand. Water Resour Res  28: 3227–3234, 1993.
22. GC Topp, JL Davis, AP Annan. Electromagnetic determination of soil water
content: measurements in coaxial transmission lines. Water Resour Res  16:
574–582, 1980.
23. TJ Heimovaara, JI Freijer, W Bouten. The application of TDR in laboratory
column experiments. Soil Technol  6: 337–377, 1993.
24. USDA. Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classi ﬁcation for Making and
Interpreting Soil Surveys , Agricultural Handbook, V ol. 436. USDA Soil Conser-
vation Service, Washington, DC, 1975.
25. TF Coleman, Y Li. An interior, trust region approach for nonlinear minimization
subject to bounds. SIAM J Optimization  6: 418–445, 1996.
26. EJ Pebesma, CG Wesseling. Gstat, a program for geostatistical modelling, pre-
diction and simulation. Comput Geosci  24: 17–31, 1998.453Index
A
Aboveground attributes, 4
Abrupt
boundary, 330, 333, 334, 340
variation, 7, 9, 221
Absolute
orientation, 166, 167, 168
position, 246
Absorption, 138, 422Abstraction, 5, 7, 48
data, 381
skills, 383
Accumulated ﬂow index, 189
Accuracy, 22, 25, 31, 32, 81, 84
of digital elevation model, 186, 197, 207
of global positioning systems, 134
horizontal, 134, 172
map, standards for, 179–180
spatial, 44, 93
submeter, 134target, 50
vertical, 134, 172, 181
Acidity, 7, 93
of catalysts, 130, 133, 139, 227, 229
indication of, 192
processes, 40
Aerial digital cameras, 171–172
Aerial photography, 92–94, 160–161
stereoscopic vision and, 165
Aerial triangulation, 167–168
Aforestation, 5
Aggregation, 133, 134, 395
Agriculture, 419, 423
precision, 4, 129, 290, 311
Air photo interpretation, 53
Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging 
Spectrometer, 13, 140, 141
Akaike’s information criterion, 401
Algorithm(s), 21, 188, 203, 237
change-of-resolution, 393–394, 396, 398, 
400, 401, 403, 413, 415
conditional simulation, 311
expectation-maximization, 396, 400, 403
ﬂow direction, 187
fuzzy c-means, 226, 229, 237Gaussian, 300
grouping, 21
iterative, 310
Kalman ﬁlter, 394, 396, 398, 401, 403, 415
kriging, 438
Matlab subspace trust region, 446
multiple- ﬂow, 425
neighborhood search, 298
one-pass change-of-resolution, 400, 401, 
413
prediction, 396
pyramid, 350, 352sequential indicator, 300, 305
simulation, 294, 295, 296, 299, 300, 303, 
311
spatial, 378
turning band, 300, 318
Alluvial, 43, 52, 329, 330, 331, 332, 334, 336, 
338, 367, 429
Altitude, 167, 171, 195, 426, 427, 429
Aluminum, eluviation of, 26
Amplitude, 135, 346, 347
Analog photogrammetry, 166, 168
Analytical photogrammetry, 166, 168–169
Anatomy, 62, 68, 87–92
Anisotropy, 7, 253–254, 255, 300, 446
Area(s)
agricultural, 45, 94
alluvial, 338complex, 53
cultivated, 420
deﬁnition, 91
delineation, 54
dispersal, 188, 195
distribution of soil-landscapes in, 42
erosions in, 43
forested, 73, 156, 173, 175, 178
glaciated, 55
heterogeneous, 134
hilly, 73
homogeneous, 135
humid, 44
large, 325
large land, 49, 62, 77, 82, 83, 86, 128, 140, 
156, 169, 171, 230
leaf, 270, 274, 275, 283, 284454 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
level, 115
local, 39low-lying, 157with no outcrops, 67in photogrammetric topographic mapping, 
166
physiographic, 46polder, 326, 327, 329as primary topographic attribute, 12remote, 82with repetitive patterns, 146rugged, 94sandy, 312, 329, 331, 332, 334, 336silty, 329, 330, 332, 334, 336, 339simple, 53small, 53, 86, 229soil mapping, 14spatial, 23spatial variations in, 9speci ﬁc geographic, 6
steep gradients in, 157strati ﬁcation, 333
subhumid, 44unsampled, 82upslope contributing, 187urban, 42, 45, 178without regular relationships, 75
Area-class model, 232, 234Arti ﬁcial intelligence, 216, 229, 234, 235, 237, 
380
Arti ﬁcial neural networks, 20, 190, 196, 235
Aspect, 12, 163, 164, 186, 188, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 197
deﬁned, 187
map, 157
Association, 41, 81, 84, 86, 95
catena vs ., 86
diagrams, 85map, 46soil-vegetation-geology, 94
Atmosphere, 4, 6, 19, 39, 140, 167Attribute(s)
aboveground, 4anisotropic, 7belowground, 6biological, 7, 11, 18boundaries, 21chemical, 7, 11, 18datasets, 9formation, 9near-surface, 6physical, 7, 11, 18pixel maps, 9secondary, 12space, 8, 10–14
spatial distribution, 6
subsurface, 9, 14, 136surface, 4tables, 9
terrain, 191–196
topographic, 12type, 11
variability, 7, 9
Auger-based mapping, 11, 13, 94, 128, 134Australian Soil Resources Information System, 
147
Autocorrelation, 247
spatial, 8, 11, 17, 20, 24, 130, 328
Autocovariance, 442
Autokriging, 383
Autovariogram, 258, 259Auxiliary
data, 141
information, 141, 439
sources, 142variable, 383
Azimuth, 176, 187
Azonal concepts, 107
B
Back-transformation, 295, 317, 318Baldwin, Mark, 92Band(s), 13, 140, 170, 171
spectral, 13, 140
standard deviation, 449turning, 298–300
Barrier
ﬂow, 291, 303
sampling, 14
Bayesian
maximum entropy, 337
statistics, 192, 194, 400
Bedrock, 26, 67, 79, 135
Belowground attributes, 6
Bessel function, 252Best linear unbiased predictor (BLUP), 395, 
400, 448
Bias, 52, 109, 244
Bilonick model, 441Bin(s), 248–249
size, 248, 273, 274
Binary
Boolean, 21, 130
membership function, 8
variable, 305
Biofunction, 17Index 455
Biological soil attribute, 7, 11, 18
Biophysical Resource Inventory, 46
Biosphere, 4Bivariate distribution, 291, 292, 295, 303
Block kriging, 301, 336
Boolean
binary, 21, 130
logic, 216, 217, 221–223, 232
model, 290, 303, 307–311random functions, 303, 309–310
random set, 309, 310
Boundary(ies), 8, 9
abrupt, 325, 334, 340
attributes, 21
between categories, 21, 40class, 21, 50, 130, 244, 325, 339
deﬁned, 27, 243
errors, 50
ﬁeld, 357
ﬁxed, 49
functional, 19
geological, 356
gradual, 333, 334limits, 49
map, 75, 147, 333
nature of, 324placement, 45
plotting, 128
polygon, 130for segregating soils, 27
spacing, 346
for strati ﬁcation, 337, 339
surface, 116
thickness, 51
topographic, of drainage basins, 19types, 333
width, 40
Bounded variogram, 282, 327
Broad-scale
behavior, 30quantitative evaluation, 138
relief, 198
variations in CO
2 emissions, 365
Bulk density, 11, 18, 130
compaction and, 138
electrical conductivity and, 134in LAPSUS model, 425
measurements, 382, 384
spatial distribution of, 382, 383, 384variability, 131
voxel representation, 383
Bushnell, Thomas, 65, 80, 90, 92C
Calcium, 135, 140, 403, 415
Calibration, 19, 169, 422, 432
Canadian Soil Information System, 51Carbon content, 344, 365–368Carbon dioxide emission rates, 344, 363–365Cartography, 14, 91, 186Categorical
level, 48, 49, 245
random function, 311variable, 290, 294, 303–311
Category, 9, 49
deﬁned, 47
highest, 46, 48
theory, 237
Catena model, 12, 18–19, 44
accumulation, 19applications, 85–87
association model vs ., 86
classi ﬁcation, 19
debates, 65deﬁned, 18, 77–80, 84
description, 43grouping, 19
historical perspectives, 62, 77–87
leaching, 19soil association vs ., 83–85
three-dimensional, 12, 80transformation, 19
two-dimensional, 80
types, 114
Cation exchange capacity (CEC), 18, 50, 134, 
191
Cell(s), 177
adjacent, 402in DEM, 426
as digital numbers, 164
grid, 7, 9, 54, 162, 187nonoverlapping, 303orthoquad, 181raster, 203, 376
size, 55, 162, 181
subcells, 397voxel, 376, 383
Central limit theorem, 295, 300Centroid, 42, 190, 236
deﬁned, 225–227
map, 54
Certainty, 50, 218Change, 114, 130, 243, 255
abrupt, 7, 257in CO
2 emissions, 344, 365
detection, 86, 352–356456 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
dynamic, 55, 62
in elevation, 157, 161, 187, 204
environmental, 40
explanations of, 39
in factors, 16factors associated with, 9
identi ﬁcation of, 76
on landscape scale, 112
model, 254
neighborhood, 298
net, 110, 112
of-resolution, 393–394, 396, 398, 400, 401, 
403, 413, 415
overtime, 5, 7, 29, 109
recognizable, 42relation, 279
in relief, 75
of soil attributes, 7, 9, 21
subtle, 172
surface, 177
in texture, 200
Channel(s), 140, 172, 189, 196
contiguous spectral, 13
meandering, 311
multispectral, 172
subsurface ﬂow, 136
Chaotic, 23, 245, 345, 378
Chemical soil attribute, 7, 11, 18
Child node, 397, 398, 399
Choropleth (soil) map, 8, 138, 243, 257
Chrono
function, 17, 109
sequence, 109, 419
Chronocatena model, 19
Chronofunction, 17, 109
Circular variogram, 250–251
Class(es), 8, 10, 41, 130, 225–230
boundaries, 21, 40, 49, 50, 130
criteria, 11
fuzzy, 20
important features of, 40
multivariate, 190
overlapping, 40
prediction, 189
Classi ﬁcation
models, 20–22
scheme, 48, 69, 243
Classi ﬁcation and regression tree, 20, 190
Clay(s), 6, 26, 42, 50, 53, 134, 198
black, 82
content, 422
cokriging, 207
mapping, 186, 203
measurements, 186, 198, 207predicting, 189
semivariogram of, 345
variation, 345, 346
illuviation, 112
limestone and, 70sand and, 70
secondary, 64
wet, 135
Climate, 62
attributes and, 16
deﬁnitions, 39
as factor in soil formation, 16, 39, 67, 70, 
73, 77, 108
properties, 117
temperate, 114uniformity, 70, 80
variations, 43, 108
vegetation and, 71, 73, 96, 107
zone, 81, 95
Climofunction, 17
Clustering, 138, 190, 444
hierarchical, 21
nonhierarchical, 190
CO
2 emission rates, 344, 363–365
Coarse scale, 128, 360
Codispersion coef ﬁcient, 355
Coef ﬁcient, 413
correlation, 205, 206, 258
of determination (R2), 140
Fourier, 346
partition, 226
Pearson’s correlation, 205, 206, 259, 284
skewness, 270
of variation, 147
wavelet, 344, 348, 350, 351
Cokriging, 203, 206, 312
as extension of autokriging, 383heterotopic, 26
isotopic, 26
ordinary, 26, 312
prediction model, 186, 207
universal, 26
uses, 186, 200, 344, 374, 383
Compaction, 136, 137, 138, 279
Compilation
map, 45, 94, 178
Complex model, 24, 401
Complexity, 30, 39, 41, 374
of environmental systems, 374
fuzziness as concomitant of, 130
index, 54
pattern, 23, 53, 345
of prediction methods, 189
of spatial variability, 256Index 457
Component(s), 19, 23, 24, 26, 29, 39, 41, 46, 
85, 242, 256, 300
backscattered, 141delineation, 42deterministic, 23, 26, 189of DPWS, 170empiricism, 26essential, 109of fuzzy set, 220map, 147nugget effect, 312, 315range of values, 46of similarity model, 234slope pro ﬁle, 114
spatial, 267, 268, 269of spherical model, 260
Compositional ordinary kriging, 324, 325, 
334–335
Compound topographic index, 12, 187, 188, 189Concavity, 12, 253, 270, 274Conceptual model, 52, 107–110, 115
geomorphic, 117historical perspectives, 112, 114, 117integration of hydrologic characteristics 
using, 116
mathematical approach to, 108three-dimensional, 116–117
Conditional, 67
autoregressive model, 407cosimulation, 315, 316–317, 316–318distribution, 294, 311expectation, 291, 296, 305negative semide ﬁnite, 249
simulation, 67, 290, 294, 295, 297, 307, 310, 
311, 313, 317, 318, 319, 337
algorithms, 311applications, 294of Boolean random set, 310deﬁned, 292
intrinsic random functions, 301–302by kriging, 297–298in presence of nugget effect, 297–298
uses, 291–292, 294
spatial distribution, 292stimulation
independent, 298
Conditioning, 297–298, 302, 305, 310, 318Cone index, 20, 136
curves, 137soil texture and, 138
Con ﬁdence
interval, 206, 400limit, 245, 352, 354, 361Content Standard for Digital Geospatial 
Metadata, 143
Continuity, 28, 44, 243, 303, 425
Continuity equation, 425
Continuous ﬁeld model, 9, 131
Continuum, 10, 19, 221–223, 432
chain-like topographic, 43
limited, 55model, 38
multiproperty, 52
space–time, 3–29, 375
Contours, as relief representation for 
topographic maps, 162, 163
Contributing area, 118, 187, 195, 196
Control point, 161
Convexity, 12, 41, 116, 226, 227, 253, 282, 310, 
425
Cooperative Research Center for Landscape 
Evolution and Mineral Exploration, 9
Coordinate(s), 290
accurate mapping, 134
depth, 25
ﬁlm and photo system, 167
ground, 167, 172image and real-world, 168
pixel, 167
real-world system, 167
of soil observation, 133
spatial, 22, 25, 143, 167, 168, 189, 379
time, 25
transformation, 253
Coordinate system, 167
Core, 96, 198, 262, 312, 356, 357, 360, 402
Coregionalization, 260, 261, 284–285, 302, 312, 
315, 318
Correlation
coef ﬁcient, 205, 206, 258
length, 294
range, 251
Correlogram, 307
Cosimulation, 316–318
Covariance
function, 249, 258, 291, 293, 295, 301, 303, 
399
matrix, 297, 400
spatial, 246, 399
Covariation, 17, 24, 344, 355, 365–368
Covariogram, 310
Crisp(s)
conventional, 9
data, raster and, 131, 142
double crisp, 130
entities, 8, 19458 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
sets
fuzzy sets vs ., 21, 130, 217, 221
inﬂexibility of, 8
soil map
continuous vs ., 131
entities, 8polygon units, 131practicality of, 130production of, 20traditional, 10two-dimensional, 29unit model, 7–8
continuous ﬁeld model vs ., 9, 131
drawbacks of, 8practicality of, 8suitability of, 129
Cross
correlation, 259covariance, 258, 259, 260, 302section, 309semivariogram, 206variogram, 258, 259, 260–261, 284, 285, 
312
Cross-validation, 201, 270–276, 335, 336, 383
132Cs technique, 422
Cumulative distribution function, 23, 291Curvature
plan, 12, 194proﬁle, 118
Curve ﬁtted, 256
D
D8 ﬂow direction, 187
2D-model. See Two-dimensional model
2 1/2D-model. See Two and a half-dimensional 
model
3D-model. See Three-dimensional model
4D-model. See Four-dimensional model
5D-model. See Five-dimensional model
Darwin, Charles, 65, 88Data, 120
acquisition, 140collection, 11, 52, 75, 172, 368, 379management, 128, 131–133, 325
mining, 146, 236
model, 8, 129, 130, 131, 143, 144, 163, 202, 
234, 279, 376, 385, 395, 396
organization, 131pair, 24query, 131record, 47, 131, 132spacing, 164spatial, 21, 131, 142, 143, 186, 236, 340, 
343
storage, 131structure, 131, 377table, 146type, 132, 191, 378
Data model, 130, 131, 143, 144, 163, 202, 234, 
279, 376, 380, 385, 395, 396
comparisons, 131crisp, 8, 129errors, 202logical, 144, 379ontologies and, 376raster, 130, 234space–time information, 143vector, 234
Database(s), 50–51
management, 131–133object oriented, 132relational, 131–132
Datasets
attributes, 9environment, 142, 147, 148multidimensional, 14one-dimensional, 343
Daubechies’s wavelet, 350, 359Decision support model for agrotechnology 
transfer, 27
Decision-tree, 194Deductive science, 6, 31Dense sampling, 134, 138
Dependence, 247
directional, 27spatial, 243, 251, 273, 276, 277, 394, 396
Deposition, 7, 19, 70, 79, 113Depression, 41, 43, 75, 194
linear, 200
Depth, 13, 26, 128, 143, 145
A-horizon, 188coordinate, 25penetration, 141prediction, 135, 189weathering, 116
Descriptive model, 43–44Desktop virtual reality, 382, 386, 388Detachment, 425, 426, 429, 430Deterministic, 22
component, 23function, 24model, 22, 25, 28, 29, 30, 54, 108, 379, 439
alternative to, 439application, 130, 189component, 23, 26event, 144, 379, 380Index 459
factorial model as example of, 108
function, 24, 311
pedodynamics, 28, 29
process-based, 28requirements, 28
trend, 27
Detrending, 440, 446, 450Diagnostic horizon, 11, 49–50, 145
Dielectric constant, 135
Differential global positioning system, 382Diffuse re ﬂectance spectroscopy, 138, 139
Digital
imagery, 170
line graph, 163
number, 164orthophoto quadrangles, 163photogrammetry, 166, 169–170raster graphics, 159, 163
soil map, 13, 185–208
soil-terrain model, 96system, 180
Digital elevation model, 9, 12, 162, 163, 186, 
426, 427
accuracy, 186, 197, 207grids in, 430
scale and resolution of, 197
surface erosion model for, 425
Digital Photogrammetric Workstation (DPWS), 
170
Digital terrain modeling, 186–188, 379Dilations, wavelet, 348, 350, 351, 354Dimension(s)
ﬁnite, 295
ﬁve, 252
four, 143, 379, 382, 389
entity, 423properties, 420
space–time modeling, 380
virtual model, 374
one, 156, 248, 252
dataset, 343Gaussian IRF, 301
spatial, 326, 327, 423
three, 143, 144, 168, 170
association diagram, 85, 86basic unit, 19bulk density voxel model, 383catena representation, 80
catena unit, 12
ecosystem, 380geographic space, 25, 380graphics, 163interactive animation, 380
landform parameters, 116maps, 9
measurement, 167, 168
open-source graphics language, 380
polygon, 376polyhedron, 376, 378reconstruction, 9
regolith model, 9
SCORPAN model, 25simulation, 299, 310, 311
soil bodies, 7, 9, 91–92
soil horizon model, 9soil-terrain model, 383, 385subsurface features, 136
topographic DEM, 177
of topographic maps, 156two vs ., 9–10
variograms, 450
virtual models, 374
visualization, 380
two
catena representation, 80
crisp soil taxa maps, 29
discrete wavelet transform, 368GIS maps, 386GIS operations, 144
hillslope model, 114
landscape surfaces, 9maps, 9, 188ordinary kriging, 385, 387
polygon, 376
raster cell, 376simulation, 299, 310
three vs ., 9–10
of topographic maps, 156transformation, 167variogram of process, 253
two and a half, 9
Directional dependence, 27. See also  
Anisotropy
Discontinuity, 135Discretization, 7, 130, 222, 300
angle of, 249
disadvantages, 187points, 300
Discriminant analysis, 19, 190, 192, 195
Disjunctive kriging, 291
Dispersal area, 188, 195Distance
inverse weighting, 22
linear function, 22
soil characteristics, 114
Distribution
Gaussian, 203, 290, 337, 399460 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
normal, 296, 303
Poisson, 309
Disturbance, 30, 418, 421, 426, 431Dokuchaev, Vasilii Vasilevich, 62, 65, 72–73, 80Domain, 22, 144
application, 219, 227
attribute, 11, 30, 221, 222bounded, 290, 309, 310membership functions and, 219, 229pedological processes in, 9reﬂectometry, 26, 443
soil attributes and, 11, 30
space–time, 29, 437, 438, 441
spatial, 216, 221, 222, 259, 284, 375
Doube spherical function, 274Downscaling, 301DPWS. See Digital Photogrammetric 
Workstation (DPWS)
Drainage
class, 11, 53, 191, 192, 193, 196
proximity index, 189
Drainage proximity index, 189Drift, 26, 69, 189, 255, 274, 302, 356
coef ﬁcients, 440, 442
deterministic, 439kriging with external, 26, 444
precipitation-driven, 446, 448, 450
short-range, 256in space–time model, 439of varying composition, 345
DSSAT, 27Dynamic wetness index, 188
E
Easting, 25, 133, 143, 145, 189, 379Ecology, 30, 87, 89Ecosystem, 6, 16, 107 374
degradation, 4, 5processes, 29, 388properties, 109
Effective range, 273
Electrical conductivity, 18, 134, 193, 242, 261, 
269, 281
Electromagnetic
ﬁeld, 134
waves, 443
Electromagnetic induction, 11, 134–135Elevation, 10, 76
change in, 157
data, 162, 164
availability of, 188point, 199
raw, 198, 203
determination, 157, 176measurement, 198
portrayal, 156
soil erosion processes and, 197surveying, 198
Emerging geographic information technologies, 
4, 128–147. See also  speci ﬁc 
technologies, e.g., Ground 
penetrating radar
Empirical variogram, 403
Empiricism, 4, 7, 12, 19, 439
components, 26modeling and, 422paradigms and, 29statistics and, 27
Enhanced Thematic Mapper, 13
Entity (model), 30, 129, 145, 225, 423Entropy, 226, 303, 337Environment
attribute, 22, 23, 30, 376
changes, 14, 40, 130
climate and, 6complex systems, 374, 381correlation, 75, 90, 96data, 229, 233
display of, 382
layers, 234science of, 420, 437, 438
datasets, 142, 147, 148, 374, 388effect of human impact on, 423
factors, 4, 6, 18, 28, 229, 374
combined, 96formative, 221integration of, 29linkage between, 380
soil attributes and, 30
soil mapping and, 77
formative, 229, 235geostatistics and, 26properties, 21
protection, 423
quality, 4, 5, 16, 29
assessment of, 141
reality, 381rural, 381
three-dimensional, 381
variables, 6, 17, 142, 375virtual, 374, 386
Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc., 
142
Environmental Visualization System, 385
Environmetrics, pedometrics and, 16Index 461
Erosion, 5, 43, 422, 428, 429
landform, 115model, 425pattern, 428processes, 197
Error(s), 13
acceptable, 45allowable, 56–57boundary, 50data model, 202expected, 262, 426fuzzy partition, 225interpolation, 337, 439
kriging, 291, 297, 298
location, 45measurement, 13, 251, 300, 394, 400model, 202, 208, 396, 426prediction, 30, 291, 334, 378, 395, 400, 448probable, 50propagation, 203, 208
root mean square, 198, 203, 204
SCORPAN factors and, 203slope, 204squared, 225, 273standard, 298, 403, 404, 415variance, 400, 401, 403, 405, 408, 413, 415vector, 133
ESTDM. See Event-Based Spatio-Temporal 
Data Model (ESTDM)
Estimation, 206, 440
local, mapping and, 286variance, 245, 264, 265, 298of variogram parameters, 441
Euclidean distance, 440Event-Based Spatio-Temporal Data Model 
(ESTDM), 144, 380
Exhaustive
datasets, 13, 128, 135pixel-based thematic maps, 141sampling, 13
Exogenous factors, 23Expectation-maximization algorithm, 396, 400, 
403
Expected error, 262, 426
Experimental
cross-semivariances, 261cross-variogram, 261, 284semivariances, 273variogram, 242, 248, 251, 252, 255, 256, 
261, 266, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 281, 283, 284, 312, 314, 317, 441Expert
knowledge, 25, 130, 227, 229, 230, 237system, 192
Explanatory variable, 18, 394, 396, 398, 401, 
402, 403, 408, 413, 439, 446
Exponential
covariance, 293, 303, 304
function, 242, 252, 272, 273, 278, 282growth, 23model, 250, 252, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 
315
variogram, 317, 394
eXtensible Markup Language, 143
External
drift kriging, 26, 189, 440, 442, 444features, 76, 92, 93, 326ﬂux, 109
External Authoring Interfaces, 374, 382External drift kriging, 26, 189, 440, 442, 444External variable, 26
Extragrades, 49, 226, 227
Extrinsic variability, 30
F
Factor combinations, 25, 138Factorial concept, 16–18, 76–77, 107–109, 110
kriging and, 266–269, 280, 300
Factorial kriging analysis, 267
Family, 49, 143, 250, 301
Federal Geographic Data Committee, 133, 142Field
capacity, 269legends, 43mapping, 42, 52, 53, 76, 198scale, 128, 134
view, 129
Filtering
ﬁne-to-coarse resolution, 401
geomembrane, 4Kalman, 29, 394
Fine-
resolution, 188, 197, 201, 397
scale, 128, 129, 348
Finite-
dimensional distributions, 292, 295element, 9, 425number, 24, 29, 290, 310, 393variance, 300, 350
Fitted
curve, 256exponential function, 282462 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
model, 189, 202, 250, 256, 257, 271, 272, 
273, 275, 281, 284, 285, 312
semivariances, 257trend function, 275variogram, 266, 268, 274, 278, 441, 446
Five-dimensional model, 252
Flood plains, 159
Flow
algorithms, 187, 425barrier, 291, 303direction, 187, 195lines, 12routing, 426, 431subsurface, 19
Food and Agricultural Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO), 50, 145, 324, 419
Four-dimensional model, 143, 379, 382, 389
entity, 423properties, 420
space–time modeling, 380
virtual model, 374
Fourier
coef ﬁcient, 346
transform(ation), 346, 347
Fractal
dimensions, 53, 54theory, 52
Frequency distribution, 324, 421Fuzzy
c-means (k means), 21, 225, 226, 229class, 20
logic, 40, 193, 215–238
Boolean logic vs ., 216
membership, 230–232set(s), 130
crisp set vs ., 21, 130, 217, 221
deﬁned, 217–220
membership functions, 219, 227–229
metrics of, 228
simple operations, 220–221theory, 216–221
class centroid in, 225–227possibility and, 221
raster GIS models and, 234
representation of soils with, 223–232
variables, 20
Fuzzy c-means, 229
kriging and, 229
G
Gamma radiometry, 26, 141, 195Gaussian
distribution, 203, 290, 337, 399
random function, 291
random variable, 291simulation
sequential, 296–297, 353truncated, 304, 306–307, 308
transformation, 295–296, 315–316
variogram, 291
Generalized additive model, 190Generalized linear model, 190Genesis, 4, 6, 14, 57, 97, 108, 147, 418Geodatabase, 143
Geodetic network, 161
Geographic
coordinate, 133, 134, 379data model, 129, 130, 131, 376, 385dataset, 386
domain, 221, 232, 388
information science, 234information technology, 127–148reference system, 163
Geographic boundary. See Boundary(ies)
Geographic feature, 8, 143, 234
Geographic information systems, 6, 118, 131, 
141–145, 216, 232
applications, 186history, 142ontology-driven, 376
Geographic location, 8, 20, 25, 133
prediction of soil attributes at unsampled, 
134
Geographic Markup Language, 143
Geographic position, 24Geographic reconstruction, 10Geographic space, 4, 7–10, 21, 23, 232
deﬁned, 130
discretization, 7, 378
mapping soils in, 133three-dimensional, 25, 380two- vs . three-dimensional, 9–10
variability of soil attributes in, 11
Geography, 30, 41, 63
geology and, 62plant, 62, 63, 71soil formation and, 74
Geology, 8, 63, 69
agricultural, 64
changes in, 346
engineering, 112evolutionist approach to, 113formation, 68, 74, 94geography and, 62
quaternary, 63, 68, 97Index 463
soil mapping and, 67
statistical techniques, 107
Geomorphology, 106, 113
Geophysical techniques, 134–136Georeferencing, 130, 133, 167, 382
Geospatial Data Clearinghouse, 133
Geospatial model, 22–26
multivariate, 24–26
Geostatistics, 55, 245–258
autocorrelation in, 247intrinsic variation, 247–248
random variables and random functions in, 
245–246
soil classi ﬁcation and, 257–258
space–time, 437–450
application, 442–448
best linear unbiased predictor in, 448Bilonick model, 441case study of, 442–448
characterizing variability, 438–441
decomposition of space–time signal into 
drift and stochastic residual, 439–440
kriging, 441–442, 444, 447–448
product-sum model, 440–441
statistical characterization of stochastic 
residual, 440–441
stationarity in, 246–247
theoretical basis, 245
variogram, 247–254
conditional negative semide ﬁnite, 249
estimating the, 248–249
Gaussian, 291
models of, 249–254
anistropy, 253–254, 255
circular, 250–251
exponential, 252ﬁtting, 256–257
pentaspherical, 251–252
with reverse curvature at origin,
252
spherical, 251
unbounded, 252–253, 301–302
principal features of, 250
Glacial till, 55, 138, 382, 383Glinka, Konstantine Dimitrievich, 65, 73–74
Glinka–Marbut zonal soil concept, 74
Global
mean, 27
neighborhood, 298
positioning system, 62, 128, 133–134, 167
accuracy, 134
carrier-phase, 185differential, 382
differential vs . autonomous, 133
features, 133GIS and, 133handheld, 134
trend, 164
Global interpolation methods, 22Gradient, 187, 192, 267, 291, 420, 425, 426, 
427, 429, 430, 431
decreasing, 252gentle, 157increasing, 255slope, 102, 116
steep, 157
Gradual
boundary, 333, 334trend, 255variation, 375
Great (soil) group, 11, 49
Grid(s), 22, 248, 426
in DEM, 430large, 297nested, 133nodes, 269, 312points, 327pseudoregular, 312
resolution, 13, 140
sampling, 13, 128small, 297themes, 9triangulated irregular networks from, 164whole, 307
Grid cell, 187
contiguous, 395
function, 7
Ground, control points, 167Ground penetrating radar, 11
antenna, 135applications, 136function, 135
for soil-landscape mapping, 135–136
wave properties, 135
Ground surveying, 161–162GStat software, 447
H
Hardware, 30, 142
Harvard Laboratory for Computer Graphics and 
Spatial Analysis, 142
Heterogeneity, 128, 134, 338, 382
spatial, 418, 421, 426, 427464 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Hierarchical
database structure, 131model, 376
High resolution, 26, 128, 129, 146, 148, 172, 
195, 443
Hilgard, Eugene, 65, 74–75Hillslope models, 114–118
History
of geographic information systems, 142of soil-landscape modeling, 4, 14, 15, 19, 
62, 64, 69, 71, 97
of soil mapping techniques, 75
Holistic perception, 4, 5Homogeneity, 21, 30, 130, 135, 234, 243, 330, 
397
Horizon, 7, 9, 135, 136, 137, 191, 195, 376, 377, 
385
Humboldt, Alexander von, 62, 65, 70–72
Hybrid(s)
digital images, 163GIS, 26, 131modeling, 26, 131, 147, 163
geostatistical, 26methods, 107, 189
multivariate, 107
techniques, 26, 107
Hydraulic conductivity, 13, 19, 131, 188, 291, 
294, 442
Hydromorphic
feature, 81, 194index, 195
Hydrosphere, 4Hyperspectral images, 13, 140, 141Hypsographic data, 164
I
IKONOS, 13, 140, 181, 196Illuviation, 112, 143Image
analysis, 292orientation, 167
In-situ measurement, 11, 134, 135, 356, 358, 
368
Inclusion, 40, 77, 189, 233
limiting, 43
Independent
conditional stimulation, 298observations, 20value, 303variables, 16, 17, 22, 109
Indicator
function, 291kriging, 23, 337
morphogenetic, 11nested, 305, 306simulation, 290, 304, 305–306
Inductive science, 31
Inertial navigation system (INS), 167, 172
Inﬁltration rate, 438
Information systems, 145–147Information technology, 43, 128–147, 379, 420Infrared, 13, 138, 139, 140, 141, 170, 172, 193Interferometric synthetic aperture radar 
(IfSAR), 177
Interferometry, 177International Soil and Reference Information 
Center, 147
Internet, 128, 133, 143, 374, 380, 381, 388Interpolation, 331–339
error, 337, 439methods, 22, 334precision, 333space–time, 442–448spatial, 75, 229, 442, 448
uncertainties, 337
Intragrades, 226, 227Intrazonal concepts, 107Intrinsic
hypothesis, 247, 345random function, 301–302, 345, 369thresholds, 105, 112variability, 30
Inventory, 46, 145, 146, 147, 216, 330Inverse distance weighting, 22Inverse relation, 279, 299Iron, 140
eluviation, 26
Irregular
interval, 248
lattice, 395
Irregularly scattered data, 249, 273Isotropy, 29, 250, 253, 266, 270, 299, 300, 440, 
448
J
Jenny’s soil factorial model, 16–18, 107–109
Joint distribution, 301, 402
K
k-means clustering, 190
Kalman ﬁltering, 29, 394Index 465
Knowledge
expert, 25, 130, 227, 229, 230, 237
process, 28, 29, 437, 448
tacit, 7, 17, 18, 21, 38, 128
Knowledge-based
approach, 229, 230, 236
membership functions, 227
Kriging, 24, 261–269, 276–283, 438
block, 301, 336
cokriging, 23, 26, 186, 189, 200, 203, 206, 
207, 300, 344, 374, 383 ( See 
Cokriging)
compositional ordinary, 324, 325, 334–335
conditioning by, 297–298
disjunctive, 291error, 291, 298
estimation, 395
with external drift, 189, 440, 442, 444
factorial, 266–269, 280, 300
fuzzy c-means and, 229indicator, 23, 337
with a known mean, 296
maps, 314matrix, 266, 333
multidimensional, 138
ordinary, 144, 219, 267, 324, 331–333, 377
compositional, 324, 334–335
estimate, 262
illustration of, 276with integrated properties of map 
delineations, 333–334
linear models of, 190
punctual, 263soil layer depth, 377
space–time, 444
strati ﬁed, 334
two-dimensional, 385, 387
with process model, 345regression, 23, 26, 189
simple, 291, 296, 305, 395, 442
in soil texture mapping, 331–335space–time, 441–442, 444, 447–448
with external drift, 444, 446
space–time ordinary, 444standard error, 298
system, 263, 264, 266, 267, 268, 296
universal, 23, 26, 302, 345, 395, 440, 442with a unknown mean, 296
variance, 276, 277, 291, 292, 296, 298, 307, 
333, 335, 337
weights, 264, 442L
Lag, 247, 257, 270, 271, 272, 327
differences, 344
distance, 24, 206, 247, 248
interval, 273
long, 280
short, 257spatial, 328
Lagrange
multiplier, 263, 264, 268parameter, 333, 335
Land
capability, 43cover, 4, 6, 12, 26, 169, 379, 418
resource, 29, 146
management of, 6, 141
resource management, 6, 29, 141
suitability, 230, 232, 292
surface unit, 12unit, 46, 419
use, 47, 90, 141, 169, 374, 375, 378, 381, 
418, 420
use management, 45, 385, 420use suitability, 292
Landform, 18, 42, 74
characterization, 189delineations, 46
drainage, 131
elements, 118erosional, 115
examples, 43
natural, 6parameters, 116
quantitative classi ﬁcation, 118
Landsat Enhanced Thematic Mapper, 13, 140, 
171, 193
Landscape
modeling, 52, 112–118 ( See also  Soil-
terrain modeling)
accurate, 4, 29
case study, 424–431
catena model, 12, 18–19, 44, 77–87classi ﬁcation of, 20–21
complexity of, 41
descriptive, 43–44development of, 64
factorial vs . system approach, 110
factors that affect, 11–14four-dimensional, 379
geomorphology and, 63
geospatial, 22–26 ( See also  
Geostatistics)
hillslope, 114–118466 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
historical perspectives, 4, 15, 62, 63, 64, 
71
holistic, 4, 6, 14, 147
implication for, 39
Jenny’s soil factorial model, 16–18, 
107–109
one-dimensional, 379parameters and assumptions, 425–426quaternary geology and, 63scale issues in, 420–423
soil maps and, 6–7
space and time concepts in, 378–380space–time, 26–29spatial analysis of, 7–9, 118spatial discretization methods for, 7–9
system vs . factorial approach, 110
techniques, 4three-dimensional, 379two-dimensional, 379virtual, 374–389
unit, 21, 27, 30, 43, 45, 79
Landscape position, 12, 40, 75, 80, 81
variations, 92
LAPSUS, 425Laser
diffractometry, 324
pulse, 172, 173
Latin hypercube sampling, 186, 203, 337Latitude, 177, 402, 424Lattice
data, 394, 415data modeling, 395–396
irregular, 395
kriging in, 396regular, 395space model, 45, 393–415
Layer(s), 7, 26
contour, 178
data, 234GIS, 46organic matter, 53soil-forming factor, 142
subsurface, 135, 136
surface, 136transportation, 178uniform, 91
Leaching, 19, 109, 110
catenas, 19
chemical, 81, 143, 327, 379, 388, 420
nitrate, 143, 327, 379, 388, 420nitrogen, 327proﬁle, 67
spatiotemporal semivariogram, 27
Leaf area index, 270, 274, 275, 283, 284Least-square, 256, 312
method, 22
regression, 139, 274
Legend(s), 41, 64, 131, 233, 329, 330, 377
designs, 46
ﬁeld, 43
mapping, 42, 43
morphometric properties, 419
uniform, 145
Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), 
172–175
Line(s), 45, 63, 137, 156, 179
boundary, 69
contour, 156, 157, 160, 162, 178, 186
digital, 163digitized, 180
drainage, 94
ﬂight, 166, 167, 169
ﬂow, 12
isohumus, 72
isothermal, 65
outcrop, 69
shore, 156, 158
Linear
combinations, 190, 260, 267, 268, 302, 317, 
444
generalized, 18
interpolator, 22
model
of coregionalization, 260, 261, 284, 285, 
302, 312, 315, 318
generalized, 190
multiresolution tree-structured, 397–402
global variation in, 398
local variation in, 398–400
measurement error in, 400
prediction of soil properties with, 
413–415
selection and evaluation of, 401–402
statistical inference, 400–401
spatial, 393, 394, 397–402, 404, 406, 
407, 411, 412, 415
statistical, 115
regression, 188, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 
394
multiple, 26, 188, 189, 190, 192
transformation, 253, 300
trend, 274, 283, 284
Linnaeus, 65, 88
Lithofunction, 17, 109
Lithosphere, 4
Local
ﬁtting function, 22
interpolation methods, 22Index 467
mean, 268
neighborhood, 23, 186, 298
variability, 73, 82, 92, 294variation, 22, 77, 274, 294, 343, 347, 348, 
394, 395, 396, 398, 400
Location(s), 8, 20, 23, 42, 48, 69, 161, 172, 222
coordinate, 133deﬁning, 311
determination, 167
error, 45georeferenced, 130, 133, 382
points, 45
sample, 13, 133, 206, 382, 403unsampled, 20, 22, 30, 134, 291, 383
Log-transformed, 358, 359, 363, 365, 444
Logarithm, 270, 328, 358Logical model, 131
Logistic regression, 196
Long-range, 11, 22, 242, 268, 269, 274, 312
prediction, 279
trend, 242, 254, 256, 265
Longitude, 177, 402, 424
M
Machine learning, 229Macrocatena, 84Magnesium, 135, 140, 242, 251, 270, 273, 275, 
277, 415
Major soil group (MSG), 135, 140, 242, 251, 
270, 273, 275, 277, 415
Management, 43, 279
agricultural, 420
conservation, 420
crop, 318data, 128, 325
human, 70
land, 16, 44, 45, 70, 97, 418, 420location-dependent, 311
resource, 6, 233
soil, 324, 326water, 44
Manganese, 140
Map(s)
accuracy, 45, 162, 179–180
block kriged, 276, 278
compilation, 45, 94, 178digitizing data, 180
editing, 179
fuzzy membership, 230perspective, 160
printing, 179production, 160–180
digital cameras in, 170–172
gathering data for, 160–162
light detection and ranging in, 172–175photogrammetry and, 165–170
relief representation in, 162–164
scale, 40, 45, 46, 50, 128, 141, 146, 232, 233thematic, 9, 141, 143
topographic, 156–181 ( See also  
Topographic map(s))
in Australia, 158in Brazil, 158
in Canada, 158–159
in China, 159deﬁned, 156–159
in Germany, 159
in India, 159national efforts, 157–159production, 160–180
digital cameras in, 170–172
gathering data for, 160–162light detection and ranging in, 
172–175
photogrammetry and, 165–170
relief representation in, 162–164
in Scandinavia, 159
in United Kingdom, 159
in United States, 159
unit, 6, 7, 8, 21, 41, 43, 49, 52–53, 67, 75, 
85, 94, 141, 880
unit identi ﬁcation number (MUID), 146
unit test models, 7–8, 52–53
Mapping, 41. See also  Map(s)
delineations, 54, 55, 67
digital base, 50
legends, 42nonsoil features, 42
paradigm, 129–131, 147
soil-landscape models and, 6–7space shuttle radar topographic experiment, 
177
techniques, 11
topographic, 156–181 ( See also  
Topographic map(s))
in Australia, 158in Brazil, 158
in Canada, 158–159
in China, 159deﬁned, 156–159
in Germany, 159
in India, 159national efforts, 157–159
in Scandinavia, 159468 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
in United Kingdom, 159
in United States, 159
Marbut, Curtis Fletcher, 62, 65, 68–69, 74, 
87–92
Marked point progress, 307
Markov procedure, 310
Mass balance modeling, 111–112Matlab, 446Matrix, 333, 378
of coef ﬁcients, 260
form, 263global covariance, 297partial correlation, 200of semivariances, 264
variance-covariance, 400
weighting, 225
Maximal overlap discrete wavelet transform, 
352, 353
adapted, 352, 353, 354, 355, 361, 362, 366
Maximum likelihood, 26, 396, 398, 400, 401, 
403
McBratney’s model, 25Mean
error, 273global, 27
square error, 273
square prediction error, 395, 400
Measurement(s)
bulk density, 382, 384clay content, 186, 198, 207
elevation, 198
error, 13, 251, 300, 394, 400in-situ, 11, 134, 135, 356, 368non-destructive, 443
point, 173, 422
three-dimensional model, 167, 168
Median range, 203Membership
function, 8, 130, 218, 219, 227–229
map, 225
fuzzy, 229–230
Metadata, 9, 143Metal(s)
concentration, 290
extraction, 138
Method(s)
geostatistical, 107, 131, 142, 148, 189, 201, 
305, 343, 344, 377, 437
least-square, 22, 312
mathematical, 4, 14, 147
qualitative, 4, 191quantitative, 4, 16, 41, 147, 191, 344statistical, 14, 20, 115, 139, 147, 190, 380
Mexican hat wavelet, 348Microcatena, 84
Microscale, 300Microwave signal, 176Milne, Geoffrey, 63, 65, 77–80, 82–84
Mineral, 28, 48, 112, 134, 135, 140, 194, 290, 
326, 403
Model
catena, 12, 18–19, 44, 77–87
accumulation, 19
applications, 85–87
classi ﬁcation, 19
debates, 65deﬁned, 18, 77–80, 84
description, 43
grouping, 19
historical perspectives, 62, 77–87leaching, 19soil association vs ., 83–85
three-dimensional, 12, 80
transformation, 19
two-dimensional, 80types, 114
complex, 24, 401, 402
conceptual, 52, 107–110, 115
geomorphic, 117historical perspectives, 112, 114, 117integration of hydrologic characteristics 
using, 116
mathematical approach to, 108
three-dimensional, 116–117
conditional autoregressive, 402continuous, 8, 242continuous- ﬁeld, 7, 8, 9
crisp, 7–8
continuous ﬁeld model vs ., 9, 131
drawbacks of, 8practicality of, 8suitability of, 129
cross-semivariogram, 206
descriptive, 43–44, 57, 114deterministic, 22, 25, 28, 29, 30, 54, 108, 
379, 439
alternative to, 439application, 130, 189
component, 23, 26
event, 144, 379, 380factorial model as example of, 108function, 24, 311pedodynamics, 28, 29
process-based, 28
requirements, 28
digital elevation, 9, 12, 162, 163, 186, 426, 
427
accuracy, 186, 197, 207Index 469
grids in, 430
scale and resolution of, 197surface erosion model for, 425
discrete, 330empirical, 62, 108, 422factorial, 16–18, 107–109four-dimensional, 143, 379, 382, 389
entity, 423properties, 420space–time modeling, 380virtual model, 374
fuzzy, 232–236genetic, 42, 110geostatistical, 24, 261–266, 393, 396, 438hillslope, 114–118Jenny, 16–18, 107–109mass balance, 111–112mechanistic, 27, 28, 29, 374mental, 14, 18, 46, 242, 243, 245moving average, 402multi-scale, 25, 400, 417–432multi-variate, 17, 24–26numerical, 291, 376one-dimensional, 156, 248, 252
dataset, 343Gaussian IRF, 301
parameter, 107, 167, 186, 234, 252, 261, 
272, 274, 285, 331, 396, 398, 401, 415, 426
pedodynamic, 28pedogenetic, 374
predictive, 188
probabilistic, 290process, 26, 28, 55, 110–118process-response, 112qualitative, 18, 62quantitative, 62SCORPAN, 25, 203semivariogram, 27simple, 266, 310, 327, 417, 422simultaneous autoregressive, 402soil-forming factors, 18, 39, 192, 374soil-landscape, 52, 112–118 ( See also  Soil-
terrain modeling)
accurate, 4, 29case study, 424–431catena, 12, 18–19, 44, 77–87classi ﬁcation of, 20–21
complexity of, 41descriptive, 43–44development of, 64factorial vs . system approach, 110
factors that affect, 11–14four-dimensional, 379geomorphology and, 63
geospatial, 22–26 ( See also  
Geostatistics)
hillslope, 114–118
historical perspectives, 4, 15, 62, 63, 64, 
71
holistic, 4, 6, 14, 147
holistic approach, 4, 14, 29, 147
implication for, 39
Jenny’s soil factorial model, 16–18, 
107–109
one-dimensional, 379
parameters and assumptions, 425–426
quaternary geology and, 63
scale issues in, 420–423
soil maps and, 6–7
space and time concepts in, 378–380
space–time, 26–29
spatial analysis of, 7–9, 118spatial discretization methods for, 7–9
system vs . factorial approach, 110
techniques, 4
three-dimensional, 379
two-dimensional, 379
virtual, 374–389
space–time, 27, 145, 379, 439
four-dimensional, 380
spatial lattice, 393–415
comparisons, 408, 413
multiresolution tree-structured linear, 
397–402
global variation in, 398
local variation in, 398–400
measurement error in, 400
prediction of soil properties with, 
413–415
selection and evaluation of, 401–402
statistical inference, 400–401
selection and parameter estimation, 
405–408
spatial state-space, 27
stable, 250, 252, 275
state-space, 27, 29
statistical, 437
stochastic, 29, 242three-dimensional
basic unit, 19
bulk density voxel model, 383
catena representation, 80
catena unit, 12
ecosystem, 380
geographic space, 25, 380
graphics, 163
interactive animation, 380470 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
landform parameters, 116
maps, 9
measurement, 167, 168
open-source graphics language, 380point, 168
polygon, 376
polyhedron, 376, 378reconstruction, 9regolith model, 9
SCORPAN model, 25, 203
simulation, 299, 310, 311soil bodies, 7, 9, 91–92soil horizon model, 9
soil-terrain model, 383, 385
subsurface features, 136topographic DEM, 177
of topographic maps, 156
two- vs ., 9–10
variograms, 450virtual models, 374
visualization, 380
time series, 27topography sequence, 78, 85
trend, 23
two and a half-dimensional, 9two-dimensional
catena representation, 80
crisp soil taxa maps, 29
discrete wavelet transform, 368geographic features, in a three-
dimensional view, 379
GIS maps, 386
GIS operations, 144
hillslope model, 114landscape surfaces, 9
maps, 9, 188
ordinary kriging, 385, 387polygon, 376raster cell, 376
simulation, 299, 310
three- vs ., 9–10
of topographic maps, 156transformation, 167
variogram of process, 253
vertical pro ﬁle, 91
univariate, 17, 24
variogram, 249–254
anistropy, 253–254, 255circular, 250–251exponential, 252
ﬁtting, 256–257
pentaspherical, 251–252with reverse curvature at origin, 252spherical, 251
unbounded, 252–253, 301–302
verbal, 62, 110
Modern regression techniques, 189Moisture, 13, 39, 44, 73, 117, 135
content, 118, 138, 294, 357retention characteristics, 20, 442
Moment, 246, 259, 291, 347, 378Monitoring, 12, 146, 443
137Cs technique for, 422
designs, 439long-term, 423SAR imagery for, 141
Monte-Carlo techniques, 290
for wavelet variance and change detection, 
353
Moran I, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 413Morphogenetic indicators, 11Morphological soil attribute, 11, 128, 146, 188Morphology, 12, 39, 40, 41, 75, 88, 95, 118, 
146, 237, 303
Mother wavelet, 347Moving
average, 402
neighborhood, 268window, 346
Multi-
media, 374, 381, 388resolution, 6, 7resolution analysis, 350, 351, 359–361resolution tree-structured spatial linear 
model, 397–402
scale, 25spectral data, 171variate, 17, 21, 23, 24, 26, 106, 107, 115, 
139, 189, 190, 230, 290, 293, 294, 301, 302, 303, 311, 344, 346, 382
variate adaptive regression splines (MARS), 
139
variate analysis, 346variate conditional distribution, 294variate distribution, 293, 303, 311variate geostatistical techniques, 23, 26, 189variate probability distribution, 439variate simulation, 302
Multidimensionality, 138, 144, 145, 156, 292, 
379, 380, 382, 440
Multiple
ﬂow algorithm, 425
linear regression, 26, 188, 189, 190, 192
Multivariate geospatial model, 24–26Munsell color, 42, 56Index 471
N
National Cooperative Soil Survey, 68
National Geodetic Survey, 158
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, 177National Map Accuracy Standards, 179
National Soil Geographic Database, 46, 50
National Soil Information System, 51National Spatial Data Infrastructure, 133
Natural breaks, 8
Natural resources, 6, 16, 46, 292, 423Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(NRCS), 51, 129, 224, 402
Nearest neighbor, 22
Negative, semide ﬁnite, 249
Neighborhood, 254, 298, 333
change, 298global, 298
local, 23, 186, 298
moving, 268
Nested
design, 327
hierarchical, 48indicators, 305, 306
model, 327
sampling, 324, 326subspace, 351
Nikiforoff’s ﬁeld classi ﬁcation of soils, 81
Nitrate, 13, 138, 144, 169, 325
leaching, 143, 327, 379, 388, 420
Nitrogen, 11, 13, 18, 140, 144, 145, 188, 290, 
311, 312, 313, 318
leaching, 327
Nitrous oxide, 356
Node
child, 397, 398, 399
encoding, 378
grid, 269, 312parent, 397, 398, 399, 401
root, 398, 399
Noise, 21, 24, 318, 393
variance, 399, 400, 403, 405
white, 318
zero-mean, 394
Non-
conditional stimulation, 292, 294, 297, 298, 
300, 301, 302, 317, 318
destructive measurement, 443
Gaussian random function, 295, 300, 303
linear, 23, 30, 107, 189, 190, 256, 290, 415, 
418
parametric, 306, 337
stationarity, 290
stationary, 30, 302, 307, 346, 368, 439stationary ﬁeld, 294
uniformity, 361
Normal
distribution, 296, 303
score transform, 295
Northing, 25, 133, 143, 189, 379Nugget, 252, 266
effect, 251, 260, 265, 266, 272, 273, 
297–298, 300, 312, 315, 328, 400, 445
parameter, 326temporal, 446
Numerical
modeling, 291, 376optimization, 441
Nutrient content, 290
O
Object
-based simulation, 307–311
-oriented database, 132
Objective function, 226, 227Observation, 106
coarseness of geological, 421decomposing, 393empirical, 7, 19, 106ﬁeld, 11, 222, 229, 235
fuzzy c-means partition, 21independent, 20pedon properties, 130point, 9, 11, 13, 14remote sensing, 301
soil, 43, 62, 133, 134, 138, 146, 188
soil-landscape, 38space–time, 438topographic, 157
One-dimensional model, 156, 248, 252
dataset, 343Gaussian IRF, 301
Ontological modeling, 374, 376Open GIS Consortium, 143Ordinary
cokriging, 312conditional stimulation, 307
kriging, 331–333, 385, 387
compositional, 324, 325, 334–335estimate, 262illustration of, 276with integrated properties of map 
delineations, 333–334
linear models of, 190punctual, 263472 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
soil layer depth, 377
space–time, 444
strati ﬁed, 334
two-dimensional, 387
punctual (point) kriging, 263
Ordination technique, 19, 192, 193
Organic carbon (matter), 18, 56, 344, 358, 365Orientation, 132, 135, 423
absolute, 166, 167, 168
exterior, 166, 167image, 167, 170, 171
interior, 166, 167, 168
parameters, 167polarization, 170
relative, 166, 167, 170
Origin, 113
catena concept, 77–80
geostatistics, 438
intuitive, 20models with reverse curvatures at, 252
ORTHOD model, 28
P
Pairs, 315
aerial images, 166, 167
data, 24
of fuzzy sets, 226ordered, 217
of points, 292
of variables, 404
Panchromatic image, 171
Parameter(s), 425–426
estimation, 406–407, 407–412Lagrange, 333, 335
landform, 116
model, 107, 167, 186, 234, 252, 261, 272, 
274, 285, 331, 396, 398, 401, 415, 426
nugget, 326orientation, 167
scale, 317
unknown, 400user-de ﬁned, 388
variogram, 441
Parent
node, 397, 398, 399, 401
rock, 39, 73, 76, 78, 84, 88, 95, 107
Parsimonious model, 401Parsimony, 190, 191, 257
Partial least square regression (PLSR), 139
Particle, 425
diameter, 324, 325size, 51, 137, 269, 324
size distribution, 69
Pattern, 276
complex, 23, 53, 345
contour lines, 157deterministic, 54
distribution, 45, 85
erosion, 428
heterogeneous, 129
irrigation, 443, 444, 447
large-scale, 318
linear, 157, 206, 339lithological variation, 70
local, 54
long, 39
morphological, 146
patterns within, 55
random, 375
repetitive, 146of sediment deposition, 70
simple, 53
soil, 42, 50, 129, 383, 385
spatial, 23, 55, 413, 415, 427–430, 440, 443
on two-dimensional landscape surfaces, 9
of variation, 282, 364
Pearson’s correlation coef ﬁcient, 205, 206, 259, 
284
Ped, 13
Pedodiversity, 5Pedodynamic modeling, 28, 29
Pedogenesis, 28, 42, 128, 419
Pedogenetic modeling, 374
Pedological processes, 9
Pedology
continuum concept as part of, 55
development, 28, 63historical perspectives, 62, 108
paradigm shift in, 128
Pedometrics, 4, 14–29
deﬁned, 14
environmetrics and, 16
interdisciplinary nature, 14
Pedon, 14, 92, 129
deﬁned, 419
identity, 56as mapping unit, 6
multiple, 13
properties, 130
prototypical, 222
uniqueness, 30
Pedosphere, 4, 38, 41
Pedotransfer function, 17, 19, 20, 336
derivation of, 138
development, 147Index 473
Penetration resistance, 13, 136, 137, 138, 381
Penetrometer, 11, 382Penman equation, 444Pentaspherical variogram, 251–252Permeability, 303Perspective maps, 160pH, 7, 140, 242, 243, 244, 248, 273, 274, 346, 
415
Phases, 44Philosophy, 5, 47, 71, 106Phosphorus, 11, 138, 142, 191, 195, 376, 398, 
403, 415
extraction, 138
Photogrammetry, 165–170
aerial triangulation in, 167–168analog aerial, 168–169analytical, 168digital, 169–170
workstations, 170
geometry of, 166orientation in, 167
absolute, 167direct georeferencing, 167exterior, 167image, 167interior, 167real-world coordinate system, 167relative, 167
stereo model, 164, 167, 168, 178
Physical soil attribute, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 
191, 251, 419
Physiography, 43, 68, 76, 81, 95, 282, 283Pipette method. See Sieve-and-pipette method
Pixel, 7, 9, 167Plan curvature, 12, 118, 187Planar section, 299Plane table surveying, 160–161Podzolization, 26Point
control, 161measurement, 173, 422observation, 9, 11, 13, 14process, 307, 308–309support, 301
Poisson
distribution, 309point process, 308–309random variable, 308
Pollution, 4, 5Polygon, 130, 131, 376
Thiessen, 22
Polyhedron, 376, 378Polynomials, 22, 245, 295, 315Polypedon, 13, 92Pooled variance, 245
Population, 7, 139, 158, 244, 333, 375
stationary, 20
Position, 12, 18, 19, 21, 22, 40, 75, 80, 81
spatial, 21, 22, 24, 25variations, 92
Positive
deﬁnite, 260, 302
semi-de ﬁnite, 249
Potassium, 140, 403, 415Potential drainage density, 187
Power
function, 242, 252, 253, 254, 256, 274, 275, 
284
variogram, 301
Precision
agriculture, 4, 129, 290, 311
degrees of, 161
farming, 243, 269horizontal, 134temporal, 134vertical, 134
Prediction(s)
error, 30, 291, 334, 378, 395, 400, 448linear unbiased, 395, 400, 448of soil attributes, 19–20, 22, 139
at unsampled geographic location, 134
of soil properties, 413–415spatial, 262, 400
quantitative, 118, 191
uncertainty, 130
variance, 245
Predictor variable, 20, 189, 190, 191Primary
terrain attributes, 186, 187, 189, 199, 200, 
202
topographic attribute, 12
variable, 26
Probabilistic
model, 290prediction, 30
Probability, distribution, 394, 439
Probe, 140
soil moisture, 138
Process
knowledge, 28, 29, 437, 448
modeling, 394, 417–431
Process-response models, 112Product-sum model, 440–441Pro ﬁle
curvature, 118
darkness index, 194
Pro ﬁle cone penetrometers, 11
Propagation of error, 203, 208474 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Property
soil, 17, 243
changes, 112data, 133
distribution, 38
information, 129
key, 323, 339
map, 129
prediction of value, 344
Proportional covariance model, 302Proximal sensing, 25, 26
Proximity, 395
Proxy information, 369
Pulse, 135, 172
Punctual kriging, 263, 264, 265
Q
Quad tree, 398Quadratic trend, 202, 280
Qualitative
description, 38
method, 4
model, 4, 18, 374prediction model, 191
soil-landscape, 4, 38
Quantitative
description, 17, 116, 243
method, 4, 16, 107, 115, 147, 344model, 4, 14, 28, 111, 374, 389
prediction model, 188
reconstruction techniques, 374, 388
soil-landscape model, 4, 29, 30, 53, 62, 95, 
97, 148
soil process model, 28
Query, 132
R
Radar, 11, 176
frequencies, 135
ground penetrating, 11
antenna, 135
applications, 136function, 135
for soil-landscape mapping, 135–136
wave properties, 135
satellite, 176
sensors, 141
waves, 135
Radargrammetry, 176Radio detection and ranging, 176Radiometrics, 26, 141, 195
Radius, 310, 402Random
ﬂuctuation, 254–256, 399
functions, 301–302, 309–319model, 265, 345point process, 303process, 27, 243, 246, 266, 345, 394selection, 327set, 309, 310tesselations, 303variable, 23, 27, 245, 246, 249, 258, 260, 
291, 308, 353, 355
Range
long, 11, 22short, 11, 22
Rapid
assessment, 140
data collection, 11
Raster model, 7, 9, 130
cells, 203, 376
two-dimensional, 376
crisp data and, 131, 142fuzzy set theory, 234soil mapping paradigm and, 130
Raw data, 171, 248, 280, 282, 314, 315Real
numbers, 217, 348value, 294, 303world, 9, 29, 129, 131
coordinate system, 167
Realization, 116, 186, 203, 242, 290, 318, 344, 
394
of Boolean random sets, 309random functions and, 292simulations of unconditional, 311slope, 206of stationary random process, 27, 437tesselation, 303
Reconnaissance survey, 46, 94Reconstruction, 9, 374
quantitative techniques, 374, 388
Record, database, 131, 132
Redoximorphic, 11, 52
Reductionist approach, 5, 374Reference system, 133, 163Reﬂection, 136
Region, 8, 13, 18, 30, 39, 67Regional
scale, 82, 107, 141, 146, 325–339soil mapping, 189
Regionalization, 267, 274Index 475
Regionalized
variable, 23, 24, 260, 261, 290, 292, 306
variable theory, 23, 24
Regolith, 9
Regression
classi ﬁcation tree and, 20, 190
kriging, 23, 26, 189
least-square, 139, 274linear, 188, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 394
multiple, 26, 188, 189, 190, 192
logistic, 196
multiple linear, 26, 188, 189, 190, 192
partial least square (PLSR), 139
techniques, modern, 189
Regular
interval, 248
lattice, 395
Relational database, 131, 132, 146
Relationship(s), 105, 129
catenary soil-landscape, 44
clay-slope, 186, 200, 206, 207clay-terrain-slope, 201
of factors, 39
functional, 38
soil-geology, 64–67
soil-topography, 62, 77, 79, 80, 95, 156
soil-vegetation-climate, 73
spatial, 54, 144, 162, 168
Relative orientation, 167, 170
Relief representation, 162–164
contours as, 162, 163
digital elevation model for, 162, 163triangulated irregular networks for, 164
Remote sensing, 11, 24, 25, 62, 140–141, 201, 
233, 301
Resedimentation, 49, 421, 427, 428, 429, 430, 
431
Residual(s)
decomposition of space–time signal into 
drift and stochastic, 439–440
statistical characterization of stochastic, 
440–441
Residual mean squares (RMS), 257
Resolution
coarse, 189, 197, 401, 422
ﬁne, 188, 197, 201, 397
high, 26, 128, 129, 146, 148, 172, 181, 195, 
443
spatial, 9, 13, 135, 140, 185, 186, 197–202, 
208, 233, 234
temporal, 418, 421, 422, 423, 432
Resource inventory, 46, 216
Root mean square error, 198, 203, 204
Root node, 398, 399Ruhe, Robert V ., 65
Runge’s energy model, 109–110Runoff, 19, 109, 422, 425, 426Russell, Israel, 64
S
Salinity, 134, 135, 290Sample
location, 13, 133, 206, 382, 403mean, 245point, 291, 292, 297, 298, 313support, 11, 13variogram, 292, 295, 307
Sampling, 12, 19, 20, 133, 134, 135, 206, 269
barrier, 14dense, 134, 138design, 13, 20, 128, 382exhaustive, 13grid, 13, 128interval, 163, 251, 326Latin hypercube, 186, 203, 337locations, 76, 133, 206, 382, 395, 403nested, 324, 326points, 242, 244, 262, 263, 265, 312scheme, 13, 19, 326, 327, 403sparse, 13, 135, 262, 382
transect, 206, 327, 330, 423
unbiased, 244uniformity, 403
Sand, 50, 53, 70, 345, 356Scale, 323–339
coarse, 128, 360dependent, 232, 326, 349effect, 427–431ﬁne, 128, 129, 348
invariant, 186issues, 29, 77, 420–423large, 77, 350
applications, 162calculations, 118digital maps, 13geographic features, 381–382landscape perspective, 419map for agricultural advising, 77maps, 180, 233, 318topographic maps, 159variation, 439
parameter, 317small, 197
digital, 13geographic features, 381–382maps, 180, 233476 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
plant growth, 313
variability, 313
variations, 292, 439
spatial, 38, 145, 237, 278, 324, 325, 326, 
327, 328, 343, 344, 346, 348, 351, 352, 362, 367, 368, 381
Scaling, 25, 30, 107, 380
criterion, 107
function, 351
Scanning, 169, 171, 172, 180, 297, 298, 307
Scenario, 111, 219, 292, 294, 312, 318, 381, 426
Scheme
classi ﬁcation, 48, 69, 243
Davisian, 108ontological, 376
“pajama striping,” 82
sampling, 13, 19, 326, 327, 403
Schwarz’s inequality, 261
Scienti ﬁc visualization, 9, 374–388
SCORPAN model, 25, 203
Search neighborhood, 22, 298
Second-order stationarity, 246, 247, 252, 258, 
271, 344, 440
Secondary
attributes, 12, 187
clays, 64
variable, 26, 383
Sediment, 329, 420
deposition, 70, 329
differences, 40
particle size, 269soil mapping, 173
transport
capacity, 425, 430, 431distance, 421
index, 12, 188
rate, 425
windblown, 325
Sedimentation, 49, 425, 428Self-similarity, 52, 53
Semantic import model, 227
Semivariance, 24, 247, 248, 251, 256, 262, 263, 
264, 272, 273, 280, 328
cross, 206, 259, 261
estimated, 280ﬁtted, 257
Semivariogram, 24, 27, 199, 247, 344, 345, 346, 
352, 387
Sensitivity analysis, 324, 337–339Sensors, 128, 136–141
remote, 140–141
Separation, 19, 246, 344
distance, 24, 328
extragrades from intragrades, 226image, 170
vector, 292, 328
Sequential
Gaussian simulation, 296–297, 353
indicator algorithm, 305
indicator simulation, 304, 305–306, 311
Shift-averaging method, 359Short
range, 11, 256
range drift, 256
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission, 177Sieve-and-pipette method, 330Sill, 7, 251, 252, 258, 275, 302, 441
estimation, 312
spatial, 447spatiotemporal, 446variances, 260, 273variograms, 318, 326, 441, 445
Silt, 111, 136, 173, 196, 217, 311, 312, 324, 
329, 330, 332, 376
Similarity model, 235Simonson’s model, 111Simple kriging, 291, 296, 305, 395, 442
Simulation
algorithm, 294, 295, 296, 299, 300, 303, 311of categorical variables, 303–311with change of support, 300–301conditional, 67, 290, 292, 294, 295, 297, 
298, 307, 310, 311, 313, 317, 318, 319, 337
Gaussian, 296–297, 304, 306–307, 308, 353
indicator, 290, 304, 305–306multivariate, 302of nested and anistrophic covariances, 300
nonconditional, 292, 293, 294, 297, 298, 
301, 302, 317, 318
object-based, 307–311ordinary conditional, 307plurigaussian, 290, 306–307point, 297
in presence of nugget effect, 300
sequential Gaussian, 296–297, 353sequential indicator, 290, 304, 305–306space–time hydrologic, 144stochastic, 23, 30, 290–318
three-dimensional model, 299, 310, 311
from training images, 311truncated Gaussian, 304, 306–307, 308truncated plurigaussian, 290, 306–307
two-dimensional model, 299, 310
variable, 303
Simultaneous autoregression model, 402Skewness, 270, 358Slicing, 305, 383Index 477
Slope
aspect index, 196
element, 114
error, 204form, 114gradient, 102, 116length, 116, 188proﬁle, 114
shape, 12, 116, 117
unit, 12
Small scale, 197
digital, 13geographic features, 381–382
maps, 180, 233
plant growth, 313variability, 313variations, 292, 439
Smith, William, 64, 66
Soft, information, 306
Software
GIS, 142Gstat, 447historical perspectives, 23, 30information, 131, 133
packages, 170
proprietary, 198
Soil(s), 110–111
aggregation, 134anatomy, 87–92
attributes, 7 ( See also  Attribute(s))
biological, 7, 11chemical, 7, 11, 18, 419content of, 11–12local, 186morphological, 11, 128, 146, 188
physical, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 191, 
251, 419
prediction of, 19–20, 22, 139primary, 186regional, 187secondary, 187
sources of variation for, 23
type of, 11
biological property, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 
191, 251, 419
biology, 63, 106body, 85boundary, 8, 9
abrupt, 325, 334, 340
attributes, 21between categories, 21, 40class, 21, 50, 130, 244, 325, 339deﬁned, 27, 243
errors, 50ﬁeld, 357
ﬁxed, 49
functional, 19
geological, 356gradual, 333, 334
limits, 49
map, 75, 147, 333nature of, 324
placement, 45
plotting, 128
polygon, 130
for segregating soils, 27spacing, 346
for strati ﬁcation, 337, 339
surface, 116thickness, 51
topographic, of drainage basins, 19
types, 333
width, 40
carbon content, 344, 365–368characteristics, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 18, 20, 76, 
92, 114, 134, 137, 236, 376
chemical property, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 
191, 251, 419
classi ﬁcation, 20–21, 47–51, 108, 243–245
diagnostics, 49–50
geostatistics and, 257–258
hierarchical, 48, 81
Nikiforoff ﬁeld, 81
schemes of, keys to, 48taxonomic, 6
color, 7, 67, 76
component, 19computation, 235
conservation, 44, 65
as a continuum, 221–223
data, 1, 8, 10, 27, 46, 51, 129, 131, 135, 141, 
142, 143, 145, 147, 349, 351, 355, 369, 385, 3466
deﬁned, 39
delineation, 42
depth, 128, 195, 382, 426, 429, 430, 431
description of major, 42–43
development models, 110–111
drainage, 192drainage class, 192, 193, 196
erosion, 428, 429
evolution, 418, 421factorial concept, 16–18, 76–77, 107–109, 
110
factors, 16, 75, 109, 138, 235
feature, 42, 48, 53, 69, 92
fertility, 230
formation, factors of, 73478 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
forming process, 8, 49, 79, 130, 325
functions, 4genesis, 4, 6, 14, 57, 97, 108, 147, 418geography, 74, 87, 92
geology, 67, 69, 70, 86, 94
geomorphology, 63, 65, 69, 79, 95, 106, 115group, 48, 78, 82, 95, 130, 145hierarchy, 13, 56, 129
history, 106, 421
horizon, 7, 38, 110, 135, 136, 137, 138, 191, 
376, 377, 385, 386
intergrades, 224interpretation, 51, 216, 232landscape, 4–29, 38, 40, 41
landscape datasets, 6
landscape modeling
accurate, 4, 29case study, 424–431catena model, 18–19, 44, 77–87
classi ﬁcation of, 20–21
complexity of, 41descriptive, 43–44development of, 64
factorial vs . system approach, 110
factors that affect, 11–14four-dimensional, 379geomorphology and, 63geospatial, 22–26 ( See also  
Geostatistics)
hillslope, 114–118
historical perspectives, 4, 14, 15, 19, 62, 
63, 64, 69, 71, 97
holistic approach, 4, 6, 14, 29, 147implication for, 39
Jenny’s soil factorial model, 16–18, 
107–109
one-dimensional, 379parameters and assumptions, 425–426quaternary geology and, 63scale issues in, 420–423
soil maps and, 6–7
space and time concepts in, 378–380space–time, 26–29spatial analysis of, 7–9, 118spatial discretization methods for, 7–9
system vs . factorial approach, 110
techniques, 4three-dimensional, 379two-dimensional, 379
virtual, 374–389
landscape reality, 7, 9, 24layer, 7, 26
contour, 178GIS, 46organic matter, 53
soil-forming factor, 142subsurface, 135, 136surface, 136transportation, 178
uniform, 91
legend, 43, 64logical presentation, 221–232
Boolean, 221–223fuzzy, 223–232
loss, 422, 428, 429, 430management, 324, 326
map, 41, 44 ( See also  Mapping; Soil 
landscape(s), mapping)
data management for, 131–133entity-based approach, 129factorial approach, 76–77 ( See also  
Factorial concept)
factors for consideration, 129ﬁeld view, 130
fuzzy sets for, 130
generalized, 45–46historical perspectives, 64legends, 42object view, 129paradigms, 129–131
entity-based approach, 129
ﬁeld view, 130
fuzzy sets as, 130raster-based, 130
raster-based, 130soil-landscape models and, 6–7techniques, 11, 128
history of, 75
unit, 7–8, 20, 21, 41, 44, 78, 131, 141use digital terrain attributes for, 191–196
map of the world, 145mapping, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 19, 21, 22, 24, 
25, 30, 41, 53, 67, 77, 80, 82, 84, 86, 91, 92, 97
crisp, 130–131
generalized, 45–46
limitations, 232paradigms, 129–131technologies, 128–129uncertainty in, 230
mineral, 28, 48, 112, 134, 135, 140, 194, 
290, 326, 403
models ( See also  Soil-landscape(s), 
modeling)
conditional autoregressive, 402
development, 110–111mass balance, 111–112Index 479
parameter estimation in, 406–407, 
407–412
process-response, 112
simultaneous autoregressive, 402
spatial lattice, 393–415
moisture, 13, 39, 117, 118, 136, 138, 141
moisture retention curve, 336
monitoring, 12, 422–423morphology, 12, 19, 39, 40, 41, 42, 75
nitrogen, 11, 13, 18, 140, 144, 145, 188, 290, 
311, 312, 313, 318
observation, 43, 62, 133, 134, 138, 146, 188organic carbon, 18, 56, 344, 358, 365
organic matter, 7, 28, 138, 139, 141
particle, 425
diameter, 324, 325
size, 51, 137, 269, 324
size distribution, 69
pattern, 42, 50, 129, 383, 385
phases, 44
physical property, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 
191, 251, 419
pollutants, 345
population, 7, 20, 139, 158, 244, 333, 375
proﬁle, 13, 18, 40, 41, 42, 47, 52, 63, 64, 
79, 89, 91, 93, 97, 108, 111, 138, 147, 195, 217, 377, 419, 422
property, 17, 29, 38, 40, 44, 47, 48, 55, 62, 
70, 76, 92, 94, 95, 108, 130, 131, 134, 137, 138, 139, 146, 217, 324
asymmetry, 259
biological, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 191, 
251, 419
characterizing, 140
chemical, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 191, 
251, 419
continuous, 221
covariation, 368
estimated, 146georeferenced, 133, 141, 146, 147
gradual gradation, 233
interrelated, 136map, 129, 141
mapping, 393, 394, 396, 400
modeling, 294, 374, 393–415physical, 7, 11, 50, 128, 140, 146, 191, 
251, 419
prediction of, 139, 141, 185, 191, 237, 
369, 394, 413–415
spatial variation in, 257stepped function for, 243
topographic data combined with, 138
values, 230–231variability, 353, 356, 369
variation, 222, 223, 234, 290, 368
redistribution modeling, 427
region, 8, 13, 18, 30, 374
sampling, 12, 19, 20, 133, 134, 135, 206, 
269
science, 14, 21, 23, 38, 39, 42, 47, 53, 57, 
65, 76, 88, 97, 106, 128, 187, 216, 339
fuzzy logic in, 232, 237
fuzzy sets in, 230, 232, 236
landscape and, 418–424
membership function, 220
wavelet analysis, 368
sensors, 128, 136–138
series, 48–49
landscape of, 54–55
similarity, 234
computation, 235
vector, 236, 237
spectroscopy, 128
stratigraphy, 18
structure, 11, 12, 19, 134, 138, 140
surface, 17, 136, 141, 379, 380, 425
taxonomy, 6, 49, 55–56, 89, 418
temperature, 13, 39, 134
and Terrain Database (SOTER), 51, 146
terrain relationship, 188
texture ( See Soil texture)
thickness, 192, 237, 290topography relationship, 62, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
84, 95, 96
transport, 67
unit, 21, 85, 145, 146, 192, 232, 330, 419
variability, 43, 52, 64, 70, 134, 197, 201, 
311, 352
variable, 23, 26, 189, 191, 194, 196, 242, 
311, 345, 346, 347, 358, 403
variation, 26, 73, 76, 130, 131, 135, 189, 
191, 233, 243, 245
analysis, using wavelets, 343–368
case study of, 269–270
complex, 343–368spatial structure of, 325
stochastic simulation of, 290–318
vegetation relationship, 74
water, 18, 20, 134
water content, 312, 442–448
water retention, 191, 196
zonal classi ﬁcations, 107
Soil Data Mart, 8, 46
Soil information system, 6
Soil Land Inference Model, 229, 234
implementation, 236480 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
Soil Land Inference Model (SoLIM), 229
Soil-landscape(s)
anthology, 56–57deﬁned, 6–7
discretization, 222
distribution, 42historical perspectives, 418–420mapping ( See also  Soil mapping)
electromagnetic induction for, 134–135
global positioning systems for, 133–134ground-penetrating radar for, 135–136technologies for, 133–141
modeling, 52, 112–118 ( See also  Soil-
terrain modeling)
accurate, 4, 29
case study, 424–431catena model, 12, 18–19, 44, 77–87classi ﬁcation of, 20–21
complexity of, 41
descriptive, 43–44
development of, 64factorial vs . system approach, 110
factors that affect, 11–14
four-dimensional, 379
geomorphology and, 63geospatial, 22–26 ( See also  
Geostatistics)
hillslope, 114–118historical perspectives, 4, 15, 62, 63, 64, 
71
holistic approach, 4, 6, 14, 29, 147
implication for, 39Jenny’s soil factorial model, 16–18, 
107–109
one-dimensional, 379
parameters and assumptions, 425–426
quaternary geology and, 63scale issues in, 420–423soil maps and, 6–7space and time concepts in, 378–380
space–time, 26–29
spatial analysis of, 7–9, 118spatial discretization methods for, 7–9system vs . factorial approach, 110
techniques, 4
three-dimensional, 379
two-dimensional, 379virtual, 374–389
multiscale context, 424
philosophical perspectives, 5–6, 38
signi ﬁcance, 418–420
soil series and, 49spatial dimensions, 423standardization, 54virtual models, 374–389
characteristics of, 382
cognitive universe in, 377
examples of, 382–388implementation universe in, 377physical universe in, 377reconstruction techniques for, 380–382representation physical universe in, 377
space and time considerations, 378–380
universes for, 376–377
Soil mapping, 41, 44. See also  Mapping; Soil 
landscape(s), mapping
data management for, 131–133entity-based approach, 129
factorial approach, 76–77 ( See also  Factorial 
concept)
factors for consideration, 129ﬁeld view, 130
fuzzy sets for, 130generalized, 45–46historical perspectives, 64
legends, 42
object view, 129paradigms, 129–131
entity-based approach, 129ﬁeld view, 130
fuzzy sets as, 130
raster-based, 130
raster-based, 130soil-landscape models and, 6–7techniques, 11, 128
history of, 75
use digital terrain attributes for, 191–196
Soil paste method, 134Soil Resource Inventories, 46–47Soil series, 48–49, 224Soil survey, 41–47
correlations, 51–52
function, 41fuzzy models in, 232–238historical perspectives, 64interpretations, 43
maps, 44–45
standards, 51
Soil Survey Geographic Database, 8, 45, 131Soil Taxonomy,  224
Soil-terrain modeling, 188–197
climate in, 188
digital
impact of spatial resolution on, 197–202uncertainty analysis of, 202–207
statistical methods for, 190
Soil Terrain Program, 146
Soil terrain system, 51Index 481
Soil texture, 9, 11, 12, 19, 26, 128, 134, 137, 
138, 140, 282, 306, 324–340, 381, 394, 422, 447
classi ﬁcation, 325, 338
sensitivity analysis of, 337–339
cone index and, 138
mapping, 324–339
data strati ﬁcation in, 330–331
interpolation in, 331–337
kriging in, 331–335
at regional scale, 324–339
study area for, 329–330
variograms of, 330, 332
national triangle, 324
variability, 325–328
Solar irradiation index, 188
Solar radiation, 110, 194, 196, 439
SoLIM. See Soil Land Inference Model 
(SoLIM)
Solum depth, 26, 193
Solute concentration, 438
SOTER program. See Soil Terrain Program
Space
–time, 26–29, 29, 144, 379, 437, 438, 
440–441, 441
–time anisotropy ratio, 446
–time applications, 30
–time concepts, 379
–time continuum across landscapes, 7, 375
–time coverage, 438
–time domain, 29, 379, 437, 438, 441
–time geostatistics, 27, 438
–time hydrologic simulation, 144
–time information systems, 143, 144, 145
–time interpolation errors, 439
–time kriging, 441–442, 444, 447–448
–time kriging with external drift, 444
–time model, 27, 145, 379, 439
four-dimensional, 380
–time ordinary kriging, 444
–time points, 438–time residual, 439
–time semivariogram, 440, 441, 444–447
–time simulation of water table dynamics, 
25, 386–388
–time variability, 438–441
–time variogram, 440, 441, 444–447
Space shuttle radar topographic mapping 
experiment, 177–178
Spacing, 136, 164, 202, 346
boundary, 130, 346
Sparse sampling, 13, 135, 262, 382
Spatial
accuracy, 44, 93algorithm, 378
autocorrelation, 8, 11, 17, 20, 24, 130, 328component, 267, 268, 269
coordinate, 22, 25, 143, 167, 168, 189, 379
covariance, 246, 399data, 21, 131, 142, 143, 186, 236, 340, 343
datasets, 46, 96, 133, 143
dependence, 243, 251, 273, 276, 277, 394, 
396
dimension, 326, 327, 423generalization, 232, 234
heterogeneity, 418, 421, 426, 427
independence, 408, 413index, 395
interpolation, 75, 229, 442, 448
lattice-modeling, 393–415linear model, 393, 394, 397–402, 404, 406, 
407, 411, 412, 415
pattern, 23, 55, 413, 415, 427–430, 440, 443
prediction, 262, 400
quantitative, 118, 191
random process, 394, 395, 396
resolution, 9, 13, 135, 140, 185, 186, 
197–202, 208, 233, 234
scale, 38, 145, 237, 278, 324, 325, 326, 327, 
328, 343, 344, 346, 348, 351, 352, 362, 367, 368, 381
state-space approach, 27
stochastic simulation, 23
structure, 277, 306, 307, 311, 325, 331, 399trend, 23, 331
uncertainty, 291, 292
units, 7, 378variation, 8, 9, 22, 23, 30, 31, 130, 187, 221, 
223, 231, 232, 234, 236, 243–285, 318, 328, 330, 343, 344, 346, 356, 368, 419, 445, 447
Spatial correlation, 206, 331, 395, 399, 408
coef ﬁcients, 413
Spatial covariation, 24, 355, 365, 366Spatial Data Transfer Standard, 142
Spatial discretization methods
continuous ﬁeld, 9
crisp soil map unit model, 7–8
Spatial distribution, 4, 6, 9, 54, 300
of bulk density, 382, 383, 384characterization, 128
conditional, 292
of elevation, 186
of error, 208frequencies, 42
under fuzzy logic, 229
of key nutrients, 394482 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
signi ﬁcance of, 293
of subsurface attributes, 9, 14
Spatial lattice models, 393–415
comparisons, 408, 413
multiresolution tree-structured linear, 
397–402
global variation in, 398
local variation in, 398–400
measurement error in, 400
prediction of soil properties with, 
413–415
selection and evaluation of, 401–402
statistical inference, 400–401
selection and parameter estimation, 
405–408
Spatial state–space approach, 27
Spatial variability, 9, 12, 130
assessment, 76
characterization, 138, 290complex, 356
prevalence, 40
representation, 187, 292
Spatially
correlated, 23, 203, 242, 258, 344, 394, 395, 
404
explicit, 16, 106, 129, 142, 373, 422
intercorrelated, 258
related, 6
Spatio-temporal
database, 380
geostatistics, 27
kriging, 447–448
model, 144, 180
monitoring, 43, 439
Spatio-Temporal Environment Mapper, 145
Speci ﬁc catchment area, 187, 188, 195
Spectral
analysis, 355
band, 13, 140
library, 139
Spectrometry, 140Spectroscopy, 11, 128, 138–140
diffuse re ﬂectance, 138, 139
Spherical, 206, 251
function, 254, 259, 266, 274
variogram, 255
Spline, 22, 139, 190, 229
Square grid model, 7, 9
SSURGO. See Soil Survey Geographic 
Database
Stable model, 250, 252, 275, 283
Standard
deviation, 137, 186, 203, 204, 205, 258, 312, 
358, 448, 449error, 298, 403, 404, 415
normal distribution, 296
Performance Service (SPS), 134
Standardization, 51, 52, 146State–
factor equation, 191space modeling, 27
State Soil Geographic Database (STATSGO), 8, 
46, 50
Stationarity, 246–247
in geostatistics, 246–247of mean, 345non-, 290second-order, 246, 247, 252, 258, 271, 344, 
440
temporal, 29
Stationary
ﬁeld, 294
mean, 331population, 20random function, 293, 294, 295, 316, 437
random process, 27, 437
Statistical
inference, 295, 400–401methods, 20, 190
comparison of, 191
model, 437
properties, 297techniques, 107
STATSGO. See State Soil Geographic Database
Steady state, 110, 112, 431Stereo
aerial photographs, 425
aerial photography, 94, 96, 165model, 164, 167, 168, 178photographs, 166
Stereoscopic vision, aerial photography and, 165
Stochastic
geometry, 303model, 29, 242process, 13, 23, 242, 311simulation, 23, 30, 290–318
variable, 24
Stochasticity, 13, 24, 27, 242
framework, 290in hybrid techniques, 26in hydrologic models, 28methods, 130
models, 29, 242
residual, 439simulations, 23, 30, 290–318spatial simulation, 23
Strata, 64, 242, 244, 332
Stratigraphic model, 385Index 483
Stratigraphy, 18, 52, 67, 136, 345
Stream power index, 12, 188, 189, 194, 195, 196Structural query language (SQL), 132Subareas, 420Subcategory, 19
Subdomain, 294
Subgroup, 11, 49Suborder, 11, 49Subset, 7, 292, 297, 388, 403, 405, 408, 413Subsoil, 26, 53, 67, 192, 194, 259
attributes, 269characteristics, 134
magnesium, 270, 275, 277
mottling, 192pH, 243, 244, 248, 273, 274
Subsurface, 115
attributes, 9, 14, 136drainage, 114features, 136
ﬂow, 19
layer, 135, 136objects, 10properties, 135variability, 136
Subsurface Objects Reconstruction and U.S. 
Soil Taxonomy, 10–11
Subsurface Objects Reconstruction and 
Visualization System, 9–10
Suitability, 43, 230, 292Supervised classi ﬁcation, 196
Support
model, 27sample, 11
Surface
deposit, 67, 69
derivatives, 186runoff, 19 ( See also  Runoff)
soil, 17, 136, 141, 379, 380, 425
Surrogate variable, 344Sustainability, 423
SYMAP, 142
Symmetric, 259, 270, 404Synthetic aperture radar (SAR), 141
T
Tacit knowledge, 7, 17, 18, 21, 38, 128Target, 26, 165
accuracy, 50
block, 263
point, 262, 263
Taxa, 10, 11, 29, 38, 46, 49, 51Taxonomic
class, 6, 191
group, 78, 85
space, 130, 146unit, 85, 129, 133
Taxonomy, 49–50, 52, 92
biological, 7, 88, 91, 95, 243
evolution-based, 88
fauna, 88ﬂora, 88
hierarchical, 91soil, 6, 49, 55–56, 89, 418
Temporal
distribution, 4, 55, 107, 129, 386nugget, 446precision, 134resolution, 418, 421, 422, 423, 432
scale, 375, 418, 421, 422, 432
stationarity, 29variability, 27, 45, 375, 441variation, 437, 448, 450variogram, 441, 445
vector, 144, 380
Terrain attributes, 191–196Terrain modeling, 186–188, 379Tesselation, 303Textural fractions, 323
Texture, 9, 11, 12, 19, 26, 128, 134, 137, 138, 
140, 282, 306, 324–340, 381, 394, 422, 447
classes, 337–339classi ﬁcation, 325, 338
sensitivity analysis of, 337–339
mapping, 324–339
data strati ﬁcation in, 330–331
interpolation in, 331–337kriging in, 331–335at regional scale, 324–339study area for, 329–330
variograms of, 330, 332
triangle, 324variability, 325–328
Texture classes, 337–339Thematic map, 9, 140, 141, 143
Theodolite, 162, 425
Thickness, 191, 192, 193, 195, 231, 290, 361
boundary, 51surface, 53, 136topsoil, 237
of wind-blown sediment, 325
Thiessen polygon, 22Three-dimensional model(s)
basic unit, 19bulk density voxel model, 383484 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
catena representation, 80
catena unit, 12ecosystem, 380
geographic space, 25, 380
graphics, 163interactive animation, 380landform parameters, 116
maps, 9
measurement, 167, 168open-source graphics language, 380
point, 168
polygon, 376polyhedron, 376, 378reconstruction, 9
regolith model, 9
SCORPAN model, 25, 203simulation, 299, 310, 311
soil bodies, 7, 9, 91–92
soil horizon model, 9soil-terrain model, 383, 385subsurface features, 136
topographic DEM, 177
of topographic maps, 156two- vs ., 9–10
variograms, 450
virtual models, 374visualization, 380
Threshold, 30, 106, 217, 290, 305
concept, 112
dependency, 418, 426extrinsic, 105, 112intrinsic, 105, 112
prede ﬁned, 219
scale-effect, 431value, 219, 350
Time
interval, 172, 356, 438series analysis, 443step, 418, 424, 426, 427, 431, 432
Time domain re ﬂectometry, 443
Tolerance, 181, 249
statistical, 53
TOPMODEL, 422
Topofunction, 17Topographic
attributes, 12
contours, 162, 163
map
in Australia, 158
in Brazil, 158
in Canada, 158–159in China, 159deﬁned, 156–159
gathering data for, 160–162in Germany, 159
in India, 159national efforts, 157–159production, 160–180
digital cameras in, 170–172gathering data for, 160–162light detection and ranging in, 
172–175
photogrammetry and, 165–170relief representation in, 162–164
relief representation, 162–164
contours as, 162, 163digital elevation model for, 162, 163triangulated irregular networks for, 
164
in Scandinavia, 159three-dimensional, 156two-dimensional, 156in United Kingdom, 159in United States, 159
wetness index, 12, 187, 188, 189
Topographic survey, 161Topology, 142, 378
channel network, 118spatiotemporal databases and, 380
Toposequence, 9Topsoil, 26, 194, 356
attributes, 269CO
2 emission rates, 344
erosion, 200ﬁne materials, 200
magnesium, 251, 270, 271, 272, 273, 276predicted depth, 135, 237texture, 292, 363thickness, 237variogram, 251
Total
carbon, 140, 195, 358, 359nitrogen, 140phosphorus, 195station, 425
Traditional soil map, 138Transect, 5, 46, 80, 223, 243, 258, 326, 327, 
344, 345, 353, 357
ground survey, 94linear, 205sampling, 206, 327, 330, 423series, 136short, 269subsoil pH along, 244
Transformation, 105, 110, 189
back, 295, 317, 318catena, 19coordinate, 253Index 485
data techniques, 140
Fourier, 347
Gaussian, 295–296, 315–316
linear, 253, 300
skewness and, 270two-dimensional model, 167
Transport, 294, 381
capacity, 425, 430, 431
colluvial, 67
index, 12, 188
lateral, 197
rate, 425, 431sediment, 79, 188, 421, 425, 427, 430, 431
soil constituents, 12
Tree
classi ﬁcation, 20, 189, 190
model, 376, 397–402
regression, 20, 26, 139
structure, 190, 397–402, 415
Trend, 345
deterministic, 27
linear, 274, 283, 284
model, 23
primary, 26
quadratic, 202, 280
spatially dependent, 23, 331
surface, 22
Trial-and-error, 441Triangulated irregular networks, 164
True value, 50, 203, 297
Truncated
Gaussian simulation, 304, 306–307, 308
plurigaussian simulation, 290, 306–307
Tuple, 131, 132
Turning band(s), 298–300
algorithm, 300, 318
Two and a half-dimensional model, 9
Two-dimensional model(s)
catena representation, 80
crisp soil taxa maps, 29
discrete wavelet transform, 368
geographic features, in a three-dimensional 
view, 379
GIS maps, 386
GIS operations, 144hillslope model, 114
landscape surfaces, 9
maps, 9, 188
ordinary kriging, 385, 387
polygon, 376
raster cell, 376
simulation, 299, 310three- vs ., 9–10
of topographic maps, 156transformation, 167
variogram of process, 253vertical pro ﬁle, 91
U
Unbiased, 19, 262, 296, 333
linear prediction, 393, 394, 395, 400, 448
sampling, 244
Unbounded
models, 252–253, 301–302variograms, 252–253, 301–302
Uncertainty, 8, 21, 30, 202–208, 218, 242, 337, 
338
analysis, 202–207
characterization of, 230
classi ﬁcation, 232
exaggeration, 231in georeferencing, 133ignorance, 231interpolation, 440
level, 398
measures, 231prediction, 130representation, 82spatial, 291, 292
Uncorrelated, 354
error term, 22
process, 266
random noise, 23soil carbon content and CO
2 emissions, 344
Uniformity, 7, 294, 426
climate, 70, 80, 325grid pattern, 402hillslope, 114
layer, 91
legend, 145map series, 159parent rock, 78, 81, 84relative, 70sampling, 403soil layer, 91
variance, 361–365
wavelet variance, 361–365
Unit
complex, 61functional, 4landscape, 21, 27, 30, 43, 45, 79
map, 6, 7, 8, 21, 41, 43, 49, 52–53, 67, 75, 
85, 94, 141, 880
identi ﬁcation number (MUID), 146
test models, 7–8, 52–53486 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
model, 7–8
continuous ﬁeld model vs ., 9, 131
drawbacks of, 8practicality of, 8suitability of, 129
slope, 12
three-dimensional
basic, 19catena, 12
United Map Accuracy Standards, 45, 179United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), 129, 224, 402
United States Geological Survey (USGS), 54, 
64, 65, 157
Univariate
analysis, 346geostatistical techniques, 17, 24interpolation method, 334model, 17, 24
Universal kriging, 23, 26, 302, 345, 395, 440, 
442
Universal Soil Loss Equation, 422
Universal Transverse Mercator, 167Unknown parameter, 400Unsampled
area, 82location, 20, 22, 30, 134, 291, 383place, 243
site, 344
Unvisited
location, 331point, 23site, 242
Upscaling, 301, 432Upslope contributing area, 12, 187, 188, 189, 
192, 195, 196, 431
U.S. Soil Survey Manual,  42, 44, 51, 76, 92
U.S. Soil Taxonomy,  11, 51, 55, 56, 97, 131, 145, 
147, 224
V
Validation, 28, 140, 293, 422
cross, 201, 270–276, 335, 336, 383
Valley basin, 19, 116
Variability
attribute, 7, 9bulk density, 131characterization of space–time, 438–441extrinsic, 30intrinsic, 30local, 73, 82, 92, 294
property, 353, 356, 369small scale, 313
soil, 43, 52, 64, 70, 134, 197, 201, 311,
352
texture, 325–328
spatial, 9, 12, 130
assessment, 76
characterization, 138, 290complex, 356prevalence, 40representation, 187, 292
subsurface, 136
temporal, 27, 45, 375, 441
texture, 325–328
Variance
-covariance matrix, 297, 400noise, 399, 400, 403, 405pooled, 245
Variation, 26, 73, 76, 130, 131, 135, 189, 191, 
233, 243, 245
abrupt, 7, 9, 221analysis, using wavelets, 343–368case study of, 269–270clay content, 345, 346climate, 43, 108
in CO
2 emissions, 365
coef ﬁcient, 147
complex, 343–368global, 398gradual, 375large-scale, 439
local, 22, 77, 274, 294, 343, 347, 348, 394, 
395, 396, 398–400, 400
pattern, 70, 282, 364small-scale, 292, 439spatial, 8, 9, 22, 23, 30, 31, 130, 187, 221, 
223, 231, 232, 234, 236, 243–285, 318, 328, 330, 343, 344, 346, 356, 368, 419, 445, 447
spatial structure of, 325stochastic simulation of, 290–318
temporal, 437, 448, 450
Variogram(s), 247–254
analysis, 23, 325auto, 258Bessel, 252bounded, 282, 327
bounded linear, 252
circular, 250–251conditional negative semide ﬁnite, 249
cross, 260–261empirical, 403erratic, 248
estimation, 248–249Index 487
experimental, 242, 248, 251, 252, 255, 256, 
261, 266, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 281, 283, 284, 312, 314, 317, 441
function, 267
Gaussian, 291
irregular, 274linear, 301models, 249–254
anistropy, 253–254, 255
circular, 250–251cross-validation and, 270–276exponential, 252
ﬁtting, 256–257, 314
Cressie’s scheme for, 257
pentaspherical, 251–252with reverse curvature at origin, 252spherical, 251
three-dimensional, 450
unbounded, 252–253, 301–302
intrinsic random functions and, 
301–302
parameter, 441
pentaspherical, 251–252
power, 301principal features, 250sample, 292, 295, 307
soil texture mapping, 325–328, 330, 332
space–time, 440, 441, 444–447spherical, 251unbounded, 301–302
Whittle, 252
Vector, 236, 237
data model, 234error, 133
separation, 292, 328
temporal, 144, 380
Vegetation, 73, 74, 94
climate and, 71, 73, 96, 107
indices, 140
zone, 71
Vertical accuracy, 134, 172, 181Virtual reality, 382, 386, 388Virtual Reality Modeling Language, 377, 
380–382
Virtual soil-landscape models, 374–389
characteristics of, 382cognitive universe in, 377examples of, 382–388
implementation universe in, 377
physical universe in, 377reconstruction techniques for, 380–382representation physical universe in, 377
space and time considerations, 378–380universes for, 376–377
Virtual worlds, 374, 377, 381, 389
Visible-near infrared spectroscopy, 138
Visible range, 138, 140, 312Visualization, 380
techniques, 9, 10, 381
V olume
cell, 9object, 385
V oronoi polygon, 303V oxel, 9, 376, 383
W
Water, 18, 20, 134
content, 13, 136, 137, 138, 193, 194, 290, 
312, 313, 437, 438, 442–448
management, 44
movement, 44, 114, 116
retention, 191, 196retention curve, 196table
depth, 387dynamics, 25, 380, 388levels, interpolation, 387monitoring, 386
Water Erosion Prediction Project, 422Wavelet(s)
coef ﬁcient, 344, 348, 350, 351
covariance and change detection, 354–355
Daubechies’, 350, 359
deﬁned, 346
functions, 347Mexican hat, 348mother, 347transform, 346
continuous, 349data, multiresolution analysis of, 351discrete, 349–351
variance, 352–355
for detecting CO
2 emission rates, 
363–368
Monte Carlo method for determining, 
353
uniformity of, 361–365
variance and change detection, 352–354
Weathering, 7, 19, 28, 64, 65, 112, 116, 439WebGIS, 143, 144Weight(s), 28, 190, 265–266, 296, 383
computation, 22, 23exponent, 225488 Environmental Soil-Landscape Modeling
fuzzy membership values as, 230, 231
kriging calculation of, 331
large, 225
matrix, 225optimal, 395
Weighted
average, 23, 262, 291least squares, 256, 312
Wetness index, topographic, 12, 187, 188,
189
White noise, 318, 394Whittle variogram, 250WISE. See World Inventory of Soil Emission 
Potentials (WISE)
Within-
block variance, 265class variance, 21, 245, 258
World Inventory of Soil Emission Potentials 
(WISE), 147
World Reference Base for Soil Resources 
(WRB), 146
X
X coordinate, 24, 25Y
Y coordinate, 24, 25
Yield, 70, 290
average, 43crop, 195sediment, 422
variogram, 242, 269, 275, 278
Z
Zero-mean, 394
Zonal
anisotropy, 437, 441
classi ﬁcation, 107
concepts, 50, 80–83soils, 50, 74, 80–83
Zonal classi ﬁcations, 107
Zone, 22, 81, 279, 282, 291
chernozem, 73classi ﬁcation, 46
climate, 50, 62, 81, 95
map delineation, 340
permeability, 303physiographic, 81vegetation, 71