High-Entropy AlloysMichael C. Gao · Jien-Wei Yeh
Peter K. Liaw · Yong Zhang
Editors
Fundamentals and ApplicationsHigh-Entropy AlloysMichael C. Gao Jien-Wei Yeh
Peter K. Liaw Yong Zhang
Editors
High-Entropy Alloys
Fundamentals and ApplicationsEditors
Michael C. Gao
National Energy Technology
Laboratory & AECOM
Albany, OR, USAJien-Wei Yeh
Department of Materials Science
and Engineering
National Tsing Hua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan, China
Peter K. LiawDepartment of Materials Science
and Engineering
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN, USAYong Zhang
State Key Laboratory for Advanced
Metals and Materials
University of Science and Technology,
Beijing
Beijing, China
ISBN 978-3-319-27011-1 ISBN 978-3-319-27013-5 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016936877
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part ofthe material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmissionor information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in thispublication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exemptfrom the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in thisbook are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Cover illustration: Image was prepared by Drs. Chun-Ming Lin and Jien-Wei Yeh.Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG SwitzerlandPreface
Scientiﬁc curiosity has driven Professors Jien-Wei Yeh and Brian Cantor to
investigate multicomponent solid solutio n alloys in equal or near-equal molar
ratios since 1995 and 1981, respectively. Both unconnectedly published theirresearch in scientiﬁc journals in 2004. These unique alloys, in sharp contrastto traditional alloys based on one or two principal elements, have one strikingcharacteristic: the unusually high entropy of mixing. Thus Prof. Yeh named
these new alloys as high-entropy alloys (HEAs), and they soon have attracted
the ever-rising interest from academia and industries all over the world. Thehistory, deﬁnition, and progress of HEAs are introduced in Chap. 1, while their
promising potential applications and perspectives are outlined in Chap. 15.
Since the ﬁrst six journal papers published in 2004, there have been tremendous
progress and development in both the fundamental understanding and applicationsof HEAs. This book is written in order to capture in time what have been under-stood, what attractive properties have been reported, and what challenges still
remain pertaining to HEAs. In particular, this book attempts to tackle these ques-
tions: What kinds of physical and metallurgical aspects contribute to those superiormaterial properties that are unique to HEAs? What are the entropy sources ofHEAs? How can we accelerate the design and development of single-phaseHEAs and high-performance multiphase HEAs? What are the proper modelingtechniques available to mimic the disordered structures of HEAs at the atomiclevel, and how can they in turn help people understand the formation and propertiesof HEAs?
The 15 chapters cover very wide spectra of HEAs, ranging from manufacturing
and processing, to advanced characterization, to mechanical and functional prop-erties and from physical metallurgy to computational modeling on different timeand length scales. This book mainly presents our own research work, including agreat amount of unpublished results, but it also contains a minor amount of reviewof peers ’work in order to be comprehensive. As a result, the review portion is not
meant to be complete or impartial. The chapters are written by authors of varyingbackgrounds in experiments and/or modeling, who decide their preference in the
vwriting style and chapter contents. The intended readers of this book are students
from colleges and graduate schools and research professionals from academia andindustries.
Establishing the effective criteria to distinguish single-phase HEAs from
multiphase HEAs and bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) has been an intense researchtopic. To date a number of empirical parameters have been proposed for thispurpose, and they include enthalpies of mixing of liquid and solid solution phases,atomic size difference, electronegativity difference, valence electron concentration,Ω-parameter, ϕ-parameter, lattice topological instability, and the root mean square
residual strain. Alternatively, one can design HEAs using the computational ther-modynamic approach (i.e., CALPHAD (acronym of CALculation of PHA seDia-
grams)), experimental phase diagram inspection, ab initio molecular dynamics
(AIMD) simulations, Monte Carlo simulations, and density functional theory(DFT) calculations. These theoretical efforts are all addressed in Chaps. 2and8,
9,10,11,12and13, and hundreds of model-predicted single-phase HEAs with the
face-centered cubic (FCC), body-centered cubic (BCC), and hexagonal close-packed (HCP) structures are provided in Chap. 11.
Detailed descriptions on the physical metallurgy of HEAs, which plays a center
role in understanding their processing/structure/properties ’relationships, are
presented in Chap. 3. The impact on thermodynamics, kinetics, phase transforma-
tions, and properties from high entropy is evident, and the lattice distortion effect isregarded to be critical to the claimed properties unique to HEAs. Chapter 4over-
views advanced microstructure characterization tools, such as high-resolutionscanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), analytical transmission elec-tron microscopy (TEM), three-dimensional atom probe, and neutron and synchro-tron scattering for characterizing HEAs. Then fabrication routes via liquid, solid,and gas states are illustrated in Chap. 5, including ingot metallurgy, powder
metallurgy, coating, rapid solidiﬁcation, mechanical alloying, single-crystal prep-
aration using the Bridgman method, laser cladding, and thin-ﬁlm sputtering.
Mechanical properties of HEAs, which include tension, compression, hardness,
wear, fracture, fatigue, and creep behavior, are reviewed in Chap. 6in a compre-
hensive manner. Compositional, temperature, and temporal dependences of theirmechanical behavior where available are also reviewed. Functional properties arereviewed in Chap. 7, including electrical, magnetic, electrochemical, and hydrogen
storage properties of HEAs. As a special category of HEAs, the research progress in
high-entropy BMGs is presented in Chap. 13, covering compositions, glass-forming
ability, mechanical properties, and atomic structures and diffusion constantspredicted from AIMD simulations. Chapter 14describes the processing, micro-
structure, and properties of thick or thin HEA ﬁlms on substrates for protection,function-enhancement, and/or decoration purposes.
It is worth mentioning that this book contains substantial amounts of pioneering
unpublished computer modeling work, as presented in Chaps. 8–13. Chapter 8ﬁrst
describes DFT calculations of phase stability of HEAs at zero temperature using the
cluster expansion method, molecular dynamics simulations, and Monte Carlo
simulations and then applies them to predict phase transformations in threevi Prefacequaternary refractory BCC HEAs and, more importantly, their entropy sources. The
applications of the coherent potential approximation (CPA) to HEAs are reviewedin Chap. 9, and the thermodynamic, magnetic, electronic, and elastic properties of
selected HEAs are presented. Chapter 10details the construction of special quasi-
random structure (SQS) and their applications to determine structural stability,lattice vibrational property, electronic structure, elasticity, and stacking faultenergy in quaternary and quinary FCC, BCC, and HCP HEAs. Both the positiveand negative vibrational entropies of mixing are illustrated for selected FCC andBCC HEAs, respectively. The development and applications of CALPHAD ther-modynamic databases for HEAs are detailed in Chap. 12, and the thermodynamic
properties (entropy, enthalpy, and Gibbs energy) of FCC and BCC HEA systems
are presented as a function of temperature and composition. The calculated entro-
pies of mixing in selected FCC and BCC HEAs are consistent with the DFTcalculations presented in Chaps. 8and10. Comparisons in the phase stability and
solidiﬁcation from model predictions with experiments are also highlighted.
We are very grateful for the following scientists who kindly reviewed one or
more chapters of this book: Dan Dorescu, Sheng Guo, Shengmin Guo, Derek Hass,Jeffrey A. Hawk, Ursula Kattner, Laszlo J. Kecskes, Rajiv Mishra, Oleg Senkov,Zhi Tang, Fuyang Tian, Levente Vitos, Weihua Wang, Mike Widom, Quan Yang,
Fan Zhang, and Margaret Ziomek-Moroz.
Finally we would like to thank all contributors for their effort and patience.
Albany, OR, USA Michael C. Gao
Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China Jien-Wei YehKnoxville, TN, USA Peter K. LiawBeijing, People ’s Republic of China Yong Zhang
October 2015Preface viiContents
1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys ......................... 1
Jien-Wei Yeh
2 Phase Formation Rules ................................. 2 1
Yong Zhang, Sheng Guo, C.T. Liu, and Xiao Yang
3 Physical Metallurgy ................................... 5 1
Jien-Wei Yeh and Louis J. Santodonato
4 Advanced Characterization Techniques .................... 1 1 5
Louis J. Santodonato and Peter K. Liaw
5 Fabrication Routes .................................... 1 5 1
Yong Zhang, Carl C. Koch, Sheng Guo Ma,Hui Zhang, and Ye Pan
6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys ............... 1 8 1
Haoyan Diao, Xie Xie, Fei Sun, Karin A. Dahmen,
and Peter K. Liaw
7 Functional Properties .................................. 2 3 7
Jien-Wei Yeh, Swe-Kai Chen, Han C. Shih, Yong Zhang,
and Ting Ting Zuo
8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations ........... 2 6 7
Michael Widom
9 Applications of Coherent Potential
Approximation to HEAs ................................ 2 9 9
Fuyang Tian, Yang Wang, Douglas L. Irving, and Levente Vitos
ix10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures
to High-Entropy Alloys .................................. 3 3 3
Michael C. Gao, Changning Niu, Chao Jiang,
and Douglas L. Irving
11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys ............................ 3 6 9
Michael C. Gao
12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys ................ 3 9 9
Chuan Zhang and Michael C. Gao
13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses ............................ 4 4 5
Akira Takeuchi, Michael C. Gao, Junwei Qiao,
and Michael Widom
14 High-Entropy Coatings .................................. 4 6 9
Jien-Wei Yeh, Su-Jien Lin, Ming-Hung Tsai,
and Shou-Yi Chang
15 Potential Applications and Prospects ....................... 4 9 3
Jien-Wei Yeh, An-Chou Yeh, and Shou-Yi Chang
Index ................................................... 5 1 3x ContentsContributors
Shou-Yi Chang Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National
Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
Swe-Kai Chen Center for Nanotechnology, Materials Science, and Microsystems,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
Karin A. Dahmen Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
Haoyan Diao Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University
of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
Michael C. Gao National Energy Technology Laboratory/AECOM, Albany, OR,
USA
Sheng Guo Department of Materials and Manufacturing Technology, Chalmers
University of Technology, Gothenburg, SE, Sweden
Douglas L. Irving Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Chao Jiang Thermo-Calc Software Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Carl C. Koch Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Peter K. Liaw Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University
of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
Su-Jien Lin Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing
Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
C. T. Liu Departmentof Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, City University
of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, People ’s Republic of China
xiSheng Guo Ma Institute of Applied Mechanics and Biomedical Engineering,
Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, People ’s Republic
of China
Changning Niu Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Ye Pan School of Material Science and Engineering, Southeast University,
Nanjing, People ’s Republic of China
Junwei Qiao College of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan University
of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, China
Louis J. Santodonato Division of Instrument and Source, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
Materials Science and Engineering Department, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN, USA
Han C. Shih Institute of Nanomaterials, Chinese Culture University, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China
Fei Sun Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA
Akira Takeuchi Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan
Fuyang Tian Institute for Applied Physics, University of Science and Technology
Beijing, Beijing, China
Applied Materials Physics, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Ming-Hung Tsai Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China
Levente Vitos Applied Materials Physics, Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Materials Theory, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden
Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics,
Budapest, Hungary
Yang Wang Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Michael Widom Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA
Xie Xie Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USAxii ContributorsXiao Yang State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, University
of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People ’s Republic of China
An-Chou Yeh Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing
Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
Jien-Wei Yeh Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing
Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
Chuan Zhang CompuTherm LLC, Madison, WI, USA
Hui Zhang School of Materials Science and Engineering, Anhui University of
Technology, Ma ’anshan, Anhui, People ’s Republic of China
Yong Zhang State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People ’s Republic of China
Ting Ting Zuo State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People ’s Republic of ChinaContributors xiiiChapter 1
Overview of High-Entropy Alloys
Jien-Wei Yeh
Abstract Alloys have evolved from simple to complex compositions depending
on the ability of mankind to develop the materials. The resulting improved func-tions and performances of alloys enable advancements in civilizations. In the lastcentury, signiﬁcant evolution and progress have led to the invention of specialalloys, such as stainless steels, high-speed steels, and superalloys. Although alloyscomposed of multiple elements have higher mixing entropy than pure metals, the
improved properties are mostly due to mixing enthalpy that allows the addition of
suitable alloying elements to increase the strength and improve physical and/orchemical properties. Since the turn of the century, more complex compositions withhigher mixing entropies have been introduced. Such complex compositions do notnecessarily guarantee a complex structure and microstructure, or the accompaniedbrittleness. Conversely, signiﬁcantly higher mixing entropy from complex compo-sitions could simplify the structure and microstructure and impart attractive prop-erties to the alloys. Jien-Wei Yeh and Brian Cantor independently announced the
feasibility of high-entropy alloys and equi-atomic multicomponent alloys in reports
published in 2004. This breakthrough in alloying concepts has accelerated researchon these new materials throughout the world over the last decade.
Keywords Binary alloys • Multicomponent alloys • Multi-principal-element
alloys • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
1.1 Historical Development of Alloys
The history of civilization is closely related with the development of new materials.During the Stone Age, natural materials used by ancient people included stone,wood, leather, bone, and native metals, such as gold, silver, and copper. Thesematerials cover three basic material categories: ceramics, polymers, and metals.After the Stone Age, subsequent ages (i.e., Bronze, Iron, and Steel) successively
J.-W. Yeh ( *)
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of Chinae-mail: jwyeh@mx.nthu.edu.tw
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_11came to be because of easier reduction of copper, tin, lead, mercury, and iron from
their respective ores. This led to the development of the technology to producethese materials in large quantities. Alloying copper mainly with tin and lead and
alloying iron mainly with the carbon from the combustion fuels created copper
alloys, cast iron, and steels. Most have superior combinations of strength andtoughness when compared with the ceramics and polymers of ancient times.These led to efﬁcient applications for daily life, transportation, construction, andweapons.
The discovery of additional metal elements was slow due to poor deposits or
great difﬁculty in reduction and extraction. However, signiﬁcant progress occurredafter the First Industrial Revolution, which began in England circa 1750. With the
discovery and production of new elements by various technologies, new alloys
were gradually developed and applied to common and special applications. Thiscaused rapid advancements. Approximately 30 alloy systems, each based on oneprincipal metal element, were developed and commercialized [ 1]. Well-known
industrial alloys include high-speed steels, Stellite alloys, stainless steels, alumi-num alloys, alnico alloys, permalloys, Cu-Be alloys, superalloys, and titaniumalloys. Newly developed alloys from the mid-twentieth century include Ni-Al,Ti-Al, and Fe-Al intermetallic compounds and alloys and metallic glasses for
special applications [ 2–4].
1.2 The Concept of Multicomponent Alloys
Traditionally, the utilization of native metals and artiﬁcial alloys from extractive
elements is almost entirely based on one principal element or compound. Althoughpure metal elements with minimal impurities are used in jewelry, electrical, optical,and other special applications, alloying elements improves speciﬁc mechanical,physical, or chemical properties for speciﬁc applications. Thus, most practicalalloys are multicomponent compositions. Making food by mixing or blending
different ingredients is a comparable example, i.e., it is easy to blend fruit and
vegetables to make mixed juices. Although some solid contents could be includedfor different taste and nutrition, mixed juice is typically homogenous, even whenequal amounts of different fruit and vegetables are used. By similar thinking,metallurgists tried to synthesize new alloys by mixing many metal elementstogether, each in large proportions. However, this route is not encouraged becausemelting and casting the metals require a high temperature and the cast alloys oftenbecome hard and brittle. Franz Karl Archard, a German scientist and metallurgist in
the late of eighteenth century, is possibly the only known researcher cited in
literature as having studied multicomponent equi-mass alloys [ 5]. With ﬁve to
seven elements selected from eight common elements at that time, including iron,copper, tin, lead, zinc, bismuth, antimony, and arsenic, his results showed that theproperties of the alloys are diverse but not attractive. Clearly, this is the reason why2 J.-W. Yehalloys with multiple principal alloying elements in high proportions were not
realized during ancient times.
Even in modern times, the research and development of multicomponent alloys
other than those based on one major element or one compound is not encouraged in
physical metallurgy and materials science. The information based on binary orternary phase diagrams perpetuates this fact [ 6]. Most phase diagrams show inter-
metallic compounds (IMs), which are ordered structures with compositions instoichiometric ratio or near-stoichiometric ratio, or intermediate phases (IPs),which are compound-type solid solutions with relatively a wide compositionrange, also called as intermetallic phases [ 7]. For example, Al-Cu and Cu-Zn
phase diagrams have 13 and 5 equilibrium phases of the IMs or IPs, respectively.
Ternary phase diagrams are more complex in the variety of IMs or IPs than the
binary phase diagrams. For example, the Al-Cu-Zn phase diagram has more than20 equilibrium IMs or IPs in the solid state, including those extended from theAl-Cu and Cu-Zn binary phase diagrams. Quaternary phase diagrams cannot existin a three-dimensional form except when one or more variables are ﬁxed. Never-theless, quaternary phase diagrams are expected to have a larger number of equi-librium IMs or IPs based on the upward trend from the binary to ternary systems.Besides this, alloys with a larger number of alloying elements typically have more
equilibrium or nonequilibrium IMs or IPs. For example, adding different transition
metals, such as Fe, Co, Ti, V, Sc, Mn, Cr, and Zr, in a small amount (e.g., ~4 wt%)into Al alloys, could form at least nine binary IMs or IPs (without counting possibleternary compounds) in the Al matrix according to their respective binary phasediagrams with Al. As a result, it is natural to expect that incorporating a largernumber of components in high concentrations would lead to a complex microstruc-ture with a large variety of IMs or IPs. Obviously, this discourages people fromdeveloping multicomponent alloys with higher contents of alloying elements.
Therefore, the conventional concept still dominates the ﬁeld of alloy development,
including design, production, and applications. Any trial contrary to this concept isgenerally thought to be unreasonable and worthless. Thus, the possibility of dis-covering special microstructures, properties, and applications is still restricted inthe traditional alloying concept. From a broader perspective, alloy informationrelated to materials science and engineering and solid-state physics will be incom-plete without a thorough understanding of alloys with multiple principal elements.
1.3 Ignition of the Research on High-Entropy Alloys
Two independent publications in 2004 by Jien-Wei Yeh in Taiwan and BrianCantor in the United Kingdom, as well as a dependent publication in 2003 byS. Ranganathan in India, ignited research on the rarely touched alloy world [ 8–10].
A brand-new alloy concept, “high-entropy alloys (HEAs)” or “multi-principal-element alloys (MPEAs),” was brought into existence and investigated throughincreased experimental studies. This new concept placed a new milestone in the1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 3history of alloy development. During the following decade, extensive research has
been conducted worldwide. This is reﬂected in Fig. 1.1, showing the increased
number of journal publications related to HEAs.
1.3.1 Brian Cantor ’s Pioneering Work
In 1981, Cantor initiated research on equi-atomic multicomponent alloys with his
undergraduate student Alain Vincent [ 11]. One of the experimental alloys had
20 components. They found that only one composition of Co 20Cr20Fe20Mn20Ni20,
in atomic percentage, is of a single FCC phase, which means that all these ﬁveelements are mixed into a solid solution. The work was unpublished except inVincent ’s thesis at Sussex University. Another undergraduate student, Peter Knight,
at Oxford University in 1998, performed similar studies on a wider range of alloys.
His work supported previous conclusions and presented new results, but it was alsounpublished besides his thesis at Oxford. Circa 2002, Isaac Chang performedfurther research on such alloys at Oxford and presented the results at the RapidlyQuenched Metals conference in Bangalore in 2002. This was published in Materials
Science and Engineering A in July 2004 [ 9].
In this paper, entitled Microstructural development in equiatomic multi-
component alloys [9], Cantor provided several important conclusions. First, equi-
atomic alloys containing 20 components (i.e., 5 at.% of Mn, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu,
Ag, W, Mo, Nb, Al, Cd, Sn, Pb, Bi, Zn, Ge, Si, Sb, and Mg) and anotherequi-atomic alloy composed of 16 elements (i.e., 6.25 at.% of Mn, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni,
Fig. 1.1 Publications related with HEAs until the end of 20154 J.-W. YehCu, Ag, W, Mo, Nb, Al, Cd, Sn, Pb, Zn, and Mg) are multiphase, crystalline, and
brittle. This was observed for both the as-cast condition obtained by inductionmelting under Ar and the rapid-solidiﬁed condition obtained by melt spinning.
Surprisingly, he found that the alloys consisted predominantly of a single FCC
primary phase that contains many elements but is particularly rich in transitionmetals, notably Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni. Based on this observation, a ﬁve-component Co
20Cr20Fe20Mn20Ni20alloy formed a single FCC solid solution with
a typical dendritic structure in the as-cast condition. Further, based on this compo-sition, a wide range of six- to nine-component alloys were examined through theaddition other elements, such as Cu, Ti, Nb, V, W, Mo, Ta, and Ge. They allexhibited the primary dendrite of the FCC phase with substantial amounts of other
transition metals, such as Nb, Ti, and V. In contrast, more electronegative elements,
such as Cu and Ge, are rejected from dendrite regions into the interdendriticregions. He made an important conclusion that the total number of phases is alwayssigniﬁcantly less than the maximum equilibrium number allowed by the Gibbsphase rule and even less than the maximum number allowed under nonequilibriumsolidiﬁcation conditions.
1.3.2 Jien-Wei Yeh ’s Pioneering Work
In 1995, Yeh began exploring the world of MPEAs [ 12]. He believed that high
mixing entropy could enhance mixing among components and reduce the numberof phases. Figure 1.2shows a solid solution forming a crystal structure with ten
types of dissolved atoms and a solid solution forming an amorphous structuresimulated by eight types of coins with large size differences. In this exploration,he ﬁrst needed to ensure there was a possibility of synthesizing such alloys fromraw elemental materials. With the help of Prof. S.K. Chen, his supervised graduate
student, K.S. Huang, successfully produced the ﬁrst whole-piece ingot, ~100 g, in a
Fig. 1.2 (a) A schematic crystal structure with ten kinds of atoms and ( b) a simulated amorphous
structure with eight kinds of coins1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 5bowl-shape water-cooled crucible using the arc-melting method [ 12]. After this
success, around 40 equi-atomic alloys, each with 59 components, were prepared byarc melting. Investigations were then conducted on the microstructure, hardness,
and corrosion resistance of the as-cast state and fully annealed state of these alloys.
From this data, 20 experimental alloys based on Ti, V, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mo, Zr,Pd, and Al (with or without 3 at.% B addition) were chosen and discussed in hismaster thesis at the National Tsing Hua University in 1996 [ 12]. They are catego-
rized into three equi-atomic series differing in Cu, Al, and Mo. Each series variesfrom 6-components to 9-components, i.e., Cu, Al, or Mo + TiVFeNiZr + Co + Cr+ Pd + 0 or 3 at.% B. Based on this study, the typical dendritic structure wasobserved in the as-cast structure. All alloys have a high hardness level in the
range from 590 to 890 HV, depending on the composition and fabrication condi-
tions, as-cast or fully annealed. The full annealing treatment generally retains asimilar hardness level of the as-cast state. In each series, a higher number ofcomponents increase the hardness, but the nine-component alloys display a smalldecrease in hardness. Small additions of B could lead to an increase in hardness. Inthe discussion on these trends, a large lattice distortion and stronger bonding wereproposed to explain the strong solid solution hardening. It is noteworthy that allX-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of these alloys were unidentiﬁed and left without
any indication of diffraction plane indices in the thesis. The unidentiﬁed patterns
were due to the innocence at this initial stage of research. Yeh thought that theircrystal structures might be new and unseen in the data bank of X-ray diffraction. Ingeneral, all of these alloys displayed very good corrosion resistance, which wasassessed by their weight loss after immersion in four acidic solutions of HCl,H
2SO4, HNO 3, and HF, each with 0.01 and 1M concentrations, for 24 h, respec-
tively. The addition of effective passive elements, such as Cr and Mo, and thebeneﬁt of a low free energy due to high mixing entropy were thought to contribute
to the corrosion resistance. This study also suggested that the high-entropy effect,
lattice distortion effect, and slow diffusion effect would exist in such alloys.
After this study, two master theses were written covering similar HEA alloy
concepts [ 13,14]. Then, more colleagues, including S.J. Lin, T.S. Chin, J.Y. Gan,
and T.T. Shun, were invited to join HEAs research. Nine different studies wereperformed from 2000 to 2003 [ 15–23]: ﬁve studies on HEAs bulk alloys concerning
deformation behavior, wear behavior, and annealing behavior, two studies on HEAthin ﬁlms deposited by magnetron sputtering, and two on HEA thermal spray
coatings. As of 2014, Yeh has supervised 84 master students and 11 PhD students
in this exciting area.
In Feb. 2004, the ﬁrst HEA paper, entitled Multi-principal-element alloys with
improved oxidation and wear resistance for thermal spray coating , was published
inAdvanced Engineering Materials [24]. In May 2004, the second HEA paper,
entitled Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multi-principal elements - novel
alloy design concepts and outcomes , was also published in the same journal. This
paper is the ﬁrst to elucidate the concept of HEAs by providing experimental results
and related theories [ 8]. In this paper, their promising properties were shown to be
potentially suitable for many applications, such as tools, molds, dies, and6 J.-W. Yehmechanical parts as well as anticorrosive high-strength parts in chemical plants, IC
foundries, and even marine applications. In addition, coating technology couldfurther expand the applications of HEAs to functional ﬁlms, such as hard-facing
and diffusion barriers. Thus, the HEAs concept is not simply a compositional
concept, but may lead to a new and uncharted territory with many possiblematerials, new phenomena, new theories, and new applications.
Later in 2004, two papers, entitled Wear resistance and high-temperature
compression strength of FCC CuCoNiCrAl
0.5Fe alloy with boron addition and
Formation of simple crystal structures in solid-solution alloys with multi-principalmetallic elements , were published in Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A
[25,26]. In addition, one paper, entitled Nanostructured nitride ﬁlms of multi-
element high-entropy alloys by reactive DC sputtering , was published in Surface
and Coatings Technology in the same year [ 27]. This paper also marked the
historical milestone of the initial development of high-entropy ceramics (HECs),such as HE nitrides, HE carbides, HE carbonitrides, and HE oxides. By the end of2014, Yeh and his colleague published 111 journal articles related with HEAs.Using these HEAs concepts, developments in the materials world have beenextended to high-entropy materials (HEMs) although high-entropy polymers(HEPs) have not yet been published.
1.3.3 Srinivasa Ranganathan ’s Alloyed Pleasure in 2003
S. Ranganathan is a signiﬁcant scientist in the ignition of HEAs. Ranganathan is the
Senior Scientist Platinum Jubilee Fellowship of the National Academy of Sciences,India. He has contributed to the understanding of the structure of interfaces,quasicrystals, bulk metallic glasses, and nanostructured materials. He also spentextensive time investigating novel multicomponent alloys. Through the communi-cations and discussions on this unknown ﬁeld with J.W. Yeh, his article entitled“Alloyed pleasures – multimetallic cocktails” was published in Current Science in
Nov. 2003 [ 10]. In this article, he reviews three new alloy areas: bulk metallic
glasses by A. Inoue, superelastic and superplastic alloys (or gum metals) byT. Saito, and HEAs by J.W. Yeh. Thus, this article is the ﬁrst journal publicationon HEAs.
In this article, Ranganathan described the limitations metallurgists face with
multicomponent alloys in the following paragraphs:
Metallurgists conﬁned themselves to systems where the number of alloying elements was
limited in any one phase. This was partly because as alloys are made with an increasing
number of component metals, the database necessary in terms of phase diagram informa-
tion increases sharply. If the processing variables are superimposed leading to metastablephases and altered microstructures, the possibilities become astronomical. In fact, oneGerman scientist estimated the possibilities to exceed the number of atoms in the entire
universe! In the presence of such cornucopia metallurgists retreated to produce alloys with
a few components and assume that incremental improvement is the only possible route .1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 7He also said that the multi-component alloys represent a new frontier in metal-
lurgy. They require hyper-dimensions to visualize. If we use a coarse mesh of 10 at.% for mapping a binary system, the effort involved in experimental determination of
phase diagrams rises steeply. Thus, the effort of experimental determination of a
seven component system will be 10
5times that of a binary diagram and will alone
need as much effort as has been spent over the last hundred years in establishing~4000 binary and ~8000 ternary diagrams. While the computation of phase dia-grams from ﬁrst principles has made impressive progress in the last decade, theprospect of calculation of higher order systems is a daunting task. In this scenariowe have explorers like A. Inoue, T. Saito and J.W. Yeh pointing to exciting newalloys with applications.
In May 2004, Ranganathan traveled to Taiwan to visit Yeh in order to further
understand and discuss HEAs. In Nov. 2005, he invited Yeh and his colleagueS.K. Chen to attend the international symposium, “Frontiers in Design of Materials2005,” held at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras in Chennai, India. Yehgave a presentation with the topic “Novel Alloy Concept, Challenges, and Oppor-tunities of High-Entropy Alloys”. In Jan. 2007, he again invited Yeh to give a talk,entitled “Molecular Dynamics Simulation for Multi-elemental Effects on the GlassFormability of Equal-mole Alloys,” in the workshop on Bulk Metallic Glasses:
Science and Technology (BMG 2007) at the Indian Institute of Science in Banga-
lore, India. Through his invitation, high-entropy alloy concept quickly propagatedto the large international attendance at the talks.
1.4 Deﬁnition of High-Entropy Alloys
Before introducing the deﬁnition of HEAs, an understanding is needed on themixing entropy and conﬁguration entropy of alloys, arising from the mixing ofpure components. From statistical thermodynamics, Boltzmann ’s equation [ 28,29]
calculates the conﬁgurational entropy of a system:
ΔS
conf¼kBlnw ð1:1Þ
where kBis Boltzmann ’s constant and wis the number of ways in which the
available energy can be mixed or shared among the particles in the system. For arandom n-component solid solution, in which the ith component has a mole fraction
X
i, its ideal conﬁgurational entropy per mole is
ΔSconf¼/C0RXn
i¼1XilnXi ð1:2Þ
where Ris the gas constant, 8.314 J/K/mol.8 J.-W. YehConsider an equi-atomic alloy in its liquid state or regular solid solution state.
Its conﬁgurational entropy per mole is calculated as [ 8,30]
ΔSconf¼/C0klnw¼/C0R1=nln1=nþ1=nln1=nþ/C1/C1/C11=nln1=nÞ¼/C0 Rln1=n¼Rlnn ð
ð1:3Þ
Although the total mixing entropy has f our contributions: conﬁgurational,
vibrational, magnetic dipole, and electr onic randomness, conﬁgurational entropy
is dominant over the other three contributions [ 8] agreeing with theoretical
predictions presented in Chaps. 8and10. Hence, the conﬁgurational entropy
often represents the mixing entropy in order to avoid difﬁcult calculations todetermine the other three contributions. Table 1.1lists the conﬁgurational entro-
pies of equi-atomic alloys in terms of the gas constant R. The conﬁgurational
entropy increases as the number of elements increases. The entropy change per
mole, ΔS
f, from a solid to a liquid during melting is approximately one gas
constant Rfor metals, which is deﬁned as Richard ’s rule. Moreover, the enthalpy
change or latent heat per mole during melting, ΔHf, correlates with ΔSfby the
equation: TmΔSf¼ΔHfbecause the free energy change, ΔGf, is zero. From the
bond number difference in the solid and the liquid, ΔHfis regarded as the energy
required to destroy approximately one-t welfth of all bonds in the close-packed
solid of one mole. Thus, TmRis approximately equal to one-twelfth of the
bonding energy in the close-packed solid of one mole. This demonstrates
that mixing entropy of Rper mole of an alloy is signiﬁcant and RT is comparable
with the mixing enthalpy per mole arising from the bonding energy differencebetween the alloyed state and the unalloyed state. As a result, the mixingentropy of Rper mole is signiﬁcantly large in lowering the mixing free energy
by an amount of RT, especially at high temperatures (e.g., RT ¼8.314 kJ/mol at
1000 K).
If the strain energy effect due to the atomic size difference is not considered,
the mixing enthalpy from chemical bo nding and the mixing entropy are the two
main factors that determine the equilibri um state. In contrast to negative mixing
enthalpy (the driving force to form co mpounds) and positive mixing enthalpy
(the driving force to form a segregated sta te), mixing entropy is the driving force
to form a random solid solution. Thus, t he actual equilibrium state depends on
the competition among the relative values of different states. For example,dividing the formation enthalpies of two typical strong intermetallic compounds,
NiAl and TiAl, by their respective melting points obtains 1.38 Rand 2.06 R,
respectively [ 8]. This means the driving force for forming strong compounds
is of this order. On the other hand, the formation enthalpy of Cr-Cu and Fe-CuTable 1.1 Ideal conﬁgurational entropies in terms of Rfor equi-atomic alloys with constituent
elements up to 13 [ 31]
n 1 23 456789 1 0 1 1 1 21 3
ΔSconf 0 0.69 1.1 1.39 1.61 1.79 1.95 2.08 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.49 2.571 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 9are 12 and 13 kJ/mol, respectively. Di viding the formation enthalpies by the
melting point of Cu obtains 1.06 Rand 1.15 R, respectively. Thus, it is reasonable
to think that the mixing entropy of 1.5 Rper mole is relatively large to compete
with the mixing enthalpy and there is a higher probability to form solid solu-
tions. Shown in Table 1.1, the ideal conﬁgurational e ntropy of a 5-element alloy
is 1.61 R[31]. Hence, a system with at least ﬁve elements would have larger
probability to form solid solutions. Alt hough a random solid solution might not
form in most cases, the solid solution s with a high degree of randomness are
easier to obtain. Thus, high mixing entro py enhances mutual solubility among
constituent elements and effectively red uces the number of phases, especially at
high temperatures.
Based on the above considerations, there are two deﬁnitions for “high-entropy
alloys” [ 31]. One is based on composition and the other is based on conﬁgurational
entropy. For the former, HEAs are preferentially deﬁned as alloys containing atleast ﬁve principal elements, each with an atomic percentage between 5 and 35 %.The atomic percentage of each minor element, if any, is hence less than 5 %. Thisdeﬁnition is expressed as
n
major/C2155%/C20Xi/C2035%and nminor/C210Xj/C205%; ð1:4Þ
where nmajor andnminor are the number of major elements and minor elements,
respectively. XiandXjare the atomic percentages of major element iand minor
element j, respectively.
For the later, HEAs are deﬁned as alloys having conﬁgurational entropies at a
random state larger than 1.5 R, no matter they are single phase or multiphase at room
temperature. This is expressed as
ΔSconf/C211:5R ð1:5Þ
Although each deﬁnition covers a wide range of alloys, both deﬁnitions overlap
for the most part. The compositions in non-overlapping regions are also regarded asHEAs. For example, CoCrCu
0.2Fe0.2Ni in atomic ratio (or molar ratio) is HEAs by
the composition deﬁnition since it is also Co 29.4Cr29.4Cu5.9Fe5.9Ni29.4in atomic
percentage. However, their conﬁgurational entropy is approximately 1.414 R, which
does not ﬁt into the high-entropy deﬁnition. Under this condition, this alloy is stillconsidered a HEA. Another example is an equimolar alloy with 25 elements.Although each element has a concentration of 4 at.% in the composition, thisalloy is still a HEA since the conﬁgurational entropy is 3.219 R. Thus, an alloy
with a composition ﬁtting only one of the two deﬁnitions could be also regarded as aHEA. As for the quaternary equimolar alloy CoCrFeNi, it is sometimes considered
a HEA in literature because its composition and conﬁgurational entropy are close to
the lower limits of both deﬁnitions. Thus, the deﬁnitions of HEAs are guidelines,not laws.
From the two deﬁnitions of HEAs, it is realized that the basic principle behind
HEAs with multiple principal elements is to have high mixing entropy in order to10 J.-W. Yehenhance the formation of solid solution phases and inhibit the formation of inter-
metallic compounds. This principle is thus very important to avoid complicatedstructure and brittleness for HEAs. It further guarantees that most HEAs can be
feasibly synthesized, processed, analyzed, manipulated, and used. Among various
thermodynamic factors such as mixing enthalpy, mixing entropy, atomic sizedifference, valence electron concentration, and electronegativity, because mixingentropy is the only factor which increases with increasing the number of principalcomponents, the name “high-entropy alloys” is pertinent for MPEAs.
As 1.5 Ris a lower limit for HEAs, we further deﬁne medium-entropy alloys
(MEAs) and low-entropy alloys (LEAs) to differentiate the power of the mixingentropy effect. Here, 1 Ris the boundary between medium-entropy and low-entropy
alloys since a mixing entropy less than 1 Ris expected to be much less competitive
with a larger mixing enthalpy. That is,
For MEAs :1:0R/C20ΔS
conf/C201:5R ð1:6Þ
For LEAs :ΔSconf/C201:0R ð1:7Þ
Table 1.2provides the conﬁgurational entropies calculated for typical traditional
alloys at their liquid state or random state [ 31]. This table shows that most alloys
have low entropies. Further, some concentrated alloys such as Ni-based, Co-basedsuperalloys, and BMGs have medium entropies between 1 and 1.5 R. Figure 1.3
shows the types of alloys in the alloy world based on conﬁgurational entropy. Thisdemonstrates that HEAs are an extension from LEAs and MEAs from the entropy
viewpoint. The HEAs are not entirely alloys with complex structures and useless
properties as predicted by traditional experiences and concepts.
Table 1.2 Conﬁgurational entropies calculated for typical traditional alloys at their liquid state or
random state [ 31]
Systems Alloys ΔSconfat liquid state
Low-alloy steel 4340 0.22 Rlow
Stainless steel 304 0.96 Rlow
316 1.15 Rmedium
High-speed steel M2 0.73 Rlow
Mg alloy AZ91D 0.35 Rlow
Al alloy 2024 0.29 Rlow
7075 0.43 Rlow
Cu alloy 7-3 brass 0.61 Rlow
Ni-based superalloy Inconel 718 1.31 Rmedium
Hastelloy X 1.37 Rmedium
Co-based superalloy Stellite 6 1.13 Rmedium
BMG Cu 47Zr11Ti34Ni8 1.17Rmedium
Zr53Ti5Cu16Ni10Al16 1.30Rmedium1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 111.5 Clariﬁcation on Some Misunderstandings
Historically, there exists a common misconception that compositions such as
those of HEAs would have complex structure and be brittle by nature, as mentioned
in Sect. 1.2. Even modern physical metallurgy carelessly consolidates this
misconception, because adding larger amounts of an alloying element into analloy often leads to an intermetallic compound or phase. A larger number of alloyelements in large proportion in an alloy tend to form more intermetallic compoundsor phases between a host element and alloying elements (based on binary phasediagrams) and even between alloying elements (based on ternary phase diagrams).By the concept of HEAs, this misconception is overcome through the understanding
that high mixing entropy could enhance the formation of solid solutions. However,
new misunderstandings might arise if the deﬁnitions of HEAs and the literature onHEAs are not better understood. One predominant misconception is that HEAswould be easy to form metallic glasses. Another is that a HEA would be a simplemultielement solid solution. In addition, some think that HEAs are unstable innature, whereas some think that HEAs are actually very stable.
In fact, most HEAs processed through traditional melting-and-casting route are
crystalline, and only special compositions could be amorphous. For example,
Pd
20Pt20Cu20Ni20P20was reported to be a high-entropy, bulk metallic glass
(HE-BMGs) [ 32]. Special processes, such as mechanical alloying, rapid solidiﬁca-
tion, and thin-ﬁlm deposition, also easily enhance the formation of an amorphousstructure. However, it must be mentioned that increasing the number of elementshas a stronger tendency to lead to topological disorder, like an amorphous structureor even a liquid-like one, as revealed by the molecular dynamics simulation results[33]. This is likely related to the confusion principle proposed by Turnbull [ 34,35]
and Greer [ 36]. This principle stipulates that more components constituting an alloy
will lead to a lower chance of selecting viable crystal structures and thus have
greater glass formability. This implies the manifestation of high-entropy effectand sluggish diffusion effect, both of which enhance the tendency to mix and
Fig. 1.3 Types of alloys in the alloy world based on conﬁgurational entropy [ 31]12 J.-W. Yehrandomize the component atoms. If the atomic size difference is sufﬁcient to cause
topological instability, an amorphous structure is easier to form upon relativelyhigher cooling rates.
HEAs will not necessarily form single multi-element random (disordered) solid
solutions. Besides high mixing entropy, there are other factors acting against theformation of random solid solution, including mixing enthalpy, atomic size differ-ence, and valence electron concentration, which will be discussed in Chaps. 2and3.
High mixing entropy enhances the formation of solid solutions but does not guaranteethe formation of a single random solid solution. It was for this reason that Gaoet al. developed an effective strategy for discovering single-phase HEAs, whichcombined ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations, the CALPHAD (acro-
nym of calculation of phase diagrams) method, and the inspection of existing phase
diagrams [ 37]. In addition, Santodonato et al. elucidated the relative importance of
conﬁgurational entropy through the structural evolution of the Al
1.3CoCrCuFeNi
alloy from a liquid state down to the solid state at room temperature. Varioustechniques, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electronmicroscopy (TEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), electron backscatterdiffraction (EBSD), 3D atom probe tomography, and AIMD simulation, wereconducted for the observation and veriﬁcation [ 38]. Therefore, it was concluded that
HEAs could be a single phase or multiple phases with different degrees of ordering,
depending on their compositions and kinetic factors imposed by processing. From anengineering viewpoint, alloy development is not necessarily limited to single-phaseHEAs since multiphase HEAs could also have practical applications [ 39].
Are HEAs thermodynamically unstable or stable in nature? HEAs could be in an
equilibrium state if sufﬁciently annealed. However, this is generally a lengthyprocess when compared to conventional alloys due to their lower diffusion rateand phase transformation rate. Conversely, if the HEAs are not fully annealed, their
phases and microstructure could be in a nonequilibrium metastable state. This
phenomenon is also found in conventional alloys. Since practical production doesnot usually allow prolonged processing time to reach an equilibrium structure andmetastable structure could also have good performance in applications, HEAs witha metastable structure would be applicable structures in applications.
Therefore, HEAs could have a broad range of compositions, phases, and micro-
structures and thus generate a wide range of physical, mechanical, and chemicalproperties. Certainly, controlling metastable structures to obtain the best perfor-
mance for speciﬁc applications is an important research issue of HEAs.
1.6 Recent Activities for HEAs and HE-Related Materials
After Yeh, Cantor, and Ranganathan initiated the ﬁeld of research into HEAs,
1038 journal articles related to HEAs were published by the end of 2015, asshown in Fig. 1.1. However, the research and understanding of HEAs are still
very limited. A large territory of HEA research has yet to be explored and1 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 13developed. Recently, in response to the interest from many groups and researchers,
nine special issues on HEAs were published or processed, as listed in Table 1.3.I n
addition, ﬁve articles reviewing the research of HEAs were published in journals
[30,31,40–42]. Meanwhile, several international symposiums and workshops on
HEAs have been held, as listed in Table 1.4As for the relative contribution of SCI
(science citation index) papers on HE-related materials, Fig. 1.4a shows the pro-
portions of contributions from Taiwan, Asia (excluding Taiwan), Europe, andAmerica from 2004 to 2014. In addition, Asia, Europe, and America have anincreased growth in the number of papers. These facts show remarkable andincreasing attraction of the HEAs ﬁeld to the materials community.
1.7 Research Fields in HEAs and HE-Related Materials
Although basic differences exist in the concept of alloy composition between HEAsand conventional alloys, the research ﬁelds in HEAs are similar to those inconventional alloys. For fabricating HEAs, three main routes are also applied:ingot metallurgy (IM), powder metallurgy (PM), and coating and deposition. Formeasuring properties and investigating microstructures of the HEAs, methods andTable 1.3 Special issues on HEAs
Special issue Journal Vol. Year Editors Publisher Country
Recent
advances inhigh-entropy
alloysAnnales de
Chimie Sciencedes Mate ´riaux31 2006 J.W. Yeh,
A. DavisonLavoisier France
High-entropy
alloysEntropy 15 2013 J.W. Yeh MDPI Switzerland
High-entropy
alloysJOM 64 2012 M.C. Gao Springer Germany
High-entropy
alloysJOM 65 2013 M.C. Gao Springer Germany
High-entropy
alloysJOM 66 2014 M.C. Gao Springer Germany
High-entropy
alloysJOM 67 2015 M.C. Gao Springer Germany
High-entropy
alloysAdvances in
Materials Sci-ence andEngineering– 2015 Y. Zhang,
J.W. Yeh,I.F. Sun, J.P. Lin,K.F. YaoHindawi USA
High-entropy
alloysMaterials Sci-
ence and
Technology– 2015 H.K. Bhadeshia Maney UK
High entropy
alloy coatings– 2015 T.M. Yue MDPI Switzerland14 J.-W. Yehtechniques used for conventional alloys are also useful to HEAs. However, different
compositions lead to different microstructures and properties. As a result, correla-tions between composition, process, properties, and microstructure in HEAs pro-vide unlimited research issues for both scientiﬁc curiosity and applied sciences.Table 1.4 International symposiums and workshops on HEAs
Symposium MeetingaDate Place Organizers
BMGs and
HEAsIUMRS-ICA
conferenceSep. 25–28,
2010Qingdao,
ChinaZ. Lu, Y. Li, T. Zhang, X. Hui
BMGs and
HEAsIUMRS-ICA
conferenceSep. 19–22,
2011Taipei,
TaiwanJ.C. Huang, J.W. Yeh
BMGs and
HEAsIUMRS-ICA
conferenceAug. 26–31,
2012Busan,
KoreaE.S. Park, H. Kato,
W.H. Wang, J.C. Huang
BMGs and
HEAsIUMRS-ICAM
conferenceSep. 22–28,
2013Qingdao,
ChinaC.T. Liu, Z. Lu, P.K. Liaw
HEAs MS&T-2012
meetingOct. 7–11,
2012Pittsburgh,
USAM.C. Gao
HEAs (I) TMS-2013
annual meetingMarch 3–7,
2013San
Antonio,
USAP.K. Liaw, G.Y. Wang,
M.C. Gao, S.N. Mathaudhu
HEAs (II) TMS-2014
annual meetingFeb. 16–20,
2014San Diego,
USAP.K. Liaw, G.Y. Wang,
M.C. Gao, S.N. Mathaudhu
HEAs Workshop Dec. 15–16,
2014Quiyang,
ChinaZ. P. Lu
HEAs (III) TMS-2015
annual meetingMarch
15–19, 2015Orlando,
USAP.K. Liaw, G.Y. Wang,
M.C. Gao, S.N. Mathaudhu
HEAs Workshop March
28–29, 2015Madras,
IndiaB.S. Murty, R.S. Kottada
MS&T Materials Science & Technology
TMS The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society
aIUMRS-ICA International Union of Materials Research Societies – The IUMRS International
Conference in Asia
Fig. 1.4 (a) Contributions of HEAs papers from different areas and ( b) growth of the number of
papers in different research ﬁelds from 2004 to 20141 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 15For a simple classiﬁcation of research ﬁelds based on the fabrication route, Fig. 1.4b
illustrates that research on HEAs by number of SCI papers. Bulk HEAs prepared bymelting-and-casting methods occupy the largest portion, thin-ﬁlm and thick-ﬁlm
coatings are next, and powders and sintered products account for a small propor-
tion. Furthermore, basic science studies, theoretical approaches, and simulationsand modeling are very important but still on a small scale.
1.8 The Scope of This Book
Although research on HEAs is still in infancy, different research areas wereexplored over the last decade. Clearly, the main roads in this new world of researchwere paved to reach different areas from the world of conventional materials. Theseroads make it convenient for newcomers to enter this ﬁeld of work. The efﬁciency
in paving these roads is attributed to the aid from materials science and engineering,
modern facilities, computerization, and information network. Signiﬁcant reductionin time, effort, and resources would be impossible if research and development onHEAs was performed in earlier times when the aids mentioned above did not exist.
This book covers a wide spectrum. Chapter 2(Formation Rules) details the
existing criteria for the phase formation of HEAs and compares thermodynamic andtopological parameters over wide ranges of materials, including HEAs, metallicglasses, and traditional metallic alloys. Chapter 3(Physical Metallurgy) focuses on
the relationship between composition, processing, microstructure, and properties.
Both thermodynamics and kinetics will be analyzed to illustrate phase transforma-tions in HEAs. Chapter 4(Advanced Characterization Techniques) provides a brief
introduction to some advanced microstructure characterization tools, such as high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy or analytical TEM, three-dimensional atom probe, and neutron scattering for characterizing HEAs. Chapter 5
(Fabrication Routes) illustrates the manufacturing routes in producing HEAs,including ingot metallurgy, powder metallurgy, coating, rapid solidiﬁcation,
mechanical alloying, single crystal preparation using the Bridgman method, laser
cladding, and thin-ﬁlm sputtering. Chapter 6(Mechanical Properties of High-
Entropy Alloys) emphasizes the mechanical properties of HEAs, including tension,compression, hardness, and wear tests. Fracture, fatigue, and creep behavior arealso summarized. Chapter 7(Functional Properties) introduces electrical, magnetic,
electrochemical, and hydrogen storage properties of HEAs. Chapter 8(Prediction
of Structure and Phase Transformations) introduces ﬁrst-principles methods intothe HEA area for predicting phase stability in three quaternary systems at both
T¼0 K and ﬁnite temperatures. The method of hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular
dynamics (MC/MD) simulations is introduced, and identifying entropy sources inthe BCC HEAs is highlighted. Chapter 9(Applications of Coherent Potential
Approximation to High-Entropy Alloys) details the coherent potential approxima-tion within the exact mufﬁn-tin orbitals method to describe the chemically andmagnetically disordered phases for systems of an arbitrary number of components.16 J.-W. YehApplications of this method to predict lattice stability, electronic and magnetic
structure, and elasticity of single-phase HEAs are presented here. Chapter 10
(Applications of Special Quasi-Random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys) details
the framework and tools available to generate special quasi-random structures
(SQSs). Examples of SQSs for FCC, HCP, and BCC in 4- and 5-component alloysare presented. Comparisons between MC/MD, CPA, and SQS are discussed, andthe entropy sources in FCC, BCC, and HCP HEAs are predicted. Chapter 11
(Design of High-Entropy Alloys) presents common methods for searching forsingle-phase HEAs in FCC, BCC, and HCP lattices. These methods includeAIMD simulations, DFT calculations, CALPHAD modeling, and phase diagraminspection. New single-phase HEA compositions are suggested. Chapter 12
(CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys) emphasizes thermodynamic data-
base development tailored for HEA systems and applications of CALPHAD tounderstand HEA formation and alloy design. Chapter 13(High-Entropy Metallic
Glasses) describes how to use the concept of high entropy to produce metallicglasses. High-entropy metallic glasses and their elastic/plastic properties arepresented here. Chapter 14(High-Entropy Coatings) describes thick HEA ﬁlms or
thin HEA ﬁlms on substrates to provide protection, function enhancement, and/ordecoration purposes. Chapter 15(Potential Applications and Prospects) summa-
rizes promising potential applications. It is perspective that numerous HE materials
with improved properties will be successively developed in the future.
Acknowledgment J.W.Y. sincerely thanks Professors Ranganathan and Cantor for their great
contributions from the beginning of high-entropy alloys era and also thanks four colleagues,Professors Su-Jien Lin, Swe-Kai Chen, Tsung-Shune Chin, and Han C. Shih for their continued
research and contributions on high-entropy alloys. J.W.Y. would like to acknowledge the Ministry
of Science and Technology, Ministry of Economic Affairs, and National Tsing Hua University,R.O.C., for their ﬁnancial supports through different projects of high-entropy alloys. He also
thanks Dr. Chun-Ming Lin for the collections and statistical analyses of papers on high-entropy
alloys.
References
1. ASM International (1990) Metals handbook, vols 1 and 2, 10th edn. ASM International,
Materials Park, OH
2. Westbrook JH, Fleischer RL (2000) Intermetallic compounds-structural applications of inter-
metallic compounds. Wiley, West Sussex
3. Westbrook JH, Fleischer RL (2000) Intermetallic compounds-magnetic, electrical and optical
properties and applications of intermetallic compounds. Wiley, West Sussex
4. Suryanarayana C, Inoue A (2010) Bulk metallic glasses, 1st edn. CRC Press, West Palm Beach
5. Smith CS (1963) Four outstanding researchers in metallurgical history. American Society for
Testing and Materials, Baltimore
6. Baker H (ed) (1992) ASM handbook, vol 3, Alloy phase diagrams. ASM International,
Materials Park
7. Reed-Hill RE, Abbaschian R (1994) Physical metallurgy principles, 3rd edn. PWS Publishing
Company, Boston, pp 353–3581 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 178. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy designconcepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6:299–303
9. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 375–377:213–218
10. Ranganathan S (2003) Alloyed pleasures: multimetallic cocktails. Curr Sci 85:1404–140611. Cantor B (2014) Multicomponent and high entropy alloys. Entropy 16:4749–4768
12. Huang KH, Yeh JW (advisor) (1996) A study on the multicomponent alloy systems containing
equal-mole elements. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
13. Lai KT, Chen SK, Yeh JW (1998) Properties of the multicomponent alloy system with equal-
mole elements. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
14. Hsu YH, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2000) A study on the multicomponent alloy systems with equal-
mole FCC or BCC elements. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
15. Hung YT, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2001) A study on the Cu-Ni-Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Si-Ti multicomponent
alloy system. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
16. Chen KY, Shun TT, Yeh JW (2002) Development of multi-element high-entropy alloys for
spray coating. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
17. Tung CC, Shun TT, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2002) Study on the deformation microstructure and
high temperature properties of Cu-Co-Ni-Cr-Al-Fe. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan
18. Chen MJ, Lin SS (2003) The effect of V, S, and Ti additions on the microstructure and wear
properties of Al(0.5)CrCuFeCoNi high-entropy alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan
19. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2003) Research of multi-component high-entropy alloys for thermal
spray coating. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
20. Hsu CY, Shun TT, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2003) Alloying effect of boron on the microstructure
and high-temperature properties of CuCoNiCrAl
0.5Fe alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing
Hua University, Taiwan.
21. Lin PC, Chin TS, Yeh JW (2003) Development on the high frequency soft-magnetic thin ﬁlms
from high-entropy alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
22. Tsai CW, Shun TT, Yeh JW (2003) Study on the deformation behavior and microstructure of
CuCoNiCrAl xFe high-entropy alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
23. Tsai MH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2003) Study on the evolution of microstructure and electric
properties of multi-element high-entropy alloy ﬁlms. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan
24. Huang PK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK (2004) Multi-principal-element alloys with improved
oxidation and wear resistance for thermal spray coating. Adv Eng Mater 6:74–78
25. Hsu CY, Yeh JW, Chen SK, Shun TT (2004) Wear resistance and high-temperature compres-
sion strength of FCC CuCoNiCrAl 0.5Fe alloy with boron addition. Metall Mater Trans A
35:1465–1469
26. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Gan JY, Lin SJ, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004) Formation
of simple crystal structures in Cu-Co-Ni-Cr-Al-Fe-Ti-V alloys with multiprincipal metallic
elements. Metall Mater Trans A 35:2533–2536
27. Chen TK, Shun TT, Yeh JW, Wong MS (2004) Nanostructured nitride ﬁlms of multi-element
high-entropy alloys by reactive DC sputtering. Surf Coat Tech 188–189:193–200
28. Gaskell DR (1995) Introduction to the thermodynamics of materials, 3rd edn. Taylor & Francis
Ltd, Washington, DC, pp 80–84
29. Swalin RA (1972) Thermodynamics of solids, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York, pp 35–41
30. Yeh JW (2006) Recent progress in high-entropy alloys. Annales De Chimie – Science des
Materiaux (Euro J Control) 31:633–648
31. Yeh JW (2013) Alloy design strategies and future trends in high-entropy alloys. JOM
65:1759–177118 J.-W. Yeh32. Takeuchi A, Chen N, Wada T, Yokoyama Y, Kato H, Inoue A, Yeh JW (2011)
Pd20Pt20Cu20Ni20P20high-entropy alloy as a bulk metallic glass in the centimeter. Intermetal-
lics 19:1546–1554
33. Kao SW, Yeh JW, Chin TS (2008) Rapidly solidiﬁed structure of alloys with two to eight
equal-molar elements – a simulation by molecular dynamics. J Phys Condens Matter
20:145214
34. Turnbull D (1977) On the gram-atomic volumes of metal–metalloid glass forming alloys. Scr
Metall 11:1131–1136
35. Turnbull D (1981) Metastable structure in metallurgy. Metall Trans B 12:217–23036. Greer AL (1993) Confusion by design. Nature 366:303–30437. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
38. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish CM, Gao MC, Weber RJK, Neuefeind JC,
Tang Z, Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distribu-tions of a multi-principal-element alloy. Nat Commun 6:5964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms69
39. Miracle DB, Miller JD, Senkov ON, Woodward C, Uchic MD, Tiley J (2014) Exploration and
development of high entropy alloys for structural applications. Entropy 16:494–525
40. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93
41. Tsai MH, Yeh JW (2014) High-entropy alloys: a critical review. Mater Res Lett. doi: 10.1080/
21663831.2014.912690
42. Samaei AT, Mirsayar MM, Aliha MRM (2015) The microstructure and mechanical behavior
of modern high temperature alloys. Eng Solid Mech 3:1–201 Overview of High-Entropy Alloys 19Chapter 2
Phase Formation Rules
Yong Zhang, Sheng Guo, C.T. Liu, and Xiao Yang
Abstract This chapter gives an overview of existing active phase formation rules
for high-entropy alloys (HEAs). A parametric approach using physiochemicalparameters including enthalpy of mixing, entropy of mixing, melting points, atomicsize difference, and valence electron concentration is used to delineate phaseformation rules for HEAs, with a reference to other multicomponent alloys likebulk metallic glasses (BMGs). Speciﬁcally, rules on forming solid solutions,
intermetallic compounds, and the amorphous phase are described in detail; forma-
tion rules of solid solutions with the face-centered cubic (fcc) or body-centeredcubic (bcc) structure are also discussed. Some remaining issues and future pros-pects on phase formation rules for HEAs are also addressed at the end.
Keywords Solid solution • Enthalpy of mixing • Entropy of mixing • Atomic size
difference • Electronegativity difference • Valence electron concentration • e/aratio • Hume-Rothery rules • Empirical rules • Bulk metallic glasses • Single
phase • Face-centered cubic (fcc) • Hexagonal close-packed (hcp) • Body-
centered cubic (bcc) • Multiphase • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
Y. Zhang ( *) • X. Yang
State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, University of Science
and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: drzhangy@ustb.edu.cn ;yangxiao_sky@163.com
S. Guo
Department of Materials and Manufacturing Technology, Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, SE, Sweden
e-mail: sheng.guo@chalmers.se
C.T. Liu
Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong,
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: chainliu@cityu.edu.hk
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_2212.1 Introduction
The deﬁnition of HEAs has been quite controversial. Initially, HEAs were simply
deﬁned by their compositional complexity (i.e., composing of at least ﬁve majormetallic elements, each with a concentration between 5 and 35 at.%) [ 1]. Recently,
this notion has been challenged and the argument is that the microstructuralcomplexity needs to also be considered when classifying HEAs. Particularly, thismore strict deﬁnition of HEAs requires that the structure of HEAs has to be thesingle-phased disordered solid solution [ 2]. Indeed, the much narrower deﬁnition of
HEAs is more physically justiﬁed. From the entropic point of view, the conﬁgura-
tional entropies of the multi-principal-element alloys could be low (not really high
entropy), if ordered solid solution or intermetallic compounds form. However, newproblems also arise with this narrower deﬁnition of HEAs. The difﬁculties includebut are not limited to the following situations: in cases where two solid solutionsform and also no intermetallic compounds form, which are commonly seen inmulti-principal-element alloys [ 3], can those alloys be classiﬁed as HEAs? What
is the acceptable threshold conﬁgurational entropy (how high is high?) for alloys tobe classiﬁed as HEAs? If the amorphous phase with a high conﬁgurational entropy
is formed [ 4], can those alloys be called HEAs? Practically, it is more convenient to
adopt the initial deﬁnition of HEAs (i.e., deﬁned from the compositional complex-ity). [For more information on the history and development of HEAs, please refer toChap. 1for details.]
The conﬁgurational entropies of compositionally complex alloys are high in the
liquid or fully random solid solution state. To avoid further confusions, a sort ofarbitrary threshold of conﬁgurational entropy larger than 1.5R (where Ris the gas
constant) was suggested as an operational deﬁnition for HEAs [ 5]. Then one needs
to be aware that different phase constitutions can occur to HEAs, including solid
solutions, intermetallic compounds, or even the amorphous phase, depending on thealloy compositions and sometimes the cooling rate if they are prepared by thesolidiﬁcation route [ 6]. It is within this context that the phase selection among solid
solutions, intermetallic compounds, and the amorphous phase in HEAs will bediscussed. This will be done using a parametric approach, which utilizes parametersincluding the atomic size mismatch, mixing enthalpy, the mixing entropy, andmelting points [ 7–10]. These physiochemical parameters [as will be introduced in
Sect. 2.2] can reasonably be used to predict the formation of these different phases
from the given compositions, although, notably, the occurrence of intermetalliccompounds is still difﬁcult to be predicted and controlled. Furthermore, consideringthe signiﬁcance of solid solution type on the mechanical properties of HEAs, thephase selection between fcc- and bcc-type solid solutions is discussed in Sect. 2.3,
where the electron concentration plays a critical role. Some outstanding issues andfuture prospects relevant to the phase formation rules for HEAs are addressed inSect. 2.4, before a summary is given in Sect. 2.5.22 Y. Zhang et al.2.2 Thermodynamics and Geometry Effect
If kinetic factors are not involved, phase formation is thermodynamically controlled
by the Gibbs free energy, G, which is related to the enthalpy, H, and the entropy, S,
via the following equation, in the case of forming alloys from mixing elementalcomponents:
ΔG
mix¼ΔHmix/C0TΔSmix ð2:1Þ
Here ΔGmixis the Gibbs free energy of mixing, ΔHmixis the enthalpy of mixing,
ΔSmixis the entropy of mixing, and Tis the temperature at which different elements
are mixed. Note that the term ΔSmixincludes all entropy sources such as conﬁgura-
tional, vibrational, electronic, and magnetic contributions. [Please refer to Chaps. 8,
10, and 12for quantiﬁcation of the entropy sources in example HEA systems of
Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni, Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni, and Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W.] Naturally, it is thecompetition between ΔH
mixand TΔSmixthat determines the phase selection in
HEAs. This constitutes the thermodynamic consideration of phase formation rules.Another important effect when considering the phase formation is the geometryeffect or, more speciﬁcally, the atomic size effect. The atomic size effect is clearlyarticulated both in the classic Hume-Rothery rules for forming binary solid solutions
[11] and the famous Inoue ’s three empirical rules for the easy formation of BMGs
[12]. When establishing phase formation rules for HEAs is addressed using the
parametric approach, the descriptors [ 13] naturally are picked from parameters that
are related to the thermodynamics and geometry considerations. Not surprisingly,effective phase formation rules normally comprise both these two considerations.
Figure 2.1shows a phase selection diagram for multicomponent alloys, includ-
ing HEAs and BMGs, based on the enthalpy of mixing, ΔH
mix, and the atomic size
difference, Delta ( δ). Here, δis deﬁned as [ 9]
δ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃXN
i¼1xi1/C0di=XN
j¼1xjdj/C16/C172r
ð2:2Þ
where Nis the number of elements, xiorxjis the composition of the ith or jth
element, and diordjis the atomic diameter of the ith or jth component. The
enthalpy of mixing, ΔHmix, for the multicomponent alloys can be estimated by [ 9]
ΔHmix¼XN
i¼1,i6¼j4ΔHmix
ABxixj ð2:3Þ
where ΔHmix
ABis the enthalpy of mixing for the binary equiatomic AB alloys.
The calculated ΔHmixandδfor HEAs and BMGs used in Fig. 2.1are listed in
Table 2.1. It is noted here that the listed phases in Table 2.1are basically detectable
from the X-ray diffraction and they do not necessarily comprise all phases existing
in the listed alloys. Seen from Fig. 2.1, in the zone marked S, only disordered solid
solution will form. In this zone, as the component atomic size difference is2 Phase Formation Rules 23relatively small, the component atoms easily substitute for each other and have the
similar probability to occupy the lattice sites to form solid solutions. At the sametime, ΔH
mixis not negative enough for alloys to form a compound. In the zone
marked S0, HEAs still have solid solution as the main phase, but a small amount of
the ordered solid solution precipitates in some HEAs. Compared with zone S,
δincreases which deepens the extent of ordering in HEAs. ΔHmixalso becomes
more negative to promote the precipitation of ordered phases in certain HEAs inzone S
0. BMGs are located in two zones marked B1andB2. The zone B2contains
Mg- and Cu-based bulk metallic glasses, while the zone Blcontains other kinds of
BMGs, such as Zr-based bulk metallic glasses. Clearly, compared with HEAs,BMGs have larger δand more negative ΔH
mix. Another zone in Fig. 2.1is marked
C, in which many intermediate phases will form.
According to Eq. 2.1, at elevated temperatures the high ΔSmixcan signiﬁcantly
lower the free energy and thus lower the tendency to order and segregate during the
solidiﬁcation process, which consequently makes solid solution more easily form andmore stable than intermetallics or other ordered phases. Therefore, for some HEAs, dueto the effect of high ΔS
mix, solid solution phases form prior to intermetallics, and the
total number of phases is well below the maximum equilibrium number allowed by theGibbs phase rule. To compare the effect of ΔS
mix, Fig. 2.1is replotted in three
dimensions by adding one axis of ΔSmix,a ss h o w ni nF i g . 2.2. It is apparent that all
HEAs have a higher level of ΔSmixthan that of BMGs (marked by ▼). The HEAs
forming solid solution phases (marked by ■)h a v e ΔSmixin the range of 12–17.5 J/
(mol · K) and with smaller values of δ. Intermetallic phases (marked by Δ)f o r ma ta
Fig. 2.1 Phase selection diagram of HEAs and BMGs based on the enthalpy of mixing, ΔHmix,
and the atomic size difference, Delta (δ)[9]24 Y. Zhang et al.Table 2.1 Phase constitution; valence electron concentration, VEC; enthalpy of mixing, ΔHmix; entropy of mixing, ΔSmix; average melting point, Tm;Ω
(Ω¼TmΔSmix/|ΔHmix|); and atomic size difference, δ, for representative HEAs and BMGs. Three color codes are used to differentiate solid solutions, solid
solutions plus intermetallic compounds, and the amorphous phase forming multicomponent alloys
Alloys Major phases VEC ΔHmix[kJ/mol] ΔSmix[J/(mol · K)] Tm(K) Ωδ [%] Refs.
Cr2CuFe 2Mn 2Ni2 fcc 8.11 0.10 13.14 1749.11 229.83 0.91 [ 10]
CoCrFeMnNi fcc 8.00 /C04.16 13.38 1792.40 5.77 0.92 [ 10]
CrCu 2Fe2MnNi 2 fcc 8.88 3.88 12.97 1680.88 5.61 0.95 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeMnNi fcc 8.50 1.44 14.90 1720.00 17.80 0.99 [ 10]
CrCuFeMn 2Ni2 fcc 8.43 0.44 12.98 1713.00 50.53 0.99 [ 10]
CoCrCu 0.5FeNi fcc 8.56 0.49 13.15 1804.67 48.44 1.06 [ 10]
CoCrFeNi fcc 8.25 /C03.75 11.53 1860.50 5.71 1.06 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeNi fcc 8.80 3.20 13.38 1760.00 7.36 1.07 [ 10]
CuNi fcc 10.50 4.00 5.76 1543.00 2.22 1.63 [ 10]
CoCuFeNiV fcc 8.60 /C01.78 14.90 1833.67 15.35 2.63 [ 10]
CrCuFeMoNi fcc 8.20 4.64 13.38 1985.00 5.72 2.92 [ 10]
CoCrFeMo 0.3Ni fcc 8.09 /C04.15 12.83 1932.67 5.97 2.92 [ 10]
Al0.25CrCuFeNi 2 fcc 8.71 0.36 12.14 1712.64 57.31 2.93 [ 16]
Al0.25CoCrCu 0.75FeNi fcc 8.40 /C00.71 14.32 1738.78 35.07 3.00 [ 10]
Al0.3CoCrCuFeNi fcc 8.47 1.56 14.43 1713.22 15.85 3.15 [ 10]
Al0.25CoCrFeNi fcc 7.94 /C06.75 12.71 1805.97 3.40 3.25 [ 10]
Al0.3CoCrFeMo 0.1Ni fcc 7.84 /C07.26 13.44 1820.81 3.37 3.74 [ 10]
CoCrFeNiPd fcc 8.60 /C05.60 13.38 1853.80 4.43 3.76 [ 20]
Al0.375CoCrFeNi fcc 7.80 /C07.99 12.97 1781.04 2.89 3.80 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi fcc 8.27 /C01.52 14.70 1684.86 16.29 3.82 [ 10]
Al0.5CrCuFeNi 2 fcc 8.45 /C02.51 12.60 1677.23 8.41 3.82 [ 16]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 0.2 fcc 8.16 /C02.50 15.44 1703.01 10.52 3.87 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCu 0.5FeNi fcc 8.00 /C04.60 14.54 1717.55 5.43 4.00 [ 10]
(continued)2 Phase Formation Rules 25Table 2.1 (continued)
Alloys Major phases VEC ΔHmix[kJ/mol] ΔSmix[J/(mol · K)] Tm(K) Ωδ [%] Refs.
Al0.3CoCrFeNiTi 0.1 fcc 7.80 /C08.93 13.47 1799.24 2.72 4.06 [ 10]
CoCrFeNiPd 2 fcc 8.83 /C06.11 12.98 1849.33 3.92 4.33 [ 20]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.5 fcc 8.36 /C03.70 14.70 1776.91 7.05 4.46 [ 10]
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5 fcc 8.09 /C010.74 12.86 1848.00 2.22 4.60 [ 10]
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1 fcc 8.05 /C010.64 13.38 1866.70 2.35 4.72 [ 10]
Al0.2Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5 fcc 7.91 /C012.50 13.67 1815.91 1.98 5.00 [ 19]
Al0.25CoCrCu 0.75FeNiTi 0.5 fcc 8.00 /C07.28 15.55 1757.61 3.76 5.03 [ 10]
Mo 25.6Nb22.7Ta24.4W27.3 bcc 5.53 /C06.49 11.50 3177.60 5.62 2.27 [ 10]
Mo 21.7Nb20.6Ta15.6V21W21.1 bcc 5.43 /C04.54 13.33 2950.49 8.67 3.18 [ 10]
Al0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5 bcc 7.19 /C05.51 12.31 1747.34 3.90 3.32 [ 10]
NbHfTaTiZr bcc 4.40 2.72 13.38 2524.20 12.42 4.01 [ 21]
Al0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5 bcc 7.00 /C06.77 12.67 1711.17 3.20 4.03 [ 10]
AlCrCuFeMnNi bcc 7.50 /C05.11 14.90 1580.58 4.62 4.73 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.6 bcc 6.86 /C022.76 14.78 1676.38 1.09 4.98 [ 22]
AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNi bcc 7.55 /C07.93 14.70 1646.27 3.05 5.02 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.4 bcc 6.96 /C019.84 14.70 1675.98 1.24 5.07 [ 22]
AlCoCrCu 0.25FeNi bcc 7.38 /C09.94 14.34 1660.00 2.39 5.13 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.2 bcc 7.08 /C016.39 14.22 1675.56 1.45 5.15 [ 22]
AlCoCrFeNi bcc 7.20 /C012.32 13.38 1675.10 1.83 5.25 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiMo 0.1 bcc 7.18 /C012.13 13.92 1699.02 1.95 5.30 [ 23]
AlCoCrFeNiNb 0.1 bcc 7.16 /C013.32 13.92 1696.18 1.77 5.50 [ 17]
Al1.25CoCrFeNi bcc 7.00 /C013.42 13.34 1639.79 1.62 5.55 [ 10]
Al2.0CrCuFeNi 2 bcc 7.29 /C09.63 12.89 1517.86 2.03 5.71 [ 16]
AlCoCrCu 0.5Ni bcc 7.44 /C010.17 13.15 1609.67 2.08 5.74 [ 10]
Al1.5CoCrFeNi bcc 6.82 /C014.28 13.25 1607.68 1.50 5.77 [ 10]26 Y. Zhang et al.Al2.3CoCrCuFeNi bcc 6.97 /C09.38 14.35 1499.60 2.29 5.84 [ 10]
Al2.5CoCrCuFeNi bcc 6.87 /C09.78 14.21 1484.50 2.15 5.91 [ 10]
Al2.8CoCrCuFeNi bcc 6.72 /C010.28 14.01 1463.31 1.99 5.99 [ 10]
Al20(CoCrCuFeMnNiVTi) 80 bcc 7.36 /C015.44 17.99 1633.50 1.91 6.01 [ 10]
Al2CoCrFeNi bcc 6.50 /C015.44 12.98 1551.50 1.30 6.04 [ 10]
Al3CoCrCuFeNi bcc 6.63 /C010.56 13.86 1450.06 1.90 6.09 [ 10]
Al2.5CoCrFeNi bcc 6.23 /C016.09 12.63 1503.96 1.17 6.19 [ 10]
Al3CoCrFeNi bcc 6.00 /C016.41 12.26 1463.21 1.10 6.26 [ 10]
AlCoCuNiTiZn bcc 8.17 /C017.89 14.90 1680.12 1.39 6.43 [ 10]
Al1.5CoCrFeNiTi bcc 6.38 /C020.73 14.78 1659.73 1.18 6.64 [ 18]
Al2CoCrFeNiTi bcc 6.14 /C021.63 14.53 1607.86 1.08 6.64 [ 18]
CoCrFeNiTi 0.3 fcc + hcp 7.95 /C08.89 12.83 1866.47 2.69 4.06 [ 10]
CrCu 2Fe2Mn 2Ni bcc + fcc 8.50 4.69 12.97 1654.88 4.58 0.83 [ 10]
Cr2CuFe 2MnNi bcc + fcc 8.00 2.61 12.89 1784.86 8.82 0.84 [ 10]
CrCuFeMnNi bcc + fcc 8.40 2.72 13.38 1710.00 8.41 0.92 [ 10]
Cr2Cu2Fe2MnNi 2 bcc + fcc 8.56 3.56 13.14 1729.33 6.38 0.94 [ 10]
Cr2Cu2FeMn 2Ni2 bcc + fcc 8.44 2.37 13.14 1697.00 9.40 0.97 [ 10]
CoCrFeGeMnNi bcc + fcc 7.33 /C015.17 14.90 1695.50 1.67 3.25 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 0.4 bcc + fcc 8.05 /C03.34 15.76 1719.92 8.12 3.80 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 1.2 bcc + fcc 7.69 /C05.73 15.98 1777.49 4.96 3.99 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 2 bcc + fcc 7.40 /C07.08 15.60 1822.77 4.01 3.99 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 1.4 bcc + fcc 7.61 /C06.14 15.91 1789.79 4.64 4.00 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 1.6 bcc + fcc 7.54 /C06.50 15.82 1801.40 4.38 4.00 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 1.8 bcc + fcc 7.47 /C06.81 15.72 1812.38 4.19 4.00 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrFeNi bcc + fcc 7.67 /C09.09 13.15 1757.50 2.55 4.22 [ 10]
Al0.8CoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 8.00 /C03.61 14.87 1646.00 6.78 4.49 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNiSi bcc + fcc 7.29 /C018.86 16.18 1631.50 1.40 4.51 [ 10]
(continued)2 Phase Formation Rules 27Table 2.1 (continued)
Alloys Major phases VEC ΔHmix[kJ/mol] ΔSmix[J/(mol · K)] Tm(K) Ωδ [%] Refs.
AlCoCrCuFeNiV bcc + fcc 7.43 /C07.76 16.18 1705.07 3.56 4.69 [ 10]
Al0.75CoCrCu 0.25FeNi bcc + fcc 7.60 /C08.47 14.32 1696.33 2.87 4.71 [ 10]
AlCrCuFeNi 2 bcc + fcc 8.00 /C05.78 12.98 1615.25 3.63 4.82 [ 16]
AlCoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.83 /C04.78 14.90 1622.25 5.06 4.82 [ 10]
Al0.75CoCrFeNi bcc + fcc 7.42 /C010.90 13.33 1714.13 2.09 4.83 [ 10]
AlCo 0.5CrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.73 /C04.50 14.70 1608.82 5.26 4.91 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNi 0.5 bcc + fcc 7.64 /C03.90 14.70 1612.64 6.08 4.91 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0.2Ni bcc + fcc 7.77 /C04.47 15.60 1633.31 5.70 4.95 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFe 0.5Ni bcc + fcc 7.82 /C05.55 14.70 1605.09 4.25 5.00 [ 10]
AlCoCr 0.5CuFeNi bcc + fcc 8.00 /C05.02 14.70 1572.82 4.61 5.02 [ 10]
Al0.875CoCrFeNi bcc + fcc 7.31 /C011.66 13.37 1694.12 1.95 5.06 [ 10]
Al1.3CoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.60 /C06.24 14.85 1589.45 3.78 5.19 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuNi bcc + fcc 7.80 /C06.56 13.38 1584.50 3.23 5.19 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCeCu 0.5FeNiTi 0.5 bcc + fcc 7.09 /C010.84 15.75 1738.32 2.52 5.25 [ 10]
Al1.5CrCuFeNi 2 bcc + fcc 7.62 /C08.05 13.01 1562.81 2.53 5.38 [ 16]
Al1.5CoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.46 /C07.04 14.78 1569.27 3.30 5.38 [ 10]
Al1.8CoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.26 /C08.08 14.65 1541.22 2.79 5.54 [ 10]
AlCo 3CrFeNiTi 0.5 bcc + fcc 7.47 /C014.93 13.49 1718.47 1.55 5.69 [ 10]
Al2CoCrCuFeNi bcc + fcc 7.14 /C08.65 14.53 1523.86 2.56 5.71 [ 10]
AlCr 3CuFeNiTi bcc + fcc 6.75 /C09.31 13.86 1794.44 2.67 5.72 [ 10]
Al11.1(CoCrCuFeMnNiVTi) 88.9 bcc + fcc 7.43 /C012.74 18.27 1711.28 2.45 5.75 [ 10]
AlCoCuNi bcc + fcc 8.25 /C08.00 11.52 1447.40 2.08 5.77 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNiTiV bcc + fcc 7.00 /C013.94 17.29 1735.19 2.15 5.87 [ 10]
AlCo 2CrFeNiTi 0.5 bcc + fcc 7.23 /C016.43 14.23 1710.54 1.49 5.91 [ 10]
AlCr 2CuFeNiTi bcc + fcc 6.86 /C011.10 14.53 1746.07 2.29 5.99 [ 10]28 Y. Zhang et al.AlCo 1.5CrFeNiTi 0.5 bcc + fcc 7.08 /C017.17 14.54 1705.58 1.45 6.02 [ 10]
AlCr 1.5CuFeNiTi bcc + fcc 6.92 /C012.26 14.78 1716.31 2.08 6.14 [ 10]
AlCuNi bcc + fcc 8.00 /C08.44 9.13 1339.80 1.45 6.20 [ 10]
AlCrCuFeNiTi bcc + fcc 7.00 /C013.67 14.90 1681.58 1.83 6.29 [ 10]
AlCr 0.5CuFeNiTi bcc + fcc 7.09 /C015.40 14.70 1640.55 1.56 6.45 [ 10]
Al0.75CoCrCu 0.25FeNiTi 0.5 bcc1 + bcc2 7.00 /C015.26 15.55 1719.02 1.75 5.83 [ 10]
AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiTi 0.5 bcc1 + bcc2 7.25 /C013.42 15.86 1671.25 1.97 5.90 [ 10]
AlCoCrCu 0.25FeNiTi 0.5 bcc1 + bcc2 7.09 /C015.50 15.54 1684.87 1.68 6.01 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 0.5 bcc1 + bcc2 6.91 /C017.92 14.70 1699.73 1.39 6.11 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNiTi bcc1 + bcc2 + fcc 7.29 /C013.80 16.18 1668.50 1.95 6.23 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiTi bcc1 + bcc2 6.67 /C021.56 14.90 1720.25 1.19 6.58 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 0.6 bcc + fcc + σ-phase 7.95 /C04.07 15.92 1735.73 6.79 3.94 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV 0.8 bcc + fcc + σ-phase 7.86 /C04.71 16.00 1750.53 5.95 3.97 [ 10]
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiV bcc + fcc + σ-phase 7.77 /C05.25 16.01 1764.42 5.38 3.98 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeMnNi bcc + fcc + unknown phase 7.71 /C05.63 16.18 1607.64 4.61 4.57 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeMnNi bcc + fcc + unknown phase 7.71 /C05.63 16.18 1607.64 4.61 4.57 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNiSi bcc + δ-phase 6.67 /C027.33 14.90 1677.08 0.91 4.82 [ 22]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.8 bcc + δ-phase 6.76 /C025.23 14.87 1676.74 0.99 4.90 [ 22]
AlCrMoSiTi Ordered bcc + Mo 5Si3 4.60 /C034.08 13.38 1918.90 0.75 4.91 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNiMo 0.4 bcc + α-phase 7.72 /C04.20 15.91 1701.80 6.45 5.05 [ 10]
Co1.5CrFeMo 0.5Ni1.5Ti0.5 fcc + σ-phase 7.92 /C010.25 14.17 1935.25 2.67 5.09 [ 10]
AlCoCr 2FeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ 6.92 /C010.27 14.23 1839.38 2.55 5.10 [ 24]
AlCoCrCuFeNiMo 0.6 bcc + α-phase 7.67 /C03.95 16.08 1737.95 7.07 5.13 [ 10]
AlCoCrFe 2Mo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 7.23 /C09.70 14.23 1789.85 2.63 5.15 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV fcc + bcc + σ-phase +
unknown phase7.50 /C08.13 17.29 1808.50 3.85 5.19 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuFeNiMo 0.8 bcc + α-phase 7.62 /C03.72 16.16 1771.99 7.69 5.20 [ 10]
(continued)2 Phase Formation Rules 29Table 2.1 (continued)
Alloys Major phases VEC ΔHmix[kJ/mol] ΔSmix[J/(mol · K)] Tm(K) Ωδ [%] Refs.
AlCoCrCuFeNiMo bcc + α-phase 7.57 /C03.51 16.18 1804.07 8.32 5.25 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.8 fcc + Laves phase 8.14 /C06.75 14.89 1785.66 3.95 5.26 [ 10]
AlCoCr 1.5FeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ 7.00 /C010.83 14.53 1814.92 2.43 5.27 [ 24]
Co1.5CrFeMo 0.8Ni1.5Ti0.5 fcc + σ-phase 7.83 /C09.96 14.21 1980.95 2.83 5.28 [ 10]
AlCo 2CrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + fcc + σ-phase 7.38 /C010.70 14.23 1783.54 2.37 5.29 [ 10]
AlCoCrFe 1.5Mo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 7.17 /C010.50 14.53 1788.08 2.47 5.30 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.2Ni bcc + α-phase 7.15 /C011.95 14.22 1722.02 2.05 5.35 [ 23]
AlCo 1.5CrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 7.25 /C011.08 14.53 1784.67 2.34 5.39 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.3Ni bcc + α-phase 7.13 /C011.78 14.43 1744.15 2.14 5.40 [ 23]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.4Ni bcc + α-phase 7.11 /C011.60 14.59 1765.46 2.22 5.44 [ 23]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 7.09 /C011.44 14.70 1786.00 2.29 5.47 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ 7.09 /C011.44 14.70 1786.00 2.29 5.47 [ 24]
AlCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + α-phase 7.09 /C011.44 14.70 1786.00 2.29 5.47 [ 23]
AlCo 0.5CrFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 6.90 /C011.72 14.53 1787.60 2.22 5.54 [ 10]
AlCoCrFe 0.6Mo 0.5Ni bcc + σ-phase 7.02 /C012.32 14.61 1784.04 2.12 5.61 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeNiTi fcc + Laves phase 8.00 /C08.44 14.90 1791.00 3.17 5.65 [ 10]
AlCoCr 0.5FeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ 7.20 /C012.08 14.53 1750.06 2.11 5.69 [ 24]
Al0.5B0.2CoCrCuFeNi fcc + boride 8.09 /C04.00 15.44 1708.73 6.60 5.77 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.25Ni bcc + Laves phase 7.10 /C014.66 14.34 1726.29 1.69 5.83 [ 17]
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti fcc + η 7.75 /C015.61 13.21 1856.17 1.57 5.83 [ 19]
AlCoFeMo 0.5Ni bcc + σ 7.33 /C012.74 13.15 1708.89 1.76 5.93 [ 24]
Al0.2Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti fcc + η 7.60 /C017.12 13.97 1826.40 1.49 6.01 [ 19]
Al3.0CrCuFeNi 2 bcc + ordered bcc 6.75 /C011.50 12.42 1444.81 1.56 6.03 [ 16]
Al40(CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV) 60 bcc + Al 3Ti + unknown
phase5.70 /C018.29 15.97 1458.50 1.27 6.09 [ 10]
CoCrFeNiTi fcc + bcc + CoTi 2 7.40 /C016.32 13.38 1877.60 1.54 6.13 [ 18]30 Y. Zhang et al.AlAuCoCrCuNi fcc + AuCu 8.33 /C06.45 14.90 1543.42 3.57 6.14 [ 10]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.5Ni bcc + Laves phase 7.00 /C016.53 14.70 1772.82 1.58 6.24 [ 17]
Al0.5CoCrFeNiTi fcc + bcc + CoTi 2+ FeTi 7.00 /C016.79 14.70 1791.77 1.57 6.44 [ 18]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.75Ni bcc + Laves phase 6.91 /C018.03 14.85 1815.30 1.50 6.55 [ 17]
AlCoCrFeNiTi fcc + bcc + CoTi 2+ FeTi 6.67 /C019.22 14.90 1720.25 1.33 6.58 [ 18]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 1.5 bcc1 + bcc2 + Laves phase 6.46 /C023.91 14.78 1737.62 1.08 6.93 [ 10]
Al0.5B0.6CoCrCuFeNi fcc + boride 7.75 /C08.01 15.92 1751.76 3.48 8.07 [ 10]
Al0.5BCoCrCuFeNi fcc + ordered fcc + boride 7.46 /C011.03 16.01 1789.50 2.60 9.52 [ 10]
CrCuFeNiZr bcc + compounds 7.80 /C014.40 13.38 1831.60 1.70 9.91 [ 10]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 2 Compounds 7.43 /C014.04 14.53 1813.14 1.87 6.69 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY 0.5 Cu2Y + AlNi 2Ti + Cu + Cr 6.85 /C018.32 16.00 1935.38 1.68 7.53 [ 10]
CuFeHfTiZr Compounds 6.20 /C015.84 13.38 1949.40 1.64 9.84 [ 10]
CoCuHfTiZr Compounds 6.40 /C023.52 13.38 1941.20 1.11 10.21 [ 10]
AlTiVYZr Compounds 3.80 /C014.88 13.38 1802.10 1.62 10.35 [ 10]
BeCuNiTiVZr Compounds 6.00 /C024.89 14.90 1820.67 1.09 11.09 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY 0.8 Cu2Y + AlNi 2Ti + Cu + Cr 6.68 /C019.00 16.16 1929.45 1.64 12.73 [ 10]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY Cu 2Y + AlNi 2Ti + Cu +
Cr + unknown phase6.57 /C019.37 16.18 1925.79 1.62 13.45 [ 10]
Cu47Ti33Zr11Si1Ni6Sn2 Amorphous 7.65 /C017.02 10.45 1645.17 1.01 8.36 [ 10]
Cu47Ti33Zr11Si1Ni8 Amorphous 7.77 /C017.56 10.07 1669.63 0.96 8.46 [ 10]
Ti45Cu25Ni15Sn3Be7Zr5 Amorphous 6.51 /C021.22 11.90 1705.29 0.96 9.08 [ 10]
Mg 65Cu15Ag5Pd5Y10 Amorphous 4.30 /C013.24 9.10 1074.86 0.74 9.27 [ 10]
Mg 65Cu15Ag5Pd5Gd10 Amorphous 4.30 /C013.24 9.10 1053.49 0.72 9.27 [ 10]
Mg 65Cu7.5Ni7.5Zn5Ag5Y10 Amorphous 4.33 /C07.35 9.96 1107.24 1.50 9.53 [ 10]
Zr57Ti5Al10Cu20Ni8 Amorphous 5.78 /C031.50 10.18 1813.45 0.59 9.69 [ 10]
Co64.8Fe7.2B19.2Si4.8Nb4 Amorphous 7.38 /C024.16 8.83 1922.41 0.70 10.02 [ 30]
Co57.6Fe14.4B19.2Si4.8Nb4 Amorphous 7.30 /C024.27 9.88 1925.36 0.78 10.05 [ 30]
(continued)2 Phase Formation Rules 31Table 2.1 (continued)
Alloys Major phases VEC ΔHmix[kJ/mol] ΔSmix[J/(mol · K)] Tm(K) Ωδ [%] Refs.
Co50.4Fe21.6B19.2Si4.8Nb4 Amorphous 7.23 /C024.34 10.54 1928.31 0.83 10.08 [ 30]
Co43.2Fe28.8B19.2Si4.8Nb4 Amorphous 7.16 /C024.37 10.91 1931.26 0.86 10.12 [ 30]
CuNiHfTiZr Amorphous 6.60 /C027.36 13.38 1932.80 0.95 10.21 [ 10]
Ni45Ti20Zr25Al10 Amorphous 6.60 /C045.41 10.46 1792.15 0.41 10.35 [ 27]
Ni40Cu5Ti17Zr28Al10 Amorphous 6.65 /C043.25 11.67 1779.11 0.48 10.48 [ 27]
Ni39.8Cu5.97Ti15.92Zr27.86Al9.95Si0.5 Amorphous 6.71 /C043.58 11.97 1772.80 0.49 10.50 [ 27]
Ni40Cu6Ti16Zr28Al10 Amorphous 6.72 /C042.79 11.77 1773.23 0.49 10.52 [ 27]
Ti55Zr10Cu9Ni8Be18 Amorphous 4.75 /C025.43 10.70 1824.72 0.77 11.18 [ 10]
Ti50Zr15Cu9Ni8Be18 Amorphous 4.75 /C026.37 11.30 1833.82 0.79 11.64 [ 10]
Ti40Zr25Ni3Cu12Be20 Amorphous 4.62 /C025.88 11.60 2010.40 0.90 12.03 [ 10]
Ni40Cu5Ti16.5Zr28.5Al10 Amorphous 6.65 /C043.41 11.65 1780.02 0.48 12.07 [ 27]
Ti40Zr25Cu9Ni8Be18 Amorphous 4.75 /C028.26 11.98 1852.02 0.79 12.31 [ 10]
Mg 65Cu20Zn5Y10 Amorphous 4.40 /C05.98 8.16 1085.64 1.48 12.70 [ 10]
Fe61B15Mo 7Zr8Co7Y2 Amorphous 6.76 /C030.13 10.30 1992.27 0.68 13.20 [ 10]
Fe61B15Mo 7Zr8Co5Y2Cr2 Amorphous 6.70 /C029.97 10.65 1999.53 0.71 13.20 [ 10]
Fe61B15Mo 7Zr8Co6Y2Al1 Amorphous 6.70 /C030.30 10.54 1983.91 0.69 13.24 [ 10]
Zr38.5Ti16.5Cu15.25Ni9.75Be20 Amorphous 5.25 /C033.20 12.47 1828.35 0.69 13.36 [ 10]
Zr39.88Ti15.12Cu13.77Ni9.98Be21.25 Amorphous 5.14 /C034.27 12.34 1834.26 0.66 13.59 [ 10]
Er20Tb20Dy20Ni20Al20 Amorphous 4.40 /C037.60 13.38 1554.90 0.55 13.66 [ 25]
Dy46Al24Co18Fe2Y10 Amorphous 4.18 /C033.26 10.95 1533.60 0.50 13.71 [ 10]
Co45.5Fe2.5Cr15Mo 14C15B6Er2 Amorphous 6.88 /C033.41 12.82 2327.43 0.89 13.79 [ 31]
Co43Fe5Cr15Mo 14C15B6Er2 Amorphous 6.85 /C033.46 13.34 2369.44 0.94 13.80 [ 31]
Zr41.2Ti13.8Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5 Amorphous 5.03 /C036.72 12.18 1839.28 0.61 13.82 [ 10]
Zr42.63Ti12.37Cu11.25Ni10Be23.75 Amorphous 4.91 /C036.90 11.97 1844.44 0.60 14.05 [ 10]
Ce65Al10Ni10Cu10Nb5 Amorphous 4.60 /C019.86 9.32 1236.25 0.58 14.18 [ 26]32 Y. Zhang et al.Zr44Ti11Cu10Ni10Be25 Amorphous 4.80 /C037.07 11.73 1849.48 0.59 14.27 [ 10]
Zr45.38Ti9.62Cu8.75Ni10Be26.25 Amorphous 4.69 /C037.23 11.46 1845.09 0.57 14.49 [ 10]
Gd36Y20Al24Co20 Amorphous 4.20 /C034.26 11.26 1509.56 0.50 14.49 [ 32]
Zr46.75Ti8.25Cu7.5Ni10Be27.5 Amorphous 4.58 /C037.03 11.16 1848.95 0.56 14.70 [ 10]
La68Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)8Ni5Co5 Amorphous 4.29 /C026.33 8.94 1224.51 0.42 14.93 [ 29]
La32Ce32Al16Ni5Cu12Co3 Amorphous 4.49 /C027.96 12.74 1221.42 0.56 15.05 [ 33]
La32Ce32Al16Ni5Cu10Co5 Amorphous 4.45 /C025.71 12.11 1229.66 0.62 15.11 [ 33]
Sr20Ca20Yb20Mg 20Zn20 Amorphous 4.20 /C013.12 13.38 973.54 0.99 15.25 [ 25]
Ce60Al15Ni15Cu10 Amorphous 4.85 /C030.60 9.19 1178.23 0.35 15.29 [ 26]
La66Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)10Ni5Co5 Amorphous 4.45 /C026.73 9.35 1227.38 0.43 15.32 [ 29]
La32Ce32Al16Ni5Cu3Co12 Amorphous 4.31 /C027.92 12.74 1258.50 0.57 15.33 [ 33]
Sr20Ca20Yb20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Zn20 Amorphous 4.09 /C012.15 14.53 922.03 1.10 15.49 [ 25]
La62Al14Cu20Ag4 Amorphous 4.92 /C026.72 8.50 1191.97 0.38 15.49 [ 28]
La65Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)11Ni5Co5 Amorphous 4.53 /C026.86 9.54 1228.82 0.44 15.51 [ 29]
Ce57Al10Ni12.5Cu15.5Nb5 Amorphous 5.22 /C022.06 10.39 1268.38 0.60 15.53 [ 26]
La64Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)12Ni5Co5 Amorphous 4.61 /C027.06 9.72 1230.25 0.44 15.68 [ 29]
La62Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)20Ni2Co2 Amorphous 4.86 /C026.89 9.48 1208.43 0.43 15.70 [ 28]
Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20 Amorphous 5.30 /C027.48 9.05 1311.75 0.43 15.70 [ 32]
La32Ce32Al16Ni5Cu15 Amorphous 4.55 /C023.80 12.11 1209.06 0.62 15.72 [ 33]
Pr60Al10Ni10Cu20 Amorphous 5.30 /C027.52 9.05 1260.75 0.41 15.94 [ 32]
La62Al14(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)14Ni5Co5 Amorphous 4.77 /C027.31 10.06 1233.12 0.45 16.02 [ 28]
La55Al25Ni5Cu10Co5 Amorphous 4.45 /C032.31 10.02 1200.78 0.37 16.19 [ 10]
Sr20Ca20Yb20Mg 20Zn10Cu10 Amorphous 3.70 /C010.60 14.53 1040.07 1.43 16.35 [ 25]
(CeLaPrPd) 65Co25Al10 Amorphous 5.64 /C047.60 14.62 1396.78 0.43 16.78 [ 34]
Nd60Al15Ni10Cu10Fe5 Amorphous 5.95 /C027.37 9.99 1313.18 0.48 17.11 [ 10]
Nd61Al11Ni8Co5Cu15 Amorphous 6.28 /C027.43 9.82 1307.13 0.47 17.46 [ 10]2 Phase Formation Rules 33larger value of δ, but with the ΔSmixin the range of 11–16.5 J/(mol · K). There is a
transition zone (marked by ○) between the solid solution phase zone and the interme-
tallic compound zone, which contains ordered solid solution phases. It is noted that all
conﬁguration entropies mentioned here are calculated for HEAs assuming they are in
the liquid or fully random solid solution state ( i.e., using the Boltzmann equation) :
ΔSmix¼/C0 RXN
i¼1xilnxi ð2:4Þ
A new parameter, Ω, combining effects of ΔSmixandΔHmixon the stability
of multicomponent solid solution, was recently proposed by Yang and Zhang
[10,14,15]. The parameter Ωis deﬁned by
Ω¼TmΔSmix
ΔHmixjjð2:5Þ
Tm¼XN
i¼1xiTmðÞi ð2:6Þ
where Tmis the average melting temperature of the N-element alloy and (Tm)iis the
melting point of the ith component of the alloy. By analyzing the phase formation
using the parameters Ωandδof various reported multicomponent alloys (shown in
Fig.2.3), new criteria for forming solid solution phases in HEAs were suggested:
Ω/C211.1 and δ/C206.6 %. In contrast, intermetallic compounds and BMGs have larger
values of δand smaller values of Ω, and the value of Ωfor BMGs is smaller than
that of intermetallic compounds. Figure 2.4replaces δin Fig. 2.3by the number of
elements, N. It can be seen that solid solution forming HEAs appear at higher Ωand
larger N, while BMGs appear at lower Ωand smaller N.
Fig. 2.2 Phase selection diagram of HEAs and BMGs based on ΔHmix, Delta (δ), and ΔSmix[9]34 Y. Zhang et al.2.3 Electron Concentration
HEAs with solid solution structures are generally desired, since most, if not all,
advantageous features like high hardness [ 1], sluggish diffusion kinetics [ 35], and
high-temperature softening resistance [ 36] are related to the multi-principal-
element solid solution structures. The formation of solid solutions in HEAs, asdiscussed previously, can be reasonably predicted using parametric approaches
100
10
1
123456789
d (%)10BS
IS+I
11 12Solid Solutions (S)
Intermetallics (I)
S+I
BMGs (B)
13 14 15 16 17 18 0W
Fig. 2.3 Phase selection diagram of HEAs and BMGs based on Ωandδ[16]
Fig. 2.4 Phase selection diagram of HEAs and BMGs based on Ωand the number of elements,
N[16]2 Phase Formation Rules 35based on physiochemical properties of constituent alloying elements, like atomic
radii, mixing enthalpies between any two elements, and melting points [ 7–10].
However, these parametric approaches do not tell much information about the
crystal structure of the achieved solid solutions. Since it has been widely known
that, based on existing experimental evidences [ 37], the crystal structure signiﬁ-
cantly affects the mechanical behavior of HEAs, having the capability to designthem with desirable crystal structure is crucial. [The energies of HEAs in fcc, bcc,and hcp structures are presented in Chaps. 7,8,9,10, and 11using predictive
computational methods based on ﬁrst-principles density functional theory (DFT)and in Chap. 12using CALPHAD modeling. The ΔH
mix-δrelation is reevaluated
based on DFT calculations as presented in Chap. 11.]
The solid solutions formed in HEAs are normally of fcc, bcc, and hcp or a
mixture of these structures [ 37]. fcc-structured HEAs are known to possess good
ductility, but with relatively low strength [ 38]. bcc-structured HEAs can have
much higher strength [ 39], but almost always at the cost of much decreased
ductility, particularly in tension. Is it possible to control the formation of fcc- orbcc-structured solid solutions in HEAs? The δ-ΔH
mixplot shown in Fig. 2.5
indicates that the fcc-type solid solutions form at sufﬁciently small δ, and bcc
solid solutions form at larger δ[16], assuming ΔHmixstill satisﬁes the conditions
to form solid solutions. However, the fcc-type solid solution forming δrange
largely overlaps with that of the bcc solid solutions, which practically means δhas
limited use in terms of controlling the formation of fcc- or bcc-structured HEAs.As such, new criteria or new parameters need to be established for this importantpurpose.
Fig. 2.5 Dependence of crystal structures on the enthalpy of mixing, ΔHmix, and the atomic size
mismatch, δ, in various HEAs [ 16]36 Y. Zhang et al.Inspirations to address this issue came from the equivalency of alloying elements
in stabilizing fcc- or bcc-type solid solutions. It has been widely conﬁrmed byexperiments that elements like Al and Cr are bcc phase stabilizers and Ni and Co are
fcc phase stabilizers [ 40]. It was clearly shown that in the Al
xCoyCrzCu0.5FevNiw
alloy system, 1.11 portions of Co was equivalent to 1 portion of Ni as the fcc phase
stabilizer, and 2.23 portions of Cr was equivalent to 1 portion of Al as thebcc stabilizer. When the equivalent Co % was greater than 45 at.%, the alloyshad an fcc structure; when the equivalent Cr % was greater than 55 at.%, thealloys had a bcc structure [ 41]. Naturally, this equivalency of alloying elements
in stabilizing a particular crystal structure reminds the well-known effect of elec-tron concentration on the crystal structure in conventional alloys [ 42]. Before the
effect of electron concentration on the crystal structure of solid solutions forming
HEAs is discussed, two different notions of electron concentrations, valence elec-tron concentration ( VEC) and electrons per atom ratio ( e/a), will be introduced ﬁrst,
as there exist subtle differences in their deﬁnitions and resulting applications.
2.3.1 VEC and e/a
Electron concentration has been known to play a critical role in controlling thephase stability and even physical properties of alloys [ 42]. It is pointed out that two
different notions of electron concentration exist, one is the average number of
itinerant electrons per atom ratio ( e/a), and the other is the number of total electrons
(VEC) (including d electrons involved in the valence band). For example, e/aand
VEC for pure Cu ([Ar] 3d
104s1) is 1 and 11, respectively. Basically, e/ais in
connection with the Hume-Rothery electron concentration rule, and VEC is a key
parameter in ﬁrst-principles band calculations and is obtained by integrating thedensity of states (DOS) of the valence band from the bottom up to a given energy.Mizutani discussed different applications of e/aandVEC in depth in his monograph
Hume-Rothery Rules for Structurally Complex Alloy Phases [42]. [Interested
readers are suggested to refer to this book for more detailed information on the
difference between e/aandVEC. ] Some applications of e/aandVEC in terms of the
crystal structure and phase stability are exempliﬁed here, to facilitate the discus-sions that are followed.
The effect of e/aon the phase stability is articulated in the Hume-Rothery rules,
where Hume-Rothery noted that similar structures occur at characteristic e/a[42].
As a classical example, Fig. 2.6shows the e/adependence of the phase stability in
alloys based on noble metals (Cu-, Ag-, and Au-based alloys) [ 42]. Seen from
Fig.2.6, the α-,β-,γ-,ε-, and η-phases successively appear at particular e/aranges,
regardless of the solute element added to noble metals. The fcc α-phase exists at
e/a<1.4. Near e/a¼1.5, the bcc β-phase exists at high temperatures, which is
replaced either by its ordered CsCl-type (B2) β-phase or by the hcp ζ-phase at low
temperatures. Also around e/a¼1.5, the μ-phase containing 20 atoms in its
β-Mn-type cubic unit cell occurs in certain alloy systems. The complex cubic2 Phase Formation Rules 37γ-phase is stabilized at about e/a¼1.6 and the hcp ε-phase in the range
1.7<e/a<1.9. The hcp η-phase appears as a primary solid solution of Zn and Cd
and is centered at e/a¼2.0. This is the Hume-Rothery electron concentration rule.
Because of their locations at particular electron concentrations, these alloys arecalled electron compounds or Hume-Rothery electron phases. Judging from its
strong e/adependence, it has been naturally thought that the interaction of the
Fermi surface with the Brillouin zone must play a critical role in stabilizing theseelectron phases.
VEC has been proved to be quite effective in controlling the ordered crystal
structures of Co
3V alloyed with Fe and Ni [ 43]. Ni, Co, and Fe have similar atomic
sizes and electronegativities, but differ in VEC: 10, 9, and 8, respectively [ 37].
The stoichiometric Co 3V has a six-layer hexagonal ordered structure with the
stacking sequence ABCACB . The stacking character of Co 3Vi s hcchcc ,w i t ha
33.3 % hexagonality. VEC of Co 3V can be increased by partial replacement of Co
by Ni: (Ni, Co) 3V. With increasing VEC, the hexagonality can increase from 33.3
to 100 % at a VEC of 8.54. Further increasing VEC to 8.75, when Ni completely
replaces Co, results in a change in the basic layer structure from triangular(T) type to rectangular (R) type, and stacking of the R layers gives a tetragonalordered structure similar to DO
22-type Ni 3V.VEC of Co 3V can also be reduced by
Fig. 2.6 Schematic phase diagram showing the Hume-Rothery electron concentration ( e/a) rule in
noble metal alloys [ 42]38 Y. Zhang et al.partial replacement of Co by Fe: (Co, Fe) 3V. With VEC below 7.89, the L1 2
ordered cubic structure having the stacking sequence ABC (ccc) is stabilized.
Controlling the hexagonality of Co 3V alloys by the adjustment of VEC is very
important to the room temperature ductility, as ordered hexagonal alloys arebrittle due to the limited number of slip systems, while the deformation behaviorof ordered cubic alloys is similar to that of ductile fcc alloys. Indeed, orderedcubic alloys of the compositions of (Fe, Co)
3V, (Fe, Co, Ni) 3V, and (Fe, Ni) 3Va r e
all ductile, and ordered hexagonal alloys of the compositions of Co 3V and (Ni,
Co) 3V are brittle. The VEC dependence of the phase stability in Co 3V alloys is
shown in Fig. 2.7.S i m i l a r l y ,t h e VEC r u l eh a sb e e ns u c c e s s f u l l ya p p l i e dt ot u n e
the phase stability (cubic C15 and hexagonal C14 and C36) in NbCr 2-based Laves
phase alloys [ 44].
2.3.2 VEC or e/a?
As shown above, both e/aandVEC have been proved to be correlated to the phase
stability and physical properties of alloys. One needs to be cautious in selecting e/a
orVEC as an electron concentration parameter though, depending on the situation
that is involved. Mizutani [ 42] showed that physical properties, including the
saturation magnetization and the electronic speciﬁc heat coefﬁcient in 3d transitionmetals, the superconducting transition temperature of TM (transition metal) alloys,(Co,Ni)3V
Co3V(Co,Ni)3V
Ni3V
8.75
RT
AB ABCBCACAB
hchhchhch hcchcc cccABCACB ABC
hh
100 66.7
Ordered
hexa gonalOrdered
tetragonalOrdered
structureHexago -
nality (%)Stacking
characterStacking
sequenceOrdered
layerAlloy
VEC
Ordered
cubic33.3 OTT T8.54 8.43 8.00 <7.89 7.25(Co,Fe)3V(Ni,Fe)3V
(Ni,Co,Fe)3V
Fe3V
Fig. 2.7 Effect of the electron concentration ( VEC) on the stability of ordered crystal structures in
Ni3V-Co 3V-Fe 3V alloys [ 43]2 Phase Formation Rules 39and the thermoelectric power in the Heusler (L2 1)-type Fe 2VAl alloys, all exhibit a
universal behavior with respect to VEC. Mizutani noted that all these properties are
clearly related to the total DOS at the Fermi level. Meanwhile, physical properties
like the axial ratio, c/a, the magnetic susceptibility corrected for ionic contributions,
and the electronic speciﬁc heat coefﬁcient in noble metal alloys are all correlated toe/a, and not to VEC. These properties are known to be dominated by the FsBz
(Fermi surface-Brillouin zone) interactions and therefore are unsurprisingly scaledin terms of e/a, which is introduced through the Fermi diameter 2k
Fin the matching
condition. When discussing the role of two electron concentration parameters VEC
ande/ain designing new CMAs (complex metallic alloys), which are characterized
by a pseudogap across the Fermi level, Mizutani concluded that VEC can be used as
long as a rigid-band model holds, assuming that the electronic density of states of an
alloy can be inferred from that of the host, whereas e/aore/uc (electrons per unit
cell) is also useful, only if sound e/avalues for the TM elements are used. e/avalues
for transition metals have been quite controversial for a long time and no satisﬁedsolutions have yet emerged. This difﬁculty has challenged the interpretations of theHume-Rothery electron concentration rule for alloys containing TM elements.Mizutani evaluated different proposals for e/a, mainly analyzing those postulated
by Raynor and by Haworth and Hume-Rothery [ 42], and then deduced a new set of
e/avalues for TM elements based on the Hume-Rothery plot, which is quite
different to the previous proposals [ 42]. The work from Mizutani will not end the
discussion on e/avalues for TM elements though, since not all e/ahave been
determined, and e/afor each element even varies depending on the atomic envi-
ronment. It should be noted that the e/arule has also been used to design quasi-
crystalline alloys [ 45,46] and even amorphous alloys [ 47,48], with some success.
Nevertheless, the choice of e/afor TM elements was also ambiguous.
2.3.3 The Effect of VEC on the Phase Stability of HEAs
As said previously, the equivalency of alloying elements in stabilizing fcc- or
bcc-type solid solutions in HEAs naturally leads one to correlate this equivalencyto the electron concentration effect. Since currently developed HEAs comprisemainly TM elements, considering the difﬁculty of deﬁning the e/avalues for
them, VEC seems to be a more straightforward electron concentration parameter.
Meanwhile, it has been shown that in the Al
xCoyCrzCu0.5FevNiwalloy system, 1.11
portions of Co was equivalent to 1 portion of Ni as the fcc phase stabilizer [ 41]. This
further indicates that VEC has an effect on the phase stability in HEAs: a VEC of
9 for Co and 10 for Ni. To verify this, Guo et al. designed a series of Al xCrCuFeNi 2
alloys [ 37], fully replacing Co with Ni in the widely studied Al xCoCrCuFeNi
alloys. It was experimentally proved that the new Al xCrCuFeNi 2alloy system
showed a very similar trend of phase stability to that of Al xCoCrCuFeNi alloys,
with the increasing Al concentration. In addition, there seemed to exist thresholdVEC values for forming different types of solid solutions at VEC /C218.0, where sole40 Y. Zhang et al.fcc solid solution phases formed. Guo et al. then moved to scrutinize the VEC effect
on the phase stability in various solid solution forming HEAs (where no interme-
tallic compounds or amorphous phase is formed), comprising different alloyingelements. The result of this statistical analysis is shown in Fig. 2.8[37], from which
two important conclusions can be drawn. Firstly and qualitatively, in solid solutionforming HEAs, bcc phases are stabilized at a lower VEC, while fcc phases are
stabilized at a higher VEC. In the intermediate VEC, both fcc and bcc phases exist.
Secondly and almost quantitatively, fcc phases occur at VEC /C218.0, bcc phases at
VEC<6.87, and a mixture of fcc and bcc phases at 6.87 /C20VEC<8. Some excep-
tions do exist, particularly for Mn-containing HEAs. The VEC rule provides a
convenient way to design fcc- or bcc-structured HEAs containing mainly TMelements, from the electron concentration perspective, and its validity has beenveriﬁed widely by subsequent experiments following its publication.
A few notes need to be added in terms of utilizing the VEC rule. First, the VEC
rule was proposed based on the experimental results from cast alloys. Its validity toHEAs prepared by other routes (e.g., the powder metallurgy method) has not beenevaluated. Second, the VEC rule only works on the premise that the solid solutions
are the only alloying products (i.e., no intermetallic compounds or amorphous
phase is formed). Third, when discussing the separation of fcc and bcc solidsolutions, no distinction was made between disordered and ordered solid solutions.For example, B2-type ordered bcc phases and disordered bcc phases were bothclassiﬁed as bcc solid solutions. Fourth, forming the fcc or bcc solid solutions doesnot necessarily indicate the formation of one fcc or bcc phase. For example, this canmean the formation of two disordered fcc phases or one disordered fcc plus oneordered fcc phase. Fifth, the threshold VEC values of 6.87 and 8.0 are mainly for
reference. They can vary in different alloy systems [ 37] and even vary for the same
compositions that were cast with different cooling rates [ 6] or after subsequent heat
Fig. 2.8 Relationship between VEC and the phase stability for fcc and bcc solid solutions in
various HEAs. Note on the legends: fully closed symbols for sole fcc phases, fully open symbols
for sole bcc phases, and top-half closed symbols for mixed fcc and bcc phases [ 37]2 Phase Formation Rules 41treatments at various temperatures [ 49]. The latter variations are understandable,
considering that solid solution phases appearing in cast HEAs are actually frozenstable solid-state phases at elevated temperatures [ 50] and therefore affected by
factors like kinetics and also the entropic contribution to the Gibbs free energy.
However, so far there are no exceptions against the trend that a higher VEC favors
the fcc phase and a lower VEC favors the bcc phase, in solid solution forming
HEAs. From the published experimental results, the threshold VEC values of 6.87
and 8.0 still seem to be a reasonable guidance to design fcc- or bcc-structuredHEAs, prepared from the direct casting. Again, it has to be emphasized that, so farthis statement has mostly been veriﬁed for HEAs containing mainly TM elements.
In the second note that is given above, it is emphasized that the VEC rule for the
formation of fcc- or bcc-type solid solutions only works when no intermetallic
compounds form. In cases when entropic contribution in lowering the Gibbs freeenergy is not sufﬁcient to surpass the very negative enthalpy among alloyingelements, intermetallic compounds form [ 7]. Interestingly, Tsai et al. showed that
VEC can also be used to predict the formation of σ-phase in cast Cr- and
V-containing HEAs, and furthermore the VEC range of the formation of σ-phase
was 6.88 <VEC<7.84 (Fig. 2.9). It is interesting to point out that this range almost
overlaps with that for forming the mixture of fcc and bcc solid solutions proposed
by Guo et al.: 6.87 /C20VEC<8[51]. No σ-phase was found to form outside this
range. Based on these results, it seems probable that the internal energy differencebetween the mixed fcc and bcc solid solutions and the σ-phase is small. The general
applicability of the VEC rule to the formation of σ-phase in other alloy systems and
to other type of intermetallic compounds is uncertain and still awaits furtherexperimental evidences.
Fig. 2.9 Relationship between VEC and the presence of the σ-phase after aging for various HEAs [ 51]42 Y. Zhang et al.2.4 Remaining Issues and Future Prospects
2.4.1 Phase Formation Rules for HEAs Containing Mainly
Non-TM Elements
The phase formation rules proposed in Sect. 2.2are basically based on HEAs
containing mainly 3d and/or 4d TM elements. For low-density multicomponentHEAs containing high concentrations of Al, Mg, Li, Zn, Cu, and/or Sn, it was foundthat most previous phase formation rules fail to work effectively [ 15]. The conﬁg-
urational entropy seems not to be a dominant factor controlling the phase selectionin low-density multicomponent alloys containing signiﬁcant amounts of Al, Mg,and Li. Compared with HEAs containing mainly TM elements, low-density
multicomponent alloys do not readily form solid solution phases with a simple
crystal structure. As seen in Fig. 2.10, the threshold values of parametric criteria
that are given in Sect. 2.2need to be modiﬁed to be applicable for low-density
HEAs containing mainly non-TM elements. Namely, solid solutions form atsmaller value of δ(<4.5 %), larger value of ΔH
mix(~/C01 kJ/mol <ΔHmix/C20
5 kJ/mol), and larger value of Ω(>~10).
2.4.2 Justiﬁcation of the VEC Rule
The validity of the VEC rule in controlling the fcc- or bcc-type solid solution
phases in HEAs has been proved by a large amount of experiments. This indicates
that the phase stability in HEAs is probably determined by the total DOS at theFermi level, which can be predicted by ﬁrst-principles calculations. Widomet al. used ﬁrst-principles calculations to study the ordering issue in Mo-Nb-Ta-W refractory HEAs [ 53,54]. Tian et al. studied the structural stability in
CoCrFeNiAl
xHEAs and they found that at 300 K the fcc phase in these alloys is
stable at VEC /C217.57 and the bcc phase is stable at VEC /C207.04 [ 55]. These
threshold VEC values are not too far away from those proposed by Guo
et al. [ 37]. Firstly, as discussed before, the threshold VEC values proposed by
Guo et al. are mainly for reference only and variations among different alloysystems are expected. Secondly, in Tian et al. ’s calculation, the relative stability
of fcc and bcc phases was compared at 300 K. This would also cause someconcerns, as these solid solution phases are not equilibrium phases at roomtemperature [ 50]. In order to physically justify the VEC rule, more work
from the theoretical side needs to be carried out. For example, temperature mayimpact the chemical and structural ordering of HEAs to a large degree and
consequently their electronic and thermodynamic properties. Furthermore, addi-
tional work is required to verify the VEC rule for HEAs not containing mainly TM
elements.2 Phase Formation Rules 432.4.3 Beyond fcc and bcc Solid Solutions
In almost all available experimental results, if solid solutions are formed in HEAs,
these solid solutions are fcc structured, bcc structured, or a mixture of these struc-tures. However, some other types of solid solutions were also found. Recently,Lilensten reported an orthorhombic structure in the Ti
35Zr27.5Hf27.5Ta5Nb5alloy
[56], although whether an alloy of such a composition can be classiﬁed as HEAs is
debatable. However, hcp-type solid solutions have been experimentally observedor theoretically predicted in high-entropy alloy systems like DyGdHoTbY,DyGdLuTbY, DyGbLuTbTm, CoFeMnTi
xVyZrz, CrFeNiTiVZr, CoFeNiTi, and
Fig. 2.10 (a)δ-ΔHmix,(b)δ-Ω,(c)δ-Δχ(Δχis the electronegativity difference among elements,
deﬁned in Ref. [ 52]), and ( d)δ-VEC plots for low-density multicomponent alloys on crosshatched
regions developed in previous HEA investigations. For (Al 0.5Mg 0.5)100/C0xLix,x¼5, 10, 15,
25, and 33.33 [ 15]44 Y. Zhang et al.CoOsReRu [ 57–62]. These alloys pose challenges to the VEC rule that was initially
established to control the formation of fcc- and bcc-type solid solutions in HEAs. Thephase stability dependence on the electron concentration needs to be further under-
stood along with the discovery of new HEAs containing different phase constitutions.
2.4.4 On e/a
The difference between VEC ande/a, in terms of both deﬁnitions and applications, has
been discussed (more details in Ref. [ 42]). Due to the difﬁculty in deﬁning the e/a
values for TM elements, the use of VEC is more convenient for predicting the phase
selection in HEAs. However, based on the historical contribution of e/ato understand
the phase stability in alloys, efforts to study the effect of e/aon the phase stability in
HEAs are still necessary. Poletti and Battezzati recently evaluated the phase stability ofHEAs using both e/aand VEC [63]. They claimed that fcc phases are stabilized
atVEC>7.5 and 1.6 <e/a<1.8 and bcc phases are stabilized at VEC<7.5 and
1.8<e/a<2.3. If such a correlation between e/aand the phase stability does exist,
then it provides a new perspective to design HEAs. However, it needs to be noted thatwhen calculating e/a, they counted the electrons on the sandporbital for all elements,
even for TM elements, such as an e/aof 1 for Cr ([Ar] 3d
54s1) and 2 for Fe ([Ar] 3d64s2)
and Ni ([Ar] 3d84s2). The choice of e/a, and hence the soundness of this e/a
dependence of the phase stability, needs more justiﬁcations. Nevertheless, it isexpected that future work along this line of thinking will help to gain a deeperunderstanding into the effect of electron concentration on the phase stability of HEAs.
2.5 Summary
The phase formation rules in HEAs have been formulated using a parametric
approach, utilizing parameters based on two considerations, i.e., thermodynamics
and geometry effect. A couple of criteria are proposed to predict and controlthe phase selection, among solid solutions, intermetallic compounds, and theamorphous phase, in HEAs containing mainly transition metals. These criteriainclude the enthalpy of mixing, ΔH
mix; the atomic size difference, δ; and the Ω
parameter. Particularly, Ω/C211.1 and δ/C206.6 % proved to be quite effective in
predicting the solid solutions in HEAs. The formation of intermetallic compoundstends to complicate the phase formation rules, and this still constitutes a challenge
to formulate sufﬁcient conditions (i.e., not just necessary conditions) to form solid
solutions in HEAs. The applicability of current phase formation rules to HEAscontaining mainly non-TM elements needs further inspections.
Inspired by the equivalency of stabilizing elements and also the well-established
knowledge on physical metallurgy, the valence electron concentration, VEC, has
been found to be a good criterion to control the fcc and bcc solid solutions, the two2 Phase Formation Rules 45most common types of solid solutions seen in HEAs. The VEC rule enables one to
reﬁne the design of HEAs with desired crystal structures, based on the parametricapproaches to design solid solution forming HEAs. Essentially, elements with a
higher VEC tend to stabilize the fcc phase and elements with a lower VEC tend to
stabilize the bcc phase, and the threshold values of 8.0 and 6.87 can be a quitereasonable guidance. Since the VEC rule was proposed, its effectiveness has been
veriﬁed by a large amount of experiments and awaits further inspections. Itsapplicability to HEAs prepared by routes other than casting also needs to beevaluated. Theoretical analyses, mainly based on ﬁrst-principles calculations, arerequired to elevate the electron concentration dependence of the phase stability inHEAs, from empirical rules to scientiﬁc theories. Meanwhile, new developments
are necessary to tackle challenges like the formation of solid solutions other than
fcc and bcc structures. Another important electron concentration parameter, elec-trons per atom ratio, e/a, is worthy of more attention.
Acknowledgments Y.Z. and X.Y. would like acknowledge the ﬁnancial supports from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) with grant nos. of 51210105006,
50971019, 50571018, and 51471025 and National High-Tech R&D (863) Program with grant
no. of 2009AA03Z113. S.G. thanks the Area of Advance Materials Science from ChalmersUniversity of Technology, for the start-up funding. C.T.L. acknowledges the ﬁnancial supportfrom the Research Grants Council (RGC) of the Hong Kong government, through the General
Research Fund (GRF) with the account number CityU 521411.
References
1. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design
concepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
2. Otto F, Yang Y, Bei H, George EP (2013) Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the phase
stability of equiatomic high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 61(7):2628–2638. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2013.01.042
3. Tong CJ, Chen YL, Chen SK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Lin SJ, Chang SY (2005)
Microstructure characterization of Al xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with
multiprincipal elements. Metall Mater Trans A 36(4):881–893. doi: 10.1007/s11661-005-0283-0
4. Wang WH (2014) High-entropy metallic glasses. JOM 10(66):2067–2077. doi: 10.1007/
s11837-014-1002-3
5. Miracle DB, Miller JD, Senkov ON, Woodward C, Uchic MD, Tiley J (2014) Exploration and
development of high entropy alloys for structural applications. Entropy 16(1):494–525. doi: 10.
3390/e16010494
6. Singh S, Wanderka N, Murty BS, Glatzel U, Banhart J (2011) Decomposition in multi-
component AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 59(1):182–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2010.09.023
7. Guo S, Hu Q, Ng C, Liu CT (2013) More than entropy in high-entropy alloys: forming solid
solutions or amorphous phase. Intermetallics 41:96–103. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2013.05.002
8. Guo S, Liu CT (2011) Phase stability in high entropy alloys: formation of solid-solution phase
or amorphous phase. Prog Nat Sci:Mater Int 21(6):433–446. doi: 10.1016/S1002-0071(12)
60080-X46 Y. Zhang et al.9. Zhang Y, Zhou YJ, Lin JP, Chen GL, Liaw PK (2008) Solid-solution phase formation rules for
multi-component alloys. Adv Eng Mater 10(6):534–538. doi: 10.1002/adem.200700240
10. Yang X, Zhang Y (2012) Prediction of high-entropy stabilized solid-solution in multi-
component alloys. Mater Chem Phys 132(2–3):233–238. doi: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2011.
11.021
11. Cahn RW, Hassen P (1996) Physical metallurgy, vol 1, 4th edn. North Holland, Amsterdam12. Inoue A (2000) Stabilization of metallic supercooled liquid and bulk amorphous alloys. Acta
Mate 48(1):279–306, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6454(99)00300-6
13. Curtarolo S, Hart GLW, Nardelli MB, Mingo N, Sanvito S, Levy O (2013) The high-
throughput highway to computational materials design. Nat Mater 12(3):191–201. doi: 10.
1038/nmat3568
14. Zhang Y, Yang X, Liaw PK (2012) Alloy design and properties optimization of high-entropy
alloys. JOM 64(7):830–838. doi: 10.1007/s11837-012-0366-5
15. Yang X, Chen SY, Cotton JD, Zhang Y (2014) Phase stability of low-density, multiprincipal
component alloys containing aluminum, magnesium, and lithium. JOM 10(66):2009–2020.
doi:10.1007/s11837-014-1059-z
16. Zhang Y, Lu ZP, Ma SG, Liaw PK, Tang Z, Cheng YQ, Gao MC (2014) Guidelines in
predicting phase formation of high-entropy alloys. MRS Commun 4(2):57–62. doi: 10.1557/
mrc.2014.11
17. Ma SG, Zhang Y (2012) Effect of Nb addition on the microstructure and properties of
AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 532:480–486. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.
10.110
18. Zhang KB, Fu ZY (2012) Effects of annealing treatment on phase composition and micro-
structure of CoCrFeNiTiAlx high-entropy alloys. Intermetallics 22:24–32. doi: 10.1016/j.
intermet.2011.10.010
19. Chuang MH, Tsai MH, Wang WR, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2011) Microstructure and wear behavior
of AlxCo1.5CrFeNi1.5Tiy high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 59(16):6308–6317. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2011.06.041
20. Lucas MS, Mauger L, Munoz JA, Xiao YM, Sheets AO, Semiatin SL, Horwath J, Turgut Z
(2011) Magnetic and vibrational properties of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109
(7):07E307. doi: 10.1063/1.3538936
21. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Compd 509
(20):6043–6048. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2011.02.171
22. Zhu JM, Fu HM, Zhang HF, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2010) Synthesis and properties of
multiprincipal component AlCoCrFeNiSi
xalloys. Mater Sci Eng A 527(27–28):7210–7214.
doi:10.1016/j.msea.2010.07.049
23. Zhu JM, Fu HM, Zhang HF, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2010) Microstructures and compressive
properties of multicomponent AlCoCrFeNiMo xalloys. Mater Sci Eng A 527(26):6975–6979.
doi:10.1016/j.msea.2010.07.028
24. Hsu CY, Juan CC, Wang WR, Sheu TS, Yeh JW, Chen SK (2011) On the superior hot hardness
and softening resistance of AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 528
(10–11):3581–3588. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.01.072
25. Gao XQ, Zhao K, Ke HB, Ding DW, Wang WH, Bai HY (2011) High mixing entropy
bulk metallic glasses. J Non Cryst Solids 357(21):3557–3560. doi: 10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.
2011.07.016
26. Zhang B, Wang RJ, Zhao DQ, Pan MX, Wang WH (2004) Properties of Ce-based bulk
metallic glass-forming alloys. Phys Rev B 70(22):224208. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.70.224208
27. Xu DH, Duan G, Johnson WL, Garland C (2004) Formation and properties of new Ni-based
amorphous alloys with critical casting thickness up to 5 mm. Acta Mater 52(12):3493–3497.doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2004.04.001
28. Jiang QK, Zhang GQ, Chen LY, Wu JZ, Zhang HG, Jiang JZ (2006) Glass formability, thermal
stability and mechanical properties of La-based bulk metallic glasses. J Alloys Compd 424
(1–2):183–186. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2006.07.1092 Phase Formation Rules 4729. Jiang QK, Zhang GQ, Yang L, Wang XD, Saksl K, Franz H, Wunderlich R, Fecht H, Jiang JZ
(2007) La-based bulk metallic glasses with critical diameter up to 30 mm. Acta Mater 55(13):4409–4418. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2007.04.021
30. Chang CT, Shen BL, Inoue A (2006) Co-Fe-B-Si-Nb bulk glassy alloys with superhigh
strength and extremely low magnetostriction. Appl Phys Lett 88(1):011901. doi: 10.1063/1.
2159107
31. Zhang T, Yang Q, Ji YF, Li R, Pang SJ, Wang JF, Xu T (2011) Centimeter-scale-diameter
Co-based bulk metallic glasses with fracture strength exceeding 5000 MPa. Chin Sci Bull 56
(36):3972–3977. doi: 10.1007/s11434-011-4765-8
32. Li S, Xi XK, Wei YX, Luo Q, Wang YT, Tang MB, Zhang B, Zhao ZF, Wang RJ, Pan MX,
Zhao DQ, Wang WH (2005) Formation and properties of new heavy rare-earth-based bulk
metallic glasses. Sci Techno Adv Mater 6(7):823–827. doi: 10.1016/j.stam.2005.06.019
33. Jiang QK, Zhang GQ, Chen LY, Zeng QS, Jiang JZ (2006) Centimeter-sized
(La
0.5Ce0.5)-based bulk metallic glasses. J Alloys Compd 424(1–2):179–182. doi: 10.1016/j.
jallcom.2006.07.007
34. Li R, Pang SJ, Men H, Ma CL, Zhang T (2006) Formation and mechanical properties of
(Ce-La-Pr-Nd)-Co-Al bulk glassy alloys with superior glass-forming ability. Scr Mater 54(6):1123–1126. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2005.11.074
35. Tsai KY, Tsai MH, Yeh JW (2013) Sluggish diffusion in Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni high-entropy
alloys. Acta Mater 61(13):4887–4897. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2013.04.058
36. Wu WH, Yang CC, Yeh JW (2006) Industrial development of high-entropy alloys. Ann
Chimie Sci Materiaux 31(6):737–747. doi: 10.3166/acsm.31.737-747
37. Guo S, Ng C, Lu J, Liu CT (2011) Effect of valence electron concentration on stability of fcc or
bcc phase in high entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(10):103505. doi: 10.1063/1.3587228
38. Wang FJ, Zhang Y, Chen GL, Davies HA (2009) Tensile and compressive mechanical
behavior of a CoCrCuFeNiAl
0.5high entropy alloy. Int J Mod Phys B 23(6–7):1254–1259.
doi:10.1142/S0217979209060774
39. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Miracle DB, Chuang CP, Liaw PK (2010) Refractory high-entropy
alloys. Intermetallics 18(9):1758–1765. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2010.05.014
40. Tung CC, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK, Huang YS, Chen HC (2007) On the elemental effect of
AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system. Mater Lett 61(1):1–5. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2006.
03.140
41. Ke GY, Chen SK, Hsu T, Yeh JW (2006) FCC and BCC equivalents in as-cast solid solutions
of Al xCoyCrzCu0.5FevNiwhigh-entropy alloys. Ann Chimie Sci Materiaux 31(6):669–683.
doi:10.3166/acsm.31.669-684
42. Mizutani U (2011) Hume-Rothery rules for structurally complex alloy phases. CRC Press,
Boca Raton
43. Liu CT, Stiegler JO (1984) Ductile ordered intermetallic alloys. Science 226(4675):636–642.
doi:10.1126/science.226.4675.636
44. Zhu JH, Liaw PK, Liu CT (1997) Effect of electron concentration on the phase stability of
NbCr 2-based Laves phase alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 239–240:260–264. doi: 10.1016/S0921-
5093(97)00590-X
45. Tsai AP, Inoue A, Yokoyama Y, Masumoto T (1990) Stable icosahedral Al-Pd-Mn and Al-Pd-
Re alloys. Mater Trans JIM 31(2):98–103. doi: 10.2320/matertrans1989.31.98
46. Yokoyama Y, Tsai AP, Inoue A, Masumoto T, Chen HS (1991) Formation criteria and growth-
morphology of quasi-crystals in Al-Pd-TM (TM ¼transition metal) alloys. Mater Trans JIM
32(5):421–428. doi: 10.2320/matertrans1989.32.421
47. Chen W, Wang Y, Qiang J, Dong C (2003) Bulk metallic glasses in the Zr-Al-Ni-Cu system.
Acta Mater 51(7):1899–1907. doi: 10.1016/s1359-6454(02)00596-7
48. Dong C, Wang Q, Qiang JB, Wang YM, Jiang N, Han G, Li YH, Wu J, Xia JH (2007) From
clusters to phase diagrams: composition rules of quasicrystals and bulk metallic glasses. J PhysD Appl Phys 40(15):R273–R291. doi: 10.1088/0022-3727/40/15/r0148 Y. Zhang et al.49. Wang Z, Guo S, Liu CT (2014) Phase selection in high-entropy alloys: From nonequilibrium to
equilibrium. JOM 10(66):1966–1972. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-0953-8
50. Ng C, Guo S, Luan JH, Shi SQ, Liu CT (2012) Entropy-driven phase stability and slow
diffusion kinetics in Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy. Intermetallics 31:165–172. doi: 10.
1016/j.intermet.2012.07.001
51. Tsai MH, Tsai KY, Tsai CW, Lee C, Juan CC, Yeh JW (2013) Criterion for sigma phase
formation in Cr- and V-containing high-entropy alloys. Mater Res Lett 1(4):207–212. doi: 10.
1080/21663831.2013.831382
52. Fang SS, Xiao X, Lei X, Li WH, Dong YD (2003) Relationship between the widths of
supercooled liquid regions and bond parameters of Mg-based bulk metallic glasses. J NonCryst Solids 321(1–2):120–125. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3093(03)00155-8
53. Widom M, Huhn WP, Maiti S, Steurer W (2014) Hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics
simulation of a refractory metal high entropy alloy. Metall Mater Trans A 45(1):196–200.doi:10.1007/s11661-013-2000-8
54. Huhn WP, Widom M (2013) Prediction of A2 to B2 phase transition in the high-entropy alloy
Mo-Nb-Ta-W. JOM 65(12):1772–1779. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0772-3
55. Tian FY, Delczeg L, Chen NX, Varga LK, Shen J, Vitos L (2013) Structural stability of
NiCoFeCrAl
xhigh-entropy alloy from ab initio theory. Phys Rev B 88(8):085128. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevB.88.085128
56. Lilensten L, Couzinie ´JP, Perrie `re L, Bourgon J, Emery N, Guillot I (2014) New structure in
refractory high-entropy alloys. Mater Lett 132:123–125. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.06.064
57. Kao YF, Chen SK, Sheu JH, Lin JT, Lin WE, Yeh JW, Lin SJ, Liou TH, Wang CW (2010)
Hydrogen storage properties of multi-principal-component CoFeMnTi xVyZrzalloys. Int
J Hydrogen Energy 35(17):9046–9059. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.06.012
58. Kunce I, Polanski M, Bystrzycki J (2013) Structure and hydrogen storage properties of a high
entropy ZrTiVCrFeNi alloy synthesized using Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS). Int
J Hydrogen Energy 38(27):12180–12189. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.05.071
59. Tsau C-H (2009) Phase transformation and mechanical behavior of TiFeCoNi alloy during
annealing. Mater Sci Eng A 501(1–2):81–86. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2008.09.046
60. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for Next Single-Phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15(10):4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
61. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W (2014) High-entropy alloys with a
hexagonal close-packed structure designed by equi-atomic alloy strategy and binary phase
diagrams. JOM 10(66):1984–1992. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1085-x
62. Feuerbacher M, Heidelmann M, Thomas C (2014) Hexagonal high-entropy alloys. Mater Res
Lett 3:1–6. doi: 10.1080/21663831.2014.951493
63. Poletti MG, Battezzati L (2014) Electronic and thermodynamic criteria for the occurrence
of high entropy alloys in metallic systems. Acta Mater 75:297–306. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.
2014.04.0332 Phase Formation Rules 49Chapter 3
Physical Metallurgy
Jien-Wei Yeh
Abstract Physical metallurgy is a branch of materials science, especially focusing
on the relationship between composition, processing, crystal structure and micro-structure, and physical and mechanical properties. Because all properties are themanifestation of compositions, structure and microstructure, thermodynamics,kinetics, and plastic deformation, factors as encountered in processing controlbecome very important to control phase transformation and microstructure and
thus properties of alloys. All the underlying principles have been well built and
physical metallurgy approaches mature. However, traditional physical metallurgyis based on the observations on conventional alloys. As composition is the mostbasic and original factor to determine the bonding, structure, microstructure, andthus properties to a certain extent, physical metallurgy principles might be differentand need to be modiﬁed for HEAs which have entirely different compositions fromconventional alloys. The most distinguished effects in HEAs are high-entropy,severe lattice distortion, sluggish diffusion, and cocktail effects. This chapter will
present and discuss the corresponding subjects of physical metallurgy based on
these effects.
Keywords Physical metallurgy • High-entropy effect • Severe lattice distortion
effect • Sluggish diffusion and cocktail effect • Cocktail effect • High-entropyalloys (HEAs)
3.1 Introduction
Physical metallurgy is a science focusing on the relationships between composition,processing, crystal structure and microstructure, and physical and mechanicalproperties [ 1,2]. Figure 3.1shows the scheme of physical metallurgy, in which
straightforward correlations can be seen. Composition and processing determine
J.-W. Yeh ( *)
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of Chinae-mail: jwyeh@mx.nthu.edu.tw
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_351structure and microstructure, which in turn determine properties. The relationships
between composition, processing, and crystal structure and microstructure arethermodynamics, kinetics, and deformation theory. Those between crystal struc-ture, microstructure, and physical and mechanical properties are solid-state physicsand theories for strengthening, toughening, fatigue, creep, wear, etc. Therefore, theunderstanding of physical metallurgy is very helpful to manipulate, develop, and
utilize materials. Physical metallurgy has been gradually built over 100 year since
using optical microscope to observe the microstructure of materials. The underlyingprinciples were thought to become mature [ 2]. However, traditional physical
metallurgy is based on the observations on conventional alloys. As compositionsof high-entropy alloys (HEAs) are entirely different from those of conventionalalloys, physical metallurgy principles might need to be modiﬁed for HEAs and thusrequire more future research.
Because of their uniqueness, four core effects of HEAs were proposed in 2006
[3]. They are high-entropy effect for thermodynamics, sluggish diffusion effect for
kinetics, severe lattice distortion effect for structure, and cocktail effect for prop-erties, respectively. Figure 3.1also shows the inﬂuence positions of these four core
effects in the scheme of physical metallurgy. High-entropy effect should beinvolved in thermodynamics to determine the equilibrium structure and microstruc-ture. Sluggish diffusion effect affects kinetics in phase transformation. Severelattice distortion effect not only affects deformation theory and all the relationshipsbetween each property, structure, and microstructure but also affects thermody-
namics and kinetics. As for the cocktail effect, it is the overall effect from compo-
sition, structure, and microstructure. Properties of HEAs are not as simple as thosepredicted from the rule of mixture, but mutual interactions between unlike atomsand the feature of phases and microstructure would give excess quantity to eachproperty. Therefore, physical metallurgy principles of HEAs might be differentfrom those of current physical metallurgy because of these inﬂuences. We need to
Fig. 3.1 The scheme of physical metallurgy in which those areas inﬂuenced by four core effects
of HEAs are indicated52 J.-W. Yehreview every aspect of physical metallurgy through the four core effects of HEAs. It
can be expected that when physical metallurgy encompasses all alloys includingtradition alloys and HEAs, the whole understanding of the alloy world becomes
realized.
3.2 Four Core Effects of HEAs
3.2.1 High-Entropy Effect
As the name of HEAs implies, high entropy is the ﬁrst important core effects [ 4].
This effect could enhance the formation of solution phases and render the micro-structure much simpler than expected before. This effect thus has the potential toincrease the strength and ductility of solution phases due to solution hardening.Why high entropy could enhance the formation of solution phases? Before answer-
ing this, it is necessary to know that there are three possible categories of competing
states in the solid state of an alloy: elemental phases, intermetallic compounds(ICs), and solid solution phases [ 4]. Elemental phase means the terminal solid
solution based on one metal element as seen in the pure component side of aphase diagram. Intermetallic compound means stoichiometric compounds havingspeciﬁc superlattices, such as NiAl having B2 structure and Ni
3Ti having D0 24
structure, as seen at certain concentration ratios in phase diagrams. Solid solutionphase could be further divided into random solid solution and ordered solid
solution. Random solid solutions are those with crystal structure in which different
components occupy lattice sites by probability although short-range ordering mightexist. They could be the phases with the structures of BCC, FCC, or HCP. Orderedsolid solutions are intermetallic phases (IPs) or intermediate phase. They are solidsolutions with the crystal structure base d on intermetallic compounds, as seen in
the broader composition ranges around different stoichiometric compounds in
phase diagrams [ 5,6]. In such phases, different constituent elements tend to
occupy different sets of lattice sites. Their degree of ordering is smaller than
that of completely ordered structure an d thus they can be called partially ordered
solid solutions. Although they have the structure of intermetallic compounds and
might be classiﬁed to intermetallic com pounds, they are classiﬁed as solid solu-
tion phases here with the emphasis on the ir signiﬁcant solubility between constit-
uent elements. This is the same thing t o separate random solid solutions from
terminal phases.
1. General trend in phase competition
According to the second law of thermodynamics, a system reaches its thermo-
dynamic equilibrium when its Gibbs free energy is the lowest at given temperatureand pressure. In order to elucidate high-entropy effect in enhancing the formation of3 Physical Metallurgy 53solid solution phases and inhibiting the formation of IMs, HEAs composed of
constituent elements with stronger bonding energies between each other are con-sidered ﬁrst. If strain energy contribution to mixing enthalpy due to atomic sizedifference is not considered for simplicity, as shown in Table 3.1, elemental phases
based on one major element would have small-negative ΔH
mixand small ΔSmix,
compound phases would have large-negative ΔHmixbut small ΔSmix, and solid
solution phases containing multi-elements would have medium-negative ΔHmix
and high ΔSmix. As a result, solid solution phases become highly competitive
with compound phases for attaining the equilibrium state especially at hightemperatures.
Why multi-principal-element solid solutions have medium ΔH
mix? This is
because there has a proportion of unlike atomic pairs in solution phases [ 4].
For example, by taking a mole of atoms, N0, a binary intermetallic compound
(B2) NiAl in complete ordering would have (1/2) /C28N0Ni-Al bonds as the
coordination number is 8, whereas a mole of NiAl random solid solution would
have (1/2) /C2(1/2)/C28N0Ni-Al bonds. Thus, the mixing enthalpy in the random
s t a t ei so n e - h a l fo ft h a to ft h ec o m p l e t e ly ordered state. Similarly, for a ﬁve-
element equimolar alloy, that in the random solid solution state is 4/5 of that inbinary compounds assuming each compound of the ten possible binary com-pounds has the same mixing enthalpy, i.e., all heats of mixing for unlike atompairs are the same. Similarly, for an ei ght-element equimolar alloy, the ratio
becomes 7/8. Therefore, higher num b e ro fe l e m e n tw o u l da l l o wt h er a n d o m
state to have the mixing enthalpy closer to that of the completely ordered state
and to become even more competitive with the ordered state under the aid of itshigh mixing entropy.
If the average of the mixing enthalpy of unlike pairs (28 unlike pairs in total) in
an equiatomic eight-element alloy ABCDEFGH is assumed to be /C023 kJ/mol,
ΔH
mixof completely ordered structure, i.e., forming 28 intermetallic compounds
(each has N0/8 atoms), is /C046 kJ/mol, and that of complete disordered structure,
i.e., random solid solution, is /C046/C27/8¼/C040.25 kJ/mol. On the other hand, the
conﬁgurational entropy ( ΔSconf) of completely ordered structure is 0 and that of
complete disordered structure is 17.29 J/Kmol. At 1473 K, which is often lowerthan the melting points of most HEAs, ΔG
mixof completely ordered structure is
thus equal to /C046 kJ/mol and that of completely disordered structure is equal to
/C065.72 kJ/mole. Therefore, completely disordered structure is the stable phase atTable 3.1 Comparisons of ΔHmix,ΔSmix, andΔGmixbetween elemental phases, compounds, and
solid solutions. Strain energy from atomic size difference is not included in ΔHmix
Possible statesElemental
phases CompoundsRandom solid
solutionsPartially ordered
solid solutions
△Hmix ~0 Large negative Medium negative Medium negative
/C0T△Smix ~0 ~0 /C0RTln( n) </C0RTln( n)
△Gmix ~0 Large negative Large negative Large negative54 J.-W. Yeh1473 K. Furthermore, completely disordered structure is also stable at temperature
down to 333 K since the temperature of free energy equivalence between these twostates can be calculated to be 333 K. However, it should be mentioned that due to
the difference of mixing enthalpy between different unlike pairs and the effect of
strain energy, partially ordered state might have lower mixing free energy than therandom state and form at 1473 K or become the stable state by phase separation.Obviously, the assumption of the 10 or 28 binary compounds having the same orsimilar mixing enthalpies is almost impossible from the elements in the periodicaltable. They are hypothetical alloy systems which are used to emphasize the fact thatthere are lots of unlike pairs with strong bonding and have medium-negative mixingenthalpy in the random solutions or partially ordered solid solutions. They still have
low free energy of mixing because some loss of mixing enthalpy could be com-
pensated by higher mixing entropy.
2. The effect of the diversity of mixing enthalpy between unlike atom pair
In general, if mixing enthalpies for unlike atomic pairs do not have large
difference, solid solution phases would be dominant in the equilibrium state [ 4].
For example, CoCrFeMnNi alloy can fo rm a single FCC solution even after
full-annealing treatments [ 7,8]. Ductile refractory HfNbTaTiZr alloy has single
BCC phase in the as-cast state [ 9] and in the as-homogenized state. Conversely,
large difference might generate more than two phases. For example, Al has
stronger bonding with transition metal s but Cu has no attractive bond with most
transition metals. As a result, AlCoCr CuFeNi alloy forms Cu-rich FCC + multi-
principal-element FCC + multi-princi pal-element BCC (A2) at high tempera-
tures above 600
/C14C and have B2 precipitates in the Cu-rich FCC and spinodally
decomposed structure of A2 + B2 phases from A2 phase during cooling.B2 solid solution containing multi-prin cipal-elements is in fact derived from
the NiAl-type compound [ 10]. Even larger difference in mixing enthalpies for
unlike atomic pairs in those alloys co ntaining O, C, B, or N would generate
oxides, carbides, borides, or nitrides in the microstructure. However, it can be
found that these strong phases often hav e certain solubilities of other elements
with similar strong bonding due to mix ing entropy effect, for example, in
Al
0.5BxCoCrCuFeNi ( x¼0–1) alloys, strong boride phase rich in Cr, Fe, and
Co forms [ 11].
3. The effect of atomic size difference
To include the effect of atomic size difference on the phase formation, Zhang
et al. [ 12] ﬁrst proposed the forming trend of disordered solid solutions, ordered
solid solution, intermediate phases, and bulk metallic glass (BMG) by comparingΔS
mix,ΔHmix, and atomic size difference ( δ). The former three are commonly
found in HEAs, in which disordered solid solutions and ordered (or partially
ordered) ones are those with BCC, FCC, or HCP structures, and intermediate
phases are those with more complex compound structures. Guo et al. [ 13]a l s o
used these factors to lay out the phase s election rule for such kinds of phase.3 Physical Metallurgy 55Moreover, Yeh [ 14], Chen et al. [ 15] ,a n dY a n ge ta l .[ 16]u s e d δand the ratio of
TΔSmixtoΔHmixto describe the order-disorder competition in HEAs and also the
existing range of intermetallics and BM G. All these have been discussed in
Chap. 2. The main point is that solution-type phases tend to form in highly alloyed
multicomponent alloys. Disordered solut ions preferentially form under smaller δ,
smaller jΔHmixj,a n dh i g h e r ΔSmix.
In summary, high-entropy effect is the ﬁrst important effect for HEAs because it
can inhibit the formation of many different kinds of stoichiometric compoundswhich have strong ordered structures and are usually brittle. Conversely, itenhances the formation of solution-type phases and thus reduces the number ofphases much lower than the maximum number (i.e., n+1 ,nis the number of
components) of phases predicted by Gibbs ’phase rule. This renders the micro-
structure simpler than expected before, with the positive expectation in displayingbetter properties.
3.2.2 Severe Lattice Distortion Effect
Because of high-entropy effect, a solid solution phase in HEAs is often a whole-solute matrix no matter its structure is BCC, FCC, HCP, or other more complexcompound structures [ 17]. Thus, every atom in the multi-principal-element matrix
is surrounded by different kinds of atom and suffers lattice strain and stress as
shown in the right side of Fig. 3.2. In addition to the atomic size difference,
different bonding energies and crystal structure tendencies among constituentelements are expected to cause even higher lattice distortion since thenonsymmetrical neighboring atoms, i.e., nonsymmetrical bindings and electronicstructure, around an atom, and the variation of such non-symmetry from site to site
Fig. 3.2 Schematic diagram showing the severely distorted lattice and the various interactions
with dislocations, electrons, phonons, and x-ray beam56 J.-W. Yehwould affect the atomic position [ 8,18]. In conventional alloys, most matrix atoms
(or solvent atoms) have the same kind of atoms as their neighbors. The overalllattice distortion is much smaller than that in HEAs.
1. Crystal structure effect on lattice distortionWang has used Monte Carlo method in combination with MaxEnt (the principles of
maximum entropy) to demonstrate the entropy force to maximize mixing entropyfor single-phase solid solution [ 19]. He built atomic structure models of bulk
equiatomic alloys with BCC and FCC lattices from four to eight principal elements.Based on the built models, the atomic structure features are analyzed. Table 3.2
shows the information on the structure analyses of these models. The shortest
distance of an atom is the distance of the atom to its nearest-same-element atom.
It is surprising to note that an atom to have another atom of same element (like-pair)in the ﬁrst nearest neighbor can all be avoided for those BCC alloys with ﬁve ormore elements, and most of the same elements in quaternary and quinary BCC arefound in the second nearest-neighbor shell. This peak region providing highestnumber of like-pairs moves to the third nearest-neighbor shell as the elementnumber increases. On the other hand, there are still a larger proportion of sameelements in the ﬁrst shell in quaternary (74.3 %) and quinary FCC alloys (47.3 %).
Because larger proportion of unlike pairs between the center atom and dissimilar
atoms in the ﬁrst shell would give larger distortion (contributions from second andhigher shell are diminishingly minor), it can be expected from Table 3.2that larger
number of elements would tend to give larger distortion, and BCC structure haslarger distortion than FCC if constructed by the same set of elements with sameproportion. This might suggest that BCC solid solution could have larger solutionhardening effect than FCC solid solution by the same set of elements with sameproportion. This will be discussed in Sect. 3.6.4.
Table 3.2 Distribution of the shortest distances between the same-element atoms on the nearest-
neighbor lattice sites in the created BCC and FCC MaxEnt models
Phase Cell typeDistance distribution in nearest-neighbor sites (%)
12345 6
Quaternary phase BCC 8.5 83.0 6.9 1.6 0.0 0.0
FCC 74.3 23.8 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0
Quinary phase BCC 0.0 65.5 30.6 3.4 0.5 0.0
FCC 47.3 45.0 7.5 0.2 0.0 0.0
Senary phase BCC 0.0 41.4 52.4 6.0 0.2 0.0
FCC 17.2 64.9 17.7 0.2 0.0 0.0
Septenary phase BCC 0.0 19.2 65.3 15.0 0.3 0.2
FCC 3.9 50.4 44.4 1.1 0.2 0.0
Octonary phase BCC 0.0 2.5 70.9 24.3 2.1 0.2
FCC 0.2 27.1 69.8 2.7 0.2 0.0
The distances for the successive nearest-neighbor sites in BCC and FCC lattices areﬃﬃﬃ
3p
a0=2,a0,ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
a0,...; andﬃﬃﬃ
2p
a0=2,a0,ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3=2p
a0,..., respectively [ 19]3 Physical Metallurgy 572. Factors on lattice distortion and relaxation
Lattice distortion might be described by different ways but the most common
way only considers atomic size factor [ 16,20,21]. That is, lattice distortion could
be directly related to differences in atomic size ( δ) by the following equation for a
multiple-element matrix:
δ¼100ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃXn
i¼1ci1/C0ri=r ðÞ2s
ð3:1Þ
where r¼Xn
i¼1ciriandciandriare the atomic percentage and atomic radius of the
ith element, respectively. This equation is based on the assumption similar to
conventional assumption for the misﬁt strain of a solute in a matrix, in which thesolute atom occupies the exact lattice site. In the multiple-element matrix, pseudo-unary matrix with solvent atoms with an average radius
ris used. Therefore, this
equation gives the average misﬁt strain in the pseudo-unary matrix. Apparently, this
equation is still not accurate since positions of solute atoms in the multiple-elementmatrix would have some deviations from the exact site of the average lattice.Therefore, better descriptions of lattice distortion are still the issue in the future.Furthermore, it should be mentioned that the lattice distortion is not only fromatomic size difference but also from bonding difference and crystal structuredifference among components. Assuming a case that distortion strain is only 1 %,the local atomic stress could be estimated to be around 0.01E (or ~0.01 /C28G/
3¼0.027 G) in tension and 0.0135G in shear for isotropic solid at every lattice site
where EandGare Young ’s modulus and shear modulus, respectively. As the
theoretical shear strength is about 0.039–0.11 Gand actual (or observed) shear
strength is orders of magnitude below that [ 22], in general lower than 0.001 G
[22], it can be realized that such a small distortion strain is still not negligible.
Furthermore, it is easy to ﬁnd that the critical lattice distortion above which localatomic stress exceeds theoretical shear strength ( /C24G/15) is /C245 %, supposing that
Hooke ’s law is still valid. This suggests that higher distortion would cause insta-
bility in forming random or disordered solid solution. But this is underestimated
since the lattice distortion of 6.6 % is empirically found to be the borderlinebetween disordered solid solution and other complex crystal structures, as discussedin Chap. 2. This indicates that the ﬁnal lattice distortion would be resulted from
some relaxation by adjusting relative atom positions in the lattice sites for the sakeof reducing the distortion energy and maintaining the local atomic stress balance.By this, the critical lattice distortion just for maintaining disordered solid solution,calculated by misﬁt strain concept, is relaxed to 6.6 %.
3. Evidences of lattice distortion effect
Severe lattice distortion not only affects properties but also reduces the thermal
effect on properties. Figure 3.2also shows that interactions will occur when
dislocations, electrons, phonons, and x-ray beams passing through the distortedlattice. In general, it can effectively increase hardness and strength by large solution58 J.-W. Yehhardening. For example, refractory MoNbTaW alloy and MoNbTaVW alloy have
Hv 4455 MPa and 5250 MPa, respectively. Their hardness values are three timesthat obtained by the mixture rule [ 23]. In addition, severe lattice distortion signif-
icantly decreases electrical and thermal conductivity since it can markedly scatterfree electrons and phonons [ 24]. For example, Lu et al. studied the thermal
diffusivity as a function temperature for four HEAs and pure Al as shown in
Fig.3.3. It was found that the slopes of thermal diffusivities of HEAs with respect
to temperature are positively small and thus insensitive to temperature whereasthose of conventional metal Al are negatively large and sensitive to temperature[25]. In x-ray diffraction, peak intensity largely decreases due to diffuse scattering
on the distorted atomic planes [ 18]. Lots of x-ray cannot fulﬁll Bragg ’s law during
diffraction and are scattered to the background. It is also noted that all theseproperties in HEAs become quite insensitive to temperature. This is explainablesince the lattice distortion caused by thermal vibration of atoms is relatively small
as compared with the severe lattice distortion [ 4,18].
3.2.3 Sluggish Diffusion Effect
Phase transformations in HEAs would require cooperative diffusion of many
different kinds of atoms to accomplish the partitioning of composition betweenphases. However, the vacancy concentration for substitutional diffusion isstill limited in HEAs as found in traditional alloys since each vacancy incrystalline HEAs is also associated with a positive enthalpy of formation and an
Fig. 3.3 Thermal diffusivities as a function of temperature for pure aluminum and HEA-a
(Al0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5), HEA-b(Al 0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5), HEA-c(Al 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5Mo 0.1), and
HEA-d(Al 0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5Mo 0.1)[25]3 Physical Metallurgy 59excess mixing entropy. The competition between these two factors yields a certain
equilibrium vacancy concentration with minimum free energy of mixing at a giventemperature [ 26]. A vacancy in the whole-solute matrix is in fact surrounded and
competed by different element atoms during diffusion. Either a vacancy or an atomwould have a ﬂuctuated diffusion path to migrate and have slower diffusion andhigher activation energy. As a result, diffusional phase transformation would beslower in HEAs. In brief, the sluggish diffusion effect implies slower diffusion andphase transformation.
1. Diffusion couple experiment on HEAs
Although there are many indirect evidences of sluggish diffusion effect, direct
diffusion measurement is more persuasive. In order to verify this effect, a near-idealsolution system of Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni with stable single FCC solid solution wasselected by Tsai et al. to do diffusion experiment [ 8]. Four quasi-binary diffusion
couples were made as listed in Table 3.3. In the two end members of each couple,
only two elements differed in concentration. The diffusion couple was tightly ﬁxed
in a molybdenum tube which was then sealed in a vacuum quartz tube. From the
concentration proﬁles obtained after diffusion at 1173, 1223, 1273, and 1323 K,diffusion coefﬁcients and activation energy were calculated. Figure 3.4shows the
temperature dependence of the diffusion coefﬁcient of a different element, reveal-ing that the sequence of elements in the order of decreasing diffusion rate was Mn,Cr, Fe, Co, and Ni. It was also found that diffusion coefﬁcients of each elements atT/T
min the Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni alloy system were the smallest in similar FCC
matrices including Fe-Cr-Ni(-Si) alloys and pure Fe, Co, and Ni metals (see
Fig.3.5). In addition, the melting-point-normalized activation energies, Q/Tm,i n
the HEA were the largest as shown in Fig. 3.6. It was also noted that for the same
element, the degree of sluggish diffusion is related to the number of principalelements in the matrix. For example, the Q/T
mvalues in the present HEAs are the
highest; those in Fe-Cr-Ni(-Si) alloys are the second; and those in pure metals arethe lowest. In brief, all these are direct evidences for the sluggish diffusion effect inHEAs.
2. Positive beneﬁts from sluggish diffusion effect
Sluggish diffusion effect might provide several important advantages as found in
many related researches [ 10,27–34]. They include easiness to get supersaturatedTable 3.3 The
concentrations of end
members of three
diffusion couples [ 8]Couple AlloyComposition (at.%)
Co Cr Fe Mn Ni
Cr/C0Mn 1 22 29 22 5 22
22 2 1 7 2 2 1 7 2 2
Fe/C0Co 3 33 23 11 11 22
41 1 2 3 3 3 1 1 2 2
Fe/C0Ni 5 23 24 30 11 12
62 3 2 4 1 2 1 1 3 060 J.-W. YehFig. 3.5 Temperature dependence of the diffusion coefﬁcients for Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni in
different matrices
Fig. 3.4 Temperature
dependence of the diffusion
coefﬁcients for Co, Cr, Fe,
Mn, and Ni obtained fromCo-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni diffusioncouple experiments [ 8]3 Physical Metallurgy 61state and ﬁne precipitates, increased recrystallization temperature, slower grain
growth, reduced particle coarsening rate, and increased creep resistance. These
advantages might beneﬁt microstructure and property control for better performance.For example, Liu et al. studied the grain growth of cold-rolled and annealed sheet ofCoCrFeMnNi HEA and found that activation energy is much higher than AISI304LN stainless steels, which is consistent with the sluggish diffusion effect [ 33].
3.2.4 Cocktail Effect
The term “multimetallic cocktails” was ﬁrst proposed by Ranganathan to empha-
size alloy pleasures in alloy design and development [ 35]. Although this effect is
also possessed by conventional alloys, cocktail effect is emphasized in HEAs
Fig. 3.6 Melting-point-
normalized activation
energy of diffusion for Cr,
Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni indifferent matrices [ 8]62 J.-W. Yehbecause at least ﬁve major elements are used to enhance the properties of materials.
As stated above, HEAs might have simple phase, two phases, three phases, or moredepending on the composition and processing. As a result, the whole properties are
from the overall contribution of the constituent phases by the effect of grain
morphology, grain-size distribution, grain and phase boundaries, and properties ofeach phase. However, each phase is a multi-principal-element solid solution andcan be regarded as atomic-scale composites. Its composite properties not only comefrom the basic properties of elements by the mixture rule but also from the mutualinteractions among all the elements and from the severe lattice distortion. Interac-tion and lattice distortion would bring excess quantities to the quantities predictedby the mixture rule. As a whole, “cocktail effect” ranges from atomic-scale multi-
principal-element composite effect to microscale multi-phase composite effect.
Therefore, it is important for an alloy designer to understand related factorsinvolved before selecting suitable composition and processes based on the cocktaileffect [ 4]. For example, refractory HEAs developed by Air Force Research Labo-
ratory have melting points very much higher than those of Ni-base and Co-basesuperalloys [ 23,29]. This is simply because refractory elements were selected as
constituent elements. By the mixture rule, quaternary alloy MoNbTaW and quinaryalloy MoNbTaVW have melting point above 2600
/C14C. As a result, both alloys
display much higher softening resistance than superalloys and have yield strength
above 400 MPa at 1600/C14C as shown in Fig. 3.7[29]. Such refractory HEAs are thus
also expected to have potential applications at very high temperatures. In anotherexample, Zhang et al. studied FeCoNi(AlSi)
0–0.8alloys for ﬁnding the composition
with the optimum combination of magnetic, electrical, and mechanical properties.The best was achieved in alloy FeCoNi(AlSi)
0.2with saturation magnetization
(1.15 T), coercivity (1400 A/m), electrical resistivity (69.5 μΩcm), yield strength
0200400600800100012001400
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600Yield Strength  (MPa)Inconel 718
Haynes 230
Temperature  (oC)Nb25Mo25Ta25W25
V20Nb20Mo20Ta20W20
Fig. 3.7 Temperature dependence of the yield stress of Nb 25Mo 25Ta25W25and
V20Nb20Mo 20Ta20W20HEAs and two superalloys, Inconel 718 and Haynes 230 [ 29]3 Physical Metallurgy 63(342 MPa), and strain without fracture (50 %), which makes the alloy an excellent
soft magnetic materials for many potential applications [ 36]. Obviously, this alloy
design relied on the selection of equimolar ferromagnetic elements (Fe, Co, and Ni)
for forming ductile FCC phase with higher atomic packing density than BCC and
suitable addition of nonmagnetic elements (Al and Si having slightly antiparallelmagnetic coupling with Fe, Co, and Ni) to increase lattice distortion. It led to apositive cocktail effect in achieving high magnetization, low coercivity, goodplasticity, high strength, and high electrical resistance.
3.3 Crystal Structures and Phase Transformation in HEAs
3.3.1 The Number of Crystal Structures in Alloy World
1. Mackey ’s statistical analysis on crystal number
In the periodic table, there are 80 metal elements and most of them are of three
simple structures: FCC, HCP, and BCC. However, there exist different kinds of ICsand IPs in binary alloys, as seen in binary phase diagrams. Moreover, more ternaryICs or IPs exist in lots of ternary alloy systems. Thus, it is easy to have the concept
that higher-order alloy systems would generate more ICs or IPs and an alloy with a
large number of elements would have many different kinds of ICs and IPs inequilibrium although Gibbs ’phase rule places the limitation for the maximum
number of phases. Is this right? Mackay has reported the statistics of inorganiccrystal structures in his paper entitled “On Complexity” [ 37]. He wrote “The
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database contains some 50,000 structures (many ofwhich are duplicated), which can be searched according to various parameters.Figure 3.1(i.e., Fig. 3.8in this chapter) shows a plot of the numbers of structures
containing 1, 2, 3, ...,Ndifferent elements. A cursory examination shows that
many of the structures with large values of Ncontain solid solutions, different
Fig. 3.8 Points denote the
numbers of inorganiccrystal structures with 1, 2,
3,....Ndifferent elements.
N¼3 has a maximum of
19,000. The line follows the
Planck distribution of
energy in an absolutelyblack body [ 34]. Three alloy
regions, LEAs, MEAs, and
HEAs , are indicated64 J.-W. Yehelements occupying the same sites, but the result is nevertheless clear. There is a
sharp limit to complexity.” He tried to explain this phenomenon by two approaches.One is “The problem could be considered thermodynamically. For example, a soup
of many elements does not produce very complex crystals but minimizes the
conﬁgurational entropy by forming ordered crystal of several simpler composi-tions.” The other is based on the similarity between Planck distribution of energy inan absolutely black body and the distribution of numbers of crystal structure:“In fact, in a one-dimensional crystal, the number of atoms in a repeat must be aninteger and similar effects are to be expected in three-dimensions. Space is “quan-tized” by atomicity, and not all dimensions of unit cells are possible.” As a result,the explanations for the distribution are still not clear and require further conﬁrma-
tion. On the other hand, if we select 2 elements from 80 metal elements in the
periodic table, there are 3160 combinations. Furthermore, the selection of 40 ele-ments from 80 metal elements give possible combinations with a number1.075 /C210
23, which is about one-sixth of an Avogadro ’s number. As there are
around 6500 inorganic crystal structures found from binary systems and 19,000structures from ternary systems (see Fig. 3.8), it could be expected that the number
of crystal structure would be huge by extrapolation. It has been estimated that thenumber of compounds for metal systems could be up to 10
90, which exceed the
number of atoms, around 1080, in the universe. Thus, the number of compounds is
inconceivable except some factors interfere with this extrapolation.
2. Entropy and dilution effects on the statistical distribution of crystal number
What are the interfering factors? Considering the high-entropy effect in HEAs,
high entropy is thought to be one important factor to interfere those factors whichcause the formation of compounds such as larger atomic size difference whichpromotes size-factor compounds with highest-neighboring atoms to maximize bond
number and also lower the strain energy, valence bonding which promotes valence
compounds to maximize the ionic and/or covalent bond strength and satisfy thevalence balance, and certain valence electron concentration ( e/a) ranges which
stabilize electron phases [ 38,39]. Entropy effect can be seen in binary and ternary
systems. It can enhance the substitution in compounds between different elementswith similar chemical features. As the electronegativity and valence of elements inthe same group or close groups of the periodic table generally have close chemicalfeature, the substitution is common. It is apparent that this partial substitution is
favored by increasing mixing entropy with some gain or loss in mixing enthalpy
depending on the substituting element. For example, NiAl compound (with B2crystal structure) has a range of composition (also called as NiAl intermediatephase) in Ni-Al phase diagram. By alloying, Co and Pt can substitute a portion ofNi, and Ti and Ta can substitute a portion of Al in the compounds. By the samereason, even high mixing entropy in high-order compositions could enhance thesubstitution and the mixing in the compounds. This means the ability to accommo-date more elements in compounds to form IPs could consume a portion of compo-
nents. Besides compounds, similar substitution and consumption also occur in the
terminal phases based on the component ’s structures. Furthermore, there is a3 Physical Metallurgy 65dilution effect in high-order alloy such as HEAs. For equiatomic quinary alloys in
which each component possesses 20 % in atomic concentration, its tendency toform compounds is lower since the ratio in A
xBy-type compounds is often 2:5, 3:4,
1:1, 4:3, or 2:5. Only the ratios, 2:5 and 5:2, are possible except the cases in which
the components could be grouped into two and form pseudo-binary alloys. Even forthis, solution-type compounds (or IPs) are formed due to high-entropy effect.Therefore, in high-order alloys such as HEAs, high-entropy and dilution effectcould enhance the formation of solution-type phase including terminal solid solu-tions or IPs. This is the main reason, as referred to Fig. 3.8, why there are a sharp
decrease in the number of crystal structures with four elements and a furtherdecrease with elements more than four. It is noted that the number of crystal
structure with more than eight elements is nearly at the same level of that with
one element. As observed by Mackay, many of the structures with large values ofNcontain solid solutions, different elements occupying the same sites. This is
clearly the evidence to support the above explanation based on high-entropy anddilution effects.
What is the entropy effect on the shape of crystal number distribution? The large
decrease in the number of crystal structures in fact echoes the deﬁnition of HEAsemphasizing the number of major elements being at least ﬁve. Two lines are set in
the plot of Fig. 3.8to mark the degree of entropy effect. Mixing entropy is
pronounced for crystal structures with at least ﬁve elements, moderately pro-nounced for those with three to ﬁve elements and less pronounced for those withone or two elements. As a result, the fast increase of crystal structure number fromone element to three elements is due to weaker entropy effect, the slowdown andconcave-down are due to increased entropy effect from three to ﬁve elements, andfurther decrease to small number after ﬁve elements is related to strong entropyeffect. In brief, the distribution curve can be related to entropy effect. This corre-
lation explains the classiﬁcation of alloy world into HEAs, MEAs, and LEAs based
on the number of major elements [ 3]. Based on the above reasons, it can be
expected that most crystal structures in HEAs are also found in LEAs or MEAs.Furthermore, a lot of crystals are of BCC, FCC, and HCP solid solutions sinceterminal phases of 80 elements almost belong to three kinds of structures: FCC,HCP, and BCC.
3.3.2 Factors Affecting Solubility Between Metal Elements
According to crystallography [ 40], a lattice is a regular periodic array of points in
space. The crystal structure is formed when a basis of atoms (atom or a group ofatoms or ions) is attached identically to every lattice point. This can be expressed as
Lattice þbasis ¼crystal structure ð3:2Þ
where every basis is identical in composition, arrangement, and orientation.66 J.-W. YehHume-Rothery (H-R) rules are rules in judging the mutual solubility of the two
elements at high temperatures in substitutional solid solution of a binary alloy. Forexample, the solubilities of Ni, Co, Cr, Mo, and Si in Fe are regarded as larger than
15 at.% although their solubility is much lower than 15 at.% at room temperature
[41]. He is the ﬁrst to propose three empirical rules to explain the formation of solid
solutions in 1920s. [ 42,43]: (1) the atomic sizes of the solvent and solute must not
differ by more than 15 %, (2) the electrochemical nature of the two elements mustbe similar, and (3) a higher-valent metal is more soluble in a lower-valent metalthan vice versa. Through a number of latter research, H-R rule are generally statedas [44]:
1. The radii of the solute and solvent atoms must not differ by more than about 15 %:
For complete solubility, the atomic size difference should be less than 8 %.
2. The crystal structures of the two elements must be the same for extended solid
solubility.
3. Extended solubility occurs when the solvent and solute have the same valency.
4. The two elements should have similar electronegativity so that intermetallic
compounds will not form.
Therefore, the similarity and difference of crystal structure, valence, electroneg-
ativity, and atomic size are considered to affect the maximum solubility which
occurs in the high temperature range below solidus line as seen in phase diagrams.For example, Cu-Ag system has an atomic size difference of 12.5 %(r
Cu¼0.128 nm, rAg¼0.145 nm [ 40]), same electronegativity (Cu and Ag are
both 1.9), same crystal structure (both are FCC), and small difference in valences(+1 for Ag and +1 and +2 for Cu). Thus, due to its atomic size difference larger than8 %, the maximum solubility of Ag in Cu at 779
/C14C is 8 wt.% (~5 at.%) and that of
Cu in Ag is 8.8 wt.% (~14.3 at.%).
Alonso and Simozar [ 41] have correlated the mixing enthalpy, atomic size
difference, and maximum solubility quite well. In fact, mixing enthalpy can beregarded as the result of interaction between two elements, which have been moreprecisely treated by Miedema model using work function, the electron density ofthe Wigner-Seitz cell, and molar volume of the two elements. This parameter isobviously better than crystal structure, electronegativity, and valence between twoelements in the solubility prediction [ 41,45]. However, mixing entropy hasn ’t been
considered as a factor in the solubility prediction although it is known to have a
contribution of /C0TΔSto the mixing free energy. This neglect might be due to the
thinking that binary alloys have low mixing entropy as compared with mixingenthalpy. In fact, mixing entropy is still important at high temperatures. Co-Crbinary system is an example. Although Co is FCC at above 810
/C14C and Cr is BCC,
the mutual solubility is very high (37 wt.%Cr in Co side and 56.1 wt.%Co in Cr sideat 1395
/C14C). This could not be explained adequately with H-R rules since they are
different in crystal structure, atomic size (Co, 0.125 nm, and Cr, 0.128 nm), andelectronegativity (Co, 1.7, and Cr, 1.6) and quite different in valence (Co, +2 and
+3; Cr, +3, +4, and +6). Obviously, mixing entropy could relax the strictness of H-R
rules. In HEAs, there are many examples which reveal the relaxation of H-R rules.3 Physical Metallurgy 67That means large mutual solubilities in BCC and FCC solid solutions and partially
ordered solid solutions with compound structures at high temperatures are often
found in those alloys not fulﬁlling the rules, such as in AlCoCrCuFeNi [ 10],
AlCrCuFeMnNi [ 46], CoCrFeMnNi [ 7,8], and HfNbTaTiZr [ 9]. This is also why
most of the phase formation criteria for HEAs discussed in Chap. 2already consider
high-entropy effect for the extended solubility.
3.3.3 Phase Transformation in Different Processing
for HEAs
1. High-entropy effect on phase evolution from liquid state
High-entropy effect plays an important role on the phase transformation of
HEAs. It should be reminded that mixing entropy is compared at the liquid solution
or random solid-solution state in the deﬁnition of HEAs. That means HEAs have
high mixing entropy at such states as compared with those of conventional alloys.
Why high mixing entropy at such states is emphasized? Figure 3.9shows the typical
phase evolution during solidiﬁcation and cooling [ 4]. If an alloy has high mixing
entropy, simple solid-solution phases will form at high temperatures due to the
large TΔSmix. During subsequent cooling, mixing entropy become less important
and short-range ordering, long-range ordering, or even precipitation of second
phases might occur. But sluggish diffusion effect may either yield ﬁne precipitates
or inhibit precipitation depending on alloys and processing, which is important for
improving mechanical properties. Santodonato et al. studied the evolution of
structure, microstructure, phase composition, long-range ordering, short-range
ordering, and conﬁgurational entropy of Al 1.3CoCrCuFeNi HEA from room tem-
perature to above 1315/C14C by using atom probe tomography, SEM, TEM, EDS,
EBSD, neutron diffraction, synchrotron x-ray powder diffraction, and ab initio
molecular dynamics simulation [ 10,47]. At above 1315/C14C, the alloy becomes
100 % liquid, with some preferred nearest-neighbor pair correlations: Al-Ni, Cr-Fe,
and Cu-Cu. At 1230–1315/C14C, Cu-rich liquid plus BCC crystals (Al 1.3CoCrCu 1-zFeNi)
with chemical short-range order are obt ained. Total conﬁgurational entropy of
Fig. 3.9 Phase evolution during solidiﬁcation and cooling of HEAs [ 4]68 J.-W. YehBCC phase is 1.73 R/C20ΔSconf/C201.79Rcalculated by the phase composition and
degree of ordering. At 1080–1230/C14C, 95 % B2 phase (Al 1.3CoCrCu 0.7FeNi) and
5 % Cu-rich liquid are obtained. The total conﬁgurational entropy of B2 phase is
1.63R/C20ΔSconf/C201.73R. At 600–1080/C14C, 85 % B2 phase (Al 1.3CoCrCu 0.1FeNi)
plus 10 % Cu-rich rod FCC phase and 5 % Cu-r ich interdendrite are obtained. The
total conﬁgurational entropy of B2 phase is ΔSconf¼1.50R. At room temperature
to 600/C14C, 84 % spinodal BCC/B2 (Co 0.2CrFe 0.5/Al1.3Co0.8Fe0.5Ni) plus 16 %
various Cu-rich FCC phases are obtained . The total conﬁgurational entropy is
0.89R. They concluded that when the alloy undergoes elemental segregation,
precipitation, chemical ordering, and spinodal decomposition with decreased
temperature, a signiﬁcant amount of disor der remains due to the distributions of
multiple elements in the major phases . That means an enhancement of the overall
disorder due to the entropy effect still exi sts at room temperature as reﬂected by the
multi-principal-element c omposition in most phases.
Conversely, if multi-principal-element alloys do not have high mixing entropy at
high temperatures, intermetallic phases would form at high temperatures. And insubsequent cooling, the microstructure would become even more complex. Suchcomplex microstructures obviously become very difﬁcult to understand and manip-ulate and very brittle to be utilized. Therefore, the fortune to avoid the complexity at
low temperatures essentially comes from the high-entropy effect which is ampliﬁed
by high temperature and becomes stronger in competing with mixing enthalpies ofintermetallic compounds.
How about the phase diagrams of HEAs? Due to high-entropy effect involved,
phase diagram of a HEA system in the composition hyperspace may not be toocomplicated. Single-phase region, two-phase region, and three-phase region mightexist. Each region has their composition and temperature range. Thus, if the phasediagram of a HEA system is known, the equilibrium phases of a composition in the
system can be predicted. Figure 3.10 shows the approximate phase diagrams of
different alloy series of Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Mo-Ni system [ 48]. Each diagram was
obtained by investigating an alloy series varied with the content of one elementwith SEM, TEM, room-temperature and high-temperature x-ray diffractometer, anddifferential thermal analyzer (DTA). Taking the AlCoCrFeMo
0.5Ni as an example,
three phases, FCC + B2 + σ, coexist at 1000/C14C and two phases, B2 + σ, coexist at
400/C14C. From the viewpoint of thermodynamics, the two and three solid solutions
would have lower free energies than that of the single random solid-solution phase.
Figure 3.11 shows the schematic curves of mixing Gibbs ’free energy at 400 and
1000/C14C, respectively, for such a comparison. Although the mixing free energy for
each solid solution and thus the overall mixing free energy were not calculated dueto their complexity and almost impossible to take a common tangent plane for theequilibrium compositions in the hyperspace, the role of high mixing entropy infurther lowering free energy of solution-type phase from pure elements or com-pounds is obvious in the ﬁgure. That is to say that an existence of a mixture ofseveral multi-principal-element solution phases in equilibrium is still a result of
high-entropy effect.3 Physical Metallurgy 692. Lattice distortion and sluggish diffusion effects on solid-state transformation
What factors affect phase transformation? Phase transformation has two
categories: diffusional type and diffusionless type. Diffusion type one includes
solidiﬁcation, eutectic reaction, eutectoid reaction, precipitation, spinodal decom-
position, ordering transformation, and dissolution as found in phase diagram when
cooling or heating is exerted. In addition, long holding time at high temperatures
Fig. 3.10 Schematic phase diagrams of different alloy systems: ( a)A l uCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni, (b)
AlCo vCrFeMo 0.5Ni, (c) AlCoCr wFeMo 0.5Ni, (d) AlCoCrFe xMo 0.5Ni, (e) AlCoCrFeMo yNi, and
(f) AlCoCrFeMo 0.5Nizalloys [ 48]70 J.-W. Yehwill cause grain coarsening and Oswald ripening of second phase particles. One
example of diffusionless type one is martensitic transformation. Up to 2015, HEAs
have provided many examples for different diffusional phase transformations in theliterature. However, examples for martensitic transformation are still rare. Nucle-ation and growth are commonly seen in addition to spinodal transformation. Innucleation-and-growth transformation process, surface energy required to form anucleus results in the nucleation energy barrier for an embryo to become a stablenucleus. In addition, free energy difference between new and old phases (or newstate and old state) provides driving force for the transformation. Because lattice
distortion affects interfacial energy and driving force, and sluggish diffusion affects
nucleation rate and growth rate, their detailed effects need to be considered for eachHEA. But, the general trend of these effects will be considered and explained inSects. 3.4,3.5,3.6and3.7.
3. Lattice distortion and sluggish diffusion effects under severe deformation or
extremely high cooling rate
What is the lattice distortion and sluggish diffusion effects under severe defor-
mation and extremely high cooling rate? Mechanical alloying and sputtering
deposition are easy ways to obtain non-equilibrium simple solid solutions due tothe kinetic reason by which sufﬁcient long-range diffusion is inhibited. In additionto crystalline structures, amorphous structure is especially easy to form either bymechanical alloying [ 49–52] and by sputtering deposition from HEA targets
[31,53] since atomic size difference required to form amorphous structure is
smaller than that required for solidiﬁcation route. Egami ’s criterion based on
topological instability is suitable to explain which compositions tend to form
amorphous solid because the alloy synthesized by mechanical alloying or sputtering
deposition is directly formed from elemental state [ 51]. His criterion is that
topological instability would happen when the critical volume expansion, 6.3 %,
Fig. 3.11 Schematic curves of mixing Gibbs ’free energy for the AlCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni alloy at
(a) 673 K and ( b) 1273 K [ 49]3 Physical Metallurgy 71by atoms of different sizes is exceeded [ 51,54,55]. It has been found that diverse
atomic size in HEAs enhances the topological stability and sluggish diffusion ofHEAs is helpful in freezing the atom conﬁguration and avoiding crystallization.
The combination of a deposition temperature at 400–500
/C14C and a deposition time
1 h is still easy to obtain the HEA amorphous ﬁlms with lesser atomic sizedifference. On the other hand, by solidiﬁcation route, stricter alloy design isrequired for obtaining amorphous structure by rapid solidiﬁcation with at leastone dimension very small in thickness or by moderate cooling with bulk forms.Because nucleation and growth of solid phases should be involved during thecooling through freezing range, compositions near deep eutectic composition andfulﬁlling Inoue ’s rules tend to have high glass formability [ 56]. Another viewpoint
to increase the glass formability relates with confusion principle which says more
components will have a lower chance to select viable crystal structures and thushave greater glass formability [ 57–60]. To summarize the general factors for
forming amorphous structure, increased atomic size difference, negative mixingenthalpy, number of components, and deviation in crystal structures could increasethe glass formability of a solid solution [ 54–60].
3.4 Defects and Defect Energies in HEAs
3.4.1 Defects in Distorted Lattice and Origin of Defect
Energy
It is well known that even in very pure crystals, it is inevitable to have a certain
amount of crystal defects such as vacancies and impurity atoms, which exist at leastbecause of their contribution in mixing entropy. In addition, during preparation ofmaterials, dislocations and grain boundaries and even voids are easily to beintroduced into the materials. In HEAs, their structure could be either amorphousstructure or crystal structure which depends on the composition and process used. Inamorphous structure with multiple elements, residual strain energy might existsince atoms in the structure could suffer from atomic-scale compressive or tensile
stress although there is no net stress to cause plastic ﬂow. This stress is different
from the external applied stress or residual stress balanced in a long-range scale.Residual distortion energy in amorphous structure could be relaxed to a lower levelif suitable thermal energy is provided, such as annealing at below glass transitiontemperature. In crystal structure with multiple elements, the crystal lattice isdistorted due to the difference in atomic size, crystal structure tendency, andchemical bonding as discussed in Sect. 3.2.2 . Any atom at a lattice site might
have position deviation from exact lattice site. In addition, the electron conﬁgura-
tion around the atom has no symmetry as compared with that of crystal structure of
pure component. All the deviation and non-symmetry depends on its neighboringatoms. Apparently, such a severe lattice distortion, i.e., distortion exists every-where, affects phase stability, microstructure, and properties.72 J.-W. YehTopologically, strain and strain energy might be used to describe the degree of
lattice distortion in the whole-solute lattice. Because vacancies, dislocations,
stacking faults, twins, and grain boundaries are all formed from the lattice, the
atomic conﬁguration of these defects would be different between pure lattice andwhole-solute lattice with distortion. In addition, the energy level of distorted latticewould be higher than pure lattice without distortion if average chemical bonding isthe same. In other words, the deviation of energy level of a kind of defect from theenergy level of distorted lattice would be smaller than its deviation from that of purelattice. This concept could be realized from the typical textbook on phase transfor-mation [ 61]. The origin of interface energy is discussed in the book. It says, as
shown in Fig. 3.12, “The free energy of a system containing an interface of area
Aand free energy γper unit area is given by G¼G
0þAγwhere G0is the free
energy of the system assuming that all material in the system has the properties ofthe bulk— γis therefore the excess free energy arising from the fact that some
material lies in or close to the interface. It is also the work that must be done atconstant TandPto create unit area of interface.” Another textbook on thermody-
namics of solids [ 62] also says, “The interface is a site of disturbance on an atomic
scale, since the environment of atoms at the interface is not regular as it is in the
interior of the phase. As a result, to increase the area of an interface, work must be
expended by the system.” Although this concept is for interfacial energy, it issimilarly applied to the energy of other defects since all these other defects aregenerated by doing work from the distorted lattice.
The energies of vacancies, dislocations, stacking faults, twin boundaries, and
high-angle grain boundaries in most pure metals have been well established in theliterature. Table 3.4selects typical examples of FCC metals, Al, Cu, Ag, Au, and Ni
and lists their values for comparison. In the multiple-principal-element matrix, the
lattice distortion energy would increase the energy level of the distorted lattice and
thus reduce the defect energy from the undistorted lattice to a lower level. There-fore, it is important to estimate the distortion energy so that the importance ofdistortion energy in affecting defect energy could be determined. The estimationwill be presented in the next section.
Fig. 3.12 A portion of material is shown, which contains an interface with interface area A. Total
free energy Gis equal to G0+γA, where γis the excess free energy per unit interface area arising
from the generation of the interface3 Physical Metallurgy 733.4.2 Lattice Distortion and Distortion Energy
In Sect. 3.2.2 , it was discussed that besides atom size difference, different bonding
energies and crystal structure tendencies among constituent elements also increaselattice distortion. The lattice distortion energy due to atomic size difference hasbeen formulated in the literature. However, the effects of crystal structure differ-ence, bonding difference, and the extent of lattice relaxation on distortion energyare still difﬁcult to estimate in a quantitative way. Nevertheless, the lattice distor-tion energy could increase the lattice energy level due to chemical bonding energy.In other words, lattice energy level per mole is equal to the sum of that contributed
by chemical bonding and lattice strain per mole:
U
lattice ,per mole ¼Ubonding ,per mole þUstrain ,per mole ð3:3Þ
The common calculation of distortion strain is the average misﬁt strain by using
Eq.3.1. It was also mentioned that actual lattice distortion is not as large as
predicted by misﬁt strain. There would have relaxation process to adjust the atomicconﬁguration in the lattice so that local stress balance and overall minimum freeenergy could be reached at the equilibrium state. The lattice for such an atomicconﬁguration is just the average lattice as measured by XRD method. Therefore, the
lattice strain of this atomic conﬁguration should be based on the average lattice. The
calculation of lattice distortion strain and strain energy was proposed by Huanget al. who investigated inhibition mechanism why original grain-size strengtheningof high-entropy AlCrNbSiTiV nitride ﬁlm with NaCl-type structure in theas-deposited state changes little, even after annealing at 1000
/C14C for 5 h [ 20].
They calculated the strain and strain energy based on the average lattice constant ofaverage lattice measured by XRD. The strain caused by a component is thedeviation between its lattice constant at the pure component state and the experi-
mental average lattice constant. This calculation is based on the tendency that each
component would take their original lattice if no constraint for local atomic stressbalance and minimum free energy is exerted. The ﬁtting of their original lattices toTable 3.4 The energies of vacancies, dislocations, stacking faults, twin boundaries, and
high-angle grain boundaries in FCC metals: Al, Cu, Ag, Au, and Ni
ElementVacancies
(kJ/mole)
[63,64]Dislocation Gb2[65]
Stackingfault
(mJ/m
2)
[66]Coherent
twinboundary
(mJ/m
2)
[66]High-angle
grainboundary
(mJ/m
2)
[66]G
(GPa) b(nm)Gb2
(10/C09J/m)
Al 72.5 26.1 0.286 2.1 166 75 324
Cu 96.1 48.3 0.255 3.1 78 24 625
Ag 105 30.3 0.289 2.5 22 8 375
Au 92.5 27.0 0.288 2.2 45 15 378Ni 138 76.0 0.249 4.7 128 43 86674 J.-W. Yehaverage lattice brings about the strain energy. Thus, by assuming average strain
energy per unit volume is U0, and per atom, U0, per atom , the following equations
could be obtained under the hypothesis of isotropic elastic solids:
U0¼1
2ε2
xEþ1
2ε2
yEþ1
2ε2
zE; ð3:4Þ
ε2
x¼ε2
y¼ε2
z¼X
ixiε2
i; ð3:5Þ
εi¼ai/C0aexp
aexp; ð3:6Þ
and
U0,per atom ¼U0
ρv; ð3:7Þ
where Eis Young ’s modulus; εx,εy, and εzare strains in the [100], [010], and [001]
directions, respectively; εiis the lattice strain from component i;xiis the molar
fraction of component i;aiis the lattice constant of component i;aexpis average
lattice constant of the whole-solute lattice obtained by XRD method; and ρvis the
mole number density.
By using the above equation to calculate the distortion energy of AlCrNbSiTiV
nitride ﬁlm with NaCl-type structure, it is successful to explain low driving forcefor subgrain growth and grain growth and also the actual subgrain size and grainsize observed with TEM. The agreement suggests the distortion energy calculationis persuasive.
As an example for the calculation, an equimolar alloy series from Ni, NiCo,
NiCoFe, NiCoFeCr, and CoNiFeCrMn alloy with single FCC structure is used. The
basic features of the elements used in this alloy series are listed as Table 3.5[67].
In the table, the atomic radius and lattice constants are of FCC structure, in whichthose of non-FCC Cr and Mn, although not found directly in the literature, have
been calculated using the equation: a
FCC¼4ri=ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
, where riis the atomic radius of
element iin 12-coordinated metals as listed in the table. Average lattice constants
measured by XRD and Burgers ’vector, Young ’s modulus measured by tensile test,
and density measured by Archimedes ’method for the alloy series are listed in
Table 3.5 Properties of constituent elements in Ni-Co-Fe-Cr-Mn alloy series [ 67]
Element Ni Co Fe Cr Mn
Crystal structure (20/C14C) FCC HCP BCC BCC SC
Atomic radius, ri(Å) 1.25 1.25 1.27 1.28 1.26
Lattice constant, ai(Å) 3.524 3.544 3.555 3.620 3.564
Melting point (/C14C) 1455 1495 1538 1863 12443 Physical Metallurgy 75Table 3.6[68]. Based on this and Eqs. 3.4and3.7, we can calculate the distortion
energies also listed in Table 3.6. It can be seen that the distortion energy increases
with increased addition of element. Although Mn does not have the largest latticeconstant, distortion energy still increases after its addition.
3.4.3 Vacancies
In HEAs, what is the formation enthalpy of vacancy? Is the vacancy concentrationinﬂuenced by high mixing entropy? How about the diffusivity of vacancy? All theseanswers are important for understanding the kinetics of phase transformation andcreep behaviors.
It is well known that vacancies are inevitable in materials because of entropy
reason. The formation of a vacancy by removing an atom would destroy the bondswith its neighboring atoms and thus raise the energy state with an increase, ΔH
v,i n
enthalpy although some relaxation would occur. Besides, the formation would also
be associated with an excess entropy ΔSvmainly by vibrational randomness around
vacancy. However, an amount of vacancy would increase the conﬁguration entropyby conﬁgurational randomness. For a pure metal, it can be derived that there exists acritical concentration at which the total free energy of mixing is minimum [ 26].
Consider a crystal containing N
0atoms and Nvvacancies, the free energy change
from perfect crystal without vacancies could be written as
G/C0G0¼NvΔHv/C0kTlnN0þNv ðÞ !=N0!Nv! ½/C138 /C0 NvTΔSv ð3:8Þ
where kis Boltzmann ’s constant. Using Stirling ’s approximation and
rearrangement,Table 3.6 Related data of Ni-Co-Fe-Cr-Mn alloy series
Metals Ni NiCo NiCoFe NiCoFeCr NiCoFeCrMn
Lattice constant, aavg(Å) 3.524 3.534 3.541 3.561 3.561
Lattice constant, aexp(Å) 3.524 3.532 3.569 3.589 3.612
Burgers ’vector, b(Å) 2.492 2.498 2.524 2.538 2.554
Young ’s modulus, E(GPa) 199.5 183.4 /C65.4 162.3 /C62.2 232.9 /C63.2 168.4 /C65.8
Shear modulus, G(GPa) 76.0 69.6 62.1 90.8 66.0
Density, ρv(mole/cm3) 0.150 0.149 0.146 0.144 0.140X
ixiε2
i(/C210/C04) 0 0.08 0.74 1.63 2.76
U0 per mole (J) 0 15.4 123 396 500
U0 per atom (/C210/C022J) 0 0.26 2.0 6.6 8.376 J.-W. YehG/C0G0¼NvΔHv/C0kT N 0þNv ðÞ lnN0þNv ðÞ /C0 N0lnN0/C0NvlnNv ½/C138
/C0NvTΔSv ð3:9Þ
Since dG/C0G0 ðÞ =dNv¼0 at equilibrium and N0is very small, it leads to the
equilibrium vacancy concentration
Xv¼Nv=N0þNv ðÞ ¼ eΔSv=kTe/C0ΔHv=kT¼e/C0ΔGv=kTð3:10Þ
How about the vacancy concentration in HEAs? Consider the simplest case, an
equimolar random ideal solid solution with nmetal elements which have the same
atomic size, then the above equation becomes
Gh/C0G0h¼NvhΔHvh/C0kT N 0þNvh ðÞ lnN0þNvh ðÞ /C0 N0lnN0=nðÞ /C0 NvhlnNvh ½/C138
/C0NvhTΔSvh
ð3:11Þ
Since dG h/C0G0h ðÞ =dNv¼0 at equilibrium and N0is very small, it leads to the
equilibrium vacancy concentration
Xvh¼Nvh=N0þNvh ðÞ ¼ eΔSvh=kTe/C0ΔHvh=kT¼e/C0ΔGvh=kTð3:12Þ
Therefore, the number of elements does not alter the equation form of vacancy
concentration for pure metal. For a non-equimolar and non-ideal solid solution inwhich atomic size and bonding are different between elements, the equation form isstill the same except using its own excess enthalpy, excess entropy, and excess freeenergy. This demonstrates that the equation of vacancy concentration for eachsolid-solution phase of HEAs is essentially the same as that for pure metals. Doeslattice distortion of multiple-element matrix affect the excess enthalpy? The answeris that lattice distortion would be very small and negligible since lattice distortion
energy per mole of atoms as shown in Table 3.6is far below the heat of formation of
vacancy per mole. The largest distortion energy, 500 J/mole, of quinary alloy isabout ﬁve thousandth of the formation enthalpy of vacancy as seen in Table 3.4.
This is reasonable because the formation of a vacancy needs to break chemicalbonds with its neighboring atoms whereas lattice distortion only changes bondlength or angle. In brief, the concept of vacancy concentration for conventionalalloys still holds for HEAs.
3.4.4 Solutes
Solute atoms come from the impurity inherent from the extraction and fabricationprocesses or intended alloying from initial alloy design for improving properties. InHEAs, most phases are of solid solutions (disordered or partially ordered). In each3 Physical Metallurgy 77solid solution, a variety of elements are mixed in the matrix which can be regarded
as a whole-solute matrix. Larger atoms are mostly in compressive strain or stresswhereas smaller atoms mostly are in tensile strain or stress. Thus, each lattice point
of the whole-solute matrix has atomic-scale lattice strain and the whole lattice
suffers severe lattice distortion as compared with conventional lattice with a majorelement. As mentioned previously, besides atomic size effect, different crystalstructure tendencies and different bondings among unlike neighboring atomswould inﬂuence atomic position and cause further distortion. However, due to thetendency to lower the total free energy, lattice strain at each site would be relaxedby adjusting the relative positions of neighboring atoms.
1. Stress ﬁeld around an atom
Despite the relaxation, the atomic-scale stresses exist in the whole-solute
matrix. Egami has pointed out the existence [ 54,55]. Even in amorphous struc-
ture, such atomic-scale stresses still ex ist. Although such atomic-scale stress
varies from site to site in the lattice, some in compression and some in tension,local balance between their stresses should be attained in the steady state. That is,their overall contribution to microscal e or macroscale stress is zero on average
basis. Because the stress ﬁeld around a s olute atom would be shielded or elimi-
nated by the stress ﬁeld of surrounding atoms, the long-range atomic stress of
any atom would be small. That is, the stress around an atom is atomic scale orshort range.
2. Distortion effect on lattice constant
As the whole-solute matrix of HEA solid solution is a mixture of various
elements, the lattice constant of the real crystal structure would have some relationwith the lattice constant of pure element. For the simplest case of random solid
solution, is Vegard ’s law valid? Vegard ’s law in a binary A-B solid solution can be
expressed as
a
AB¼1/C0xðÞ aAþxaB ð3:13Þ
where xis the fraction of component B. Vegard ’s law can be regarded as the rule of
mixtures, which was proposed based on his observation on continuous solid solu-tion of ionic salts, such as KCl-KBr. However, this law is not strictly obeyed bymetallic solid solutions [ 6]. But the reason for the deviation is still unclear. For this,
we need to consider the effects of lattice distortion and excess chemical bonding. It
is proposed that lattice distortion could expand the average lattice predicted by
Vegard ’s law and stronger excess chemical bonding would give shorter bond length
and thus smaller lattice constant. The superposition of these two main effectsdetermines the real lattice constant. For the ﬁrst effect, let ’s consider the equilib-
rium structure without lattice distortion and used pure Ni as example. Figure 3.13a
shows the equilibrium case in which atoms in pure Ni are in their equilibriumpositions at the minimum of potential well, bond strengths are maximized, and itslattice constant attains the minimum. Figure 3.13b shows the perturbation case. In78 J.-W. Yehthis structure, any offset of an atom from the minimum of potential well would
decrease local bond strength and increase overall bond length or lattice constant.In other words, a distorted lattice with zigzag atomic directions and planes woulddisturb the original equilibrium lattice to have a certain expansion of volume.In the extreme case, amorphous solid could have a lower density than crystallinesolid by 0.3–0.5 %.
This thinking could be applied to binary solid solution. Because the average
lattice predicted by Vegard ’s law is a linear combination of two component lattices
and total free energy would be raised by atomic size difference or other differences
in electrochemical properties, a certain offset from the composite minimum posi-tion of potential well is needed in order to relax total free energy. Under such alattice distortion, the effective bond strength is reduced and lattice constant isincreased. Similarly, for Ni-Co-Fe-Cr-Mn alloy series which is near-ideal FCC
solid solution, the lattice distortion ε
2
x¼ε2
y¼ε2
z¼X
ixiε2
iincreases with
increased number of elements explaining why the lattice constant of real crystal
structure generally has more deviation from that predicted by Vegard ’s law.
The deviations from binary to quinary alloys are /C05.66/C210/C04, 7.91 /C210/C03,
7.86/C210/C03, and 1.43 /C210/C02, respectively (see Table 3.6). It should be mentioned
that the quinary alloy has a negative mixing enthalpy /C04.16 kJmol/C01which would
reduce bond length and thus lattice constant. Hence, the increased lattice constants
as compared with ideal average lattice constant indeed give a strong suggestion thatlattice distortion has the effect to expand the lattice (see the quinary alloy inFig.3.14).
Fig. 3.13 (a) Equilibrium structure of pure Ni without lattice distortion and ( b) expanded
structure of pure Ni with lattice distortion3 Physical Metallurgy 793.4.5 Dislocations
1. Lattice distortion and pinning effect on dislocation energy
Dislocations exist in metals by various sources including nucleation and growth
of solid during solidiﬁcation and cooling, collapse of quenched vacancies, stressconcentration, and multiplication of dislocation sources [ 69]. However, due to
severe lattice distortion in the whole-solute matrix, dislocation energy, typicallywritten as Gb
2for conventional alloys ( G, shear modulus; b, Burgers ’vector),
needs to be modiﬁed by considering two factors: the interaction between disloca-
tions and surrounding atoms and lattice distortion energy level. If no interaction
occurs between dislocations and nearby atoms, the stress ﬁeld equations are thesame as that in a perfect lattice in the literature [ 69]. However, interaction would
occur for the sake of reducing total energy if thermal activation and time aresufﬁcient to let ﬂexible dislocation and nearby atoms to adjust their relative positionto lower total energy and form dislocation atmosphere. Since this adjustment doesnot require long-range diffusion and could be achieved by pipe diffusion in the corewith the abundant solutes everywhere, such an adjustment within several atomic
distances is possible at relatively lower temperature than that for conventional
alloys. This is unique for HEAs since conventional matrix with one major elementwould require long-range diffusion to attract solutes from faraway regions towarddislocation cores and thus higher temperature to enhance the diffusion to formatmospheres.
The core radius of a dislocation, in which stress and strain do not follow linear
elastic mechanics, is usually thought to be 5b (i.e., 5 atoms in the radius), and thestress built up in the core is theoretical stress which is around Gb/30 [70]. This core
energy could account for one-tenth of dislocation energy [ 69,70]. In the core, large
atoms such as Cr and Fe could migrate into tensile region beneath the edgedislocation whereas smaller atoms could diffuse into compressive region just
Fig. 3.14 (a) Equilibrium structure of CoCrFeMnNi without lattice distortion and ( b) expanded
structure of CoCrFeMnNi with lattice distortion80 J.-W. Yehabove dislocation line through fast dislocation-pipe diffusion, as shown in Fig. 3.15.
Although such a rearrangement could release the overall energy, the stress ﬁeldaround a dislocation is essentially unchanged because it is a long-range ﬁeld formedinitially with dislocation and not affected by the short-range interaction in the core.
On the other hand, lattice distortion could reduce the effective energy of
dislocations since the defect energy is a relative difference of the energy levelbetween defects (vacancy, dislocation, grain boundary, and surface) and lattice.
This means when we create the defect by doing work, the work would be smaller in
distorted lattice than in perfect lattice without distortion energy. Alternately, whentwo opposite dislocations cancel with each other and return to distorted lattice, theenergy release would be lower. Therefore, the dislocation energy is reduced andbecomes smaller than the expected Gb
2. Here, quinary alloy CoCrFeMnNi is
chosen for the estimation. As seen in Table 3.6, the core volume per unit length
(m) of a dislocation in this alloy is
Core volume per unit length ¼5bðÞ2π/C21m¼5:12/C210/C018m3ð3:14Þ
The distortion energy of the same volume in the distorted lattice without disloca-
tions is
Equivalent distortion energy =m¼5:12/C210/C018m3/C2ρv/C2U0per mole
¼3:58/C210/C010J=m ð3:15Þ
Dislocation energy =m¼Gb2/C03:58/C210/C010J=m
¼4:3/C210/C09J=m/C03:58/C210/C010J=m
¼3:94/C210/C09J=m ð3:16Þ
Fig. 3.15 Atomic conﬁgurations around a dislocation: ( a) before relaxation and ( b) after relax-
ation. Relaxation means that overall strain energy is lowered by rearrangement of different atoms.
Dashed circle presents the range of dislocation core3 Physical Metallurgy 81Thus, lattice distortion in the quinary alloy CoCrFeMnNi reduces about one-tenth
of the dislocation energy. In brief, the two factors could lower dislocation energy toa certain extent: easy relaxation effect to lower the overall strain energy (but
un-estimated) by forming atmosphere and distorted lattice effect to lower the
dislocation energy by increasing the energy level of lattice. For other systemswith larger atomic size difference and thus U
0 per mole , the dislocation energy
would be signiﬁcantly lower. It should be mentioned that the stress required toform a dislocation is similar to the theoretical shear stress to shear a crystal alongslip plane. The theoretical stress is about G/15. In real crystals having dislocations
to aid the slip deformation, the actual stress required to shear only ranges from1/100 to 1/10,000 of theoretical shear stress. This means, even if the above two
factors result small energy reduction of dislocation energy, their effects on real
strength can be signiﬁcant. Therefore, compared to the undistorted lattice, disloca-tions in the whole-solute matrix have a relatively lower energy state which are moredifﬁcult to move in the slip plane, not only to overcome strong atmospheres but alsoto overcome the abundant solute obstacles even after releasing from atmospheres.This will be further discussed in the later section of solution hardening. However, itshould be pointed out that more fundamental research to derive exact dislocationenergy by simulation or theoretical calculation is required in the future. Direct
observations or indirect evidences are also required to check the existence of strain
aging (solute pinning on dislocations).
2. Vitual force on dislocations under applied stress
The virtual force that results from a shear stress applied to a conventional crystal
needs to be checked for HEA crystal. Since the virtual force is derived by equatingthe external work done by applied stress with the internal work done by the virtualforce, which does not concern with lattice distortion, the virtual force equation for
dislocations in HEAs is the same as that in conventional alloys. That is, all the
virtual force per unit length on screw, edge, or mixed dislocations in the slip plane is
F¼τ
ob ð3:17Þ
where τois the applied shear stress in parallel with Burgers ’vector. If the stress is
not parallel with Burgers ’vector, the virtual force could be calculated by a general
equation called Peach-Koehler equation: the cross product of stress tensor andBurgers ’vector [ 69,70].
3.4.6 Stacking Faults
1. Lattice distortion and Suzuki effect on stacking fault energy
Stacking faults relate with dislocations. Discontinuities in the stacking order of
atomic planes are called stacking faults. If a stacking fault terminates in the crystal,
its boundary is a partial dislocation. In FCC, it could be Shockley partial82 J.-W. Yehdislocations or Frank partial dislocations [ 69]. Stacking fault can be regarded as a
planar defect and have a surface energy because the atoms on either side of astacking fault are not in normal positions and lose some bonding energy. The
stacking fault is in fact a HCP layer with four atomic layers. However, strain ﬁelds
and chemical tendency in FCC or HCP structure of those atoms near or alongstacking fault could be used to lower the stacking fault energy (SFE) by segregationand adjusting their positions if suitable thermal energy is provided. This is theso-called Suzuki interaction. Conventionally Suzuki interaction is used forexplaining the reduction of SFE due to alloying effect. For HEAs, this interactionalso holds true and can be considered as one factor in lowering SFE. In the whole-solute matrix, this local adjustments or rearrangements of atoms will change the
composition in atomic-scale range (without long-range diffusion as in the conven-
tional matrix) but might not change it when measured in nanoscale or larger range.Therefore, the proof on such an interaction requires very careful analysis onidentifying the segregation.
Besides Suzuki interaction, there is in fact another factor, lattice distortion
energy, in reducing SFE for HEAs. Figure 3.16 shows the schematic diagram for
the effect of Suzuki interaction and lattice distortion, in which different free energylevels of stacking fault, perfect lattice without distortion, and distorted lattice are
shown. The hypothetical lattice without distortion means solute atoms simply
occupy lattice sites and do not cause the lattice distortion. The energy level ofstacking fault is assumed to be constant although it could be somewhat lower byrelaxation in distorted lattice. The stacking fault energy in such a lattice is γ
perfect .
After Suzuki interaction which releases some energy, Usuzuki , of stacking fault, the
stacking fault energy is reduced. In reality, lattice is distorted by solute atoms andhas a higher energy level due to distortion energy. As a result, real SFE, γ
real, is even
lower than γperfect /C0Usuzuki . Therefore, as all atoms in the HEA matrix are solutes,
the SFE in HEA matrix is inherently low because of Suzuki interaction and lattice
distortion energy. However, Suzuki interaction occurs when thermal energy issuitably provided to cause the diffusion for segregation. Thus, suitable temperatureis required. Low temperature could not afford the diffusion for segregation whereashigh temperature would destroy the interaction or segregation toward randomness.
Fig. 3.16 Diagram shows the effect of Suzuki interaction and lattice distortion on stacking fault
energy. Different free energy levels of stacking fault, perfect lattice without distortion, anddistorted lattice are compared3 Physical Metallurgy 83If a specimen is processed to avoid the suitable temperature range for Suzuki
interaction, SFE becomes γ0realwhich is larger than γrealbyUsuzuki .
As Suzuki interaction and lattice distortion energy depend on the constituent
elements in the matrix, the relative positions of energy levels and thus real SFE also
depend on compositions.
It should be pointed out that lattice distortion energy effect should be also
considered as the second factor in reducing SFE of conventional alloys such asFCC Cu-Al bronze and FCC Cu-Zn brass in considering the origin of interfaceenergy mentioned above. The additions of Al and Zn into the copper matrix havebeen found to effectively lower SFE. In view of the second factor, the signiﬁcant
atomic size difference between Al (1.43 Å) and Cu (1.28 Å) and between Zn
(1.39Å) and Cu and other differences in crystal structure tendency and chemical
bonding can cause lattice distortion and decrease SFE.
2. Stacking fault energies measured for HEAs
By using XRD patterns taken from powder samples, stacking fault energy of the
equiatomic alloy series with single FCC structure, Ni, NiCo, NiCoFe, NiCoFeCr,
and NiCoFeCrMn has been measured [ 68]. The powders were obtained from two
bulk samples by using a high-speed steel rasp. One is cold-rolled sample obtainedby cold-rolling the sheet homogenized at 1100
/C14C for 6 h and quenched. The cold
reduction is 70 % so that fully work hardening is ensured. The other is full-annealedsample which is obtained by heat-treating the cold-rolled sample at 1100
/C14C for
10 min. Table 3.7shows the related data for deriving stacking fault energy by using
related equations as reported in the literature [ 71]. The SFE, 108 mJ/m2, of pure Ni
obtained by this XRD method agrees well with that, 128 mJ/m2, obtained by TEM
node method in the literature [ 72,73]. Figure 3.17 shows the variation of SFE with
the number of composing elements. Stacking fault energy decreases with increasingnumber of elements. It is noted that there is a large reduction of SFE from Ni toNiCo and NiCoFeCrMn has the lowest SFE, 6.2 mJ/m
2. As SFE of FCC Co is
15 mJ/m2[73], the SFE value, 40.8 mJ/m2, of NiCo in Table 3.7is reasonable since
the SFE predicted by the rule of mixture is 71.5 mJ/m2. Suzuki interaction and
lattice distortion energy in NiCo alloy would cause a further reduction of SFE. In
fact, the value is similar to that found for NiCo in the literature [ 72].
Koch ’s group used mechanical alloying method to prepare another equiatomic
alloy series and derived stacking fault energy by using XRD method and different
Table 3.7 Related data and related equations for deriving stacking fault energy by XRD method
[61]
Alloys Ni NiCo NiCoFe NiCoCrFe NiCoFeCrMn
Δ2θ(degrees) 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.156
α(/C210/C03) 3.66 3.69 3.71 9.32 29.2
<ε2
50>111(/C210/C05) 7.84 7.92 6.71 9.31 9.89
G(GPa) 76 69.6 62.1 90.8 66.1
γ(mJ/m2) 108 40.8 31.3 25.3 6.284 J.-W. Yehsimulations [ 74]. They found that SFE decreases with increased number of
elements, and ﬁve-element alloy has the lowest SFE (see Fig. 3.18). However,
there exists a larger difference between the SFEs of equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi
in Figs. 3.17 and3.18. Hence, further research is required for clariﬁcation. In
addition, by varying Ni content and Cr content, Kock ’s group found that
Ni14Fe20Cr26Co20Mn 20alloy has an extremely low SFE 3.5 mJ/m2[74]. If one plots
Fig. 3.17 SFE as a function of the number of composing elements from Ni to NiCoFeCrMn
alloy [ 68]
Fig. 3.18 Stacking fault energies of equiatomic FCC metals from pure Ni to NiFeCrCoMn
measured by XRD methods combined with different simulations [ 74]3 Physical Metallurgy 85SFEs as a function of atomic size difference (see Eq. 3.1) for these Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni
alloys, Fig. 3.19 is obtained revealing the trend which rationalizes the combined
effect of increased energy level of the distorted matrix and the increased strainenergy relief of stacking fault by in situ atom position adjustment since largeratomic size difference could enhance these two factors. However, all these phe-
nomena require new model and theory to explain the mechanisms.
3. Effect of stacking fault energy on slip bands
Stacking fault energy is very important in affecting dislocation movement,
dislocation substructure, twinning, strength, strain hardening, ductility, climb,creep, stress corrosion, and hydrogen embrittlement. For example, low SFE willgive larger separation between partial dislocations. For the stacking fault boundedby Shockley partial dislocations in FCC structure, the cross-slip or double cross-slip
process becomes more difﬁcult since far-spaced partial dislocations need to com-
bine into complete screw dislocations for ﬁnishing such processes. The resultingdislocation structure will be more uniform in planar array and slip bands are ﬁnerand more uniform. In addition, both the stress and energy required to form twins islower because a coherent twin boundary is basically half-thickness of a stackingfault. Figure 3.20 shows the optical micrographs of the slip bands in grains after
cold-rolling with a reduction of 50 % from Ni to NiCoFeCrMn alloy [ 68]. It can be
seen under such a reduction that there is essentially one slip system operated.
However, the average spacing between slip bands ﬁrst decreases and then increases
with increasing number of elements. Their spacings are 15.8, 9.0, 3.3, 5.4,
Fig. 3.19 Stacking fault energies [ 74] and atomic size differences of non-equiatomic and
equiatomic Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni alloys86 J.-W. Yehand 6.0 μm. As dislocation etching pits represent dislocation, dark slip bands in Ni,
NiCo, and NiCoFe suggest that dislocation density in slip bands is high enough tolet pits seen under optical microscope. This means the plastic strain in their slipbands is also large. However, NiCoFe has the densest slip bands, which is helpful torelease the strain concentration in each slip band and helpful to enhance ductility. Itis noted that NiCoFeCr and NiCoFeCrMn alloys have discrete etching pits in slip
bands and between slip bands. The spreading of etching pits is obviously large in
NiCoFeCr as compared with NiCoFeCrMn alloy. However, because NiCoFeCrMnalloy has much smaller SFE than that of NiCoCrFe, nanotwinning deformation ismuch easier to operate especially between slip bands. To sum up, decreased SFEfrom Ni to NiCoFeCr could increasingly inhibit cross-slip and double cross-slip andthus enhance strain hardening and the activation for other slip bands. Higher strainhardening and lesser strain concentration in turn delay the fracture and improve theductility. On the other hand, low SFE of NiCoFeCr and NiCoFeCrMn is expected to
induce nanotwinning deformation, in which NiCoFeCrMn would be much easier
than NiCoFeCr. So, a portion of strain is expended in nanotwinning which isexpected to form between slip bands. Similar phenomena could be observed inlow SFE stainless steel such as 310S (Fe-25Cr-19Ni) having a SFE of 14/m
2
[71,75]. This is why etching pits of NiCoFeCrMn are not so dense in between
slip band. The large formation of nanotwinning (during rolling or tensile deforma-tion at low temperatures) is especially beneﬁcial for ductility due to large strainhardening and induced plasticity.
As the cold-rolling reduction is increased up to 90 %, second slip systems are
induced in deformed grains [ 68]. Coarse slip bands in Ni and NiCo become
intersected and wavy. Fine slip bands in NiCoFe are also found to be interwoven.NiCoFeCr alloy has even ﬁne and dense interwoven structure of slip lines.
Fig. 3.20 Slip bands observed in the grains after cold-rolling with a reduction of 50 %: ( a) Ni, ( b)
NiCo, ( c) NiCoFe, ( d) NiCoFeCr, and ( e) NiCoFeCrMn [ 68]3 Physical Metallurgy 87NiCoFeCrMn alloy has very ﬁne network structure in which substructures with
deformed subgrains and nanograins exist.
4. Texture of FCC NiCoFeCrMn alloy
Figure 3.21 shows the cross-sectional microstructure and texture of the
NiCoFeCrMn after 90 % cold-rolling [ 76]. Figure 3.21a, b shows the EBSD
(electron backscatter diffraction) image quality (IQ) maps overlaid with the typical
FCC rolling texture components while Fig. 3.21c, d shows the (111) pole ﬁgures for
two different regions, respectively. The IQ maps show submicron-cell structure.Thin shear band (marked by the arrow) inclined to the rolling direction (RD) about~25
/C14could be observed in region I. The HAGB (high-angle grain boundary)
fractions in the two regions are similar. The orientation maps show strong presenceof the brass ({110} <112>; designated as B
Sand highlighted in green), S({123}
<634>; highlighted in yellow), and Goss ({110} <001>; designated as Gand
Fig. 3.21 (a) and ( b) are IQ maps with overlaid orientations obtained from two different regions
of 90 % cold-rolled NiCoFeCrMn; ( c) and ( d) are the corresponding (111) pole ﬁgures [ 76]88 J.-W. Yehhighlighted in orange) components but very little presence of the copper orientation
({112} <111>; designated as Cu and highlighted in red). The appearance of the
(111) pole ﬁgures (Fig. 3.21c, d ) clearly reveals the development of a predomi-
nantly BStexture after 90 % cold-rolling. The volume fractions of the different
texture components obtained from the two regions are very similar, which indicatethat the microtexture in the HEA following heavy deformation is reasonablyhomogeneous brass texture. Besides the volume fraction of random componentsis 42 %, and that of brass component is the largest, around 22 %, among the restcomponents.
3.4.7 Grain Boundaries
1. Lattice distortion and local rearrangement effect on grain boundary energy
Grain boundaries are the interface between adjacent grains with different orien-
tations. There are low-angle boundaries constructed with dislocation arrays, high-angle boundaries with disordered structure along with it, and coincident boundaries
at speciﬁc misorientation angles. They all have interface energy because the energy
level is higher than that of the matrix. Similar to stacking fault discussed inSect. 3.4.6 , the effective boundary energy of all kinds of grain boundary could be
lowered by the segregation layer of solute atoms along boundaries and by the higherenergy level of the distorted matrix as compared with the pure matrix. This meansgrain boundaries in HEAs are smaller in boundary energy and thus become morestable and difﬁcult to migrate than that in conventional alloys during annealing.Furthermore, the driving force for grain coarsening is also lower in HEAs. All these
are beneﬁcial to have more stable grain structure at high temperatures. To under-
stand the distortion energy effect on grain boundary energy, an extreme case ofdistorted matrix, that is, amorphous structure, could be used as an example. Ashigh-angle boundaries except those speciﬁc orientations could be regarded asdisordered interface layer in the matrix, any boundary line in amorphous structurewould be completely disordered in atomic conﬁguration and equivalent to otherdisordered structure besides boundary line. Thus, no boundary energy of theboundary line could exist. This is why amorphous structure has no grain
boundaries.
2. Factors affecting grain and particle coarsening in HEAs
Consider a metal with an average grain size Dand assume the polyhedral grains
to be spherical for simplifying the calculation. Then for one unit volume, the totalgrain boundary area is
A
g¼1=2ðÞ D2π1=D3π=6/C0/C1/C0/C1
¼3=D: ð3:18Þ3 Physical Metallurgy 89Thus, the total grain boundary energy per unit volume is
Ug¼3γ=D: ð3:19Þ
Assume grains grow with an incremental size dD, the loss of Ugwill be
dUg¼3γ=D2/C0/C1
dD: ð3:20Þ
Assume the virtual driving force on unit grain boundary area is Fg, then the work
done by driving force is equal to the loss of Ug:
3=DðÞ FgdD=2¼3γ=D2/C0/C1
dD: ð3:21Þ
This gives
Fg¼2γ=D: ð3:22Þ
Since this derivation is only based on grain size and boundary energy, the result
is equally applied to single-phase HEAs. It implies that driving force of graingrowth is proportional to grain boundary energy and inversely proportional tograin size.
In reality, grain growth concerns with boundary migration. Assuming the mobil-
ity is M
gand grain growth rate is νg, the phenomenological equation becomes
νg¼MgFg: ð3:23Þ
The mobility of boundary is determined by the successful jumping rate of atoms
across the boundary which has an energy barrier to overcome and thus lower energybarrier and higher temperature would result in higher mobility [ 61]. Besides these
two factors in affecting mobility and growth rate, other structural factors solutesegregation and precipitates along grain boundary also drag the boundary directly.The drag force F
dwill cancel a portion of driving force and the above equation
becomes
νg¼MgFg/C0Fd/C0/C1
: ð3:24Þ
Because driving force is inversely proportional to grain size, it is apparent that a
stable grain size is attained at the treating temperature when driving force is equal todrag force. This also implies smaller grain boundary energy and larger drag forcewould get a smaller grain size. It is well known that higher temperature couldeliminate the segregation and second phase along boundaries (except oxides orsimilar stable phases) and might lead to abnormal grain growth. All these phenom-ena and phenomenological relations also hold true for single-phase HEAs.
However, there is something different between conventional matrix and the
whole-solute matrix in HEAs. First, the grain boundary energy is inherently low90 J.-W. Yehin HEAs as discussed above. This would reduce the driving force and thus lower the
growth rate. Second, the successful jumps across grain boundary would be moredifﬁcult in HEAs since many kinds of component are involved and need to
cooperate to make the same composition of adjacent grains. This in turn lowers
the mobility of boundary. Third, segregation along grain boundary is easy in HEAssince grain boundary has relatively higher diffusion rate than grain interiors andsegregation to lower grain boundary energy could be obtained by atomic-scalerearrangement of solutes along grain boundaries, which might be accomplishedeven at room temperature within a suitable aging time. As a result, drag force iseasy to be attained during grain growth and retard grain growth. In brief, the graingrowth is effectively slower than conventional alloys with similar melting
points. Several researches also reported such an observation on a typical FCC
CoCrFeMnNi HEA [ 33,76]. Liu et al. found the growth kinetics could be described
by a power law of 3 (see Fig. 3.22), suggesting that grain boundary motion is
controlled by a solute-drag mechanism. The activation energy for growth was about321.7 kJ mol
/C01which is close to the highest activation energy, 317.5 kJ mol/C01of
Ni among the ﬁve elements as described in Sect. 3.2.3 [8]. This demonstrates
that the grain boundary migration during grain growth is rate-controlled by thediffusion of slowest Ni atoms through lattice diffusion, instead of grain boundary
diffusion as seen for conventional alloys. This is very particular in consideration of
the smaller activation energy of AISI 304LN stainless steels, which is only about150 kJ mol
/C01[33].
In binary alloys, if an impurity has small solubility in the matrix, the relative
segregation (or enrichment ratio) to grain boundary is large and causes slow graingrowth rate. If an impurity has large solubility, the inhibiting effect on grain growthbecomes small at the same content due to lesser segregation [ 61]. However, this
phenomenon is not applied to HEAs with the whole-solute matrix, since grain
boundaries in HEAs already have many different components to rearrange the
best segregation to lower overall free energy. The rearrangement is mainly conﬁnedin the grain boundary layer with a typical width about 0.5 nm. That means theaverage composition in this layer would be similar to that in the grain interiors. Forthe case with minor impurity and alloying elements, the observation in binary alloymentioned above could be applied if the whole-solute matrix is regarded as apseudo-unary matrix. The minor elements having low solubility in the pseudo-unary matrix would segregate a large portion to enrich grain boundaries. But, they
might bring brittleness to HEAs and need our precaution.
Phase boundary is the interface between two phases. In equilibrium, chemical
potential of each component in both phase s and their phase boundary are equal.
But, the free energy level of both phases c ould be different with each other. Thus,
the phase boundary energy could be regar ded as the energy difference between
the energy level of phase boundary and the arithmetic average of the energylevels of both phases. Similarly, lattic e distortion in both phases raises their
energy level and also might lower the phase boundary energy under no distortion
effect. This would also aff ect the particle coarseni ng or phase coarsening in
two-phase alloys.3 Physical Metallurgy 913.5 Basic Mechanism of Sluggish Diffusion
For a multi-principal-element solid solution, the mechanism of substitutional dif-
fusion is still vacancy mechanism except that the diffusion is sluggish and thekinetic process is lower due to larger activation energy of diffusion. This sluggishdiffusion effect has been conﬁrmed with the diffusion couple experiment on
Fig. 3.22 (a) Grain size as a function of the annealing time for the CoCrFeMnNi alloy specimens
at different temperatures; a linear relation between the cube of the grain size and time is observed.
(b) Grain-growth constant, C, as a function of the reciprocal of absolute temperature. Activation
energy is calculated [ 33]92 J.-W. YehCo-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni HEA system as discussed in Sect. 3.2.3 [8]. In this section, the
sluggish diffusion was explained based on the distorted lattice. The distorted multi-
principal-element lattice would have ﬂuctuated lattice potential energy (LPE) for
the migration of an atom from one site to site because each site is surrounded by
different kinds of atoms and has different types of bonds. Consider an atom-
vacancy pair ( A-V) and their nearest-neighboring atoms in an FCC lattice, as
shown in Fig. 3.23. The nearest-neighboring atoms of the A-Vpair can be divided
into three types. Type-1 (T1) atoms are adjacent to A(A1–A7), type-2 (T2) atoms are
adjacent to V(V1–V7), and type-3 (T3) atoms are adjacent to both AandV(S1–S4).
When atom Aexchanges with vacancy V, four T3 atoms remain to be the neighbors
ofA, but the seven A/C0T1 bonds are broken and seven new A/C0T2 bonds are
established instead. Therefore, when an atom migrates, the change in LPE comes
from the interaction energy difference between A/C0T1 bonds and A/C0T2 bonds. As
a result, this ﬂuctuated LPE would let the diffusion of atoms be more difﬁcult than
that in the lattice with uniform LPE, as shown in Fig. 3.24. This is analogue to the
driving of a car along a rugged road. The barrier is higher and the speed is lower
than those along a smooth road. As for the self-diffusion of vacancies, the activation
energy required is also lower than that in undistorted lattice with uniform lattice
potential energy. By the same thinking, the interstitial diffusion of small atoms
Fig. 3.23 Illustration of an
atom-vacancy pair ( A/C0V)
and their neighboring atoms
in an FCC lattice: A1–7,
atoms adjacent to Aonly,
type 1; V1–7, atoms adjacent
toVonly, type 2; and S1–4,
atoms adjacent to both
AandV, type 3 [ 8]
Fig. 3.24 Schematic diagram showing the ﬂuctuation of lattice potential energy along the
diffusion path for an atom in the lattice. Deep traps are indicated3 Physical Metallurgy 93would be slowed down and its activation energy is higher in the distorted lattice
although vacancy aid is not required.
High diffusion paths along dislocations and grain boundaries also exist in the
whole-solute matrix in HEAs. In conventional alloy matrix, the diffusivity along
dislocation, Dp, and that along high-angle grain boundaries, Dg, have similar order
in magnitude because high-angle grain boundaries could be regarded as an array ofdislocations with very small spacing between two neighboring dislocations. Butboth diffusivities are larger than those through defect-free lattice, D
l, at any
temperature. For example, at 500/C14C,Dp/DlandDg/Dlin silver are 2 /C2106and at
1/C2106, respectively [ 77,78]. Moreover, its activation energy of diffusion in grain
boundary is about 0.45 of that in the lattice. The increased diffusivity could be
explained with the increased degree of opening in the defect structure. That means
the jumping frequency of an atom in these defect structures is much higher than thatof an atom in the lattice. Similar trend of diffusivity for lattice, dislocation, andgrain boundary holds for the whole-solute matrix in HEAs although atom diffusionin such a distorted lattice is more difﬁcult than that in undistorted lattice.
However, all the above discussions still need to be justiﬁed by more researches
on different-structured HEAs, such as BCC and HCP. More rigorous mechanismsare also required. In addition, isotopic elements should be also incorporated in the
diffusion couples for non-ideal solutions in order to get diffusion coefﬁcients of
each component and assist the understanding of mechanisms.
3.6 Plastic Deformation in HEAs
All basic processes for plastic deformation such as dislocation slip, twinning, andgrain boundary sliding in conventional alloys are also seen in HEAs but theirdetailed mechanisms might be signiﬁcantly different between conventional alloys
and HEAs. This is at least because the whole-solute matrices in HEAs are distorted
at all lattice points which directly affect the behaviors of plastic deformation.
3.6.1 Yielding and Serration Phenomenon
As discussed in Sect. 3.4.5 , there are two factors in lowering dislocation energy:
easy relaxation effect to lower the overall strain energy by forming atmosphere anddistorted lattice effect to lower the dislocation energy by increasing the energy level
of lattice. Compared with the undistorted lattice, dislocations require extra stress to
overcome atmospheres and to overcome the whole-solute obstacles even afterreleasing from atmospheres. This lattice distortion effect is the structural factorcontributing to solution hardening, in addition to other factors relating to excesschemical bonding, shear modulus difference, short-range order, and dipole inter-action. If temperature is sufﬁciently low in inhibiting pipe diffusion, atmosphere94 J.-W. Yehcould not automatically form around dislocations through aging. The extra stress to
overcome atmosphere is absent. As diffusion increases with increasing temperature,the relaxation effect to form atmosphere becomes easier because of abundant
solutes everywhere. This aging might increase the yield strength by an extra stress
for dislocations releasing from atmospheres at room temperature. This might beused to explain the small load drops after yielding observed at 77 K, 293 K, and473 K (not at higher temperatures) for ﬁne-grained FCC CoCrFeMnNi alloy whichreceived a recrystallization treatment at 1073 K for 1 h for obtaining a grain size of4.4μm[79]. In addition, the relaxation effect at higher temperatures could result in
serration phenomena (dynamic strain aging) during deformation. However, at muchhigher temperatures, thermal vibration becomes too large to make successful
structural relaxation, and serration behavior would disappear. This also explains
why CoCrFeMnNi alloy displayed serration behavior on stress-strain curves at673 K for three grain sizes: 4.4, 50, and 155 μm[79]. So, the relaxation behavior
of HEAs is different from that in conventional alloys in which solutes are limited inconcentration and require long-distance diffusion to release the strain energy andpin the dislocations.
3.6.2 Effect of Low Stacking Fault Energy on Ductility
and Toughness
In fact, a perfect dislocation would tend to decompose itself into two Shockley
partial dislocations with wide stacking fault in FCC HEA solid solution which
generally has low stacking fault energy. As discussed in Sect. 3.4.6 , this feature
causes the cross-slip and double cross-slip of screw dislocations to be more difﬁcultand tend to form a substructure characterized by banded, linear arrays of disloca-tions. This is because each double cross-lip could form a Frank-Reed source whichin turn generates new dislocation loops in the slip plane. In contrast, high stackingfault metals tend to exhibit tangled dislocations and dislocation cell structure afterdeformation. Thus, deformation in HEA solid solution tends to be more uniform
with more planar slips. This tendency gives an advantage in enhancing ductility
because stress concentration on interface between the matrix and inclusions or ongrain boundaries becomes smaller without coarse slip band impingement. In addi-tion, less cross-slip gives smaller dynamic recovery and strain hardening. Botheffects could be beneﬁcial for the good ductility of FCC HEAs.
The inherent low stacking fault energy of FCC HEAs also enhances the
nanotwinning deformation mechanism which beneﬁts strain hardening rate andoverall ductility. Basically, low SFE in FCC means that coherent twin boundary
energy (one-half of SFE because a coherent twin boundary, e.g., C in
ABCAB CBACBA ...stacking sequence, is similar to one-half of an intrinsic
stacking fault, ABCAB CBCABC ...bounded by Shockley partial dislocations)
and thus the critical stress for nucleation and growth are also low. On the other3 Physical Metallurgy 95hand, the yield stress of FCC HEAs is increased by solution hardening and other
strengthening mechanism, which make the movement of dislocation more difﬁcult.
As a result, the formation of deformation twinning becomes easier in FCC HEA
solid solution under the competition between the two critical stresses required fortwinning and slip deformations, respectively. By this competition, both low tem-peratures and high strain rates will enhance the nanotwinning deformation since theyield strength increases faster than critical stress for twinning. Twinning duringdeformation is very important to induce higher plasticity. Twin-induced plasticitysteels (TWIP steels) are a famous example in which twinning causes high strainhardening rate and lets the onset of necking delayed to occur at higher strain
according to Considere ’s criterion. Therefore, FCC HEA solid solution generally
has an excellent combination of strength and toughness. Otto et al. [ 79] observed
the temperature effect on the mechanical properties of FCC CoCrFeMnNi HEA andfound that yield strength, strain hardening, and ductility are increased as tempera-ture decreases from 293 to 77 K. Moreover, Gludovatz et al. reported similar resultsas shown in Fig. 3.25 [80]. They also showed that CoCrFeMnNi HEA displays
remarkable fracture toughness properties at tensile strengths of 730–1280 GPa,which exceed 200 MPa · m
1/2at crack initiation and rise to >300 MPa · m1/2for
stable crack growth at cryogenic temperatures down to 77 K. The alloy has
toughness levels that are comparable to the very best cryogenic steels, speciﬁcallycertain austenitic stainless steels and high-Ni steels. Wu et al. reported the temper-ature dependence of the mechanical properties of various equiatomic alloys whichare subsets of the CoCrFeMnNi HEA [ 81]. The UTS and uniform elongation to
Fig. 3.25 Typical stress-strain curves obtained by tensile testing at 77, 200, and 293 K. Yield
strength, ultimate tensile strength, and ductility (strain to failure) all increase with decreasing
temperature [ 80]96 J.-W. Yehfracture of all the equiatomic alloys such as CoCrNi, CoCrMnNi, and CoCrFeNi
also increase with decreasing temperature, with the largest increase occurringbetween 77 and 293 K. To sum up, this phenomenon was attributed to a transition
from planar-slip dislocation activity at room temperature to deformation by
mechanical nanotwinning with decreasing temperature, which results in continuoussteady strain hardening at cryogenic temperatures.
Easy twinning has another advantage in producing abundant twins which will
effectively reduce the grain size and increase the grain-size strengthening approx-imately at below recrystallization temperatures. Also, ﬁne grain size could enhancesuperplasticity at above recrystallization temperatures by grain boundary sliding.Thus, low stacking fault energy of FCC HEAs is very beneﬁcial for microstructure
reﬁning and property enhancement.
3.6.3 Deformation Mechanisms in BCC or HCP HEAs
The last two sections concern with the deformation behaviors in FCC HEAs. As for
the dislocation behavior in BCC HEAs, the study is quite lack. This is because mostBCC HEAs have high strength but brittle. The dislocation structure has been foundin refractory BCC HEA HfNbTaTiZr in the as-cast state, as shown in Fig. 3.26 [82].
There is the presence of numerous dislocations, the majority of which are arranged
in subgrain boundaries. In addition, pileups are observed and some dislocationreactions have led to the formation of hexagonal networks. This indicates thatdislocations exist in the as-cast alloys, which suggests that plastic deformationcould assist by dislocation movement. Senkov et al. reported that refractoryBCC HEA HfNbTaTiZr has compressive fracture strain higher than 50 %. Themicrostructure observation on the cross section of compression-tested specimenrevealed deformation twins and cracking along some grain boundaries as shown in
Fig.3.27 [9]. This further demonstrates that twinning is also a possible deformation
mechanism. Although lesser investigations could be found for HCP HEAs, it isbelieved that basic deformation mechanisms are similar to conventional HCP alloysexcept suitable modiﬁcations mentioned above.
3.6.4 Strengthening Mechanisms in HEAs
Strengthening mechanisms in physical metallurgy include solution hardening,
strain hardening, grain-size strengthening, precipitation hardening, dispersion hard-
ening, martensitic strengthening, and composite strengthening. Except martensiticstrengthening, they have been also found in the literature on HEAs andHEA-related composites.3 Physical Metallurgy 97Fig. 3.26 TEM observations on refractory BCC HfNbTaTiZr HEA: ( a) selected area diffraction
(inset) indicating the [001] zone-axis pattern; ( b) bright-ﬁeld micrograph of the as-cast micro-
structure. Symbols highlight the presence of subgrain boundaries and hexagonal dislocation
network [ 82]
Fig. 3.27 SEM backscatter
electron image of a
longitudinal cross
section of the HIP ’d
Ta20Nb20Hf20Zr20Ti20
alloy after compression
deformation at room
temperature [ 9]1. Solution hardening
For solution hardening, the whole-solute matrix inherently has a very large
solution hardening effect when real strength (or hardness) and rule-of-mixturestrength (or hardness) are compared. The ratio could be as high as 3–4 forHfNbTaTiZr [ 9] and NbMoTaW and VNbMoTaW [ 23]. This is surprising because
such high strength could be attained only by solution hardening. However, the ratiois about 1–2 for FCC HEAs. This might be related to the fact that the distortion inFCC HEA is smaller than that in BCC HEA as discussed in Sect. 3.2.2 . In the
strengthening through the addition of one component to the whole-solute matrix,
Lin et al. studied a series of refractory Al
0–1HfNbTaTiZr HEA and found the linear
relation, σ¼1031 þ26:1cMPaðÞ , between yield strength and atomic percent-
age,c, of Al, as shown in Fig. 3.28 [83]. They proposed that the strengthening effect
of a certain element in a single-phase HEA alloy can be explained based on quasi-binary alloy concept. The fact of linearity is thus originated from the strengtheningcontribution per Al atom. Strong bonding factor in combination with atomic-size-difference factor (or lattice distortion) is the main contributor of Al addition tostrengthening. However, a number of metals follow the less-effective c
1/2depen-
dence of solution hardening with substitutional solutes and interstitial ones [ 84].
Although exponent from 1/3 to 1 was also observed in conventional metals,theoretical models for HEAs are required to be established.
2. Grain-size strengthening
Fig. 3.28 Effects of solute concentration of Al on the yield strength of the Al xHfNbTaTiZr
HEAs [ 83]3 Physical Metallurgy 99In grain-size strengthening, Liu et al. systematically investigated the grain
growth behavior of FCC CoCrFeMnNi equiatomic HEA by cold-rolling and sub-sequently annealing at different temperatures [ 33]. One can see from Fig. 3.29 [33]
that Hall-Petch relation also holds for this alloy. But it is noted that the hardeningcoefﬁcient, 677 MPa μm
/C00.5, is quite large since the upper bound of hardening
coefﬁcient in BCC, FCC, and HCP metals is about 600 MPa μm/C00.5. This suggests
that grain boundary hardening efﬁciency in the current CoCrFeMnNi alloy is much
higher. The reason might relate to the large strain hardening of this alloy [ 80].
Furthermore, Al 0.2CoCrFeMnNi alloy has even larger hardening coefﬁcient,
2199 MPa μm/C00.5, because addition of Al provides larger lattice distortion and
stronger bonding and thus larger work hardening [ 85]. This might be explained with
Li’s theory. He explained that grain-size strengthening in fact arises from the strain
hardening of the near-grain boundary regions due to the dislocation pumping fromgrain boundary ledges under the elastic incompatibility stresses between adjacent
grains before macroyielding [ 86]. Therefore, larger strain hardening such as FCC
HEAs would imply larger hardening coefﬁcient.
3. Strain hardening
Strain hardening is commonly observed in the deformation of HEAs. In FCC
HEAs, slip and nanotwinning could be the main mechanisms because their stackingfault energies are effectively lower. Higher temperature and lower strain rateenhance the deformation by dislocation motion whereas lower temperature such
as at subzero and higher strain rate such as forging and rolling, nanotwins are more
pronounced in the deformed structure. It can be observed that both mechanisms cangive high strain hardening. In the slip mechanism, low stacking fault energy makes
Fig. 3.29 Hardness as a function of grain size in the CoCrFeMnNi alloy [ 33]100 J.-W. Yehdislocation cross-slip more difﬁcult and thus delay dynamic recovery to cause
softening. In the nanotwinning mechanism, grain-size strengthening due to theformation of nanotwins is involved during deformation. Both factors increase
large strain hardening and thus result in enhanced ductility based on Considere ’s
criterion [ 79–81]. In BCC HEAs, twinning is less found during deformation
suggesting its formation is difﬁcult as compared with slip. Strain hardening isgenerally smaller than that of FCC HEAs [ 9]. This could be attributable to three
factors: (1) high strength due to large solution hardening, (2) easy cross-slip tocause dynamic recovery, and (3) difﬁcult twinning. The ﬁrst factor relates to largelattice distortion which is similar to severe cold-work structure. The second andthird factors relate to the lack of partial dislocations and many slip systems for
cross-slip. Cryo-rolling might enhance twinning because the stress for dislocation
glide is signiﬁcantly increased. However, more researches for taking more data(including HCP HEAs and other structures) and building rigorous theories arerequired.
4. Precipitation, dispersion, and composite hardenings
Precipitation hardening is often observed in HEAs. To the ﬁrst approximation,
conventional theories on these are also applicable to HEAs. Precipitate shape, size,
coherency, degree of ordering, shear modulus, and volume fraction are factors
affecting the strengthening [ 86]. But, in HEAs, multi-principal-element matrix
and multi-principal-element precipitates might be stronger than conventional onesand have higher strength level. Interface energy and strain ﬁeld between precipi-tates and the matrix should be further considered. Dispersion hardening is obtainedby adding hard particles to the alloy in the molten liquid, to the alloy by powdermetallurgy, or to the alloy by internal oxidation [ 86]. Their strengthening mecha-
nism is essentially similar to precipitation hardening for HEAs. Composite
strengthening is obtained by in situ phase formation such as eutectic and eutectoid
structure or by extrinsically adding large amount of second phases or reinforce-ments. Finer lamellae, ﬁne particles, and ﬁne ﬁbers would provide higher strength.HEA-related hard metals such as sintered carbides and cermets with HEA bindershave been reported [ 87,88]. Wettability, interface bonding, morphology, grain size,
distribution, volume fraction, and binder strength are needed to be considered. It isnoted that HEA binders might change all these factors and thus properties. Under-standing of the mechanisms is very important for improving properties.
3.7 Creep and Creep Mechanisms in HEAs
3.7.1 Creep Behavior and Extrapolation Method to Predict
Creep
Creep deformation is a very important aspect for the materials used at high
temperatures [ 84,89–91]. A number of high-temperature failures are due to creep3 Physical Metallurgy 101or creep plus fatigue since failures and insufﬁcient yield strength and tensile
strength could be observed instantly or in the early stage failure. A material creepat high temperatures means its dimension changes with time under a load. Creep
test at constant load could give a creep curve, i.e., strain ( ε) as a function of time ( t).
It typical displays three distinct stages after the initial rapid elongation: I (primary),II (secondary), and III (tertiary). The slope, dε/dt, of the curve is creep rate. In
primary stage, the creep rate decreases with time; in secondary stage, the creep ratechanges little and remains constant; and in tertiary stage, the creep rate increasesrapidly with time until fracture occurs. In general, higher load will result in highercreep rate and shorten the time to rupture. In the intermediate stress range (10
/C04
<σ/G<10/C02;σis applied stress and Gis shear modulus), constant creep rate in
stage II could be described by power law:
dε=dt¼Aσne/C0Qc=RTð3:25Þ
where Aandnare constants depending on creep mechanism and Qcthe activation
energy for creep. It should be noted that Qcis approximately equal to the activation
energy for self-diffusion for pure metals and solid-solution alloys if T>0.5Tm.
Usually, an industrial equipment is designed to have a reasonable life for
customers. For jet turbine, power plant turbine, and nuclear reactors, the reasonablelives are 10,000 h (~1 year), 100,000 h (~10 years), and 350,000 h (~40 years),
respectively. To avoid the lengthy tests, the extrapolation methods have been
developed. The Larson-Miller equation with the following form has been com-monly accepted and used for the extrapolation:
Tlogt
rþC ðÞ ¼ m; ð3:26Þ
where Cis the Larson-Miller constant depending on the alloy, tris the time to
failure, and mis the Larson-Miller parameter depending on stress. Thus, one can
use the shorter rupture time obtained by creep testing at higher temperature topredict rupture time at lower temperatures under the same stress. It is note that
higher mwould be better by giving longer rupture time under the same stress.
3.7.2 Creep Mechanisms
The creep deformation mechanisms have been well-established and can be approx-
imately grouped into four kinds [ 84,89–91]:
1. Diffusion creep: σ/G<10/C04
This involves a ﬂow of vacancies and atoms through the material. Two mech-
anisms are possible. Nabarro and Herring mechanism states that the vacanciesmove in such a way to produce an increase in length under the direction of appliedstress. The grain boundaries could act as sources or sinks. Coble proposed another102 J.-W. Yehmechanism which is based on the diffusion along grain boundaries. The activation
energies of both creep mechanisms are the self-diffusion activation energy in latticeand grain boundary, respectively. Coble mechanism is predominant for lower
temperatures and small grain size where grain boundary is more important than
bulk diffusion. Both mechanisms could be operated in parallel and creep rate is thesummation of both creeps. The summation equation is [ 84]
dε=dt¼A
NHDL=d2/C0/C1
σΩ=kTðÞ þ ACDGBδ=d3/C0/C1
σΩ=kTðÞ ð 3:27Þ
where DLandDGBare diffusion coefﬁcients of lattice and grain boundary, respec-
tively. Ωis the atomic volume, dis grain size, and δis grain boundary thickness.
Thus, Coble creep is more sensitive to grain size.
2. Dislocation creep: 10/C04<σ/G<10/C02
This also involves vacancy diffusion which assists dislocations to overcome
obstacles by climb during their glide, called climb-plus-glide mechanism. Since the
rate of climb is determined by the rate at which the vacancies arrive at (as vacancysinks) or leave (as vacancy sources) the dislocation, higher rate of climb processenhanced by larger stress and higher temperature would enhance dislocation climband glide and cause higher creep rate. The creep rate in this stage is described bypower law as mentioned above. For pure metals in which dislocation climb iseasier, glide contributes most of creep strain and becomes the rate-controllingprocess; nis commonly about 5 and can be derived as in the following formula
based on the balance between softening mode and hardening mode [ 91]:
dε=dt¼A
0γSF=GbðÞ3σ=GðÞ5e/C0Qc=RTð3:28Þ
where A0is a constant and γSFis the stacking fault energy (SFE). This mechanism is
also evidenced by the formation of dislocation cell substructure observed by TEMand same cell size remains during stage II creep but inversely proportional toapplied stress.
Sherby and Burke further divided solid-solution alloys into two classes with
different mechanisms [ 89,91]. In class I alloys, dislocation glide is controlled by
the drag of solutes and nis about 3, such as in Ni-Au binary system with larger
atomic size difference. In class II alloys with small atomic size difference such asNi-Fe, Ni-Co, and Ni-Cr, the creep is controlled by dislocation climb as in puremetals; thus nis also about 5.
3. Dislocation glide: σ/G>10
/C02
At high stress, power law breaks down and dislocation climb is replaced by
dislocation glide which does not involve diffusion. Thermally activated dislocation
glide is the rate-controlling step. When a dislocation encounters the obstacles,
thermal energy is required to overcome the obstacles with energy barrier U0.
Applied stress could provide a work to reduce the thermal energy required to3 Physical Metallurgy 103overcome the barriers. Thus larger stress and higher temperature could increase
such “dislocation glide” creep. This process occurs from low temperature to hightemperature [ 84,89,90].
4. Grain boundary sliding
Grain boundary sliding occurs during the stage II to accommodate the grain
shape change under creep strain. Smaller steady-state creep rate in stage II also hassmaller grain boundary sliding. But, it becomes important in stage III with highercreep rate because it causes intergranular crack initiation and propagation. As grainboundary slides, diffusional mass ﬂow is required to accommodate the incompat-ibility between grains. When this is not sufﬁcient, voids at grain boundaries will
form. However, single-crystal components do not have grain boundary sliding and
have improved creep resistance [ 84,89,90].
3.7.3 Potential of HEAs to Have Improved Creep Resistance
Based on the above creep mechanisms, different factors could be considered to
increase creep resistance and rupture life. Combining the positive factors wouldhave superposition effect on creep resistance. Following factors are thus discussedto ﬁnd the potential of HEAs to get improved creep resistance.
1. Sluggish diffusion factor
As mentioned above, for both diffusion and dislocation creeps, steady-state
creep rate is directly related to the diffusion rate in the alloy. Activation energyfor creep is essentially equal to that for diffusion. In this regard, sluggish diffusionin HEAs has the beneﬁt to have a better resistance to creep. Similarly, grainboundary sliding is also inhibited because diffusion in the vicinity of grain bound-aries to support the diffusion and dislocation creeps is sluggish. This leads to
enhanced resistance to creep. In addition, the component having the slowest
diffusion rate could become the rate-determining component in creep. This dem-onstrates the beneﬁt from HEA composition which contains appreciable amounts ofmajor elements. If the slowest component is added, its power to determine the creeprate would be signiﬁcant. In refractory BCC-type HEAs which have a commonmelting point over 2000
/C14C, all these sluggish diffusion effects might compensate
the higher diffusion rate in the open-packed structure of BCC matrix.
2. Low stacking fault energy factor
Solute addition has been found to lower the SFE such as Cu-Al bronze and
Cu-Zn brass due to interactions between solutes and stacking fault. It is well knownthat low stacking fault energy of pure metals and solid-solution-strengthened alloyshave low creep rate [ 91,92]. This trend can be explained because low SFE causes
the dislocation difﬁcult to overcome obstacles by cross-slip. This makes the dislo-cation mainly use climb process to overcome the obstacles. Although the actual104 J.-W. Yehmodel/mechanism is still not clear, this trend suggests that low stacking fault
energy has the advantage in reducing creep rate. As FCC-HEAs have quite lowstacking fault energy, they have the potential to have a better creep resistance.
3. Atomic size difference factor
In polycrystalline nickel, solid-solution strengthening has been found to increase
the time to fracture under the same stress. In addition, larger atomic size differencegives larger creep resistance (higher stress at the same stage-II strain rate). Evenlarger atomic size difference could reduce stress component from ﬁve to three asmentioned above. Furthermore, higher content of solutes gives smaller creeprate [ 91]. Based on the same trend, it appears that multi-principal-element solid-
solution phases in HEAs would be beneﬁcial to the creep resistance because they
essentially possess the whole-solute matrix and have solute-dislocation interactioneverywhere.
4. Precipitate factor
In nickel alloys, γ
0phase not only enhances high-temperature strength but also
increases creep resistance [ 91]. Higher volume fraction of γ0phase could increase
creep resistance. For example, the Nimonic 80A, 90, 105, and 115 alloys having γ0
fractions of 0.17, 0.18, 0.32, and 0.62, respectively, also have improved creep
resistance. The temperature of the last alloy for 1000 h creep life at 137 MPa ishigher than the ﬁrst by about 120
/C14C. In addition, lattice misﬁt between γ0phase and
γmatrix and solvus temperature of γ0phase are important factors for creep resis-
tance [ 91]. Small lattice misﬁt means less coarsening rate of γ0precipitates and
higher solvus temperature means higher thermal stability of γ0phase at higher
working temperature. As different solute elements have different partitions betweenγ
0phase and γmatrix affecting lattice misﬁt, shear modulus, coherency, and
stability, how to design high-entropy superalloys based on conventional superalloys
is a good research topic to obtain improved properties.
5. Carbide and boride factors
Small addition of boron and carbon for forming boride and carbide particles
could increase the resistance of grain boundary sliding and thus improve creepresistance. For example, Che and Knowles [ 91] tested an experimental second-
generation superalloy in creep at 950
/C14C and 290 MPa; addition of 0.09 wt.%C and
0.01 wt.%B could improve the rupture life from 10 h to 100 h. This is due to small
carbide M 23C6formed along grain boundaries. This method is also required for
improving creep resistance of polycrystalline HEAs.
Up to 2015, direct data on creep properties of HEAs are lack in the literature. He
et al. reported the steady-state ﬂow behavior of CoCrFeMnNi HEA in strain-ratejump tension tests at temperatures ranging from 1023 to 1123 K (~0.65–0.7 T
m)
[93]. They used the power law Eq. 3.24 to ﬁt ﬂow behavior with stress and
temperature shown in Fig. 3.30. Two regions, region I with a low stress exponent
at the low strain rates (or stresses) and region II with a high stress exponent at the
high strain rates (or stresses), are observed. The activation energies are 284 kJ/mol3 Physical Metallurgy 105in region I and 333 kJ/mol in region II. They emphasized that these values are
comparable to the activation energies for lattice diffusion in the FeCoNiCrMn alloy
[8], for example, Ni (317.5 kJ/mol), Cr (292.9 kJ/mol), and Mn (288.4 kJ/mol).
The stress exponent about 5 in region II suggests that the dominant deformationprocess is dislocation climb. The activation energy around 330 kJ/mol can berationalized by that (317.5 kJ/mol) of the slowest-diffusing species Ni whichcontrols the rate process. On the other hand, the stress exponent about three inregion I suggests that the mechanism is the drag of gliding dislocations. However,the lower activation energy, 284 kJ/mol, is difﬁcult to rationalize by the slowestNi. But when region I in Fig. 3.30 is rechecked, an activation energy same as region
I might be expected. This again conﬁrms that rate controlling is still the slowest Ni.
Besides, the measurement of hot hardness to see the softening resistance at high
temperatures could provide an indicator to compare creep resistance betweenmaterials [ 94]. In addition, indentation creep test is also a way to compare the
creep resistance [ 94–96]. Figure 3.31 shows the plots of hot hardness
vs. temperature for Al
xCoCrFeNi cast alloys ( x¼0–1.8) from room temperature
to 1273 K [ 94]. In this alloy series, Al 0–0.3 alloys form single FCC structure.
Al0.5–0.9 alloys form FCC plus BCC mixture in which BCC phase further decom-
poses into modulated spinodal structure. Al 0.9–1.8 alloys form complete spinodal
structure [ 94,97].
Although hot hardness represents the strength at high temperatures, their varia-
tion could provide information about deformation mechanism. The hot hardness asa function of temperature can be represented by the following equation suggestedby Westbrook [ 94,95,98–100]:
H¼Aexp/C0BTðÞ ð 3:29Þ
Fig. 3.30 (a) Steady-state strain rate as a function of the true stress on a double logarithmic plot
shows apparently two deformation regions (marked as region I and region II) and ( b) the steady-
state strain rate vs. the inverse of temperature on an Arrhenius plot showing the apparent activation
energy of ~280 kJ/mol for region I and ~330 kJ/mol for region II, respectively106 J.-W. Yehwhere Ais the intrinsic hardness or the value of hardness at 0 K and Bis called
softening coefﬁcient. There are two set of constants AandBin low-temperature and
high-temperature regions, respectively, suggesting a change in the deformationmechanism. In most metals and alloys, the transition temperature T
Tis known to
occur at about 0.5 Tm, where Tmis the melting point. It has been suggested that the
deformation mechanism for low temperatures is slip and that for high temperatures(>0.5T
m) is dislocation climb and glide [ 95,99,100]. The activation energy is also
same as that of lattice diffusion. This is reasonable since at temperatures above TT
the indentation size does not attain a constant value after a certain time but
continues to increase with time [ 99]. Because the plastic zone gradually built
beneath the indenter, dislocations are generated in the interface and multiplied inthe zone. As the diffusion is high, dynamic recovery occurs during indenterdescending. This is mainly due to the climb of edge dislocations to overcomeobstacles and the movement of jogged screw dislocations to facilitate cross-slip.If dwell time increases, creep deformation continues and hardness decreases.
Table 3.8lists and compares hot-hardness transition temperature ( T
T), homolo-
gous temperature ( TT/Tm), and two sets of intrinsic hardness ( A) and softening
coefﬁcient ( B):AIandBIfor low temperatures and AIIandBIIfor high temperatures,
for Al xCoCrFeNi cast alloys and three commercial alloys, T-800, In718, and
In718H [ 94]. One can see that all the homologous temperatures are about 0.5
Fig. 3.31 Hot hardness vs. temperature plots for Al xCoCrFeNi alloys ( x¼0/C01.8) from room
temperature to 1273 K [ 94]3 Physical Metallurgy 107except that 0.66 of In718. Furthermore, the softening coefﬁcients, BI, are similar to
those of the comparing alloys, whereas the softening coefﬁcients, BII, are in general
smaller than those of the compared commercial alloys. This suggests that thepresent alloy system has a higher softening resistance than compared alloys atabove T
T. The explanation is related to sluggish diffusion effect in the multi-
principal-element solid-solution phases such as ordered BCC, disordered BCC,
FCC, and sigma phases in the alloy series. It is noted that Al 0and Al 0.3alloys
with single FCC phase have the lowest BIIvalues. This demonstrates the combined
effects of the lower diffusion rate of FCC structure than other structures and thesluggish diffusion in the multi-principal-element matrix.
Indentation creep test was also used for measuring the hot hardness as a function
of dwell time (5, 10, and 30 s) on Al
0.3,A l 0.5,A l 0.7,A l 0.9, and Al 1.5alloys at
773, 873, 973, 1073, and 1173 K [ 94]. The results also conﬁrm that the FCC Al 0.3
alloy has negligible creep and the Al xalloys with x/C210.5 display some creep at
above TT. This is consistent with the variation of the BIIvalues with aluminum
content.Table 3.8 Transition temperature ( TT), intrinsic hardness ( A), softening coefﬁcient ( B), melting
point, and homologous temperature of the Al xCoCrFeNi alloys and commercial alloys T-800,
In718, and In718H [ 94]
AlloyTransition
temperature
(TT) Below TT Above TTMelting
point
(Tm)Homologous
temperature
KA I BI AII BII KT T/Tm
Al0 815 148 1.09 /C210/C0397 5.77 /C210/C041690 0.48
Al0.3 823 134 9.28 /C210/C0479 2.82 /C210/C041655 0.50
Al0.5 938 194 2.60 /C210/C04491 1.25 /C210/C031631 0.58
Al0.7 914 320 3.86 /C210/C041575 2.13 /C210/C031621 0.56
Al0.9 844 539 4.88 /C210/C043888 2.83 /C210/C031635 0.52
Al1.0 823 532 5.67 /C210/C043234 2.68 /C210/C031635 0.50
Al1.2 903 503 4.08 /C210/C042381 2.13 /C210/C031643 0.55
Al1.5 888 504 4.22 /C210/C041699 1.79 /C210/C031660 0.53
Al1.8 884 511 4.28 /C210/C041379 1.55 /C210/C031680 0.53
T-800a818 791 2.84 /C210/C048041 3.12 /C210/C031563 0.52
In718b1069 268 3.10 /C210/C0411,766 3.55 /C210/C031609 0.66
In718Hc1037 487 5.29 /C210/C0413,778 3.74 /C210/C031609 0.64
aComposition of T-800: Co, 47.6 %; Mo, 28 %; Cr, 18 %; Si, 3.4 %; Fe, 1.5 %; and Ni, 1.5 %
bComposition of In 718: Ni, 53 %; Cr, 19 %; Fe, 18.5 %; Nb, 5.1 %; Mo, 3 %; Ti, 0.9 %; and
Al, 0.5 %
cAnnealed at 1253 K for 30 min, air-cooled, and aged at 1033 K for 8 h, furnace-cooled at a rate of
55 K, heated to 893 K for 8 h, and air-cooled108 J.-W. Yeh3.8 Conclusions and Perspective
This chapter emphasizes the four core effects of HEAs, which inﬂuence many
aspects of physical metallurgy. By these core effects, many aspects have beendiscussed as detailed as possible with the author ’s knowledge. One can see that
their effects on microstructure and properties are mostly positive and encouraging.Alloy design utilizing these positive effects becomes very promising to developapplication-oriented HEAs. Nevertheless, the discussion and explanation are stillfar from completeness. More experimental data and evidences and clear mecha-nisms and theories are required for HEAs in the future. When physical metallurgy
from conventional alloys to HEAs is built, the whole understanding of the alloy
world becomes realized.
Acknowledgments J.W.Y. would like to acknowledge all the ﬁnancial supports from the
Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of Economic Affairs, and National Tsing HuaUniversity, R.O.C.
References
1. Reed-Hill RE, Abbaschian R (1994) Physical metallurgy principles, 3rd edn. PWS Publishing
Company, Boston, pp xiii–xv
2. Cahn RW, Haasen P (eds) (1983) Physical metallurgy, 3rd revised and enlarged ed. Elsevier
Science publishers BV, Amsterdam, pp 1–35
3. Yeh JW (2006) Recent progress in high-entropy alloys. Ann Chimie Sci Materiaux (Eur
J Control) 31:633–648
4. Yeh JW (2013) Alloy design strategies and future trends in high-entropy alloys. JOM
65:1759–1771
5. Reed-Hill RE, Abbaschian R (1994) Physical metallurgy principles, 3rd edn. PWS Publishing
Company, Boston, pp 353–358
6. Cullity BD, Stock SR (2001) Elements of X-ray diffraction, 3rd edn. Prentice-Hall Inc, Upper
Saddle River, pp 327–340
7. Otto F, Yang Y, Bei H, George EP (2013) Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the
phase stability of equiatomic high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 61:2628–2638
8. Tsai KY, Tsai MH, Yeh JW (2013) Sluggish diffusion in Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni high-entropy
alloys. Acta Mater 61:4887–4898
9. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Compd
509:6043–6048
10. Tong CJ, Chen YL, Chen SK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Lin SJ, Chang SY (2005)
Microstructure characterization of Al xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with multi-
principal elements. Metall Mater Trans A 36A:881–893
11. Hsu CY, Yeh JW, Chen SK, Shun TT (2004) Wear resistance and high-temperature com-
pression strength of FCC CuCoNiCrAl0.5Fe alloy with boron addition. Metall Mater Trans A35A:1465–1469
12. Zhang Y, Zhou YJ, Lin JP, Chen GL, Liaw PK (2008) Solid-solution phase formation rules
for multi-component alloys. Adv Eng Mater 10:534–5383 Physical Metallurgy 10913. Guo S, Liu CT (2013) Phase selection rules for complex multi-component alloys with
equiatomic or close-to-equiatomic compositions. Chin J Nat 35:85–96
14. Yeh JW (2009) Recent progress in high-entropy alloys, the 2009 cross-strait conference on
metallic glasses. National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei
15. Chen ST, Yeh JW (2009) Effect of mixing enthalpy, mixing entropy and atomic size
difference on the structure of multicomponent alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua
University
16. Yang X, Zhang Y (2012) Prediction of high-entropy stabilized solid-solution in multi-
component alloys. Mater Chem Phys 132:233–238
17. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Gan JY, Lin SJ, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004) Formation
of simple crystal structures in solid-solution alloys with multi-principal metallic elements.
Metall Mater Trans A 35A:2533–2536
18. Yeh JW, Chang SY, Hong YD, Chen SK, Lin SJ (2007) Anomalous decrease in X-ray
diffraction intensities of Cu-Ni-Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Si alloy systems with multi-principal elements.Mater Chem Phys 103:41–46
19. Wang S (2013) Atomic structure modeling of multi-principal-element alloys by the principle
of maximum entropy. Entropy 15:5536–5548
20. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2010) Inhibition of grain coarsening up to 1000
/C14C in (AlCrNbSiTiV)N
superhard coatings. Scr Mater 62:105–118
21. Guo S, Liu CT (2011) Phase stability in high entropy alloys: formation of solid-solution phase
or amorphous phase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 21:433–446
22. Meyers MA, Chawla KK (1984) Mechanical metallurgy: principles and applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, pp 188–199
23. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Miracle DB, Chuang CP, Liaw PK (2010) Refractory high-entropy
alloys. Intermetallics 18:1758–1765
24. Kao YF, Chen SK, Chen TJ, Chu PC, Yeh JW, Lin SJ (2011) Electrical, magnetic, and hall
properties of Al xCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 509:1607–1614
25. Lu CL, Lu SY, Yeh JW, Hsu WK (2013) Thermal expansion and enhanced heat transfer in
high-entropy alloys. J Appl Crystallogr 46:736–739
26. Swalin RA (1972) Thermodynamics of solid, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York, pp 263–266
27. Tsai CW, Chen YL, Tsai MH, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK (2009) Deformation and
annealing behaviors of high-entropy alloy Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi. J Alloys Compd 486:427–435
28. Hsu CY, Juan CC, Wang WR, Sheu TS, Yeh JW, Chen SK (2011) On the superior hot
hardness and softening resistance of AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng
A 528:3581–3588
29. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Scott JM, Miracle DB (2011) Mechanical properties of
Nb25Mo 25Ta25W25and V 20Nb20Mo 20Ta20W20refractory high entropy alloys. Intermetallics
19:698–706
30. Tsai MH, Wang CW, Tsai CW, Shen WJ, Yeh JW, Gan JY, Wu WW (2011) Thermal
stability and performance of NbSiTaTiZr high-entropy alloy barrier for copper metallization.J Electrochem Soc 158:H1161–H1165
31. Tsai MH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2008) Diffusion barrier properties of AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr high-
entropy alloy layer between copper and silicon. Thin Solid Films 516:5527–5530
32. Shun TT, Hung CH, Lee CF (2010) Formation of ordered/disordered nanoparticles in FCC
high entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 493:105–109
33. Liu WH, Wu Y, He JY, Nieh TG, Lu ZP (2013) Grain growth and the hall–petch relationship
in a high-entropy FeCrNiCoMn alloy. Scr Mater 68:526–529
34. Juan CC, Hsu CY, Tsai CW, Wang WR, Sheu TS, Yeh JW, Chen SK (2013) On microstruc-
ture and mechanical performance of AlCoCrFeMo
0.5Nixhigh-entropy alloys. Intermetallics
32:401–407
35. Ranganathan S (2003) Alloyed pleasures: multimetallic cocktails. Curr Sci 85:1404–140636. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Cheng YQ, Liaw PK (2013) High-entropy alloys with high saturation
magnetization, electrical resistivity, and malleability. Sci Rep 3:1455110 J.-W. Yeh37. Mackay AL (2001) On complexity. Crystallogr Rep 46:524–526
38. Cahn RW, Haasen P (eds) (1983) Physical metallurgy, 3rd revised and enlarged ed. Elsevier
Science publishers BV, Amsterdam, pp 219–248
39. Porter DA (1992) Phase transformations in metals and alloys. Chapman & Hall, New York,
pp 1–59
40. Kittel C (1996) Introduction to solid state physics, 7th edn. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 3–2641. Alonso JA, Simozar S (1980) Prediction of solid solubility in alloys. Phys Rev B
22:5583–5588
42. Hume-Rothery W (1967) Factors affecting the stability of metallic phases. In: Rudman PS,
Stringer J, Jaffee RI (eds) Phase stability in metals and alloys. McGraw-Hill, New York
43. Hume-Rothery W, Smallman RE, Haworth CW (1969) Structure of metals and alloys, 5th
edn. Institute of Metals, London
44. Smith WF, Hashemi J (2006) Foundations of materials science and engineering, 4th edn.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York
45. De Boer FR, Boom R, Mattens WCM, Miedema AR, Niessen AK (1988) Cohesion in metals:
transition metal alloys. North-Holland Physics Publishing/Elsevier Science Publisher B.V,
Amsterdam
46. Chen HY, Tsai CW, Tung CC, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen HC, Chen SK (2006) The effect of
the substitution of Co by Mn in Al-Cr-Cu-Fe-Co-Ni high-entropy alloys. Ann Chimie Sci
Materiaux 31:685–698
47. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish CM, Gao MC, Weber RJK, Neuefeind JC,
Tang Z, Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distri-
butions of a multi-principal-element alloy. Nat Commun 6:5964:1–13. doi: 10.1038/
ncomms6964
48. Hsu CY, Juan CC, Chen ST, Sheu TS, Chen ST, Yeh JW, Chen SK (2013) Phase diagrams of
high-entropy alloy system Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Mo-Ni. J Appl Meteorol 65:1829–1839
49. Chen YL, Hu YH, Tsai CW, Hsieh CA, Kao SW, Yeh JW, Chin TS, Chen SK (2009)
Alloying behavior of binary to octonary alloys based on Cu-Ni-Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ti-Mo duringmechanical alloying. J Alloys Compd 477:696–705
50. Chen YL, Hu YH, Hsieh CA, Yeh JW, Chen SK (2009) Competition between elements
during mechanical alloying in an octonary multi-principal-element alloy system. J Alloys
Compd 481:768–775
51. Chen YL, Hu YH, Tsai CW, Yeh JW, Chen SK, Chang SY (2009) Structural evolutions
during mechanical milling and subsequent annealing of Cu-Ni-Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ti alloys. Mater
Chem Phys 118:354–361
52. Chen YL, Tsai CW, Juan CC, Chuang MH, Yeh JW, Chin TS, Chen SK (2010)
Amorphization of equimolar alloys with HCP elements during mechanical alloying. J Alloys
Compd 506:210–215
53. Chang HW, Huang PK, Davison A, Yeh JW, Tsau CH, Yang CC (2008) Nitride ﬁlms
deposited from an equimolar Al-Cr-Mo-Si-Ti alloy target by reactive DC magnetronsputtering. Thin Solid Films 516:6402–6408
54. Egami T (1996) The atomic structure of aluminum based metallic glasses and universal
criterion for glass formation. J Non Cryst Solids 205–207:575–582
55. Egami T, Waseda Y (1984) Atomic size effect on the formability of metallic glasses. J Non
Cryst Solids 64:113–134
56. Inoue A (2000) Stabilization of metallic supercooled liquid and bulk amorphous alloys. Acta
Mater 48:279–306
57. Kao SW, Yeh JW, Chin TS (2008) Rapidly solidiﬁed structure of alloys with two to eight
equal-molar elements – a simulation by molecular dynamics. J Phys Condens Matter
20:145214
58. Turnbull D (1977) On the gram-atomic volumes of metal-metalloid glass forming alloys.
Scr Metall 11:1131–1136
59. Turnbull D (1981) Metastable structures in metallurgy. Metall Trans B 12B:217–2303 Physical Metallurgy 11160. Greer AL (1993) Confusion by design. Nature 366:303–304
61. Porter DA (1992) Phase transformations in metals and alloys. Chapman & Hall, New York,
pp 110–142
62. Swalin RA (1972) Thermodynamics of solids, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York, pp 220–223
63.www.materials.ac.uk/elearning/ .../vacancies/enthalpy.html
64. Swalin RA (1972) Thermodynamics of solids, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York, pp 267–28965. Meyers MA, Chawla KK (1984) Mechanical metallurgy: principles and applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, pp 52–59, and 247–256
66. Humphreys FJ, Hatherly M (2004) Recrystallization and related annealing phenomena,
2nd edn. Elsevier, Oxford, pp 102–104
67. Kittel C (1996) Introduction to solid state physics, 7th edn. Wiley, Hoboken, p 78
68. Lee C, Yeh JW (2013) Study on deformation behaviors of equimolar alloys from Ni
to CoCrFeMnNi. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University
69. Meyers MA, Chawla KK (1984) Mechanical metallurgy: principles and applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, pp 226–270
70. Weertman J, Weertman JR (1964) Elementary dislocation theory. Macmillan, New York,
pp 22–83
71. Schramm RE, Reed RF (1975) Stacking fault energies of seven commercial austenitic
stainless steels. Metall Trans A 6A:1345–1351
72. Gallagher PCJ (1970) The inﬂuence of alloying, temperature, and related effects on the
stacking fault energy. Metall Trans 1:2429–2461
73. Humphreys FJ, Hatherly M (2004) Recrystallization and related annealing phenomena,
2nd edn. Elsevier Science Ltd, Oxford, pp 24–26
74. Zaddach AJ, Niu C, Kock CC, Irving DL (2013) Mechanical properties and stacking fault
energies of NiFeCrCoMn high-entropy alloy. J Appl Meteorol 65:1780–1789
75. Morikawa T, Higashida K (2010) Deformation microstructure and texture in a cold-rolled
austenitic steel with low stacking-fault energy. Mater Trans 51:620–624
76. Bhattacharjee PP, Sathiaraj GD, Zaid M, Gatti JR, Lee C, Tsai CW, Yeh JW (2014)
Microstructure and texture evolution during annealing of equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy alloy. J Alloys Compd 587:544–552
77. Shewmon PG (1963) Diffusion in solids. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp 164–178
78. Reed-Hill RE, Abbaschian R (1994) Physical metallurgy principles, 3rd edn. PWS Publishing
Company, Boston, pp 390–394
79. Otto F, Dlouhy A, Somsen C, Bei H, Eggeler G, George EP (2013) The inﬂuences of
temperature and microstructure on the tensile properties of a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropyalloy. Acta Mater 61:5743–5755
80. Gludovatz B, Hohenwarter A, Catoor D, Chang EH, George EP, Ritchie RO (2014)
A fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. Science 345:1153–1158
81. Wu Z, Bei H, Pharr GM, George EP (2014) Temperature dependence of the mechanical
properties of equiatomic solid solution alloys with face-centered cubic crystal structures.Acta Mater 81:428–441
82. Couzinie ´JP, Dirras G, Perrie `re L, Chauveau T, Leroy E, Champion Y, Guillot I (2014)
Microstructure of a near-equimolar refractory high-entropy alloy. Mater Lett 126:285–287
83. Lin CM, Juan CC, Chang CH, Tsai CW, Yeh JW (2015) Effect of Al addition on mechanical
properties and microstructure of refractory Al
xHfNbTaTiZr alloys. J Alloys Compd
624:100–107
84. Couryney TH (1990) Mechanical behavior of materials, international ed. McGraw-Hill,
New York, pp 162–219 & 263–324
85. Tsai BS, Yeh JW (2015) Microstructure and mechanical properties of AlxCoCrFeMnNi
(x¼0 ~ 1). Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University
86. Meyers MA, Chawla KK (1984) Mechanical metallurgy: principles and applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, pp 402–413, & 494–514112 J.-W. Yeh87. Chen CS, Yang CC, Chai HY, Yeh JW, Chau JLH (2014) Novel cermet material of
WC/multi-element alloy. Int J Refract Met Hard Mater 43:200–204
88. Lin CM, Tsai CW, Huang SM, Yang CC, Yeh JW (2014) New TiC/Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5
cermet with slow TiC coarsening during sintering. J Appl Meteorol 66:2050–2056
89. Meyers MA, Chawla KK (1984) Mechanical metallurgy: principles and applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, pp 659–687
90. Dieter GE (1988) Mechanical metallurgy, SI metric ed. McGraw-Hill, New York,
pp 432–470
91. Reed RC (2006) The superalloys: fundamentals and applications. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 1–120
92. Mohamed FA, Langdon TG (1974) The transition from dislocation climb to viscous glide in
creep of solid solution alloys. Acta Metall 30:779–788
93. He JY, Zhu C, Zhou DQ, Liu WH, Nieh TG, Lu ZP (2014) Steady state ﬂow of the
FeCoNiCrMn high entropy alloy at elevated temperatures. Intermetallics 55:9–14
94. Wang WR, Wang WL, Yeh JW (2014) Phases, microstructure and mechanical properties of
AlxCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys at elevated temperatures. J Alloys Compd 589:143–152
95. Khana KB, Kutty TRG, Surappa MK (2006) Hot hardness and indentation creep study on
Al-5% Mg alloy matrix-B 4C particle reinforced composites. Mater Sci Eng A 427:76–82
96. Kutty TRG, Jarvis T, Ganguly C (1997) Hot hardness and indentation creep studies on
Zr-1Nb-lSn-0.1Fe alloy. J Nucl Mater 246:189–195
97. Wang WR, Wang WL, Wang SC, Tsai YC, Lai CH, Yeh JW (2012) Effects of Al addition
on the microstructure and mechanical property of Al xCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys.
Intermetallics 26:44–51
98. Dieter GE (1988) Mechanical metallurgy, SI metric ed. McGraw-Hill, New York,
pp 336–337
99. Merchant HD, Murty GS, Bahadur SN, Dwivedi LT, Mehrotra Y (1973) Hardness-
temperature relationships in metals. J Mater Sci 8:437–442
100. Kutty TRG, Ravi K, Ganguly C (1999) Studies on hot hardness of Zr and its alloys for nuclear
reactors. J Nucl Mater 265:91–993 Physical Metallurgy 113Chapter 4
Advanced Characterization Techniques
Louis J. Santodonato and Peter K. Liaw
Abstract This chapter ﬁrst provides a brief introduction to some advanced
microstructure characterization tools, such as three-dimensional (3D) atom probetomography, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, and neutron scat-tering. Applications of these techniques to characterize high-entropy alloys (HEAs)are illustrated in model alloys. Utilization of these advanced techniques can provideextremely useful structural and chemical information at the nanoscale. For exam-
ple, the identiﬁcation of nano-twins in the fracture-toughness crack region of an
HEA may explain the anomalous increases in strength and ductility at cryogenictemperatures. Another striking feature of HEAs is the large local strain amongneighboring atoms, which, in general, are arranged in a crystal structure with long-range order. Our understanding of these types of features, and their effect onmaterial properties, will increase as the microstructural characterization techniquesdescribed here are further developed and applied to HEA research.
Keywords Microstructure characterization • Three-dimensional atom probe
tomography • High-resolution transmission electron microscopy • Neutronscattering • Nanoscale • Microstructure • Nano-twins • Local strain • Solidsolution • Atomic scale • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
Characterization techniques included in this chapter:
• Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
• Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
L.J. Santodonato
Division of Instrument and Source, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Materials Science and Engineering Department, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
e-mail: Santodonatol@ornl.gov
P.K. Liaw (
*)
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USAe-mail: pliaw@vols.utk.edu
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_4115• High-angle annular dark-ﬁeld (HAADF) imaging
• Selected area electron diffraction (SAED)• Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX)
• Backscattered electron (BSE) imaging
• Atom probe tomography (APT)• Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)• X-ray diffraction (XRD)• High-energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction• Anomalous X-ray diffraction (AXRD)• Neutron scattering, including diffraction and pair-distribution function analysis
(PDF)
4.1 Overview of Advanced Characterization Techniques
The experimental studies of high-entropy alloys (HEAs) most often begin withstandard techniques, which are later integrated with more advanced techniques. Forexample, the crystal structures of many HEAs may be determined, using theconventional X-ray diffraction facilities available in many university laboratories.Typical HEA diffraction patterns are quite simple and may be indexed to the body-centered cubic (BCC), face-centered cubic (FCC), and hexagonal close packed(HCP) structures [ 1–6]. The only way that the multiple principal elements can
produce such simple structures is by randomly occupying the lattice sites. Thus, the
solid-solution microstructures are inferred, simply by indexing the diffractionpeaks, and the phases are often referred to as the “disordered” FCC, BCC, orHCP phases. More detailed examinations, however, may reveal that the structuresare not completely disordered (e.g., small “superstructure” peaks may be present).Furthermore, the crystal structures may have signiﬁcant local distortions. In suchcases, additional studies using synchrotron X-ray and/or neutron scattering may beneeded, in order to determine the details of the atomic structures. The scientiﬁc
community has access to several advanced techniques, such as synchrotron X-ray
scattering, neutron scattering, and the microscopy techniques described below, bysubmitting peer-reviewed proposals to major user facilities (Table 4.1).
Electron microscopy techniques, such as transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), are the primary tools for studyingHEA microstructures. Note that many HEAs, especially when studied in the as-castcondition, have complex microstructures with multiple phases. Because the micro-structures contain multiple principal elements, phase-speciﬁc elemental analyses
should be an integral part of the microscopy studies, using techniques such as
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Furthermore, phase-speciﬁc diffrac-tion techniques, such as the electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and selectedarea electron diffraction (SAED), are often part of the microscopy studies. EBSD istypically used to obtain a large-scale map (tens or hundreds of microns) of thecrystal structures, grain sizes, and grain orientations and correlates them with116 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawTable 4.1 Major user facilities providing access to neutron scattering and synchrotron X-ray
diffraction
Technique Facility
Neutron
scatteringNorth America
Oak Ridge Neutron Facilities (SNS/HFIR)NIST Center for Neutron Research
Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE)
University of Missouri Research Reactor CenterCanadian Neutron Beam Centre, Chalk River, CanadaIndiana University Cyclotron Facility
Europe
ISIS-Rutherford-Appleton Laboratories, United KingdomInstitut Laue-Langevin, Grenoble, FranceLeon Brillouin Laboratory, Saclay, France
Berlin Neutron Scattering Center, Germany
GEMS at Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht, GermanyJuelich Center for Neutron Science, GermanyFRM-II, Munich, Germany
Budapest Neutron Centre, Hungary
RID, Delft, The NetherlandsSINQ, Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI), SwitzerlandFrank Laboratory of Neutron Physics, Dubna, RussiaSt. Petersburg Neutron Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia
Asia and Australia
ISSP Neutron Scattering Laboratory, Tokai, JapanJAEA Research Reactors, Tokai,JapanKENS Neutron Scattering Facility, Tsukuba, Japan
Hi-Flux Advanced Neutron Application Reactor, Korea
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, IndiaBragg Institute, ANSTO, Australia
Synchrotron
X-rayNorth America
ALS: Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA USA)
APS: Advanced Photon Source (Argonne, IL USA)CHESS: Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (Cornell, Ithaca, NY USA)NSLS: National Synchrotron Light Source (Brookhaven, Upton, NY USA)
SSRL: Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SLAC, Stanford, CA USA)
SURF: NIST SURF-II UV synchrotron (NIST, Gaithersburg, MD USA)Synchrotron Radiation Center (Stoughton, WI USA)Europe
Daresbury Laboratory SERC (Daresbury, England)
ESRF: European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Grenoble, France)LURE (Orsay, France)DELTA: Dortmund Electron Test Accelerator (Dortmund, Germany)
ELSA: ELectron Stretcher and Accelerator (Bonn, Germany)
Hasylab (DESY, Hamburg, Germany)Elettra (Trieste, Italy)
(continued)4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 117microstructural features. SAED may focus on a smaller region of the microstructure
and is often used to determine subsequent dark-ﬁeld TEM studies, providing a
nanoscale map of the crystal structures.
The atomic-level homogeneity and structural features are important issues in
HEAs. The atomic conﬁgurations are directly related to the conﬁgurational entropyof mixing, which forms the basis of the HEA design strategy. Atomic-level featuresare beyond the resolution of many techniques. However, the specialized TEMtechnique of high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld (HAADF) imaging is capable of captur-ing atomic-level details. APT is another powerful technique, capable of detectingindividual atoms within a selected volume and constructing detailed maps of the
atomic distribution.
Advanced characterization techniques are not simply a matter of using advanced
equipment. The integration of several techniques, and clever experimental design,is a crucial factor. The examples given below, taken from a review of the literature,illustrate these strategies.
4.2 Microstructural Features of the Al xCoCrCuFeNi
System: Integrated SEM, TEM (Bright and DarkField), SAED, EDX, and XRD
The tendency of HEAs to form simple solid-solution structures was established
from the early work on the Al xCoCrCuFeNi alloys, with varying aluminum con-
tents (molar ratios from x¼0 to 3.0) [ 1,2]. Conventional XRD was used to identify
the FCC and BCC crystal structures in this system and to establish the trend that theFCC-dominated microstructure changes to a BCC-dominated microstructure as the
aluminum content increases (Fig. 4.1). The effect of aluminum content on the HEA
microstructure continues to be studied to the present [ 5].
Because the alloy contains multiple principal elements, the simple FCC and
BCC crystal structures may be interpreted as substitutional solid solutions, whereeach lattice site is statistically populated by several elements. However, a deviationfrom the simple FCC/BCC structure is indicated by the presence of “ordered BCC”Table 4.1 (continued)
Technique Facility
MAXLAB (Lund, Sweden)
SLS: Swiss Light Source (PSI, Villigen, Switzerland)
Asia
BSRF: Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Beijing, China)The Photon Factory (KEK, Tsukuba, Japan)SPring-8 (Riken Go, Japan)
SRRC: Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (Hsinchu City, Taiwan)
Source: www.ncnr.nist.gov118 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawpeaks in the diffraction scans (Fig. 4.2). These peaks are systematically absent in a
true BCC structure (i.e., peaks where the sum of the Miller indices, h+k+l, is odd).
Their presence indicates that the solid solution is at least partially ordered, such thatthe site at the center of the unit cell does not have the same atomic occupation as thesite at the origin (Fig. 4.3). The detailed nature of this type of ordering has been the
subject of subsequent studies [ 7–9] and is discussed later in the chapter (Sect. 4.8).
The microstructures of the as-cast Al
xCoCrCuFeNi alloys progress from the
simple to complex structures, as the aluminum content is increased. A thorough
characterization was obtained [ 1,2], using a combination of SEM and TEM studies.
Dendrite and interdendrite structures were observed using SEM (Fig. 4.4). The
SEM studies included EDX to determine, for example, that the interdendrites areCu rich. Despite the Cu segregation in the small volume fraction of theinterdendrites, the EDX results showed that the dendrites were composed ofmultiple principal elements, particularly for low Al contents ( x<0.8). As the Al
content increases to x¼1, the dendrites develop a spinodal microstructure (i.e., a
periodic microstructure, arising from composition ﬂuctuations). The changes in the
SEM microstructures may be correlated with the XRD studies, such that the alloyphases for the low aluminum content are FCC (a Cu-rich FCC phase in theinterdendrites and a multi-principal element FCC phase in the dendrites) andmixed-phase FCC/BCC/B2 at higher aluminum contents. However, further infor-mation from the TEM studies is needed for a more detailed picture.
The TEM bright-ﬁeld imaging, SAED, conﬁrms the correlation between the
XRD crystal structures and the microstructures. Both the dendrites and
interdendrites of the as-cast Al
xCoCrCuFeNi alloys, with aluminum contents
from x¼0 to 0.5, were composed of FCC structures. Within the dendrites and
interdendrites, a homogeneous TEM microstructure was observed.
800
FCC FCC + BCC BCC 7003.70 3.00
2.952.90
2.85FCC BCC
3.65
3.60
3.55600
500400300200100
0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
x value in Al xCoCrCuFeNiA
B
CHardness (HV)
Lattice constant (angstrom)
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Fig. 4.1 FCC/BCC crystal structure trend in the Al xCoCrCuFeNi system (From Ref. [ 1])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 119Fig. 4.2 XRD analyses of the Al xCoCrCuFeNi alloy system with different aluminum contents
(xvalues). The patterns are indexed to FCC ( open triangles ) and BCC ( solid diamonds ) phases.
Ordered peaks of the B2 phase are also indicated (From Ref. [ 2])
Fig. 4.3 Schematic illustration of disordered versus ordered BCC structures in HEAs. The gray
spheres represent crystal sites that are occupied by a random or nearly random mixture of
elements. The colored sphere, in the center of the B2-ordered unit cell, represents a site that is
preferentially occupied, by Al, for example. Note that there are several different mixing scenarios
that could lead to a B2-ordered structure120 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawThe TEM examinations of the dendrites in the Al 0.8CoCrCuFeNi composition
show only a simple FCC phase, as in the lower Al-content compositions. However,
the interdendrites were composed of mixed FCC and BCC phases, resulting from a
eutectic reaction, corresponding to the two main groups of XRD peaks at the x¼0.8
composition (Fig. 4.2). As the Al content is further increased to x/C211, the BCC
structures dominate. The TEM and SAED analyses (Fig. 4.5) further elucidate the
phase decomposition seen in the SEM micrographs (Fig. 4.4). Superstructure
reﬂections are clearly observed in the SAED (an inset on the bright-ﬁeld image of
Fig. 4.4 SEM microstructures of the as-cast Al xCoCrCuFeNi alloys with different aluminum
contents ( xvalues): ( a)0 ,(b) 0.3, ( c) 0.5, ( d) 0.8, and ( e) 1.0 [(dendrite ( DR), interdendrites ( ID),
and spinodal decomposition ( SD)] (From Ref. [ 2])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 121Fig. 4.5a), indicating that the spinodal microstructure contains an ordered BCC
phase. A more precise pinpointing of the ordered phase was achieved, using the
dark-ﬁeld TEM analysis [ 2].
In dark-ﬁeld TEM, the image is produced by the portion of the electron beam
that is diffracted at a particular scattering vector, Qhkl. The dark-ﬁeld TEM images
of the equimolar AlCoCrCuFeNi alloy (Fig. 4.5b), based upon the (0 1 0) super-
structure reﬂection seen in the SAED pattern (Fig. 4.5a, inset), reveal that the ~100-
nm thick plates have an ordered BCC (B2) structure and the ~70-nm thick
interpolates have a disordered BCC structure. Thus, a combination of bright-ﬁeld
(i.e., a transmitted beam) and dark-ﬁeld (i.e., a diffracted beam) TEM examinations
allows a nanometer-scale mapping of the crystallographic features of the alloy.
The equimolar AlCoCrCuFeNi alloy contains various nanoprecipitates, visible
in Figs. 4.5c–e . A SAED pattern of one of the nanoprecipitates (Fig. 4.5c, inset)
corresponds to the FCC structure. In the dark-ﬁeld TEM image, based upon one of
the FCC reﬂections (Fig. 4.5d), nanoprecipitates of various sizes appear bright,
indicating that they have similar FCC structures. The BCC/B2 matrix appears dark,
because it does not produce any signiﬁcant scattering in the vicinity of the FCC
Fig. 4.5 TEM microstructures of the dendrite of the as-cast Al 1.0CoCrCuFeNi alloy: ( a) bright-
ﬁeld image of modulated plates and interplates with the SAED pattern of the BCC [0 0 1] zone
axis; ( b) dark-ﬁeld image corresponding to the (0 1 0) superlattice spot of the SAED pattern shown
in (a); parts (c) through (e) shown on the next page. (c) Bright-ﬁeld image with the SAED pattern
of the arrowed precipitate close to the FCC zone axis; ( d) dark-ﬁeld image corresponding to the
circled spot of the SAED pattern shown in (c); and ( e) enlarged bright-ﬁeld image of the modulated
plates and interplates with the same SAED pattern of the BCC [0 0 1] zone axis shown in (a); α,
interplate, 70-nm wide, disordered BCC phase (A2), of lattice constant 2.89 Å;β, plate, 100-nm
wide, ordered BCC phase (B2), lattice constant of 2.89 Å;ε, nanoprecipitation in plate, 7–50 nm in
diameter, close to the FCC phase; and δ, contrast in the interplate due to the surface roughness
effect of the TEM foil (From Ref. [ 2])122 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawreﬂection. Finally, the enlarged bright-ﬁeld TEM image (Fig. 4.5e) shows more
details of the spinodal microstructure and the various nanoprecipitates.
The early studies [ 1,2] of the Al xCoCrCuFeNi alloys, summarized here,
established that the HEA design strategy promotes the formation of simple, solid-
solution microstructures. These studies also showed how the disordered solid-
solution microstructures may decompose into a mixture of ordered and disordered
phases and that a variety of nanoprecipitates are present. These studies integrated
XRD, SEM, and TEM. The TEM studies included bright-ﬁeld imaging, SAED, and
dark-ﬁeld imaging, based upon particular SAED reﬂections, in order to correlate
Fig. 4.5 (continued)4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 123the crystal structures with the nanoscale features of the microstructure. These
detailed, early studies set the foundation for the ﬁeld of the HEA research. Thestrategic use of conventional XRD, SEM, bright-ﬁeld and dark-ﬁeld TEM continue
to advance our understanding of HEAs.
4.3 Understanding the Fracture-Resistant Behavior
of the CoCrFeMnNi Alloy: BSE Imaging, EBSD, EDX,and Stereomicroscopy
XRD studies indicate that the CoCrFeMnNi alloy forms a single-phase FCC solid
solution and EDX veriﬁes the nearly homogeneous CoCrFeMnNi composition ofthe solid solution [ 10,11]. This alloy exhibits excellent damage tolerance, with
fracture-toughness values [ 11] exceeding 200 MPa · m
1/2. Moreover, both the
strength and ductility increase at cryogenic temperatures, contrary to the trend inmost alloys, where ductility typically decreases as strength increases. When
CoCrFeMnNi was cooled from room temperature to 77 K, the ultimate tensile
strength was found to increase by 70 %, reaching 1280 MPa, while the tensileductility (strain at failure) increased by 25 %, such that ε>0.7 [11]. The nature of
this interesting behavior in CoCrFeMnNi was uncovered using microscopy toexamine the sample regions surrounding a fracture-toughness crack tip. The com-plementary techniques included stereomicroscopy, SEM, EBSD, EDX, and BSEimaging.
Sample preparation and fatigue-cracking procedures were important aspects of
the CoCrFeMnNi study, and were crucial for obtaining relevant microscopy results,
which revealed the underlying mechanisms of the fracture resistance. TheCoCrFeMnNi alloys were prepared by arc melting and drop casting into a rectan-gular cross-section mold (25.4 mm /C219.1 mm /C2127 mm). The specimens were
further processed by cold forging, cross rolling (producing a 60 % reduction inthickness), and annealing at 800
/C14C for one hour in air. The annealing process
produced fully recrystallized, equiaxed grains of ~6 μm size, as shown on the BSE
micrograph (Fig. 4.6). The Cr-rich and Mn-rich particles, ~2 μm in diameter, are
dispersed throughout the solid-solution matrix. These particles may serve as the
initiation sites for microvoids that form during cracking [ 11], as described further
below.
The annealed CoCrFeMnNi specimens were cut into the compact-tension geom-
etry (ASTM International, formerly known as the American Society of Testing andMaterials, Standard E18200) [ 12], of a nominal width, W¼18 mm, and thickness,
B¼9 mm, and notched (6.6 mm in length with notch root radii of ~100 μm) using
electrical discharge machining (EDM). The specimens were then fatigue cracked
by applying a cyclic load, using a commercial load frame, until the crack propa-
gated to a length of about 10 mm. Finally, some of the cracked samples were slicedin half, such that their ﬁnal thickness was B/2. This slicing procedure exposed new124 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawsurfaces, which were representative of the interior of the sample during the fatigue-
cracking process, including the regions in the immediate vicinity of the crack tip,where plane-strain conditions prevail. The slicing provided pairs of closely relatedsamples for control tests, such as those used to verify that the microscopy prepa-
ration, where specimens were embedded at 180
/C14C in a conductive resin, did not
introduce any structural damage. Thus, the microscopy studies of the carefullyprepared fatigue-cracked specimens provided the reliable and relevant informationabout the mechanisms of the fracture-resistant behavior in the CoCrFeMnNi alloy.
Low-magniﬁcation SEM images of surfaces containing the fatigue cracks
(Fig. 4.7a) show many irregular-shaped voids along the crack path, indicating
that ductile fracture occurs by microvoid coalescence. Signs of ductile fractureare present for both the room-temperature and 77 K fatigue cracks, based upon the
low-magniﬁcation SEM. Higher-magniﬁcation EBSD and BSE images, however,
reveal important details and distinctions between the room-temperature and cryo-genic deformation and fracture behaviors.
Fig. 4.6 Backscattered electron (BSE) micrograph of the annealed CoCrFeMnNi, showing ~6 μm
grains containing several recrystallization twins. The inset on the top right shows the EDX result,verifying the equimolar composition of the solid solution. The inset on the middle right shows thesimple X-ray diffraction pattern, which corresponds to the FCC structure (From Ref. [ 11])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 125The EBSD images of the room-temperature crack tip show pronounced grain
misorientations (Fig. 4.7b), which are attributed to the glide of dislocations on the
{111} crystal planes, and may serve as the primary room-temperature deformationmechanism. Several twins are also visible near the room-temperature crack tip,
Fig. 4.7 Deformation mechanisms near the crack tip at the center (plane-strain) section of
CoCrFeMnNi HEA samples. ( a) Low-magniﬁcation SEM images of samples tested at room
temperature and 77 K show ductile fracture by the microvoid coalescence. ( b) EBSD images of
the room-temperature sample show grain misorientations due to dislocations, representing the
dominant deformation mechanism. Annealing twins are also present, as in the crack-free regions.(c) At 77 K, nano-twinning is seen on the BSE and EBSD images (the “IQ + EBSD” label indicates
that the EBSD image is an overlay to an image quality [IQ] map). The low-temperature nano-
twinning provides the enhanced ductility (tensile engineering strain >0.7 at failure stress of
1280 MPa). The cell structures (dark patches) seen throughout the BSE image, and especiallyon the inset, are due to the dislocation activity (From Ref. [ 11])126 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawwhich are identiﬁed as annealing twins, because they are present throughout the
bulk of the annealed CoCrFeMnNi samples. In the immediate vicinity of the crackformed at 77 K, however, EBSD and BSE images show nano-twinning (i.e., closely
spaced twins, on the nanometer scale). The nano-twins appear in addition to the
dislocation cell structures, which are associated with the abovementioned disloca-tion glide (Fig. 4.7c). It is concluded, therefore, that nano-twinning provides an
extra deformation mechanism at cryogenic temperatures and is responsible for theenhanced ductility and exceptional toughness of the CoCrFeMnNi HEA.
The nano-twinning in the CoCrFeMnNi alloy was observed using EBSD on
highly polished surfaces (progressively polished to a 0.05- μm surface ﬁnish,
followed by a ﬁnal polishing step using colloidal silica) [ 13]. These surfaces
intersected the actual crack surfaces, providing the crucial information about the
deformation behavior around the crack. Additional information was obtained bydirectly examining the crack surfaces of fully separated compact-tension samples,using optical stereomicroscopy, EDX, and SEM stereo image pairs. The resultshelped determine that the high toughness was associated with ductile fracture bymicrovoid coalescence.
SEM shows that the CoCrFeMnNi crack surfaces are covered with ductile
fracture dimples (Fig. 4.8a). Distinct particles are observed within the dimples,
which were shown to be Mn rich and Cr rich, using EDX. These particles were
identiﬁed as microvoid-initiation sites. These microvoids grow and coalesce, whena sufﬁcient tensile stress is applied, ultimately leading to ductile fracture. Three-dimensional fracture surface models were constructed from SEM stereo image pairs(Fig. 4.8b), which show distinct differences between the fatigue pre-crack regions,
and the ﬁnal ductile facture zone, where the dimples become most pronounced.
The CoCrFeMnNi fracture-toughness study [ 11] demonstrates the value of an
integrated mechanical testing and microscopy experiment plan. Here, the micros-
copy studies were performed on carefully prepared compact-tension specimens.
Microstructural features were examined across many length scales, from millime-ters (optical microscopy) to nanometers (BSE and EBSD). Nano-twinning wasidentiﬁed as the underlying mechanism for the exceptional cryogenic ductilityand fracture enhancement.
4.4 Phase Decomposition in AlCoCrCuFeNi:
High-Resolution TEM and APT
Although HEAs have a tendency to form solid solutions with simple crystal
structures, detailed examinations of the microstructures sometimes reveal signiﬁ-
cant complexity. The AlCoCrCuFeNi HEA is an excellent example. A comparison
of splat-quenched versus conventional cast samples was made, using the high-resolution electron microscopy and atom probe tomography as the main analyticaltechniques [ 8]. XRD was also used to identify the major phases. Advanced sample4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 127Fig. 4.8 (a) SEM micrograph of a room-temperature crack surface covered with dimples,
indicating a ductile fracture mode. The particles seen within the dimples served as microvoid-
initiation sites. These particles were determined to be Cr rich and Mn rich from EDX analyses
(inset). ( b) A three-dimensional fracture surface was rendered using SEM stereo image pairs. The
different morphologies of the fatigue pre-crack zone, stretch zone (transitional region), and ductile
fracture zone are visible (From Ref. [ 11])128 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawpreparation techniques, particularly splat quenching, which produced cooling rates
on the order of 106K/s, played a key role in this study. It was shown that the
quenched samples consisted of a single-phase, imperfectly ordered solid solution,
while the cast samples formed complex, multiphase microstructures.
The XRD patterns of the as-cast samples were indexed to three phases: FCC1
(a lattice parameter, afcc1¼3.59Å), FCC2 ( afcc2¼3.62Å), and BCC
(abcc¼2.87Å). The splat-quenched samples, however, produced only the BCC
reﬂections (Fig. 4.9). The details of the microstructure, and the atomic structure,
were revealed using the high-resolution TEM and APT.
A bright-ﬁeld TEM image shows the polycrystalline microstructure of the splat-
quenched alloy (Fig. 4.10a ), which has ~1.5 μm grain sizes. The dark-ﬁeld TEM
(Fig. 4.10b ) reveals a domain-like structure within the crystal grains, seen as bright
spots throughout the image. The SAED pattern corresponds to an ordered BCC, or
B2 structure, and the dark-ﬁeld image is produced, using the [1 0 0] superlattice
reﬂection. Thus, the spots on the dark-ﬁeld image are ultimately interpreted as an
imperfectly ordered B2 phase, consisting of a mixture of B2 and BCC domains
within a coherent crystal structure.
The as-cast samples show a phase-separated microstructure, similar to the results
of the earlier study [ 2] presented in Fig. 4.5. However, new details of the atomic-
level phase decomposition were obtained using APT, a technique where individual
atoms are stripped from a specimen that is specially prepared in the form of a sharp
tip (Fig. 4.11). The as-cast AlCoCrCuFeNi samples where sharpened, using a
two-step process: mechanical polishing and focused ion beam (FIB) milling. The
subsequent APT studies provided atom maps (Fig. 4.12) within various
Fig. 4.9 Comparison of XRD patterns of as-cast and splat-quenched AlCoCrCuFeNi samples.
The as-cast samples separate into three different phases (fcc1, fcc2, and bcc), while the splat-
quenched samples appear to be of a single phase (From Ref. [ 8])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 129microstructural features, such as the Al-Ni-enriched B2-ordered plates, the Fe-Cr-
enriched BCC interpolates, and the Cu-rich plate precipitates.
By correlating the APT and high-resolution microscopy results, a very detailed
picture of the extensive phase decomposition in the as-cast AlCoCrCuFeNi
emerged. The splat-quenched samples had a single-phase, solid-solution character.
Fig. 4.10 TEM images of the splat-quenched AlCoCrCuFeNi. ( a) Bright-ﬁeld micrographs show
the polycrystalline microstructure. ( b) A dark-ﬁeld image, using the (1 0 0) superlattice reﬂection,
reveals a domain-like structure within the grains. The inset shows the SAED pattern (From
Ref. [ 8])
Fig. 4.11 TEM image of an
AlCoCrCuFeNi needle-tip
sample prepared for the
APT study (From Ref. [ 8])130 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawThe single-phase character was especially apparent on the XRD and bright-ﬁeld
TEM images. However, the high-resolution dark-ﬁeld TEM studies revealed adomain-like structure, produced by the local segregation of elements. The strong
tendency for elemental segregation thus became apparent.
4.5 Nature of the Phase Interfaces in Al 1.5CoCrCuFeNi:
HAADF Imaging
Phase separation in the Al xCoCrCuFeNi system (Figs. 4.4and 4.5) has been
thoroughly studied [ 1,2,7,8,14]. This section highlights the use of HAADF to
study the nanoscale microstructural features and even the atomic-level details of theinterfaces between the B2 and BCC phases in Al
1.5CoCrCuFeNi. The work was
performed at the Center for Electron Microscopy and Analysis (CEMAS) at the
Ohio State University [ 15].
The high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld (HAADF) imaging is a technique where high-
angle scattered electrons are collected, using an annular detector in a scanningtransmission electron microscope [ 16]. When combined with EDX, nanoscale
Reg.1 Reg.2 Reg.3
Al
Cr
Co
CuFeNi
Fig. 4.12 Atom maps from an APT study of the as-cast AlCoCrCuFeNi. The numbered regions
correspond to (1) an Al-Ni-enriched region, (2) a Cr-Fe-enriched region, and (3) a Cu-rich plate
precipitate (From Ref. [ 8])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 131segregation of elements may be detected. In the case of Al 1.5CoCrCuFeNi
(Fig. 4.13), the elements, Ni, Al, Co, and small amounts of Fe and Cu, tend to
partition to one of the platelike phases. The elements, Cr, Fe, and small amounts ofCo, tend to partition to the other of the two platelike phases. In addition to the two
main platelike phases, Cu-rich precipitates are seen on the EDX images.
At higher magniﬁcations, individual columns of atoms can be resolved, and the
coherent lattice structure of the different phases can be directly observed(Fig. 4.14). Sample orientation was an important consideration on these high-
resolution HAADF images. It was determined that the interfacial planes (planesseparating the BCC and B2 plates) have normals in the <001 >direction. The
sample could thus be tilted about the <001 >axis without signiﬁcantly changing
the projection of the interfaces. When the sample was tilted such that the electron
beam direction was near <110>, a pronounced contrast was found between the B2
and BCC regions. In particular, the spots (i.e., atom columns) in the B2 region havealternating intensities, forming rows of above-average and rows of below-averageintensities (the top left portion of Fig. 4.14). These alternating intensities are
consistent with the B2 structure, particularly, if the Al atoms preferentially occupyone sublattice, giving it a lower average atomic number, Z, compared to the other
sublattice, which has more Ni, Co, and Fe. As expected, the atom column intensities
Fig. 4.13 HAADF and EDX maps of the nanoscale elemental segregation in the
Al1.5CoCrCuFeNi alloy (From Ref. [ 15])132 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawin the BCC region (lower right) are nearly uniform, due to the disordered mixing of
the elements in this phase, giving each atom column the same average Z.
The presently described HAADF study identiﬁed, for the ﬁrst time, a distinct
interface region between the B2 and BCC phases. The interface region is about2-nm thick, and it has an intensity proﬁle different from either the main B2 or theBCC phase. The interface is actually a secondary B2 phase, with a differentcomposition than the main B2 phase. In particular, the interface phase is FeCoenriched and is similar to the binary FeCo intermetallic compound.
The atomic-scale resolution and Z-sensitivity of the HAADF measurements
were crucial factors in identifying the interface phase, which may play an importantrole in the mechanical properties of the Al
1.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA. In general,
HAADF may play a critical role in determining the detailed microstructures ofmany HEAs.
Fig. 4.14 High-resolution HAADF image showing individual atom columns in
Al1.5CoCrCuFeNi. The electron beam is aligned along the <110 >direction, and the interface
normal is along <001 >. As emphasized by the yellow line, the lattices of the phases are aligned
and registered. The B2 phase has alternating intensities, and the BCC phase has much more
uniform atom column intensities. An interface region, about 2-nm thick, has a different intensityproﬁle than either the BCC or B2 regions. Each region is associated with a particular composition
and structure (i.e., a distinct phase) (From Ref. [ 15])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 1334.6 Chemical Disorder Veriﬁed Using Anomalous X-Ray
Diffraction and Neutron Scattering
Ordered structures (Fig. 4.3) have been detected in many HEAs, such as
AlxCoCrCuFeNi, based on the appearance of superstructure reﬂections in the
XRD patterns (Fig. 4.2). The detection of the XRD superstructure reﬂections,
however, is possible only when there is a sufﬁcient difference in the X-ray scatter-ing factors ( f) of the elements in the ordered HEA phase. The same requirement
applies to neutron diffraction, where the neutron scattering lengths ( b) among the
elements must be sufﬁciently different to be sensitive to ordered versus disordereddistributions. It is important to note that the fandbfollow very different trends
across the periodic table, which is a great motivation for conducting complemen-
tary X-ray and neutron scattering studies.
In the case of the conventional XRD, using Cu K αradiation, for example, there
are small differences in ffor elements that are close in atomic numbers. Conse-
quently, the conventional XRD cannot distinguish between ordered and disordereddistributions of the transition metals, such as the possible conﬁgurations shown inFig.4.15. Aluminum, however, has a signiﬁcantly lower fthan the 3-d transition
metals. Therefore, B2 order has been readily detected in the Al
xCoCrCuFeNi
family, even using the conventional XRD (Fig. 4.2). Despite the detection of the
B2 order in the Al-containing HEAs, a detailed knowledge of the atomic distribu-tions is not feasible, based upon the conventional XRD alone. The anomalous X-raydiffraction (AXRD), however, may be used to create the scattering contrast neededto detect ordering in HEAs.
Lucas et al. [ 17] applied AXRD (using the beamline, 33BM, at the Advanced
Photon Source of the Argonne National Laboratory) and neutron scattering(using the ARCS spectrometer at the Spallation Neutron Source, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory) to demonstrate that the CoCrFeNi alloy lacks the
Fig. 4.15 Different atomic distributions on a simple cubic lattice ( solid box ) with the face-
centered cubic atomic basis. ( a) The random solid solution where gray atoms represent an average
atom. ( b) The L12-ordered structure where the gray atoms represent Ni atoms for FeNi3 or a
random mixture of Co, Cr, and Ni atoms for Fe(Co,Cr,Ni) 3.(c) A fully ordered CoCrFeNi alloy
(From Ref. [ 17])134 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawlong-range chemical order. The applicability of AXRD to this problem is best
understood by examining expressions for the structure factor, Fhkl. The Bragg
intensity of the hklfamily of planes is proportional to | Fhkl|2, where Fhklis given by
Fhkl¼XN
j¼1fjexp 2 πih x jþkyjþlzj/C16/C17hi
: ð4:1Þ
Here, the unit cell contains Natoms, identiﬁed by j¼1t oN, located at positions, xj,
yj, and zj, and having atomic scattering factors, fj. For the case of a CoCrFeNi alloy
with a random FCC solid-solution structure, Eq. 4.1may be written as [ 17]
Frss
hkl¼fhi1þ/C0 1ðÞhþkþ/C0 1ðÞhþlþ/C0 1ðÞlþkhi
; ð4:2Þ
where fhirepresents the concentration-weighted average scattering factor for the
Co, Cr, Fe, andNi atoms and the “rss” superscript identiﬁes the random solid-solution phase. The rss structure factor of Eq. 4.2gives the familiar FCC selection
rule, allowing only non-mixed reﬂections (i.e., h,k, and lare all even or all odd). If
the alloy is ordered, however, the elements will preferentially occupy certain sites,and the average scattering factor fhiwill be replaced by the element-speciﬁc
scattering factors in a structure factor. For example, if the ordering behavior issimilar to the scheme shown in Fig. 4.15, then Eq. 4.1may be written as
F
ord
hkl¼fFeþfNi/C01ðÞhþkþfCr/C01ðÞhþlþfCo/C01ðÞlþkhi
: ð4:3Þ
For the conventional XRD with the CuK αradiation, fFe/C25fNi/C25fCr/C25fCo, and the
structure factors given in Eqs. 4.2and4.3are nearly equivalent. Thus, no super-
structure reﬂections will be detected, even if the alloy is ordered.
Using AXRD, the incident photon energies are tuned to the K-edge of a selected
element, signiﬁcantly reducing its scattering factor (Fig. 4.16). The sensitivity to
chemical ordering is, thus, greatly enhanced. Lucas et al. [ 17] included the ordered
FeNi 3compound as a control sample in their study of the CoCrFeNi alloy to verify
that their measurement was sensitive to the chemical order. Thus, when theCoCrFeNi alloy showed no signs of order in the AXRD measurements
(Fig. 4.17), it made a convincing case that the alloy indeed lacked the long-range
chemical order. The authors were careful to specify that the diffraction resultsaddress only the long-range order, and, therefore, short-range order could not beruled out.
In the case of neutron diffraction, the scattering lengths, b
Fe,bNi,bCr, and bCo,
will replace the scattering factors, f,i nE q . 4.3. These neutron scattering lengths
have a signiﬁcant variation (Table 4.2) and, thus, provide a modest sensitivity to
ordering. The CoCrFeNi study [ 17] included both neutron diffraction and AXRD
measurements, with consistent results (i.e., the lack of the long-range order).
Furthermore, the vibrational density of states was obtained from the inelastic4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 135scattering of neutrons. The inelastic neutron results demonstrated that the average
forces on the Fe and Ni atoms are similar, providing more evidence of the disor-
dered solution structure, independent of the diffraction results. Note that the
inelastic measurements were less sensitive to the Co and Cr vibrational modesthan the Fe and Ni modes. Therefore, it could not be concluded that all of the atomsexperienced similar atomic forces.
The CoCrFeNi study summarized above demonstrates the great potential of
techniques, such as AXRD and neutron scattering (both diffraction and inelasticscattering), for characterizing HEAs. Another complementary use of neutron andX-ray scattering is given in the next section.
4.7 Local Atomic Structure in the Ternary HfNbZr Alloy
Most HEAs [ 18] have a long-range crystal order, i.e., the atoms occupy positions on
a periodic lattice. However, the atoms may ﬁll the lattice sites in a disorderedfashion, causing local distortions in the lattice structure, due to the different sizes ofthe atoms. These local distortions are an important feature of HEAs, potentiallystrengthening the material.
An important technique for studying the local atomic structure is the pair-
distribution function (PDF) [ 19] analysis. The reduced PDF may be calculated
from the Fourier transform of the structure function, S(Q), experimentally deter-
mined from diffraction measurements, such that
30
25
20
15
10
60005989 eVCrCr
FeFe
CoCoNi
Ni
7112 eV 7709 eV 8333 eV
7000Characteristic Cu K α Radiation (8028 eV)
Photon Energy (eV)Scattering Factor
8000 9000
Fig. 4.16 The basis for AXRD. The real part of the scattering factor, f, as a function of photon
energy, shows sharp dips. The dashed vertical lines are the energies used in AXRD experiments on
the CoCrFeNi HEA (From Ref. [ 17])136 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liaw104
103FeNi3 Annealed (ordered)
FeNi3 Quenched (disordered)
FeCoCrNi Annealed
FeCoCrNi Quenched(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)s-(100)
x-ray 7112eV
x-ray 7112eV
x-ray 7112eV
x-ray 7112eV
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Q (Å-1)a
b
c
dIntensity (counts/sec)
3.5 4.0s-(110)s-(210) s-(211)(200)
(200)
(200)
(200)102
104
103
102
104
103
102
104
103
102
Fig. 4.17 Anomalous X-ray diffraction (AXRD) patterns comparing FeNi 3,which has a strong
tendency to order, with the equimolar CoCrFeNi, which show no tendency to order. Both materials
were measured in the annealed and quenched conditions (From Ref. [ 17])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 137GrðÞ¼2
πð1
0QSQðÞ /C0 1 ½/C138 sinQrðÞ dQ; ð4:4Þ
where Qis the magnitude of the scattering vector in a reciprocal space and ris the
interatomic distance. Software applications, such as PDFgui [ 20] and PDFgetN
[21], may be used to obtain the PDF, which gives a real-space map of the atomic
structure. The “pairs” in the PDF refer to the nearest neighbor, second neighbor, etc.pairs of atoms in the structure. The peaks in a PDF proﬁle give the distancesbetween these pairs. The PDF studies are often conducted, using optimized diffrac-tometers at high-energy synchrotron X-ray and/or neutron user facilities(Table 4.1).
The HfNbZr alloy, containing only three elements, has been used as a test case to
study the local structure of HEAs, in order to simplify sample preparation and dataanalysis [ 22]. Complementary PDF measurements were made using high-energy
synchrotron X-rays (beamline ID6-C, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne NationalLaboratory, IL.) and neutrons (high-intensity powder diffractometer [HIPD] at theLos Alamos National Laboratory, NM).
Diffraction studies show that the HfNbZr alloy has a BCC structure in both bulk
sample and in a thin ﬁlm ~1.5 μm thick. The model PDF was calculated, using
PDFgui [ 20], based upon the BCC structure obtained from the Rietveld reﬁnement
[23] of the neutron scattering intensities. The experimental neutron and synchrotron
X-ray PDFs are plotted, along with the model calculation, in Fig. 4.18.
PDFs obtained from X-ray diffraction and neutron diffraction agree well with
each other. The measured PDFs differ from the calculated PDF, particularly in thepeak shape of the ﬁrst two peaks, indicating local lattice distortion due to differentatomic sizes in the solid solution (the metallic radii of Hf, Nb, and Zr are 1.59, 1.46,
and 1.60 Å, respectively).Table 4.2 Neutron scattering lengths of selected elements
Element b(fm)
Al 3.45
Co 2.49
Cr 3.64
Cu 7.72Fe 9.45Ni 10.3
A complete listing of neutron scattering lengths may be found in Ref. [ 28]138 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawFig. 4.18 Comparison of observed and calculated PDF (pair-distribution function) for HfNbZr.
(a) The PDFs obtained from the neutron and the calculation agree well. The difference in the ﬁrst
two peaks (see arrow ) originates from the size difference of the atoms in the lattice, which makes
the second peak shadowed by the ﬁrst peak in the neutron data. ( b) In a comparison, the X-ray and
neutron PDF agree in the main features. Some features, such as the X-ray peaks noted by the
arrows, are attributed to noise (From Ref. [ 22])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 1394.8 Deviations from High-Entropy Atomic Conﬁgurations
Characterized Using Complementary Neutronand X-Ray Diffraction Techniques
HEAs have a tendency to form solid solutions because of the high conﬁgurational
entropy of mixing ( ΔSconf
mix). Although disordered solid solutions are especially
favored at high temperatures, as temperature decreases, the entropy effect is
diminished in relation to the enthalpy effect, and phases with a higher degree oforder may form. However, even when “ordered” phases form in HEAs, these phasesmay be only partially ordered, such that a persistent entropy effect inﬂuences thematerial properties. Thus, the HEA strategy applies not only to single-phase solid-solution structures but also to more complex alloys containing partially orderedintermetallic phases; see, for example, [ 9]. It is important, therefore, to study the
detailed atomic distributions within HEAs and to quantify the ΔS
conf
mix. Calculations
of the entropy sources of HEAs, including conﬁgurational, vibrational, and elec-
tronic contributions, are presented in Chap 8and10based on ﬁrst-principles
methods, while the total entropy and entropy of mixing of HEAs are also deter-mined using the CALPHAD (acronym of CALculation of PHA seDiagrams) method
as presented in Chap 12.
The ordered HEA phases often have seemingly simple crystal structures, such as
the B2 structure (Fig. 4.3), which is best known in the context of binary interme-
tallic compounds. Experimentally, B2 ordering is easily detected by the presence of
superlattice reﬂections in diffraction patterns that otherwise resemble BCC patterns(Fig. 4.2). The complexity arises, in the case of multi-element B2 phases, in
determining the particular atomic arrangement associated with the B2 order. Inprinciple, the atomic distribution may be directly solved by applying Rietveldreﬁnements [ 23] to match multi-element structural models to the observed diffrac-
tion proﬁles. Such reﬁnements have several ﬁtting parameters, which may notstrongly converge. The problem may be greatly simpliﬁed, however, by introducing
a single parameter ( δ) to represent the scattering contrast between the two sites in
the B2 unit cell [ 9]. As shown below, the δ-parameter model may be used to
interpret the observed diffraction data and ultimately to experimentally determine
theΔS
conf
mixof the B2-ordered structure. The approach may be adapted to other types
of ordered, multi-element structures.
The HEA lattice sites are statistically populated by several elements, each with
different neutron and X-ray scattering lengths. These sites may be characterized interms of their average scattering lengths, which are generally different for neutrons
versus X-rays. Therefore, complementary information may be obtained by com-
bining the experimental techniques. Using the case of neutron scattering as anexample, the average scattering length of an elemental distribution may be deﬁnedby [9]140 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawbav¼Xn
i¼1xibi; ð4:5Þ
where xiis the molar fraction and biis the neutron scattering length of the ith
element. The B2 structure is characterized by two sublattices, αand β, which
generally have different elemental distributions. The average scattering lengths
associated with the αandβsublattices, respectively, may be written as
bα¼bav/C21þδ ðÞ ð 4:6Þ
and
bβ¼bav/C21/C0δ ðÞ : ð4:7Þ
Theδmay be incorporated into Rietveld reﬁnements as a unitless parameter, which
is directly related to the neutron structure factors:
Ffund
hkl¼bαþbβ; ð4:8Þ
Fsuper
hkl¼bα/C0bβ; ð4:9Þ
where Ffund
hklapplies to the B2 fundamental reﬂections (those where the sum of the
Miller indices, h+k+l , is an even number) and Fsuper
hkl to the superstructure
reﬂections ( h+k+l is an odd number). Thus, the δparameter is equal to the ratio
of the superstructure and fundamental structure factors:
δ¼Fsuper
hkl
Ffund
hklð4:10Þ
The δparameter may be determined experimentally by measuring the ratio of
superstructure and fundamental peak intensities. The parameter has little signiﬁ-cance, however, unless it can be associated with an actual structure. Fortunately,this relationship becomes apparent when the B2 structure is represented in terms oforder parameters. In particular, let x
iαandxiβrepresent the molar fractions of the
element, i, on the αandβsublattices, respectively, expressed as
xiα¼xi1þηi ðÞ ð 4:11Þ
and
xiβ¼xi1/C0ηi ðÞ ; ð4:12Þ
where ηiis the order parameter of the element, i. The ηivalue may range from /C01t o
1, such that ηi¼1 represents an exclusive occupation of the αsublattice, ηi¼0
represents the random occupation of both sublattices, and ηi¼/C01 represents an4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 141exclusive occupation of the βsublattice. The relationship between δand the order
parameters is given by
δ¼1
bavX
xiηibi ð4:13Þ
Using Eq. 4.13, atomic distribution models consistent with complementary neutron
and X-ray diffraction results (Fig. 4.19) were identiﬁed for the complex
Al1.3CoCrCuFeNi alloy [ 9]. At high temperatures, for example, the primary B2
phase was characterized by Al atoms preferentially occupying one sublattice, while
all of the remaining transition-metal atoms were distributed on both sublattices. Astemperature decreases, phase separation occurs, and the atomic distributions asso-ciated with the B2 phase undergo signiﬁcant change. Despite all of the complex
details, the ΔS
conf
mixof the multi-element B2 phase was quantiﬁed, according to
ΔSconf
mix¼/C0R
2Xn
i¼1xi1þηi ðÞ lnxi1þηi ðÞ½/C138 þ xi1/C0ηi ðÞ lnxi1/C0ηi ðÞ½/C138 fg :ð4:14Þ
Fig. 4.19 Atomic distribution analysis. Based upon the integrated intensity ratios of the B2 (1 0 0)
superstructure and (1 1 0) fundamental reﬂections, δ2values are plotted versus temperature, for
both the synchrotron X-ray and neutron diffraction results. The values are determined from theleast squares ﬁtting of Gaussian curves to the observed peaks and the error bars from the standard
errors of the Gaussian ﬁts. The ﬁtted values are compared to the model calculations, indicated by
the dashed black (neutron calculations) and red (X-ray calculations) lines. Calculations for a room-temperature model (RT model) and high-temperature model (HT model) are shown. Atomicredistributions occur in the temperature region associated with the spinodal transformation in
the Al
1.3CoCrCuFeNi alloy. A spinodal BCC phase coexists at room temperature (Adapted from
Ref. [ 9])142 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawThe previously used “ordered” versus “disordered” classiﬁcations were thus
replaced by quantitative characterizations, and a persistent entropy effect wasdemonstrated [ 9].
4.9 In Situ Neutron Diffraction Study of the Deformation
Behavior of the CoCrFeNi HEA
Using a specialized engineering diffractometer (Fig. 4.20), the deformation behav-
ior of HEAs may be examined by applying stress to a sample mounted in a loadframe, while simultaneously collecting neutron diffraction data. The applied stressleads to changes in the lattice constants (i.e., elastic lattice strains), which aredetermined by precisely tracking the positions of the Bragg reﬂections duringloading. The lattice strain, ε
hkl, which may be strongly dependent on the crystal
grain orientation, hkl, is calculated by
εhkl¼dhkl/C0dhkl,0
dhkl,0; ð4:15Þ
where dhklis the d-spacing for a given hklreﬂection at a load and dhkl,0is the value
at zero load. In addition to the peak positions, the relative intensities may changeduring loading, which often indicate changes in texture caused by plastic deforma-
tion. Another important aspect of the in situ neutron diffraction study is the
simultaneous measurement of the macroscopic strain, determined by the loadframe displacements and/or strain gauges on the sample. Ultimately, the combinedobservations of the lattice strain, macroscopic strain, and texture evolution maylead to a detailed understanding of the HEA deformation behavior.
The CoCrFeNi HEA was studied using the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, USA) VULCAN diffractometer [ 24], which
has a high resolution ( Δd/d¼0.2 %) over a wide range of d-spacings, and is
equipped with a multi-axis load frame. The CoCrFeNi HEA consists mostly of a
single FCC phase and therefore serves as an interesting comparison to conventionalFCC metals [ 25]. One important comparison concerns the elastic lattice strain
behavior, which, in conventional FCC metals, is anisotropic, with soft <100 >
directions, attributed to the low atomic packing density and the large interplanardistance of the (1 0 0) planes [ 26]. In the FCC CoCrFeNi alloy, however, the atomic
separations and interactions vary from atom to atom. The VULCAN study shedsome light on the impact of these local ﬂuctuations on the deformation behavior of
the CoCrFeNi alloy.
The neutron diffraction pattern (Fig. 4.21a ) veriﬁed the FCC structure, and the
tensile stress–strain curve (Fig. 4.21b ) showed that the macroscopic deformation
behavior of the CoCrFeNi alloy is similar to that of conventional FCC metals. Inparticular, the CoCrFeNi alloy has a low yield strength (~200 MPa), large tensile4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 143plasticity (~40 %), and a work-hardening coefﬁcient of 0.47, which is similar to that
of FCC copper. The lattice strains (Fig. 4.22a ) and the deformation-induced
changes in peak intensities (Fig. 4.22b ) provide further indications that the
CoCrFeNi alloy has deformation behavior similar to conventional FCC metals.
Fig. 4.20 Diffraction geometry for measuring lattice strains due to applied tensile loads. ( a)
Schematic diagram showing a sample oriented at 45/C14to the incident neutron beam and two
detectors at 90/C14to the beam direction. The scattering vectors of the diffracted beams collected
on the North and South detectors are transverse and parallel to the sample axis, respectively. Thus,transverse and parallel lattice strains are detected separately. ( b) [From the SNS website, http://
neutrons.ornl.gov ] A photograph of a sample mounted on a load frame, and heated by an induction
coil, at the SNS VULCAN instrument144 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawThe [2 0 0] grains have a signiﬁcantly larger elastic strain than the other orientations
([1 1 1], [2 2 0], [3 1 1], and [3 3 1]), based upon d-spacing shifts (Eq. 4.15), which
is expected in FCC metals. The ratio of the elastic stiffness (i.e., the slope of stress–
lattice strain curves) in the <111 >and<100 >directions was found to be 1.98,
close to pure nickel [ 25]. Finally, the deformation-induced intensity changes
Fig. 4.21 (a) The diffraction pattern of CoCrFeNi conﬁrms that the alloy is mostly a single FCC
phase. ( b) The tensile stress–strain curve shows the same features as conventional FCC metals,
such as low yield strength (~200 MPa), large tensile plasticity, and considerable work hardening.
The inset shows an SEM image of the lateral fracture surface, with typical FCC features, such as
the numerous slip bands (From Ref. [ 25])4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 145(Fig. 4.22b ) are similar to those observed in FCC metals and conventional FCC
alloys, in which the textured structure forms during tensile elongation.
The technique of in situ neutron diffraction during loading provides both mac-
roscopic and microscopic information about the deformation behaviors and mech-
anisms in HEAs. In the case of the CoCrFeNi alloy, the technique provided a
rigorous veriﬁcation that the room-temperature deformation behavior was similarto that of conventional FCC metals. Of course, this similarity does not necessarily
Fig. 4.22 (a) The evolution of lattice strain shows a strong, anisotropic strain response, typical of
an FCC structure. ( b) The peak intensities begin to change above the yield stress (~200 MPa) due
to plastic deformation-induced texture development (From Ref. [ 25])146 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liawhold for all HEAs and for different temperature ranges. This neutron technique will
likely be employed on many other HEAs and under a variety of environmentalconditions.
4.10 Future Work
The experimental studies of HEAs are becoming more thorough and challenging, asthe ﬁeld advances. For example, there is a growing need to move beyond room-temperature experiments and conduct structural and mechanical characterizationsover wide temperature ranges, as exempliﬁed in recent high-impact HEA research[11]. Given that the inﬂuence of entropy is linked to temperature, it may be
expected that HEA characterizations increasingly involve temperature as a variableand that they become better integrated with theoretical studies. For the most part,
the technology to perform in situ structural and mechanical characterizations
throughout wide temperature ranges already exists. As shown in Fig. 4.20b , for
example, the combination of loading, heating, and neutron diffraction is available atmajor user facilities. However, the capabilities must continue to advance and keeppace with new trends in HEA characterization, such as the study of serrationbehavior [ 4,27].
Microscopy studies will continue to play a large role in HEA research, with
perhaps increased emphasis on understanding how the microstructures can be
manipulated by fabrication methods and processing techniques [ 4]. Thus, an
increased integration of the fabrication, processing, and microstructural studies isneeded. Furthermore, a greater understanding of how plastic deformation affectsthe microstructure, and even the nanostructure, is required. Features must becharacterized across many length scales and in three dimensions. Advances inthree-dimensional microstructure characterization should be applied to HEAs inorder to learn more about properties such as fracture toughness and fracturemechanisms [ 4,11]. Quite literally, researchers will dig beneath the surface when
studying HEA microstructures and properties.
The presence and inﬂuence of local lattice strains, as a potential strengthening
mechanism, for example, has been postulated from the early days of the HEAresearch. Yet, few studies have directly addressed this important aspect of HEAs.Perhaps the ﬁrst local structure study of HEAs was described above, in which thepair-distribution-function (PDF) analysis was applied to the ternary HfNbZr alloy[22]. The presence of local lattice distortions was indeed veriﬁed. However, the
detailed nature and inﬂuence of the local lattice distortions are still not well
understood. Therefore, there is much work to be done in the area of local HEA
structures and great opportunities to conduct groundbreaking research.
One theme that emerges from the advanced characterization examples described
in this chapter is the importance of integrating different techniques, such as neutronand X-ray scattering, and multiple imaging techniques, ranging from the opticalexamination of fracture surfaces to the atom probe tomography studies of the4 Advanced Characterization Techniques 147nanoscale structures. An advanced understanding of HEAs must encompass fea-
tures across several length scales and behaviors under a wide range of environmen-tal conditions. A growing number of scientists will likely be attracted to HEA
research, in pursuit of many exciting questions.
4.11 Conclusion
Advanced characterization techniques, as applied to HEAs, often involve an inte-
gration of many methods and experimental equipment, such as SEM, TEM (withbright- and dark-ﬁeld techniques), SAED, and APT. In other cases, novel tech-niques are used, such as the splat-quenched sample preparation [ 8]. In general, the
advanced experimental characterizations are difﬁcult and require considerableresources. Many researchers take advantage of the instruments operated at the
major user facilities (Table 4.1), which are typically available through a peer-
reviewed proposal process. Although great efforts are required to conduct thehigh-impact research in the area of HEAs, the potential reward is great. Manymajor questions remain to be answered: What are the best ways to characterize locallattice strains and determine their effect on the strength and deformation behaviorof HEAs? How does the deformation behavior of HEAs differ from that ofconventional alloys, and what microstructural characterization techniques will weuse to better understand it? What microstructural features (grain size, twinning,
dislocation structures, chemical homogeneity, etc.) are most crucial for producing
HEAs with exceptional properties? Signiﬁcant discoveries will likely be made, asthese questions are studied.
Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial supports by Department of Energy
(DOE) Ofﬁce of Nuclear Energy ’s Nuclear Energy University Programs (NEUP, grant
#00119262), the DOE Ofﬁce of Fossil Energy, NETL (DE-FE0008855 and DE-FE-0011194),
and the US Army Ofﬁce Project (W911NF-13-1-0438).
References
1. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design
concepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
2. Tong CJ, Chen YL, Chen SK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Lin SJ, Chang SY (2005)
Microstructure characterization of AlxCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with
multiprincipal elements. Metall Mater Trans A Phys Metall Mater Sci 36A(4):881–893.
doi:10.1007/s11661-005-0283-0
3. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W (2014) High-entropy alloys with a
hexagonal close-packed structure designed by equi-atomic alloy strategy and binary phase
diagrams. JOM 66(10):1984–1992. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1085-x148 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. Liaw4. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61 (0):1–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2013.10.001
5. Tang Z, Gao MC, Diao HY, Yang TF, Liu JP, Zuo TT, Zhang Y, Lu ZP, Cheng YQ, Zhang
YW, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Egami T (2013) Aluminum alloying effects on lattice types,
microstructures, and mechanical behavior of high-entropy alloy systems. JOM 65(12):1848–1858. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0776-z
6. Zhang Y, Lu ZP, Ma SG, Liaw PK, Tang Z, Cheng YQ, Gao MC (2014) Guidelines in
predicting phase formation of high-entropy alloys. MRS Communications 4(02):57–62.doi:10.1557/mrc.2014.11
7. Wang YP, Li BS, Fu HZ (2009) Solid solution or intermetallics in a high-entropy alloy. Adv
Eng Mater 11(8):641–644. doi: 10.1002/adem.200900057
8. Singh S, Wanderka N, Murty BS, Glatzel U, Banhart J (2011) Decomposition in multi-
component AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 59(1):182–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2010.09.023
9. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish C, Neuefeind J, Weber RJR, Gao MC, Tang Z,
Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distributions of amulti-principal-element alloy. Nat Commun 6:1–64. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6964
10. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A Struct Mater Prop Microstruct Process375:213–218. doi: 10.1016/j.mesa.2003.10.257
11. Gludovatz B, Hohenwarter A, Catoor D, Chang EH, George EP, Ritchie RO (2014) A fracture-
resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. Science 345(6201):1153–1158. doi: 10.
1126/science.1254581
12. International A (2013) Standard test method for measurement of fracture toughness. ASTM
International, West Conshohocken, PA, pp E1820–E1821
13. Online supplementary materials to ref. 7
14. Liu Z, Guo S, Liu X, Ye J, Yang Y, Wang X-L, Yang L, An K, Liu CT (2011)
Micromechanical characterization of casting-induced inhomogeneity in an Al0.8CoCrCuFeNihigh-entropy alloy. Scr Mater 64(9):868–871. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.03.031
15. Welk BA, Williams REA, Viswanathan GB, Gibson MA, Liaw PK, Fraser HL (2013) Nature
of the interfaces between the constituent phases in the high entropy alloy CoCrCuFeNiAl.Ultramicroscopy 134:193–199. doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2013.06.006
16. Liu J, Cowley JM (1991) Imaging with high-angle scattered electrons and secondary electrons
in the STEM. Ultramicroscopy 37(1–4):50–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-3991(91)
90006-R
17. Lucas MS, Wilks GB, Mauger L, Mu ~noz JA, Senkov ON, Michel E, Horwath J, Semiatin SL,
Stone MB, Abernathy DL, Karapetrova E (2012) Absence of long-range chemical ordering in
equimolar FeCoCrNi. Appl Phys Lett 100 (25):2519071–2519074. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/
1.4730327
18. Takeuchi A, Chen N, Wada T, Yokoyama Y, Kato H, Inoue A, Yeh JW (2011)
Pd20Pt20Cu20Ni20P20 high-entropy alloy as a bulk metallic glass in the centimeter. Inter-
metallics 19(10):1546–1554
19. Proffen T, Billinge SJL, Egami T, Louca D (2003) Structural analysis of complex materials
using the atomic pair distribution function - a practical guide. Zeitschrift Fur Kristallographie
218(2):132–143. doi: 10.1524/zkri.218.2.132.20664
20. Farrow CL, Juhas P, Liu JW, Bryndin D, Bozin ES, Bloch J, Proffen T, Billinge SJL (2007)
PDFﬁt2 and PDFgui: computer programs for studying nanostructure in crystals. J Phys-
Condens Matter 19(33):335219. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/19/33/335219
21. Peterson PF, Gutmann M, Proffen T, Billinge SJL (2000) J Appl Crystallogr 33:119222. Guo W, Dmowski W, Noh J-Y, Rack P, Liaw P, Egami T (2013) Local atomic structure
of a high-entropy alloy: an X-ray and neutron scattering study. Metall Mater Trans A
44:1994–19974 Advanced Characterization Techniques 14923. Rietveld H (1969) A proﬁle reﬁnement method for nuclear and magnetic structures. Journal of
Applied Crystallography 2(2):65–71. doi: 10.1107/S0021889869006558
24. Wang XL, Holden TM, Rennich GQ, Stoica AD, Liaw PK, Choo H, Hubbard CR (2006)
VULCAN—The engineering diffractometer at the SNS. Phys B: Condens Matter 385–386,
Part 1 (0):673–675. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physb.2006.06.103
25. Wu Y, Liu WH, Wang XL, Ma D, Stoica AD, Nieh TG, He ZB, Lu ZP (2014) In-situ neutron
diffraction study of deformation behavior of a multi-component high-entropy alloy. Appl Phys
Lett 104(5). http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4863748
26. An K, Skorpenske H, Stoica A, Ma D, Wang X-L, Cakmak E (2011) First In Situ lattice strains
measurements under load at VULCAN. Metall Mater Trans A 42(1):95–99. doi: 10.1007/
s11661-010-0495-9
27. Antonaglia J, Xie X, Tang Z, Tsai CW, Qiao JW, Zhang Y, Laktionova MO, Tabachnikova
ED, Yeh JW, Senkov ON, Gao MC, Uhl JT, Liaw PK, Dahmen KA (2014) Temperatureeffects on deformation and serration behavior of high-entropy alloys (HEAs). JOM 66(10):2002–2008. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1130-9
28. Shirane G, Shapiro SM, Tranquada JM (2002) Neutron Scattering with a triple-axis spectrom-
eter. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK150 L.J. Santodonato and P.K. LiawChapter 5
Fabrication Routes
Yong Zhang, Carl C. Koch, Sheng Guo Ma, Hui Zhang, and Ye Pan
Abstract The high-entropy alloys (HEAs) are essentially solid-solution alloys that
contain multiprincipal elements in simple crystal structure such as body-centeredcubic (BCC), face-centered cubic (FCC), and hexagonal close-packed (HCP) lat-tices. The typical manufacturing routes for traditional materials can be applied toproducing HEAs. Depending on how the constituent elements are mixed, theprocesses are divided into liquid melting, solid-state mechanical alloying, and
gas-state mixing. This chapter reviews those typical manufacturing routes in pro-
ducing HEAs, including ingot metallurgy, powder metallurgy, coating, rapid solid-iﬁcation, mechanical alloying, single crystals prepared by using the Bridgmanmethod, laser cladding, and thin ﬁlm sputtering. Comparisons between thesemethods and the resulting structures are provided.
Keywords Fabrication routes • Liquid melting • Mechanical alloying • Vapor
deposition • Micro-segregation • Single crystal • Bridgman method • Laser
cladding • Thin ﬁlm • Nanostructure • Microstructure • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
Y. Zhang ( *)
State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, University of Scienceand Technology Beijing, Beijing, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: drzhangy@ustb.edu.cn
C.C. Koch
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North Carolina State University,911 Partners Way, suite 3002, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA
e-mail: cckoch@ncsu.edu
S.G. Ma
Institute of Applied Mechanics and Biomedical Engineering, Taiyuan University
of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi Province 030024, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: mashengguo@tyut.edu.cn
H. Zhang
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Anhui University of Technology,
Ma ’anshan, Anhui 243002, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: huizhang@ahut.edu.cn
Y. Pan
School of Material Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189,
People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: panye@seu.edu.cn
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_51515.1 Introduction
The fabrication processes of high-entropy alloys can be categorized into three
major routes, as shown in Fig. 5.1. The ﬁrst route is from the liquid state, which
includes arc melting, electric resistance melting, inductive melting, laser melting,laser cladding, and Laser Enhanced Net Shape (LENS) forming. The second routeis from the solid state, which mainly includes mechanical alloying and subsequentconsolidation process. We can also mix the elements from the vapor state. Thisroute includes sputter deposition, pulse laser deposition (PLD), atomic layer depo-sition (ALD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and vapor phase deposition to
prepare the ﬁlms on substrates.
5.2 Liquid-State Route
5.2.1 Arc Melting
Arc melting is the most common technique to prepare HEAs [ 1,2], by which all the
constituent elements are fully mixed in the liquid state and then solidiﬁed in thecopper crucible. Multiple repetitive melting and solidiﬁcation are often carried outto ensure the chemical homogeneity of the alloys. The shape of solidiﬁed ingots isbutton-like in the bowl-like copper crucible. Another version is to let the melt drop
Fig. 5.1 Summary of the fabricating routes for HEAs152 Y. Zhang et al.into a copper mold through the hole pre-machined in the bottom of the copper
crucible. Figure 5.2shows the picture of such an arc-melting and copper-mold-
casting equipment. The copper crucible and split copper mold are also shown. Bythis method, cylindrical ingots can be achieved with higher cooling rate. Thesamples are also convenient to be machined into specimens for tensile/compressivetesting. Based on this casting method, a series of HEAs with unique properties
have been found. For instance, Zhou et al. [ 3] have applied this technique to prepare
AlCoCrFeNiTi
x(xin molar ratio) HEAs, which exhibited body-centered cubic
(BCC) solid-solution structures and excellent compressive properties such asultrahigh fracture strength and signiﬁcant work-hardening capability. Wanget al. [ 4] found that the alloy strength and plasticity of the AlCoCrFeNi HEAs
were enhanced signiﬁcantly by decreasing the diameter of cast samples and thusincreasing the cooling rate during solidiﬁcation.
However, the problem with this technique is that the solidiﬁcation process
cannot be easily controlled due to the nature of rapid solidiﬁcation, which thus
leads to a varying microstructure characteristic from the surface to the center ofalloy samples, e.g., inhomogeneous distribution of the as-cast dendrites in mor-phology and size, ranging from ﬁne grains (label A) to columnar dendrites (label B)and then to coarse equiaxed dendrites (label C), as shown in Fig. 5.3, and hence an
uncontrollable macroscopic property [ 5]. In addition, a series of inevitable as-cast
defects, including elemental segregation, suppression of equilibrium phases, micro-scopic and macroscopic residual stresses, cracks, and porosities, may also have a
negative effect on the mechanical properties of HEAs. Measures should be taken to
reduce or eliminate these defects in the HEAs. Therefore, in the following sections,a series of fabricating routes that can provide an improved balance of strength anddamage tolerance are introduced.
Fig. 5.2 Photograph of the arc-melting and casting equipment (the right two are the copper
crucible and copper mold)5 Fabrication Routes 1535.2.2 Bridgman Solidiﬁcation Casting
Compared with the common casting, the Bridgman solidiﬁcation technique (BST)
can be effectively used for the microstructure control and property optimization ofHEAs. Speciﬁcally, the direction of the thermal conduction and extraction forrod-shaped samples obtained by BST is intensively along the longitudinal direction,which assures the microstructural growth direction; two important processing
parameters, namely, the temperature gradient and growth rate, can be precisely
controlled by adjusting the heating power and withdrawal velocities, which ensuresthe microstructural morphology and size. The two factors ﬁnally yield controllablemicrostructures and properties of HEAs. Among successful cases, the Ti-Al-Nbintermetallics [ 6] and nickel-based superalloys [ 7] are two typical alloys. The
former applies the BST to control the lamellar structure and the latter to optimizethe coherent γ-γ
0structure in order to improve their high-temperature performances.
In addition, it is also reported that dendrites/bulk metallic glass (BMG) composites
are successfully tailored by BST, during which the dendrites are homogeneously
Fig. 5.3 The optical micrographs of the AlCoCrFeNi HEA cylindrical samples by the arc-melting
and copper-mold casting: ( a) and ( b) central equiaxed dendrites; ( c) typical as-cast structure with
ﬁne grains viewed in the inset; ( d) transitional columnar dendrites [ 5]154 Y. Zhang et al.distributed within the BMG matrix, and the dendrite spanning length has a strong
dependence on the temperature gradient and growth rates [ 8]. Figure 5.4shows the
photograph of the BS equipment.
Figure 5.5schematically illustrates the BST processing and the sample location.
Firstly, the target alloys are cast into rod-shaped samples by the common castingmethod. Then, the synthesized samples are crashed into pieces and placed in analumina tube with an internal diameter of 3 mm and a wall thickness of ~1 mm,which are inductively heated to the fully melted condition by adjusting proper
heating power and holding time. Subsequently, the BS processing is performed by
assigning a withdrawal velocity Rranging from 5 to 2000 μm/s and a temperature
gradient Gof ~45 K/mm. The liquid alloys are directionally put into the water-
cooled Ga-In-Sn liquid agents, where three regions of the sample location can bedeﬁnitely demonstrated including region A, unremelted region; region B, transitionregion; and region C, fully remelted or directionally growth region [ 9].
Figure 5.6shows the optical micrographs of the AlCoCrFeNi HEAs by BST with
different withdrawal velocities. Note that by BS processing, apparent morphology
transition from ﬂowery dendrites to equiaxed grains is observed, as shown in
Fig.5.6a–d , and the average grain size is about 100–150 μm[5].
Furthermore, Fig. 5.7shows the corresponding scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) images. Honeycomb-like structures with uniform dispersion of nanoscalespherical particles can be seen in Fig. 5.7a–d . These nanoscale precipitations with
sizes of ~50–100 nm may originate from the spinodal decomposition, which leadsto a modulated structure composed of ordered (B2) and disordered (A2) phases, asmarked by 1 and 2, respectively [ 5].
Fig. 5.4 Photograph of the Bridgman solidiﬁcation equipment5 Fabrication Routes 155b
Bottom of the sample
A - Unremelted region;
B - Transition region;
C - Fully-remelted or directional growth re gionTop of the sample
Growth directionAB CHeat flow direction
VacuumHeat insulatora
Graphite heater
Melt alloy
Induction coil
Ga-In-Sn liquid alloy
Water cooling
Pull downAl2O3 tube
Fig. 5.5 A schematic diagram of the BST: ( a) the BS processing and ( b) the sample location [ 9]
Fig. 5.6 The optical micrographs of the AlCoCrFeNi HEAs by BST with withdrawal velocities of
(a) 200, ( b) 600, ( c) 1000, and ( d) 1800 μm/s [ 5]156 Y. Zhang et al.5.2.3 Synthesis of Single-Crystal HEA by BST
Since the mid-twentieth century, metal single crystals have been developed, in
terms of the synthesis of single crystals and the growth mechanisms of singlecrystals from their melts, on the consideration of the requirements of their
Fig. 5.7 The SEM secondary electron images of the AlCoCrFeNi HEAs by BST with withdrawal
velocities of ( a) 200, ( b) 600, ( c) 1000, and ( d) 1800 μm/s. ( e) and ( f) are the magniﬁcations of ( a)
and ( d), respectively [ 5]5 Fabrication Routes 157mechanical and physical properties especially for the high-temperature perfor-
mances [ 10]. From the viewpoint of solidiﬁcation theory, the production of a single
crystal has in fact required the atoms of a melt solidifying into a nucleus or seed that
further grows into a whole single crystal. However, the seed crystal is not so easy to
be fabricated because a large number of nuclei are formed initially in the commoncasting methods such as the copper-mold casting. In other words, upon solidiﬁca-tion, competitive growth with preferred crystallographic orientation has to be done,and ﬁnally one nucleus will extend for any distance into the crystal [ 10]. The
fundamental task to obtain the seed crystal can be realized by BST and properG/Rratios, which will be stated in the following sections.
The superior high-temperature properties of HEAs hold great potential for high-
temperature applications (as an example for the turbine blades in aircraft engines
[7]). In addition, as mentioned above, almost all reported HEAs microstructures are
polycrystalline regardless of whether they have a single-phase or multiple-phasestate [ 1,2]. As we know, grain boundary (GB) often plays a negative or even fatal
role in the high-temperature performances of materials, which acts as shortcut pathsfor diffusivity of atoms (thermodynamic instability) and easy nucleation sites forcracks (more sensitive to fracture). Also compositional segregation or impuritiestend to locate at GB that easily yields the brittle tendency of materials. These
intrinsic defects associated with GB have led to the rapid development of single-
crystal alloys, such as the single-crystal nickel-based superalloys and Ni
3Al-based
alloys [ 7,11]. Therefore, there is an urgent need in producing single-crystal HEAs
for which the composition is homogeneous and property characterization couldtruly represent HEAs from a viewpoint of fundamental understanding.
Figure 5.8shows the microstructure evolution and schematic illustration of the
CoCrFeNiAl
0.3HEA by BS processing. Here, it needs to be noted that the desig-
nated Rvalue is about 5 μm/s and two BS steps as described in Fig. 5.5are
repeatedly conducted upon the present system. As shown in the middle schematic
diagram, based on the growth direction of the sample, the CoCrFeNiAl 0.3HEA
undergoes an obvious microstructural transition from dendrites to equiaxed grainsand then to columnar grains and last to a single-crystal structure. Speciﬁcally,typical network-like dendrites and interdendrites morphology stem from region Aof the sample (a region close to the Ga-In-Sn liquid alloy surface) and thus remainin the as-cast microstructure. Along the solidiﬁcation direction or the transitionregion B, numerous equiaxed grains with a wide size range of ~50–300 μm are
obtained, accompanied by some twinning crystals with a width of several tens
micrometer possibly due to the annealing-like effect. As the solid/liquid interfaceadvances into the fully remelted region C, the bulky columnar grains with amillimeter scale are formed due to the signiﬁcantly preferential growth of grainswith the crystallographic orientation inclining to the growth direction. As a result,in the upmost part of the sample, only one grain or the seed crystal with preferentialcrystallographic orientation is obtained. In other words, a single-crystal growth isachieved via planar interface through a controlled BS processing. Relying on the
second BS processing, the growth of a whole single crystal proceeds from the seed
crystal at the end of the rod, and a single-crystal CoCrFeNiAl
0.3HEA sample with
3 mm in diameter and 50 mm in length is ﬁnally acquired [ 9].158 Y. Zhang et al.For the scientiﬁc validity of the single-crystal product, Fig. 5.9displays the
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) mapping of the single-crystalCoCrFeNiAl
0.3HEA. As indicated in Fig. 5.9a, the crystallographic orientation of
the single-crystal sample mainly focuses on the <001>direction. Figure 5.9b
presents the misorientation distribution of the single-crystal product. Note that themisorientation curve is very narrow and close to a Gaussian distribution and very
low-angle grain boundaries (generally, grain boundaries with an angle less than 15
/C14
are referred to as low-angle grain boundaries) basically within 2/C14are detected,
Fig. 5.8 Microstructure evolution and systematic illustration of the CoCrFeNiAl 0.3HEA prepared
by BST [ 9]
Fig. 5.9 The EBSD analyses of the single-crystal CoCrFeNiAl 0.3HEA: ( a) crystallographic
orientation and ( b) misorientation angle [ 12]5 Fabrication Routes 159indicating that the scattering level of the crystallographic orientation for the single
crystal is within acceptable limits [ 12].
Figure 5.10 shows the engineering tensile stress–strain curves of the
CoCrFeNiAl 0.3HEAs for both as-cast and single-crystal states. It can be seen that
the single-crystal alloy exhibits an ultimate tensile elongation value of about 80 %,which is much higher than the as-cast sample, while the yielding tensile strengthand ultimate tensile strength values of the former case are also lower than that of the
latter case by 32.7 % and 24.4 %, respectively [ 12]. This feature indicates that the
classic Hall–Petch relationship still conforms to the current HEA and the single-crystal product demonstrates a larger homogenous deformation capability than theas-cast sample.
5.2.4 Laser Melting and Laser Cladding
Laser cladding uses a concentrated beam of energy from the laser as the heat sourceand can keep the heat-affected zone of the substrate very shallow by focusing to a
very small area. This feature minimizes the chance of cracking, voids, and defor-
mation and results in ﬁne microstructure and a metallurgical bond that havesuperior bond strength over thermal spray. So far, coating materials for the lasercladding are primarily focused on Co- or Ni-based superalloys, such as Inconel andStellite alloys, which however are considerably expensive with a relatively lowhardness. The newly designed HEAs have shown great potentials in applications
Fig. 5.10 Tensile stress–strain curves of the CoCrFeNiAl 0.3HEA for both as-cast and single-
crystal states [ 12]160 Y. Zhang et al.where high strength, high hardness, high wear resistance, or high-temperature
softening resistance is required. Some of these promising properties match thoseof the widely used Co- and Ni-based coatings with the advantage of low cost.
The schematic drawing of the laser cladding process is illustrated in Fig. 5.11a
[13]. The basic system consists of a laser source to generate the beam, a set of optics
to direct and focus the beam, a powder feeder, and a part manipulator. The laser andoptics stay stationary and the specimens move with respect to the laser. Lasercladding systems are fully automated providing precise control of the claddingprocess. The melt pool produced by the laser beam rapidly solidiﬁes as the beamand powder injection are moved away and becomes a fully dense weld bead.Figure 5.11b is the laser cladding process by ﬁlling cladding materials in synchro-
nous feeding way [ 14]. A single and overlapped multi-passed layer can be formed
to protect the material ’s surface after cladding. Therefore, it can be applied to all
kinds of product with a variety of sizes and shapes and continues to gain market.
Zhang et al. delicately studied the inﬂuences of laser rapid solidiﬁcation on the
microstructure and phase structure in the HEA coatings [ 15–18]. They calculated
the nucleation incubation time for various competing phases and indicated that thegrowth of intermetallic compounds will be hampered if the solidiﬁcation rate issufﬁciently high, because different atomic radii in the HEA composition leads to
the increase of the solid–liquid interface energy and the difﬁculty of the long-range
diffusion of atoms in the crystal lattice, thus favoring the nucleation of solidsolution and decreasing growth rate of intermetallic compounds [ 19]. Meanwhile,
they found there are lots of nano- or submicron-size precipitates in their fabricatedHEA coatings. Qiu et al. also found many Ti-rich nanocrystals distributed in thesolid-solution matrix in the laser cladding Al
2CoCrCuFeNi 1.5Ti coating [ 20]. Ide-
ally, the HEAs generally refer to single-phase solid solutions, and there existconcerns that precipitates in HEA coatings may deteriorate the toughness. How-
ever, if we noted the widely used commercial Ni- and Co-based alloy coatings,
which always contain various types and high content of brittle precipitates, such asCrNi, Co
7W6,C r 23C6, and Ni 3B[21,22], there is no need to worry about such
Fig. 5.11 (a) Schematic diagram and ( b) operation of laser cladding process [ 13,14]5 Fabrication Routes 161precipitates possibly ruining the toughness of the HEA coatings. On the contrary,
the precipitate content should be minor in the rapidly solidiﬁed HEA coatings and is
generally in nanoscale dimensions. As a consequence, it is deemed that moreattention should be paid to the brittleness of the solid-solution phase in the HEAcoatings.
As for the microstructure features in the laser rapidly solidiﬁed HEA coatings, it
is believed that the microstructure and component segregation are mainlyinﬂuenced by laser-processing parameters and coating component. Figure 5.12a
presents the columnar and equiaxed grains in the CoCrCuFeNi coating and shows a
typical morphology of single-phase alloys [ 16], while energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDS) analysis conﬁrms that all alloying elements are almost uni-formly distributed in the coating. Figure 5.12b shows typical dendrite microstruc-
ture with coarse interdendritic regions in the Al
2CoCrFeNiSi coating, which is
mainly composed of a simple BCC solid-solution phase as identiﬁed by the X-raydiffraction (XRD) analysis [ 19]. The distinctive contrast between the dendritic and
interdendritic regions is correspondent to two BCC phases with slightly deferentlattice constants. The formation of secondary arms is mainly caused by component
segregation, which promotes the constitutional supercooling at the interface of
liquid–solid during solidiﬁcation. As shown in Fig. 5.12c by EBSD observation
when using the lattice constant of α-Fe to calibrate the phase distribution in the
Fig. 5.12 Microstructure of the HEA coatings: ( a) CoCrCuFeNi [ 16]; (b–d) SEM, EBSD, and
angle distribution of grain boundaries in the Al 2CoCrFeNiSi coating, respectively [ 19]162 Y. Zhang et al.coating, it is interesting to ﬁnd that the microstructure of the coating has coarse
equiaxed grains with the size about 100 μm, verifying that the coupled growth of
dendritic and interdendritic microstructure observed in Fig. 5.12b has similar
growth orientation and crystal lattice. Figure 5.12d presents the distribution of
misorientations for the grain boundaries and conﬁrms there exist lots oflow-angle grain boundaries in the coating [ 19].
Figure 5.13a shows the hardness of the laser cladding HEA coatings compared
with conventional Ni- and Co-based alloy coatings containing different amount ofWC hard particles. Hardness of FCC-structured HEA coatings ranged from 200 to400 HV, while BCC-structured HEA coatings reached 600–1150 HV [ 15,17,18],
which was higher than the hardness of about 400–800 HV in Ni- and Co-based
coatings [ 21,22]. This indicated great advantages of HEA coatings over conven-
tional alloy coatings, both in hardness and materials cost. Meanwhile, it should benoted that Qiu and Zhang et al., respectively, reported a hardness of about 1100 and1150 HV in Al
2CoCrCuFeNi 2Ti and AlCoCrCuFeMoNiSiTiB 0.5, which was almost
four times that of the Q235 iron substrate [ 18,23]. Zhang et al. further proved that
laser clad HEA coatings have higher hardness than that of the similar compositionalloy prepared by ordinary solidiﬁcation process because of the rapid solidiﬁcation
inﬂuences, such as grain reﬁnement, relief of component segregation, nano-size200 400 600 800 1000 1200a
Ni-coatings
Co-coatings
WC/Ni coatings
WC/Co coatingsbcc HEAsfcc HEAs
Microhardness (HV)Different coating materials
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
Displacement (nm)0500100015002000b
c
Load (mN)
UnloadingFeCoNiCrCuTiMoAlSiB 0.5
FeCoNiCr Al3
Loading
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0150200250300350400450
550 °C
650 °C
750 °C
850 °C
950 °CMicrohardness (HV)
Distance from the coatin g surface  (mm)SubstrateCoating
Fig. 5.13 Hardness of the HEA coatings. ( a) Comparison of the hardness in different coating
materials [ 18,24]. (b) The nanoindentation curves [ 40]. (c) Effect of annealing treatment on the
hardness in the CoCrCuFeNi coating [ 24]5 Fabrication Routes 163precipitates, etc. [ 15–18]. Figure 5.13b depicts a serrated ﬂow behavior in the load–
displacement curves of Al 3CoCrFeNi and AlCoCrCuFeMoNiSiTiB 0.5coatings by
nanoindentation, which were measured by sharp cube-corner indenter with large
load force of 2 N. One possible explanation for the serrated ﬂow behavior could be
the repeated solute locking and unlocking of dislocations during plastic deforma-tion in crystalline alloys. The high hardness of the HEAs may result from thestronger interaction between the dislocation and solute atoms, which is greater thanthose in the traditional alloys [ 18]. HEA coating also exhibits excellent resistance to
high-temperature softening up to 1000
/C14C, which is similar with bulk HEAs
prepared by the arc-melting technique [ 18,24]. Figure 5.13c presents the effect
of annealing treatment on the hardness in the laser clad CoCrCuFeNi coating
[24]. The coating shows an impressive phase stability of up to 0.7 Tm(750/C14C)
and presents good potential to be used as high-temperature coating materials.Meanwhile, it was reported that lots of profuse stacking faults, which are knownto be beneﬁcial for the creep properties at elevated temperatures, formed in thecoating after annealing treatment at 750
/C14C. The mechanical stability, together with
the morphological and phase stability for the CoCrCuFeNi coating, makes it a goodcandidate coating material to be used at high temperatures, at least up to 750
/C14C.
As for corrosion resistant property of the HEA coatings, Yue et al. fabricated
AlCoCrCu xFeNiSi 0.5coatings to protect AZ31 Mg substrate and found the corro-
sion current densities of the coatings were one order of magnitude lower than that ofthe un-clad magnesium [ 25]. The Al
2CoCrCuFeNi xTi coating could play an impor-
tant protective role in NaOH and NaCl environment on Q235 substrate. Meanwhile,it is found that the corrosion resistance of CoCrCuFeNi coating in NaCl solution iseasier to be passivated and has higher corrosion resistance than that in Ni-basedalloy coating [ 16,20]. As for oxidation resistance, Huang et al. prepared AlCrSiTiV
coating to protect the wear and oxidation of the Ti-6Al-V substrate [ 26]. They
found that the weight gain of the Ti-6Al-V substrate after oxidization at 800
/C14C for
50 h is almost ﬁve times higher than the HEA coating owing to the formation ofdense, adherent, and protective Cr
2O3and Al 2O3oxide layer on the surface of the
HEA coating, thus reducing the interdiffusion of atoms across the oxide layer andthe oxidation kinetics.
5.3 Solid-State Route
5.3.1 Introduction: Description of Mechanical Alloying
and Milling
The milling of materials has been a major component of the ceramic processing and
powder metallurgy industries. The objectives of milling include particle size
reduction, mixing or blending, and particle shape changes. However, ball millingof powders can often accomplish solid-state alloying – mechanical alloying. The164 Y. Zhang et al.development of this process by J.S. Benjamin and his colleagues at the International
Nickel Company has been described previously [ 27,28]. Mechanical alloying has
been deﬁned as a dry, high-energy, ball milling process that produces composite
metal alloy powders with controlled, extremely ﬁne microstructures. In mechanical
alloying, the resultant powder develops through the repeated cold welding and
fracture of the powder particles until the ﬁnal composition of the powders corre-
sponds to the percentage of the respective constituents in the initial charge. While
the ﬁrst application of MA was the production of oxide dispersion strengthened
alloys, it has subsequently been used as a nonequilibrium processing method to
make a wide variety of metastable materials such as extended solid solutions,
nanocrystalline metals and alloys, quasicrystalline materials, and amorphous mate-
rials. The large literature on this subject has been covered in several reviews
[29,30] in which the processing methods, mechanics/physics of mechanical attri-
tion, the synthesis of “equilibrium” phases, and the variety of metastable phases
formed have been documented. A schematic of two common devices for mechan-
ical attrition is given in Fig. 5.14a (a tumbler ball mill) and Fig. 5.14b (an attritor
mill) [ 29].
Mechanical attrition – the ball milling of powders – is often divided into
“mechanical alloying” (MA) where compositional changes occur in the milling of
dissimilar powders (alloying on the atomic level) and “mechanical
milling”(MM) where structural changes can be induced on ball milling of single-
component powders (elements or compounds) such as solid-state amorphization or
production of nanocrystalline grain microstructures. Mechanical alloying
(MA) will be the focus of this section.
The several advantages of the mechanical alloying process include its versatility.
Almost any material can be produced by this method including ductile metal alloys,
brittle intermetallic compounds, and composites. Mechanical alloying, which is
typically carried out at room temperature or below, bypasses the potential problems
with melting and casting methods and the segregation of chemistry the latter
methods can produce. Thus, it can synthesize alloys with very different melting
temperatures or vapor pressures that often pose a problem for solidiﬁcation
processing. The as-milled crystalline microstructures are typically very ﬁne
Fig. 5.14 (a) Schematic cross-section of a tumbler ball mill [ 29]. (b) Schematic of an attritor ball
mill [ 29]5 Fabrication Routes 165grained, and this is one of the important processing routes for making nanocrystal-
line materials.
Disadvantages of mechanical alloying include possible contamination from the
milling media or atmosphere and the fact that in most cases the product is powder
which requires subsequent consolidation to bulk form. The contamination problemcan be minimized or eliminated by proper choice of the milling media (compositionof balls and vial) and by milling in a high-purity inert gas or vacuum environment.The consolidation process is most important if the as-milled structure needs to beretained and temperatures of consolidation cause changes (e.g., grain growth orcrystallization).
In the following sections, examples of equilibrium phases, metastable phases,
and high-entropy alloys prepared by mechanical alloying will be presented. The
possible competition between formation of amorphous and solid-solution high-entropy alloys will be discussed.
5.3.2 Examples of “Equilibrium” Phases Produced
by Mechanical Alloying
In this section several examples are given of material synthesis by mechanical
alloying of elemental component powders which produce the phase predicted bythe binary equilibrium phase diagram. The word “equilibrium” is put in quotationmarks in the section heading to indicate that there may be some nonequilibrium
features associated with the equilibrium phase product of mechanical alloying.
A number of equilibrium solid-solution alloys have been produced by mechan-
ical alloying such as Ni-Cr [ 30], which ﬁrst showed the true atomic-level alloying.
Ge and Si exhibit complete solid solubility, and while both are brittle at roomtemperature, the solid solution of these elements across the phase diagram could beobtained by mechanical alloying [ 31]. Lattice parameters for Si and Ge powders
and the solid-solution Ge – 72 at.% Si alloy are given as a function of milling timein Fig. 5.15 [31]. The intermetallic compound, Nb
3Sn, can be prepared by mechan-
ical alloying of Nb and Sn powders. However, on continued milling after the
compound has been formed, an amorphous phase is observed. The amorphizationof a single-phase equilibrium structure will be discussed later in regard to thecompetition between amorphous and crystalline solid-solution HEAs.
5.3.3 Examples of Metastable Phases Produced
by Mechanical Alloying
Mechanical alloying/milling as a nonequilibrium processing method to prepare
metastable materials has been used widely since it was observed that mechanicalalloying could produce an amorphous alloy by ball milling of elemental powders166 Y. Zhang et al.[32] in 1983. Besides the synthesis of metallic glasses, it has been used to prepare
extended solid solutions, nanocrystalline microstructures, quasicrystalline mate-rials, and metastable crystalline compounds. Of particular interest with regard tomaking solid-solution HEAs are the examples of extended solid solutions in binaryalloys, nanocrystalline microstructures, and metallic glasses. These will be brieﬂydiscussed in turn.
Extended – supersaturated – solid solutions have been obtained in many binary
systems [ 29,30]. Analogous to the results of rapid solidiﬁcation from the liquid
phase, mechanical alloying is capable of signiﬁcantly extending solid solubilities.One example is the well-studied Ag-Cu binary where the equilibrium solubility ofCu in Ag is a maximum of 14.1 at.%. Both mechanical alloying and rapid solidi-ﬁcation can extend this to 100 at.%, that is, complete solid solubility across thebinary phase diagram. Many other examples are listed in Table 9.1 in Ref. [ 4]. Of
concern to the production of solid-solution HEA phases by mechanical alloying isthat metastable, supersaturated solid solutions may be produced in the as-milled
powders. In order to assess the equilibrium structure of the HEA, elevated temper-
ature annealing is necessary for times long enough to ensure the equilibrium statehas been obtained.
Mechanical alloying/milling has been used extensively to produce metals,
alloys, and intermetallic compounds with nanocrystalline microstructures. It isprobable that the as-milled powders of HEAs will have a nanocrystalline micro-structure. Such a microstructure, if maintained after powder consolidation, mayoffer enhanced properties, such as mechanical hardness and strength. It may also
affect the stability of the phases formed due to the high energy of the large grain
boundary areas in nanocrystalline materials.
Fig. 5.15 Lattice parameter vs. milling time for Si and Ge powder for the composition Ge – 72 at.
%S i[ 31]5 Fabrication Routes 167Metallic glasses (amorphous alloys) are competitors with simple solid-solution
structures in multicomponent HEAs. The empirical rules that distinguish betweenHEAs and metallic glasses made from the liquid state may not apply to those
produced by mechanical alloying. That is, metallic glasses are favored by large
negative heats of mixing and dissimilar atomic sizes of the components, whilesolid-solution HEAs typically require small (nearly ideal) heats of mixing andsimilar atomic sizes of the constituents. However, the mechanism for solid-stateamorphization by mechanical alloying differs from that for amorphization byquenching from the liquid state. In the latter case, the kinetic constraint of coolingfast enough from the liquid state to miss the “nose” of a crystalline time–temperature–transformation (TTT) curve to reach the glass transition temperature
is controlling. Factors such as large negative heats of mixing and dissimilar atomic
sizes affect these kinetics. However, in solid-state amorphization by mechanicalalloying or milling, different mechanisms are likely. While there are severalpossible explanations proposed for amorphization by ball milling of powders[30], it is generally recognized that amorphization during MA is not purely a
mechanical process and that a solid-state reaction similar to that observed inamorphization of thin ﬁlms (solid-state amorphization reaction) [ 33] occurs during
MA also. During MM, however, destabilization of the crystalline phase is thought
to occur by the increase in free energy through accumulation of structural defects
such as vacancies, dislocations, grain boundaries, and antiphase boundaries. Inorder to raise the free energy of the crystalline state to that of the amorphousphase, the only such defects that provide enough free energy are grain boundariesor, in the case of an ordered structure, disordering energy. Therefore, one sugges-tion for solid-state amorphization by MM is that the creation of nanocrystallinegrain sizes can destabilize the crystalline structure when the grain size is reduced toa critical value that provides sufﬁcient free energy to transform to the amorphous
structure. Whatever the mechanism may be, it is clear that ball milling of single-
component (elemental, alloy, or compound) powders can induce solid-stateamorphization in some materials which is invariably preceded by the formationof a ﬁne nanocrystalline structure.
5.3.4 Examples of Solid-Solution HEAs Produced
by Mechanical Alloying
The ﬁrst examples of solid solution HEAs prepared by MA were given by Murty
and coworkers. The Ph.D. thesis of S. Varalakshmi [ 34] reported on the preparation
of equiatomic elemental powder blends in the AlFeTiCrZnCu, CuNiCoZnAlTi,
FeNiMnAlCrCo, and NiFeCrCoMnW systems using mechanical alloying. The
equiatomic binary to six-component compositions of all four systems was synthe-sized in the order of, for example, AlFe, AlFeTi, AlFeTiCr, AlFeTiCrZn, and168 Y. Zhang et al.AlFeTiCrZnCu. The inﬂuence of composition on HEA formation was also followed
in non-equiatomic compositions by varying one of the elements from 0 to 50 at.%.All the alloys in these systems had either the BCC or FCC phase as the major phase
as determined by X-ray diffraction. The as-milled structures (either BCC or FCC)
were maintained after annealing at 800
/C14C for 1 h. The as-milled structures
exhibited nanocrystalline grain sizes (~10 nm), and the nanostructured grain sizewas retained after annealing at 800
/C14C. Several papers were published from this
thesis work [ 35–37]. Subsequently Chen et al. [ 38] studied the alloying behavior of
binary to octonary alloys based on Cu-Ni-Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ti-Mo prepared bymechanical alloying. Binary and ternary alloys formed FCC phases or BCC phases,respectively. Quaternary to octonary alloys ﬁrst formed FCC solid solutions which
transformed to amorphous structures after prolonged milling.
Zhang et al. [ 39] milled equiatomic AlCoCrCuFeNi. The as-milled powders
were solid solutions with the BCC (major phase) and FCC (minor phase) structures.The grain size was very ﬁne nanoscale with estimated size of about 7 nm.Annealing at 600
/C14C gave BCC and FCC phases. After annealing at 1000/C14C,
another FCC phase appeared. This was comparable to the structures observed inarc-melted and cast AlCoCrCuFeNi.
Praveen et al. [ 40] prepared AlCoCrCuFe and CoCrCuFeNi equiatomic alloys
by mechanical alloying followed by spark plasma sintering (SPS) at 900
/C14Ct o
compact the powders. After mechanical alloying for 15 h, AlCoCrCuFe showedmostly BCC structure, with a minor FCC peak by X-ray diffraction. However,CoCrCuFeNi showed mostly the FCC phase with very small traces of BCC. Thestructures observed by X-ray diffraction after SPS were as follows: in AlCoCrCuFeon ordered BCC (B2) phase was dominant with small amounts of Cu-rich FCCphase and sigma phase, and in CoCrCuFeNi, FCC phases were dominant with smallamounts of sigma phase present. The authors suggest that the additional phases
formed in these alloys are attributed to the inﬂuence of enthalpies of mixing, and
conﬁgurational entropy is not sufﬁcient to suppress their formation.
Tariq et al. [ 41] synthesized AlCoCrCuFeNi, AlCoCrCuFeNiW, and
AlCoCrCuFeNiWZr equiatomic alloys by mechanical alloying of the elementalpowders. All the alloys were analyzed by X-ray diffraction and the as-milledstructures were found to be mostly BCC, with small FCC peaks. The seven-component alloy containing W appeared to have somewhat more FCC phase.
Sriharitha et al. [ 42] studied phase formation in mechanically alloyed
Al
xCoCrCuFeNi with x¼0.45, 1, 2.5, 5. The lower Al-content ( x¼0.45, 1) alloys
showed a mixture of FCC phases (major) and BCC phase (minor). The Al-richalloys ( x¼2.5, 5) exhibited a single ordered BCC (B2) phase. After heating up to
1480
/C14C in a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC), the BCC phase disappeared
from the lower Al-content alloys. The alloy with 2.5 mol Al showed FCC peaksalong with the B2 peaks, while the alloy with 5 mol Al exhibited only B2 peaks.Fine grain sizes (nanocrystalline or submicron) were observed after heating in theDSC, suggesting the microstructure has good thermal stability.5 Fabrication Routes 169Fu et al. [ 43] have studied the effect of Cr additions on the alloying behavior and
structure of CoFeNiAl 0.5Ti0.5prepared by mechanical alloying. After long milling
times (42 h), the alloy without Cr showed only FCC peaks in X-ray diffraction.
However, the Cr-containing alloy exhibited a mixed structure of FCC and BCC
phases. However, after SPS at 1000/C14C, the alloy without Cr now showed a mixture
of FCC and BCC phases, while the Cr-containing alloy showed mainly FCC phases(with a small unidentiﬁed peak).
Praveen et al. [ 44] reported the phase evolution and densiﬁcation behavior of
nanocrystalline HEAs prepared by mechanical alloying and compacted by sparkplasma sintering (SPS). They studied multicomponent alloys with the followingequiatomic compositions: CoCrCuFeNi, CoCuFeNi, CoCrCuNi, CoCrFeNi,
CoFeMnNi, and CoFeNi. The as-milled structures resulted in a major FCC phase
and a minor BCC phase in Cr-containing alloys and a single FCC phase in the otheralloys. After SPS, CoFeMnNi and CoFeNi remained FCC. However, CoCuFeNitransformed to two FCC phases, and CoCrFeNi had a major FCC phase with minorsigma phase.
In order to study the stacking fault energy in selected HEAs by experimental and
computational methods, Zaddach et al. [ 45] prepared alloys with the following
compositions by both arc-melting and casting and mechanical alloying methods:
NiFe, NiFeCr, NiFeCrCo, NiFeCrCoMn, and off-stoichiometry alloys
Ni
26Fe20Cr14Co20Mn20,N i 23Fe20Cr17Co20Mn20,N i 14Fe20Cr26Co20Mn20, and
Ni14Fe21.5Cr21.5Co21.5Mn21.5. All the alloys prepared by mechanical alloying
contained a single-phase FCC structure. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.16 for the
X-ray diffraction results of these alloys.
35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
2q (degrees)Intensity (a.u.)
75 80 85 90 95NiFeNiFeCrNiFeCrCoNiFeCrCoMnNi14Fe20Cr26Co20Mn20
100
Fig. 5.16 XRD patterns of as-milled NiFe, NiFeCr, NiFeCrCo, and NiFeCrCoMn170 Y. Zhang et al.5.4 Vapor-State Route
This subsection mainly reviews HEA thin ﬁlm process via vapor deposition and
then compares the resulting properties with traditional low-entropy ﬁlms. Moreapplications of vapor deposition to process HEA ﬁlms in carbides and nitrides aredetailed in Chap. 14.
5.4.1 Physical Vapor Deposition
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) presents a variety of vacuum deposition methods
used to deposit thin ﬁlms by the condensation of a vaporized form of the desiredﬁlm material onto various workpiece surfaces. It includes cathodic arc deposition,
electron beam physical vapor deposition, evaporative deposition, pulsed laser
deposition, and sputter deposition [ 46].
Among them, magnetron sputtering deposition is the most popular method to
fabricate HEA ﬁlms, as shown in Fig. 5.17. Based on the ion or atom bombardment
from the sputtering gas, sputtered atoms close to the atomic fractions of thedeposited HEA are ejected from the sputtering target. These sputtered atoms arerandomly deposited on the substrate, but the nucleation and growth and thusmicrostructure of the HEA ﬁlm are determined by the parameters including the
form of source material, power, base pressure, atmosphere composition, substrate
bias voltage, and workpiece temperature. So far, this technique has been widelyapplied to the preparation of a series of HEA ﬁlms. For example, Tsai et al. [ 47]
successfully synthesized the AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr HEA layer and investigated itsdiffusion barrier properties between copper and silicon. Chang et al. [ 48] system-
atically investigated the inﬂuence of substrate bias, deposition temperature, andpost-deposition annealing on the structure and properties of the (AlCrMoSiTi)N
Substrate and film growth
Ar+Sputtering
Gas
Sputterin g Target
Fig. 5.17 A schematic showing the processing of sputtering deposition [ 46]5 Fabrication Routes 171coatings. Dolique et al. [ 49,50] studied the relationship between structure and
composition as well as its thermal stability (by in situ XRD analysis) of theAlCoCrCuFeNi thin ﬁlm. Cheng et al. [ 51] found that the (AlCrMoTaTiZr)N
nitride ﬁlm exhibited a very high hardness of 40.2 GPa and a good wear resistance.
PLD, as another thin ﬁlm deposition technique, has been effectively used in
depositing materials with multielements or complex stoichiometry [ 52]. Figure 5.18
schematically shows the processing of PLD. A high-powered laser beam from the
vacuum chamber strongly strikes the rotating target with required atomic fractionsof the HEAs. Due to superheating, the vaporized energetic species from the targetmaterial, including atoms, ions, electrons, and otherwise, are in the form of plasmaplume, which are further deposited as a thin ﬁlm on the substrate surface.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) can be used to effectively control over the
atomic layer and ﬁlm growth of the deposited material using sequential, self-limiting surface reactions, which belongs to a gas-phase chemical process
[53]. As shown in Fig. 5.19, the conventional ALD reaction is commonly based
on binary reaction sequences, where the reaction chemicals or gaseous species arereferred to as precursors and the growth of the ﬁlm is ascribed to expose its surfaceon these precursors. Moreover, the reaction between the precursor and the surfaceof the material is achieved sequentially (called as an ALD cycle) as exhibited inFig.5.18. Therefore, for the synthesis of the HEA ﬁlm, multiple ALD cycles are
necessary to be done due to the nature of multicomponent alloys.
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), as a thin ﬁlm deposition technique, is widely
used to grow thin, epitaxial ﬁlms of a wide variety of materials [ 54]. Due to an
Fig. 5.18 A schematic showing the processing of pulse laser deposition [ 52]172 Y. Zhang et al.ultra-high vacuum preparation environment and very low deposition rate, the
highest purity of the grown ﬁlms can be achieved such as depositing single crystals.Therefore, the MBE technique can be potentially used to prepare the HEA thin ﬁlmwith single-crystal status (Fig. 5.20).
Fig. 5.19 A schematic showing the processing of atomic layer deposition [ 53]
Valve
to Buffer Chamber
ManipulatorHeated
Substrate
Holder
RHEED
gunRHEED
Screen
Flux
Measurement
Ionisation
GaugeRGA
DRS
LN2
ShroudsAl
Ga
In
Si
Be
N2
P4,P2
As4,As2
Sb4,Sb2Effusion cells
Transfer Rod
Fig. 5.20 A schematic showing the processing of molecular beam epitaxy [ 54]5 Fabrication Routes 1735.5 Discussion
5.5.1 Mechanical Properties and Application Prospects
Mechanical properties of metallic materials are generally controlled by phase
selection, grain size, alloying effect, component segregation, etc., which may bestrongly inﬂuenced by the solidiﬁcation rate. Zhang et al. [ 4] veriﬁed that the
morphology of AlCoCrFeNi alloy changed from the dendrite prepared by copper-mold casting to the equiaxed grains by Bridgman solidiﬁcation with improvedplasticity by a maximum of 35 %. They believed the high-temperature gradientand solidiﬁcation rate tend to decrease the constitutional undercooling (constitu-
tional undercooling, which occurs during solidiﬁcation, is due to compositional
changes and results in cooling a liquid below the freezing point ahead to the solid–liquid interface) of the alloy, and thus it is possible to restrain the dendrite formationand leads to grain reﬁnement. This provides a new idea to improve the mechanicalproperties of the HEAs by rapid solidiﬁcation methods. Zhang et al. [ 15–18] found
that the laser rapid solidiﬁcation can effectively decrease the long-range diffusionrate of atoms and thus favor the formation of solid solutions rather than interme-tallic compounds. Large solidiﬁcation rates further lead to the formation of nano- or
submicron-size precipitates in the HEAs coatings, which signiﬁcantly contributes
to the outstanding hardness of the HEAs coatings.
Mechanical alloying, as a classical nonequilibrium processing method, can make
a wide range of extended solid solutions, nanocrystalline, quasicrystal, or evenamorphous materials. Repeated cold welding makes it a perfect selection forsynthesizing the alloys with very high melting temperatures, which is often achallenge for other solidiﬁcation routes. The vapor decomposition, such as PVD,ALD, and MBE, exhibits a potential synthesis route for the HEA ﬁlms in carbides
and nitrides. Due to the signiﬁcant sluggish diffusion effect, the
AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr HEA ﬁlms demonstrate outstanding diffusion barrier proper-ties between copper and silicon [ 47]. On the basis of the multiprincipal cocktail
effect, the (AlCrMoTaTiZr)N nitride ﬁlm exhibited a very high hardness of 40.2GPa and a good wear resistance, showing a huge application potential in the surfaceengineering ﬁeld [ 51].
5.5.2 Thermodynamic Analysis of the Phase Formation
In the previous sections, we have presented three major fabrication routes to
prepare HEAs. One apparent difference among them is that their mixing tempera-tures are very different. For the liquid mixing, the mixing temperature Tis above
the melting temperature T
mand below the boiling temperature Tb(Tm<T<Tb).
For the vapor mixing, Tis above Tb(T>Tb), while for the solid mixing, Tis below
Tm(T<Tm).174 Y. Zhang et al.It is known that the cooling rates for both the liquid and gas-state routes impact
the resulting microstructure substantially. For example, a more or less homogenoussolid solution in the FCC structure was obtained in AlCoCrCuFeNi using the splat
quenching, while multiphases formed when the sample cooled at a low rate from
melt [ 56]. The cooling rates for vapor deposition are typically orders of magnitude
higher than those for conventional arc-melting technique, and as a result, thegas-state route often results in much wider ranges of compositions that can formsingle solid solution with much ﬁner grain sizes and more uniform elementaldistribution in the solid than the liquid-state route. For instance, for theCoCrCuFeNi, noticeable Cu segregation is prevalent in the sample fabricatedusing the arc-melting technique [ 1], while using the sputter deposition technique,
all alloying elements are almost uniformly distributed in the coating [ 39].
As for the solid mixing, e.g., the mechanical alloying, numerous reports have
revealed that simple solid-solution or even amorphous lattices were dominated inthe nanocrystalline structures in spite that minor ordered phases or precipitationssuch as sigma phase were still presented. For example, Lucas et al. [ 57] reported a
single FCC solid solution without long-range chemical order in CoCrFeNi that wasprocessed using the arc-melting technique, while Praveen et al. [ 44] reported σ
phase formation in addition to the FCC solid solution in CoCrFeNi that was
processed using the ball milling technique. It is generally recognized that the
entropy effect cannot sufﬁciently overcome the enthalpy effect due to its lowerreaction temperature ( T<T
m), which thus leads to a lower level of disordered solid-
solution phase. However, it needs to be pointed out that by using mechanicalalloying, the mechanical energy Wshould not be ignored, since it contributes to
the change of Gibbs free energy of the system ( ΔG)b y
ΔG¼ΔHþW/C0TΔS ð5:1Þ
where ΔS(ΔH) is the change in the entropy (enthalpy) of the system between two
states and Tis the temperature.
From ( 5.1), one can see that the Wcan be a contributor to reduce the enthalpy
effect besides the entropy. Moreover, Zhang et al. proposed a Ωcriterion that was
expressed as Ω¼TΔS=ΔHjj and found that a higher ΩorΩ/Tvalue would predict a
higher level of disordered solid-solution phase [ 55]. Subsequently, on the consid-
eration of the mechanical energy for the mechanical alloying, the Ωcriterion can be
simply changed as
Ω¼TΔS=ΔHj/C0Wj jjðÞ ð 5:2Þ
From Eq. ( 5.2), due to the introduction of the W, a higher Ωvalue can be still
obtained even when the temperature is relatively small. In other words, a higher Ω/T
value can be realized in this case, which conﬁrms that the solid-solution phaserather than ordered phase tends to be formed by using mechanical alloying.5 Fabrication Routes 1755.6 Summary
The arc-melting technique is the most widely reported method in the literature. The
HEAs with multiprincipal alloying elements easily exhibit concentrated solid-solution structures and unique mechanical properties. A dendritic microstructureis often observed in the as-cast state, and thus annealing at higher temperatures isrequired to obtain equiaxed grains and eliminate chemical inhomogeneity. TheBridgman solidiﬁcation technique successfully synthesizes the single-crystallineHEAs with exceptional tensile plasticity. Due to the signiﬁcantly higher coolingrates used, the laser cladding HEA coatings demonstrate very ﬁne microstructures
and superior properties, such as high-temperature softening resistance, corrosion
resistance, and oxidation resistance.
Mechanical alloying of elemental powders is a versatile method to prepare high-
entropy alloys. The as-milled powders typically have a nanocrystalline grainstructure. Annealing the as-milled powders may or may not lead to changes in theas-milled crystal structure dependent on the particular alloy. Caution in usingmechanical alloying to study the competition between an amorphous structureand crystalline solid solutions should be considered since prolonged milling may
convert a crystalline structure into an amorphous phase by the introduction of
sufﬁcient free energy of the defects – grain boundaries.
Physical vapor deposition is an effective method to prepare thin ﬁlms from a
wide variety of materials. Magnetron sputtering deposition, based on its easyavailability, has been successfully applied to prepare the multicomponent HEAthin ﬁlms with potentially promising properties. Compared with the sputteringdeposition, the atomic layer deposition technique can easily realize the ﬁlm growthwith controllable atomic layers, while the molecular beam epitaxy exhibits a
potential on the preparation of the single-crystalline HEA ﬁlms.
Acknowledgments Y.Z. and S.G.M. acknowledge the ﬁnancial supports from the National
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) with granted No. of 51210105006, 50971019, 50571018,51471025, and 51501123 and National High-tech R&D (863) program with granted No. of
2009AA03Z113. C.C.K. acknowledges the support by the National Science Foundation from the
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program under grant DMR-1104930. H.Z. and Y.P. thank theﬁnancial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under GrantNo. 51271001 and the Open Project of Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallic Materials
under Grant No. AMM201201.
References
1. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design
concepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
2. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.10.001176 Y. Zhang et al.3. Zhou YJ, Zhang Y, Wang YL, Chen GL (2007) Solid solution alloys of AlCoCrFeNiTix with
excellent room-temperature properties. Appl Phys Lett 90:181904. doi: 10.1063/1.2734517
4. Wang FJ, Zhang Y, Chen GL (2009) Cooling rate and size effect on the microstructure and
mechanical properties of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy. J Eng Mater Technol 131:034501.
doi:10.1115/1.3120387
5. Zhang Y, Ma SG, Qiao JW (2012) Morphology transition from dendrites to equiaxed grains for
AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys by copper mold casting and Bridgman solidiﬁcation. Metall
Mater Trans A 43(8):2625–2630. doi: 10.1007/s11661-011-0981-8
6. Ding XF, Lin JP, Zhang LQ, Su YQ, Chen GL (2012) Microstructural control of TiAl-Nb
alloys by directional solidiﬁcation. Acta Mater 60(2):498–506. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2011.10.
009
7. Pollock TM, Tin S (2006) Nickel-based superalloys for advanced turbine engines: chemistry,
microstructure and properties. J Propuls Power 22(2):361–375. doi: 10.2514/1.18239
8. Qiao JW, Zhang Y, Liaw PK (2008) Tailoring microstructures and mechanical properties of
Zr-based bulk metallic glass matrix composites by the Bridgman solidiﬁcation. Adv Eng Mater
10(11):1039–1042. doi: 10.1002/adem.200800149
9. Ma SG, Zhang SF, Gao MC, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (2013) A successful synthesis of the
CoCrFeNiAl 0.3single-crystal, high-entropy alloy by Bridgman solidiﬁcation. J Miner, Met
Mater Soc 65(12):1751–1758
10. Hurle DTJ (1963) Mechanisms of growth of metal single crystals from the melt. Prog Mater
Sci 10:81–147. doi: 10.1016/0079-6425(63)90009-4
11. Aoki K, Izumi O (1978) On the ductility of the intermetallic compound Ni 3Al. Trans JIM
19:203–210. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0733-x
12. Ma SG, Zhang SF, Qiao JW, Wang ZH, Gao MC, Jiao ZM, Yang HJ, Zhang Y (2014) Superior
high tensile elongation of a single-crystal CoCrFeNiAl 0.3high-entropy alloy by Bridgman
solidiﬁcation. Intermetallics 54:104–109. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2014.05.018
13. Wikipedia, free encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cladding_%28metalworking%29
14. Schnell A, Kurz W (2003) Epitaxial deposition of MCrAlY coatings on a Ni-base superalloy
by laser cladding. Scr Mater 49(7):705–709. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6462(03)00369-5
15. Zhang H, He YZ, Pan Y, Jiao HS (2011) Microstructure and properties of 6FeCoNiCrAlTiSi
high-entropy alloy coating prepared by laser cladding. Appl Surf Sci 257(6):2259–2263.
doi:10.1016/j.apsusc.2010.09.084
16. Zhang H, Pan Y, He YZ (2011) Synthesis and characterization of FeCoNiCrCu high-entropy
alloy coating by laser cladding. Mater Des 32(4):1910–1915. doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2010.12.
001
17. Zhang H, Pan Y, He YZ (2011) Effects of annealing on the microstructure and properties of
6FeNiCoCrAlTiSi high-entropy alloy coating prepared by laser cladding. J Therm Spray
Technol 20(5):1049–1055. doi: 10.1007/s11666-011-9626-0
18. Zhang H, He YZ, Pan Y (2013) Enhanced hardness and fracture toughness of the laser-
solidiﬁed FeCoNiCrCuTiMoAlSiB 0.5high-entropy alloy by martensite strengthening. Scr
Mater 69(4):342–345. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2013.05.020
19. Zhang H, He YZ, Pan Y, Zhai PL (2011) Phase selection, microstructure and properties of laser
rapidly solidiﬁed FeCoNiCrAl 2Si coating. Intermetallics 19(8):1130–1135. doi: 10.1016/j.
intermet.2011.03.017
20. Qiu XW, Zhang YP, Liu CG (2014) Effect of Ti content on structure and properties of
Al2CrFeNiCoCuTi xhigh-entropy alloy coatings. J Alloys Compd 585(2):282–286. doi: 10.
1016/j.jallcom.2013.09.083
21. Li MX, He YZ, Sun GX (2004) Microstructure and wear resistance of laser clad cobalt-based
alloy multi-layer coatings. Appl Surf Sci 230(1–4):201–206. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2004.02.
030
22. Zhang SH, Li MX, Cho TY, Yoon JH, Lee CG, He YZ (2008) Laser clad Ni-base alloy added
nano- and micron-size CeO 2composites. Opt Laser Technol 40(5):716–722. doi: 10.1016/j.
optlastec.2007.10.0075 Fabrication Routes 17723. Qiu XW, Liu CG (2013) Microstructure and properties of Al2CrFeCoCuTiNix high-entropy
alloys prepared by laser cladding, J Alloy Comp 553(3), 216-220. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2012.
11.100
24. Zhang H, He YZ, Pan Y, Guo S (2014) Thermally stable laser cladded CoCrCuFeNi high-
entropy alloy coating with low stacking fault energy, J Alloy Comp 600(7): 210-214. doi: 10.
1016/j.jallcom.2014.02.121
25. Yue TM, Zhang H (2014) Laser cladding of FeCoNiCrAlCuxSi0.5 high-entropy alloys on
AZ31 Mg-alloy substrates, Mater Res Innov 588(S2): 588-592. doi: 10.1179/1432891714Z.
000000000530
26. Huang C, Zhang YZ, Shen JY, Vilar R (2011) Thermal stability and oxidation resistance of
laser clad TiVCrAlSi high entropy alloy coatings on Ti–6Al–4V alloy, Surf Coat Technol 206
(6): 1389-1395. doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2011.08.063
27. Benjamin JS (1970) Dispersion strengthened superalloys by mechanical alloying. Metall Trans
1(10):2943–2951. doi: 10.1007/BF03037835
28. Benjamin JS (1976) Mechanical alloying. Sci Am 234(5):40–48. doi: 10.1038/
scientiﬁcamerican0576-40
29. Koch CC (1991) In: Cahn RW (ed) Processing of metals and alloys, materials science and
technology – a comprehensive treatment, vol 15. VCH, Weinheim, pp 193–245
30. Surayanarayana C (2004) Mechanical alloying and milling. Marcel Dekker, New York
31. Davis RM, Koch CC (1987) Mechanical alloying of brittle components: silicon and germa-
nium. Scr Metall 121(3):305–310. doi: 10.1016/0036-9748(87)90218-3
32. Koch CC, Cavin OB, McKamey CG, Scarbrough JO (1983) Preparation of amorphous
Ni60Nb40by mechanical alloying. Appl Phys Lett 43:1017–1019. doi: 10.1063/1.94213
33. Schwartz RB, Petrich RR, Saw CK (1985) The synthesis of amorphous Ni-Ti alloy powers
by mechanical alloying. J Non-Cryst Solids 76(2–3):281–302. doi: 10.1016/0022-3093(85)
90005-5
34. Varalakshmi S (2008) Synthesis and characterization of nanocrystalline high entropy alloys by
mechanical alloying. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
35. Varalakshmi S, Kamaraj M, Murty BS (2008) Synthesis and characterization of nanocrystal-
line AlFeTiCrZnCu high entropy solid solution by mechanical alloying. J Alloys Compd 460
(1–2):253–257. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2007.05.104
36. Varalakshmi S, Kamaraj M, Murty BS (2010) Processing and properties of nanocrystalline
CuNiCoZnAlTi high entropy alloys by mechanical alloying. Mater Sci Eng A 527
(4–5):1027–1030. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2009.09.019
37. Varalakshmi S, Appa Rao G, Kamaraj M, Murty BS (2010) Hot consolidation and mechanical
properties of nanocrystalline equiatomic AlFeTiCrZnCu high entropy alloy after mechanical
alloying. J Mater Sci 45(19):5158–5163. doi: 10.1007/s10853-010-4246-5
38. Chen YL, Hu YH, Tsai CW, Hsieh CA, Kao SW, Yeh JW, Chin TS, Chen SK (2009) Alloying
behavior of binary to octonary alloys based on Cu–Ni–Al–Co–Cr–Fe–Ti–Mo during mechan-ical alloying. J Alloys Compd 477(1–2):696–705. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.10.111
39. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Shi J, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ (2009)
Nanocrystalline CoCrFeNiCuAl high-entropy solid solution synthesized by mechanicalalloying. J Alloys Compd 485(1–2):L31–L34. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.05.144
40. Praveen S, Murty BS, Kottada RS (2012) Alloying behavior in multi-component AlCoCrCuFe
and high entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 534:83–89. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.11.044
41. Tariq NH, Naeem M, Hasan BA, Akhter JI, Siddique M (2013) Effect of W and Zr on
structural, thermal and magnetic properties of AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy. J Alloys
Compd 556:79–85. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2012.12.095
42. Sriharitha R, Murty BS, Kottada RS (2013) Phase formation in mechanically alloyed
Al
xCoCrCuFeNi (x ¼0.45, 1, 2.5, 5mol) high entropy alloys. Intermetallics 32:119–126.
doi:10.1016/j.intermet.2012.08.015178 Y. Zhang et al.43. Fu ZQ, Chen WP, Fang SC, Li XM (2014) Effect of Cr addition on the alloying behavior,
microstructure and mechanical properties of twinned CoFeNiAl 0.5Ti0.5alloy. Mater Sci Eng
A597:204–211. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2013.12.096
44. Praveen S, Murty BS, Kottada RS (2013) Phase evolution and densiﬁcation behavior of
nanocrystalline multicomponent high entropy alloys during spark plasma sintering. J Miner,
Met Mater Soc 65(12):1797–1804. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0759-0
45. Zaddach AJ, Niu C, Koch CC, Irving DL (2013) Mechanical properties and stacking fault
energies of NiFeCrCoMn high-entropy alloy. J Miner, Met Mater Soc 65(12):1780–1789.
doi:10.1007/s11837-013-0771-4
46.http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sputter_deposition
47. Tasi MH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2008) Diffusion barrier properties of AlMoNbSiTaTiZr high-
entropy alloy layer between copper and silicon. Thin Solid Films 516:5527–5530.
doi:10.1016/j.tsf.2007.07.109
48. Chang HW, Huang PK, Yeh JW, Davison A, Tsau CH, Yang CC (2008) Inﬂuence of substrate
bias, deposition temperature, and post-deposition annealing on the structure and properties of
multi-principal-component (AlCrMoSiTi)N coatings. Surf Coat Technol 202:3360–3366.
doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.12.014
49. Dolique V, Thomann AL, Brault P, Tessier Y, Gillon P (2009) Complex structure/composition
relationship in thin ﬁlms of AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy. Mater Chem Phys
117:142–147. doi: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2009.05.025
50. Dolique V, Thomann AL, Brault P, Tessier Y, Gillon P (2010) Thermal stability of
AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy thin ﬁlms studied by in-situ XRD analysis. Surf Coat
Technol 204:1989–1992. doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2009.12.006
51. Cheng KH, Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2011) Structural and mechanical properties of multi-
element (AlCrMoTaTiZr)N xcoatings by reactive magnetron sputtering. Thin Solid Films
519:3185–3190. doi: 10.1016/j.tsf.2010.11.034
52.http://groups.ist.utl.pt/rschwarz/rschwarzgroup_ﬁles/PLD_ﬁles/PLD.htm
53. George SM (2010) Atomic layer deposition: An overview, Chem Rev, 110: 111–131.
doi:10.1021/cr900056b .
54.http://newenergyandfuel.com/ http:/newenergyandfuel/com/201 0/09/13/on-the-path-to-full-
spectrum-photovoltaic-solar-cells/
55. Zhang Y, Lu ZP, Ma SG, Liaw PK, Cheng YQ, Gao MC (2014) Guidelines in predicting phase
formation of high-entropy alloys. MRS Commun 4:57–62. doi: 10.1557/mrc.2014.11
56. Singh S, Wanderka N, Murty BS, Glatzel U, Banhart J (2011) Decomposition in multi-
component AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 59(1):182–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2010.09.023
57. Lucas MS, Wilks GB, Mauger L, Munoz JA, Senkov ON, Michel E, Horwath J, Semiatin SL,
Stone MB, Abernathy DL, Karapetrova E (2012) Absence of long-range chemical ordering in
equimolar FeCoCrNi. Appl Phys Lett 100(25):251907–251904. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.
47303275 Fabrication Routes 179Chapter 6
Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy
Alloys
Haoyan Diao, Xie Xie, Fei Sun, Karin A. Dahmen, and Peter K. Liaw
Abstract This chapter reviews mechanical properties of high-entropy alloys
(HEAs) in the ﬁelds of hardness, compression, tension, serration behavior, fatigue,and nanoindentation. It shows that the hardness of HEAs varies widely from 140 to
900 HV, highly depending on the alloy systems and related processing methods.
The effects of annealing treatment, alloying, and structure on the hardness arediscussed. The hardness at high temperatures is also summarized. For compressiontests, several parameters of materials, such as Young ’s modulus, compressive yield
strength, elastic strain, and plastic strain, are determined and discussed. Variousloading conditions, such as temperatures, Al contents, strain rates, sample sizes, andaging/annealing effects, are reported to have inﬂuence on the microstructuralevolution during compression deformation. Microcompression experiments have
been performed on HEAs. Even though the study of tensile properties of HEAs is
limited to few alloy systems, the effects of structures, grain sizes, alloying elements,and processing parameters on the yielding stress, ductility, and shape of the stress–strain curve, and fracture behavior are discussed. The characteristic elastic behavioris studied by in situ neutron-diffraction techniques during tension. A mean-ﬁeldtheory (MFT) successfully predicts the slip-avalanche and serration statisticsobserved in recent simulations of plastic deformation of HEAs. Four-point-bend-ing-fatigue tests are conducted on the Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA at various applied
loads and reveal that fatigue properties of HEAs could be generally better, com-
pared with conventional alloys and bulk metallic glasses. Nanoindentation studieson the incipient plasticity and creep behavior are discussed. The future work relatedto mechanical properties of HEAs is suggested at the end.
H. Diao • X. Xie • P.K. Liaw ( *)
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
e-mail: pliaw@utk.edu
F. Sun • K.A. Dahmen
Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
1110 West Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USAe-mail: dahmen@illinois.edu
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_6181Keywords Mechanical properties • Hardness • Compression • Tension • Serration
• Fatigue • Nanoindentation • Mean-ﬁeld theory • Temperature effect • Alloyingeffect • Microstructure • Nanostructure • Face-centered cubic (FCC) • Body-
centered cubic (BCC) • Solid solution • Single phase • Multiphase • High-entropy
alloys (HEAs)
6.1 Introduction
Mechanical properties of high-entropy alloys (HEAs) are widely studied in the ﬁeldof hardness [ 1–51], compression [ 2,3,52,53], tension [ 15,48,49,54–61], serration
[62–72], fatigue [ 20,45,73], and nanoindentation [ 8,74–76] since 2004 . Even
though HEAs have a wide range of mechanical properties, many HEAs have beenreported to have promising properties, such as high hardness values [ 3,4,6,7,9,10,
13,17,22,29,31,40,51], high yielding strengths [ 22,50,77,78], large ductility
[54,57,61], excellent fatigue resistance [ 45,73], and good fracture toughness
[20,79]. In this chapter, we will review the effects of compositions, annealing
treatments, alloying-element contents, temperatures, strain rates, sample sizes, andlattice-structure types on the mechanical behavior and related microstructuralevolution of HEAs in the sections relating to hardness, compression, tension,fatigue, and nanoindentation, respectively. Besides experimental studies, a mean-ﬁeld theory (MFT) model successfully predicts the slip avalanche and serration
statistics observed in recent simulations of plastic deformation of HEAs [ 58,
62–72]. Based on former studies, future work related to mechanical properties of
HEAs is proposed at the end of this chapter.
6.2 Hardness
Hardness is one of the most convenient ways to describe the mechanical propertiesof metallic materials [ 80]. Vickers hardness testing can be done quickly and
efﬁciently, without the need for a large volume of sample materials. For some
thin-ﬁlm HEAs, the yield stress of thin ﬁlms cannot be measured directly, but
microhardness tests can easily be done with high precision. HEAs exhibit hardnessvalues varying widely from 140 to 900 HV, depending on the alloy systems andrelated processing methods [ 2–4,6,9–15,17,19–22,28–31,38–42,47–50]. The
hardness values of the 20 most studied HEAs, compared with conventional alloys,are shown in Fig. 6.1. The hardness changes widely in each alloy system. Taking
the AlCoCrCuFeNi [ 2,3,5,54,81–85] alloy system, for example, the hardness
values vary from 154 to 658 HV, which are strongly dependent on the exact
chemical compositions, fabrication methods, and following heat-treatment pro-
cesses. The hardness values of several alloy systems, such as AlCrFeMnNi andAlCrFeMoNi, are generally higher than conventional ferrous and nonferrous alloys182 H. Diao et al.in Fig. 6.1. However, the hardness values of the as-cast HEAs mainly with the face-
centered cubic (FCC) phase (i.e., CoCrFeNi, CoCrCuFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi) are
generally low at room temperature [ 12], but those containing appreciable amounts
of Al and Ti are generally high due to the formation of stronger second phases. Theaverage hardness values of refractory HEAs mainly with the body-centered cubic(BCC) phase are relatively high, e.g., 390 HV, 454 HV, 535 HV, 591 HV, and500 HV for HfNbTaTiZrTi, MoNbTaW, MoNbTaVW, AlMo
0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr, and
Al0.4Hf0.6NbTaTiZr alloys, respectively [ 13,21,50]. Thus, the selection of the
alloy system, adjusting the composition ratio within an alloy system, and the choice
of alloy-processing methods are critical in determining the alloy hardness of HEAs.
6.2.1 Annealing Treatment
Based on the effect of the annealing treatment on the hardness, HEAs are divided
into two groups: (a) strong aging hardening (red lines) and (b) weak aging harden-ing (black lines), shown in Fig. 6.2.
Fig. 6.1 Hardness values of 20 most studied HEAs, compared with conventional alloys, such as
Al-, Co-, Cr-, Cu-, Fe-, Ni-, Ti-, and V-based alloys, using data from Refs. [ 2–4,6,9–15,17,19–
22,28–31,38–42,47–50,81–85]. The hatched region shows the hardness range of each alloy
system. For example, the hardness of AlCoCrCuFeNi varies from 154 to 658 HV6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 183Fig. 6.2 Annealing effects on the hardness of HEAs, using data from Refs. [ 9,12,14,19,28,40,
42,47]. (a) Hardness values and ( b) hardness ratio, hardness/original hardness ( H/Ho)184 H. Diao et al.Strong high-temperature aging hardening happens in several alloy systems, such
as Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5(x¼0.3 and 0.5) [ 9], three FCC-structured HEAs
(Al0.3CoCrFeNi, Al 0.3CoCrFeNiMo 0.1, and Al 0.3CoCrFeNiTi 0.1)[ 14],
Cr2CuFe 2MnNi [ 28], and CoCrFeNiMo 0.85[42], shown by red lines in Fig. 6.2.
This strong high-temperature age-hardening phenomenon is seldom found in con-ventional alloys. The age-hardening behavior is attributed to the formation ofprecipitates, for example, a ρ(Cr
5Fe6Mn 8) phase in the Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5
(x¼0.3 and 0.5) alloy, a (Ni, Al)-rich B2 phase in the Al 0.3CoCrFeNi alloy, the
dual precipitates of a (Ni, Al)-rich phase and a (Cr, Mo) (Co, Fe, Ni) σphase in
the Al 0.3CoCrFeNiMo 0.1alloy, and a (Ni, Co, Ti)-rich B2 phase in the
Al0.3CoCrFeNiTi 0.1alloy [ 9,14]. However, when the temperature is above 900 K,
the hardness of the Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5(x¼0.3 and 0.5) alloy decreases. The reason
is mainly related to the larger grain size and softening of the second phases [ 9].
If there is no new precipitation during the annealing process, annealing plays a
slight role in increasing hardness of HEAs. This situation happens in theAl
0.5CoCrFeNi, CoCrCu 0.5FeNi, Al 0.5CoCrNiTi 0.5, and CoCrFeNiTi 0.5samples
[12,19,40,47], shown by black lines in Fig. 6.2.
6.2.2 Alloying Effects
The alloying ratio plays an important role on the structure and mechanical proper-
ties of HEAs, which draws much attention to HEAs in the area of metallurgy. In this
section, we will summarize the effect of the Al, B, Co, Cr, Mo, Nb, Ni, and V on themechanical properties of the single-phase HEAs and multiphase HEAs,respectively.
None of the reported equiatomic multicomponent bulk alloys of light transitions
metals with Al are single-phase solid solutions. Their common feature is theeutectic type of the interaction between the components [ 2,23,86]. For the systems,
Al
xCoCrCuFeNi [ 2], Al xCoCrFeMnNi [ 60], Al xCoCrFeNi 2[38], and Al xCoCuFeNi
[87,88], single-phase HEAs with a FCC structure type form with very low Al
contents ( x/C200.5). In the FCC single-phase region ( x/C200.5) (marked by gray
squares in Fig. 6.3), the increase of hardness mainly results from substitutional
solid-solution strengthening.
The effects of aluminum concentrations on the hardness values of the
AlxCoCrCuFeNi [ 2,3,43,60], Al xCoCrFeNi 2[38], Al xCoCrFeNi [ 11,30],
AlxCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni [39], and Al xCoCrFeNiTi [ 31] alloys are summarized in
Fig. 6.3. From Fig. 6.3, we can see that the hardness of the alloys generally
increases, as the aluminum ratio increases in the Al xCoCrCuFeNi, Al xCoCrFeNi 2,
and Al xCoCrFeNi alloys. The aluminum contribution to the hardness increase of
multiphase HEAs was related to a solution-hardening mechanism, a precipitation-strengthening effect, and a nanocomposite-strengthening effect [ 2,11,30,38]. The
origins of such effects can go back to lattice-strain energies and electronic bonds[43]. For Al
xCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni and Al xCoCrFeNiTi, the trend is different, that is, the6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 185hardness increases, when the atomic ratio of aluminum is lower than 1.0, while the
hardness decreases, when the aluminum atomic ratio is higher than 1.0. This trend
can be explained by phase compositions and microstructures. In the as-cast Al 0
alloy, the FCC solid solution was conﬁrmed as the main phase, while the Al 1.0alloy
is mainly composed of the ( α-Fe,Cr)-based BCC solid solution, which is stronger
than the FCC counterpart [ 31,39]. The hardness decreases, as the aluminum ratio is
higher than 1.0, resulting from the brittleness of the formed BCC phase.
The effect of B/Ni/V/Co/Cr/Nb/Mo on the hardness values of HEAs is summa-
rized in Fig. 6.4. The alloys, AlB xMnNiTi, possess high hardness. The hardness
increases from 740 to 779 HV, as the boron atomic ratio increases from 0 to 0.5,
which could be induced by the aberrance of the crystal lattice [ 6]. The effect of
vanadium addition on hardness is well studied in Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiV xand
AlCoCrFeNiV x.F o rA l 0.5CoCrCuFeNiV x, in the range of x<0.4 and x>1.2,
solution hardening in FCC and BCC phases seems small with the addition ofmore vanadium. In the range of 0.4 <x<1.0, with more vanadium addition, the
hardness value rapidly increases and peaks (640 HV) at x¼1.0. The increased
volume fractions of the BCC phase and the σ-phase precipitation are the main
reason [ 4]. The hardness of as-cast AlCrFeCuNi
xHEAs is constant, around 490 HV,
when xis in the range of 0.6 to 1.0. But the hardness decreases markedly, when xis
in the range of 1.0 to 1.4, which results from the decrease of the proportion of theCrFe-rich BCC phase [ 24,26]. The hardness of AlCrFeNiMo
x(x¼0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8,
Fig. 6.3 Vickers hardness of the Al xCoCrCuFeNi, Al xCoCrFeNi, Al xCrCuFeNi 2,
AlxCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni, and Al xCoCrFeNiTi alloy systems with different aluminum contents
(xvalues in molar ratio), using data from Refs. [ 2,3,11,30,31,38,39,43,60]. The single-
phase HEAs are marked by a gray square186 H. Diao et al.Fig. 6.4 Vickers hardness of the ( a) AlMnNiTiB x,A l 0.5CoCrCuFeNiV x, AlCoCrFeNiV x,
AlCrFeCuNi x, and ( b) AlCrFeNiMo x, AlCo xCrFeMo 0.5Ni, AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni, and
AlCoCrFeNiNb xalloy systems with different B/V/Ni/Mo/Co/Cr/Nb contents ( xvalues in molar
ratio), using data from Refs. [ 4,6,10,18,24–26,35]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 187and 1.0) increased obviously from 472.4 to 911.5 HV with the addition of the Mo
element, which is due to the solution-strengthening behavior and the transformationfrom the CrFe-type solid solution to the CrFeMo-type σphase
[35]. AlCo
xCrFeMo 0.5Ni HEAs are superior over the Al xCoCrCuFeNi HEAs,
which is attributable to the high-volume fraction of the σphase. With the increase
of Co from 0.5 to 2.0, the hardness decreases from 800 to 600 HV [ 10]. For the
AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni, the alloy hardness increases from 601 HV at x¼0 to 867 HV at
x¼2.0, as a result of increasing the amount of the hard σphase [ 18]. The Vickers
hardness of AlCoCrFeNiNb x[25] has an approximately linear increase with
increasing the Nb content.
6.2.3 Structure Effects
There are many factors determining the hardness values of FCC and BCC phases. Itis known that the FCC structure has slip planes with the closest packing, while theBCC structure has no true close-packed slip planes. Thus, the critical stress for slip inthe FCC structure is basically smaller than the BCC structure. In addition, strongerinteratomic bonding would have higher Young ’s modulus and, thus, higher strength.
The solution-hardening effect is also more pronounced for metals with higher
modulus. The BCC phase is stronger than the FCC phase in several alloy systems,such as Al
xCoCrCuFeNi [ 2,3], Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiV x[4], and Al xCoCrFeNi [ 8],
which can be explained with the basic structure factor and solution-hardeningmechanism [ 2–5]. The hardness, H, and volume fractions of FCC and BCC phases
in the transition region of the Al
xCoCrFeNi system can be calculated as follows [ 7]:
H¼aHFCCþ1/C0aðÞ HBCC ð6:1Þ
where HFCCandHBCCare the average hardness values of single FCC and BCC
phases, respectively. ais the volume fraction of the FCC phase, and (1 /C0a) is that
of the BCC phase.
Microstructures affect the hardness of HEAs too. For example, dendritic and
interdendritic areas in HEAs have different microhardnesses. Take theCoCrFeMnNi-related system, for example. The dendritic and interdendritic hard-nesses are 30 HV and 109 HV for CoCrFeMnNi, 105 HV and 41 HV forCoCrFeMnNbNi, and 103 HV and 29 HV for CoCrFeMnNiV, respectively [ 1].
This trend can be explained by the composition segregation and the hardness nature
of related pure metals.
6.2.4 Hot Hardness
Some HEAs own high hot hardness and have the potential in high-temperature
applications. The AlCo xCrFeMo 0.5Ni (x¼0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0) alloys exhibit the
high hot hardness of about 740 HV at 300 K, 660 HV at 600 K, and 340 HV at188 H. Diao et al.1,273 K [ 10]. The softening coefﬁcients of pure metals, such as Mo, Ni, Cr, Si, and
Fe [10], are two orders of magnitudes larger than those of AlCo xCrFeMo 0.5Ni
alloys, indicating that alloying indeed has a tremendous effect on lowering the
softening coefﬁcient. It suggests that the σphase is the main strengthener at high
temperatures [ 10]. AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni (x¼0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2) alloys [ 18] and
AlxCoCrFeNi alloys [ 51] have respective hardness values at high temperatures,
shown in Fig. 6.5.
The hot hardness as a function of temperature can be represented, using the
following equation suggested by Westbrook [ 89]:
H¼Aexp/C0BTðÞ ð 6:2Þ
The constant, A, is called the intrinsic hardness or the value of hardness at 0 K,
i.e., extrapolated hardness at the absolute zero temperature, and Bis called the
softening coefﬁcient or thermal coefﬁcient of hardness. There are two sets ofconstants, Aand B, in low-temperature and high-temperature regions of
AlCoCr
xFeMo 0.5Ni (x¼0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2), respectively, suggesting a change
in the deformation mechanisms. In the high-temperature region, smaller B meanshigher resistance to softening. The transition between low-temperature and high-temperature regions may occur at one temperature or over a range of temperatures.In most metals and alloys, the transition temperature is known to occur at about 0.5
T
m, where Tmis the melting point.
6.3 Compressive Properties
6.3.1 Compressive Stress–Strain Curves
Compression experiments have been extensively performed to study the mechan-
ical properties of HEAs [ 2,3,35,49,53,90–102]. From the stress–strain curve,
several parameters of materials can be determined, including Young ’s modulus ( E),
compressive yield strength ( σy), compressive strength ( σmax), elastic strain ( εe),
plastic strain ( εp), etc. The reported values determined from compression tests for
different kinds of HEAs are summarized in Table 6.1.
Various loading conditions can affect the mechanical behavior of HEAs in
compression tests. Yeh et al. [ 2] ﬁrst reported that the temperature, strain rate,
and Al content cause variations in the compressive yield strength forAl
xCoCrCuFeNi. The investigation of elemental addition is then followed, and
the alloying effect has been characterized, such as the addition of Al [ 3,50,53,90–
94], Ti [ 95–97], Cu [ 98], Y [ 99], Si [ 94,100], Mo [ 35,103], C [ 102], Nb [ 25,104],
Ni [26], V [ 44,104], and Cr [ 105]. The temperature effect also draws great
attention, since it ’s essential to characterize materials properties for applications
under extreme temperatures, such as aerospace and nuclear ﬁelds. Recently,compressive behavior at cryogenic and elevated temperatures has been studied6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 18930020030040050060070080020030040050060070080090050100150200300
250350400450a
b
c
Co-0.5Cr-0
Cr-0.5
Cr-1AI-1.8AI-1.5AI-1.2AI-1AI-0.9AI-0.7AI-0.5AI-0.3AI-0
Cr-1.5
Cr-2
AICoxCrFeMo0.5NiAICoCrxFeMo0.5NiAIxCoCrFeNi
Co-1
Co-1.5
Co-2
400 500 600 700 800
Temperature, KTemperature, KHardness, HV Hardness, HV Hardness, HV
900 1000 1100 1200 1300300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300Temperature, K300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300Fig. 6.5 Hot hardness ( H)
as a function of temperature
(T) for ( a)A l xCoCrFeNi,
(b) AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni, and
(c) AlCo xCrFeMo 0.5Ni
alloys, using data from
Refs. [ 10,18,51]190 H. Diao et al.Table 6.1 Room-temperature compressive properties of HEAs
Composition _ε:(s/C01) E(GPa) σy(MPa) σmax(MPa) εp(%) S(mm) Ref.
AlC 0CoCrFeNi 1 /C210/C04125.1 1,138 11 Ø5/C210 [ 102]
AlC 0.1CoCrFeNi ’’ 213.2 957 2,550 10.52 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 0.2CoCrFeNi ’’ 150.9 906 2,386 8.68 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 0.3CoCrFeNi ’’ 137.2 867 2,178 7.82 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 0.4CoCrFeNi ’’ 156.1 1,056 2,375 6.67 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 0.5CoCrFeNi ’’ 180.8 1,060 2,250 5.6 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 1.0CoCrFeNi ’’ 75.1 1,251 2,166 7.04 ’’ [ 102]
AlC 1.5CoCrFeNi ’’ 72.5 1,255 2,083 5.54 ’’ [ 102]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0 1/C210/C04– 1,110 11 Ø5/C28[ 100]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.2 ’’ – 1,265 2,173 13.76 ’’ [ 100]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.4 ’’ – 1,481 2,444 13.38 ’’ [ 100]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.6 ’’ – 1,834 2,195 2.56 ’’ [ 100]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 0.8 ’’ – 2,179 2,664 1.77 ’’ [ 100]
AlCoCrFeNiSi 1.0 ’’ – 2,411 2,950 1.17 ’’ [ 100]
Al0CoCrFeNiTi 4.167 /C210/C03134.6 – 2,020 9 Ø4 /C210 [ 91]
Al0.5CoCrFeNiTi ’’ 106.8 – 1,600 9.9 ’’ [ 91]
Al1.0CoCrFeNiTi ’’ 147.6 – 2,280 6.4 ’’ [ 91]
Al1.5CoCrFeNiTi ’’ 133.4 – 2,110 9.8 ’’ [ 91]
Al2.0CoCrFeNiTi ’’ 93.5 – 1,030 5.2 ’’ [ 91]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 0 1.67/C210/C03– 1,250.96 2,004.23 32.7 Ø3 /C25[ 115]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 0 1/C210/C04127 1,500 2,830 26.9 Ø5 /C210 [ 96]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 177.7 2,260 3,140 23.3 ’’ [ 96]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 1.0 ’’ 90.1 1,860 2,580 8.8 ’’ [ 96]
AlCoCrFeNiTi 1.5 ’’ 159.8 2,220 2,720 5.3 ’’ [ 96]
AlCrCoCuFeNi 1.67 /C210/C03– 1,147 1,560 21#Ø3/C25[ 116]
(continued)6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 191Table 6.1 (continued)
Composition _ε:(s/C01) E(GPa) σy(MPa) σmax(MPa) εp(%) S(mm) Ref.
Al0CoCrCuFeNi ’’ – 237 11 ’’ [ 116]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0Ni 2 /C210/C04– 1,300 2,270 9.9 Ø5 /C210 [ 103]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0.2Ni ’’ – 1,420 2,240 3.5 ’’ [ 103]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0.4Ni ’’ – 1,690 2,660 1.5 ’’ [ 103]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0.6Ni ’’ – 1,880 2,820 1.4 ’’ [ 103]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 0.8Ni ’’ – 1,920 2,640 1.2 ’’ [ 103]
AlCoCrCuFeMo 1.0Ni ’’ – 1,750 2,600 1.1 ’’ [ 103]
AlCoCrFeNb 0Ni 2 /C210/C04– 1,373 3,531 24.5 Ø5 /C210 [ 25]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.1Ni ’’ – 1,641 3,285 17.2 ’’ [ 25]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.25Ni ’’ – 1,959 3,008 10.5 ’’ [ 25]
AlCoCrFeNb 0.5Ni ’’ – 2,473 3,170 4.1 ’’ [ 25]
Al0CoCrCu 1FeNiTi 0.5 1/C210/C0492.73 700 1,650 28.7 Ø5 /C210 [ 90]
Al0.25CoCrCu 0.75FeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 102.85 750 1,970 38.5 ’’ [ 90]
Al0.5CoCrCu 0.5FeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 160.54 1,580 2,389 17.4 ’’ [ 90]
Al0.75CoCrCu 0.25FeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 164.14 1,900 2,697 12 ’’ [ 90]
AlCoCrCu 0.25FeNiTi 0.5 1/C210/C04110.46 1,994 2,460 9.05 Ø5 /C210 [ 98]
AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 107.8 1,984 2,374 6.04 ’’ [ 98]
AlCrCoCuFeNi 1.67 /C210/C03– 1,303 2,081 24#Ø3/C25[ 117]
AlCrCoCuFeMnNi ’’ – 1,005 1,480 15#’’ [ 117]
AlCrCoCuFeNiTi ’’ – 1,234 1,356 9#’’ [ 117]
AlCrCoCuFeNiV ’’ – 1,469 1,970 16#’’ [ 117]192 H. Diao et al.AlCoCrCuNiTiY 0 – 35.545 – 1,495 7.68 5 /C25/C210 [ 99]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY 0.5 – 35.815 – 1,024.5 3.07 ’’ [ 99]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY 0.8 – 37.69 – 1,324.5 4.73 ’’ [ 99]
AlCoCrCuNiTiY 1.0 – 36.855 – 1,192 3.54 ’’ [ 99]
Al0(CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV) 100 1/C210/C0474.247 1,312 1,312 0 Ø5 /C210 [ 53]
Al11.1(CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV) 88.9 ’’ 164.087 1,862 2,431 0.95 ’’ [ 53]
Al20(CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV) 80 ’’ 190.086 1,465 2,016 2.35 ’’ [ 53]
Al40(CoCrCuFeMnNiTiV) 60 ’’ 163.208 1,461 1,461 0 ’’ [ 53]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0 1/C210/C0455.6 230 11 Ø5 [ 95]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.5 ’’ 98.6 700 1,650 21.6 ’’ [ 95]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.8 ’’ 128.3 1,042 1,848 2.11 ’’ [ 95]
CoCrCuFeNiTi 1.0 ’’ 76.5 1,272 1,272 0 ’’ [ 95]
Strain rate, _ε:; Young ’s modulus, E; yield strength, σy; compressive strength, σmax; plastic strain, εp; sample size, S; symbol– , blank; symbol ", same as above;
symbol # fracture strain instead of plastic strain; and symbol 1, not fractured6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 193[3,22,50,72,78,106–110], and the temperature-dependent behavior was investi-
gated. Besides, the strain rate [ 3,108], sample size [ 111], and aging/annealing
effects [ 16,49,81,93,112,113] are also reported to have dramatic inﬂuence on the
microstructural evolution during compression deformation. For instance, Fig. 6.6
presents the typical compressive stress–strain curves of HEAs [ 3]. It ’s obvious that
HEAs behave differently at various temperatures and strain rates. With a closer
look at the plastic region, serration behavior can only be found in speciﬁc temper-
ature and strain-rate regimes, which is at temperatures of 873, 973, 1,073, and
1,173 K and a strain rate of 10/C03/s in Fig. 6.6. This trend implies that diverse
deformation mechanisms may exist. The effects of temperature, strain rate, and
sample size on compressive behavior are discussed in detail in the following
subsections.
Fig. 6.6 Compressive
stress–strain curves of
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi at
different temperatures
and strain rates of ( a)
10/s and ( b)1 0/C03/s [3]194 H. Diao et al.6.3.2 Fracture Morphology
A characteristic fractography provides an efﬁcient way to study the ductility of
materials. Based on the understanding of conventional alloys, the fracture surfaces
of HEAs can be categorized to be ductile and brittle fracture as well. The following
example exhibits the effect of Cu addition on the compressive fracture surfaces at
room temperature [ 98]. As shown in Fig. 6.7a, b , a high density of dimple-like
structures can be observed on the fracture surfaces of Cu 0AlCoCrFeNiTi 0.5.A
dimple-like structure is related to the microvoid coalescence or aggregation [ 118],
which is a typical feature of ductile fracture. As the content of Cu increases, the
dimple-like structures gradually decrease, and instead, tear edges and cleavage steps
Fig. 6.7 Compressive fracture surfaces of as-cast AlCoCrCu xFeNiTi 0.5alloys, ( a,b)x¼0, (c,d)
x¼0.25, ( e,f)x¼0.5 [98]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 195begin to appear, as denoted by the white arrow in Fig. 6.7c, d , which is caused by the
coordinated operation of dislocations and microvoids. The combination of bothfeatures (tear edges and cleavage steps) can be classiﬁed as the quasi-cleavage
fracture [ 93,98], which lies in-between brittle and ductile fracture modes. With a
further addition of Cu, planar facets and riverlike patterns can be identiﬁed inFig.6.7e, f , which is the typical cleavage fracture morphology, and cleavage fracture
usually leads to brittle behavior. The analysis of the fracture morphology agrees verywell with the corresponding stress–strain curves [ 98], which shows a plastic strain of
9.05 % for AlCoCrCu
0.25FeNiTi 0.5, 6.04 % for AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiTi 0.5, and 21.6 %
for AlCoCrFeNiTi 0.5, respectively (listed in Table 6.1).
6.3.3 Temperature Effects
Besides the multicomponent systems (e.g., Al-Co-Cr-Cu-Fe-Ni), refractory HEAs
are also developed for high-temperature applications [ 22,50,78,108,109]. With
the addition of refractory elements, the mechanical behavior of HEAs at elevatedtemperatures has been improved, compared to traditional alloys. The compressivebehavior of MoNbTaW at elevated temperatures is described in Fig. 6.8a [78]. All
curves exhibit signiﬁcant plasticity. The yield strength decreases, as temperatureincreases. Microstructural examinations indicate that localized shear and crackingdominate the deformation behavior at lower temperatures (873–1,273 K), while
grain-boundary sliding and voids formation should be responsible for the fracture at
higher temperatures.
The compressive behavior of Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi at cryogenic temperatures was
also studied [ 72,106,107]. In Fig. 6.8b, interestingly, the stress–strain curves
present obvious transition from a serrated ﬂow at lower temperature (4.2–7.5 K)to non-serrated ﬂow at higher temperatures (30–300 K), which indicates a signif-icant change in the deformation mechanism. In addition, the sharp sawlike type ofserrations could serve as a probe for microstructural evolution. Work hardening is
also observed at all listed temperatures. Structural characterization at cryogenic
temperatures is, thus, needed to clarify the reason.
The yield strengths at various temperatures are replotted in Fig. 6.8c using
data from Table 6.2, for the comparison between HEAs and conventional alloys.
The advantage for HEAs is evident over traditional alloys. For example, theMoNbTaW and MoNbTaVW have better yield strengths than Inconel 718 andHaynes 230 conventional alloys when the temperature is above 1,273 K. When thetemperature is below 1,073 K, the AlMo
0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr, Al 0.4Hf0.6NbTaTiZr,
CrMo 0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr, and CrNbTiVZr have better yield strengths than Inconel
718 and Haynes 230.196 H. Diao et al.Fig. 6.8 (a) The compressive behavior of MoNbTaW at elevated temperatures [ 78], (b) com-
pressive behavior of Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi at cryogenic temperatures [ 72,106], and ( c) temperature
dependence of compressive yield strength for HEAs and conventional alloys, replotted using data
from Table 6.2[22,50,78,108,109]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 197Table 6.2 Elevated-temperature compressive behavior of refractory HEAs
Composition T(K) _ε:(s/C01) E(GPa) σy(MPa) σp(MPa) εf(%) S(mm) Ref.
MoNbTaW 296 1 /C210/C03220/C620 1,058 1,211 1.5#Ø3.6/C25.4 [ 78]
873 ’’ – 561 11 ’’ [ 78]
1,073 ’’ – 552 11 ’’ [ 78]
1,273 ’’ – 548 1,008 16#’’ [ 78]
1,473 ’’ – 506 803 12#’’ [ 78]
1,673 ’’ – 421 467 9#’’ [ 78]
1,873 ’’ – 405 600 27#’’ [ 78]
MoNbTaVW 296 1 /C210/C03180/C615 1,246 1,087 1.7 Ø3.6 /C25.4 [ 78]
873 ’’ – 862 1,597 13 ’’ [ 78]
1,073 ’’ – 846 1,509 17 ’’ [ 78]
1,273 ’’ – 842 1,370 19 ’’ [ 78]
1,473 ’’ – 735 802 7.5 ’’ [ 78]
1,673 ’’ – 656 11 ’’ [ 78]
1,873 ’’ – 477 11 ’’ [ 78]
HfNbTaTiZr 296 1 /C210/C03– 929 – – Ø3.8 /C25.7 [ 108]
673 ’’ – 790 – – ’’ [ 108]
873 ’’ – 675 – – ’’ [ 108]
1,273 ’’ – 295 – – ’’ [ 108]
1,473 ’’ – 92 – – ’’ [ 108]
1,073 1 /C210/C01– 285 – – ’’ [ 108]
’’ 1 /C210/C02– 475 – – ’’ [ 108]
’’ 1 /C210/C03– 535 – – ’’ [ 108]
’’ 1 /C210/C04– 543 – – ’’ [ 108]
’’ 1 /C210/C05– 550 – – ’’ [ 108]
AlMo 0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr 296 1 /C210/C03178.6 2,000 2,368 10 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 50]
1,073 ’’ 80 1,597 1,810 11 ’’ [ 50]
1,273 ’’ 36 745 772 >50 ’’ [ 50]
1,473 ’’ 27 250 275 >50 ’’ [ 50]198 H. Diao et al.Al0.4Hf0.6NbTaTiZr 296 1 /C210/C0378.1 1,841 2,269 10 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 50]
1,073 ’’ 48.8 796 834 >50 ’’ [ 50]
1,273 ’’ 23.3 298 455 >50 ’’ [ 50]
1,473 ’’ – 89 135 >50 ’’ [ 50]
CrMo 0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr 296 1 /C210/C03– 1,595 2,046 5.0 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 22]
1,073 ’’ – 983 1,100 5.5 ’’ [ 22]
1,273 ’’ – 546 630 1 ’’ [ 22]
1,473 ’’ – 170 190 1 ’’ [ 22]
NbTiVZr 298 1 /C210/C0380 1,105 – >50 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 109]
873 ’’ – 834 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,073 ’’ – 187 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,273 ’’ – 58 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
NbTiV 2Zr 298 1 /C210/C0398 918 – >50 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 109]
873 ’’ – 571 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,073 ’’ – 240 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,273 ’’ – 72 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
CrNbTiZr 298 1 /C210/C03120 1,260 – 6 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 109]
873 ’’ – 1,035 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,073 ’’ – 300 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,273 ’’ – 115 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
CrNbTiVZr 298 1 /C210/C03100 1,298 – 3 4.7 /C24.7/C27.7 [ 109]
873 ’’ – 1,230 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,073 ’’ – 615 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
1,273 ’’ – 259 – >50 ’’ [ 109]
Temperature, T; strain rate, _ε:; Young ’s modulus, E; yield strength, σy; peak stress, σp; plastic strain, εp; sample size, S; symbol – , blank; symbol ", same as
above; symbol #, plastic strain instead of fracture strain; and symbol 1, not fractured6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 1996.3.4 Strain-Rate Effects
Loading rate has a major effect on the response time of materials during deforma-
tion and further on the mechanical performance. For HfNbTaTiZr, it ’s evident that
at high strain rates ( >10/C03/s), deformation strengthening dominates, and the plastic
ﬂow keeps on increasing in the compression experiment at a temperature of1,073 K, as shown in Fig. 6.9a [108]. In contrast, strain softening occurs after
1000a
b
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0800
600
400
200
0
0
052mm 5mm 8mm 10mm
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 4510 20
Engineering Strain (%)Engineering Stress (MPa)
True Strain (%)True stress(MPa)3010−2s−1 e. = 10−1s−1
10−3s−1
10−4s−1
T = 1073 K10−5s−1
40 50
Fig. 6.9 (a) Strain-rate effect on the compressive stress–strain curve of HfNbTaTiZr at
T¼1,073 K [ 108], and ( b) sample-size effect on the compressive stress–strain curve of
AlCoCrFeNi at room temperature [ 111]200 H. Diao et al.yielding, followed up with a steady state for low strain rates of 10/C04/s and 10/C05/s,
which indicate an alternative deformation mechanism. Indeed, by scanning electronmicroscopy (SEM) characterization, extensive wedge-like cavities assemble at
grain boundaries with strain rates of 10
/C03/s and 10/C02/s, suggesting that the pure
dislocation mobility and diffusion activity are not sufﬁcient to accommodate thedeformation and relieve stress concentration around sliding grain boundaries. Withhigher magniﬁcation, ﬁne recrystallized grains/particles can be found along grainboundaries, indicating the presence of the high internal stress and high-densitydislocations, which may contribute to the formation of the grain-boundary cavita-tion. However, when the strain rate slows down to 10
/C04/s and 10/C05/s, only small
round cavities exist, implying that the operation of dislocations and diffusion are
sufﬁcient to accommodate the deformation process.
6.3.5 Sample-Size Effects
Sample-size effects could be remarkable, since they may affect the cooling rate
during solidiﬁcation. As well known for bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), sample sizedramatically inﬂuences their plastic behavior [ 114,119,120], due to the cooling
rate and crystallization. Similarly, HEAs also show the sample-size effect on thecompressive behavior to some extent. Figure 6.9b depicts the stress–strain curve of
samples with diameters of 2, 5, 8, and 10 mm, respectively [ 111]. The yield strength
decreases slightly, as the sample size increases, and the plasticity increases dramat-
ically with decreasing the specimen size. That ’s to say, smaller HEA samples
exhibit both higher strength and larger plasticity.
The SEM characterization [ 111] indicates that samples of 2 and 5 mm in
diameter present similar single-phase morphologies, in contrast to the typical castdendritic structures for larger samples. Furthermore, the energy-dispersive analysisimplies that for samples of 2 and 5 mm in diameter, the elements within grainsdistribute homogeneously. However, for the other two samples of 8 and 10 mm in
diameter, Cr segregated to the interdendritic regions, and a compound containing
Ni and Cr may form during solidiﬁcation, which could result in the decrease ofyield strength [ 111].
6.3.6 Microcompression
It has been found that metallic alloys behave in a different way at the submicron
scale, compared to their bulk counterpart [ 98,121–126]: (1) the yield strength rises
signiﬁcantly, (2) plastic deformation proceeds as intermittent strain bursts, and(3) the special creep behavior occurs during high-load holding. Especially for (2),
the strain burst refers to serration behavior. The previous work has demonstrated6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 201that the distribution of strain bursts follows a power-law scaling behavior [ 123,125]
or a tuned critical behavior [ 69].
Microcompression experiments have also been conducted on HEAs
[127,128]. Figure 6.10 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of
the compressed MoNbTaW HEA pillars with different sizes and correspondingstress–strain curves. The [316] orientation is selected to obtain the single-slipsystem. Figure 6.10a, b clearly reveals the single-slip bands on the pillars of larger
sizes, while multiple slips can be found in Fig. 6.10c, d with smaller-sized pillars,
which may contribute to strain hardening. The stress–strain curves in Fig. 6.10e
exhibit that smaller pillars possess larger yield strengths and larger strain burstswith higher frequency as well, which may result from more activation and interac-
tion of multiple slips. These results veriﬁed that the above statements (1) and
(2) also apply in HEAs.
6.4 Tensile Properties
Compared to hardness and compression tests, tensile experiments are sensitive todetect the embrittlement. For the HEA samples with a dendritic structure and someshrinkage pores, tensile tests are more suitable to reveal the mechanical properties
in the stressed state which is frequently encountered in practical applications.
The study of tensile properties of HEAs is limited to few alloy systems [ 15,48,
49,54–61]. Tsai et al. are the ﬁrst to study the tensile properties of HEAs [ 15]. Until
now, all reported tensile properties of HEAs are analyzed. Promising results havebeen found in HEAs. The effects of structures and grain sizes on the shapes ofstress–strain curves [ 59,60], temperature effects on yielding stress [ 15,54], Al/Sn/
Mn/V alloying effects on yield stress and ductility [ 49,55,60], and fracture
behavior [ 15] are summarized in this part.
6.4.1 Stress–Strain Curves
The shapes of stress–strain curves are highly affected by the structure of HEAs.
Typical tensile stress–strain curves of Al xCoCrFeMnNi HEAs are shown in
Fig. 6.11. In the single-phase FCC region (represented by Al0, Al4, Al7, and
Al8), alloys behaved like a solid solution with relatively low strengths but extendedductility. In the mixed structure region (FCC + BCC phases, represented by Al9,
Al10, and Al11), alloys behaved like a composite with a sharp increase in strength
but reduced ductility. In the single-phase BCC region, alloys became extremelybrittle [ 60].
The shapes of stress–strain curves also are affected by the grain size of HEAs.
The tensile stress–strain curves of CoCrFeMnNi alloys with three different grainsizes (4.4 μm, 50 μm, and 155 μm) are compared (Fig. 6.12). Fine-grained materials202 H. Diao et al.Fig. 6.10 SEM images of post-compressed [316]-oriented MoNbTaW HEA pillars with diame-
ters of ( a)2μm, (b)1μm, (c) 500 nm, ( d) 250 nm, and ( e) corresponding stress–strain curves [ 127]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 203have higher strength than coarse-grained materials. Small load drops after yielding
were observed in the ﬁne-grained materials, while the stress–strain curves of the
coarse-grained materials show neither well-deﬁned yield points nor load drops after
yielding [ 59]. For the ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained materials, serration behavior
happens at the temperature of 673 K (Fig. 6.12).
6.4.2 Yield Strength and Ductility
By summarizing all published tensile data of HEAs [ 15,48,49,54–61], it reveals
that the HEAs display both yield strength and ductility at room temperature with awide range, shown in Fig. 6.13. The tensile yield stresses of AlCoCrCuFeNi and
Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi are superior to Ti-6Al-4 V and Inconel 713. The CoCrFeNi has
the better ductility than conventional alloys, such as 304 stainless steels, Ti-6Al-4 V,
Inconel 713, and 5083 Al. The temperature effect on tensile properties is studied inthe Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi [ 15] and CoCrFeMnNi [ 59] systems. As shown in Fig. 6.14,
the yield stress decreases as the temperature increases. For the single-phaseCoCrFeMnNi [ 129], the mechanisms of temperature effects on the yield stress
are revealed.
The curves in Fig. 6.14 can be well ﬁtted in the form:
σ
yTðÞ ¼ σaexp/C0T
C/C18/C19
þσb ð6:3Þ
where σa,C, and σbare ﬁtting constant.
Fig. 6.11 Engineering tensile stress–strain curves of the as-cast Al x(CoCrFeMnNi) 100- x(denoted
as Al x, where xis the atomic percent of Al) alloys at room temperature [ 60]204 H. Diao et al.Fig. 6.12 Representative engineering stress–strain curves of the CoCrFeMnNi alloy at the six
testing temperatures for the ( a) ﬁne-grained (grain size of 4.4 μm) and ( b) coarse-grained (grain
size of 155 μm) materials. The inset in (a) shows a small load drop after yielding for a ﬁne-grained
sample that was tested at 473 K [ 59]
Fig. 6.13 Tensile yield stress versus ductility of most studied HEAs at room temperature,
compared with conventional alloys, e.g., 304 stainless steel, Ti-6Al-4 V, Inconel 713, and 5083Al, using data from Refs. [ 15,48,49,54–61]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 205The Peierls lattice friction, σp,is chosen to reveal the deformation mechanisms
of CoCrFeMnNi [ 129]:
σp¼2G
1/C0νexp/C02πω
b/C18/C19
ð6:4Þ
where Gis the shear modulus, νis Poisson ’s ratio, ωis the dislocation width, and
bis the magnitude of the Burgers vector.
The dependence of dislocation width, ω, on temperature has been approximated:
ω¼ωo1þαT ðÞ ð 6:5Þ
where αis a small positive constant, and ω0is the dislocation width at 0 K.
Combining the above two equations yields
σp¼2G
1/C0νexp/C02πωo
b/C18/C19
exp/C02πωo
bαT/C18/C19
ð6:6Þ
Equating the temperature-dependent part of Eq. ( 6.3) with that of Eq. ( 6.6) yields
σa¼σp0ðÞ ¼2G
1/C0νexp/C02πωo
b/C18/C19
ð6:7Þ
Fig. 6.14 Tensile yield stress as a function of temperature for three kinds of most studied HEAs,
using data from Refs. [ 15,59,129]206 H. Diao et al.and
C¼b
2πωoαð6:8Þ
Thus, for the single-phase CoCrFeMnNi HEAs, the calculated Peierls stress at
0K , σp(0), has the best match with the ﬁtted σavalues when ω0¼b. For pure Ni,
the match is better when ω0¼1.5b. These results show that the dislocations in
single-phase HEAs are narrower than in pure FCC metals. In addition, the temper-ature dependence of the yield strength of single-phase HEAs may be due tothermally induced changes in the dislocation width that, in turn, produce a temper-
ature dependence of the Peierls stress [ 129].
The CoCrFeMnNi and CoCrFeNi alloys exhibit a strong temperature-dependent
decrease in strength with increasing temperature from 77 to 1,273 K and a relativelyweak strain-rate dependence (at 10
/C03and 10/C01s/C01)[57].
Besides test conditions (temperatures and strain rates), the processing method
has a great impact on the ductility of HEAs. The AlCoCrCuFeNi alloy was moreductile and strong after hot working than in the as-cast condition [ 15,54]. The
strengthening and toughening characteristics are mainly due to its small grain size
(around 1.5 μm). Very interestingly, the hot-worked AlCoCrCuFeNi alloy showed a
superplastic-like behavior in the temperature range of 1,073–1,273 K. The tensileelongation was above 400 % and reached 860 % at 1,273 K [ 54].
6.4.3 Deformation Mechanisms
Tension tests, associated with neutron diffraction, transmission electron micros-
copy (TEM), and so on, are effective techniques for revealing the deformationmechanisms of HEAs. Even though the local atomic stress can be studied by thepair distribution function (PDF) [ 130], no paper studies the local atomic stress
under loading.
To reveal the elastic deformation mechanism of HEAs, the lattice structural
evolution of CoCrFeMnNi is investigated by in situ tensile deformation withneutron diffraction [ 131]. The lattice strain during loading can be calculated from
the shift of a diffraction peak position as
ε
hkl¼dhkl/C0dhkl,0
dhkl,0ð6:9Þ
where dhklis the dspacing determined from the hkl reﬂection for a given load, and
dhkl,0refers to the value for zero load. The lattice-strain revolution during defor-
mation of CoCrFeMnNi is shown in Fig. 6.15. Strong elastic anisotropy exists, i.e.,
the lattice-strain change is strongly dependent on the grain orientations. Amongthem, the {200} grains have the largest elastic strain along the loading direction.6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 207Elastic moduli and constants of different planes are determined to be E 111¼
222.6 GPa, E 100¼112.2 GPa, C 11¼172.1 GPa, C 12¼107.5 GPa, and C 44¼
92.0 GPa. These elastic trends and constants show that the elastic anisotropy behaviorof the CoCrFeMnNi is close to that of its FCC component, pure Ni [ 131,132].
To reveal the plastic deformation mechanism of HEAs, TEM is used to charac-
terize the microstructure of HEAs after tension tests. The TEM results ofCoCrFeMnNi reveal that initial plasticity, up to tensile strains of about 2 %, occurs
exclusively by the planar glide of (110) dislocations on <111>planes at room
temperature [ 57]. At higher strains, with room temperature and above, slip became
more homogeneous and cell structures developed. This dislocation motion issimilar to the normal FCC metals. However, at a low temperature, 77 K, extensivedeformation twinning is observed in the specimen deformed to a plastic strain of20.2 %, which is not common in normal FCC metals. This deformation-inducedtwinning, by providing an additional deformation mode, likely contributes to theobserved increase in ductility at low temperatures [ 57].
6.4.4 Fracture
The fracture surfaces of HEAs are routinely used to determine the cause of failure in
engineering structures and develop theoretical models of crack-growth behavior.Compared with fractures after compression, the fractures after tension own differ-ent features [ 15,54,55,58]. The fracture mode of Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi transfers from
the brittle to ductile types, as the temperature increases, shown in Fig. 6.16.
Fig. 6.15 Lattice-strain evolution of CoCrFeMnNi as a function of applied stress [ 131]208 H. Diao et al.The fracture surfaces of Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi undergo shear rupture at room temper-
ature (Fig. 6.16a ), ductile one at 873 K (Fig. 6.16c ), and greater ductility with larger
dimples at 1,073 K (Fig. 6.16d )[15]. At a certain temperature, HEAs exhibit a
mixed type of brittle and ductile fracture. Taking AlCoCrCuFeNi, for example, the
fracture morphology at 873 K is a mixed mode of brittle and ductile fractures
[54]. The brittle fracture is reﬂected by the presence of ﬂat facets with characteristic
river-pattern markings inside large dimples, while the ductile fracture is reﬂected in
numerous dimples of different diameters surrounding the ﬂat facets [ 54]. The
alloying also affects the fracture mode. For CoCuFeNiSn x, a ductile fracture for
the CoCuFeNiSn 0.05alloy and a cleavage fracture for the CoCuFeNiSn 0.2alloy
were observed [ 55].
Fig. 6.16 Fracture surfaces of as-rolled Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi tensile-tested samples at different
temperatures: ( a) room temperature, ( b) 773 K, ( c) 873 K, and ( d) 1,073 K [ 15]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 2096.4.5 Comparison Among Hardness, Compression,
and Tension Properties
Since few papers report the mechanical properties of HEAs using both hardness and
tension techniques, we choose one material, Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi [ 15], fabricated by two
methods, and compare both the hardness and tension properties, as shown in Fig. 6.17.
Fig. 6.17 The relationship between hardness and tensile yielding stress as a function of temper-
ature using data from Ref. [ 15]. (a) Yielding stress and hardness and ( b) the ratio of tensile yielding
stress over hardness as a function of temperature of the annealed and cold-rolled Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi210 H. Diao et al.As described by Tabor [ 80] originally, during indentation, the pressure, P,
normal to the surface of the indenter tip can be calculated as
P¼2k1þπ=2 ðÞ ð 6:10Þ
Plastic deformation during indentation occurs, when the Huber–von Mises
criterion is satisﬁed, which in the two-dimensional case occurs when the maximumshear stress reaches a critical value, k:
2k¼1:15σ
y ð6:11Þ
For a Vickers indenter,
Hv¼Load
ContactArea¼0:927P ð6:12Þ
Combining Eqs. ( 6.10,6.11, and 6.12) gives
σy¼0:364Hv ð6:13Þ
with σyandHvin kg/mm2. Alternatively,
σy¼3:55Hv ð6:14Þ
with σyin MPa and Hvin kg/mm2.
In Fig. 6.17b , for both cold-rolled and annealed samples, the ratios of tensile
yielding stress versus hardness are lower than the constant, 3.55, predicted byTabor, no matter how high the temperature is. However, the constants are very
similar in magnitude.
Compressive yielding stress is the stress state caused by an applied load that acts
to reduce the length of the material along the axis of the applied load, while thetensile yielding stress is the stress state caused by an applied load that tends toelongate the material along the axis of the applied load. The compressive strengthof HEAs is generally higher than their tensile strength. For example, the compres-sive and tensile yielding stresses at room temperature are 460 MPa and 360 MPa ofAl
0.5CoCrCuFeNi [ 82], respectively. That is generally because materials loaded in
tension are susceptible to stress concentrations, such as material defects or abrupt
changes in geometry.
6.5 Modeling of Serration Behavior
A simple mean-ﬁeld theory (MFT) model successfully predicts the slip-avalanchestatistics [ 66,72] observed in many recent simulations of plastic deformation [ 58,
68,72,133–141]. This analytic model has the advantage that as simple as it is and
as few ingredients as it has, the model is able to give exact quantitative predictionsof avalanche dynamics [ 66]. According to the MFT model [ 66]:6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 2111. A slowly sheared material undergoes a local slip, when the local stress at a weak
spot exceeds the local threshold stress, or failure stress. A local slip stops, andthe weak spot resticks, when the local stress is reduced to a lower arrest stress, or
sticking stress.
2. The stress released by a microscopic slip at one weak spot may trigger other
weak spots to slip as well, and the process may go on and result in a macro-scopically large slip avalanche.
3. The material is sheared slowly enough to prevent the slip avalanches from
overlapping in time, so that each avalanche has enough time to ﬁnish beforethe next avalanche initiates.
4. Each weak spot in the slowly sheared material interacts with every other weak
spot equally strong. In other words, the interactions between the weak spots do
not decay with distance.
The MFT model predicts avalanche statistics for two boundary conditions, a
slowly increasing stress applied to the boundaries, or a small strain rate imposed at
the boundaries [ 66]. Here we present a brief review of the discrete version of the
MFT model for the slowly increasing stress boundary condition. This discreteversion treats the slowly sheared material as a system with Nlattice points. Under
the applied stress, F, that is below but close to the failure stress, F
c, the local stress
at a lattice point, l,i s[66,142]
τl¼J=NX
mum/C0ul ðÞ þ F ð6:15Þ
When the local stress, τl, exceeds the local threshold stress at the weak spot, l, the
spot slips by Δul, and releases a stress of the amount, 2GΔul, where G~J is the
elastic shear modulus. The stress released by this microscopic slip at one weak spotis equally redistributed to other weak spots of the material, which may trigger newslips. These new slips further increase the stress at other weak spots and may causemore slips. The process may continue and lead to a macroscopically large slipavalanche. A slip avalanche stops, when the local stress is lower than the currentlocal threshold stress at each weak spot of the material. The current local thresholdstress may be different from the initial local threshold stress at the beginning of the
slip avalanche due to weakening or strengthening [ 66].
Next we present some of the main MFT model predictions [ 66] in the absence of
weakening effects:
1. For a small stress bin around the failure stress, F
c, the probability distribution,
D(s, F c), of avalanche sizes, s, obeys a universal power law, D(s, F c) ~ 1/sτ, and
the model predicts that the universal exponent of τ¼1.5.
2. For small stress bins around the stress, F, the maximum avalanche size is related
to the stress by smax~( F c–F )/C01/σ, and the model predicts that the universal
cutoff exponent is σ¼0.5.
3. For the distribution, D(s,F), of avalanche sizes, s, observed in a small stress bin
around F, the model predicts that212 H. Diao et al.Ds;FðÞ /C24 1=sτs/C1Fc/C0F ðÞ1=σhi
ð6:16Þ
where τ¼1.5 and σ¼0.5, and D(x) ~ A exp(/C0Bx)is a universal scaling function .
The values of AandBdepend on the material details. When the number of
avalanches is small, the stress-integrated form, Dint(s) ~Ð
0FcD(s,F)dF ~ 1/sτ+σ,
can be more useful. In addition, using the complementary cumulative distribu-
tion, C(s), instead of the probability density distribution, D(s), may also improve
the statistics for a small number of avalanches. Here C(s) is deﬁned asð1
SDsðÞds, i.e., C(s) gives the probability of ﬁnding an avalanche larger than s.
4. The model predicts that the local slope, Geof the stress–strain curve, scales as
Ge/C241=<s>/C24Fc/C0F ðÞ2/C0τðÞ =σ/C24Fc/C0F ðÞ ð 6:17Þ
where <s>is the mean avalanche size for a small stress bin around the stress, F.
5. For the loading condition of a small imposed strain rate, Γ, the model predicts
that
Smax/C24Γ/C0λð6:18Þ
Ds;ΓðÞ /C24 1=sτKs/C1Γλ/C0/C1
ð6:19Þ
where τ¼1.5 and λ¼2 according to the analytical predictions, and the universal
scaling function, K, is quickly decaying.
Widom scaling collapses can be used to test these predictions [ 143]. For exam-
ple, in order to test Ds;FðÞ /C24 1=sτDs/C1Fc/C0F ðÞ1=σhi
, or equivalently
Ds;FðÞ sτ/C24Ds/C1Fc/C0F ðÞ1=σhi
, one plots D(s,F)sτon the yaxis and s/C1(Fc–F )1/σ
as the x-axis. Next the values for Fc,τ, and σare tuned until the distributions, D(s,F),
for different, F, lay on top of each other. Figure 6.18 shows the Widom-scaling
collapse of four C(s) curves with different stresses for Mo nanopillars [ 69].
The corresponding experimental setup and the stress–strain curves are shown inFig.6.19 [69].
Recent studies indicate that the above MFT model could be applied to HEAs
[72]. Figures 6.20,6.21, and 6.22 show the complementary cumulative distribution
functions of the stress-drop sizes for three kinds of HEAs at different temperaturesand strain rates [ 72]. It ’s clear that the temperature dramatically affects the distri-
bution of stress-drop sizes. In some speciﬁc temperature ranges, the stress-drop sizewill decrease as the temperature increases, which is true for the Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi
HEA from 7 to 9 K (Fig. 6.20), for the MoNbTaW HEA from 298 to 873 K
(Fig. 6.21), and for the Al 5Cr12Fe35Mn 28Ni20HEA from 573 to 673 K
(Fig. 6.22). The experimental results agree well with the MFT model prediction
that the slip avalanches are expected to become smaller for larger in these speciﬁc
ranges of temperature [ 52,58,68,72]. An recent extension of the MFT for the6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 213serration behavior of HEAs shows that in other temperature ranges the dependence
of the average avalanche size on the temperature can be even non monotonic,reaching a maximum within a special temperature range that depends on the applied
strain rate.
In addition, the MFT model [ 66,68,69,72] could also be related to the
deformation mechanism for HEAs, including the dislocation motion and deforma-tion twinning. In high-temperature ranges, i.e., the cases of MoNbTaW andAl
5Cr12Fe35Mn 28Ni20HEAs in the above discussion, the thermal vibration energy
of pinning solute atoms should be considered at high temperatures. Since HEAs areregarded as solid solutions, each constituent element can be a solute atom. Astemperature increases, the pinning effect of solutes around dislocations becomes
smaller because solute atoms tend to shake away from their low-energy sites for
pinning as the thermal vibration energy increases [ 62], which will lead to a decrease
for the slip size. In contrast, in the cryogenic-temperature range, i.e., the case of theAl
0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA in the present study, twinning may likely be responsible for
the deformation process [ 67], since higher temperatures make it more difﬁcult for
deformation twins to be induced. Therefore, slip size will be decreased, as temper-ature increases since the twinning process is more restricted. However, it should be
10−1S. f1/sC(S). f  -(k-1)/ s
10−310−410−210−2100102
10010−210−1100
100From 0.4 to 0.5 of max Stress
From 0.5 to 0.6 of max Stress
From 0.6 to 0.7 of max Stress
From 0.7 to 0.8 of max Stress
slip size S (nm)complementary cumulative distribution C(S)
101
Fig. 6.18 The main ﬁgure shows C(s) curves for slips in stress intervals around different applied
stress values, τ. The avalanche events are obtained from compression experiments on seven
800-nm-diameter Mo nanopillars at a nominal displacement rate of 0.1 nm/s. The avalanche
events are all normalized according to their respective maximum stress. The insert shows theWidom-scaling collapse of the C(s) curves, and f¼(τ
c–τ)/τc–c0, where the adjustable parameter,
c0¼0.14, compensates for the ﬁnite system size. The scaling exponents, κ¼1.5 and σ¼0.5, agree
with MFT predictions. The gray function is the scaling function, gxðÞ /C17ð1
xe/C0Att/C0κdt, also predicted
by the MFT model [ 69]214 H. Diao et al.noted that the above two proposed deformation mechanisms may not be only
limited or separated in the speciﬁc temperature ranges as discussed. For different
solid-solution systems, for instance, the twinning process may overwhelm the
dislocation process and dominate in the high-temperature range, or the combinationof both mechanisms may exist at the same time. Thus, more detailed studies for thetemperature effects are needed. Other possible reasons may also exist, like phase-transformation-induced changes in the deformation mechanism. In summary, theexperimental results of the decreasing trend for the slip size at higher temperaturematch well with the trend predicted by the MFT model, suggesting that the study ofserration behavior may improve the understanding of the deformation process of
HEAs or even for new HEA materials, which can also be used to compare with the
Portevin–Le Chatelier (PLC) effect in conventional alloys [ 63–65,70,71].
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
00 0.05 0.15
StrainStress (MPa)
0.25 0.1 0.2criticality slope1
2
341. Nb 868 nm, 2 nm/s
2. Mo 800 nm, 10 nm/sConstant
Displacement
Rate
Single
Crystalline
Nanopillar
SubstrateDiamond
Flat Punch
3. Au 250 nm, 0.1 nm/s
4. Ta 400 nm, 2 nm/s
0.3ab
cd
Fig. 6.19 (a) SEM image of an Nb pillar at 5200tilt before compression. ( b) SEM image of the
same pillar after compression and the ﬁnal slip-avalanche event, with the slip data at the largeststrains excluded. ( c) Stress–strain curves for different metals compressed at different displacement
rates. Curve 1 corresponds to the Nb pillar in ( a,b). The criticality slope line is ﬁt to estimate the
slope of curve 4 near the failure stress. ( d) The compression test setup [ 69]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 215Fig. 6.20 Serration events for Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi in compression experiments under a constant
strain rate of 4 /C210/C04/s. Serration events in samples compressed at temperatures around 7 K occur
in broad ranges of magnitudes, compared to events in samples compressed at 7.5 and 9 K [ 72]
Fig. 6.21 Serration events for MoNbTaW in compression experiments under a constant strain rate
of 1/C210/C03/s. Heating the sample from room temperature to 873 K severely diminishes the
characteristic size of the serrations [ 72]216 H. Diao et al.6.6 Fatigue Properties
6.6.1 Stress–Life (S–N) Curve
Fatigue behavior of materials is extremely important for industrial and engineering
applications. For the Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA, four-point-bending tests have been
conducted at various applied loads [ 73]. The maximum stress, σ, on the tensile
surface within the span of the two outer pins can be calculated, using
σ¼3PS o/C0Si ðÞ
2BW2ð6:20Þ
where Pis the applied load, Sois the outer span length, Siis the inner span length,
Bis the thickness, and Wis the height.
The stress range versus the number of cycles to failure (S–N) curve is plotted in
Fig.6.23a , marked by red and blue points. The points are scattered within stress
range of 600–1,200 MPa. Even at the largest stress range above 1,100 MPa, thefatigue life still scatters from 35,000 to 450,000 cycles. One possible reason could
be the defects introduced during the casting and rolling process, such as aluminum
oxide particles. Figure 6.23b shows these particles in the energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDS) analysis, which contain around 50 % oxygen. These defects
Fig. 6.22 Serration events for Al 5Cr12Fe35Mn 28Ni20in tension experiments under a constant
strain rate of 1 /C210/C04/s. This alloy was tested in its as-homogenized state; alloys that were cold-
rolled after homogenization did not exhibit serration behavior. The effect of temperature is shown
here; higher temperatures curb the distribution of serration magnitudes [ 72]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 217Fig. 6.23 (a) S–N curve (all redandblue points) of the Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA in four-point-
bending-fatigue tests and ( b) SEM images with EDS analyses of the aluminum oxide particles [ 73]218 H. Diao et al.may serve as nucleation sites for microcracks and shorten the fatigue life of HEA
samples.
The fatigue tests reach 107cycles at three stress levels, which indicates that the
endurance limit is roughly estimated to be 540–945 MPa. Actually, by combining the
characterization of microstructure and the predictive model, the estimation of endur-ance limit becomes more speciﬁc, a value of 858 MPa, as described in Sect. 6.7.3 .
6.6.2 Fractography
Figure 6.24 shows the fractography of fatigued samples at a stress range of 900 MPa
after 555,235 cycles [ 73]. In general, crack initiation occurred from defects at the
surface, or the corner of the sample, where the stress highly concentrates. As
indicated in Fig. 6.24a, b , the initiation sites locate at the microcracks, and typical
fatigue regions (initiation, propagation, and fracture regions) can be recognized, asmarked by red arrows. Within the fatigue-propagation region, characteristic stria-tions can be identiﬁed, indicating the crack-growth direction, which is generallyperpendicular to the striation direction in Fig. 6.24c . The dimple-like ﬁnal fracture
surface implies a ductile fracture, as shown in Fig. 6.24d .
Fig. 6.24 (a) SEM images of fracture surfaces of a fatigued sample at a stress range of 900 MPa
after 555,235 cycles, ( b) microcracks found at the surface before the fatigue test, ( c) fatigue
striations in the crack-propagation region, and ( d) dimples in the ﬁnal fracture region [ 73]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 2196.6.3 Weibull Mixture Predictive Model for Fatigue Life
From the S–N plot in Fig. 6.23a , the data points seem to be not homogeneous and
distribute into two groups. One can be denoted as a strong group, indicating sampleswith fewer fabrication defects, and the other is marked as a weak group. Therefore,the Weibull mixture predictive model is selected to predict the fatigue life insteadof the Weibull model. The probability density function (PDF) and the cumulativedistribution function (CDF) of the Weibull mixture model are given [ 73]:
fN/C12/C12p,α
s,βs,αw,βw/C0/C1
¼pβw
αwN
αw/C18/C19βw/C01
exp/C0N
αw/C18/C19βw"#
þ1/C0pðÞβs
αsN
αs/C18/C19βs/C01
exp/C0N
αs/C18/C19βs"#
ð6:21Þ
FN/C12/C12p,αs,βs,αw,βw/C0/C1
¼p1/C0exp/C0N
αw/C18/C19βw"# ()
þ1/C0pðÞ 1/C0exp/C0N
αs/C18/C19βs"# ()
ð6:22Þ
where Nis the cycles to failure, subscripts wandsdenote the weak and strong
groups, pis the fraction of samples belonging to the weak group, and the Weibull
parameters, αsandαw, are assumed to be dependent on the stress, S, according to
logαwðÞ ¼ γw,0þγw,1logSðÞ ð 6:23Þ
logαsðÞ ¼ γs,0þγs,1logSðÞ ð 6:24Þ
So the model has seven unknown parameters in total, p,γs,0,γs,1,βs,γw,0,γw,1,
and βw, which can be estimated by the maximum likelihood method [ 144]:
Lp;γs,0;γs,1;βs;γw,0;γw,1;βw/C0/C1
¼Ym
i¼1fN iðÞδi1/C0FN iðÞ ðÞ1/C0δið6:25Þ
Then the observed fatigue data can be clustered into the two groups. Therefore, the
p-quantile fatigue lives of the strong group and the weak group are predicted by
Np,wSðÞ ¼ exp γw,0þγw,1logSðÞ/C2/C3
/C0log1/C0pðÞ ½/C1381=βwð6:26Þ
Np,sSðÞ ¼ exp γs,0þγs,1logSðÞ/C2/C3
/C0log1/C0pðÞ ½/C1381=βsð6:27Þ220 H. Diao et al.More details of the model can be found elsewhere [ 73]. The predicted two groups
are described in Fig. 6.23a using red and blue lines. The median life of the strong
group exceeds 107cycles when the applied stress was less than 858 MPa, which can
be used as the estimation of the endurance limit.
6.6.4 Comparison with Conventional Alloys
The Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA shows promising fatigue resistance, when compared to
other conventional alloys and bulk metallic glasses (BMGs). With respect to the
fatigue ratio of the stress range divided by the ultimate tensile strength (UTS),HEAs span from the lower bound comparable to IN 625 superalloy to the higherbound surpassing all the other alloys listed in Fig. 6.25a . The ﬂuctuation is mainly
introduced by the casting defects in the HEA. Figure 6.25b shows that the endur-
ance limit increases linearly with ultimate tension strength (UTS), with a slope ofbeing approximately equal to 0.5 for most materials, HEAs exceed this ratio, withan upper bound of 0.7. All these results indicate that HEAs are promising candidate
materials in the structures requiring the fatigue resistance for future applications.
6.7 Nanoindentation
6.7.1 Nanoindentation and Modeling
Over the past years, nanoindentation was utilized as a powerful tool to determine
the hardness and elastic modulus of HEA coatings, prepared by reactive magnetronsputtering [ 145–152] or by the transferred arc-cladding process [ 153], and the
hardness or elastic modulus proﬁle was successfully obtained. Recently, the inves-tigation using nanoindentation for the bi-phase (FCC and BCC) bulk AlCrCuFeNi
2
alloy was reported [ 75], and the contact modulus and hardness were compared for
these two phases. Besides the room-temperature indention, the deformation behav-
ior at elevated temperatures has also been studied [ 74], with emphasis on the
incipient plasticity, and vacancy-mediated heterogeneous dislocation nucleationis deduced through modeling. To understand the nanoindentation deformationand results, we ﬁrst review several equations for general purpose [ 74].
Before the ﬁrst pop-in in the load–displacement (P–h) curve, the deformation
can be regarded as elastic, and the Hertzian elastic theory [ 154] could be used to
describe the elastic-loading curve:
P¼
4
3ErR1=2h3=2ð6:28Þ6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 221where Pis the applied load, Ris the tip radius of the indenter, his the penetration
depth, and Eris the reduced modulus of the indenter-sample combination and can
be calculated as
Fig. 6.25 Fatigue behavior including ( a) fatigue ratio [stress range/ultimate tensile strength
(UTS)] versus cycles to failure and ( b) endurance limits versus UTS, comparing the
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA, other conventional alloys, and BMGs [ 73]222 H. Diao et al.1
Er¼1/C0v2
i
Eiþ1/C0v2
s
Esð6:29Þ
where viandEiare Poisson ’s ratio and Young ’s modulus of the indenter and vs
andEsare Poisson ’s ratio and Young ’s modulus of the sample, respectively. Then
the mean pressure at pop-in, Pm, and maximum shear stress, τmax, can be derived
from [ 155]
Pm¼6PE2
r
π3R2/C18/C19 1=3
ð6:30Þ
τmax¼0:31Pm ð6:31Þ
The cumulative probability, F(P), of the indentation pop-in load, P, is given by
ln/C0ln1/C0FðÞ½/C138 ¼ αP1=3þβ ð6:32Þ
where βis a weak function of the pop-in load, P, and αis correlated to the activation
volume, V:
V¼π
0:473R
4Er/C18/C192=3
kTα ð6:33Þ
In addition, the relationship between the temperature and pop-in load at a
speciﬁc F(P)i s[156]
P1=3¼γkTþπ
0:473R
4Er/C18/C192=3H
Vð6:34Þ
where γis a complex function, and His the activation enthalpy.
6.7.2 Elevated-Temperature Nanoindentation
As described in Fig. 6.26a , the typical P–h shows the pop-in behavior at different
temperatures, T. Through Hertzian ﬁtting, Eq. ( 6.28), the reduced modulus at
different T,Er(T), can be obtained. As the temperature increases, a signiﬁcant
decrease in the pop-in load, P(T), can be observed. Thus, from Eq. ( 6.31), the
maximum shear stress, τmax(T), is calculated from P(T), and its relationship with
temperature is plotted in Fig. 6.26b .I t ’s obvious that τmax(T) and Tare linearly
correlated.
To obtain the activation volume, V, and activation enthalpy, H, two more ﬁtting
steps are needed. Using Eq. ( 6.32), the parameter, α, can be acquired by ﬁtting the6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 223slope of ln[ /C0ln(1/C0F)] versus P1/3, as shown in Fig. 6.26c . Then by combining
with Eq. ( 6.33),Vis readily derived. By ﬁtting P1/3versus Tusing Eq. ( 6.34), as
plotted in Fig. 6.26d , the intercept value determines H/V, and, thus, His obtained.
The possibilities of the homogeneous dislocation nucleation and vacancy-mediated
heterogeneous dislocation nucleation were then discussed [ 74], but only the values
from the latter fall into the range of experimental values. These results improve theunderstanding of mechanisms for the onset of plasticity in HEAs.
6.7.3 Indentation and Nanoindentation Creep
Conventional creep tests have not been reported in the area of HEAs. Only twopapers using indentation tests to study the creep behavior of HEAs have beenreported [ 51,76]. The indentation creep has been deﬁned as a time-dependent
motion of a hard indenter into a solid under a constant load for a long time, i.e.,
Fig. 6.26 (a) Typical P–h curves of CoCrFeMnNi at temperatures of 295, 323, 373 and 423 K, ( b)
maximum shear stress versus temperature, ( c) extracting the activation volume from the experi-
mental data, and ( d) extracting the activation enthalpy for the pop-in [ 74]224 H. Diao et al.an elongated hard test. The indentation-creep experiments were done for
AlxCoCrFeNi ( x¼0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, and 1.5) in the temperature range of
773–1,173 K using a load 1 kgf for dwell times of 5, 10, and 30s [ 51]. The creep
behavior is strongly dependent on the crystal structure of HEAs. For the single-
phase FCC Al 0.3CoCrFeNi alloy, hot hardness resists without large changes for all
experimental temperatures in the time range of 30s. Hence, no obvious creep occursin single-phase FCC HEAs, even at high temperatures, which suggests that the maindeformation mechanism is slip. The situation is different for the multiphaseAl
xCoCrFeNi ( x¼0.5, 0.7, 0.9, and 1.5) HEAs. The variations of hot hardness as
a function of dwell time are negligible below 873 K, while the hot hardnessdecreases with increasing the dwell time above 873 K. It conﬁrms that the creep
happens for multiphase HEAs above a certain temperature (e.g., 873 K for
Al
xCoCrFeNi, x¼0.5, 0.7, 0.9, and 1.5).
Nanoindentation is also used to characterize the initial transient creep stage in
CoFeNi by Wang et al. [ 76] by the viscoelastic ﬁtting theory. The CoFeNi is a
single-phase FCC HEA [ 157]. The displacement curve for the initial creep stage
can be described by an empirical law [ 158]:
htðÞ¼ hiþβt/C0tiðÞmþkt ð6:35Þ
where β,m, and kare ﬁtting parameters. The ﬁtting protocol in Eq. ( 6.35) is found to
produce very good ﬁts for the CoFeNi HEA at a constant load of 4,000 μN, shown
in Fig. 6.27. Unlike conventional alloys, a crossover point where the slope changes
in the initial creep stage is found in CoFeNi HEA (Fig. 6.27). Further studies show
that the value of the crossover point increases with increasing holding time at the
same constant load (Fig. 6.28a ) and with the increase of the holding stress at
constant holding time (Fig. 6.28b ).
A hypothesis is proposed for the crossover point in the initial creep stage from
the viewpoint of the dislocation migration beneath the indenter [ 76]. The formation
Fig. 6.27 Crossover
behavior in thedisplacement-time curve in
the initial creep stage of
CoFeNi [ 76]6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 225of the dislocation cells corresponds to the crossover behavior. Before the crossover
point, the separated dislocation entanglement leads to the work-hardening effect.After the crossover point, the work-hardening effect is saturated, and the residualdislocations migrate into the domain boundary of the dislocation cell, whichdetermines the viscous behavior [ 76].
6.8 Conclusions
This chapter reviews the mechanical properties of HEAs in the ﬁelds of hardness,
compression, tension, serration behavior, fatigue, and nanoindentation. It showsthat the hardness of HEAs varies widely from 140 to 900 HV, highly dependent onthe alloy systems and related processing methods. The effects of alloying,
Fig. 6.28 Hardening effect
in the initial creep of
CoFeNi. ( a) the holding-
time-dependent yieldingpoint, ( b) the holding-
load-dependent yielding
point [ 76]226 H. Diao et al.annealing treatment, and structure on the hardness are discussed. The trend of hot
hardness is also summarized. Various loading conditions, such as temperatures, Alcontents, strain rates, sample sizes, and microcompression, are related to the
microstructural evolution during compression deformation. The effects of struc-
tures, grain sizes, alloying elements, and processing parameters on the tensileyielding stress, ductility, shape of tensile stress–strain curves, and fracture aftertension tests are discussed. A MFT model successfully predicting the slip avalancheand serration statistics observed in recent simulations of the plastic deformation ofHEAs is presented. The fatigue study under four-point-bending tests conducted onthe Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA is revealed to demonstrate that fatigue properties of
HEAs are generally better, compared with conventional alloys. Nanoindentation
studies on the incipient plasticity and creep behavior are discussed.
6.9 Future Work
Although extensive work has been done in exploring the mechanical behavior of
HEAs, we should continue to describe and explore mechanical properties in depth.
1. The effects of heat treatment and processing on mechanical behavior have to be
optimized to develop HEAs with desirable microstructures and mechanicalproperties.
2. More work should be focused on the high-temperature mechanical properties,
such as hot hardness, hot compression, and hot tension tests.
3. Compared to hardness and compression experiments, limited work on the tensile
properties of HEAs has been done. We should do tensile tests at room and high
temperatures with different strain rates, which will lead a guide to the broader
application of HEAs.
4. Fatigue experiments should be conducted in more alloy systems. Besides high-
cycle fatigue, low-cycle-fatigue and fatigue-crack-growth behavior should beincluded to fully describe the fatigue performance of HEAs.
5. The indenter and nanoindenter are used to successfully describe the creep
behavior of HEAs successfully on a small scale. However, we should conductconventional creep studies on larger scales.
6. The theoretical work relating microstructural features to mechanical perfor-
mance needs to be explored. Serration behavior of HEAs should be intensivelystudied and understood, which shed light on deformation mechanisms. Thestudies of tension and compression behavior have to be conducted to understandthe anisotropic behavior of HEAs. Moreover, the serration characteristics of thetension and compression behavior have to be investigated to fully comprehendthe deformation mechanisms. It would be great to see if there are effects of creepand fatigue damage on serration features with a hope of predicting creep and
fatigue life through modeling serration characteristics.6 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 2277. Advanced characterization techniques [ 159,160], such as in situ neutron and
synchrotron diffraction, SEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomicprobe microscopy (APT), and so on, are needed to reveal the deformation
mechanisms of HEAs at the level of atomic stresses or dislocations.
Acknowledgment The authors very much appreciate Dr. Michael C. Gao ’s kind and excellent
comments on this book chapter. HYD and PKL would like to acknowledge the Department ofEnergy (DOE), Ofﬁce of Fossil Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory (DE-FE-
0008855 and DE-FE-0024054), with Mr. V. Cedro and Mr. R. Dunst as program managers. XX,
FS, KAD, and PKL thank the support from the project of DE-FE-0011194 with the programmanager, Dr. J. Mullen. PKL very much appreciates the support of the US Army Research Ofﬁceproject (W911NF-13-1-0438) with the program manager, Drs. D. Stepp and S. Mathaudhu, and the
National Science Foundation (CMMI-1100080) with the program director, Dr. C. Cooper.
References
1. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 375–377:213–218. doi: 10.1016/j.
msea.2003.10.257
2. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy designconcepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
3. Tong C-J, Chen M-R, Yeh J-W, Lin S-J, Chen S-K, Shun T-T, Chang S-Y (2005) Mechanical
performance of the Al
xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with multiprincipal elements.
Metall Mater Trans A 36(5):1263–1271. doi: 10.1007/s11661-005-0218-9
4. Chen M-R, Lin S-J, Yeh J-W, Chuang M-H, Chen S-K, Huang Y-S (2006) Effect of
vanadium addition on the microstructure, hardness, and wear resistance of Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi
high-entropy alloy. Metall Mater Trans A 37(5):1363–1369. doi: 10.1007/s11661-006-0081-3
5. Tung C-C, Yeh J-W, Shun T-t, Chen S-K, Huang Y-S, Chen H-C (2007) On the elemental
effect of AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system. Mater Lett 61(1):1–5. doi: 10.1016/j.
matlet.2006.03.140
6. Li C, Li JC, Zhao M, Zhang L, Jiang Q (2008) Microstructure and properties of AlTiNiMnB x
high entropy alloys. Mater Sci Technol 24(3):376–378. doi: 10.1179/174328408x275964
7. Kao Y-F, Chen T-J, Chen S-K, Yeh J-W (2009) Microstructure and mechanical property of
as-cast, /C0homogenized, and -deformed Al xCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys.
J Alloys Compd 488(1):57–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.08.090
8. Yu PF, Cheng H, Zhang LJ, Zhang H, Jing Q, Ma MZ, Liaw PK, Li G, Liu RP (2016) Effects
of high pressure torsion on microstructures and properties of an Al 0.1CoCrFeNi high-entropy
alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 655:283–291, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2015.12.085
9. Chen S-T, Tang W-Y, Kuo Y-F, Chen S-Y, Tsau C-H, Shun T-T, Yeh J-W (2010) Micro-
structure and properties of age-hardenable Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 527
(21–22):5818–5825. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2010.05.052
10. Hsu C-Y, Wang W-R, Tang W-Y, Chen S-K, Yeh J-W (2010) Microstructure and mechanical
properties of New AlCo xCrFeMo 0.5Ni high-entropy alloys. Adv Eng Mater 12(1–2):44–49.
doi:10.1002/adem.200900171
11. Li C, Li JC, Zhao M, Jiang Q (2010) Effect of aluminum contents on microstructure and
properties of Al xCoCrFeNi alloys. J Alloys Compd 504:S515–S518. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.
2010.03.111228 H. Diao et al.12. Lin C-M, Tsai H-L, Bor H-Y (2010) Effect of aging treatment on microstructure and
properties of high-entropy Cu 0.5CoCrFeNi alloy. Intermetallics 18(6):1244–1250. doi: 10.
1016/j.intermet.2010.03.030
13. Senkov O, Wilks G, Miracle D, Chuang C, Liaw P (2010) Refractory high-entropy alloys.
Intermetallics 18(9):1758–1765
14. Shun T-T, Hung C-H, Lee C-F (2010) The effects of secondary elemental Mo or Ti addition
in Al 0.3CoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy on age hardening at 700/C14C. J Alloys Compd 495
(1):55–58. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.02.032
15. Tsai C-W, Tsai M-H, Yeh J-W, Yang C-C (2010) Effect of temperature on mechanical
properties of Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi wrought alloy. J Alloys Compd 490(1–2):160–165. doi: 10.
1016/j.jallcom.2009.10.088
16. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Shi J, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ (2010)
Annealing on the structure and properties evolution of the CoCrFeNiCuAl high-entropyalloy. J Alloys Compd 502(2):295–299. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.11.104
17. Chuang M-H, Tsai M-H, Wang W-R, Lin S-J, Yeh J-W (2011) Microstructure and wear
behavior of Al
xCo1.5CrFeNi 1.5Tiyhigh-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 59(16):6308–6317.
doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2011.06.041
18. Hsu C-Y, Juan C-C, Wang W-R, Sheu T-S, Yeh J-W, Chen S-K (2011) On the superior hot
hardness and softening resistance of AlCoCr xFeMo 0.5Ni high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng
A 528(10–11):3581–3588. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.01.072
19. Lin CM, Tsai HL (2011) Evolution of microstructure, hardness, and corrosion properties of
high-entropy Al 0.5CoCrFeNi alloy. Intermetallics 19(3):288–294. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.
2010.10.008
20. Seiﬁ M, Li D, Yong Z, Liaw PK, Lewandowski JJ (2015) Fracture toughness and fatigue
crack growth behavior of as-cast high-entropy alloys. JOM 67(10):2288–2295. doi: 10.1007/
s11837-015-1563-9
21. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Compd 509(20):6043–6048. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2011.02.171
22. Senkov ON, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and properties of a refractory
NbCrMo
0.5Ta0.5TiZr alloy. Mater Sci Eng A-Struct 529:311–320. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.
09.033
23. Singh S, Wanderka N, Murty BS, Glatzel U, Banhart J (2011) Decomposition in multi-
component AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 59(1):182–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2010.09.023
24. Jinhong P, Ye P, Hui Z, Lu Z (2012) Microstructure and properties of AlCrFeCuNi x
(0.6/C20x/C201.4) high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 534:228–233. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.
2011.11.063
25. Ma SG, Zhang Y (2012) Effect of Nb addition on the microstructure and properties of
AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 532:480–486. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.
10.110
26. Pi JH, Pan Y, Zhang H, Zhang L (2012) Microstructure and properties of AlCrFeCuNi x
(0.6<¼x<¼1.4) high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A-Struct 534:228–233. doi: 10.1016/
j.msea.2011.11.063
27. Praveen S, Murty BS, Kottada RS (2012) Alloying behavior in multi-component
AlCoCrCuFe and NiCoCrCuFe high entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 534:83–89. doi: 10.
1016/j.msea.2011.11.044
28. Ren B, Liu ZX, Cai B, Wang MX, Shi L (2012) Aging behavior of a CuCr 2Fe2NiMn high-
entropy alloy. Mater Des 33:121–126. doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2011.07.005
29. Tsao LC, Chen CS, Chu CP (2012) Age hardening reaction of the Al 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5high
entropy alloy. Mater Des 36:854–858. doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2011.04.0676 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 22930. Wang W-R, Wang W-L, Wang S-C, Tsai Y-C, Lai C-H, Yeh J-W (2012) Effects of Al
addition on the microstructure and mechanical property of Al xCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys.
Intermetallics 26:44–51. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2012.03.005
31. Zhang K, Fu Z (2012) Effects of annealing treatment on properties of CoCrFeNiTiAl xmulti-
component alloys. Intermetallics 28:34–39. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2012.03.059
32. Zhuang YX, Liu WJ, Chen ZY, Xue HD, He JC (2012) Effect of elemental interaction on
microstructure and mechanical properties of FeCoNiCuAl alloys. Mater Sci Eng
A 556:395–399. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.07.003
33. Chen W, Fu Z, Fang S, Wang Y, Xiao H, Zhu D (2013) Processing, microstructure and
properties of Al 0.6CoNiFeTi 0.4high entropy alloy with nanoscale twins. Mater Sci Eng
A 565:439–444. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.12.072
34. Chen W, Fu Z, Fang S, Xiao H, Zhu D (2013) Alloying behavior, microstructure and
mechanical properties in a FeNiCrCo 0.3Al0.7high entropy alloy. Mater Des 51:854–860.
doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2013.04.061
35. Dong Y, Lu Y, Kong J, Zhang J, Li T (2013) Microstructure and mechanical properties of
multi-component AlCrFeNiMo xhigh-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 573:96–101. doi: 10.
1016/j.jallcom.2013.03.253
36. Fu Z, Chen W, Fang S, Zhang D, Xiao H, Zhu D (2013) Alloying behavior and deformation
twinning in a CoNiFeCrAl 0.6Ti0.4high entropy alloy processed by spark plasma sintering.
J Alloys Compd 553:316–323. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2012.11.146
37. Fu Z, Chen W, Xiao H, Zhou L, Zhu D, Yang S (2013) Fabrication and properties of
nanocrystalline Co 0.5FeNiCrTi 0.5high entropy alloy by MA–SPS technique. Mater Des
44:535–539. doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2012.08.048
38. Guo S, Ng C, Liu CT (2013) Anomalous solidiﬁcation microstructures in Co-free
AlxCrCuFeNi 2high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 557:77–81. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.
2013.01.007
39. Hsu C-Y, Juan C-C, Sheu T-S, Chen S-K, Yeh J-W (2013) Effect of aluminum content on
microstructure and mechanical properties of Al xCoCrFeMo 0.5Ni high-entropy alloys. JOM
65(12):1840–1847. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0753-6
40. Lee C-F, Shun T-T (2013) Age hardening of the Al 0.5CoCrNiTi 0.5high-entropy alloy. Metall
Mater Trans A 45(1):191–195. doi: 10.1007/s11661-013-1931-4
41. Qiu X-W (2013) Microstructure and properties of AlCrFeNiCoCu high entropy alloy
prepared by powder metallurgy. J Alloys Compd 555:246–249. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2012.
12.071
42. Shun T-T, Chang L-Y, Shiu M-H (2013) Age-hardening of the CoCrFeNiMo 0.85high-
entropy alloy. Mater Charact 81:92–96. doi: 10.1016/j.matchar.2013.04.012
43. Tang Z, Gao MC, Diao H, Yang T, Liu J, Zuo T, Zhang Y, Lu Z, Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Dahmen
KA, Liaw PK, Egami T (2013) Aluminum alloying effects on lattice types, microstructures,
and mechanical behavior of high-entropy alloys systems. JOM 65(12):1848–1858. doi: 10.
1007/s11837-013-0776-z
44. Dong Y, Zhou K, Lu Y, Gao X, Wang T, Li T (2014) Effect of vanadium addition on the
microstructure and properties of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy. Mater Des 57:67–72.
doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2013.12.048
45. Tang Z, Yuan T, Tsai C-W, Yeh J-W, Lundin CD, Liaw PK (2015) Fatigue behavior of a
wrought Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi two-phase high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 99:247–258, doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2015.07.004
46. Ji W, Fu Z, Wang W, Wang H, Zhang J, Wang Y, Zhang F (2014) Mechanical alloying
synthesis and spark plasma sintering consolidation of CoCrFeNiAl high-entropy alloy.
J Alloys Compd 589:61–66. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.11.146
47. Jiang L, Lu Y, Dong Y, Wang T, Cao Z, Li T (2014) Annealing effects on the microstructure
and properties of bulk high-entropy CoCrFeNiTi 0.5alloy casting ingot. Intermetallics
44:37–43. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2013.08.016230 H. Diao et al.48. Ng C, Guo S, Luan J, Wang Q, Lu J, Shi S, Liu CT (2014) Phase stability and tensile
properties of Co-free Al 0.5CrCuFeNi 2high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 584:530–537.
doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.09.105
49. Salishchev GA, Tikhonovsky MA, Shaysultanov DG, Stepanov ND, Kuznetsov AV, Kolodiy
IV, Tortika AS, Senkov ON (2014) Effect of Mn and V on structure and mechanical
properties of high-entropy alloys based on CoCrFeNi system. J Alloys Compd 591:11–21.doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.12.210
50. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Woodward C (2014) Effect of aluminum on the microstructure and
properties of two refractory high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 68:214–228. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2014.01.029
51. Wang W-R, Wang W-L, Yeh J-W (2014) Phases, microstructure and mechanical properties
of Al
xCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys at elevated temperatures. J Alloys Compd 589:143–152.
doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.11.084
52. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures
and properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.
10.001
53. Zhou YJ, Zhang Y, Wang YL, Chen GL (2007) Microstructure and compressive properties of
multicomponent Al x(TiVCrMnFeCoNiCu) 100-x high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A-Struct
454:260–265. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2006.11.049
54. Kuznetsov AV, Shaysultanov DG, Stepanov ND, Salishchev GA, Senkov ON (2012) Tensile
properties of an AlCrCuNiFeCo high-entropy alloy in as-cast and wrought conditions. MaterSci Eng A 533:107–118. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.11.045
55. Liu L, Zhu JB, Zhang C, Li JC, Jiang Q (2012) Microstructure and the properties of
FeCoCuNiSn
xhigh entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 548:64–68. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.
03.080
56. Daoud HM, Manzoni A, V €olkl R, Wanderka N, Glatzel U (2013) Microstructure and tensile
behavior of Al 8Co17Cr17Cu8Fe17Ni33(at.%) high-entropy alloy. JOM 65(12):1805–1814.
doi:10.1007/s11837-013-0756-3
57. Gali A, George EP (2013) Tensile properties of high- and medium-entropy alloys. Interme-
tallics 39:74–78. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2013.03.018
58. Carroll R, Lee C, Tsai C-W, Yeh J-W, Antonaglia J, Brinkman BAW, LeBlanc M, Xie X,
Chen S, Liaw PK, Dahmen KA (2015) Experiments and model for serration statistics in low-entropy, medium-entropy, and high-entropy alloys. Sci Rep 5:16997. doi: 10.1038/srep16997
59. Otto F, Dlouhy ´A, Somsen C, Bei H, Eggeler G, George EP (2013) The inﬂuences of
temperature and microstructure on the tensile properties of a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropyalloy. Acta Mater 61(15):5743–5755. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2013.06.018
60. He JY, Liu WH, Wang H, Wu Y, Liu XJ, Nieh TG, Lu ZP (2014) Effects of Al addition on
structural evolution and tensile properties of the FeCoNiCrMn high-entropy alloy system.
Acta Mater 62:105–113. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2013.09.037
61. Yao MJ, Pradeep KG, Tasan CC, Raabe D (2014) A novel, single phase, non-equiatomic
FeMnNiCoCr high-entropy alloy with exceptional phase stability and tensile ductility. Scr
Mater 72–73:5–8. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2013.09.030
62. Cottrell AH, Bilby BA (1949) Dislocation theory of yielding and strain ageing of iron. Proc
Phys Soc Sect A 62(1):49
63. Venkadesan S, Phaniraj C, Sivaprasad PV, Rodriguez P (1992) Activation energy for serrated
ﬂow in a 15Cr5NiTi-modiﬁed austenitic stainless steel. Acta Metallurgica et Materialia 40(3):569–580, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0956-7151(92)90406-5
64. Clausen AH, Børvik T, Hopperstad OS, Benallal A (2004) Flow and fracture characteristics
of aluminium alloy AA5083–H116 as function of strain rate, temperature and triaxiality.
Mater Sci Eng A 364(1–2):260–272, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2003.08.027
65. Shankar V, Valsan M, Rao KB, Mannan SL (2004) Effects of temperature and strain rate on
tensile properties and activation energy for dynamic strain aging in alloy 625. Metall Mater
Trans A 35(10):3129–3139. doi: 10.1007/s11661-004-0057-06 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 23166. Dahmen KA, Ben-Zion Y, Uhl JT (2009) Micromechanical model for deformation in solids
with universal predictions for stress–strain curves and slip avalanches. Phys Rev Lett 102(17):175501
67. Tsai C-W, Chen Y-L, Tsai M-H, Yeh J-W, Shun T-T, Chen S-K (2009) Deformation and
annealing behaviors of high-entropy alloy Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi. J Alloys Compd Journal of
Alloys and Compounds 486(1–2):427–435, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.06.182
68. Chan PY, Tsekenis G, Dantzig J, Dahmen KA, Goldenfeld N (2010) Plasticity and disloca-
tion dynamics in a phase ﬁeld crystal model. Phys Rev Lett 105(1):015502
69. Friedman N, Jennings AT, Tsekenis G, Kim J-Y, Tao M, Uhl JT, Greer JR, Dahmen KA
(2012) Statistics of dislocation slip avalanches in nanosized single crystals show tunedcritical behavior predicted by a simple mean ﬁeld model. Phys Rev Lett 109(9):095507
70. Sakthivel T, Laha K, Nandagopal M, Chandravathi KS, Parameswaran P, Panneer Selvi S,
Mathew MD, Mannan SK (2012) Effect of temperature and strain rate on serrated ﬂowbehaviour of Hastelloy X. Mater Sci Eng A 534:580–587, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.
2011.12.011
71. Wu D, Chen RS, Han EH (2012) Serrated ﬂow and tensile properties of a Mg–Gd–Zn alloy.
Mater Sci Eng A 532:267–274, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2011.10.090
72. Antonaglia J, Xie X, Tang Z, Tsai CW, Qiao JW, Zhang Y, Laktionova MO, Tabachnikova
ED, Yeh JW, Senkov ON, Gao MC, Uhl JT, Liaw PK, Dahmen KA (2014) Temperature
effects on deformation and serration behavior of high-entropy alloys (HEAs). JOM 66(10):2002–2008. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1130-9
73. Hemphill MA, Yuan T, Wang GY, Yeh JW, Tsai CW, Chuang A, Liaw PK (2012) Fatigue
behavior of Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloys. Acta Mater 60(16):5723–5734. doi: 10.
1016/j.actamat.2012.06.046
74. Zhu C, Lu ZP, Nieh TG (2013) Incipient plasticity and dislocation nucleation of
FeCoCrNiMn high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 61(8):2993–3001. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.
2013.01.059
75. Sun Y, Zhao G, Wen X, Qiao J, Yang F (2014) Nanoindentation deformation of a bi-phase
AlCrCuFeNi 2alloy. J Alloys Compd 608:49–53. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.04.127
76. Wang Z, Guo S, Wang Q, Liu Z, Wang J, Yang Y, Liu CT (2014) Nanoindentation
characterized initial creep behavior of a high-entropy-based alloy CoFeNi. Intermetallics
53:183–186. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2014.05.007
77. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward C (2013) Mechanical properties of
low-density, refractory multi-principal element alloys of the Cr–Nb–Ti–V–Zr system.
Mater Sci Eng A 565:51–62. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.12.018
78. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Scott JM, Miracle DB (2011) Mechanical properties of
Nb25Mo 25Ta25W25and V 20Nb20Mo 20Ta20W20refractory high entropy alloys. Intermetallics
19(5):698–706. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2011.01.004
79. Gludovatz B, Hohenwarter A, Catoor D, Chang EH, George EP, Ritchie RO (2014) A
fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. Science 345(6201):1153–1158. doi: 10.1126/science.1254581
80. Tabor D (1951) The hardness of metals. Oxford University Press, New York
81. Wen LH, Kou HC, Li JS, Chang H, Xue XY, Zhou L (2009) Effect of aging temperature on
microstructure and properties of AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Intermetallics 17
(4):266–269. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2008.08.012
82. Wang F, Zhang Y, Chen G, Davies HA (2009) Tensile and compressive mechanical behavior
of a CoCrCuFeNiAl
0.5high entropy alloy. Int J Mod Phys B 23(06n07):1254–1259
83. G /C19omez-Esparza CD, Ochoa-Gamboa RA, Estrada-Guel I, Caba ~nas-Moreno JG, Barajas-
Villarruel JI, Arizmendi-Morquecho A, Herrera-Ramı ´rez JM, Martı ´nez-Sa ´nchez R (2011)
Microstructure of NiCoAlFeCuCr multi-component systems synthesized by mechanicalalloying. J Alloys Compd 509:S279–S283. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.12.105232 H. Diao et al.84. Tsai C-W, Chen Y-L, Tsai M-H, Yeh J-W, Shun T-T, Chen S-K (2009) Deformation and
annealing behaviors of high-entropy alloy Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi. J Alloys Compd 486
(1–2):427–435. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.06.182
85. Liu Z, Guo S, Liu X, Ye J, Yang Y, Wang X-L, Yang L, An K, Liu CT (2011)
Micromechanical characterization of casting-induced inhomogeneity in an Al 0.8CoCrCuFeNi
high-entropy alloy. Scr Mater 64(9):868–871. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2011.01.020
86. Shaysultanov DG, Stepanov ND, Kuznetsov AV, Salishchev GA, Senkov ON (2013) Phase
composition and superplastic behavior of a wrought AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. JOM
65(12):1815–1828. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0754-5
87. Ma SG, Zhang SF, Gao MC, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (2013) A successful synthesis of the
CoCrFeNiAl 0.3single-crystal, high-entropy alloy by Bridgman solidiﬁcation. JOM 65
(12):1751–1758. doi: 10.1007/s11837-013-0733-x
88. Shun T-T, Du Y-C (2009) Microstructure and tensile behaviors of FCC Al 0.3CoCrFeNi high
entropy alloy. J Alloys Compd 479(1–2):157–160. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.12.088
89. Westbrook JH, Conrad H (1973) The science of hardness testing and its research applications.
American society for metals, Metals Park
90. Wang FJ, Zhang Y, Chen GL (2009) Atomic packing efﬁciency and phase transition in a high
entropy alloy. J Alloys Compd 478(1–2):321–324. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.11.059
91. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ, Shi J (2009)
Microstructure and mechanical properties of CoCrFeNiTiAl xhigh-entropy alloys. Mater Sci
Eng A 508(1–2):214–219. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2008.12.053
92. Yang X, Zhang Y, Liaw PK (2012) Microstructure and compressive properties of
NbTiVTaAl xhigh entropy alloys. Procedia Eng 36:292–298. doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2012.03.
043
93. Zhang KB, Fu ZY (2012) Effects of annealing treatment on properties of CoCrFeNiTiAl x
multi-component alloys. Intermetallics 28:34–39. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2012.03.059
94. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Cheng YQ, Liaw PK (2013) High-entropy alloys with high saturation
magnetization, electrical resistivity, and malleability. Sci Rep 3:1455. doi: 10.1038/
srep01455
95. Wang XF, Zhang Y, Qiao Y, Chen GL (2007) Novel microstructure and properties of
multicomponent CoCrCuFeNiTi xalloys. Intermetallics 15(3):357–362. doi: 10.1016/j.
intermet.2006.08.005
96. Zhou YJ, Zhang Y, Wang YL, Chen GL (2007) Solid solution alloys of AlCoCrFeNiTi xwith
excellent room-temperature mechanical properties. Appl Phys Lett 90(18):181904, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1063/1.2734517
97. Shun TT, Chang LY, Shiu MH (2012) Microstructures and mechanical properties of
multiprincipal component CoCrFeNiTi xalloys. Mater Sci Eng A-Struct 556:170–174.
doi:10.1016/j.msea.2012.06.075
98. Greer JR, De Hosson JTM (2011) Plasticity in small-sized metallic systems: intrinsic versus
extrinsic size effect. Prog Mater Sci 56(6):654–724, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.
2011.01.005
99. Hu ZH, Zhan YZ, Zhang GH, She J, Li CH (2010) Effect of rare earth Y addition on the
microstructure and mechanical properties of high entropy AlCoCrCuNiTi alloys. Mater Des31(3):1599–1602. doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2009.09.016
100. Zhu JM, Fu HM, Zhang HF, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2010) Synthesis and properties of
multiprincipal component AlCoCrFeNiSi
xalloys. Mater Sci Eng A 527(27–28):7210–7214.
doi:10.1016/j.msea.2010.07.049
101. Zhu JM, Zhang HF, Fu HM, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2010) Microstructures and compres-
sive properties of multicomponent AlCoCrCuFeNiMo xalloys. J Alloys Compd 497
(1–2):52–56. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.03.074
102. Zhu JM, Fu HM, Zhang HF, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2011) Microstructure and compressive
properties of multiprincipal component AlCoCrFeNiC xalloys. J Alloys Compd 509
(8):3476–3480. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.10.0476 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 233103. Zhu JM, Zhang HF, Fu HM, Wang AM, Li H, Hu ZQ (2010) Microstructures and compres-
sive properties of multicomponent AlCoCrCuFeNiMo xalloys. J Alloys Compd 497
(1–2):52–56. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.03.074
104. Zhang Y, Yang X, Liaw PK (2012) Alloy design and properties optimization of high-entropy
alloys. JOM 64(7):830–838. doi: 10.1007/s11837-012-0366-5
105. Li AM, Ma D, Zheng QF (2014) Effect of Cr on microstructure and properties of a series of
AlTiCr xFeCoNiCu high-entropy alloys. J Mater Eng Perform 23(4):1197–1203. doi: 10.1007/
s11665-014-0871-5
106. Laktionova MO, Tabachnikova ED, Tang Z, Antonaglia J, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK (2012)
Low temperature mechanical behavior of the Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Materials
Science and Technology, Pittsburgh
107. Laktionova MA, Tabchnikova ED, Tang Z, Liaw PK (2013) Mechanical properties of the
high-entropy alloy Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi at temperatures of 4.2–300 K. Low Temp Phys 39
(7):630–632, http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4813688
108. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Meisenkothen F, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2012)
Microstructure and elevated temperature properties of a refractory TaNbHfZrTi alloy.
J Mater Sci 47(9):4062–4074. doi: 10.1007/s10853-012-6260-2
109. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward C (2013) Mechanical properties of
low-density, refractory multi-principal element alloys of the Cr-Nb-Ti-V-Zr system. Mater
Sci Eng A-Struct 565:51–62. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.12.018
110. Qiao JW, Ma SG, Huang EW, Chuang CP, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (2011) Microstructural
characteristics and mechanical behaviors of AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys at ambient
and cryogenic temperatures. In: Wang RM, Wu Y, Wu XF (eds) Materials science forum.
Elsevier, Philadelphia, PA. pp 419–425. doi: 10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/MSF.688.419
111. Wang FJ, Zhang Y, Chen GL, Davies HA (2009) Cooling rate and size effect on the
microstructure and mechanical properties of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy. J Eng Mater
Technol 131(3):034501. doi: 10.1115/1.3120387
112. Sheng HF, Gong M, Peng LM (2013) Microstructural characterization and mechanical
properties of an Al 0.5CoCrFeCuNi high-entropy alloy in as-cast and heat-treated/quenched
conditions. Mater Sci Eng A 567:14–20. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2013.01.006
113. Zhuang YX, Xue HD, Chen ZY, Hu ZY, He JC (2013) Effect of annealing treatment on
microstructures and mechanical properties of FeCoNiCuAl high entropy alloys. Mater SciEng A 572:30–35. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2013.01.081
114. Liu FX, Liaw PK, Wang GY, Chiang CL, Smith DA, Rack PD, Chu JP, Buchanan RA (2006)
Specimen-geometry effects on mechanical behavior of metallic glasses. Intermetallics 14(8–9):1014–1018, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intermet.2006.01.043
115. Wang YP, Li BS, Ren MX, Yang C, Fu HZ (2008) Microstructure and compressive properties
of AlCrFeCoNi high entropy alloy. Mater Sci Eng A-Struct 491(1–2):154–158. doi: 10.1016/
j.msea.2008.01.064
116. Wang YP, Li BS, Fu HZ (2009) Solid solution or intermetallics in a high-entropy alloy. Adv
Eng Mater 11(8):641–644. doi: 10.1002/adem.200900057
117. Li BS, Wang YR, Ren MX, Yang C, Fu HZ (2008) Effects of Mn, Ti and V on the
microstructure and properties of AlCrFeCoNiCu high entropy alloy. Mater Sci EngA-Struct 498(1–2):482–486. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2008.08.025
118. Tawancy HM, Ul-Hamid A, Abbas NM (2004) Practical engineering failure analysis. Marcel
Dekker, New York
119. Gu XJ, Poon SJ, Shiﬂet GJ, Lewandowski JJ (2010) Compressive plasticity and
toughness of a Ti-based bulk metallic glass. Acta Mater 58(5):1708–1720. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2009.11.013
120. Han Z, Wu WF, Li Y, Wei YJ, Gao HJ (2009) An instability index of shear band for
plasticity in metallic glasses. Acta Mater 57(5):1367–1372, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
actamat.2008.11.018234 H. Diao et al.121. Ng KS, Ngan AHW (2008) Stochastic nature of plasticity of aluminum micro-pillars. Acta
Mater 56(8):1712–1720, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2007.12.016
122. Uchic MD, Dimiduk DM, Florando JN, Nix WD (2004) Sample dimensions inﬂuence
strength and crystal plasticity. Science 305(5686):986–989. doi: 10.1126/science.1098993
123. Dimiduk DM, Uchic MD, Parthasarathy TA (2005) Size-affected single-slip behavior of pure
nickel microcrystals. Acta Mater 53(15):4065–4077, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.
2005.05.023
124. Shade PA, Wheeler R, Choi YS, Uchic MD, Dimiduk DM, Fraser HL (2009) A combined
experimental and simulation study to examine lateral constraint effects on microcompressionof single-slip oriented single crystals. Acta Mater 57(15):4580–4587, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.actamat.2009.06.029
125. Dimiduk DM, Woodward C, LeSar R, Uchic MD (2006) Scale-free intermittent ﬂow in
crystal plasticity. Science 312(5777):1188–1190. doi: 10.1126/science.1123889
126. Greer JR, Oliver WC, Nix WD (2005) Size dependence of mechanical properties of gold at
the micron scale in the absence of strain gradients. Acta Mater 53(6):1821–1830, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2004.12.031
127. Zou Y, Maiti S, Steurer W, Spolenak R (2014) Size-dependent plasticity in an
Nb
25Mo 25Ta25W25refractory high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 65:85–97. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2013.11.049
128. Liu ZY, Guo S, Liu XJ, Ye JC, Yang Y, Wang XL, Yang L, An K, Liu CT (2011)
Micromechanical characterization of casting-induced inhomogeneity in an Al 0.8CoCrCuFeNi
high-entropy alloy. Scr Mater 64(9):868–871. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2011.01.020
129. Wu Z, Bei H, Pharr GM, George EP (2014) Temperature dependence of the mechanical
properties of equiatomic solid solution alloys with face-centered cubic crystal structures.Acta Mater 81:428–441. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2014.08.026
130. Guo W, Dmowski W, Noh JY, Rack P, Liaw PK, Egami T (2013) Local atomic structure of a
high-entropy alloy: an x-ray and neutron scattering study. Metall Mater Trans A 44A
(5):1994–1997. doi: 10.1007/s11661-012-1474-0
131. Wu Y, Liu WH, Wang XL, Ma D, Stoica AD, Nieh TG, He ZB, Lu ZP (2014) In-situ neutron
diffraction study of deformation behavior of a multi-component high-entropy alloy. Appl
Phys Lett 104(5):051910. doi: 10.1063/1.4863748
132. Huang EW, Yu D, Yeh J-W, Lee C, An K, Tu S-Y (2015) A study of lattice elasticity from
low entropy metals to medium and high entropy alloys. Scripta Mater 101:32–35, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2015.01.011
133. Miguel MC, Vespignani A, Zapperi S, Weiss J, Grasso J-R (2001) Intermittent dislocation
ﬂow in viscoplastic deformation. Nature 410(6829):667–671, http://www.nature.com/nature/
journal/v410/n6829/suppinfo/410667a0_S1.html
134. Zaiser M, Marmo B, Moretti P (2005) The yielding transition in crystal plasticity – discrete
dislocations and continuum models. Paper presented at the International Conference onStatistical Mechanics of Plasticity and Related Instabilities, Indian Institute of Science,Bangalore, India
135. Miguel MC, Vespignani A, Zapperi S, Weiss J, Grasso J-R (2001) Complexity in dislocation
dynamics: model. Mater Sci Eng A 309–310:324–327
136. Laurson L, Alava MJ (2006) 1/f noise and avalanche scaling in plastic deformation. Phys Rev
E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 74(6 Pt 2):066106
137. Csikor FF, Motz C, Weygand D, Zaiser M, Zapperi S (2007) Dislocation avalanches, strain
bursts, and the problem of plastic forming at the micrometer scale. Science 318:251–254
138. Ispanovity PD, Groma I, Gyorgyi G, Csikor FF, Weygand D (2010) Submicron plasticity:
yield stress, dislocation avalanches, and velocity distribution. Phys Rev Lett 105(8):085503
139. Tsekenis G, Goldenfeld N, Dahmen KA (2011) Dislocations jam at any density. Phys Rev
Lett 106(10):105501
140. Tsekenis G, Uhl J, Goldenfeld N, Dahmen K (2013) Determination of the universality class of
crystal plasticity. EPL (Europhysics Letters) 101(3):360036 Mechanical Properties of High-Entropy Alloys 235141. Koslowski M (2007) Scaling laws in plastic deformation. Philos Mag 87(8–9):1175–1184.
doi:10.1080/14786430600854962
142. Dahmen K, Ertas ¸ D, Ben-Zion Y (1998) Gutenberg-Richter and characteristic earthquake
behavior in SimpleMmean-ﬁeld models of heterogeneous faults. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft
Matter Phys 58(2):1494–1501
143. Sethna JP, Dahmen KA, Myers CR (2001) Crackling noise. Nature 410(6825):242–250144. Meeker WQ, Escobar LA (1998) Statistical methods for reliability data, vol 314. Wiley,
New York
145. Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW, Davison A (2006) Effect of substrate bias on the structure and
properties of multi-element (AlCrTaTiZr)N coatings. J Phys D-Appl Phys 39(21):4628–4633. doi: 10.1088/0022-3727/39/21/019
146. Chang HW, Huang PK, Davison A, Yeh JW, Tsau CH, Yang CC (2008) Nitride ﬁlms
deposited from an equimolar Al-Cr-Mo-Si-Ti alloy target by reactive direct current magne-tron sputtering. Thin Solid Films 516(18):6402–6408. doi: 10.1016/j.tsf.2008.01.019
147. Chang HW, Huang PK, Yeh JW, Davison A, Tsau CH, Yang CC (2008) Inﬂuence of
substrate bias, deposition temperature and post-deposition annealing on the structure and
properties of multi-principal-component (AlCrMoSiTi)N coatings. Surf Coat Technol 202(14):3360–3366. doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.12.014
148. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2009) Effects of substrate temperature and post-annealing on micro-
structure and properties of (AlCrNbSiTiV)N coatings. Thin Solid Films 518(1):180–184.doi:10.1016/j.tsf.2009.06.020
149. Lin M-I, Tsai M-H, Shen W-J, Yeh J-W (2010) Evolution of structure and properties of multi-
component (AlCrTaTiZr)O
xﬁlms. Thin Solid Films 518(10):2732–2737. doi: 10.1016/j.tsf.
2009.10.142
150. Chang ZC, Liang SC, Han S (2011) Effect of microstructure on the nanomechanical prop-
erties of TiVCrZrAl nitride ﬁlms deposited by magnetron sputtering. Nucl Instrum Meth B
269(18):1973–1976. doi: 10.1016/j.nimb.2011.05.027
151. Feng XG, Tang GZ, Gu L, Ma XX, Sun MR, Wang LQ (2012) Preparation and character-
ization of TaNbTiW multi-element alloy ﬁlms. Appl Surf Sci 261:447–453. doi: 10.1016/j.
apsusc.2012.08.030
152. Wu ZF, Wang XD, Cao QP, Zhao GH, Li JX, Zhang DX, Zhu JJ, Jiang JZ (2014) Micro-
structure characterization of Al xCoCrCuFeNi (x ¼0 and 2.5) high-entropy alloy ﬁlms. J
Alloys Compd 609:137–142. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.04.094
153. Cheng JB, Liang XB, Wang ZH, Xu BS (2013) Formation and mechanical properties of
CoNiCuFeCr high-entropy alloys coatings prepared by plasma transferred arc claddingprocess. Plasma Chem Plasma Proc 33(5):979–992. doi: 10.1007/s11090-013-9469-1
154. Hertz H (1896) Miscellaneous papers. Macmillan, New York
155. Johnson KL, Johnson KL (1985) Contact mechanics. Cambridge University Press, New York
156. Mason J, Lund A, Schuh C (2006) Determining the activation energy and volume for the
onset of plasticity during nanoindentation. Phys Rev B 73(5):054102
157. Wu Z, Bei H, Otto F, Pharr GM, George EP (2014) Recovery, recrystallization, grain growth
and phase stability of a family of FCC-structured multi-component equiatomic solid solution
alloys. Intermetallics 46:131–140. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2013.10.024
158. Li H, Ngan AHW (2004) Size effects of nanoindentation creep. J Mater Res 19(2):513–522.
doi:10.1557/jmr.2004.19.2.513
159. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish CM, Gao MC, Weber RJ, Neuefeind JC,
Tang Z, Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distribu-tions of a multi-principal-element alloy. Nat Commun 6:5964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6964
160. Gao MC, Yeh JW, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (eds) (2016) High-entropy alloys: fundamentals
and applications, 1st edn. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-319-27013-5236 H. Diao et al.Chapter 7
Functional Properties
Jien-Wei Yeh, Swe-Kai Chen, Han C. Shih, Yong Zhang, and Ting Ting Zuo
Abstract This chapter reviews various functional properties of HEAs: electrical
properties (including superconducting), magnetic properties, electrochemical prop-erties, and hydrogen storage properties. Interesting phenomena and potentiallypromising properties better than those of conventional alloys have been observed.These indicate that HEAs provide attractive functional properties to be exploredand developed from both academic and application-oriented viewpoints. In this
chapter, compositions, process parameters, and microstructure will be correlated
with functional properties to give a better understanding.
Keywords Electrical property  Magnetic property  Electrochemical property 
Hydrogen storage property  High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
7.1 Introduction
More and more researches are conducted on functional properties of HEAs and
HE-related materials because there are many promising possibilities for academic
studies and industrial applications. The functional properties include electrical,
J.-W. Yeh ( *)
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of China
e-mail: jwyeh@mx.nthu.edu.tw
S.-K. Chen
Center for Nanotechnology, Materials Science, and Microsystems,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of China
e-mail: skchen@mx.nthu.edu.tw
H.C. Shih
Institute of Nanomaterials, Chinese Culture University, Taipei,
Taiwan 11114, Republic of China
e-mail: hcshih@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Y. Zhang  T.T. Zuo
State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, University of Science
and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, People ’s Republic of China
e-mail: drzhangy@ustb.edu.cn ;zuott1986.520@163.com
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_7237thermal, magnetic, electrochemical, hydrogen storage, diffusion barrier, irradiation
resistance, and catalytic properties. Besides these, more functional properties couldbe also developed to enhance practical performances such as biomedical,
antibacteria, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, anti-ﬁngerprint, anti-
sticky, hydrophilic, and hydrophobic properties. As discussed on “cocktail effect”in Sect. 3.1.4 , it is known that the overall properties of HEAs are from the overall
contribution of the constituent phases by the effect of phase shape, phase distribu-tion, phase boundaries, and properties of each phase. Because each phase is amultielement solid solution and can be regarded as atomic-scale composites, itsproperties not only come from the basic properties of elements by the mixture rulebut also from the mutual interactions among all the elements and from the severe
lattice distortion. The most distinct feature not pronounced in conventional alloys is
the “severe lattice distortion” effect since all atoms are solutes and have their locallattice distortion in the whole-solute matrix as discussed in Sects. 3.1.2 and3.3.
This effect not only inﬂuences the plastic deformation and annealing behaviors, butalso the behaviors of electrons, phonons, dipoles, and incident beams. Therefore,the additional special properties are mainly originated from the same lattice distor-tion although the extent of their inﬂuences and the degree of equations are differentfrom each other due to their different mechanisms interacted with lattice distortion.
The mechanisms or theoretical models are thus scientiﬁcally interesting topics to be
revealed and to be utilized in the future. This chapter selects several importantfunctional properties to review in consideration of their breadth and popularity.These reviews might provide a good basis for future research and development.
7.2 Electrical Properties of HEAs
7.2.1 Normal Conducting Behaviors
The ﬁrst systematic study on electrical properties of HEAs was conducted on the
AlxCoCrFeNi (denoted as H- xherein below) alloys with the variation of Al content
(0/C20x/C202) [1]. The samples were prepared with arc melting and subsequent
homogenization treatment at 1100/C14C for 24 h. Figure 7.1shows the electrical
resistivity in the temperature range from 4 to 400 K and also the effect of Al contenton electrical conductivity [ 1]. The electrical resistivity of each alloy is approxi-
mately a linear function of temperature with a small positive slope in the range of298–400 K except H-1 ( x¼1) alloy has a larger slope. Figure 7.1b shows the
electrical resistivity of three homogenized alloys with x¼1, 1.5, and 2 (H-1, H-2,
and H-3) in the range of 4–400 K. The curves in 4–298 K and those in 298–400 K
were measured with two apparatus. In the temperature range of 100–298 K, the
three alloys also display a linear increase of resistivity with temperature. However,their slopes might not be the same as that in 298–400 K. The resistivity levels aregenerally higher as compared to that (1 ~ 100 μΩcm) of conventional alloys.238 J.-W. Yeh et al.The high-level electrical resistivity is mainly attributable to the severe lattice
distortion in the whole-solute matrix of constituent phases since lattice distortion
could cause intense electron scattering and reduce the free electron mobility. Ineach phase, the structure could be regarded as a pseudo-unitary lattice (PUL) withhighly concentrated point defects or distorted lattice sites [ 2]. Furthermore, the
thermal vibration effect causing electron scattering becomes relatively smaller ascompared with severe lattice distortion effect. This makes the alloy to have a lowtemperature coefﬁcient of resistivity (TCR). The variation of electrical conductivitywith xcan be divided into three distinct ranges which clearly relate with constituent
phases: single face-centered cubic (FCC) in 0 /C20x/C200.375, single body-centered
cubic (BCC) in 1.25 /C20x/C202, and duplex FCC/BCC in 0.5 /C20x/C201. The electrical
conductivity decreases with increasing x in single-phase FCC or single-phase BCCregion and has a lower level in the duplex FCC/BCC phase region. These could beexplained because larger additions of large-sized Al atoms would cause moresevere lattice distortion and electron scattering no matter it is FCC or BCC. Besides,the interface between FCC and BCC phases would increase free electron scatteringwhen electrons pass through interface. As for the higher conductivity level of BCC
phase than FCC phase compared by extrapolating the curve of FCC to higher Al
content, the reason is that the more open BCC structure has larger mean free pathfor electron than the close-packed FCC structure [ 2].
The resistivity at 4.2 K ( ρ
0), resistivity at 300 K ( ρ300), residual resistivity ratio
(RRR, ρ0/ρ300), and temperature coefﬁcient of resistivity (TCR, ρ300/C0ρ150)/ρ150of
as-cast Al 0-2CoCrFeNi alloys (C- x) and 75 %-cold-rolled Al 0–0.875 CoCrFeNi alloys
(D-x) were reported and also compared [ 3]. The ranges of the ρ0values of alloys
C-x,H -x, and D- xare 111.06–196.49, 93.78–162.77, and 120.48–162.05 μΩcm,
respectively. It suggests that homogenization could lower the resistivity but defor-
mation increases the resistivity, even higher than that of as-cast state. The former
Fig. 7.1 (a) Electrical resistivity of three homogenized H- xalloys with x¼1, 1.5, and 2 (H-1,
H-1.5, and H-2) in the range of 4–400 K (the curves in 4–298 K and those in 298–400 K weremeasured with two apparatus), and ( b) electrical conductivity as a function of xat 300, 350, and
400 K [ 1]7 Functional Properties 239would relate with the signiﬁcant elimination of phase boundaries by homogeniza-
tion, whereas the latter relates with increased dislocations and/or twins by defor-mation. The RRR values range from 1.03 to 1.27. In addition, the alloys generally
have low TCR, and the H-2 alloy has the lowest TCR, 82.5 ppm/K. All these results
show the low-temperature sensitivity of HEAs, which have been explained above.The resistivity versus temperature curve was also ﬁtted by ρ(T)¼ρ
0+Aln(T)+BT2
+CT3+DT, where ρ0stands for the residual resistivity at 4.2 K. Fitted coefﬁcients
A,B,C, and Dare coefﬁcients of Kondo-like, magnetic, low-temperature and high-
temperature phonon terms, respectively. In 4.2–66 K, the ﬁtting could be simpliﬁedby using ρ(T)¼ρ
0+Aln(T)+BT2+CT3, whereas in 100–300 K the ﬁtting could be
well with ρ(T)¼ρ0+Aln(T)+BT2+DT. The variations of these coefﬁcients were
discussed with their physical meaning [ 3]. The Hall effect measurements were also
done in alloys H-0.25 (FCC), H-0.50 (FCC + BCC), H-0.75 (FCC + BCC), H-1.00(FCC + BCC), and H-1.25 (BCC) [ 3]. The results demonstrate that carrier density in
H-xalloys is around 10
22–23cm/C03which is similar to that in conventional alloys.
However, the H- xalloys has lower carrier mobility, 0.40–2.61 cm2V/C01s/C01, than
conventional alloys. This ﬁnding is very important to illustrate that the highresistivity is mainly due to severe lattice distortion in HEAs than conventionalalloys.
To further reduce TCR, Chen et al. modiﬁed H-2 alloy, i.e., Al
2CoCrFeNi, by
tuning Al content and found that Al 2.08CoCrFeNi alloy has a very low TCR [ 4]. The
crystal structure of this alloy is a mixture of B2 (ordered BCC) and BCC solidsolutions. The values of electrical resistivity of as-cast Al
2.08CoCrFeNi at 4.2 and
300 K are 117.24 and 119.90 μΩcm, respectively, and only differ by 2.66 μΩcm, as
shown in Fig. 7.2a. Its RRR is 1.02. The wide-range averaged TCR of as-cast
Al2.08CoCrFeNi from 4.2 to 360 K is 72 ppm/K. This is quite unusual as compared
to traditional low-TCR alloys ( <100 ppm/K) that have low TCR in a narrow range
of temperatures, e.g., some 50 K or so, such as the commercial Manganin shown in
Fig.7.2b. Except for the 4.2–50 K range where there is a Kondo-like phenomenon,
Fig. 7.2 (a)ρ(T) curve of Al 2.08CoCrFeNi showing TCR in different temperature regions
(a minimum at about 30 K showing a Kondo-like effect). ( b) normalized ρ(T)/ρ(4.2 K), curve
for Manganin and Al 2.08CoCrFeNi (Inserted enlarged curve for the latter alloy [ 4])240 J.-W. Yeh et al.the values of TCR in 50–150, 150–300, and 300–360 K are 128, 75, and 42 ppm/K,
respectively. It is clear that TCR decreases as temperature increases. From thecurve shape, it is reasonable to predict that the TCR value may be even lower at
temperatures higher than 360 K. From the above data and unique features of the
whole-solute matrix with severe lattice distortion, many HEAs and their coatingscan be expected to have low TCR or extremely low TCR. Thus, potential applica-tions of HEAs in precision resistors in broad temperature range are plentiful bynature.
In summary, current understanding of the electrical properties of HEAs is
mainly based on the Al
xCoCrFeNi alloys. These alloys have resistivities ranging
from 120 to 175 μΩcm between 4.2 and 400 K. Another example is the FeCoNi
(AlSi) xalloys, whose resistivities are between 70 and 270 μΩcm [5]. As pointed out
in a previous review [ 6], these values are higher than that of many conventional
alloys. The resistivities of the Al xCoCrFeNi alloys increase with temperature, but
the TCR is pretty small. Some alloys can have very small TCR values over a widetemperature range.
7.2.2 Superconducting Behaviors
Cheap and accessible superconductors with a high critical temperature ( Tc), a high
critical current density ( Jc), and critical magnetic ﬁeld ( Hc) will bring a large
revolution in many aspects and promote our civilization level. A traditional alloy
or the material concept in composition seems to be difﬁcult to get a breakthrough ofT
ceither in metal systems and nonmetallic systems. As a result, HEAs and
HE-related materials have been investigated to ﬁnd the possibility of better super-conductors, such as room-temperature superconductors.
Chen et al. have explored the possibility on HEAs since 2011 [ 7–9] and have
found the superconducting behavior is also possible in HEAs, and the criticaltemperature T
ccould be higher than that predicted by the rule of mixture. Moreover,
the results suggest that the Tcis not necessarily reduced by the whole-solute matrix.
Table 7.1 lists the Tcvalues of as-cast and as-homogenized equal-atomic
NbTaTiZr, GeNbTaTiZr, HfNbTaTiZr, NbSiTaTiVZr, GeNbSiTaTiZr, andGeNbTaTiVZr [ 7–9]. For the as-cast samples, H
c1is within 100–400 Oe, while
Hc2exceeds 1 T, except GeNbTaTiVZr which shows a small Hc2of 6 kOe [ 7]. For
the as-homogenized samples, Hc1varies from 80 to 660 Oe, while Hc2ranges from
1.50 to 3.29 T. Jcis in the range of 104–105A/cm2[8]. In addition, Nb 45-64Zr18-
30Ti8-20Hf1-6Ta5-8Ge1-5V5(in at.%) alloys have a maximum Tcof 10.59 K, with an
average Tcof 8.54 K. Hc1is from 400 Oe to 7000 Oe, and Hc2from 4.38 to 9.25 T
with Jcbeing from 1 /C2104to 1.5 /C2106A/cm2[9].
Although the abovementioned high-entropy alloys have multiple phases, the
superconducting phase of these alloys comes from a BCC random solid solution.The fact that such kinds of random solid solutions have superconducting behavior ismeaningful for academic and application investigation.7 Functional Properties 241At similar time, P. Ko želj et al. reported that a BCC Ta 34Nb33Hf8Zr14Ti11(in at.
%) HEA has a lattice parameter a¼3.36Åwhich is very close to that predicted by
Vegard ’s law [ 10]. It suggests a possible random mixing of the ﬁve elements on the
BCC lattice which is distorted due to the difference among constituent elements asstated in Chap. 3. In addition, they showed the measurements of the electrical
resistivity, the magnetization, and magnetic susceptibility, and the speciﬁc heat andrevealed that this Ta
34Nb33Hf8Zr14Ti11HEA is a type II superconductor with a
transition temperature Tc/C257.3 K, an upper critical ﬁeld μ0Hc2/C258.2 T, a lower
critical ﬁeld μ0Hc1/C2532 mT, and an energy gap in the electronic density of states
(DOS) at the Fermi level of 2 Δ/C252.2 meV. Figure 7.3a shows electrical resistivityTable 7.1 Superconducting critical temperatures obtained by electrical resistivity and magnetic
measurements for NbTaTiZr-based HEAs [ 7–9]
Alloys Tc,R(K) Tc,M(K) T*c,R(K) T*c,M(K)
M 8.98/8.28 7.98 8.27 7.97
GeM 9.16 8.61 – –HfM 7.93/7.12 6.30 6.69 6.40
SiVM 4.99 4.73 – –
GeSiM 8.10 5.49 – –GeVM 9.10 6.34 – –FeM 7.12 – 6.75 5.77
HfVM 5.09 – 4.96 4.93
Note: M ¼NbTaTiZr, T
c,Rcritical temperatures for as-cast alloys tested by resistivity measure-
ments, Tc,Mcritical temperatures for as-cast alloys by magnetism measurements at an applied
magnetic ﬁeld of 1 kOe, T*c,Rcritical temperatures for as-homogenized alloys by resistivity
measurements, and T*c,Mcritical temperatures for as-homogenized alloys by magnetism measure-
ments at an applied magnetic ﬁeld of 0.1 kOe
Fig. 7.3 (a) Electrical resistivity in zero magnetic ﬁeld between 300 and 2 K. Magnetic ﬁeld
dependence of the resistivity in the region of the superconducting transition for ﬁelds up to 9 T isshown in the inset. ( b) The magnetic susceptibility χ¼M/Hunder zero-ﬁeld-cooling condition in a
5 mT ﬁeld in the region of the superconducting transition. The inset shows isothermal magneti-
zation M(H) in the low-ﬁeld range at temperatures between 2 and 8 K. The arrow denotes the
lower critical ﬁeld H
c1atT¼2K[ 10]242 J.-W. Yeh et al.variation in zero magnetic ﬁeld between 300 and 2 K and also the resistivity in the
region of the superconducting transition under magnetic ﬁeld up to 9 T. Figure 7.3b
shows a strong diamagnetic response due to the Meissner effect below about 8 K,
and the susceptibility corrected for the demagnetization factor assumes almost the
ideal diamagnetic value χ¼/C01 intrinsic to a superconductor. The isothermal
magnetization M(H) curves between 2 and 8 K in the low-ﬁeld range up to
H¼50 kA/m are also shown in the inset. Close to the origin, the M(H) relation is
linear with the slope /C01, whereas at higher ﬁelds, the M(H) curves show a
minimum and then approach the weakly paramagnetic value of the normal state,which is a typical behavior of type II superconductors. The ﬁeld value in theminimum was taken as a measure of the lower critical ﬁeld H
c1. At 2 K, the
lower critical ﬁeld amounts to μ0Hc1/C2532 mT.
By the evaluation of different criteria using parameters of the superconducting
state, they concluded that the investigated HEA is close to a BCS-type phonon-mediated superconductor in the weak electron–phonon coupling limit.
7.3 Magnetic Properties of HEAs
Since the composition of FCC HEAs often contain the excessive metallic elementswhich include the ferromagnetic Fe, Co, and Ni, the magnetic properties of thesealloys have been investigated. Among all the studied alloys, the ternary equi-atomic
FeCoNi alloy which possesses the uniform polycrystalline microstructure has a
higher saturation magnetization ( M
s) of 1047 emu/cc and a lower coercivity [ 11].
Any addition of paramagnetic or ferromagnetic elements will lower the saturationmagnetization, since the saturation magnetization is primarily determined by thecomposition and atomic-level structures. For example, the addition of 25 % anti-ferromagnetic Cr to CoFeNi alloy makes CoCrFeNi alloy paramagnetic [ 12]. How-
ever, CoCrFeNi alloying with Pd (FeCoCrNiPd, FeCoCrNiPd
2) can increase the
magnetic moment and Curie temperature in the FCC phase. Control of the Curie
temperature with Pd additions may make these alloys useful for magnetic refriger-
ation applications near room temperature [ 12].
The most widely studied AlCoCrCuFeNi HEA has been reported possessing
ferromagnetic behavior. The as-cast and as-annealed AlCoCrCuFeNi HEAs pos-sess high saturated magnetization and undergo a ferromagnetic transition as shownin Fig. 7.4[13]. The M
scan decrease from 38.178 to 16.082 emu/g, and its
coercivity can be reduced from 45 to 15 Oe after annealing which is assumed tobe related with the structure coarsening and phase transformation [ 13]. For detailed
study, Singh et al. [ 14] investigate the microstructure of AlCoCrCuFeNi HEA in
three different states, namely, splat-quenched, as-cast, and as-aged at 600
/C14C for 2 h
after casting. The results indicate the spinodal decomposition of Cr-Fe-Co-richregions into Fe-Co-rich and Cr-rich domains. The splat-quenched alloy showssofter magnetic behavior than the as-cast and as-aged alloys, which is attributedto the initial stage of decomposition. The as-aged alloy exhibits a higher saturationmagnetization, coercivity, and remanence ratio than the as-cast alloy due to a7 Functional Properties 243Fig. 7.4 Magnetization curves of as-cast and as-annealed AlCoCrCuFeNi HEAs: ( a) the hyster-
esis loops and ( b) the temperature dependence of magnetization ( M(T)) curves while cooling the
alloys at 200 Oe [ 13]244 J.-W. Yeh et al.higher degree of decomposition in Cr-Fe-Co-rich regions. Thus, the ferromagnetic
behavior of the AlCoCrCuFeNi HEA is correlated with the spinodal decompositionof Cr-Fe-Co-rich regions into ferromagnetic Fe-Co-rich domains and anti-
ferromagnetic Cr-rich domains.
Chou et al. also studied the magnetic behavior of Cu-free Al
0–2.0CoCrFeNi
(denoted as H- x) alloys in homogenized condition [ 1]. All the H- xalloys are
ferromagnetic at low temperatures (5 and 50 K). Additionally, the saturationmagnetization ( M
s) of alloys H-1.25 ( x¼1.25) and H-2.0 exceeds that of alloys
H-0 and H-0.25, indicating that at low temperatures, the BCC phase has higher Ms
value than the FCC phase. At room temperature (300 K), alloys H-0.5, H-1.25, and
H-2.0 remain ferromagnetic, while alloys H-0, H-0.25, and H-0.75 are paramag-
netic. In the FCC/BCC duplex region, the saturation magnetization ( Ms) of each
phase at 5 K was estimated by linear superposition of BCC contribution and FCCcontribution, and the volume fractions of each phase at x¼0.5 and 0.75. The
estimated results are M
s,FCC¼167.78 emu cm/C03andMs,BCC¼54.79 emu cm/C03.
The reason for Ms,BCC<Ms,FCC is ascribed to the existence of Al,Ni-rich phase
formed by spinodal decomposition from disordered BCC phase. It is well knownthat the Al,Ni-rich phase in Alnico magnets exhibits weak ferromagnetism. The M
s
value declines as x increases in the ranges 0 /C20x/C200.25 and 1.25 /C20x/C202.0. The Ms
and magnetic susceptibility values of alloy H-0 are smaller than those of alloy
H-0.25, implying that Al reduces the ferromagnetism of the FCC phase alloys(0/C20x/C200.25). On the other hand, the M
svalue of H-2.0 is smaller than that of
H-1.25 because H-2.0 alloy is mainly an Al,Ni-rich ordered BCC phase, whereasH-1.25 alloy has lesser B2 phase but more disordered BCC phase. In summary, theaddition of Al reduces the ferromagnetism of single-FCC and single-BCC H- x
alloys. In single-BCC phase, the reduction is due to the higher volume fraction ofAl,Ni-rich B2 phase at a higher Al content.
By substituting Nb for Cu, the AlCoCrFeNb
xNi (x¼0, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75)
HEAs studied by Ma [ 15] exhibit ferrimagnetic properties, since their permeability
(χ) is in the range of 2.0 /C210/C02/C03.0/C210/C03which is in the deﬁnition range of
ferromagnetism, as shown in Fig. 7.5.
Recently, Zhang [ 5] reported a new class of FeCoNi(AlSi) x(0/C20x/C200.8 in molar
ratio) HEAs by investigating the magnetic, electrical, and mechanical propertieswith the observed atomic-level and micro-scale structures. It was found that thesaturation magnetization is primarily determined by the composition and atomic-
level structures. With increasing Al and Si contents, M
slargely decreases as shown
in Fig. 7.6. Different from the saturation magnetization, coercivity is sensitive to
microstructures, such as grain size and phase boundary. With the compositional andstructural changes, the optimal balance of magnetic, electrical, and mechanicalproperties is achieved at x¼0.2, for which the combination of saturation magne-
tization (1.15 T), coercivity (1400 A/m), electrical resistivity (69.5 μΩcm), yield
strength (342 MPa), and strain without fracture (50 %) makes the alloy an excellentsoft-magnetic material.
Wang et al. [ 16] prepared equi-atomic AlBFeNiSi and AlBFeNbNiSi HEAs
using the method of mechanical alloying and investigated the magnetic properties.They pointed out that the as-milled AlBFeNbNiSi powders are soft magnetic with7 Functional Properties 245low coercivity. The saturation magnetization of the as-milled AlBFeNbNiSi pow-
ders decreases with prolonging of the milling time and shows the lowest value whenthe amorphous HEA are formed, as presented in Fig. 7.7. This suggests that the
as-milled products with solid solution phases show the better soft-magnetic
Fig. 7.5 (a) Magnetization curves of the AlCoCrFeNb xNi alloys ( x¼0, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75).
(b) the corresponding saturation magnetizations Ms, residual magnetizations Mr, and coercive
forces Hc[15]246 J.-W. Yeh et al.Fig. 7.6 Magnetic properties of FeCoNi(AlSi) x(x¼0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.8) alloys. Hc
andMsrepresent the coercivity and saturation magnetization, respectively [ 5]
Fig. 7.7 Magnetic properties of the as-milled AlBFeNiSi (S5) and AlBFeNbNiSi (S6) powders
after different milling times [ 16]7 Functional Properties 247properties than those with fully amorphous phases. The Nb addition does not
improve the soft-magnetic properties of the AlBFeNiSi HEAs. Rather, both amor-
phous HEAs have similar soft-magnetic properties after a long milling time.
Figure 7.8a shows the magnetization curves of the CoCrCuFeNiTi xalloys [ 17].
Both CoCrCuFeNi and CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.5exhibit typical paramagnetism, and the
saturation magnetizations are 1.505 and 0.333 emu/g, respectively, under
20,000 Oe magnetic ﬁeld, while the alloys of CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.8and CoCrCuFeNiTi
have likely superparamagnetic curves with the saturation magnetizations of 1.368
and 1.511 emu/g, respectively. This paramagnetism is due to the nano-
precipitations in the alloys as shown in Fig. 7.8b.
Generally speaking, the more the contents of magnetic elements (Fe, Co, and
Ni), the higher is the saturation magnetization. However, the amount and distribu-
tion of anti-ferromagnetic Cr can have signiﬁcant effect. The saturation magneti-
zation is usually below 500 emu/cc, unless the concentration of magnetic elements
is very high. Coercivity is affected by factors such as microstructure and grain size.
Most reported HEAs have coercivities less than 100 Oe [ 6], while some have higher
values ranging from 250 to about 400 Oe.
7.4 Electrochemical Properties of HEAs
7.4.1 Electrochemical Kinetics
A structural part in engineering applications often encounters corrosive environ-
ment with different kinds of attacking chemical species. The lifetime is often
determined by its corrosion resistance to the environment. In the multi-principal
Fig. 7.8 (a) Magnetization curves of the CoCrCuFeNiTi xalloys ( x¼0, 0.5, 0.8, and 1) showing a
transition from the paramagnetism ( x¼0 and 0.5) to superparamagnetism ( x¼0.8 and 1) [ 15]. (b)
High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of nanoparticles embedded in
the amorphous phase in CoCrCuFeNiTi alloy ( region A , nanoparticles, region B , amorphous
matrix) [ 15]248 J.-W. Yeh et al.element composition of HEAs, it is noted that Cr, Ni, Co, and Ti are positive to
enhance corrosion resistance in acid solutions. Mo might inhibit pitting corrosion inCl
/C0-containing solutions. On the other hand, Al, Cu, and Mn often display negative
effect. However, microstructure and the interaction among constituent elements
might alter the intuitive prediction. Therefore, it is important to conduct actualexperimental study of electrochemical behaviors of different HEAs with differentprocessing.
Anodic Process The polarization curves of the alloy AlCoCrCu
0.5FeNiSi in com-
parison with the 304 stainless steel (ss) demonstrate a mixed control in 1 N H 2SO4
(pH 0.5) and an anodic control in 1 N NaCl (pH 6.5), as presented in Figs. 7.9[18]
and 7.10 [ 19]. The corrosion potential ( Ecorr) increases signiﬁcantly at temperatures
>40/C14C, while 304 ss is not that sensitive to the same temperature range and
therefore maintains a constant extent of passivity ( ΔE). The prominent kinetic
factors shown on the anodic polarization curve are the critical current density forpassivation ( i
crit) and the passive current density ( ipass); both are temperature-
dependent. The corrosion rate, e.g., μg/mm2, in terms of corrosion current density
(icorr) according to Faraday ’s laws of electrolysis increases with temperature, too.
The 304 ss corrodes more readily than the HEA. For instance, in 1 N H 2SO4
(70/C14C), the icorrfor 304 ss is measured as 10.5 /C210/C04A/cm2atEcorr/C00.41VSHE
while for the HEA is 1.91 /C210/C04A/cm2atEcorr/C00.31VSHE(VSHE: the potential
relative to the standard hydrogen electrode) [ 19,20]. The activation energy ( Q) for
anodic dissolution in 1 N H 2SO4is 94.1 kJ/mole for the HEA and 220 kJ/mole for
the 304 ss according to the Arrhenius plot of icorr¼Aexp/C0Q=RT ðÞ . The lower
Qvalue of the HEA should be due to the buildup of a defect-free passivity which
results from the higher anodic current density as comparing with the Qvalue for the
304 ss or even with the pure iron in the H 2SO4solution [ 19,20]. The lower
corrosion rate at Ecorrmay account for the higher hydrogen overvoltage, ηon
the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi surface which is caused by the Al content in this
particular HEA AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi. Literature has shown that the value of ηfor
Al can be as high as 0.70 V in 2 N H 2SO4at an applied current density of 1 mA/cm2
[21–23].
Anodic polarization shows that HEA is more resistant to general corrosion than
304 ss at room temperature in chloride at 0.1 and 1 N and in acidic environments at0.1 and 1 M concentrations. Figure 7.9 shows comparisons between
AlCoCrCu
0.5FeNiSi and 304 ss in 0.1 M NaCl solution, based on the anodic
polarization measurements, indicating a higher pitting potential ( Epit) of HEA
(~0.6 VSHE) than that of 304 ss (~0.4 VSHE) and a lower corrosion rate ( icorr)o f
HEA (~0.5 μA/cm2) than that of 304 ss (~2 μA/cm2)[22,23].
Metallic corrosion takes place mainly on the anodic reaction. Alloying and
processing effects on the aqueous corrosion behavior of the HEA systems in
3.5 wt.% NaCl solution exhibit a lower icorr(0.03 μA/cm2) and higher Epit(0.55
VSHE) for the Al, Cu-free CoCrFeNi. However, lower values of icorrand higher
values of Epitcan be enhanced by heat treatments, e.g., on the Al-free
CoCrCu 0.5FeNi and Cu-free Al 0.5CoCrFeNi alloys. For example, a lowest icorr7 Functional Properties 249(0.01 μA/cm2) for the Cu-containing CoCrCu 0.5FeNi can be obtained through the
heat treating at 1250/C14C/24 h, while a highest Epit(0.96 VSHE) for the Al-containing
Al0.5CoCrFeNi has been achieved through the heat treating at 650/C14C/24 h [ 24].
Cathodic Process The cathodic process of the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi com-
prises the production of hydrogen (2H 2O+2 e/C0!H2+ 2OH/C0), reduction of
dissolved oxygen (O 2+2 H 2O+4 e/C0!4OH/C0), and various metallic ions (Mn+)
derived from the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi. Inﬁnite concentration polarization is
approached when [Mn+]sapproaches zero at the alloy surface; the corresponding
current density producing this limiting lower value of Mn+is the limiting current
density, iL. In the case of the deposition of Mn+, the potential moves to that for
hydrogen evolution, and hydrogen gas is liberated together with the simultaneousplating out of M
n+. The limiting current density ( iL) is approximated by the relation:
iL¼0.02 nc [ 20], where n is the number of equivalent and c is the concentration of
discharging ions, i.e., Mn+,H+,O H/C0in mole/liter, and iLis increased with the
increasing solution temperature. For this particular HEA AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi,
values of iLare ~12 μA/cm2at 30/C14C and 100 μA /cm2at 70/C14C, indicating that
the higher valence ions, i.e., Mn+, in addition to the single valence ion of H+or OH/C0
, prevail at higher solution temperatures. The cathodic Tafel constant βccan be
evaluated by taking the slope of the linear region near Ecorron the cathodic
polarization curve. It is interesting to note that the βcfor the 304 ss
(/C00.150 V/decade at 70/C14C) increases with the increasing temperature since βcis
proportional to the RT/F, where Ris the gas constant and Fis the Faraday constant,
but decreases for the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi ( /C00.108 V/decade at 70/C14C) [19,20,
22]. The reason for this is not clear, but it may be related to the material properties,
2.0
1.5
1.00.50.0
−0.5
−1.0
−7 −6
Current density (10
x A/cm2)304Sin deaerated 0.1M NaCl at 25°CPotential E (V)
−5 −4HEA
−3 −2 −1
Fig. 7.9 Comparisons of the anodic polarization curves for AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi HEA and 304 ss
in 0.1 M NaCl at room temperature (~25/C14C) [18]250 J.-W. Yeh et al.such as microstructure, chemical composition, and above all the entropy of the
HEA system.
Polarization and Corrosion Rates The alloy composition on the surface is found
very similar to the bulk HEA as conﬁrmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) [ 19]. Both anodic and cathodic equilibrium
potentials of the HEA in 1 N H
2SO4(pH 0.5) and in 1 N NaCl (pH 6.2) can be
calculated according to the Nernst equation; they are /C00.841 VSHEfor the anodic
equilibrium ( Ea) and +0.330 VSHEfor the cathodic equilibrium ( Ec) and slightly
increasing with the temperature, as shown in Fig. 7.10. The measured Ecorr, which is
the potential resulting from the short-circuited galvanic cells on the alloy surface,lies between the equilibrium potentials of E
aandEc. A mixed control is observed in
1NH 2SO4solution, implying that the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi exhibits a similar
degree of the polarization between the anode ( Ea) and cathode ( Ec). However, an
anodic control dominates the both alloys in 1 N NaCl solution; that is to say, muchmore polarization takes place on the anode than on the cathode (Fig. 7.10). In
particular, this alloy AlCoCrCu
0.5FeNiSi exhibits a wide passive region
(ΔE/C211.2 V) and a passive current density ( ipass)o f~ 2 /C210/C04A/cm2in 288/C14C
water containing 0.01 N Na 2SO4[25]. A low weight loss of ~4.5 μg/mm2is
obtained after immersion for 12 weeks [ 25,26]. Besides showing the good corro-
sion resistance, the AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi alloy presents a high tensile fracture
strength and elongation of 2660 MPa and 2.01 %, respectively, in the air, andonly a slightly lower performance, 2000 MPa and 1.49 %, in an autoclave water of288
/C14C[27]. The ﬁnding of the HEA Cu 0.5AlCoCrFeNiSi with good corrosion
resistance and mechanical strength is encouraging for the possible application as
structural materials in high-temperature aqueous environments, e.g., in boilingwater reactor (BWR).
Based on the data of the Tafel slopes, i.e., β
a,βc, and the given equilibrium
potentials (Fig. 7.10), it is possible to evaluate the exchange current density, i0,o r
the current density equivalent to the equal forward and reverse reactions at theelectrode at equilibrium according to the Tafel equation, η¼βlog ( i
corr/i0). The
larger the i0and the smaller the β, the smaller is the corresponding overvoltage, η.
The effect of Al can effectively decrease the i0(0.064 μA/cm2) as compared with
the Al-free Al xCoCrFeNi (0.43 μA/cm2). A lower hydrogen overvoltage is thus
observed for the Al-free Al xCoCrFeNi in aqueous environments.
7.4.2 Alloying for Corrosion Resistance
Effect of Boron Boron added to the alloy is known to improve the wear resistance.
Anodic polarization studies demonstrate that the Ecorrof the B-free alloy
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi ( /C00.094 VSHE) is more noble, i.e., higher reduction potential
than that of the 304 ss ( /C00.165 VSHE), and the corresponding icorr(3.19 μA/cm2)i s
lower than that of the 304 ss (33.2 μA/cm2)i n1NH 2SO4solution [ 28]. Clearly, this7 Functional Properties 251Fig. 7.10 The measured Ecorrin relation with the calculated equilibrium potentials, EaandEc, for
the alloy AlCoCrCu 0.5FeNiSi assuming [Mn+]¼10/C06in solutions: ( a)1NH 2SO4,p H¼0.5, and
(b) 1 N NaCl, pH ¼6.2 [19]252 J.-W. Yeh et al.B-free alloy Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi is more resistant to general corrosion than the
304 ss. Cyclic polarization curves [ 29] indicate that these B-containing alloys
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xare not susceptible to pitting corrosion in 1 N H 2SO4solution,
and the corresponding values of Ecorrandicorrvary in range from /C0115 to /C0159
mV SHE and from 787 to 2848 μA/cm2, respectively, responding to the boron
contents up to 1 mole ( x¼1). It is apparent that boron is detrimental to the corrosion
resistance because of the stringy precipitates of Cr, Fe boride phases as revealedfrom X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses of alloyAl
0.5CoCrCuFeNiB 0.6after anodic polarization in 1 N H 2SO4solution [ 28]. Results
from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) indicate that the polarizationresistance ( R
p) of the B-free Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi alloy (2500 Ωcm2) considerably
exceeds that of the B-containing alloy, e.g., Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiB 0.6(900 Ωcm2),
again indicating that the alloying of boron impairs the corrosion resistance.
Adding metalloid such as boron to the alloy Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNi should increase
the hardness and wear resistance through the formation of borides. However,potentiodynamic polarization curves show that the alloys Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xare
less corrosion resistant to general corrosion than the B-free alloys in 0.5 N H 2SO4
solution [ 28]. Some electrochemical parameters of the Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xalloys
in 1 N H 2SO4solution are listed in Table 7.2[28,29]. The passive range, ΔEofB0/C0
andB0.2/C0alloys, is 273 and 256 mV, respectively. However, the passive range of
theB0.6/C0andB1.0/C0alloys narrows ﬁrst and ﬁnally disappears, resuming to an
active dissolution accounting for the presence of boron contents. The analyzedresults from Nyquist plot indicate that the alloys Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xin 1 N H 2SO4
possess (1) the Cr content on the surface, but outside the CrB 2precipitate is
depleted and not sufﬁcient for the passivation, (2) the galvanic corrosion occursalong the edge of CrB
2precipitates, and (3) the polarization resistance ( Rp) reduces
as the metalloid, boron being alloyed. Microstructure of the alloy
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xsystem under investigation is composed of a mixture of
disordered BCC and FCC phases and borides [ 28].
Effect of Aluminum Effect of the aluminum content in the alloy Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5
system on the corrosion behavior is prominent in aqueous environments.
Both polarization and EIS of the alloys Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5, obtained in 0.5 M
H2SO4mixed with varying NaCl solutions, clearly reveal a decreasing pitting
resistance as the alloying Al content increases [ 30]. This alloy system,
Table 7.2 Electrochemical properties of Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xin 1 N H 2SO4according to the
cyclic polarization [ 28,29]
DesignationEcorr Epit ΔEE rp icorr Rp
(mV SHE) (mV SHE) (mV) (mV SHE)( μA/cm2)( Ωcm2)
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi /C0115 233 273 290 787 6652
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiB 0.2 /C0121 215 256 266 1025 2763
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi B 0.6 /C0148 ~0 ~0 82 2626 1872
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi B 1.0 /C0159 ~0 ~0 /C0103 2848 10817 Functional Properties 253AlxCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5, demonstrates a wide passive range ( ΔE/C211.2 V) in 0.5 M
H2SO4solution, which covers the potential range of the stability of H 2O
(ΔE¼1.23 V) [ 31], as shown in Fig. 7.11. The current peak at 0.3 VSHEis likely
due to the formation of Al 2O3·3H 2O as one of the constituents that composes the
passive ﬁlm ( EAl=Al2O3~0 . 3 VSHE)[30,31].
Potentiodynamic polarization curves obtained in 0.5 M H 2SO4mixed with
varying, e.g., NaCl, solutions exhibit a shift of transpassive potential for oxygen
evolution at 1.2 VSHEtoward to a much active potential for pitting corrosion.
TheEpitdepends on the Cl/C0ion concentration and also on the Al contents of the
alloy Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi. For instance, both Al-free and Al-bearing alloys of
CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5tend to show a distinct passive range ( ΔE) of about 1.2 V with an
oxygen evolution at 1.15 VSHEwhich drops to a much active value of 0.45 VSHEfor
the Al-free CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5and to an even more active potential of 0.25 VSHE
for the Al-bearing Al 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5responding to the increasing Cl/C0ion to
values /C210.25 M NaCl solution, together with the dissolving of the current peak of
theEAl=Al2O3reaction at 30 VSHEthat could degenerate the intact passive ﬁlm, as
illustrated in Fig. 7.12.
Similar polarization curves for the Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys show a much
narrow passive region ( ΔE/C200.3 V) in 1 N NaCl solution and clearly reveal a
decreasing pitting resistance with the increasing aluminum contents in HEA as the
electrochemical properties presented in Table 7.3[30]. For the Al-containing
Al0.3/C0and Al 0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys, the Nyquist plot has two capacitive loops,
which are typically related to the presence of an electrical double layer and an
adsorption layer [ 30].
Effect of Molybdenum The addition of molybdenum is widely recognized for its
beneﬁcial effect on the corrosion resistance of the stainless steels and has been
Fig. 7.11 Potentiodynamic polarization curves for ( a) CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5 and ( b)
Al0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys in 0.5 M H 2SO4mixed with varying NaCl solutions, both showing a
shift of transpassive potential for oxygen evolution (1.2 VSHE) toward much active potentials for
pitting corrosion, e.g., 0.45 VSHE for Al-free CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5and 0.25 VSHE for Al-bearing
Al0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5[30]254 J.-W. Yeh et al.studied extensively in the past [ 32–34]. The anodic polarization curves of the
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Mo xalloy in acids exhibit an active-passive transition, an extensive
passive region, and ΔE/C211.2 V, which is consistent with the stability of H 2O. The
corrosion current density, in the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1alloy, is lower than that
in the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5alloy, which may be attributed to the simultaneous
presence of lower Cr and slightly higher Mo content (1.8 at.%) in the
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1alloy. As the Mo content increases from 0.5 to 0.8 in
molar ratio in the HEAs, the interdendrite phase of the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo x
alloys is a Cr- and Mo-rich σphase, and the dendrite is a Cr- and Mo-depleted
phase. As 316 L ss plate has failed due to the presence of σphase, which is
deleterious to corrosion performance of the stainless steels in H 2SO4solution, the
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo x(x¼0.5, 0.8) alloys possessed the lower corrosion current
density in comparison with the Mo-free alloy [ 35]. On the other hand, the Mo-free
Co1.5CrFeTi 1.5alloy tends to pit in Cl/C0environments by showing a narrower range
of passive potentials. However, the Mo-containing Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xalloys
are quite pitting resistant in chloride-containing environments, accounting for the
MoO2/C0
4ions on the passive surface which is cation selective, thus repelling the
incorporation of anions such as Cl/C0,B r/C0, etc., and this passive ﬁlm is generally
believed to repair itself [ 35,36]. The corrosion data of the alloy
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xsystem in deaerated 0.5 M H 2SO4and in deaerated 1 M
Fig. 7.12 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs of the alloy ( a) CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5, and
(b)A l 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5showing that the Al-containing HEA apparently reduces the pitting
resistance in 0.5 M H 2SO4mixed with 0.25 N NaCl solution [ 30]
Table 7.3 Electrochemical parameters of the alloy Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5in 0.5 N H 2SO4
solution [ 30]
DesignationEcorr icorr icrit Epp ipass ΔE
(mV SHE) (A/cm2) (A/cm2) (mV SHE) (A/cm2) (mV)
Al0CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5 /C0229 6.86 /C210/C041.26/C210/C02/C055 3.14 /C210/C051227
Al0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5/C0194 2.39 /C210/C032.36/C210/C02/C012 7.39 /C210/C051176
Al0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5/C0206 5.08 /C210/C035.54/C210/C0247 6.82 /C210/C051114
304 stainless steel /C0186 7.45 /C210/C058.19/C210/C04/C022 8.05 /C210/C0511787 Functional Properties 255NaCl solutions have been summarized in Tables 7.4and7.5. XPS analysis indicates
the existence of Cr 2O3and MoO 2in the passive ﬁlm with the respective equilibrium
of CrO2/C0
4=Cr2O3(E0¼1.31 V) and MoO2/C0
4=MoO 2(E0¼0.606 V) is quite similar to
the potentials within the passive range [ 31]. In alkaline environments, e.g., 1 N
NaOH, the corrosion resistance deteriorates with the increasing Mo content,because of the formation of the Cr-rich σphase, which reduces the critical compo-
sition of Cr for the passivation [ 35,37].
Effect of Copper Cu tends to segregate as clusters, forming Cu-deﬁcient dendrites
and Cu-rich interdendrites during solidiﬁcation due to its weaker bonding energieswith Fe, Co, Ni, and Cr [ 19] as in the alloy Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi. Galvanic corrosion
between the composite phases also occurs in CoCrCu xFeNi in 3.5 wt.% NaCl
solution at room temperature for 30 days. The localized corrosion was foundalong the Cu-rich interdendrites in both alloys Cu
0.5HEA and Cu 1.0HEA, but not
in the Cu-free CoCrFeNi dendrite. In general, CoCrFeNi alloy is easier to be
passivated and thus more corrosion resistant than the alloys CoCr Cu 0.5FeNi and
CoCrCuFeNi in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution [ 19,38]. Hot corrosion of the alloys
Al0.5CoCrCuFeNiB xmay occur in the absence of liquid electrolyte. A solid reaction
product ﬁlm or scale forms on the metal surface through which the metal and theenvironment must encounter in order for the reaction to continue. The eliminationof Cu-rich regions from B-free Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNiB 0alloy would greatly improve
the corrosion resistance [ 19,28,39]. Corrosion data collected during exposure of
syngas containing 0.1–1 % H 2S at 500/C14C showing multiphase Cu-rich regions in
the low B-containing HEAs were vulnerable to the corrosion attack. Cu 1.96S was
the primary sulﬁde in the external corrosion scale on the low-B HEAs, whereasFeCo
4Ni4S8on the high-B HEAs [ 39].Table 7.4 Electrochemical parameters of the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xalloys in deaerated 0.5 M
H2SO4[35]
DesignationEcorr icorr ipass Epit ΔE
(mV SHE)( μA/cm2)( μA/cm2) (mV SHE) (mV)
Mo 0 /C092 30 9 1089 1130
Mo 0.1 /C071 78 9 1089 1112
Mo 0.5 /C064 72 11 1089 1109
Mo 0.8 /C070 69 22 1089 1109
Table 7.5 Electrochemical parameters of the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xalloys in deaerated 1 M
NaCl [ 35]
DesignationEcorr icorr ipass Epit ΔE
(mV SHE)( μA/cm2)( μA/cm2) (mV SHE) (mV)
Mo 0 /C0443 0.57 1.46 338 557
Mo 0.1 /C0381 0.13 3.80 1214 1429
Mo 0.5 /C0493 0.20 4.10 1164 1383
Mo 0.8 /C0551 0.41 5.11 1182 1371256 J.-W. Yeh et al.7.4.3 Corrosion Protection
Anodizing Anodizing within the passive potential, the corresponding current
declines exponentially with the anodizing time which leads to the growth of the
multicomponent anodized ﬁlm in 15 % H 2SO4solution. XPS analysis proves
the existence of Al and Cr oxide ﬁlms as the major components resulting from
the anodizing of the Al-containing alloy Al 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5. The current transient
of the chronoamperometric curve indicates that the Al-free alloy CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5is
susceptible to localized corrosion. However, such curve is not observed in the case
of the Al-containing alloy, such as Al 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5, which is smooth and
effectively protective against the pitting corrosion, as shown in Fig. 7.13 [23,40,
41]. The polarization impedance ( Rp) before the anodizing Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5
increases with the alloying aluminum content, which is also notably lower than
that of the 304 ss. The anodized Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys have shown a higher
corrosion resistance against pitting than the untreated ones. It is also apparent to
Fig. 7.13 SEM images of ( a) CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5,(b)A l 0.3CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5alloys subject to anodic
treatment at a passive potential of 0.7 VSHEin 15 % H 2SO4solution, ( c) anodic polarization curves
for alloy Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5in 15 % H 2SO4solution, showing an oxygen evolution potential at 1.2
VSHEwith a varying passive current density, ipass(15–200 μA/cm2) as the aluminum contents
increase from Al 0/C0to Al 0.5CrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5, and ( d) chronoamperometric curves for
AlxCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5(x¼0, 0.3, and 0.5) alloys at a constant potential of 0.7 VSHEin 15 % H 2SO4
solution [ 40,41]7 Functional Properties 257show the difference in surface morphology after the anodizing in the presence with
0.25 N NaCl, as shown in Fig. 7.12 [41].
Inhibiting Critical pitting temperature (CPT) [ 18,42–44] is the lowest temperature
on the test surface at which stable propagating pitting occurs under speciﬁed testconditions. CPT determined by ASTM G48-03 and ASTM G150-99 is suitable forranking the susceptibility of stainless steels and other alloys like HEAs. It is wellknown that Cl
/C0ions break down passivity or prevent its formation in Fe, Cr, Ni, Co,
and the stainless steel, because Cl/C0ion penetrates the oxide ﬁlm through pores or
defects easier than do other ions, e.g., SO2/C0
4,o rC l/C0may colloidally disperse the
oxide ﬁlm and increase its permeability. In other words, adsorbed chloride ions
increase the exchange current, i.e., (decrease overvoltage, η) for anodic dissolution
of the metal. The inhibiting effect of the SO2/C0
4ions on the pitting potential ( Epit) and
critical pitting temperature (CPT) of the alloy Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1results
from the chloride solutions [ 32,45,46]. The values of CPT for the alloy in 0.1,
0.5, and to 1 N NaCl solution are 70, 65, and 60/C14C, respectively; CPT apparently
decreases with the increasing [Cl/C0][47]. The values of Epitvary linearly with
the logarithm of chloride concentrations; they are EpitmVðÞ ¼ 551/C0295log Cl/C0½/C138
at 70/C14C, and Epit¼470/C0353log Cl/C0½/C138 at 80/C14C. The addition of SO2/C0
4ions to
chloride solutions has therefore the inhibiting effect on both Epitand CPT [ 32], as
shown in Figs. 7.11 and7.13. The anodic polarization of this HEA exhibits an
S-shape active-passive feature followed by transpassive corrosion which is nor-mally beyond the stability of H
2O. Adding NaCl to the sulfate solution, the
transpassive potential Etrﬃ1:2VSHE ðÞ would shrink to a lower potential required
for the pitting occurrence. Figure 7.11 shows that the increase in Cl/C0salt shifts the
pitting potential to more active values. Adding sulfate to the chloride-containingsolution would cause not only an increased potential against the pitting but also anincreased CPT [ 32] for pit nucleation and growth. In addition to sulfate ions, other
anodic inhibitors such as NO
3/C0, NbO 4/C02, ClO 4/C0,C2H3OO/C0, and C 7H5O2/C0are also
found to be effective in the Cl/C0solutions for inhibiting the pitting corrosion [ 32].
Effect of Heat Treatment Heat treatments are often adopted in processing the
inhomogeneities of the cast and cold-worked structures to achieve peak hardnessand enhanced mechanical properties in the growth of precipitates. Whenever phasesin an alloy constitute the electrodes of local-action cells, their removal appreciablyimproves corrosion resistance. Between the separated phases, numerous galvanic
couples form; the type and intensity of the corrosion depend on the electrochemical
natures of each individual phase and the relative physical size.
The microstructure of the as-cast Al
0.5CoCrFeNi comprises an FCC solid solu-
tion matrix and Al,Ni-rich phases. At aging temperatures between 350 and 950/C14C,
the alloy microstructure comprises an FCC + BCC solid solution and various formsof Al(Ni, Co, Cr, Fe) phases. Both the as-cast and aged Al
0.5CoCrFeNi are
considerably corroded in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution because of segregation of theAl,Ni-rich precipitate in the FCC matrix [ 24,48]. Electrochemical parameters of
the Cu-bearing alloy Cu
0.5CoCrFeNi after various aging temperatures tested in258 J.-W. Yeh et al.3.5 wt.% NaCl at 25/C14C show all of the as-cast and heat-treated specimens
possessing icorrin the range of 2.03 /C210/C09to 4.58 /C210/C08Acm/C02atEcorrvarying
from/C00.28 to /C00.41 VSCE(VSHE(Volt) ¼VSCE+ 0.241) in response to the aging
temperature from 350 to 1350/C14C;Epitfalls in a range between 0.07 and 0.05 VSCE.
The copper segregation in this particular HEA as a result of aging forms anonprotective passive ﬁlm where the Cl
/C0ions preferentially attack the sensitivity
zone at a signiﬁcantly different potential from the Cu-rich phase. The formation of aCu-rich phase and a Cr-rich phase with different potentials in the alloyCu
0.5CoCrFeNi can lead to preferential galvanic corrosion [ 49,50].
Effect of Work The HEA Al 5Cr12Fe35Mn 28Ni20is hardenable and can be worked
up to 60 % from its cast structure. An extensive passivity ( ΔE/C211.2 V) has been
observed with a passive current density (5 μA/cm2) which only slightly increases
with the increasing cold work, as observed in 1 N H 2SO4solution. The corrosion
current density ( icorr) falls in the range of ~10 μA/cm2that makes this alloy
Al5Cr12Fe35Mn 28Ni20an efﬁcient anode for the production of oxygen, since the
oxygen overvoltage is negligibly small as observed in this particular HEA, i.e.,
the potential for oxygen evolution is almost right on the equilibrium potential,1.23 V for the O
2/OH/C0reaction [ 51]. For pure iron in the similar environment,
oxygen is not evolved until the potential exceeds the equilibrium value byseveral tenth of a volt. A few shallow pits resulting from the underlying caststructure appear and seem independent of the degree of cold work [ 51]. However,
in Cl
/C0-containing environments, cold work can effectively promote the pitting
potential toward noble direction. Cold work on this HEA can electrochemically
transform the pitting corrosion into mo re or less a uniform corrosion. In NaCl
solution, the anodic polarization curve shows an unequivocal Epitat 0.15 VSHE,
ipass~1μA/cm2, and the pit size and its distribution decrease as the cold work
increases [ 51].
Coating for Protection The ﬁeld of HEA coating is new, and some of the recent
studies have reported fabrication of HEA coatings by various methods like mag-netron sputtering, electrolytic spark process, plasma arc cladding, and also by laserprocessing [ 52]. It is more intuitive to use HEA as coating than bulk so as to take
advantage of the properties possessed by these alloys. High-entropy alloy coatingssynthesized on aluminum 1100 substrate by laser surface engineering have shownan enhanced corrosion resistance for the coatings in neutral NaCl solutions. The
AlFeCrCoNi-based system processed with a double layer/25 J mm
/C02experienced
minimal or no pitting corrosion due to the minimum compositional dilution anduniform distribution of the HEA in the coating. This system has shown an excellentcorrosion resistance because the presence of corrosion resistant elements Ni, Cr,and Co and lower Al contents have been reported to be beneﬁcial [ 24,52].
For instance, a lowest corrosion current density, i
corrof 0.3 μA/cm2atEcorrof
/C0730 mV SCE, has been achieved using 25 J mm/C02for the AlCoCrFeNi-coated
aluminum 1100.7 Functional Properties 2597.5 Hydrogen Storage Properties of HEAs
The greenhouse effect is principally caused by the emission of CO 2. Various green
energies without CO 2emission such as hydrogen, solar, and wind power have been
widely explored. Hydrogen energy is effective and convenient, but the storage ofhydrogen is an important issue because of the ﬂammability and explosion danger ofhydrogen. Among various techniques of hydrogen storage, metal hydride has beenregarded as an excellent hydrogen storage material because of its safety, low cost,high storage capacity per volume, and high absorption/desorption reversibility.LaNi
5, an important metal hydride, has been commercialized. However, it contains
rare earth La and also expensive Ni. As a result, other cheap metal hydride systems
having at least similar performance are highly demanded. The increase in thenumber of components in hydrogen-storing alloys has recently become a majordeveloping direction in improvement of the hydrogen storage properties especiallyhydrogen absorption, hydrogen desorption, and life cycle. Moreover, HEAs havebeen explored in order to develop those potential compositions satisfying hydrogenstorage requirements [ 53,54].
The ﬁrst HEA system designed for hydrogen storage alloys is based on equimo-
lar CoFeMnTiVZr reported by Kao et al. [ 2]. The CoFeMnTiVZr HEA has a single
AB
2C14 structure (an ordered HCP structure) in which Ti and Zr are thought to
occupy the A sites while Co, Fe, Mn, and V to occupy the B sites. The substitutionof different elements with similar atomic size and chemical properties due to ahigh-entropy effect in the alloy system lowers the total free energy. A single C14Laves phase is present in CoFeMnTi
0.5–2.5 VZr, CoFeMnTiV 0.4–3.0 Zr, and
CoFeMnTiVZr 0.4–3.0 alloys before and after pressure-composition isotherm (PCI)
tests. Therefore, the absorption and desorption of hydrogen and the hydrogen
storage properties of such CoFeMnTi xVyZrzalloys can be improved by varying
greatly the Ti, V, and Zr contents without changing the C14 crystal structure. Thefactor that dominates the maximum hydrogen storage capacity ( H/M)
maxis the
afﬁnity between the alloy elements and hydrogen. Since Ti and Zr are involved inhydrogen absorption in CoFeMnTi
xVZr (denoted as Ti x) and CoFeMnTiVZr z
(denoted as Zr z) alloys, the results show that ( H/M)maxincreases with xandzin
the ranges 0.5 /C20x/C202 and 0.4 /C20z/C202.3, respectively. The maximum H2absorption
is 1.8 wt.% for CoFeMnTi 2VZr alloy at ambient temperature. Figure 7.14 shows the
PCI curve for CoFeMnTiV yZr (denoted as Vy) alloy at 25/C14C. This conﬁrms that
the additions of Ti and Zr promote the absorption of hydrogen. The decrease in(H/M)
maxin alloys Ti 2–2.5 and Zr 2.3–3.0 is attributed to the serious segregation of Ti
and Zr.
The kinetics of hydrogen absorption of Ti x,Vy, and Zr zalloys at 25 and 80/C14C, as
well as the time required for these alloys to absorb 90 % of their absorptioncapacity, t
0.9, were measured and determined. The t0.9parameter is a convenient
indicator for the estimation of the hydrogen absorption kinetics of alloys.
Figure 7.15 shows the absorption kinetic curve at 25/C14C for Zr zalloys. The time
oft0.9is less than 60 s.260 J.-W. Yeh et al.After hydrogen desorption, a large amount of hydrogen is retained in alloys Zr z
because of the strong bonding between Zr and H. According to PCI tests, the factor
that dominates t0.9and the plateau pleasure is the size of the interstitial sites that are
associated with the lattice constants. Adding Zr or Ti enlarges the interstitial sites ofthe alloys and expands the lattice with lower compressive atomic stress. Therefore,thet
0.9values and plateau pressures of alloys Zr zand Ti xdecrease as zand
xincrease.
From the average formation, enthalpy ΔHcalof various hydrides t(H/atom) maxis
found to be a linear function of ΔHcalin A 2B and AB 5alloy systems as shown in
Fig.7.16 [2]. Although it is nonlinear, for AB and AB 2(including Ti x,Vy, and Zr z)
systems, ( H/atom) maxis still strongly related to ΔHcalfor Ti x,V y, and Zr z.B y
varying the relative content of the three elements or adding other elements whilekeeping the single C14 structure, many new metal hydrides with high-hydrogenstorage potential might be explored.
Fig. 7.14 PCI curves for
CoFeMnTiV yZr (V y) alloys
at 25/C14C[2]
Fig. 7.15 Absorption
kinetics curves for
CoFeMnTiVZr z(Zrz) alloy
at 25/C14C[2]7 Functional Properties 261Although only a very small number of HEAs has been studied for functional
properties, many interesting and sometimes unique results have been reported. Forexample, the Al
2.08CoCrFeNi alloy has extremely low TCR over a wide tempera-
ture range [ 4]. This alloy could be used as precision resistor. The FeCoNi(AlSi) 0.2
alloy has a good combination of properties, making it a potential soft-magnetic
material [ 5]. In terms of corrosion resistance, some HEAs show better performances
than 304 ss or even 316 ss. The hydrogen storage properties also appear encourag-ing. Other directions for functional applications [ 6] include but are not limited to
nuclear (radiation resistant) materials, electronic materials such as diffusion bar-riers, electromagnetic-shielding materials, thermoelectric materials, and functionalcoatings.
7.6 Conclusions and Perspectives
From the review and discussion on various functional properties of HEAs includingelectrical properties (including superconducting), magnetic properties, electro-chemical properties, and hydrogen storage properties, we can conclude that HEAsand HEA-related materials could provide a wide range of data for each propertydepending on composition and processing. Among them, some have been proven to
have comparable properties with respect to conventional materials. Furthermore,
interesting phenomena and potentially promising properties better than those ofconventional alloys are also observed. Basic properties of components, interactionsbetween components, multielement and even whole-solute matrix, phase and inter-face morphologies inﬂuence physical, chemical, and eletrochemical properties.Their correlations and interplays will supplement the underlying principles of
Fig. 7.16 (H/atom) maxversus ΔHcalcurves for Mg 2Ni (A 2B type), LaNi 5(AB 5type); TiFe and
TiCo (AB type); and ZrB 2,T i x,Vy, and Zr z(AB 2type) [ 2]262 J.-W. Yeh et al.materials science. More researches are needed in the future. HEAs and HEA-related
materials with attractive functional properties deserve to be explored and developedfrom both academic and application-oriented viewpoints.
Acknowledgments J.W.Y, S.K.C, H.C.S, Y.Z, and T.T.Z. would like to thank Dr. Michael
C. Gao for his great patience to provide review comments and suggestions from himself andinvited experts. They also thank Professor Shou-Yi Chang for his ﬁnal editing of this chapter withall revisions.
References
1. Chou HP, Chang YS, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2009) Microstructure, thermophysical and electrical
properties in Al xCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng B 163:184–189
2. Kao YF, Chen SK, Sheu JH, Lin JT, Lin WE, Yeh JW, Lin SJ, Liou TH, Wang CW (2010)
Hydrogen storage properties of multi-principal-component CoFeMnTi xVyZrzalloys. Int
J Hydrogen Energy 35:9046–9059
3. Kao YF, Chen SK, Chen TJ, Chua PC, Yeh JW, Lin SJ (2011) Electrical, magnetic, and hall
properties of Al xCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 509:1607–1614
4. Chen SK, Kao YF (2012) Near-constant resistivity in 4.2-360 K in a B2 Al 2.08CoCrFeNi. AIP
Adv 2(012111):1–5
5. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Cheng YQ, Liaw PK (2013) High-entropy alloys with high saturation
magnetization, electrical resistivity, and malleability. Sci Rep 3(01455):1–7
6. Tsai MH (2013) Physical properties of high entropy alloys. Entropy 15:5338–53457. Tsaur DG, Chen SK (2012) Nb-containing superconductive high-entropy alloys. Master thesis,
Chinese Culture University
8. Wu KY, Chen SK (2013) Superconductivity in NbTaTiZr-based high-entropy alloys. Master
thesis, Chinese Culture University
9. Liu TH, Chen SK (2014) Superconductivity in NbZrTi-bearing multi-element alloys. Master
thesis, Chinese Culture University
10. Ko želj P, Vrtnik S, Jelen A, Jazbec S, Jaglic ˇic´Z, Maiti S, Feuerbacher M, Steurer W, Dolins ˇek
J (2014) Discovery of a superconducting high-entropy alloy. Phys Rev Lett 113(107001):1–5
11. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93
12. Lucas MS, Mauger L, Mun˜oz JA, Xiao Y, Sheets AO, Semiatin SL, Horwath J, Turgut Z
(2011) Magnetic and vibrational properties of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(7):07E307-07E307-3
13. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Shi J, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ (2010)
Annealing on the structure and properties evolution of the CoCrFeNiCuAl high-entropy alloy.J Alloys Compd 502(2):295–299
14. Singh S, Wanderka N, Kiefer K, Siemensmeyer K, Banhart J (2011) Effect of decomposition
of the Cr-Fe-Co rich phase of AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy on magnetic properties.
Ultramicroscopy 111(6):619–622
15. Ma SG, Zhang Y (2012) Effect of Nb addition on the microstructure and properties
of AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 532:480–486
16. Wang J, Zheng Z, Xu J, Wang Y (2014) Microstructure and magnetic properties of mechan-
ically alloyed FeSiBAlNi (Nb) high entropy alloys. J Magn Magn Mater 355:58–64
17. Wang XF, Zhang Y, Qiao Y, Chen GL (2007) Novel microstructure and properties
of multicomponent CoCrCuFeNiTi
xalloys. Intermetallics 15:357–3627 Functional Properties 26318. Chen YY, Duval T, Hung UD, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2005) Microstructure and electrochemical
properties of high entropy alloys – a comparison with type-304 stainless steel. Corros Sci47(9):2257–2279
19. Chen YY, Hong UT, Shih HC, Yeh JW, Duval T (2005) Electrochemical kinetics of the high
entropy alloys in aqueous environments – a comparison with type 304 stainless steel. Corros
Sci 47(11):2679–2699
20. Vetter KJ (1961) Theoretical kinetics: theoretical and experimental aspects. Academic Press
Inc, New York, pp 104–120
21. Frangini S, Cristofaro ND, Lascovich J, Mignone A (1993) On the passivation characteristics
of aβ-FeAl intermetallic compound in sulphate solutions. Corros Sci 35:153–159
22. Kao YF, Lee TD, Chen SK, Chang YS (2010) Electochemical passive properties of
Al
xCoCrFeNi (x ¼0, 0.25, 0.50, 1.00) alloys in sulfuric acids. Corros Sci 52:1026–1034
23. Cristofaro ND, Frangini S, Mignone A (1996) Passivity and passivity breakdown on a β-FeAl
intermetallic compound in sulphate and chloride containing solutions. Corros Sci 38:307–315
24. Tang Z, Huang L, He W, Liaw PK (2014) Alloying and processing effects on the aqueous
corrosion behavior of high-entropy alloys. Entropy 16:895–911
25. Chen YY, Hong UT, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2006) Selected corrosion behaviors of a
Cu0.5NiAlCoCrFeSi bulk glassy alloy in 288 degrees C high-purity water. Scr Mater
54(12):1997–2001
26. Chen YY, Duval T, Hong UT, Yeh JW, Shih HC, Wang LH, Oung JC (2007) Corrosion
properties of a novel bulk Cu 0.5NiAlCoCrFeSi glassy alloy in 288 degrees C high-purity water.
Mater Lett 61(13):2692–2696
27. Chen YY, Hong UT, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2005) Mechanical properties of a bulk
Cu0.5NiAlCoCrFeSi glassy alloy in 288 degrees C high-purity water. Appl Phys Lett
87(26):261918
28. Lee CP, Chen YY, Hsu CY, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2007) The effect of boron on the
corrosion resistance of the high entropy alloys Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiB x. J Electrochem Soc
154(8):C424–C430
29. ASTM committee, Standard method G61-86, Annual book of ASTM standards (1998) vol.
3.02. ASTM, Philadelphia, p 254
30. Lee CP, Chang CC, Chen YY, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2008) Effect of the aluminium content of
AlxCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5high-entropy alloys on the corrosion behaviour in aqueous environments.
Corros Sci 50(7):2053–2060
31. Pourbaix M (1974) Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous solutions. NACE, Houston
32. Chou YL, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2011) Effect of inhibitors on the critical pitting temperature
of the high-entropy alloy Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1. J Electrochem Soc 158:C246–C251
33. Chou YL, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2011) Pitting corrosion of Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo 0.1in chloride-
containing nitrate solutions. Corrosion 67:065003
34. Sigimoto K, Sawada Y (1977) The role of molybdenum additions to austenitic stainless steels
in the inhibition of pitting in acid chloride solutions. Corros Sci 17:425–445
35. Chou YL, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2010) The effect of molybdenum on the corrosion behavior
of the high-entropy alloys Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xin aqueous environments. Corros Sci
52(8):2571–2581
36. Ogura K, Ohama T (1984) Pit formation in the cathodic polarisation of passive iron. IV: Repair
mechanism by molybdate, chromate and tungstate. Corrosion 40:47–51
37. Szklarska-Smialowska Z (1986) Pitting corrosion of metals. NACE, Houston38. Hsu YJ, Chiang WC, Wu JK (2005) Corrosion behavior of FeCoNiCrCu
xhigh-entropy alloys
in 3.5% sodium chloride solution. Mater Chem Phys 92:112–117
39. Do /C21gan O ¨N, Nielsen BC, Hawk JA (2013) Elevated-temperature corrosion of CoCrCuFeNiAl 0.
5Bx high-entropy alloys in simulated syngas containing H 2S. Oxid Metals 80(1–2):177–190
40. Lee CP, Chen YY, Hsu CY, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2008) enhancing pitting corrosion resistance of
AlxCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5high-entropy alloys by anodic treatment in sulfuric acid. Thin Solid Film
517:1301–1305264 J.-W. Yeh et al.41. Lee CP, Shih HC (2008) Corrosion behavior and anodizing treatment of the high-entropy
alloys Al 0.5CoCrCuFeNiB x(x¼0, 0.2, 0.6, 1.0) and Al xCrFe 1.5MnNi 0.5(x¼0, 0.3, 0.5).
Doctor thesis, National Tsing Hua University
42. Brigham RJ, Tozer EW (1973) Temperature as a pitting criterion. Corrosion 29:33–36
43. Salinas-Bravo VM, Newman RC (1994) An alternative method to determine CPT of stainless
steels in ferric chloride solution. Corros Sci 36:67–77
44. Huang PK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK (2004) Multi-principal-element alloys with improved
oxidation and wear resistance for thermal spray coating. Adv Eng Mater 6:74
45. DeBarry DW (1993) In: Reviews on corrosion inhibitor science and technology. Raman A,
Labine P (eds). NACE, Houston, p II-19-1
46. Castle JE, Qiu JH (1990) The application of ICP-MS and XPS to studies of ion selectivity
during passivation of stainless steels. J Electrochem Soc 137:2031–2038
47. Burstein GT, Souto RM (1995) Observations of localised instability of passive titanium in
chloride solution. Electrochim Acta 40:1881–1888
48. Lin CM, Tasi HL (2011) Evolution of microstructure, hardness, and corrosion properties of
high-entropy Al 0.5CoCrFeNi alloy. Intermetallics 19:288–294
49. Lin CM, Tasi HL, Bor HY (2010) Effect of aging treatment on microstructure and properties of
high-entropy Cu 0.5CoCrFeNi alloy. Intermetallics 18:1244–1250
50. Lin CM, Tasi HL (2011) Effect of aging treatment on microstructure and properties of high-
entropy FeCoNiCrCu 0.5alloy. Mater Chem Phys 28:50–56
51. Lin SY, Shih HC (2011) Studies on electrochemical corrosion properties of high-entropy alloy:
Al5Cr12Fe35Mn28Ni20. Master Thesis. Chinese Culture University
52. Shon YK, Joshi SS, Katakam S, Rajamure RS, Dahotre NB (2015) Laser additive synthesis of
high entropy alloy coating on aluminum: corrosion behavior. Mater Lett 142:122–125
53. Lin JT, Chen SK (2007) Design and study on the hydrogen-storage 4- to 7-element
high-entropy alloys based on composition of TiVFe. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua
University
54. Sheu JH, Chen SK (2008) Hydrogen storage in CoCrFeMnTiV xZry(0.4/C20x, y/C203)
high-entropy alloys. Master ’s thesis, National Tsing Hua University7 Functional Properties 265Chapter 8
Prediction of Structure and Phase
Transformations
Michael Widom
Abstract This chapter introduces calculational methods that can be used for ab
initio structure prediction in multicomponent alloy systems, with an emphasis onconcepts relevant to high-entropy alloys. Speciﬁcally, we will address density
functional-based calculation of T¼0 K total energies. Extension to ﬁnite temper-
ature will use cluster expansions for the energies to obtain the chemical substitutionentropy that characterizes the high-entropy alloy family. Additional contributionssuch as vibrational and electronic entropies will be included as needed. We describemolecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulation methods and the types of infor-mation that can be obtained from them. Example applications include three high-entropy alloy families, Cr-Mo-Nb-V, Nb-Ti-V-Zr, and Mo-Nb-Ta-W, and theirbinary and ternary subsystems.
Keywords First principles • Density functional theory (DFT) • Hybrid Monte
Carlo/molecular dynamics (MC/MD) • Entropy sources • Conﬁgurationalentropy • Vibrational entropy • Electronic entropy • Helmholtz free energies •Phonon vibration • Cluster expansion • Phase stability • Phase transformations •Pair distribution function • Density of states • Temperature effect • Body-centeredcubic (BCC) • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
8.1 Introduction
High-entropy alloys form when multiple chemical species intermix freely on asimple underlying crystal lattice, forming a thermodynamically stable single phase.However, most mixtures of chemical species will not form a high-entropy alloy.Instead, the mixtures separate into multiple distinct phases, and some of thesephases might be complex crystal structures. Thermodynamic states of mixtures asfunctions of chemical composition and temperature are recorded in phase diagrams.While the stable crystal structures of almost all pure elements are known, as are thephase diagrams and crystal structures of most binary intermetallics, many ternary
M. Widom ( *)
Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USAe-mail: widom@cmu.edu
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_8267phase diagrams have not been determined, and almost no quaternary or higher
phase diagrams are known. The discovery of high-entropy alloys provides anopportunity to make progress on this scientiﬁc frontier.
This chapter outlines how basic physical principles can be used to predict the
formation and stability of high-entropy alloys. Conceptually, the approach isstraightforward. Every thermodynamic phase αhas a Gibbs free energy G
αthat
depends on composition and temperature. We must calculate the free energies ofdifferent phases or combinations of phases and ﬁnd the minimum. In practice, weuse quantum mechanics to calculate the total energy of speciﬁc crystal structures ofinterest, yielding the zero temperature limit of free energy. We then extend the freeenergy to ﬁnite temperature by using methods of statistical mechanics to include a
variety of sources of entropy. Examples will be given drawn from mixtures of
refractory elements. We will discuss certain binary compounds in detail and thenmove on to ternaries and ﬁnally quaternaries. The concepts and proceduresdescribed here generalize directly to non-refractory metals and to quinary andhigher-order alloy systems, although these lie outside the scope of this chapter.
Our approach differs from an alternative and highly successful method known as
CALPHAD (see Chap. 12) for calculation of phase diagrams. CALPHAD uses
databases of thermodynamic information based on experimental measurements
(when available) supplemented by numerical interpolation schemes to ﬁll in
unknown territory. Ultimately, CALPHAD should be merged with ﬁrst principlestotal energy calculations to exploit the relative advantages of each. First principlesexcel at prediction of low-temperature stability, obtaining enthalpies that while notexact are simply unavailable from experiment. CALPHAD excels at modeling oftransition temperatures and phase diagram topology, as these are often determinedexperimentally with high reliability.
To illustrate these methods, we discuss in detail three overlapping examples of
four-component alloy systems consisting of refractory metals. We examine
Mo-Nb-Ta-W, which is known to readily form a stable high-entropy alloy [ 36];
Nb-Ti-V-Zr, which exhibits ﬁne-grained second-phase precipitation [ 35]; and
Cr-Mo-Nb-V, which has not been considered experimentally to date, but whichwe predict should be stable at high temperature and decompose at low temperature.Understanding the quaternary alloy system requires, in addition, understanding allfour ternary and all six binary subsystems. Indeed, our calculations conﬁrm or shednew light on several experimentally known phase diagrams in addition to making
some new predictions.
8.2 Total Energy Calculation, T¼0K
Our goal in this section is to predict the T¼0 K limit of alloy phase diagrams by
calculating the total energy of potential ground-state structures and ﬁnding theminimum. Two major and distinct challenges arise immediately: (1) how to calcu-late the energy of a given crystal structure and (2) how to choose candidate268 M. Widomstructures whose energies should be determined. The ﬁrst problem has a conceptu-
ally simple, though technically challenging, answer. We will apply known laws ofquantum mechanics that directly provide the desired quantity. The calculation will
be made tractable through the use of well-established approximations of density
functional theory [ 28]. The second problem has no obvious solution. Although at a
given composition there should be a unique minimum energy structure, we know ofno method to predict what it will be. Since there are inﬁnitely many conceivablestructures, we cannot calculate all possibilities. Rather, we will make a ﬁnitenumber of plausible guesses, based on a combination of physical intuition, chem-ical analogy, and computer-assisted search. This latter approach will exploit the factthat high-entropy alloy families tend to form simple crystal lattices so that a cluster
expansion of the total energy can accelerate our search for the ground state.
8.2.1 Density Functional Theory
Quantum mechanics tells us that the ground-state energy of a system of interacting
particles is the lowest eigenvalue of the system Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian is anoperator that expresses the total energy by adding together the kinetic and potentialenergies. For bulk matter, we may separate atoms into positively charged nuclei,which are sufﬁciently massive that they may be treated as ﬁxed point charges, andnegatively charged electrons, whose mass is sufﬁciently low that they must be
described through a position-dependent many-body wave function that is the
eigenvector of the Hamiltonian. Electrons interact with each other and withthe nuclei through the Coulomb potential. The eigenvalue equation to be solvedis the Schrodinger equation of the system,
HΨ
ðNÞðr1,...,rNÞ¼EΨðNÞðr1,...,rNÞ, ð8:1Þ
with Ψ(N)the many-body wave function.
The resulting interacting many-body problem, though well posed, is computa-
tionally intractable owing to the high dimensionality of the Hilbert space in which
the many-electron wave function must be expressed. Hohenberg and Kohn [ 16]
argued the many-body calculation could be replaced with the simpler problem ofﬁnding the electron density ρ(r) that minimizes a total energy functional E[ρ(r)].
Kohn and Sham [ 23] reexpressed this minimization problem as a coupled set of
single-electron Schrodinger equations that can be solved individually (but self-consistently):
/C0h2
2m∇2
rþVeðrÞþð
dr0ρðr0Þ
jr/C0r0jþVxc½ρðrÞ/C138/C18/C19
ψiðrÞ¼εiψiðrÞ: ð8:2Þ8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 269The terms on the left-hand side represent, respectively, the single-electron kinetic
energy, the “external potential” (electron-ion coupling), electron-electron interac-tions, and the “exchange-correlation potential.” The equations for the single-
particle wave functions ψ
iare coupled through the electron density
ρðrÞ¼XN
i¼1jψiðrÞj2: ð8:3Þ
Although the replacement can be exact in principle, in practice the exact form of
Eq. (8.2) is unknown, as it collects difﬁcult to calculate effects of electron exchange
and correlation into the unknown exchange-correlation potential Vxc[ρ(r)] that is a
functional of the electron density. The exchange-correlation functional can beapproximated to accuracy sufﬁcient for our present purposes using the familiarlocal density approximation [ 4] (LDA) that replaces the exchange-correlation
functional with the value of the exchange-correlation potential of a uniform elec-
tron gas whose density matches the local value of ρ(r) or using the generalized
gradient approximation [ 32] (GGA) that supplements the local density approxima-
tion with corrections dependent on the gradient of the density at the same point.
For the examples given in this chapter, we solve the equations of density
functional theory using a program known as VASP [ 24,25]. This program exploits
translational symmetry of crystal structures to express the single-electron wavefunctions in a plane wave basis (i.e., a Fourier series). To ensure convergence oftotal energies, we use dense k-point grids and truncate the basis at plane wave
energy of 400 eV, signiﬁcantly higher than the VASP defaults. We select the
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation [ 32] and also make
an approximation that treats atomic core electrons approximately based on a variantof pseudopotential known as the projector augmented wave method [ 3,26].
No simpler approach is feasible for total energy calculation of high-entropy
alloys. Popular approaches such as pair potentials, embedded atom potentials, andsimilar empirical forms can be useful for modeling pure elements and even somebinary compounds. Unfortunately, these approximations contain adjustable param-
eters whose number proliferates with each additional chemical species, making
them impossible to ﬁt accurately as the number of chemical species increases. Incontrast, the complexity and accuracy of density functional theory is relativelyindependent of the number of species present. The greatest utility of empiricalpotentials would be the study of abstract model systems whose properties can bedeﬁned for theoretical and computational convenience rather than realism.
8.2.2 Ground-State Prediction
The lowest-energy structure is known as the ground state and is the stable form ofmatter in the limit T!0 K. Note that we adopt the absolute Kelvin scale of
temperature throughout this chapter. Owing to the third law of thermodynamics270 M. Widom(vanishing entropy), this structure is essentially unique for a given composition and
pressure. Since we ﬁx the pressure (generally at P¼0, which approximates atmo-
spheric pressure), our energy is actually an “enthalpy”
H¼min
V½EðVÞþPV/C138, ð8:4Þ
and the corresponding free energy at ﬁnite temperature is the Gibbs free energy
GðT,PÞ¼H/C0TS: ð8:5Þ
We need a notation for crystal structures. Among many possible schemes, we
adopt the Pearson notation as especially convenient. The Pearson notation consistsof lowercase letters a,m,o,t,h, and cindicating, respectively, asymmetric, mono-
clinic, orthorhombic, tetragonal, hexagonal, or cubic; an uppercase letter PRFICBA
indicating primitive, rhombohedral, or some type of centering; and a number
indicating the number of atomic sites per unit cell. For example, hP2 indicates
HCP, while cI2 indicates BCC. Because many different compounds can form thesame crystal structure, and vice versa, we will append the Pearson symbol to thecompound name to reduce ambiguity. Thus, Cr.cI2 and Nb.cI2 are BCC chromiumand niobium, while Cr
2Nb.cF24 and Cr 2Nb.hP12 are Laves phases (speciﬁc types
of tetrahedrally close-packed Frank-Kasper phases), with hP12 beingStrukturbericht C14 (prototype MgZn
2) and cF24 being Strukturbericht C15 (pro-
totype Cu 2Mg).
The difﬁculty is ﬁnding the unique minimum enthalpy structure, because there
are inﬁnitely many conceivable arrangements among which we must ﬁnd theminimum. Fortunately, we often have experimental hints, as well as chemical andphysical intuition and computer algorithms, that allow us to focus our search on alimited set of possibilities. By employing such constraints, we risk the possibilitythat we exclude the true ground state and will always be confronted with anassociated uncertainty in our predictions.
For most pure elements, experimentalists voice little doubt about the stable form
at low temperature and atmospheric pressure, and DFT calculations generally agree
this form is the lowest in energy among competing possibilities [ 29] (elemental
boron is a notable exception [ 43]). In many cases, the elements undergo allotropic
transitions to alternative structures as temperature rises. Notably, among the refrac-tory metals in the Sc and Ti columns of the periodic table (groups IIIA and IVA),the ground-state structure is a high-density, close-packed (FCC or HCP) structure.At higher temperatures, the structure transforms to a lower-density, loosely packedBCC structure. The mechanism for this transformation is the entropy of thermal
vibrations, as will be explained in detail in Sect. 8.3.2 .
Moving from pure elements to compounds introduces a composition variable
xthat is one-dimensional in the case of a binary compound but multidimensional in
general. Many compounds exist as a pure phase at a precise value or over a limitedrange of compositions x. The thermodynamic state at composition xbetween8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 271two pure phases of composition xα<x<xβconsists of a mixture of the two
phases αandβ. Figure 8.1a, which plots enthalpies of formation (enthalpy differ-
ence ΔHbetween the compound at composition xand the pure elements at
compositions 0 and 1) of various structures containing elements Cr and Nb,
illustrates the point. In this ﬁgure, ΔH<0 indicates structures whose enthalpy is
lower than a mixture of pure crystalline Cr and Nb. Here, we ﬁnd two negativeenthalpy compounds, both at composition Cr
2Nb. At compositions with Nb content
less than x¼1/3, the ground state corresponds to a mixture of two coexisting
crystals, one of pure Cr.cI2 and the other of pure Cr 2Nb.cF24. The enthalpy of
formation of this mixture lies along the tie-line joining the enthalpy of formation ofCr
2Nb.cF24 to Cr.cI2. Similarly, at compositions x>1/3, the ground state consists
of Cr 2Nb.cF24 coexisting with Nb.cI2.
The vertices Cr.cI2, Cr 2Nb.cF24, and Nb.cI2, together with the line segments
joining them, constitute the convex hull of a scatter plot of formation enthalpy ΔH
vs. composition x. This convex hull forms the sequence of predicted ground states
as a function of composition. The structure Cr 2Nb.hP12 has a negative enthalpy of
formation, indicating it is favorable to form from pure elements, but it lies above theconvex hull by an amount ΔE¼0:01 eV/atom, indicating it is thermodynamically
unstable relative to the ground state. Indeed, the hP12 variant of Cr
2Nb is reported
to be a high-temperature stable phase.
We have neglected compositional variability of the stable phases, treating them
as “line compounds” of ﬁxed stoichiometry and thus ruling out, for example,solubility of Cr in Nb. This is appropriate in the limit of low temperature, but atelevated temperature the scatter plot of discrete enthalpies must be replaced by a setof Gibbs free energy functions { G
α(T,P,x)}. For Nchemical species, the compo-
sition variable xlies within a simplex of dimension N/C01. The convex hull of this
set forms the sequence of predicted stable phases, consisting of continuously
variable composition whenever the free energy is minimized by a single phase α,
separated by coexistence regions where the free energy is minimized by a combi-nation of phases. In this latter case the convex hull is simultaneously tangent to the0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8x-0.0500.050.10.15 ΔH [eV/at]SQS
cP2a
Cr Nb 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8x-0.0500.050.15
0.1ΔH [eV/at]
Nb Vb
Fig. 8.1 Enthalpies of formation in the ( a) Cr-Nb and ( b) Nb-V binary alloy systems. Plotting
symbols use thick circles for known low-temperature stable phases, thin circles for known high-
temperature phases, squares for hypothetical structures, diamonds for representative structures of
the BCC solid solution, and plus signs for cluster expansion ﬁts272 M. WidomGibbs functions of the coexisting phases, with the condition of tangency implying
equality of chemical potentials of each chemical species in all coexistingphases [ 5]. A lever rule relates the mole fractions of the coexisting phases and
their individual compositions { x
α} to the global average composition x.
Also visible in Fig. 8.1aare a variety of hypothetical crystal structures formed by
decorating sites of a BCC lattice with Cr and Nb atoms in various speciﬁc repeatingpatterns. We shall refer to these structures as representative structures of the BCCsolid solution. Keep in mind that the true solid solution is inﬁnite in size andcontains within it every possible ﬁnite representative structure. One speciﬁc suchstructure, known as a special quasirandom structure [ 46] (SQS, see Chap. 10), is
chosen because its correlation functions closely match an idealized perfectly
random distribution of Cr and Nb among the BCC lattice sites. The SQS can be
considered as a realization of the disordered structure represented by the coherentpotential approximation (CPA, see Chap. 9). Another structure, which is the most
ordered possible arrangement of two species on a BCC lattice, is cP2(Strukturbericht B2, prototype CsCl) which places one species at cube verticesand the other species at cube centers. All of these decorated BCC lattices havepositive enthalpy of formation indicating their formation is unfavorable at lowtemperature, although it is possible that some source of entropy could stabilize them
at high temperature.
For convenience, we give here some representative energies of SQS and cP2
structures in three quaternary alloy families that we will focus on in this chapter, inaddition to their binary and ternary subsystems.
Our ground-state prediction remains tentative because it includes only ﬁnitely
many trial structures. There is no guarantee that the experiment has found allthe
relevant structures, as it can be quite difﬁcult to ensure the experimental samplesremain in thermodynamic equilibrium, especially at low temperatures where
atomic diffusion vanishes. A variety of alternative methods exist that aid in the
exploration of potential ground states. Probably the most powerful, in the sense thatthe odds of success are high, is invoking chemical and geometrical anal-ogy [ 29]. Another method for generating trial structures is known as genetic or
evolutionary algorithms [ 12,34]. This method generates random trials and then
explores combinations of successful attempts to create new trials. While it hasenjoyed some successes, its efﬁciency in general remains to be proven. Othermethods include basin hopping [ 40] and minima hopping [ 13], which jump between
nearby potential energy minima. A ﬁnal method, the cluster expansion, proves quite
effective for high-entropy alloys, as we discuss below in Sect. 8.2.3 .
Among the columns of the periodic table starting with Ti, V, and Cr, the reported
structures include the hP2, cI2, cF24, and hP12 structures previously discussed.However, not every structure occurs in every combination of elements. An exampleof discovery by chemical analogy is illustrated in Fig. 8.1b, where we examine the
same structures (cF24, hP12, and BCC-based structures) for Nb-V as we didpreviously for Cr-Nb. Here, we use square plotting symbols to indicate that cF24
and hP12 are hypothetical structures, proposed on the basis of chemical analogy.
Although they have not been reported to occur experimentally, there is a clear8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 273energetic preference for NbV 2.hP12, well outside the expected errors of DFT
formation enthalpies, which are typically a few meV/atom. In Sects. 8.3.1
and8.3.2 , we suggest an explanation for this discrepancy.
Noting that hP12 and cF24 are Laves (Frank-Kasper, F-K) phases characterized
by tetrahedral close packing into speciﬁc clusters related to icosahedra, we invokegeometric analogy to investigate two other F-K structures, of Pearson types cP8(A15) and hR13 ( μ). We place the smaller Cr atoms at low-coordination sites, while
the larger Nb atoms occupy higher-coordination sites. We ﬁnd that the μphase
slightly outperforms the decorated BCC lattices, but in fact neither of thesealternative F-K structures produce a new ground state for Cr-Nb, in agreementwith experiment.
8.2.3 Cluster Expansion
Because the high-entropy alloys distribute multiple chemical species among sites of
a common crystal lattice, we can use the underlying lattice structure to our
advantage. The idea [ 6,9,45] is to represent the chemical species at each lattice
siteiwith a variable σi(here for simplicity we take σi¼/C61 for the case of two
species) and then expand the energy in a series of pair, three-body, and higherinteractions,
Eðσ
1,...,σnÞ¼X
i,jJijσiσjþX
i,j,kJijkσiσjσkþ/C1/C1/C1 : ð8:6Þ
The cluster interaction coefﬁcients Jcan be ﬁt to a database of DFT energies.
Although the variables are assigned to lattice sites, it is important to note that thecoefﬁcients can be ﬁt to relaxed energies, so that displacements off the ideal sites
caused by size and chemical variation can be included. Given a cluster expansion, itbecomes quick and easy to estimate the energies of thousands of trial structures, and
then the best predictions can be checked with higher precision with a full DFT
calculation. A convenient implementation of this method named the Alloy-Theoretic Automated Toolkit [ 41,42](ATAT ) has been placed in the public
domain. This is the method that was used to generate the trial BCC decorationsof Cr-Nb and Nb-V shown in Fig. 8.1.
The cluster expansion can be extended to multicomponent systems. Figure 8.2
illustrates the case of the Cr-Nb-V ternary. Conveniently, the databases of BCCenergies for the three binaries (Cr-Nb, Nb-V, and Cr-V) can be reused as the
starting point for the full ternary. In this ﬁgure, only the predicted lowest-energy
structure is shown at each composition tested. The series of stable Cr-V binariesbased on various patterns of chemical order on the BCC lattice (diamonds) dem-onstrate that formation enthalpies in the Cr-V binary are negative [ 10,11]. The
stable (Cr,V)
2Nb sequence has structure cF24, except for V 2Nb which is hP12.
Based on these data, we predict that at low temperature any ternary combination of274 M. WidomCr-Nb-V will decompose into a mixture of cF24 or hP12 together with pure
elemental or binary BCC-based structures. In the following, we use the clusterexpansion to predict the behavior at high temperature.
8.3 Extension to Finite Temperature
In order to predict the phase behavior at high temperature, we combine thequantum-based energetics with principles of statistical mechanics and thermody-namics. Our discussion will be easiest if we neglect thermal expansion. At constantvolume, the relevant free energy is the Helmholtz free energy F(V,T), which differs
from the Gibbs free energy by the Legendre transform
GðT,PÞ¼min
VFðV,TÞþPV ½/C138 , ð8:7Þ
similar to the relationship (Eq. 8.4) of energy and enthalpy. The Helmholtz free
energy is given by the logarithm of the canonical partition function
F¼/C0kBTlnQ, ð8:8Þ
where the partition functionCrNb
V(Cr,V)2Nb.cF24
NbV2.hP12
(Cr,V) ordered
0 < ΔE <100
100 < ΔE
Fig. 8.2 Convex hull of the enthalpy of formation in the Cr-Nb-V alloy system. Predicted stable
phases (convex hull vertices) are shown in black . Convex hull vertices are connected by tie-lines
and by triangular tie-planes corresponding, respectively, to two- and three-phase coexistence
regions. Structures above the convex hull by ΔE<100 meV/atom are shown as blue diamonds ,
while higher-energy structures are shown as red crosses8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 275Q¼1
N!2πmkB
h2/C18/C193N=2
Z ð8:9Þ
factorizes into a contribution from the momenta times a conﬁguration integral
Z¼ð
VYN
i¼1drie/C0Eðr1,...,rNÞ=kBT: ð8:10Þ
The integrand in Eq. ( 8.10) is known as the Boltzmann factor and is proportional to
the probability of a given set of positions ðr1,...,rNÞ. In the following, we shall
drop the momentum factors, as they are universal to all ordinary matter and hencethermodynamically irrelevant.
Evaluation of the conﬁguration integral Zis our main task. The position-
dependent energies Eðr
1,...,rNÞwill be obtained from DFT. However, evaluation
of the integral requires many evaluations of E, each of which is very time
consuming. We will take advantage of the exponential dependence of the
Boltzmann factor to make further approximations.
In crystalline solids, atoms typically vibrate within small distances of their
equilibrium positions. Indeed, the character of the energy landscape is such that itpossesses a collection of local minima with approximately quadratic variation in thevicinity of each minimum. Each local minimum corresponds to a discrete arrange-ment of atoms that we shall refer to as a “conﬁguration,” while the small continuousdisplacements consist of mixtures of vibrational phonon modes. Temporarilyrestricting our attention to a single conﬁguration Γ, we may evaluate the conﬁgu-
ration integral Z(Γ) by integrating over a neighborhood of Γ. In accordance with
Eq. (8.8), we deﬁne the free energy of the conﬁguration Γas the logarithm
FðΓÞ¼/C0 kTlnZðΓÞ, which we separate into the energy E(Γ) of the discrete
conﬁguration Γplus the vibrational free energy FðΓÞ¼EðΓÞþF
vðΓÞ. Alterna-
tively, we may factorize the conﬁguration integral into separate contributions fromthe energy of the conﬁguration E(Γ) and the vibrational free energy F
v(Γ),
ZðΓÞ¼e/C0EðΓÞ=kBTe/C0FvðΓÞ=kBT: ð8:11Þ
Since the Boltzmann factor nearly vanishes far from the discrete conﬁgurations,
the entire conﬁgurational integral can be approximated as a sum of integrals around
each conﬁguration. If we were to ﬁnd that Fvdepended only weakly on Γ, then in
view of the factorization expressed in Eq. ( 8.11), we could pull a common factor out
of the sum,
Z/C25X
ΓZðΓÞ/C25X
Γe/C0EðΓÞ=kBT !
e/C0Fv=kBT/C17e/C0Fc=kBTe/C0Fv=kBTð8:12Þ276 M. Widomwhere we deﬁne Fc¼kBTlnZcwith Zc¼X
Γe/C0EðΓÞ=kBTas the partition function of
the discrete conﬁgurational degrees of freedom. Finally, we note the separation of
the free energy into a discrete conﬁgurational part and a contribution from the
continuous vibrations, F¼/C0kBTlnZ¼FcþFv.
The preceding discussion assumed the integration in Eq. ( 8.10) was carried out
at ﬁxed volume V, and hence the resulting free energy was a Helmholtz free
energy F(N,V,T). Additionally, integrating over the volume, including a factor
expð/C0PV=kBTÞin the integrand, takes us to a constant pressure ensemble, where
the corresponding free energy is a Gibbs free energy G(N,P,T). Equivalently, we
could perform the Legendre transform in Eq. ( 8.7). The decomposition into discrete
conﬁgurational and continuous vibrational contributions follows as above, resulting
in the decomposition G¼GcþGv.
8.3.1 Example: Conﬁgurational Free Energy
As an example of conﬁgurational free energy, consider the case of Nb-V. As seen in
Fig.8.1b, the representative structures of the BCC solid solution are all positive in
energy, implying immiscibility, in seeming contradiction to the experimentallyassessed phase diagram [ 37] which shows a continuous solid solution. However,
the assessed phase diagram only goes down to T¼2173 K. Indeed, experiments
generally cannot achieve true equilibrium at temperatures far below their melting
temperature. Meanwhile, the ideal solid solution possesses klnð2Þof entropy
suggesting entropic stabilization relative to phase separation at temperature T¼
0:063 eV =k
Blnð2Þ¼1055 K, where we take the SQS energy from Table 8.1as a
characteristic value. However, the actual energy and entropy of the solid solutioncannot be estimated as simply as suggested in this paragraph. Short-range
Table 8.1 Representative formation enthalpies in the Cr-Mo-Nb-V quaternary and its subsys-
tems. Units are meV/atom. Equiatomic SQSs include a 16-atom structure for binaries [ 20], a
36-atom structure for ternaries [ 19], and a 16-atom structure for quaternary that has vanishing ﬁrst
and second neighbor correlations. Binary cP2 structure is CsCl-type (cP2). cF24 structures place
smaller atoms on 16d sites and larger atoms on 8a (∗is based on hP12,{has composition
Cr2MoNbV 2, and ternaries are equiatomic). Melting temperatures (units are K) are experimental
minimum solidus temperatures for binaries, and averages are given for ternaries and quaternary
Cr-Mo-Nb-V alloy system
Binary SQS cP2 cF24 Tm Ternary SQS cF24 Tm Quaternary SQS cF24 Tm
Cr-Mo 95 61 95 2093 Cr-Mo-Nb 65 46 2243 Cr-Mo-Nb-V 27 /C022{2180
Cr-Nb 139 62 /C034 1893 Cr-Mo-V /C035 62 2105
Cr-V /C050 /C074 50 2040 Cr-Nb-V 81 /C096 2022
Mo-Nb /C071 /C0106 91 2742 Mo-Nb-V /C028 /C040 2353
Mo-V /C097 /C0118 17 2183
Nb-V 63 55 /C060∗21338 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 277correlations in chemical occupation, related to the actual chemical interactions
among constituents, will tend to reduce both the energy and entropy.
Monte Carlo simulation can properly deal with these correlations, by sampling
all possible conﬁgurations weighted by their Boltzmann factors which favor ener-
getically favorable structures. Figure 8.3illustrates results obtained using the emc2
Monte Carlo program of the ATAT [41] in conjunction with energies deﬁned by the
cluster expansion obtained using the maps program [ 42]. We take as our initial
condition a disordered arrangement of Nb and V on a 6 /C26/C26 BCC
supercell, with global stoichiometry NbV 2. The ideal entropy of S =kB¼ð1=3Þ
lnð3Þþð 2=3Þlnð3=2Þ¼ln1:89 is slightly less than ln2 owing to the stoichiometry
being non-equiatomic. Together with the i nitial energy of 0.058 eV/atom, this
entropy determines the free energy at high temperatures. At ﬁxed temperature T,
we attempt to swap positions between pair s of atoms of differing species, always
accepting the swap if it lowers the total energy and accepting with probability
expð/C0ΔE=kBTÞif it raises the energy. The mean energy at temperature Tprovides
the conﬁgurational contribution to the enthalpy, Hc, while thermodynamic inte-
gration provides the relative conﬁgurational free energy Gcbetween nearby
temperatures. Note that the slope of GcI2(T) goes asymptotically to ln1 :89 at
high temperature. Note also that we may perform Monte Carlo at any desiredtemperature, including above the actua l melting temperature, because we are
simulating a lattice gas model with discrete conﬁgurations.
An alternative Monte Carlo method [ 41] attempts to swap the chemical identity
of individual atoms, rather than interchanging positions of atom pairs. Since thetotal number of atoms is preserved, but not the global stoichiometry, this simulationoccurs in the semi-grand ensemble. The ATAT program phb uses this method to
identify the boundaries of coexisting phases. When applied to the case of Nb-V, thisT[K]-0.06-0.0300.030.06Energy  [eV/atom]TcTsepT*
ΔHcI2(T)
ΔGcI2(T)
ΔHhP12(T)
ΔGhP12(T)Tma
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200
T[K]-0.25-0.2-0.15-0.1-0.050Energy  [eV/atom]ΔHcI2(T)
ΔGcI2(T)
ΔHsep
ΔGsep(T)TmTsepb
Fig. 8.3 (a) Thermodynamics of NbV 2. Enthalpy and conﬁgurational free energy of BCC (cI2)
solid solutions are obtained from Monte Carlo simulations. Free energy ΔGhP12of NbV 2includes
vibrational free energy from Eq. ( 8.14).Tm’s are experimental melting temperatures. Tcis
predicted critical temperature of Nb-V, while Tsepis phase separation temperature of the BCC
phase and T∗is predicted temperature for stability of NbV 2.hP12. ( b) Thermodynamics of
CrMoNbV. Notation as in ( a)278 M. Widommethod conﬁrms the existence of a low-temperature miscibility gap, which closes
in a critical point at temperature Tc¼1400 K, far below the melting point. The
phase boundary passes through stoichiometry NbV 2at an even lower temperature,
Tsep¼1250 K. It is thus no surprise that experiments fail to identify phase separa-
tion in Nb-V, as this is predicted to occur far below the melting temperature whichranges from 2133 K close to NbV
2up to 2742 K depending on composition, and
hence equilibration will prove difﬁcult. Similar conclusions were reached in anindependent study [ 33].
According to the DFT-calculated enthalpies, an additional competitor to the
solid solution, other than phase separation, is formation of the predicted NbV
2.hP12
complex intermetallic, whose enthalpy of formation of /C00. 060 eV/atom lies on the
convex hull implying stability in the limit of T!0 K. Since the tetrahedral close
packing exhibits sites of differing coordination numbers that favor speciﬁc chem-ical species, we assume this phase possesses no appreciable conﬁgurationalentropy, and hence its conﬁgurational Gibbs free energy is simply given by itsformation enthalpy, as indicated in Fig. 8.3. Notice that the solid solution free
energy crosses the hP12 enthalpy at a temperature that happens to be close to themelting temperature. Accordingly, if vibrational free energy were to be neglected,hP12 would be expected to be the stable phase from T
mon down at composition
NbV 2. The fact that NbV 2has not been observed experimentally suggests that we
must consider vibrational free energy, as we do in Sect. 8.3.2 .
The reader may wonder why the solid solution beats NbV 2.hP12, but not Cr 2Nb.
cF24, since the formation enthalpy of NbV 2.hP12 is even greater in magnitude than
for Cr 2Nb.cF24. However, as can be seen in Fig. 8.1, the range of representative
solid solution structure energies in Cr-Nb nearly double those in Nb-V. The MonteCarlo simulated critical temperature of T
c¼2950 K lies far above the melting point
Tm¼1893 K. Although Cr exhibits 25 % solubility in Nb, at higher Cr contrations,
the solid solution is unstable to the formation of Cr 2Nb.cF24. Thus, we understand
the high-temperature Cr-Nb-V ternary phase diagram [ 40], which consists of BCC
solid solutions along the Cr-V and Nb-V binary edges, while Cr 2Nb.cF24 is stable
as a binary and extends stably far into the interior of the ternary composition space.
8.3.2 Example: Vibrational Free Energy
The conﬁgurational integral Zin Eq. ( 8.10) restricted to the region of conﬁguration
space nbd(Γ) surrounding the speciﬁc conﬁguration Γbecomes
ZðcÞ¼ð
nbdðΓÞYN
i¼1drie/C0Eðr1,...,rNÞ=kBT, ð8:13Þ8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 279and the free energy is FðΓÞ¼/C0 kBTlnZðΓÞ. Provided that Evaries quadratically in
the vicinity of the local minimum Γ, the integrand becomes a Gaussian that can be
integrated analytically. The resulting vibrational free energy is
Fv¼kBTð
gðωÞln½2sinh ðhω=2kBTÞ/C138dω ð8:14Þ
where g(ω) is the vibrational (phonon) density of states. In the limit of T!0, we
ﬁndFvconsists entirely of the zero point energy of the harmonic phonon modes,
while at elevated temperatures Fvgrows negative. The form of this equation reveals
that an excess of low-frequency modes makes Fvgrow negative rapidly, owing to a
high vibrational entropy. We will restrict our discussion in this chapter to theharmonic approximation, whose validity diminishes at elevated temperature. Thequasi harmonic approximation is a mild generalization that takes into account the
volume dependence of vibrational frequencies (Gru ¨neisen parameters) and thus
incorporates anharmonic effects leading to thermal expansion.
To compute the phonon spectrum, we use the force constant method [ 27]. The
force constants give the forces on one atom due to a displacement of another via the
second derivative of total energy ∂
2U=∂Ri∂Rj, which can be evaluated from
density functional perturbation theory within VASP. We convert this to a dynam-
ical matrix D(k) by weighting the rows and columns by inverse atomic masses and
then Fourier transforming at wavevector k. Eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix are
phonon frequencies ω(k), which can be converted into a density of states g(ω)b y
integrating over the Brillouin zone,
gðωÞ¼ð
BZδðω/C0ωðkÞÞd3k: ð8:15Þ
In practice, we choose to sample the frequencies on a dense grid in k-space and then
smear the distribution to approximate g. This procedure must be performed in a cell
of sufﬁcient size that all important interatomic force constants are represented.
As a concrete example, consider the problem of stability of V 2Zr.cF24. The
assessed phase diagram shows this phase as stable from low temperature up to
1592 K. However, DFT calculations (Table 8.2) suggest a formation enthalpy of
Table 8.2 Representative formation enthalpies in the Nb-Ti-V-Zr quaternary and its subsystems.
Other details as in Table 8.1
Nb-Ti-V-Zr alloy system
Binary SQS cP2 cF24 Tm Ternary SQS cF24 Tm Quaternary SQS cF24 Tm
Nb-Ti 32 70 215 1943 Nb-Ti-V 63 84 1977 Nb-Ti-V-Zr 113 96 1884
Nb-V 63 55 /C060∗2133 Nb-Ti-Zr 66 213 1929
Nb-Zr 64 119 49 2018 Nb-V-Zr 133 38∗1892
Ti-V 61 124 91 1855 Ti-V-Zr 143 100 1736
Ti-Zr 53 113 201 1827
V-Zr 164 233 43 1526280 M. Widom+43 meV/atom, indicating the state is unstable at low temperature. Probably this
phase is actually stable only at high temperatures where it is formed and simplyremains metastable at low temperature. We need to ﬁnd a source of entropy that canlower the free energy of the compound relative to that of the competing elements.Substitutional entropy is unlikely, as the two atomic species play distinct roles inthis tetrahedrally close-packed structure. The small V atoms center CN ¼12 ico-
sahedra, while the larger Zr atoms center CN ¼16 polyhedra.
Figure 8.4compares the vibrational densities of states of the V
2Zr.cF24
compound with those of the pure elemental states V.cI2 and Zr.hP2. Owing toits large mass, Zr exhibits lower-frequency modes and hence more negative
vibrational free energy, than the lower mass V, with V
2Zr falling in between.
Although individual vibrational free energies are large, their differences are
small and comparable to the discrete c onﬁgurational free energy. Combining
the favorable vibrational free energy w ith the unfavorable formation enthalpy,01 0 2 0 3 0
hω[meV]00.10.20.30.4g(ω)  [modes/meV/atom]V2Zr.cF24
V.cI2
Zr.hP2
ΔF
0 500 1000
T[K]-0.4-0.20Fv-6 -4 -2 0 2
E[eV]01234567D(E)  [states/eV/atom]
0 500 1000
T[K]-0.010Feab
c d
Fig. 8.4 (a) Vibrational density of states in the V-Zr alloy system; ( b) electronic density of states
(Eis relative to the Fermi level EF); (c) and ( d) corresponding free energies8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 281ΔHþΔFv, we ﬁnd that the V 2Zr compound is unstable to separation into pure
elements below T∗¼1290 K, but is stable above this temperature. One factor
contributing to the vibrational entropy of V 2Zr.cF24 is the low-frequency modes
below 5 meV/atom. These resi de predominantly on V atoms (counterintuitively,
given the low V mass) and appear related to an unusually long V-Zr bond length
in this structure.
Note that Zr undergoes an allotropic transition from its low-temperature α
(hP2) form to high-temperature β(cI2) at T¼1136 K, which is lower than the
T¼1290 K at which we just predicted V 2Zr.cF24 becomes stable. Hence, we
should have compared with the free energy of Zr.cI2 rather than hP2. Unfor-tunately, Zr.cI2 is mechanically unstable, leading to phonon modes with
imaginary frequencies ω.E q u a t i o n( 8.14) cannot be used to calculate the
vibrational free energy, requiring more sophisticated approaches [ 2,7]. Alterna-
tively, we can look up the NIST-JANAF [ 31] table to ﬁnd that the entropy
jump at the α/βtransition amounts to 3. 7 /C210
/C05eV/atom/K. Including this
additional stability of βraises the predicted stability temperature of V 2Zr.cF24
toT¼1380 K.
As a second example, recall the mysterious absence of NbV 2.hP12 from the
experimental phase diagram despite its favorable enthalpy (Figs. 8.1b and8.3a).
Vibrational free energy provides the e xplanation. As a representative of the
BCC solid solution, we choose a speciﬁc structure of Pearson type tI6 andpresume that its vibrational free energy is representative of the entire ensemble.Indeed, we ﬁnd that the G
vof tI6 matches the composition-weighted Gvof pure
Nb.cI2 and V.cI2 to within 2 meV/atom over the entire temperature range ofinterest (too low to be worth including in Fig. 8.3), despite the individual values
reaching approximately /C01.2 eV/atom at T
m, justifying our neglect of the
structure dependence within the solid s olution. In striking contrast, the fre-
quency spectrum of hP12 is shifted to high frequencies relative to BCC,
owing to the tetrahedral close packing of the Laves phase contrasting with theloose packing of BCC. Consequently, the vibrational free energy of hP12greatly exceeds the pure elemental reference points, ΔF
vispositive , leading
to the upward slope of ΔGin Fig. 8.3,c a u s i n gt h ef r e ee n e r g yo fh P 1 2t oc r o s s
with the solid solution at T∗¼1100 K. We predict that the BCC solid solution is
thermodynamically stable from melting at Tm¼2133 K down to the critical
point for phase separation at Tc¼1400 K. The hP12 Laves phase gains stability
at a slightly lower temperature T∗¼1100 K and remains stable down to T¼0K .
The low temperature at which hP12 gains stability inhibits its formationexperimentally.
Notice that the enthalpically favorable NbV
2.hP12 was destabilized byFv, while
the enthalpically unfavorable V 2Zr.cF24 was stabilized . Strong bonding, which
lowers ΔH, increases vibrational frequencies ω, in turn raising Fv.282 M. Widom8.3.3 Electronic Free Energy
Excitations of the electron gas contribute entropy to an associated electronic free
energy Fe(T). Excitations are described by the Fermi-Dirac occupation function
fTðEÞ¼1
1þexp½ðE/C0μÞ=kBT/C138ð8:16Þ
representing the occupation probability fof states of energy Eat temperature
Tgiven electron chemical potential μ. This function interpolates from full occupa-
tion ( f¼1) for states below μto complete vacancy ( f¼0) for states above, with
intermediate values restricted to energies within a few kBTof the chemical poten-
tial, which thus approaches the Fermi energy EFat low T.
In combination with the electronic density of states, D(E), obtained from ﬁrst
principles calculations, we can evaluate the electronic band energy and entropy,
UðTÞ¼Ð
DðEÞðE/C0EFÞðfTðEÞ/C0f0ðEÞÞdE
SðTÞ¼/C0 kÐ
DðEÞ½fTðEÞlnfTðEÞþð 1/C0fTðEÞÞlnð1/C0fTðEÞÞ/C138dE,ð8:17Þ
and set Fe(T)¼U(T)/C0TS(T). Since low-temperature excitations are restricted to
the vicinity of EF, the results are approximately proportional to the density of states
at the Fermi level [ 22],
UðTÞ/C25π2
6DðEFÞk2T2,SðTÞ/C25π2
3DðEFÞk2T,FeðTÞ/C25/C0π2
6DðEFÞk2T2:ð8:18Þ
The resulting quadratic variations are evident in Fig. 8.4, with coefﬁcients propor-
tional to D(EF). The electronic free energy difference yields a few meV/atom
of additional stability to V 2Zr.cF24, bringing its temperature of instability down
toT∗¼1180 K. Notice that the individual electronic free energies are much smaller
than the vibrational free energies, but the tendency toward cancelation is lesspronounced, so the electronic contribution remains important.
8.4 Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Molecular dynamics is well suited to reproduce the small-amplitude oscillations ofatoms in the vicinity of crystal lattice sites. At low temperatures, the probability foran atom crossing the barrier from one lattice site to another is prohibitively low andwill rarely occur on the time scale of a molecular dynamics run. In contrast,Monte Carlo swaps of atomic species on different sites occur with a probabilityP¼expð/C0ΔE=k
BTÞrelated to the net energy difference ΔE¼Eswap/C0Einiof
swapped and initial conﬁgurations, independently of the energy barrier separating8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 283the states. Since some of the pairwise interactions are quite low (see, e.g., Mo-W,
Nb-Ta, and Nb-W in Table 8.3), we expect that some Monte Carlo species swaps
will be accepted even at low temperatures.
We implement this computationally by alternating molecular dynamics with
Monte Carlo swaps [ 44], each performed from ﬁrst principles using VASP. In the
runs described below, we perform 10 MD steps of 1 f. per time step, between each
attempted species swap. As illustrated in Fig. 8.5for Mo-Nb-Ta-W, swaps are
frequently accepted with reasonably high probability at moderate and high temper-atures, indicating that the Monte Carlo achieves our goal of sampling the fullconﬁgurational ensemble in the solid state. The same species swaps will almostnever be observed via molecular dynamics. The utility of various hybrid MC/MDmethods with empirical interaction potentials has been reviewed recently [ 31].Table 8.3 Representative formation enthalpies in the Mo-Nb-Ta-W quaternary and its subsys-
tems. Other details as in Table 8.1
Mo-Nb-Ta-W alloy system
Binary SQS cP2 Tm Ternary SQS Tm Quaternary SQS Tm
Mo-Nb /C071 /C0106 2742 Mo-Nb-Ta /C070 2793 Mo-Nb-Ta-W /C073 2885
Mo-Ta /C0110 /C0186 2896 Mo-Nb-W /C058 2793
Mo-W /C00.4 /C010 2896 Mo-Ta-W /C097 3028
Nb-Ta /C04 1 2742 Nb-Ta-W /C033 2926
Nb-W /C034 /C025 2742
Ta-W /C067 /C094 3293
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
T00.20.40.60.8Swap RateTa-Nb
Nb-W
W-Mo
Ta-W
Nb-Mo
Ta-Mo
Fig. 8.5 Monte Carlo acceptance rates (ratio of accepted to attempted species swaps) for each
species pair vs. temperature. Note correlation of high acceptance rate with low enthalpy values inTable 8.3284 M. WidomSwaps with the greatest size contrast (e.g., Ta-Mo and Nb-Mo) occur most
infrequently and are nearly absent at low temperatures, while the intermediate-size swaps (Nb-W) occur occasionally and the most similar size swaps (e.g., Ta-Nb
and W-Mo) occur with high probability even at the lowest temperatures. We
conclude that at low temperature the system behaves nearly as a pseudobinary,consisting of the chromium group (group 5, here Ta and Nb) and the vanadiumgroup (group 6, here W and Mo) as two effective species.
8.4.1 Pair Correlation Functions
Pair correlation functions describe the relative positional preferences of differentatomic species. Their Fourier transforms yield the diffraction pattern, which is animportant experimental probe of structure. Although crystalline solids are aniso-tropic, here we shall consider only the radial distribution function which measures
the magnitudes of interatomic separations. The radial distribution function governs
the angle-averaged (i.e., powder) diffraction pattern. For chemical species αandβ,
we deﬁne
g
αβðrÞ¼1
NαNβXNα
i¼1XNβ
j¼1⟨δðjrijj/C0rÞ⟩: ð8:19Þ
In practice, a small amount of smearing is required to regularize the δ-functions.
Given a pair distribution function, the associated structure factor is
~hαβðQÞ¼ð
dre/C0ik/C1rðgαβðrÞ/C01Þ, ð8:20Þ
and the total structure factor becomes
SðQÞ¼1þX
αβcαfαcβfβ~hðQÞ, ð8:21Þ
where cαis the concentration of species α. Here, fαis the form factor, which is
approximately equal to the atomic number fα¼Zαfor x-rays or to the scattering
length fα¼bαfor neutrons.
8.4.2 Route to the Entropy
Monitoring conﬁguration statistics can yield estimates for the entropy. If the actual
atomic positions can be mapped uniquely to nearby ideal lattice sites, then statisticson the occupation of each lattice site can be accumulated, along with statistics ofvarious locally deﬁned multisite clusters. Cluster variation methods [ 1,8,9,21]8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 285have been developed as analytical approximations for the calculation of free energy
given a model Hamiltonian. The general idea is to represent both the energy and theentropy, separately, as functions of the clusters. As the cluster size grows, the
approximate free energy converges toward the exact value.
The simplest of these methods takes individual atomic sites as one-point
clusters. Given Nsites containing N
α¼xαNatoms of species α, where αruns
from 1 to mandxαis the concentration of species α, counting the distinct occupa-
tions of sites (one-point clusters) yields the total number of conﬁgurations
gðNαÞ¼Y
αNα!=N!. Neglecting correlations among sites, the total entropy takes
its maximal value
SðNαÞ=kB¼lng¼lnN/C0X
αlnNα!: ð8:22Þ
Making the Stirling approximation, ln N!/C25NlnN, yields the entropy per site in the
thermodynamic limit,
σðxαÞ¼/C0k
NSðNαÞ/C25/C0 kX
αxαlnxα: ð8:23Þ
For an equiatomic composition of Nspecies, so that xα¼1/N, this immediately
yields the usual S=kB¼lnðNÞentropy. Alternatively, we may take Eq. ( 8.23) as the
local entropy density at any speciﬁc site. In this case, if individual sites exhibit apreference for speciﬁc elements (e.g., with the onset of chemical order), the valuesofx
αdiffer from 1/ N, and the entropy is reduced.
Moving to two-point clusters (nearest-neighbor bonds) improves accuracy of the
entropy as it corrects for the onset of short-range order. Guggenheim [ 10] calcu-
lated the number of conﬁgurations gðNα,NαβÞ, where Nαβdenotes the average
number of βneighbors of atoms of chemical species αon a regular lattice of
coordination number z. In the absence of correlations, we expect Nαβ¼N∗
αβ/C17Nα
Nβ=Nand the actual number of conﬁgurations to equal g({Nα}). In the presence of
correlations, the reduced number of conﬁgurations is
gðNα,NαβÞ¼gðNαÞY
αðzNα=2/C0X
γ6¼αN∗
αγÞ!
ðzNα=2/C0X
γ6¼αNαγÞ!Y
α6¼βN∗
αβ!2Nαβ
Nαβ!2N∗
αβ: ð8:24Þ
The multiplicative factors in Eq. ( 8.24) reduce the entropy due to deviations of the
bond frequencies Nαβfrom their uncorrelated values N∗
αβ. As in the case of the
single-site cluster, this can be turned into a local entropy density
σðNα,NαβÞ¼klngðNα,NαβÞ: ð8:25Þ286 M. WidomOwing to the two-point correlations, the global averages are nontrivial, in contrast
to the single-point case. They can be either evaluated by Monte Carlo simulation orestimated using the quasichemical approximation [ 14]. This method can be
extended to more complex clusters, for example, the tetrahedron approximations
for BCC [ 1] and FCC [ 21] lattices.
8.5 Structure and Thermodynamic Modeling
of High-Entropy Alloys
So far this chapter developed basic techniques that can in principle be applied to
high-entropy alloys, though the speciﬁc examples mainly concentrated on binary
and ternary alloy systems. We now turn our attention to quaternary high-entropy
alloys, with a focus on BCC refractory metals, as example applications of the abovemethods.
The properties of the periodic table imply that metals whose positions are
adjacent left/right or above/below tend to have similar size, valence, and electro-negativity and hence substitute with relative ease for one another. Valency generallyis constant within a column and differs by 1 between adjacent columns. Electroneg-ativity correlates strongly with atomic volume, being low for large atoms and high
for small atoms. The majority of elements in the known high-entropy alloys lie in
proximity to each other on the periodic table, presumably exploiting the similarity inphysical properties to increase their conﬁgurational entropy.
This observation motivates our choice to draw examples from 2 /C22 “squares” of
the periodic table, that is, groups of four elements that lie on vertices of a unitsquare consisting of two adjacent elements of a row together with the two elementsthat lie directly below. In such a square, the largest element will lie at the bottomleft corner, while the smallest is at the upper right corner. We shall call this the
positive diagonal, while the top left to bottom right, which has smaller size contrast,
will be called the negative diagonal.
8.5.1 Cr-Mo-Nb-V
Having previously discussed the binaries Cr-Nb and Nb-V in addition to the ternary
Cr-Nb-V, we add a fourth element, Mo, to complete a 2 /C22 square consisting of the
ﬁrst two elements in the (V) column (namely, V and Nb) and the ﬁrst two elementsof the adjacent (Cr) column (namely, Cr and Mo). We extended our ATAT models
of the binary and ternary subsystems to the full quaternary, running maps until the
internal database extends to at least 8 atoms/unit cell and the true and predictedground states agree. Despite the SQS being at positive enthalpy, as listed inTable 8.1,maps was able to identify an equiatomic structure of negative enthalpy,8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 287/C06 meV/atom. This lowest-energy structure, which has Pearson type oI8, arranges
the four chemical species on the BCC lattice in such a manner that each unit cell has24 near-neighbor pairs between columns (i.e., V-Cr, V-Mo, Nb-Cr, or Nb-Mo) and
only 8 near-neighbor pairs within columns (i.e., V-V, V-Nb, Nb-Nb, Cr-Cr, Cr-Mo,
or Mo-Mo). It thus exploits the preference for atoms of differing sizes and electro-negativity to be nearest neighbors [ 44]. In general, the enthalpies of the cP2
structures lie below the SQS enthalpies (see Table 8.1), because cP2 and similar
ordered structures can exploit preferred local chemical environments.
Despite the existence of negative enthalpy BCC representative structures, our
DFT total energies predict that the ground state of equiatomic CrMoNbV consistsof phase separation into four coexisting phases, raising questions concerning the
possible existence of a high-entropy alloy of this composition. No experimental
report exists to date.
Relative free energies of the BCC solid solution and the competing Laves
phase are illustrated in Fig. 8.3b. The free energy of the solid solution was
evaluated from Monte Carlo using memc2 (the multicomponent version of
emc2 [41]), similarly to the case of NbV
2discussed previously in Sect. 8.3.1 .A
by-product of the simulation is the abili ty to predict the entropy, in the present
case by thermodynamic integration from a high-temperature reference state.
Assuming maximal entropy of ln ð4ÞatT¼3000 K, we obtain a nearly ideal S=kB
¼lnð3:82ÞatTm. The coexisting phases consist of three BCC-based structures,
Cr2V.tI6, Mo 4Nb3.tI14, and Mo 4V3.hR7, together with the Laves phase CrNbV.
cF24, yielding the balanced equation
12CrMoNbV !3Cr 2Vþ2Mo 4Nb3þ6CrNbV þMo 4V3: ð8:26Þ
Taking the composition-weighted average of their enthalpies of formation pre-
dicts a ground-state enthalpy of /C0101 meV/atom. We convert this into a ﬁnite-
temperature free energy by assuming ideal entropy of mixing at appropriate com-positions for the three BCC-based structures, together with assumed Cr-V disorderin the Laves phase. As the entropies of all four competing phases are less than ln ð2Þ,
the combination loses out to the high-entropy alloy at high temperature, with phase
separation expected only below T
sep¼1430 K. There is considerable uncertainty in
the precise separation temperature owing to several factors: we used the idealentropy of mixing rather than the cluster expansion to evaluate the conﬁgurationalentropies of the competing phases; we have neglected vibrational entropy through-out; some other combination of phases may exist whose enthalpy is less favorablebut that has higher entropy. Indeed, we have treated the competing phases as “linecompounds” of ﬁxed stoichiometry, which is appropriate only in the limit of low
temperature as discussed previously in Sect. 8.2.2 . At high temperature, the com-
peting phases most likely contain all four chemical species, exploiting the higherentropy at the cost of slightly increased enthalpy to lower their combined freeenergies. Thus, we must regard the calculated T
sepas a lower bound on the actual
temperature of phase separation.288 M. WidomMC/MD simulation results are shown in Fig. 8.6. Here, we carry out the MC/MD
simulation at T¼1200 K, a temperature sufﬁciently high that chemical short-range
order might be in equilibrium even in experiment. We then quench the system toT¼300 K and anneal under conventional molecular dynamics, where atomic dif-
fusion is frozen out. Thus, we freeze in short-range order typical of the highannealing temperature, in an attempt to mimic the actual experiment. The ﬁgure
illustrates the four partial pair correlations for each of the four constituent elements,
arranged on the page according to their positions on the periodic table. The BCCstructure is clearly evident, with the well-deﬁned 8:6 split of nearest- and next--nearest-neighbor peaks as well as well-deﬁned further neighbor peaks. Also evidentis the strong preference for intercolumn neighbors, with Cr and Mo forming thestrongest near-neighbor peaks of V and Nb and vice versa.
Swap rates reported in Table 8.4give insight into respective roles of different
elements, with the swap rates being largest for elements that are most similar in size
(the nearest off-diagonal) and becoming progressively smaller as the size contrast
grows more extreme, ﬁnally nearly vanishing for the pair Nb-Cr which constitutesthe positive diagonal of the square as deﬁned above. This table also gives the near-neighbor bond counts corresponding to the near-neighbor peaks in Fig. 8.6. We may02468gαβ(r) gαβ(r)V Cr
234 5 6
r[Å]02468Nb
234 5 6
r[Å]Mo
Fig. 8.6 Pair distribution functions of Cr-Mo-Nb-V at T¼300 K quenched from 1200 K. Each
panel shows the four partial pair correlation functions for the element named above. The partials
are color-coded, e.g., under V the black curve is V-V and the red curve is V-Cr. Bars at top indicate
the corresponding correlations in the pure BCC element, e.g., V has 8 neighbors at r¼2. 6Å,6a t
3.0, 12 at 4.3, 24 at 5.0, and 8 at 5.38 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 289use these bond counts in the formula Eq. ( 8.24) to evaluate the entropy at
T¼1200 K, which leads to S=kB¼lnð3:82Þ, identical to the value obtained at Tm
frommemc2 .
8.5.2 Nb-Ti-V-Zr
Our next square consists of the ﬁrst two rows of the (Ti) column, namely, Ti and Zr,
together with the ﬁrst two rows of the (V) column. This new compound provides aninteresting example because Ti and Zr are HCP at low temperature but BCC at hightemperature as a result of the lower enthalpy of HCP competing with the highervibrational entropy of BCC (HCP is close-packed, while BCC is loose-packed).Meanwhile, Nb and V are BCC at all temperatures. Can compounds formed fromthe (Ti) and (V) columns form HCP solid solutions, or must they form BCC?
Figure 8.7provides a hint.Table 8.4 Monte Carlo swap rates and bond statistics for Cr-Mo-Nb-V quaternary at T¼1200 K.
Bond counts Nα,βcount number of β-type neighbors of atom type α, where αlabels rows and β
labels columns. Elements are arranged in order of decreasing BCC lattice constant
Swap Bonds
α∖β Nb Mo V Cr Nb Mo V Cr
Nb 0.48 0.24 0.05 1.73 2.05 1.71 2.51Mo 0.49 0.23 2.00 1.90 2.14 1.96V 0.43 1.86 2.21 1.79 2.14
Cr 2.41 1.84 2.36 1.39
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
x00.050.10.150.20.25ΔH  [eV/atom]BCC
HEX
SQS
cP2
cP2
SQS
Fig. 8.7 Enthalpy of formation in the Nb-Zr alloy system. Squares indicate representative
structures of the BCC solid solution. SQS andcP2are marked with special symbols. Hexagonal
stars indicate HCP290 M. WidomApplication of the ATAT cluster expansion to predict low-energy states of both
BCC and HCP Nb-Zr alloys suggests complete phase separation into coexisting Nb.cI2 and Zr.hP2 in agreement with experiment at low temperature. However, in
Fig.8.7, we see a large number of individual BCC conﬁgurations with energies of
order 0.05 eV/atom. Clearly, energy and conﬁgurational entropy favor a BCC solidsolution over HCP at all but the most Zr-rich compositions. Applying emc2 within
the BCC solid solution, we identify a critical point for phase separation into Nb-richand Zr-rich BCC phases at T
c¼1250 K and at a composition of 30 % Zr. Experi-
mentally, the critical point lies at Tc¼1258 K and at a composition of 40 % Zr.
Extending the cluster expansion to the quaternary fails to identify additionallow-temperature structures. The NbTiVZr quaternary is expected to decompose at
low temperatures as
2NbTiVZr !NbV
2þNbþ2Tiþ2Zr: ð8:27Þ
Figure 8.8shows the quaternary pair correlation functions obtained from
MC/MD. Notice that in contrast to the case of CrMoNbV just discussed, here the
8:6 split of nearest- and next-nearest-neighbor peaks is hardly evident, despite the
longer-range correlations beyond 4 Åremaining intact. This reﬂects the inherent
mechanical instability of BCC-based structures containing Zr and Ti. A side effectis that the energies of the SQS structures in Table 8.2generally lie below the
0246gαβ(r) gαβ(r)Ti V
5 6
r  [Å]0246Zr
234 234 5 6
r  [Å]Nb
Fig. 8.8 Pair distribution functions of Nb-Ti-V-Zr at T¼1200 K quenched to T¼300 K. Layout
and conventions as in Fig. 8.68 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 291energies of the cP2 structure, because the high symmetry of cP2 prevents lattice
distortion. A similar severe distortion in the local BCC structure was seen exper-imentally in the HfNbZr ternary HEA [ 15]. Indeed, the BCC lattice is more visible
in the V and Nb partials than in those containing Ti and Zr. Notice further that thestrongest near-neighbor correlation is between Zr and V, which lie along thepositive diagonal of the square, while the partials of Ti and Nb are roughly similar,
as is normal for the negative diagonal. This is further reﬂected in the Monte Carlo
swap rates in Table 8.5, where Zr and V are almost unable to swap positions owing
to their strong size contrast, while Ti and Nb swap easily. Applying theGuggenheim formulas to compute the T¼1200 K entropy yields S=k
B¼
lnð3:89Þ, slightly greater than was observed in the case of CrMoNbV.
8.5.3 Mo-Nb-Ta-W
As a ﬁnal example, we choose a square from the bottom two rows of the (V) and
(Cr) columns, namely, Nb and Ta and Mo and W. As previously shown [ 44] and
reproduced in Table 8.3, the enthalpies of formation in this alloy system are
signiﬁcantly negative between columns and nearly zero within columns. Thus,
strong chemical order is anticipated, with the possibility of forming an orderedstructure such as cP2 at low temperature, with the pair of elements from eachcolumn occupying its own sublattice. However, the very high melting temperaturemakes this phase difﬁcult to observe experimentally. A mean ﬁeld analysis of thistransition [ 18] indicated a transition with a critical temperature of T
c¼1600 K,
although subsequent Monte Carlo simulations place it at 1280 K [ 17] (mean ﬁeld
theory typically overestimates transition temperatures). Thermodynamics of the
ternary subsystem Mo-Ta-W was investigated using combined ab initio and
CALPHAD methods [ 39].
The cluster interaction model produced by maps predicts the equiatomic
ground-state structure is a coexistence of two BCC-based phases, Mo 2NbTa 2W2.
hR7 and pure elemental Nb.cI2, yielding the balanced equation
2MoNbTaW !Mo 2NbTa 2W2þNb: ð8:28Þ
Taking the composition-weighted average of the ground-state enthalpy of forma-
tion yields enthalpy of /C0126 meV/atom. Monte Carlo simulation using memc2
yields the entropy at TmasS=kB¼ln 3:93.Table 8.5 Monte Carlo swap
rates and bond counts for
Nb-Ti-V-Zr quaternary.
Elements are arranged inorder of decreasing BCClattice constantSwap Bonds
α∖βZr Ti Nb V Zr Ti Nb V
Zr 0.32 0.29 0.07 1.60 2.03 1.96 2.41
Ti 0.59 0.39 1.96 2.10 2.10 1.83
Nb 0.34 1.98 2.27 1.98 1.89V 2.57 1.59 1.96 1.88292 M. WidomMC/MD pair correlation functions shown in Fig. 8.9reveal very strong
BCC-like order including the 8:6 nearest- to next-nearest-neighbor split. As in the
two previously examined cases, there is a pronounced preference for nearest-
neighbor pairs along the positive diagonal (Ta and Mo), while the partials forpairs along the negative diagonal (Nb and W) generally resemble each other. Theeffect is also seen in the swap rates reported in Table 8.6, with the pair along the
positive diagonal swapping at far lower frequency than the pair along the negativediagonal. In keeping with the nearly zero interaction on pairs within columns, wenotice very high swap rates for these pairs (Nb with Ta and Mo with W).
Applying the Guggenheim formulas, we estimate the entropy at T¼1200 K as
S=k
B¼lnð3:82Þ, again similar to the value obtained for CrMoNbV. Full tempera-
ture dependence of the entropy is plotted in Fig. 8.5and can be seen to decrease0246810Nb Mo
5 6
r[Å]0246810gαβ(r) g αβ(r)
Ta
234 234 5 6
r[Å]W
Fig. 8.9 Pair distribution functions of Mo-Nb-Ta-W at T¼1200 K quenched to T¼300 K.
Layout and conventions as in Fig. 8.6
Table 8.6 Monte Carlo swap
rates and bond counts forMo-Nb-Ta-W quaternary.
Elements are arranged in
order of decreasing BCClattice constantSwap Bonds
α∖βTa Nb W Mo Ta Nb W Mo
Ta 0.74 0.37 0.27 1.39 1.90 2.20 2.51
Nb 0.54 0.35 1.84 1.95 2.11 2.10W 0.64 2.18 1.93 1.99 1.90Mo 2.59 2.22 1.70 1.498 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 293signiﬁcantly only below 1200 K. Given the existence of a ground state at nearly the
equiatomic composition, we can say that MoNbTaW is an essentially perfect high-entropy alloy that remains stable at all temperatures, with only minor shift in
composition. At the same time, the entropy does vanish in this low-temperature
limit, with the growth of short-range chemical order, notably an increase inintercolumn bonds.
Vibrational and electronic densities of states and the resulting free energies are
presented in Fig. 8.10. Notice that the relative vibrational free energy ΔF
vis
positive, owing to the relatively high vibrational frequencies, and likewise therelative electronic free energy ΔF
eis positive because of the relatively low density
of states at the Fermi level. Because these have been derived at ﬁxed volume V,
the free energies are Helmholtz free energies; hence, thermodynamics yields the
entropy by simple differentiation, S¼/C0∂F/∂T, so we see that electronic and
vibrational contributions actually reduce the entropy.
0 1 02 03 0
hω[meV]00.050.10.150.20.25g(ω)  [modes/meV/atom]HEA
Mo.cI2
Nb.cI2
Ta.cI2
W.cI2
ΔF
0 500 1000
T[K]-0.4-0.20Fv
Fe-10 -8 -6-4 -2 0 2 4
E[eV]0123456D(E)  [states/eV/atom]
0 500 1000
T[K]-0.010ab
c d
Fig. 8.10 (a) Vibrational density of states in the MoNbTaW HEA; ( b) electronic density of states
(Eis relative to Fermi level EF); (c) and ( d) are corresponding free energies294 M. Widom8.6 Conclusion
This chapter provides a brief introduction to ﬁrst principles approaches to free
energy and phase stability calculation, w ith application to three high-entropy
alloy-forming quaternary compounds. We describe and apply a variety ofmethods including the cluster expansion of total energy as implemented in theATAT in Sect. 8.2.3 , vibrational and electronic free energy calculation in
Sects. 8.3.2 and8.3.3 , and a hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics method
in Sect. 8.4that is speciﬁcally efﬁcient for systems such as HEAs where chem-
ical substitution proliferates. Later chapters cover some additional ﬁrst princi-
ples methods in detail, the coherent pot ential approximation (CPA) in Chap. 9
and special quasirandom structures (SQSs) in Chap. 10, as well as application of
the MC/MD method to liquids in Chaps. 11and 13. The thermodynamic data
calculated using the present methods can be a guide to the reﬁnement ofCALPHAD-type thermodynamic databases such as employed in Chap. 12,
which eventually provide the rigorous basis for formation rules such as thosedescribed in Chap. 2
Although the intent was tutorial, this chapter reports several new results, illus-
trating the potential for new discovery in this emerging ﬁeld of research. Two
speciﬁc results challenge or shed new light on assessed binary phase diagrams.Namely, we propose that the continuous BCC solid solution in Nb-V is replaced bya previously unknown C14 Laves phase, NbV
2.hP12, below T∗¼1100 K, and we
explain the occurrence of the C15 Laves phase V 2Zr.cF24, despite its unfavorable
enthalpy of formation, as a result of vibrational and electronic entropy above T∗
¼1180 K, while predicting it becomes thermodynamically unstable below this
temperature. Through the use of cluster expansions of total energy, we predicted
the existence of low-temperature stable quaternaries in the Mo-Nb-Ta-W alloy
system. These new structures are speciﬁc ordered arrangements of species closeto sites of the underlying BCC lattice. In the case of Cr-Mo-Nb-V, we found that allBCC-based quaternary structures were destabilized at low temperature by compet-ing binaries and ternaries, but we predict this compound forms a high-entropy alloythat is stable above the temperature T
sep¼1430 K. Because Ti and Zr prefer HCP
structures at low temperatures, there are likewise no BCC-based ground states inthe quaternary Nb-Ti-V-Zr, so this HEA is also unstable at low temperature. Indeed,
we show through MC/MD simulations that the Nb-Ti-V-Zr HEA exhibits strong
deviations from ideal lattice sites even while preserving the long-range BCCstructure.
To conclude this chapter, we present all contributions to the entropy for the
quaternary Mo-Nb-Ta-W. The discrete conﬁgurational entropy is evaluated fromEq. (8.25), while the vibrational and electronic free energies were obtained from the
free energies illustrated in Fig. 8.10 by differentiation, S¼/C0∂F(V,T)/∂T.
The corresponding entropies are shown in Fig. 8.11. For this particular compound,
the vibrational and electronic entropies turn out to be negative relative to a mixture
of pure elements. Notice that the electronic contribution is relatively small, while8 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 295the vibrational contribution is signiﬁcant, but still less than the conﬁgurational part,
validating the claim that high-entropy alloys are dominated by their conﬁgurationalentropy of mixing.
Acknowledgements M.W. thanks Will Huhn, Michael C. Gao, Axel van de Walle, Walter
Steurer, Volker Blum, Peter Liaw, Malcolm Stocks and Takeshi Egami for useful discussions.
M.W. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the DOE under grant DE-SC0014506.
References
1. Ackermann H, Inden G, Kikuchi R (1989) Tetrahedron approximation of the cluster variation
method for B.C.C. alloys. Acta Metall 37:1–7
2. Antolin N, Restrepo OD, Windl W (2012) Fast free-energy calculations for unstable high-
temperature phases. Phys Rev B 86:054119
3. Blochl PE (1994) Projector augmented-wave method. Phys Rev B 50:17953–179794. Ceperley DM, Alder BJ (1980) Ground state of the electron gas by a stochastic method. Phys
Rev Lett 45:566–569
5. DeHoff R (2006) Thermodynamics in materials science. CRC Press, Hoboken6. Ducastelle F (1991) Order and phase stability in alloys. Elsevier, Amsterdam/New York7. Errea I, Calandra M, Mauri F (2014) Anharmonic free energies and phonon dispersions from
the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation: application to platinum and palladium
hydrides. Phys Rev B 89:064302
8. de Fontaine D (1979) Conﬁgurational thermodynamics of solid solutions. In: Ehrenreich H,
Turnbull D (eds) Solid state physics, vol 34. Academic, New York, pp 73–274
9. de Fontaine D (1994) Cluster approach to order-disorder transformations in alloys. In:
Ehrenreich H, DTurnbull (eds) Solid state physics, vol 47. Academic, San Diego, pp 33–1760 500 1000 1500 2000
T[K]-0.500.511.52S/kB
Sc
ΔSe
ΔSv
STot
Fig. 8.11 Conﬁgurational, vibrational, and electronic contributions to the total entropy STot.
Conﬁgurational entropy calculated according to the Guggenheim approximation Eqs. ( 8.24)
and ( 8.25). Vibrational and electronic contributions come from Eqs. ( 8.14) and ( 8.18), respectively296 M. Widom10. Gao M, Dogan O, King P, Rollett A, Widom M (2008) First principles design of ductile
refractory alloys. J Metals 60:61–65
11. Gao M, Suzuki Y, Schweiger H, Dogan O, Hawk J, Widom M (2013) Phase stability and
elastic properties of Cr-V alloys. J Phys Condens Matter 25:075402
12. Glass CW, Oganov AR, Hansen N (2006) USPEX – evolutionary crystal structure prediction.
Comput Phys Commun 175:713–720
13. Goedecker S (2004) Minima hopping: An efﬁcient search method for the global minimum of
the potential energy surface of complex molecular systems. J Chem Phys 120:9911–9917
14. Guggenheim EA (1944) Statistical thermodynamics of mixtures with non-zero energies of
mixing. Proc R Soc Lond A 183:213–227
15. Guo W, Dmowski W, Noh JY, Rack P, Liaw PK, Egami T (2013) Local atomic structure of a
high-entropy alloy: an x-ray and neutron scattering study. Metall Mater Trans A 44:1994–1997
16. Hohenberg P, Kohn W (1964) Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys Rev 136(3B):864–87117. Huhn WP (2014) Thermodynamics from ﬁrst principles: Prediction of phase diagrams and
materials properties using density functional theory. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University
18. Huhn WP, Widom M (2013) Prediction of A2 to B2 phase transition in the high entropy alloy
MoNbTaW. JOM 65:1772–1779
19. Jiang C (2009) First-principles study of ternary BCC alloys using special quasi-random
structures. Acta Mater 57:4716–4726
20. Jiang C, Wolverton C, Sofo J, Chen LQ, Liu ZK (2004) First-principles study of binary BCC
alloys using special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev B 69:214202
21. Kikuchi R (1974) Superposition approximation and natural iteration calculation in cluster
variation method. J Chem Phys 60:1071–1080
22. Kittel C (2005) Introduction to solid state physics. Wiley, Hoboken23. Kohn W, Sham LJ (1965) Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
effects. Phys Rev 140:1133–1138
24. Kresse G, Furthmuller J (1996) Efﬁcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calcula-
tions using a plane- wave basis set. Phys Rev B 54:11169–11186
25. Kresse G, Hafner J (1993) Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys Rev B 47:
RC558–RC561
26. Kresse G, Joubert D (1999) From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave
method. Phys Rev B 59:1758–1775
27. Kresse G, Furthmuller J, Hafner J (1995) Ab initio force constant approach to phonon
dispersion relations of diamond and graphite. Europhys Lett 32:729–734
28. Martin R (2008) Electronic structure: basic theory and practical methods. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
29. Mihalkovic ˇM, Widom M (2004) Ab-initio cohesive energies of fe-based glass-forming alloys.
Phys Rev B 70:144107
30. Neyts EC, Bogaerts A (2013) Combining molecular dynamics with monte carlo simulations:
implementations and applications. Theor Chem Acc 132:1–12
31. NIST (2013) Janaf thermochemical tables. http://kinetics.nist.gov/janaf
32. Perdew JP, Burke K, Ernzerhof M (1996) Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Phys Rev Lett 77:3865–3868
33. Ravi C, Panigrahi BK, Valsakumar MC, van de Walle A (2012) First-principles calculation of
phase equilibrium of V-Nb, V-Ta, and Nb-Ta alloys. Phys Rev B 85:054202
34. Revard BC, Tipton WW, Hennig RG (2014) Structure and stability prediction of compounds
with evolutionary algorithms. Top Curr Chem 345:181–222
35. Senkov O, Senkova S, Woodward C, Miracle D (2013) Low-density, refractory multi-principal
element alloys of the CrNbTiZr system: Microstructure and phase analysis. Acta Mater
61:1545–1557
36. Senkova O, Wilks G, Miracle D, Chuang C, Liaw P (2010) Refractory high-entropy alloys.
Intermetallics 18:1758–1765
37. Smith JF, Carlson ON (1990) Nb-V (niobium-vanadium). In: Massalski TB (ed) Binary alloy
phase diagrams, 2nd edn. ASM, Materials Park, pp 2779–27828 Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations 29738. Takasugi T, Yoshida M, Hanada S (1995) Microstructure and high-temperature deformation of
the c15 NbCr2-based laves intermetallics in Nb-Cr-V alloy system. J Mat Res 10:2463–2470
39. Turchi P, Drchal V, Kudrnovsky J, Colinet C, Kaufman L, Liu ZK (2005) Application of ab
initio and CALPHAD thermodynamics to Mo-Ta-W alloys. Phys Rev B 71:094206
40. Wales DJ, Doye JPK (1997) Global optimization by basin-hopping and the lowest energy
structures of Lennard-Jones clusters containing up to 110 atoms. J Phys Chem A101:5111–5116
41. van de Walle A, Asta M (2002) Self-driven lattice-model monte carlo simulations of alloy
thermodynamic properties and phase diagrams. Modelling Simul Mater Sci Eng 10:521
42. van de Walle A, Ceder G (2002) Automating ﬁrst-principles phase diagram calculations. J
Phase Equil 23:348
43. Widom M, Mihalkovic M (2008) Symmetry-broken crystal structure of elemental boron at low
temperature. Phys Rev B 77:064113
44. Widom M, Huhn W, Maiti S, Steurer W (2013) Hybrid monte carlo/molecular dynamics
simulation of a refractory metal high entropy alloy. Mat Met Trans A 45:196–200
45. Zunger A (1994) First principles statistical mechanics of semiconductor alloys and interme-
tallic compounds. In: Turchi PE, Gonis A (eds) NATO ASI on statics and dynamics of alloyphase transformation, vol 319. Plenum, New York, p 361–419
46. Zunger A, Wei SH, Ferreira LG, Bernard JE (1990) Special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev
Lett 65:353–356298 M. WidomChapter 9
Applications of Coherent Potential
Approximation to HEAs
Fuyang Tian, Yang Wang, Douglas L. Irving, and Levente Vitos
Abstract This chapter details the coherent potential approximation (CPA) to
describe the chemically and magnetically disordered phases for systems of arbitrarynumber of components. Two widely used CPA implementations, namely, the exact
mufﬁn-tin orbitals (EMTO) and the Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker (KKR) methods, are
brieﬂy reviewed. Applications to predict lattice stability, electronic and magneticstructure, elasticity properties, and stacking fault energies of single-phase HEAs arepresented.
Keywords Coherent potential application (CPA) • Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker
(KKR) • Exact mufﬁn-tin orbitals (EMTO) • Density functional theory (DFT)• Magnetism • Electronic structure • Elasticity • Elastic consents • Stacking fault
energy • Disordered solid solution • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
F. Tian (*)
Institute for Applied Physics, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
Beijing 100083, China
Applied Materials Physics, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm SE-100 44, Sweden
e-mail: fuyang@ustb.edu.cn
Y. Wang ( *)
Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, 300 South Craig Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USAe-mail: ywg@psc.edu
D.L. Irving
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North CarolinaState University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
e-mail: dlirving@ncsu.edu
L. Vitos
Applied Materials Physics, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm SE-100 44, Sweden
Division of Materials Theory, Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Uppsala University, Box 516, Uppsala SE-75120, Sweden
Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Institute for Solid State Physics
and Optics, P.O. Box 49, Budapest H-1525, Hungarye-mail: levente@kth.se
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_92999.1 The Coherent Potential Approximation
Ab initio density functional theory (DFT) [ 1,2], as a powerful ground state theory,
has been widely applied to investigate the structural and electronic properties ofsolids. In the case of the random solid solutions modeling, the coherent potentialapproximation (CPA) represents the most efﬁcient alloy theory for the electronicstructure calculations in multicomponent random solid solutions. The CPA wasintroduced by Soven [ 3] for the electronic structure problem and by Taylor [ 4] for
phonons in random alloys. Later, Gyo ˝rffy [ 5] formulated the CPA in the framework
of the multiple scattering theory using the Green function technique.
The CPA is based on the assumption that the alloy may be replaced by an
ordered effective medium, the parameters of which are determined self-consistently. The impurity problem is treated within the single-site approximation.This means that one single impurity is placed in an effective medium and noinformation is provided about the individual potential and charge density beyondthe sphere or polyhedral around this impurity. Below, we illustrate the principalidea of the CPA within the conventional mufﬁn-tin formalism.
We consider a substitutional alloy A
aBbCc..., where A, B, C, ...are the
randomly distributed atoms on an underlying crystal lattice and a, b, c, ...stand
for the corresponding atomic fractions. The system is characterized by the Greenfunction g
alloyand the alloy potential Palloy. In a real alloy, for a selected type of
atom, Palloyshows small variations due to the different local chemical environ-
ments. There are two main approximations within the CPA. First, it is assumed thatthe local potentials around a certain type of atom from the alloy are the same, i.e.,the effect of local environments is neglected. These local potentials are describedby the functions P
A,PB,PC,.... Second, the system is replaced by a monoatomic
setup described by the site-independent coherent potential ~P. In terms of Green
functions, one approximates the real Green function galloyby a coherent Green
function ~g. For each alloy component i¼A, B, C, ..., a single-site Green function
giis introduced.
The main steps to construct the CPA effective medium are as follows. First, the
coherent Green function is calculated from the coherent potential using an elec-tronic structure method. Within a multiple scattering method, we have
~g¼S/C0~P/C2/C3
/C01; ð9:1Þ
where Sdenotes the structure constant matrix describing the underlying lattice
[6–9]. Next, the Green functions of the alloy components, gi, are determined by
substituting the coherent potential of the CPA medium by the real atomic potentialsP
i. Mathematically, this condition is expressed via the real-space Dyson equation
gi¼~gþ~gP i/C0~P/C0/C1
gi ð9:2Þ300 F. Tian et al.for each i¼A, B, C, ...Finally, the average of the individual Green functions
should reproduce the single-site part of the coherent Green function, i.e.,
~g¼agAþagBþcgCþ...: ð9:3Þ
Equations ( 9.1,9.2, and 9.3) are solved iteratively, and the output ~gandgis are used
to determine the electronic structure, charge density, and total energy of the randomalloy. According to the single-site impurity equation ( 9.2), the impurity Green
function g
idescribes the single impurity (one single atom) with potential Pias
embedded in the effective medium speciﬁed by the coherent potential ~P.
Nowadays, the CPA has become a state-of-the-art technique for electronic
structure calculations in random alloys. Numerous applications have shown that
within this approximation, one can calculate lattice parameter, bulk modulus,
mixing enthalpy, etc., with an accuracy similar to that obtained for ordered solids.At the same time, the CPA, being a single-site approximation to the impurityproblem, has intrinsic limitations. For instance, within the CPA, one cannot takeinto account the short-range order effects. Moreover, systems with large-sizemismatch between the alloy components are difﬁcult to describe because of thesizable local lattice relaxations. More speciﬁcally, the average lattice dilation iswell captured by CPA but not the element-speciﬁc local displacements of the lattice
sites.
Probably, the most important failure of the existing CPA methods happens in the
case of anisotropic lattice distortions in random alloys. This problem has errone-ously been attributed to the inherent single-site approximation. However, oneshould bear in mind that certain limitations of the CPA are not directly related tothe approximation itself. Rather, they originate from additional approximationsintroduced by particular DFT implementations. The most common electronicstructure calculation methods used in combination with the CPA are based on the
Atomic Sphere Approximation (ASA). The associated shape approximation turned
out to be insufﬁcient for the accurate description of the behavior of the total energyupon anisotropic lattice distortions. Thus, one cannot calculate, for example, elasticconstants in random alloys or relax the axial ratio in alloys with a tetragonal,hexagonal, or lower symmetry. In addition, such DFT methods do not give a properdescription of the open structures or structural energy differences between struc-tures with different packing fractions, to the extent that even the energy differencebetween the bcc and fcc structures of the late transition metals is often incorrectly
described. However, a recent reformulation of the CPA [ 10–12] demonstrates that
this approximation implemented within the framework of the exact mufﬁn-tinorbitals (EMTO) method, in contrast to several previous implementations, issuitable to reproduce the structural energy differences and energy changes relatedto small lattice distortions in random alloys with high accuracy.
In addition to the CPA, the virtual crystal approximation (VCA), the cluster
expansion method, and the supercell approach [ 13], in particular, the so-called
special quasi-random structure (SQS) [ 14], are often used to study random alloys.
Recently, the SQS was employed in describing the CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 301alloys [ 15]. However, today, the SQS calculations for the paramagnetic state are
still very cumbersome. The reader is referred to Chap. 10for more details about
SQS. Another important method to describe atomic structure of HEAs is through
hybrid Monte Carlo/Molecular Dynamic (MCMD) simulations as detailed in
Chap. 8. The advantages of SQS and MCMD are that they allow atomic relaxation
and render reliable prediction of temperature-dependent thermodynamic properties.On the other hand, due to the constraint associated with the supercell, they cannotaccount for small compositional changes as discussed, for example, in Ref. [ 15].
A brief comparison among the above methods in treating HEAs is presented inChap. 10in this book.
In the present chapter, we describe two widely used CPA implementations,
namely, the EMTO-CPA and the Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker (KKR)-CPA methods,
and demonstrate them through several recent applications. The structure of thechapter is as follows: in Sect. 9.2, we review the main features of the EMTO-CPA
method relevant for the HEAs and in Sect. 9.3, we assess it using supercell
calculations. In Sects. 9.4and9.5, we present results obtained for 3 dand refractory
HEAs, respectively. Section 9.6puts forward a ﬁrst attempt to determine the
stacking fault energies of HEAs using a combined experimental–theoretical effort.Finally, the KKR-CPA method is introduced and demonstrated in Sects. 9.7
and9.8. The chapter ends with brief conclusions.
9.2 The EMTO-CPA Method
The EMTO theory belongs to the third-generation mufﬁn-tin approximation family.
This theory is an improved KKR method, which uses large overlapping mufﬁn-tinpotential spheres which can describe the exact one-electron potential rather accu-rately. In the calculation of the total energy, the EMTO method employs the FullCharge Density (FCD) technique, which not only improves the calculation efﬁciencybut also ensures total energies with accuracy similar to that of the full-potential
methods [ 12]. For numerical details of the present EMTO-CPA calculations, see
Refs. [ 16–18].
It should be mentioned that most of the present EMTO-CPA calculations of the
3dHEAs are based on the paramagnetic state. We employed the disordered local
magnetic moment (DLM) [ 19] picture to describe the paramagnetic state of these
HEAs. According to that model, an alloy component M of concentration mis
presented by its spin-up ( ") and spin-down ( #) counterparts assumed to be distrib-
uted randomly on the underlying sublattice, i.e., each magnetic alloy component is
treated as M
m!M"
m=2M#
m=2. For example, CoCrFeNi is described as a quasi-eight-
component random solid solution, viz., Co"
0:125Co#
0:125Cr"
0:125Cr#
0:125Fe"
0:125
Fe#
0:125Ni"
0:125Ni#
0:125:302 F. Tian et al.9.3 Assessing the EMTO-CPA Method for HEAs
In order to assess the performance of EMTO-CPA in the case of HEAs, we select
CoCrFeNi and set up a simple supercell (SC) with fcc underlying lattice. To mimica homogeneous solid solution, we distribute the four alloying elements so that theyare neighbors to each other within a conventional fcc unit cell, as shown in Fig. 9.1.
We notice that CoCrFeNi is found to show no tendency for long-range chemicalordering [ 20]. Taking into account that the long-range order has a rather small
effect on the elastic properties of alloys [ 21], it seems to be reasonable to assume
that one may directly compare the result from CPA with the SC results calculated
for the present ordered structure. In this test, ferromagnetic order was assumed in
both CPA and SC calculations. Table 9.1lists the results obtained from the above
SC method and those calculated for the corresponding Co
0.25Cr0.25Fe0.25Ni0.25
(equivalent to CoCrFeNi) random solid solution using the single-site CPA as
Fe
FeFeCoCo
NiCrCr
FeFeFe
FeFe
NiFig. 9.1 The simple
supercell (SC) used to
model the CoCrFeNi high-
entropy alloy
Table 9.1 Theoretical bulk parameters for fcc CoCrFeNi HEA calculated using the CPA and SC
(see text) methods
Method wB c 11 c12 c14 c0
CPA 2.607 207 271.0 175.0 189.3 48.0
SC 2.601 208 257.1 183.5 193.9 36.8
AZ (c12–c44) GEv A VR
CPA 3.9 /C014.3 110 280 0.275 0.21
SC 5.2 /C010.4 101 262 0.290 0.29
All data are from Ref. [ 16]. The Wigner–Seitz radius from experiment is 2.632 Bohr [ 22]
Listed are the equilibrium Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr); the bulk modulus B(GPa); three
independent elastic constants c11,c12,c44, and c0¼(c11–c12)/2 (GPa); the Zener anisotropy AZ;
the Cauchy pressure ( c12–c44) (GPa); the shear modulus G(GPa); the Young modulus E(GPa); the
Poisson ratio v; and the polycrystalline elastic anisotropy ratio AVR9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 303implemented in EMTO. More DFT calculations on the effect of the SC size to the
energy and elastic properties of HEAs are presented in Chap. 10.
The average SC equilibrium Wigner–Seitz (WS) radius is 2.601 Bohr, which is
rather close to 2.607 Bohr obtained for solid solution via CPA. The agreement
between the SC (207 GPa) and CPA (208 GPa) bulk moduli is also excellent. Forall theoretical parameters, we ﬁnd a good consistency between the CPA and SCresults. In particular, the three cubic elastic constants, c
11,c12andc44, obtained
with the two methods differ on the average by ~4 %. The larger relative differencesin the Zener anisotropy ( c
44/c0) and the Cauchy pressure ( c12–c44) are still accept-
able, especially if we consider that the present SC is the simplest periodicapproximant of the four-component random alloy considered in the CPA calcula-
tions. The good agreement seen for the shear and Young ’s modulus ( GandE),
Poisson ratio ( v), and polycrystalline anisotropy ratio A
VRindicates that the CPA is
an efﬁcient and accurate method to investigate the bulk properties of thesemulticomponent alloys.
In order to further assess the performance of the calculations derived from the
mean-ﬁeld CPA, we construct two 2 /C22/C22 cubic supercells shown in Fig. 9.2. The
supercell formed by the bcc (fcc) unit cells is treated as simple cubic (body-centeredcubic), where we introduce one (two) Al atom per 16 (32) atomic sites. All other
sites are occupied by an equimolar four-component CoCrFeNi alloy. We note that
similar partially ordered solid solution has been reported in Al
0.3CoCrFeNi HEA
[23]. The present supercells have the molar radio Al 1Co15/4Cr15/4Fe15/4Ni15/4,
corresponding to Al 0.2667 CoCrFeNi HEA. The Wigner–Seitz radii obtained for
these supercells are 2.620 Bohr for fcc and 2.634 Bohr for bcc, which are practicallythe same as those obtained in the corresponding CPA calculations (2.620 Bohr forfcc and 2.635 for bcc). The corresponding bulk moduli are 197 and 193 GPa for thefcc and bcc supercells, respectively, which are also close to the CPA results
(198 GPa for fcc and 193 GPa for bcc).
M MMMM
MMMMAIM
MMMM
AIMMMAIMMMM
MM
MMM MMM
MMM
MM
MMMMMMM
MMMMMM MMMM
M
MMM
MMMMM
MMM
MMab
MM
MMM
MMMMM
MMAIAI
AIM
MM
MM
MMMM
MAI
MAI
AIAI
Fig. 9.2 Schematic plot of the 2 /C22/C22 bcc supercell ( a) and the 2 /C22/C22 fcc supercell ( b) for
Al0.2667 CoCrFeNi HEA. Label M represents an equimolar four-component CoCrFeNi alloy, and
label Al is aluminum at the center or vertex sites304 F. Tian et al.9.4 EMTO-CPA Applications to 3 dHEAs
9.4.1 Equilibrium Volumes
In Table 9.2, we compare the EMTO-CPA Wigner–Seitz (WS) radii calculated for
CoCrFeNi, CoCrCuFeNi, CoCrFeMnNi, and CoCrFeNiTi with available experi-mental values measured by x-ray diffraction. Using the Wigner–Seitz radii for thealloy constituents, we may estimate the equilibrium volume of the HEAs viaVegard ’s rule. In Table 9.2,/C22w
tstands for the estimated volume based on the
previous PBE-level theoretical data, and /C22wethe one obtained from the experimental
data. It is found that the calculated average WS radii are smaller than the averaged
experimental data. The calculated WS radii are also slightly smaller than the
experimental values except for CoCrFeNiTi (we notice that the as-cast CoCrFeNiTiis not a single fcc structure, but the main fcc matrix with two minor phases [ 27]).
The connection between the WS radius and the lattice parameter aisa
3¼2*4
3πw3
(a3¼4*4
3πw3) for bcc (fcc) structure.
9.4.2 Magnetic Properties
Figure 9.3shows the local magnetic moments ( "or#) versus the Wigner–Seitz
radius for the magnetic sublattices in paramagnetic CoCrCuFeNi, CoCrFeNi, and
CoCrFeNiTi high-entropy alloys. According to the calculations, the local magneticmoments vanish on the Cu, Ni, and Ti sites for all volumes and thus, they are notshown in Fig. 9.3. We should note that thermal effects would eventually induce
local magnetic moments on the Ni sites as well at ﬁnite temperature. Such longi-tudinal spin ﬂuctuations have been neglected in the present study. For all alloys, Fepossesses a signiﬁcant (~1.8–2.0 μ
B) local magnetic moment around the equilib-
rium volume. Cobalt remains nonmagnetic in CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeNiTi but
shows a small (~0.6 μB) magnetic moment for CoCrCuFeNi.
We plot the paramagnetic total density of state (DOS) and partial density of
state (pDOS) for CoCrCuFeNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeNiTi in Fig. 9.4. For all
alloys, Fe has a moderate pDOS peak located very close to the Fermi level ( EF). It
is found that the size of the DOS at EF(DFe(EF)) is the largest among all pDOS at
EF, followed by DCo(EF) and DCr(EF). This distinct Fe peak at EFleads to magnetic
instability in Fe sublattice. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 9.4, the spin-polarized pDOS
of Fe has two separate peaks: one above the Fermi level and one below the Fermi
level. These two Fe peaks hybridize with the Cr and Co peaks, respectively. As a
result of the magnetic splitting, the total D(EF) drops signiﬁcantly in all three
alloys.9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 305Table 9.2 Theoretical and experimental Wigner–Seitz radii (Bohr) for CoCrFeNi, CoCrFeMnNi, CoCrCuFeNi, and CoCrFeNiTi x[22,24–26]
HEAs ww e /C22wt /C22we c11 c12 c44 c0EE (Expt.)
CoCrFeNi 2.607 2.632 2.623 2.642 271.0 175.0 189.3 48.0 280.0 –
CoCrFeMnNi 2.609 2.651 – – 245.1 148.9 191.5 48.1 275.9 157
CoCrCuNiFe 2.628 2.643 2.636 2.647 227.8 154.6 165.3 36.6 234.0 55.6
CoCrFeNiTi 2.682 2.650 2.706 2.724 184.5 170.9 127.0 6.8 130.3 134CoCrCuFeNiTi
0.1 2.635 – 2.644 2.655 219.7 152.6 160.2 33.5 223.1 –
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.2 2.643 – 2.652 2.663 213.6 152.1 155.1 30.5 231.1 –
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.3 2.651 – 2.659 2.670 209.6 151.9 154.6 28.9 205.9 –
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.4 2.655 – 2.666 2.677 207.6 151.7 150.8 27.9 200.4 –
CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.5 2.663 – 2.673 2.684 198.4 151.0 142.7 23.7 187.1 98.6
CoCrCuFeNiTi 1.0 2.694 – 2.703 2.715 174.3 148.6 125.0 12.8 145.4 76.5
Data taken from Ref. [ 16]
wandweare those predicted in EMTO-CPA calculations and the available experiments, respectively. /C22wtand /C22werepresent the alloys ’Wigner–Seitz radii
as estimated from Ref. [ 12], according to Vegard ’s rule306 F. Tian et al.9.4.3 Elastic Properties of 3 dHEAs
The three cubic elastic constants c11,c12,c44andc0of CoCrFeNi, CoCrFeMnNi,
CoCrCuFeNiTi x, and CoCrFeNiTi are listed in Table 9.2. The elastic constants and
elastic moduli for CoCrCuFeNiTi xare also plotted in Fig. 9.5as a function of
Ti content. As seen from Table 9.2, all 3 dHEAs considered here are mechanically
stable. Titanium decreases the tetragonal elastic constant c0both in CoCrFeNiTi
and CoCrCuFeNiTi x, as compared to that of CoCrFeNi. This indicates that
Ti decreases the mechanical stability of the fcc phase, which is in line with theexpectation based on the effective number of delectrons.
Theory predicts a moderate elastic anisotropy and small negative Cauchy pres-
sure for CoCrFeNi. We recall that negative ( c
12–c44) has been associated with the
covalent nature of the metallic bond and is characteristic to brittle alloys. In theabsence of any experimental data, we compare the present results calculated forparamagnetic CoCrFeNi with those obtained for paramagnetic austenitic stainlesssteel alloys composed of ~18 % Cr, ~8 % Ni, and balance Fe [ 28]. The three cubic
elastic constants reported for this stainless steel are c
11¼208.6 GPa,
c12¼143.5 GPa, and c44¼132.8 GPa, which yield 4.07 for the Zener anisotropy
ratio and 10.7 GPa for the Cauchy pressure. Therefore, compared to the austenitic
stainless steels, the paramagnetic CoCrFeNi is predicted to be more brittle. Equi-molar Cu addition to CoCrFeNi is found to increase slightly the Cauchy pressure
Fig. 9.3 Local magnetic moments of Co, Cr, and Fe in paramagnetic fcc CoCrFeNi,
CoCrCuFeNi, and CoCrFeNiTi alloys as a function of the WS radius. For each HEA, the vertical
(green ) line stands for the calculated equilibrium SW radius (Data taken from Ref. [ 16])9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 307from/C014.3 GPa obtained for CoCrFeNi to /C010.7 GPa calculated for CoCrCuFeNi.
For reference, fcc Ir has Cauchy pressure of /C013 GPa and undergoes both
transgranular and intergranular fracture.
Before continuing our discussion, we mention that the validity of the correlation
between brittle–ductile behavior and the Cauchy pressure has not yet been con-ﬁrmed in the case of HEAs, so the above theoretical prediction regarding thebrittleness of CoCrFeNi should be treated with precautions. On the other hand,we should recall that the present calculations correspond to static conditions (0 K),which substantially underestimates the equilibrium volume of the alloy. Computingthe elastic parameters close to the experimental volume (i.e., accounting for the
lattice expansion) leads to positive Cauchy pressures for both CoCrFeNi and
CoCrFeMnNi [ 15]. Employing the Vienna ab initio simulation packages (VASP)
in combination with special quasi-random structure (SQS) yields somewhat
Fig. 9.4 Total ( upper panels ) and Co, Cr, and Fe partial ( lower panels ) density of states (pDOS)
for the paramagnetic fcc CoCrCuFeNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeNiTi HEAs. In the lower panels,
only the Co, Cr, and Fe partial densities of state are shown (Ni, Cu, and Ti are no local magnetic
moments). Apart from the sign (spin up versus spin down) difference, the partial densities of statesfor Co, Cr, and Fe are identical to those shown in the ﬁgure (Data taken from Ref. [ 16])308 F. Tian et al.different elastic parameters as compared to EMTO-CPA and positive (negative)
Cauchy pressure for CoCrFeNi (CoCrFeMnNi) [ 15]. Research focusing on the
above trends and differences is in progress. In the rest of this chapter, the discus-sions related to the brittle–ductile behavior of HEAs should be considered in themirror of the above results.
Titanium is found to change the CoCrFeNi host into a more ductile but strongly
anisotropic material. Equimolar fcc CoCrFeNiTi has c
44/c0¼18.7 and ( c12–c44)
¼43.9 GPa. Such high anisotropy ratio is rather unusual. For comparison, the Zener
anisotropy of paramagnetic bcc and fcc Fe was found to be around 8.6 and 3.6,respectively. Considering the change of the Cauchy pressure upon equimolardoping, we may conclude that although Cu also improves the ductility of the 3 d
HEAs, Ti makes it especially ductile. Indeed, as seen in the case ofCoCrCuFeNiTi
x, Ti can substantially increase the Cauchy pressure of the host
alloy. It gradually increases the metallic character of the bonds turning the static(0 K) Cauchy pressure positive somewhere between x¼0.3 and x¼0.4. We ﬁnd
that all elastic parameters of CoCrCuFeNiTi
xchange monotonously with the
amount of Ti in Fig. 9.5b. According to the present theoretical calculations, the bulk
parameters of single-crystal CoCrCuFeNiTi 0.5HEAs, which are still believed to be
Fig. 9.5 Panel ( a): Three independent elastic constants c11,c12, and c44as well as c0((c11–c12)/2),
c44/c0, and ( c12–c44) for CoCrCuFeNiTi x(x¼0–0.5,1.0) HEAs. Panel ( b): Polycrystalline elastic
moduli B,G, and Eas well as B/G,v, and AVRfor CoCrCuFeNiTi x(x¼0–0.5,1.0) HEAs (All data
are from Ref. [ 16])9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 309single-phase alloys, are surprisingly close to those reported for the Cr 0.18
Fe0.74Ni0.08austenitic stainless steel alloy [ 28].
Next, we compare the theoretical results with the available experimental data. It
is particularly surprising that for CoCrCuFeNi, our Young ’s modulus of 234 GPa is
about four times larger than 55.6 GPa found in experiment [ 24]. This alloy shows
relatively low anisotropy and thus, the uncertainty associated with the Voigt–
Reuss–Hill averaging is expected to be small. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 9.6,
the Young ’s modulus of a single-crystal CoCrCuFeNi changes between 102.79 GPa
obtained for the <001>direction and 379.18 GPa calculated for the <111>
direction. Therefore, even for a highly textured material, theory would predict thelowest Eto be around 100 GPa, which is still almost double of the experimental
value. For the two Ti-containing CoCrCuFeNiTi
0.5and CoCrCuFeNiTi alloys, the
calculated Young ’s moduli differ from the reported experimental values by ~ 90 %.
On the other hand, the agreement between theory and experiment is almost perfect
for CoCrFeNiTi. Such good agreement is rather unexpected since for this alloy, we
obtained very large anisotropy ratio. The single-crystal Young ’s modulus of
CoCrFeNiTi changes signiﬁcantly with direction (Fig. 9.6), the lowest value
being close to 20 GPa (for <001>direction) and the largest around 307 GPa (for
<111>direction). One should also point out that the recent experiments show that
CoCrFeNiTi is not a single fcc phase alloy [ 27]. Finally, we note that the paramag-
netic CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi HEAs have very close Young ’s moduli Eas a
function of direction.
Regarding the difference between the theoretical and experimental Young ’s
moduli for CoCrCuFeNi, one possible reason is that all present calculations werecarried out at static conditions (0 K) while the experimental measurements were
Fig. 9.6 Theoretical Young ’s modulus for ﬁve HEAs (CoCrFeNi, CoCrCuFeNi, CoCrCuFeNiTi,
CoFeCrFeNiTi, and CoCrFeMnNi) as a function of direction including the three main cubic
directions310 F. Tian et al.performed at room temperature. In addition, our calculations assumed an ideal solid
solution phase with fcc underlying lattice in contrast to the real alloys havingcomplex microstructure. For instance, in CoCrCuFeNi, Cu segregation to the
interdendrite region was observed. More extensive experimental as well as theo-
retical studies are necessary to understand the large deviation between the theoret-ical and experimental Young ’s modulus for these important category of engineering
materials.
9.4.4 The fcc–bcc Phase Transformation in Al-Doped
3dHEAs
In Fig. 9.7, we show the theoretical equilibrium volume ( V) and structural energy
difference ΔE¼Et(bcc)- Et(fcc) for the Al xCoCrFeNi alloys as a function of Al
content. Experimental volumes are available for the single fcc phase for x/C200.5 and
for single bcc phase for x/C210.9 [29–31]. Aluminum addition is found to increase the
equilibrium volume of the solid solution, which is consistent with the fact that wof
Al is larger than those of the other alloy components. Using a cubic spline ﬁt for thecalculated energy points, we ﬁnd that the structural energy difference between idealbcc and fcc lattices vanishes at x¼1.11 Al fraction.
Because of the large atomic volume of Al, the interatomic distance between Al
and the other elements is larger than the average bulk value. We estimated the size
Fig. 9.7 Theoretical fcc and bcc equilibrium volumes and structural energy difference for
AlxCoCrFeNi ( x¼0–2.5) HEAs9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 311of the local lattice relaxation (LLR) around the Al atoms in Al xCoCrFeNi alloys by
making use of the above 2 /C22/C22 supercells, each of them containing one single Al
atom. We relaxed the ﬁrst 12 nearest neighbor CoCrFeNi sites in the fcc supercell
and the ﬁrst eight nearest neighbor CoCrFeNi sites in the bcc supercell. For the
energy gain upon the LLR, we obtained δEbcc¼0.17 mRy and δEfcc¼0.32 mRy.
The larger relaxation effect in the fcc lattice is in line with our previous observationthat the bcc lattice can accommodate the large substitutional Al more easily than thefcc lattice. Then, we consider ΔE
0/C17x(δEbcc/C0δEfcc) as the measure of the LLR
effect on the structural energy difference per Al fraction. Adding ΔE0toΔE,w e
obtain that the total structural energy difference vanishes around x¼1.2, i.e., at
only slightly larger Al content than the one predicted from the total energies
obtained for rigid underlying lattices.
Two phases arrive at equilibrium when their Gibbs free energies become equal.
Here, we consider the Al xCoCrFeNi system as a pseudo-binary Al y(CoCrFeNi) 1-y
alloy (with y¼x/(4 + x)) and compute the relative formation energy according to
ΔGα(y)¼Gα(y)-(1-2 y)Gfcc(0)-2 yGfcc(0.5), where αstands for fcc or bcc and Gα
(y) is the Gibbs free energy per atom for Al y(CoCrFeNi) 1-yin the αphase. This is
approximated as Gα(y)~Eα(y)-TSmix(y)-TSα
mag(y), where Eα(y) is the total energy
per atom for Al y(CoCrFeNi) 1-yin the αphase and Tis the temperature. The two
entropy terms are estimated within the mean-ﬁeld approximation. Namely,
the mixture entropy of ideal solutions is Smix¼/C0kBX5
i¼1cilnci, and the magnetic
entropy Smag¼kBX5
i¼1ciln 1þμi ðÞ , where ciis the concentration and μithe mag-
netic moment of the ith alloying element. Accordingly, all chemical and magnetic
short-range order effects and the longitudinal spin ﬂuctuations are neglected(i.e., for each alloy composition, we assume constant local magnetic moments
with temperature). The above phenomenological approximation for the magnetic
entropy was previously used to estimate the free energy of paramagnetic Fe andFe-based alloys having non-integer magnetic moments.
The present Gibbs free energies at different temperature are plotted in Fig. 9.8.
According to the rule of common tangent line, we ﬁnd that at room temperature,Al
xCoCrFeNi has single fcc phase for x/C200.597 ( y/C200.130), single bcc phase for
x/C211.229 ( y/C210.235), and two phases (duplex) between the above limits. In terms
of valence electron concentration, the present theory predicts that at 300 K, the fcc
phase is stable for valence electronic concentration (VEC) /C217.57 and the bcc one
for VEC /C207.04. These theoretical solubility limits should be compared to 8.0 and
6.87 estimated by Guo et al. and 7.67–7.88 and 7.06–7.29 observed inexperiments [ 32].312 F. Tian et al.9.4.5 Elastic Properties of Al-Doped 3 dHEAs
The calculated elastic parameters of Al xCoCrFeNi HEAs are listed in Table 9.3.W e
notice that the elastic parameters obtained for the fcc and bcc phases around x¼1
are surprisingly close to each other. When considering the fcc or bcc structureseparately, it is found that the three cubic elastic constants ( c
ij) and the polycrystal
elastic moduli ( B,G, and E) decrease with increasing Al content. However, the
Cauchy pressure ( c12–c44), the two anisotropy ratios ( AZandAVR), the Poisson ’s
ratio ( v), and the B/Gratio increase with xin the fcc phase.
Fig. 9.8 The Gibbs free energies as a function of the content of Al for bcc and fcc Al y
(CoCrFeNi) 1-y(y¼0–0.5) at T¼0, 300, and 600 K. Note that y ¼x/(4 + x), where xis the atomic
fraction of Al in Al xCoCrFeNi HEAs (All data are from Ref. [ 17])9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 313Table 9.3 Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr), three cubic elastic constants ( cij,c0¼(c11–c12)/2,AZ¼c44/c0), Cauchy pressure ( c12–c44), and polycrystalline elastic
moduli ( B,G,E,AVR,v, and B/G) for fcc and bcc Al xCoCrFeNi HEAs as a function of the content of Al
x Phase wc 11 c12 c44 c0Az (c12–c44) BGEv A VR B/G
0.0 fcc 2.607 271 175 189 48.0 3.94 /C014.3 207 110 280 0.275 0.209 1.88
0.3 fcc 2.622 246 171 177 37.3 4.75 /C06.12 196 96 248 0.289 0.262 2.04
0.5 fcc 2.632 233 169 171 32.2 5.29 /C02.13 190 89 231 0.297 0.295 2.13
1.0 fcc 2.654 214 167 158 23.5 6.85 9.00 183 76 201 0.317 0.369 2.401.0 bcc 2.659 214 160 152 27.2 6.72 7.84 178 78 204 0.309 0.311 2.291.3 bcc 2.670 208 151 150 28.1 5.59 0.80 170 78 203 0.301 0.298 2.17
1.5 bcc 2.675 205 148 149 28.5 5.34 /C01.66 167 78 202 0.297 0.293 2.13
2.0 bcc 2.690 197 140 147 28.3 5.26 /C06.56 159 77 199 0.291 0.289 2.06
All data are from Ref. [ 17]
The unit is GPa except for the dimensionless A
Z,AVR,v, and B/G314 F. Tian et al.From Table 9.3, we ﬁnd that the somewhat different impact of Al on the elastic
parameters of fcc and bcc AlCoCrFeNi leads to local maxima in ( c12–c44),v, and
B/G with increase of Al content. According to the calculated trend of c0(x), Al
strongly reduces the dynamical stability of the fcc lattice and slightly increases thatof the bcc lattice. At the same time, Al stabilizes thermodynamically the bcc
structure relative to the fcc one (Fig. 9.8). Combining these two effects, we obtain
that around the duplex region ( x¼0.597–1.229), the Al
xCoCrFeNi system has two
very similar distinct local minima within the Bain conﬁgurational space (describedbyc/aand volume) with a clear barrier between them (Fig. 9.9). One local
minimum corresponds to the bcc phase ( c/a¼1) and another to the fcc phase
(c/a¼ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
). This situation is rather unusual for elemental cubic transition metals
and their alloys, for which the thermodynamically unstable cubic structure is
usually also dynamically unstable.
According to Pugh, materials with B/Gratio above 1.75 are ductile. For isotropic
materials, the Pugh criteria for ductility imply μ>0.26, which has been conﬁrmed
for bulk metallic glasses [ 33]. In the case of Al
xCoCrFeNi, alloys close to x¼1i n
both phases have large positive Cauchy pressure, and large B/Gandμ, indicating
strong metallic character and enhanced ductility for these systems. Our calculatedYoung ’s moduli are very close for the fcc (201 GPa) and bcc (204 GPa)
AlCoCrFeNi. The single-crystal Young ’s modulus changes from 70 to 370 GPa
(77–355 GPa) for the fcc (bcc) AlCoCrFeNi along the different crystallographic
directions. We note that the reported experimental value of 127 GPa [ 34] is within
the range of our calculations.
Fig. 9.9 Energy contour (mRy) for paramagnetic AlCoCrFeNi as a function of the tetragonal ratio
(c/a) and the Wigner–Seitz radius (Bohr) (Data taken from Ref. [ 17])9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 3159.5 Refractory HEAs
9.5.1 Structural Properties
For NbTiVZr and MoNbTiV xZr (x¼0–1.5), the EMTO-CPA theory predicts the
bcc structure to be the most stable one among the three close-packed lattices,namely, fcc, bcc, and hcp. The corresponding equilibrium Wigner–Seitz radii andtotal energy difference compared to bcc structure are listed in Table 9.4. The
theoretical predictions are fully supported by experiments. At this point, we shouldnote that local lattice relaxation (neglected in the present study) could slightly alterthe structural energy difference. According to our previous estimation of the
inﬂuence of the lattice relaxation on the bcc–fcc energy difference [ 17], the effect
of relaxation is well below the energy differences from Table 9.4.
Experimentally, the HEAs composed of refractory elements were found to have
a single bcc structure. It should be noted that the present refractory elements Ti,Zr, V, Nb, and Mo all adopt a bcc crystal structure below their melting temperature,but Ti and Zr are stable in the hcp phase at ambient conditions (the allotropictransition from hcp to bcc happens at temperatures of 1155 K and 1136 K for Ti andZr, respectively).
We show the calculated equilibrium WS radii for bcc NbTiVZr and
MoNbTiV
xZr (x¼0–1.50) HEAs in Table 9.5. The only experimental equilibrium
radius we could ﬁnd in the literature is 3.094 Bohr [ 35] reported for NbTiVZr. To
further assess the theoretical volumes predicted for the present HEAs, we make useof Vegard ’s rule and estimate the mean equilibrium WS radii for alloys using those
of the alloy components. First, we study the atomic radius of the refractoryelements. For the Wigner–Seitz radius of bcc Ti and Zr at 0 K, we extrapolate thehigh-temperature data assuming a linear thermal expansion, i.e., w( T)¼w(0 K)(1
+αT), where w(0 K) is the WS radius at 0 K and w(T) at temperature Tandαis
the linear thermal expansion coefﬁcient. Using the experimental values
Table 9.4 Theoretical Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr) for HEAs with bcc, fcc, and hcp structures,
respectively
HEAs wbcc ΔHbcc wfcc ΔHfcc whcp ΔHhcp
NbTiVZr 3.054 10.94 3.083 33.23 3.085 34.60
MoNbTiZr 3.075 1.289 3.107 13.65 3.107 14.76
MoNbTiV 0.25Zr 3.060 /C012.99 3.092 9.394 3.092 11.10
MoNbTiV 0.50Zr 3.046 /C00.956 3.078 21.66 3.078 23.45
MoNbTiV 0.75Zr 3.033 /C02.098 3.065 20.55 3.066 22.54
MoNbTiV 1.00Zr 3.023 5.728 3.055 28.07 3.054 29.65
MoNbTiV 1.25Zr 3.011 12.73 3.044 35.50 3.045 37.51
MoNbTiV 1.50Zr 3.002 23.36 3.034 46.29 3.035 48.43
All data are from Ref. [ 18]
The formation enthalpy ΔHof bcc, fcc, and hcp phases (kJ/mol) is relative to that of the bcc
structure316 F. Tian et al.wTi(1155 K) ¼3.077 Bohr and wZr(1140 K) ¼3.358 Bohr together with the
reported thermal expansion coefﬁcients for bcc Ti (10.9 /C210/C06K/C01) and Zr
(9/C210/C06K/C01)[36], we get 3.039 Bohr and 3.324 Bohr for w(0 K) of
the hypothetical bcc Ti and Zr, respectively. For bcc V, Nb, and Mo, the Wigner–Seitz radii at 0 K were extrapolated by ﬁtting the selected lattice parameters in
Ref.[ 37]. Considering the quoted estimated values in Table 9.5, we conclude that
the present theory correctly describes the equilibrium properties of all ﬁve refrac-tory elements.
It is interesting to note that for all HEAs considered here, the calculated
equilibrium WS radius w
tis slightly smaller than w̅t. Hence, all alloys show a
small but systematic negative deviation relative to Vegard ’s rule. Similar to
CoCrCuFeNiTi x, the WS radius of MoNbTiV xZr has a linear change as a function
of the content of Vanadium x(x¼0–1.50).
9.5.2 Electronic Structure
In the following, we discuss the electronic structure of the refractory HEAs. The
total and partial DOSs for the NbTiVZr, MoNbTiZr, and MoNbTiVZr HEAs areshown in the middle and lower panels of Fig. 9.10, respectively. Although the
chemical disorder smears out most of the structure characteristic to the elementalDOSs (upper panels), a weak peak survives in the vicinity of the Fermi level for allthree alloys (middle panels). This peak is located at the Fermi level for NbTiVZrTable 9.5 Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr), bulk modulus B(GPa), and elastic constants c11,c12,
c44, and c0(GPa) for NbTiVZr and MoNbTiV xZr (x¼0–1.5) HEAs
HEAs wt /C22wt /C22we Bc 11 c12 c44 c0
NbTiVZr 3.054 3.057 3.062 118.6 166.4 94.7 53.8 35.9
MoNbTiZr 3.075 3.100 3.090 137.3 209.9 101.0 52.6 54.4MoNbTiV
0.25Zr 3.060 3.083 3.074 137.4 211.0 100.6 52.1 55.7
MoNbTiV 0.50Zr 3.046 3.068 3.059 137.6 212.2 100.3 51.6 55.9
MoNbTiV 0.75Zr 3.033 3.054 3.046 138.0 213.2 100.3 51.2 56.4
MoNbTiV 1.00Zr 3.023 3.042 3.035 138.5 213.7 100.7 50.9 56.5
MoNbTiV 1.25Zr 3.011 3.031 3.024 140.6 218.0 101.9 50.0 58.0
MoNbTiV 1.50Zr 3.002 3.022 3.015 141.2 219.3 102.2 49.8 58.5
Mo 0.8NbTiZr 3.085 3.114 3.099 132.2 199.0 98.7 52.8 50.1
Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.2Zr 3.071 3.098 3.085 132.9 200.8 99.0 52.5 50.9
Mo 0.9NbTiZr 3.080 3.111 3.094 134.4 204.3 99.5 52.6 52.5
Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.5Zr 3.054 3.101 3.066 134.6 203.7 100.0 51.9 51.9
All data are from Ref. [ 18]
wtrepresents the EMTO-CPA Wigner–Seitz radius and /C22wt(/C22we) stands for the average
Wigner–Seitz radii of the HEAs estimated from EMTO calculated (experimental or extrapolated)
radius of bcc refractory elements (those for Ti, Zr, and Hf were extrapolated to 0 K), according toVegard ’s rule9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 317and shifted toward the descending zone when equimolar Mo replaces V or is added
to the alloy. This feature may explain why NbTiVZr has smaller dynamical stabilityagainst tetragonal deformation (smaller c
0) as compared to the other alloys
(Table 9.5). We should notice that the aforementioned lattice distortion mechanism
is expected to be less effective in HEAs due to the disorder-driven smearing of theDOS. Monitoring the total DOS curves (Fig. 9.10), one may conclude that the two
Mo-containing HEAs should exhibit similar anomalous temperature dependence asfound in V and Nb metals [ 38]. These theoretical predictions need to be veriﬁed by
future theoretical and experimental analysis.
The partial DOSs (Fig. 9.10, lower panels) are somewhat different from the
DOSs of the elemental metals (upper panels). In all three cases, Ti and Zr contribute
with a peak to the DOS at the Fermi level. The partial DOSs resemble the pure
metal DOSs the most in NbTiVZr. Here, the small charge redistribution betweenthe alloy components shifts slightly the peaks in V and Nb partial DOSs close to E
F,
resulting in the global peak seen in the total DOS (left middle panel). The partialDOS of Mo is strongly altered compared to that of pure Mo. However, the presenceof Mo makes the V and Nb partial DOSs more V- and Nb-like, respectively (havingE
Fin the descending zone). That is the reason why the Mo-containing alloys are
mechanically more stable than the Mo-free NbTiVZr alloy.
Fig. 9.10 Density of state (DOS) of bcc Ti, Zr, V, Nb, and Mo refractory metals ( upper panels );
total ( middle panels ) and partial ( lower panels ) DOS for bcc NbTiVZr, MoNbTiZr, and
MoNbTiVZr high-entropy alloys. The vertical dashed lines stand for the positions of the Fermi
level (All data are from Ref. [ 18])318 F. Tian et al.9.5.3 Elastic Properties
The three cubic elastic constants c11,c12, and c44and the tetragonal shear modulus
c0are listed in Table 9.6. All HEAs considered here are predicted to be mechani-
cally stable. Adding equimolar V to MoNbTiZr-based alloy produces small changesin the elastic parameters. The weak increase of the tetragonal elastic constant c
0
with V content in MoNbTiV xZr alloys indicates that V slightly enhances the elastic
stability of the bcc phase against tetragonal deformation. At the same time, Vaddition decreases c
44, resulting in a small increases of the elastic anisotropy. In
Table 9.6, we also list the theoretical elastic constants, the Zener anisotropy AZ, and
Cauchy pressure (c 12–c44) (GPa), as well as polycrystalline elastic moduli ( B,G,E,
v,B/G,AVR) and VEC of the present refractory HEAs. One can see that the ductility
is slightly enhanced with increasing V content. However, these changes are toosmall and the quoted correlation between the elastic parameters and ductility toovague to be able to draw more solid conclusions here.
The VEC has often been used to classify the single solid solution phases (bcc,
fcc, or mixture of bcc and fcc). According to the experimental ﬁndings, HEAs
prefer to form bcc solid solution when VEC <7.55. This correlation is fully
supported by the present theory and former experiments. In addition to the phasestability, the VEC should also reﬂect the changes of the metallic bonds and thus thechanges of the polycrystalline elastic moduli. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 9.11, we ﬁnd
a correlation between the bulk and shear moduli of MoNbTiV
xZr and the VEC. The
increase in the VEC with V content (we should remember that HEAs are equimolarsystems) is followed by an increase (slightly decrease) of the bulk (shear) modulus.The opposite trends in BandGexplain the enhanced ductility of MoNbTiV
xZr for
large xvalues.
Table 9.6 The Cauchy pressure ( c12–c44) (GPa) and Zener anisotropy AZ(c44/c0); polycrystalline
elastic moduli GandE(GPa) and Poisson ’s ratio v; the B/Gratio, elastic anisotropy ratio AVR, and
VEC for selected refractory HEAs
HEAs c12–c44 AZ G E v B/G A VR VEC
NbTiVZr 41.0 1.500 45.70 121.1 0.33 2.60 0.0196 4.50
MoNbTiZr 48.4 0.966 53.33 141.7 0.33 2.58 0.0001 4.75MoNbTiV
0.25Zr 48.6 0.944 53.31 141.6 0.33 2.58 0.0004 4.76
MoNbTiV 0.50Zr 48.7 0.923 53.30 141.7 0.33 2.58 0.0008 4.78
MoNbTiV 0.75Zr 49.1 0.908 53.25 141.5 0.33 2.59 0.0011 4.79
MoNbTiV 1.00Zr 49.8 0.900 53.17 141.1 0.33 2.61 0.0014 4.80
MoNbTiV 1.25Zr 51.9 0.861 53.09 141.4 0.33 2.65 0.0027 4.81
MoNbTiV 1.50Zr 52.1 0.850 53.10 141.6 0.33 2.66 0.0032 4.82
Mo 0.8NbTiZr 45.9 1.054 51.71 137.2 0.33 2.57 0.0003 4.68
Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.2Zr 46.5 1.031 51.82 137.6 0.33 2.57 0.0001 4.70
Mo 0.9NbTiZr 46.8 1.004 52.56 139.5 0.33 2.56 0 4.72
Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.5Zr 48.1 1.000 51.88 137.9 0.33 2.59 0 4.72
All data are from Ref. [ 18]9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 319In order to illustrate the effect of alloying on the elastic anisotropy of refractory
HEAs, in Fig. 9.12, we plot the three-dimensional Efor NbTiVZr, MoNbTiZr, and
MoNbTiVZr. Here, Eis the Young ’s modulus along [hlk] crystallographic direc-
tion. For NbTiVZr alloy, the Eexhibits rather strong orientation dependence, so this
system may be regarded as being anisotropic. The largest value of Eis 140.2 GPa
realized along the [111] direction, whereas the smallest value of 97.7 GPa belongsto the [100] direction.
In contrast to the Mo-free alloy, the Mo-containing alloys seem to be almost
isotropic. Namely, their three-dimensional Eshown in Fig. 9.12 have almost
spherical shapes. The Young ’s modulus changes between 136.0 and 149.2 GPa
for MoNbTiVZr and between 139.9 and 144.3 GPa for MoNbTiZr. Previous
theoretical calculations predicted nearly isotropic surface energies for bcc Moand, as a consequence, spherically shaped nanoparticles for this metal.
For a fully isotropic material, the tetragonal shear modulus c
0¼(c11–c12) equals
the cubic shear modulus c44, so we have AZ¼1 and AVR¼0. The latter condition
reﬂects the fact that all statistical averaging methods (in the present case, the Voigtand Reuss methods) lead to the same polycrystalline shear modulus. According toour calculations, V slightly enhances the anisotropy of MoNbTiV
xZr, whereas
equimolar Mo addition to NbTiVZr turns the alloy almost isotropic. Based on
this information, we propose that one can optimize the content of Mo and V inMo
yNbTiV xZr so that the resulting alloy is fully isotropic. We demonstrate this by
performing calculations for Mo yNbTiV xZr as a function of xandy(keeping the Ti,
Zr, and Nb atomic fractions to 1). Some of the results of this additional study are
Fig. 9.11 Correlation between the bulk moduli Band shear moduli Gand Pugh ratio B/G of
MoNbTiV xZr (x¼0–1.5) and VEC (All data are from Ref. [ 18])320 F. Tian et al.shown in the lower part of Table 9.6. We ﬁnd that Mo yNbTiV xZr becomes almost
perfectly isotropic for ( x,y)¼(0, 0.9) or ( x,y)¼(0.5, 0.8). The Young ’s modulus
for Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.5Zr is shown in Fig. 9.12.
Very interestingly, for both isotropic Mo 0.9NbTiZr and Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.5Zr HEAs,
the VEC is about 4.72. On this ground, we suggest that VEC ~ 4.72 (valid within thepresent approximations) is an important criterion for the isotropic HEAs. Forcomparison, Li et al. predicted that the Ti–V alloys (Gum Metals) become elasti-
cally isotropic for VEC ~ 4.7 [ 39].
In addition to the above cases, we used the EMTO-CPA method to calculate
some other equimolar refractory HEAs reported in experiments. Table 9.7lists the
Wigner–Seitz radii, elastic constants, and polycrystalline elastic moduli as wellas VEC of the HfNbTiXZr (X ¼V, Cr, Ta), MoNbTaW, MoNbTaVW, as well as
HfNbTiZr and HfNbZr refractory HEAs. Like before, we used Vegard ’s law to
estimate the WS radius of the solid solution, i.e., w
mix. Our ab initio predications are
slightly smaller than wmixfor these seven refractory HEAs. Hence, all alloys show a
small but systematic positive deviation relative to Vegard ’s rule. We note that for
all HEAs considered here, the calculated lattice parameter wtis slightly larger than
the experiments we,except for HfNbTiZr and CrHfNbTiZr. It is very likely that this
100
−100
−100
−100 100NbVTiZr Mo0.8NbTiV0.5Zr
MoNbTiVZr MoNbTiZr100
[100]
[100][010] [010][001] [001]
[001] [001]0−100
−100 100100
[100]0 0
−100
10000
−100100
[010]0
[100]−100
1000−100100
[010]00100150
150
145
140
135140
130120
110
100−1000
100
−1000100
−1000
Fig. 9.12 Characteristic surfaces of the Young ’s modulus Efor NbTiVZr, MoNbTiZr,
MoNbTiVZr, and Mo 0.8NbTi V 0.5Zr. The values on the color scale and on the axes are in GPa.
Note that the same color bar applies to NbTiVZr and Mo 0.8NbTiV 0.5Zr and another to MoNbTiZr
and MoNbTiVZr9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 321Table 9.7 Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr) and elastic properties of refractory HEAs
HEAs wt wmix we Bc 11 c12 c44 c0
HfNbTiVZr 3.160 3.171 3.145 126.6 149.5 115.1 55.0 17.2
CrHfNbTiZr 3.132 3.140 3.186 117.2 153.1 99.3 49.2 26.9HfNbTaTiZr 3.212 3.235 3.163 136.3 160.2 124.4 62.4 17.9MoNbTaW 3.037 3.067 2.985 261.6 413.5 185.6 69.0 114
MoNbTaVW 3.003 3.017 2.957 245.1 380.8 177.3 61.2 102
HfNbTiZr 3.253 3.187 3.270 116.0 125.9 111.1 61.2 7.4HfNbZr 3.311 3.332 3.240 113.2 127.5 106.1 57.1 10.7
VEC c
44/c0c12–c44 G E v B/G A VR
HfNbTiVZr 4.4 3.200 60.1 34.6 95.0 0.375 3.663 0.154
CrHfNbTiZr 4.6 1.827 50.1 38.6 104.4 0.352 3.034 0.043HfNbTaTiZr 4.4 3.491 62.0 37.9 104.1 0.373 3.596 0.176MoNbTaW 5.5 0.605 116.6 84.4 228.7 0.354 3.097 0.030
MoNbTaVW 5.4 0.602 116.1 75.1 204.5 0.361 3.263 0.031
HfNbTiZr 4.25 8.263 49.8 27.7 77.0 0.389 4.189 0.434HfNbZr 4.33 5.351 49.01 29.74 81.89 0.379 3.815 0.298
Date taken from Ref. [ 40]
w
t,wmix, and westand for the theoretical, estimated (using Vegard ’s rule) and experimental Wigner–Seitz radii, respectively
Cubic elastic constants c11,c12,c44, and ( c12–c44) (GPa) ,polycrystalline elastic moduli ( B, G,E) (GPa), the Poisson ratio v, and the Pugh ratio B/G322 F. Tian et al.deviation is due to the employed frozen-core approximation, which is known to
yield somewhat larger lattice parameters as compared to all-electron calculations.
The seven refractory HEAs listed in Table 9.7are predicted to be mechanically
stable according to the dynamical stability conditions c44>0,c11>jc12j, and
c11+2c12>0. For the HfNbTiXZr (X ¼V, Cr, Ta) refractory HEAs, the polycrys-
talline elastic moduli are very similar. It is found that V has a small effect on B, G,
andEof MoNbTaW alloys.
The experimental Young ’s modulus is 128 (112) GPa for HfNbTiVZr
(CrHfNbTiZr), whereas the ab initio Eis 95 (104.4) GPa. We should note that
Hf20Nb20Ti20V20Zr20is almost a single bcc phase, whereas CrHfNbTiZr consists of
a mixture of bcc and Laves phases. The theoretical results are expected to be valid
for the completely random and homogeneous bcc solid solutions.
The calculated large positive Cauchy pressure ( c12/C0c14) suggests that these
refractory HEAs have strong metallic character and enhanced ductility. Keepingin mind our previous discussion from Sect. 9.4.3 , we ﬁnd that all values in Table 9.7
would indicate enhanced ductility for these refractory alloys. Good ductility hasindeed been reported for the single-phase HfNbTaTiZr alloy, while limited ductilityat room temperature and extensive compressive plasticity above 873 K has beenfound for the single-phase MoNbTaW and MoNbTaVW alloys. The reduced
ductility of CrHfNbTiZr alloy may result from the precipitation of Laves phase.
9.6 Stacking Fault Energy of HEAs
It has been established in this chapter that EMTO-CPA is a valuable tool to make
independent predictions on the structure and properties of HEAs. Beyond indepen-dent calculation of properties of HEAs, this method can also be coupled to availableexperimental measurements to aid in the extraction of physical properties. Here, wereview a recent example of the extraction of the stacking fault energy (SFE) frommulticomponent alloys, including HEAs, using this combined approach.
Determination of SFEs is important in alloy design because it indicates the
predominant plastic deformation mechanism to be expected in the alloys. HighSFE materials tend to deform via a dislocation glide mechanism with little splittinginto partial dislocations, while lower SFEs more readily split into partial dislocationpairs and the stacking fault widths tend to increase as the SFE is reduced. Solidsolution alloying has been one route to engineer lower SFE alloys experimentally,typically successful in Cu- or Mg- based where a wide range of solid solubility isachievable. Although successful, these materials have not retained sufﬁcient
strength to suit all potential applications. HEAs, however, provide a unique oppor-
tunity to tune the SFE as they form as solid solutions on fcc lattices in materialstypically known for having higher strength and over a wider compositional range.The ability to extract trends in SFE from new alloys is essential as these provide ameans of evaluating success of experiment and also provide for comparison withindependent predictive simulation.9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 323One route to assess the SFE experimentally is accomplished through x-ray
diffraction (XRD) measurements. However, this approach is only possible if elasticproperties of the alloy are known ahead of the measurement. If this is not the case,
ﬁrst principles methods, such as EMTO + CPA, can play a valuable role of
assessing the elastic constants of alloy as a function of their components andconcentrations and make the extraction of SFEs possible. From XRD (andEMTO + CPA), the SFE is calculated by use of Eq. 9.4for fcc materials
γ¼
6:6
πﬃﬃﬃ
3p/C1G111ðÞ2c44
c11/C0c12/C18/C19/C00:37
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Theory/C1aoε2
α|{z}
Experimentð9:4Þ
In this expression, theoretical calculations provide values for the shear modulus
in (111) determined from the elastic constants, G(111), and the Zener elastic anisot-
ropy determined from the independent elastic constants for fcc (i.e., c11,c12, and
c44), and experiment provides information on the lattice parameter ( ao), mean
square microstrain ( ε2), and the stacking fault probability ( α). The microstrain
can be extracted by ﬁtting XRD peaks with a Lorentzian function. The width ofthese ﬁtted peaks yields the microstrain through the procedure of Williamson andHall [ 41] and can be converted to the mean square microstrain through the proce-
dure of Klug and Alexander [ 42]. The stacking fault probability can be extracted by
use of the PM2K software package [ 43]. The elastic constants can be extracted
through ﬁts to both equations of state as well as quadratic ﬁts to volume conservingorthorhombic strains to the unit cell [ 12].
Using the XRD together with EMTO-CPA approach, Zaddach et al. recently
explored the SFE in equiatomic alloys as a function of the number of componentsup to ﬁve-component HEAs [ 15]. The SFEs presented in this work are plotted in
Fig. 9.13. Each equiatomic alloy was found to be a single-phase random solid
solution on the fcc lattice. The data in Fig. 9.13 shows a clear trend of a reduction in
the SFE with the number of components.
Although the SFEs were able to be reduced as a function of the number of
components, the lowest achievable value still exceeds those of conventional lowSFE Cu alloys, which have been shown to exhibit an SFE in the range of 7–14 mJ/m
2
depending on composition [ 44–46]. To further explore the ability to tune the SFE,
Zaddach et al. relaxed the equiatomic constraint and explored non-equiatomic com-positions for the ﬁve-component HEA. The authors added and removed Cr at theexpense of Ni, a typical high SFE material, and found that higher Cr content alloys
further reduced the SFE while retaining the single-phase solid solution fcc structure.
Ultimately, the authors found the Cr
26Co20Fe20Mn20Ni14non-equiatomic HEA, with
the subscripts representing atomic percent with unlabeled values ﬁxed at 20 at. %, tohave an SFE slightly less than 4 mJ/m
2, which is below current reported values of
Cu-based alloys.324 F. Tian et al.9.7 The KKR-CPA Method
In the previous sections, we have discussed theoretical studies of HEAs of four and
ﬁve elements using EMTO-CPA. In this section, we present a KKR-CPA approachto the ab initio electronic structure calculation for Al
xCrCoCuFeNi. In its conven-
tional implementation, the KKR-CPA takes mufﬁn-tin approximation, in which theone-electron potential in DFT is assumed to be spherically symmetric within anonoverlapping “mufﬁn-tin” sphere centered at each atom and constant in the
interstitial region. In contrast, the EMTO-CPA method uses the optimized
overlapping mufﬁn-tin potential, in order to employ the “best possible” sphericalrepresentation of the one-electron potential. The KKR-CPA method is based on themultiple scattering theory, where the single-site scattering and the scattering pathmatrices are of fundamental interest. On the other hand, the EMTO-CPA method isbased on mufﬁn-tin orbitals theory. Because of these differences, the CPA mediumsin these two methods are somewhat different. For the completeness of this chapter,we present here the basic theoretical features of the KKR-CPA method adopting the
usual multiple scattering terminology.
The KKR-CPA method uses Green ’s function technique within the framework
of multiple scattering theory and is uniquely designed for the theoreticalFig. 9.13 Stacking fault energy for elements and alloys. Alloys without subscripts are equiatomic,
while alloys with subscripts are given in atomic percent. The all gray values are from the literature,
while the bar graphs with the patterned ﬁll came from Ref. [ 15] using the combined XRD + EMTO
approach discussed in this section (All data are taken from Ref. [ 15])9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 325investigation of random alloys from the ﬁrst principles. In multiple scattering
theory, the Green function in the vicinity of an impurity “ i” at site 1, embedded
in the host with atoms “C”, is given by [ 47,48]
gi~r;~r0;ε/C16/C17
¼X
L,L0Zi
L~r<;εðÞ τ11
iεðÞ/C2/C3
LL0Zi/C15
L~r<;εðÞ /C0X
LZi
L~r<;εðÞ Ji/C15
L~r>;εðÞ ;ð9:5Þ
where r<¼min r;r0/C0/C1
andr>¼max r;r0/C0/C1
;LandL0are the index of the combi-
nation of angular momentum and magnetic quantum numbers landm, and Zi
L~r;εðÞ
andJi
L~r;εðÞ are regular and irregular solutions, respectively, of single atom “ i”
with appropriate boundary condition at the origin and at the bounding sphere of the
atomic cell. The symbol “•” in the superscript of the single-site solutions implies
that complex conjugate is applied to the complex spherical harmonic function in the
boundary condition. The scattering path matrix [ 49],τ11
iεðÞ;describes multiple
scattering processes, starting from and ending at site 1 and is given by [ 5]
τ11
iεðÞ ¼ τ11
CεðÞt/C01
iεðÞ /C0 t/C01
CεðÞ/C0/C1
þ1/C2/C3 /C01τ11
CεðÞ; ð9:6Þ
where tiεðÞandtCεðÞare the t-matrix of atoms iand C, respectively. If the host
atoms are on a periodic lattice, the scattering path matrix can be calculated using
Brillouin zone (BZ) integration technique as follows:
τ11
CεðÞ ¼1
ΩBZð
ΩBZt/C01
CεðÞ /C0 S~k;ε/C16/C17 hi
d3~k; ð9:7Þ
where ΩBZis the BZ volume and S~k;ε/C16/C17
is the KKR structure constant matrix.
For a random alloy made of Natomic species with contents ci,i¼1, 2, ...,N, the
CPA condition is such that the average of τ11
i(ε) is the scattering path matrix τ11
CεðÞ
of the CPA medium, in which the “host” atom is described by tCεðÞ. In practice, it is
useful to deﬁne following matrices [ 50]
XiεðÞ ¼ /C0 τ11
CεðÞ þ t/C01
iεðÞ /C0 t/C01
CεðÞ/C0/C1 /C01hi/C01
, and XCεðÞ ¼XN
i¼1ciXiεðÞ;ð9:8Þ
and it is easy to verify that the CPA condition gives rise to XCεðÞ ¼ 0:To solve for
tCεðÞ, one may start with an initial guess of tCεðÞ,t1ðÞ
CεðÞ ¼XN
i¼1citiεðÞ;and obtain
τ11,1ðÞ
C εðÞandX1ðÞ
CεðÞusing ( 9.7) and ( 9.8), respectively. A better guess of tCεðÞcan
be obtained from the previous one by using326 F. Tian et al.tnþ1ðÞ ,/C01
C εðÞ ¼ tnðÞ,/C01
C εðÞ /C0 XnðÞ
CεðÞ1þτ11,nðÞ
C εðÞXnðÞ
CεðÞhi/C01
: ð9:9Þ
This recursive procedure is iterated until the convergence is obtained. Once the
CPA medium tCεðÞis determined, one is able to calculate τ11
i(ε) and then the Green
function. If the system is in ferromagnetic state, the calculations described above
are carried out for each spin channel, which means there are CPA mediums for spinup and spin down, respectively. The conﬁgurationally averaged electron densityρ~rðÞand density of state n(ε) associated with each spin channel are given by the
imaginary part of the averaged Green function as follows:
ρ~rðÞ ¼ /C0
1
πImXN
i¼1ciðεF
εBgið~r,~r;εÞdε, and nεðÞ ¼ /C01
πImXN
i¼1ð
Ωgið~r,~r;εÞd3~r;
ð9:10Þ
where Ωis atomic cell volume, and the energy integration is usually carried out
along a contour, in the upper half of complex energy plane, from the bottom of thevalence bands ε
Bto the Fermi energy εF.
Despite the fact that all of KKR-CPA calculations carried out so far have been
using the mufﬁn-tin approximation, which is a reasonable approximation for mostmetallic alloys, the formalism of the KKR-CPA method shown above is valid in
general. A full-potential KKR-CPA method is currently under development by one
of the authors.
9.8 Application of the KKR-CPA Approach
To investigate the phase stability and the mechanical and magnetic properties ofAl
xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloys, we performed ab initio, spin-polarized,
electronic structure calculation using KKR-CPA method described above. Likemany other HEAs, this category of six-element alloys exhibits a combination ofgood material properties, including high hardness, high compressive strength, and
excellent resistance to softening, corrosion, oxidation, and wearing, especially at
elevated temperatures [ 51]. It has also been reported that this category of alloys
shows ferromagnetic behavior [ 52]. In the KKR-CPA calculation, we chose von
Barth-Hedin LSDA potential [ 53] and applied the mufﬁn-tin approximation to the
potential. The angular momentum quantum number cutoff was chosen to bel
max¼3, for which the size of the scattering matrices is 16 /C216. We used an
adaptive method for the Brillouin zone integration and used 30 Gaussian pointsfor the integration of the Green function along the energy contour. To determine
the equilibrium state, we ran the calculation for both fcc and bcc structures for
xup to 0.3.9 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 327The computational results are summarized in Table 9.8in which the bulk
modulus and the lattice constant are obtained by ﬁtting the calculated averagetotal energy versus the atomic volume to the Murnaghan equation of state. Thesizable average magnetic moment shows that the alloys are ferromagnetic for x
/C200:3:The average magnetic moment in the bcc structure is found to be higher than
that in fcc. While Cu and Al appear to be nonmagnetic in both fcc and bcc
structures, Cr exhibits antiferromagnetism, but its moment in bcc is few timessmaller than in fcc. For the fcc phase ( x<2.5), Al
xCoCrCuFeNi shows signiﬁcant
positive enthalpy of mixing as shown in Fig. 9.14.Table 9.8 The calculated energetic, mechanical, and magnetic properties of Al xCoCrCuFeNi
high-entropy alloys
xB
ΔEwM
fcc bcc fcc bcc fcc bcc
0.00 156.921 219.264 /C00.029 2.588 2.589 0.485 0.684
0.30 184.483 196.348 /C00.023 2.601 2.599 0.440 0.627
0.80 175.083 156.453 /C00.020 2.623 2.616 0.400 0.540
0.50 188.643 178.334 /C00.023 2.611 2.602 0.422 0.589
3.00 170.852 207.826 0.024 2.685 2.692 0.262 0.360
Bulk modulus B(GPa), the energy difference between fcc and bcc structures ΔE¼E(fcc)– E(bcc)
(eV/atom), Wigner–Seitz radius w(Bohr), and magnetic moment M(μB) are obtained using
KKR-CPA method
Fig. 9.14 The calculated enthalpy of mixing of Al xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloys in fcc ( solid
circle ) and bcc ( solid square ) structures. The data are obtained using KKR-CPA method328 F. Tian et al.9.9 Conclusions
In this chapter, we have introduced two CPA-based ab initio approaches,
EMTO-CPA and KKR-CPA, to the theoretical study of HEAs. We have investi-gated 3 dHEAs with magnetic elements both in paramagnetic and in ferromagnetic
states. For paramagnetic alloys, Fe remains magnetic due to its local momentnature, while most of the other alloy components are essentially in the nonmagneticstate. For ferromagnetic alloys, Cr moment appears to be antiferromagnetic orsuppressed at small Wigner–Seitz radius, which may be related to the fact that weare only considering the collinear magnetic states in the spin-polarized calculations.
It is found that all the 3 dHEAs under investigation are mechanically stable. As a
base alloy, CoCrFeNi is found to be brittle at static conditions (0 K). However,when the calculations are performed at room temperature volume, CoCrFeNi ispredicted to be ductile, in line with the observations. This ﬁnding highlights theimportance of thermal effect in the case of HEAs. By adding Cu or Ti to CoCrFeNi,the material becomes more ductile. On the other hand, addition of Al to CoCrFeNior CoCrCuFeNi is found to increase the equilibrium volume of the solid solutionand reduce the dynamical stability of the fcc lattice, and as the Al content increases,
the alloy undergoes phase changes from single fcc phase to fcc–bcc duplex phase
and to single bcc phase.
We have investigated HEAs with refractory elements. These HEAs show large
positive Cauchy pressure which suggests strong metallic character and enhancedductility. We also found that Mo tends to enhance the isotropic elasticity while Vtends to enhance the anisotropy. It is therefore possible to optimize the content ofMo and V in MoNbTiVZr so that the resulting alloy is fully isotropic.
The stacking fault energy of CoCrFeNi-based alloys has been studied using a
combined theoretical–experimental approach. We have demonstrated that
non-equiatomic HEAs offer additional degrees of freedom for a precise optimiza-tion of the deformation mechanism controlling the plasticity of this promising classof engineering alloys.
Acknowledgment Work were supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) with the Grant No. 51401014, the National Basic Research Development Program of
China with No. 2011CB606401, the Swedish Research Council, the European Research Council,
and the Hungarian Scientiﬁc Research Fund (research project OTKA 84078 and 109570).
References
1. Hohenberg P, Kohn W (1964) Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys Rev 136(3B):B864–B871
2. Kohn W, Sham LJ (1965) Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
effects. Phys Rev 140(4A):A1133–A1138
3. Soven P (1967) Coherent-potential model of substitutional disordered alloys. Phys Rev 156
(3):8099 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 3294. Taylor DW (1967) Vibrational properties of imperfect crystals with large defect concentra-
tions. Phys Rev 156(3):1017
5. Gyorffy BL (1972) Coherent-potential approximation for a nonoverlapping-mufﬁn-tin-poten-
tial model of random substitutional alloys. Phys Rev B 5(6)
6. Korringa J (1947) On the calculation of the energy of a Bloch wave in a metal. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 13(6–7):392–400, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0031-8914(47)90013-X
7. Kohn W, Rostoker N (1954) Solution of the Schr €odinger equation in periodic lattices with an
application to metallic lithium. Phys Rev 94(5):1111–1120
8. Skriver HL (1984) The LMTO method. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York/Tokyo9. Andersen OK (1975) Linear methods in band theory. Phys Rev B 12(8):3060–3083
10. Vitos L (2001) Total-energy method based on the exact mufﬁn-tin orbitals theory. Phys Rev B
64(1):014107
11. Vitos L, Abrikosov IA, Johansson B (2001) Anisotropic lattice distortions in random alloys
from ﬁrst-principles theory. Phys Rev Lett 87(15):156401
12. Vitos L (2007) The EMTO Method and Applications in Computational Quantum Mechanics
for Materials Engineers (Springer-Verlag, London)
13. Gyorffy BL, Stocks GM (1983) Concentration waves and fermi surfaces in random metallic
alloys. Phys Rev Lett 50(5):374–377
14. Zunger A, Wei SH, Ferreira L, Bernard J (1990) Special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev
Lett 65(3):353–356. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.65.353
15. Zaddach AJ, Niu C, Koch CC, Irving DL (2013) Mechanical properties and stacking fault
energies of NiFeCrCoMn high-entropy alloy. JOM 65(12):1780–1789. doi: 10.1007/s11837-
013-0771-4
16. Tian F, Varga L, Chen N, Delczeg L, Vitos L (2013) Ab initio investigation of high-entropy
alloys of 3d elements. Physical Review B 87(7); 075144–075151. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.87.
075144
17. Tian F, Delczeg L, Chen N, Varga LK, Shen J, Vitos L (2013) Structural stability of
NiCoFeCrAlx high-entropy alloy from ab initio theory. Physical Review B 88(8); 085128–085132. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.88.085128
18. Tian F, Varga LK, Chen N, Shen J, Vitos L (2014) Ab initio design of elastically isotropic
TiZrNbMoVx high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 599:19–25. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.
01.237
19. Pinski FJ, Staunton J, Gyorffy BL, Johnson DD, Stocks GM (1986) Ferromagnetism versus
antiferromagnetism in face-centered-cubic iron. Phys Rev Lett 56(19):2096–2099
20. Lucas MS, Wilks GB, Mauger L, Mu ~noz JA, Senkov ON, Michel E, Horwath J, Semiatin SL,
Stone MB, Abernathy DL, Karapetrova E (2012) Absence of long-range chemical ordering inequimolar FeCoCrNi. Appl Phys Lett 100(25):251907. doi: 10.1063/1.4730327
21. Delczeg-Czirjak EK, Nurmi E, Kokko K, Vitos L (2011) Effect of long-range order on elastic
properties of Pd0.5Ag0.5 alloy from ﬁrst principles. Phys Rev B 84(9); 094205–094210.doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.84.094205
22. Lucas MS, Mauger L, Mu ~noz JA, Xiao Y, Sheets AO, Semiatin SL, Horwath J, Turgut Z
(2011) Magnetic and vibrational properties of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109
(7):07E307. doi: 10.1063/1.3538936
23. Shun T-T, Hung C-H, Lee C-F (2010) Formation of ordered/disordered nanoparticles in FCC
high entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 493(1–2):105–109, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallcom.2009.12.071
24. Wang XF, Zhang Y, Qiao Y, Chen GL (2007) Novel microstructure and properties of
multicomponent CoCrCuFeNiTix alloys. Intermetallics 15(3):357–362. doi: 10.1016/j.
intermet.2006.08.005
25. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ, Shi J (2009)
Microstructure and mechanical properties of CoCrFeNiTiAlx high-entropy alloys. Mater SciEng A 508(1–2):214–219. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2008.12.053330 F. Tian et al.26. Wu Y, Liu WH, Wang XL, Ma D, Stoica AD, Nieh TG, He ZB, Lu ZP (2014) In-situ neutron
diffraction study of deformation behavior of a multi-component high-entropy alloy. Appl PhysLett 104(5):051910. doi: 10.1063/1.4863748
27. Zhang K, Fu Z (2012) Effects of annealing treatment on phase composition and microstructure
of CoCrFeNiTiAlx high-entropy alloys. Intermetallics 22:24–32. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2011.
10.010
28. Vitos L, Korzhavyi PA, Johansson B (2003) Stainless steel optimization from quantum
mechanical calculations. Nat Mater 2(4)
29. Kao Y-F, Chen T-J, Chen S-K, Yeh J-W (2009) Microstructure and mechanical property of
as-cast, /C0homogenized, and -deformed AlxCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys.
J Alloys Compd 488(1):57–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.08.090
30. Chou H-P, Chang Y-S, Chen S-K, Yeh J-W (2009) Microstructure, thermophysical and
electrical properties in AlxCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng B 163
(3):184–189. doi: 10.1016/j.mseb.2009.05.024
31. Wang W-R, Wang W-L, Wang S-C, Tsai Y-C, Lai C-H, Yeh J-W (2012) Effects of Al addition
on the microstructure and mechanical property of AlxCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys. Inter-
metallics 26:44–51. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2012.03.005
32. Guo S, Ng C, Lu J, Liu CT (2011) Effect of valence electron concentration on stability of fcc or
bcc phase in high entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(10):103505. doi: 10.1063/1.3587228
33. Gu XJ, McDermott AG, Poon SJ, Shiﬂet GJ (2006) Critical Poisson ’s ratio for plasticity in Fe–
Mo–C–B–Ln bulk amorphous steel. Appl Phys Lett 88(21):211905. doi: 10.1063/1.2206149
34. Zhou YJ, Zhang Y, Wang YL, Chen GL (2007) Solid solution alloys of AlCoCrFeNiTi[sub x]
with excellent room-temperature mechanical properties. Appl Phys Lett 90(18):181904.
doi:10.1063/1.2734517
35. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Woodward C, Miracle DB (2013) Low-density, refractory multi-
principal element alloys of the Cr–Nb–Ti–V–Zr system: microstructure and phase analysis.
Acta Mater 61(5):1545–1557. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2012.11.032
36. Massalski TB, Okamoto H, Subramanian PR, Kacprazak L (1990) Binary alloy phase diagram,
2nd edn. ASM International, Materials Park
37. Wang K, Reeber RR (1998) The role of defects on thermophysical properties: thermal
expansion of V, Nb, Ta, Mo and W. Mater Sci Eng Struct Mater Prop Microstruct Process
23:101–137
38. Ramos de Debiaggi S, de Koning M, Monti AM (2006) Theoretical study of the thermody-
namic and kinetic properties of self-interstitials in aluminum and nickel. Phys Rev B 73
(10):104103
39. Li T, Morris JW, Nagasako N, Kuramoto S, Chrzan DC (2007) “Ideal” engineering alloys.
Phys Rev Lett 98(10):105503
40. Fazakas E ´, Zadorozhnyy V, Varga LK, Inoue A, Louzguine-Luzgin DV, Tian F, Vitos L
(2014) Experimental and theoretical study of Ti20Zr20Hf20Nb20X20 (X ¼V or Cr)
refractory high-entropy alloys. Int J Refract Met Hard Mater 47:131–138. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijrmhm.2014.07.009
41. Williamson G, Hall W (1953) X-ray line broadening from ﬁled aluminium and wolfram. Acta
Metall 1(1):22–31
42. Alexander LE, Klug HP (1974) X-ray diffraction procedures for polycrystalline and amor-
phous materials, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York
43. Leoni M, Confente T, Scardi P (2006) PM2K: a ﬂexible program implementing whole powder
pattern modelling. Z Kristallogr Suppl 23:249–254
44. Denanot M, Villain J (1971) The stacking fault energy in Cu ‐Al‐Zn alloys. Physica Status
Solidi (a) 8(2):K125–K127
45. Schramm R, Reed R (1975) Stacking fault energies of seven commercial austenitic stainless
steels. Metallurg Transact A 6(7):1345–13519 Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to HEAs 33146. Gong Y, Wen C, Li Y, Wu X, Cheng L, Han X, Zhu X (2013) Simultaneously enhanced
strength and ductility of Cu-xGe alloys through manipulating the stacking fault energy (SFE).Mater Sci Eng A 569:144–149
47. Faulkner JS, Stocks GM (1980) Calculating properties with the coherent-potential approxi-
mation. Phys Rev B 21(8):3222–3244
48. Rusanu A, Stocks GM, Wang Y, Faulkner JS (2011) Green’s functions in full-potential
multiple-scattering theory. Phys Rev B 84(3):035102
49. Gyorffy BL, Stott MJ (1973) Theory of soft X-ray emission from alloys. In: Fabian DJ, Watson
LM (eds) Proceedings of the international conference on band structure and spectroscopy ofmetals and alloys. Academic, New York
50. Mills R, Gray LJ, Kaplan T (1983) Analytic approximation for random mufﬁn-tin alloys. Phys
Rev B 27(6):3252–3262
51. Tong CJ, Chen MR, Chen SK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Lin SJ, Chang SY (2005) Mechanical
performance of the AlxCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with multiprincipal elements.Metallurg Mater Transact Phys Metallurgy Mater Sci 36A:1263–1271
52. Zhang KB, Fu ZY, Zhang JY, Shi J, Wang WM, Wang H, Wang YC, Zhang QJ (2010)
Annealing on the structure and properties evolution of the CoCrFeNiCuAl high-entropy alloy.J Alloys Compd 502(2):295–299, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.11.104
53. von Barth U, Hedin L (1972) A local exchange-correlation potential for the spin polarized
case. J Phys C: Solid State Phys 5(13):1629–1642. doi: 10.1088/0022-3719/5/13/012332 F. Tian et al.Chapter 10
Applications of Special Quasi-random
Structures to High-Entropy Alloys
Michael C. Gao, Changning Niu, Chao Jiang, and Douglas L. Irving
Abstract Special quasi-random structures (SQSs) are an important tool in
modeling disordered alloys with atomic resolution. This chapter ﬁrst presents theframework and the tools available to generate SQS for high-entropy alloys (HEAs).
Examples of SQS in 4- and 5-component equiatomic alloys with face-centered
cubic (FCC), hexagonal close-packed (HCP), and body-centered cubic (BCC)crystal structures, which are central to HEAs, are provided with different SQScell sizes. Using SQS, the phase stability of known single-phase HEAs is examined,and the vibrational, electronic, and mechanical properties are predicted. Finally, thechapter compares the strength and limitations of SQS with hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics (MC/MD) simulations and coherent potential approximation(CPA) as introduced in prior chapters. First-principles calculations on selected
single-phase HEAs show that the vibrational entropy of mixing is small, and the
electronic entropy of mixing is truly negligible. Excellent agreement in the elec-tronic density of states of HEAs was observed using SQS versus MC/MD. Theaccuracy of these SQS models is sensitive to the size of the cell, and larger cellsproduce more reliable results.
Keywords Special quasi-random structures (SQSs) • Hybrid Monte Carlo/
molecular dynamics (MC/MD) • Coherent potential application (CPA) • Density
functional theory (DFT) • First principles • Magnetism • Electronic structure
• Elasticity • Elastic constants • Stacking fault energy • Density of state • Entropysources • Conﬁgurational entropy • Vibrational entropy • Electronic entropy• Excess entropy • Phonon vibration • Phase stability • Pair distribution function
M.C. Gao ( *)
National Energy Technology Laboratory/AECOM, Albany, OR 97321, USAe-mail: michael.gao@netl.doe.gov
C. Niu • D.L. Irving
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USAe-mail: cniu@ncsu.edu ;dlirving@ncsu.edu
C. Jiang
Thermo-Calc Software, Pittsburgh, PA 15317, USAe-mail: chao@thermocalc.com
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_10333• Face-centered cubic (FCC) • Hexagonal close-packed (HCP) • Body-centered
cubic (BCC) • Cell size effect • Disordered solid solution • High-entropy alloys(HEAs)
10.1 Introduction
Within the framework of density functional theory (DFT), periodic boundaryconditions are applied to an atomic unit (or primitive) cell consisting of a limited
number of atoms in order to simulate the bulk state of a material. Such calcula-tions are straightforward for perfectly ordered structures. However, as many
materials (e.g., Ni-based s uperalloys) are multicomponent in nature, the exis-
tence of substitutional disorder can ma ke DFT calculations difﬁcult. The same
computational difﬁculty also exists in the DFT modeling of compounds with
partially occupied sites. Intuitively, to model a random solid solution, one can
arbitrarily distribute the solute and sol vent atoms on the latt ice sites of a large
supercell and then obtain the averaged energy and properties from a large numberof lattices of varying site distributio ns of atoms. Obviously this brute-force
approach would therefore be computationally too expensive for DFTcalculations.
The concept of SQS [ 1,2] is to build a special periodic structure with a small
number of atoms per unit cell whose correlation functions for the ﬁrst few nearest-
neighbor shells are as close to those of a target random alloy as possible such that
the periodicity errors only exist between more distant neighbors. Because interac-tions between distant neighbors generally contribute much less to the systemenergy than between near neighbors, an SQS can be regarded as the best possibleperiodic unit cell representing a given random alloy. However, caution should bepaid to ionic crystals for which distant-neighbor interactions may still be importantunder a given unit cell size constraint. To date, the SQS approach has beensuccessfully applied to predict the formation energies [ 3], elastic properties
[3–5], bond length distributions [ 6], density of states [ 6], and band gaps and optical
properties [ 7,8] of a wide range of materials with substitutional disorder, including
semiconductors [ 7], oxides [ 8], and metallic alloys including high-entropy
alloys [ 5].
10.2 Generation of SQS for High-Entropy Alloys
To date, SQSs have been mainly applied to model random binary [ 9–11] and
ternary alloys [ 12,13] in the literature. In the case of HEAs, SQS has some
limitations that one needs to consider. Three major questions need to be answered
to obtain an SQS for HEAs. The ﬁrst is to determine the cell size of the desired SQSmodel – is it large enough to allow exploring desired compositions with sufﬁcient334 M.C. Gao et al.accuracy and small enough to allow DFT calculations within current hardware
limitations? The second is to decide the criteria of clusters used in the calculationsof correlation functions. Namely, what is the maximum distance for pairs and
triplets that are considered as being important in generating SQS? Is it always
preferred to use strict criteria? The third is to determine when to stop the generationof SQS. Ideally the generation of SQS will stop automatically after ﬁnding theperfect SQS model that satisﬁes our search criteria. However, it is likely that aperfect SQS of an HEA can never be found due to limited supercell size, in whichcase one needs to manually stop the generation of SQS and use the best SQS modelthat is obtained.
There are two methods to generate SQSs. The ﬁrst one is to exhaustively
generate all possible supercells for a given cell size and then pick the one that
best mimics the correlation functions of the random alloy. The second method is toperform Monte Carlo simulations to search for the best SQS. The two methods havebeen, respectively, implemented in the gensqs andmcsqs codes within the Alloy
Theoretic Automated Toolkit (ATAT) developed by Axel van de Walle andcoworkers [ 14,15]. ATAT ’s main codes include a code to construct cluster
expansions from ﬁrst principles to calculate the energy of a substitutional alloy asa function of its conﬁguration and a code to perform Monte Carlo simulation of
lattice models in order to compute thermodynamic properties of alloys starting from
a cluster expansion [ 14,15]. While the gensqs code can only be used to generate
smaller SQS, the mcsqs code [ 16] is more powerful and can be used to generate
large SQS containing hundreds of atoms per unit cell. The full functionalities ofATAT can be found in the ofﬁcial manual [ 17].
Only quaternary and quinary equiatomic SQSs for HEAs with various cell sizes
to mimic disordered face-centered cubic (FCC), hexagonal close-packed (HCP),and body-centered cubic (BCC) lattices are provided in this chapter, and one can
generate other SQS for HEAs with more components using ATAT. In the genera-
tion of both the 16- and 24-atom fcc quaternary SQS, only pair correlation functionsup to the third nearest shell are considered. Based on the present authors ’experi-
ence, it usually takes more than a few days to obtain an optimal SQS for HEAswith small correlation function mismatch. The generation of BCC and HCP SQSmodels uses similar settings. In all cases, triplets are not considered becausechemical complexity of these models signiﬁcantly raises the difﬁculty of ﬁndinga usable SQS. In fact, the generated best SQS by adding triplets within the ﬁrst
nearest shell may have larger correlation function mismatch values than the one
considering only pairs.
In addition to the small SQS discussed above, larger SQS have also been
developed for 4- and 5-component HEAs using the mcsqs code, although their
generation needs much longer time than the small SQS due to combinatorialexplosion. As a general rule, the larger the SQS cell is, the better it can reproducethe correlation functions of a random alloy. A convergence test on the energy versusthe SQS cell size may be desirable to determine the optimal cell size for the sake of
computational efﬁciency.10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 33510.3 Quaternary and Quinary HEA SQS
SQSs for quaternary and quinary random solid solution HEAs at equal molar ratio
for FCC, BCC, and HCP are generated using a variety of cell sizes, namely, thenumber of atoms in SQS ranging from 16 to 250 atoms. The unrelaxed lattice vectorand atomic position in the obtained SQS models for equal molar quaternary andquinary HEAs in FCC, BCC, and HCP structures are listed in Tables 10.1,10.2,
and10.3, respectively. The crystal structures of quaternary (quinary) SQS are
shown in Fig. 10.1 (Fig. 10.2).
Table 10.1 Quaternary ABCD SQS: 16-/24-atom FCC/HCP [ 5] and 64-atom
FCC/BCC/HCP [ 18]
64-atom FCC 64-atom HCP 64-atom BCC
Lattice vectors
022
202
2200
@1
A
Atom positions
0.00 0.00 0.50 A0.00 0.25 0.25 A
0.00 0.50 0.25 A
0.00 0.75 0.25 A0.00 0.75 0.75 A0.25 0.00 0.25 A
0.25 0.25 0.00 A
0.25 0.25 0.50 A0.25 0.50 0.50 A
0.25 0.75 0.25 A
0.50 0.00 0.50 A0.50 0.75 0.00 A0.75 0.00 0.00 A
0.75 0.00 0.25 A
0.75 0.00 0.50 A0.75 0.75 0.25 A0.00 0.00 0.25 B
0.00 0.00 0.75 B
0.00 0.25 0.00 B0.00 0.50 0.75 B
0.00 0.75 0.00 B
0.00 0.75 0.50 B0.25 0.00 0.50 B0.50 0.00 0.75 B
0.50 0.25 0.75 B
0.50 0.50 0.00 B0.75 0.00 0.75 B0.75 0.25 0.00 B
0.75 0.25 0.50 B
0.75 0.50 0.50 B0.75 0.50 0.75 BLattice vectors
40 0
/C023:4641 0
00 3 :2660
@1
A
Atom positions
0.000000 0.000000 0.500000 A0.000000 0.250000 0.000000 A
0.000000 0.750000 0.500000 A
0.250000 0.000000 0.000000 A0.250000 0.250000 0.000000 A0.500000 0.250000 0.500000 A
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 A
0.500000 0.750000 0.000000 A0.750000 0.000000 0.500000 A
0.750000 0.750000 0.500000 A
0.166667 0.083333 0.750000 A0.166667 0.833333 0.250000 A0.416667 0.833333 0.750000 A
0.666667 0.333333 0.750000 A
0.666667 0.583333 0.750000 A0.916667 0.833333 0.750000 A0.000000 0.000000 0.000000 B
0.000000 0.250000 0.500000 B
0.250000 0.750000 0.000000 B0.500000 0.500000 0.000000 B
0.500000 0.750000 0.500000 B
0.750000 0.250000 0.500000 B0.166667 0.833333 0.750000 B0.416667 0.083333 0.250000 B
0.416667 0.833333 0.250000 B
0.666667 0.083333 0.250000 B0.666667 0.083333 0.750000 B0.666667 0.333333 0.250000 B
0.666667 0.583333 0.250000 B
0.666667 0.833333 0.750000 B0.916667 0.083333 0.250000 BLattice vectors
/C02/C022
2/C02/C02
2220
@1
A
Atom positions
0.00 0.00 0.50 A0.00 0.50 0.00 A
0.25 0.00 0.75 A
0.25 0.25 0.50 A0.25 0.25 0.75 A0.25 0.50 0.50 A
0.50 0.00 0.00 A
0.50 0.25 0.00 A0.50 0.50 0.25 A
0.50 0.75 0.00 A
0.50 0.75 0.25 A0.75 0.00 0.75 A0.75 0.50 0.50 A
0.75 0.75 0.25 A
0.75 0.75 0.50 A0.75 0.75 0.75 A0.00 0.00 0.00 B
0.00 0.25 0.00 B
0.00 0.25 0.50 B0.00 0.50 0.25 B
0.00 0.50 0.75 B
0.25 0.25 0.00 B0.25 0.50 0.25 B0.25 0.75 0.25 B
0.25 0.75 0.50 B
0.25 0.75 0.75 B0.50 0.00 0.75 B0.50 0.50 0.00 B
0.50 0.50 0.50 B
0.50 0.50 0.75 B0.75 0.25 0.00 B
(continued)336 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.1 (continued)
64-atom FCC 64-atom HCP 64-atom BCC
0.75 0.75 0.75 B
0.00 0.25 0.50 C
0.00 0.25 0.75 C0.00 0.50 0.00 C
0.00 0.50 0.50 C
0.25 0.00 0.00 C0.25 0.25 0.25 C0.25 0.50 0.25 C
0.25 0.75 0.00 C
0.50 0.00 0.25 C0.50 0.25 0.00 C0.50 0.50 0.25 C
0.50 0.50 0.50 C
0.50 0.50 0.75 C0.75 0.25 0.25 C
0.75 0.25 0.75 C
0.75 0.50 0.25 C0.00 0.00 0.00 D0.25 0.00 0.75 D
0.25 0.25 0.75 D
0.25 0.50 0.00 D0.25 0.50 0.75 D0.25 0.75 0.50 D
0.25 0.75 0.75 D
0.50 0.00 0.00 D0.50 0.25 0.25 D0.50 0.25 0.50 D
0.50 0.75 0.25 D
0.50 0.75 0.50 D0.50 0.75 0.75 D
0.75 0.50 0.00 D
0.75 0.75 0.00 D0.75 0.75 0.50 D0.916667 0.333333 0.250000 B
0.000000 0.500000 0.000000 C
0.000000 0.750000 0.000000 C0.250000 0.500000 0.000000 C
0.250000 0.750000 0.500000 C
0.500000 0.000000 0.500000 C0.500000 0.250000 0.000000 C0.750000 0.500000 0.500000 C
0.750000 0.750000 0.000000 C
0.166667 0.333333 0.750000 C0.166667 0.583333 0.750000 C0.416667 0.333333 0.750000 C
0.416667 0.583333 0.250000 C
0.416667 0.583333 0.750000 C0.666667 0.833333 0.250000 C
0.916667 0.333333 0.750000 C
0.916667 0.583333 0.250000 C0.000000 0.500000 0.500000 D0.250000 0.000000 0.500000 D
0.250000 0.250000 0.500000 D
0.250000 0.500000 0.500000 D0.500000 0.000000 0.000000 D0.750000 0.000000 0.000000 D
0.750000 0.250000 0.000000 D
0.750000 0.500000 0.000000 D0.166667 0.083333 0.250000 D0.166667 0.333333 0.250000 D
0.166667 0.583333 0.250000 D
0.416667 0.083333 0.750000 D0.416667 0.333333 0.250000 D
0.916667 0.083333 0.750000 D
0.916667 0.583333 0.750000 D0.916667 0.833333 0.250000 D0.75 0.50 0.00 B
0.00 0.00 0.25 C
0.00 0.00 0.75 C0.00 0.25 0.25 C
0.00 0.75 0.00 C
0.00 0.75 0.25 C0.00 0.75 0.75 C0.25 0.00 0.00 C
0.25 0.25 0.25 C
0.25 0.50 0.75 C0.50 0.75 0.50 C0.75 0.00 0.00 C
0.75 0.00 0.25 C
0.75 0.00 0.50 C0.75 0.25 0.25 C
0.75 0.25 0.50 C
0.75 0.25 0.75 C0.00 0.25 0.75 D0.00 0.50 0.50 D
0.00 0.75 0.50 D
0.25 0.00 0.25 D0.25 0.00 0.50 D0.25 0.50 0.00 D
0.25 0.75 0.00 D
0.50 0.00 0.25 D0.50 0.00 0.50 D0.50 0.25 0.25 D
0.50 0.25 0.50 D
0.50 0.25 0.75 D0.50 0.75 0.75 D
0.75 0.50 0.25 D
0.75 0.50 0.75 D0.75 0.75 0.00 D
16-atom FCC 16-atom HCPLattice vectors
/C01/C00:5/C01:5
/C011 :50 :5
10 :5/C00:50
@1
A
Atom positions
0.875 0.625 1.0 A
0.875 0.125 0.5 A0.125 0.875 0.5 A1.000 0.500 0.5 A
0.625 0.875 1.0 B
0.750 0.750 0.5 B0.625 0.375 0.5 B
0.375 0.625 0.5 B
0.750 0.250 1.0 C0.500 0.500 1.0 CLattice vectors
1:50 :866 3
:266
0:5/C00:866 3 :266
20 00
@1
A
Atom positions
0.500000 0.500000 1.000000 A
0.291666 0.958333 0.041667 A0.791666 0.458333 0.041667 A0.041666 0.708333 0.791667 A
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 B
0.750000 0.750000 0.250000 B0.541666 0.208333 0.291667 B
0.041666 0.708333 0.291667 B
1.000000 1.000000 1.000000 C1.000000 1.000000 0.500000 C
(continued)10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 337Table 10.1 (continued)
64-atom FCC 64-atom HCP 64-atom BCC
0.125 0.375 1.0 C
0.250 0.250 0.5 C
0.250 0.750 1.0 D0.375 0.125 1.0 D
1.000 1.000 1.0 D
0.500 1.000 0.5 D0.750000 0.750000 0.750000 C
0.291666 0.958333 0.541667 C
0.250000 0.250000 0.250000 D0.250000 0.250000 0.750000 D
0.541666 0.208333 0.791667 D
0.791666 0.458333 0.541667 D
24-atom FCC [5] 24-atom HCP [5]
Lattice vectors
0:5/C00:5/C01
/C01:5/C01:50
/C01:51:5/C010
@1
A
Atom positions
1.00 0.83333333 0.50 A
0.50 0.50000000 1.00 A
1.00 0.33333333 1.00 A0.25 0.33333333 0.75 A0.75 0.33333333 0.25 A
0.25 0.16666667 0.25 A
0.50 0.83333333 1.00 B0.75 0.66666667 0.25 B
0.50 0.33333333 0.50 B
0.50 0.16666667 1.00 B1.00 1.00000000 1.00 B0.75 0.16666667 0.75 B
1.00 0.66666667 1.00 C
0.25 0.66666667 0.75 C0.50 0.66666667 0.50 C1.00 0.50000000 0.50 C
0.25 0.50000000 0.25 C
0.25 1.00000000 0.75 C0.25 0.83333333 0.25 D0.75 0.83333333 0.75 D
0.75 0.50000000 0.75 D
1.00 0.16666667 0.50 D0.50 1.00000000 0.50 D
0.75 1.00000000 0.25 DLattice vectors
/C02/C01:732 1 :633
/C021:732 1 :633
/C010 /C01:6330
@1
A
Atom positions
1.00 0.833333 0.50 A
0.50 0.500000 1.00 A
1.00 0.333333 1.00 A0.25 0.333333 0.75 A0.75 0.333333 0.25 A
0.25 0.166667 0.25 A
0.50 0.833333 1.00 B
0.75 0.666667 0.25 B
0.50 0.333333 0.50 B
0.50 0.166667 1.00 B1.00 1.000000 1.00 B0.75 0.166667 0.75 B
1.00 0.666667 1.00 C
0.25 0.666667 0.75 C0.50 0.666667 0.50 C1.00 0.500000 0.50 C
0.25 0.500000 0.25 C
0.25 1.000000 0.75 C0.25 0.833333 0.25 D0.75 0.833333 0.75 D
0.75 0.500000 0.75 D
1.00 0.166667 0.50 D0.50 1.000000 0.50 D
0.75 1.000000 0.25 D
Lattice vectors and atomic positions (in fractional coordinates) are given for the unrelaxed lattices
Table 10.2 Quinary ABCDE SQS: 20-atom FCC/HCP [ 5], 125-atom FCC/BCC [ 18], and
160-atom HCP [ 18]
125-atom FCC 125-atom BCC 160-atom HCP
Lattice vectors
02:52:5
2:502 :5
2:52:500
@1
A
Atom positions
0.2 0.8 0.4 ALattice vectors
/C02:5/C02:52 :5
2:5/C02:5/C02:5
2:52 :52 :50
@1
A
Atom positions
0.2 0.4 0.4 ALattice vectors
40 0
/C023:4641 0
008 :1650
@1
A
Atom positions
0.000000 0.500000 0.400000 A
(continued)338 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.2 (continued)
125-atom FCC 125-atom BCC 160-atom HCP
0.6 0.0 0.2 A
0.6 0.4 0.8 A
0.8 0.0 0.2 A0.0 0.8 0.8 A
0.2 0.6 0.6 A
0.4 0.0 0.4 A0.4 0.6 0.6 A0.6 0.4 0.4 A
0.6 0.6 0.2 A
0.8 0.8 0.4 A0.4 0.0 0.8 A0.4 0.2 0.6 A
0.4 0.6 0.0 A
0.6 0.6 0.0 A0.8 0.4 0.2 A
0.0 0.4 0.4 A
0.2 0.0 0.0 A0.6 0.2 0.2 A0.2 0.4 0.6 A
0.2 0.8 0.6 A
0.4 0.6 0.4 A0.6 0.0 0.0 A0.8 0.2 0.0 A
0.8 0.2 0.8 A
0.2 0.0 0.8 B0.4 0.4 0.8 B0.8 0.2 0.4 B
0.8 0.4 0.8 B
0.0 0.8 0.0 B0.2 0.4 0.4 B
0.4 0.6 0.2 B
0.6 0.6 0.8 B0.6 0.8 0.8 B0.8 0.0 0.0 B
0.8 0.2 0.2 B
0.2 0.0 0.6 B0.4 0.0 0.2 B0.4 0.8 0.2 B
0.6 0.0 0.6 B
0.6 0.6 0.6 B0.6 0.8 0.6 B
0.0 0.6 0.8 B
0.2 0.6 0.2 B0.4 0.0 0.6 B0.4 0.2 0.0 B
0.6 0.2 0.0 B
0.8 0.6 0.8 B0.0 0.6 0.6 B0.2 0.2 0.0 B0.4 0.4 0.2 A
0.6 0.4 0.8 A
0.0 0.2 0.0 A0.0 0.6 0.4 A
0.4 0.0 0.8 A
0.8 0.8 0.8 A0.0 0.2 0.4 A0.0 0.6 0.2 A
0.2 0.4 0.2 A
0.4 0.2 0.6 A0.6 0.2 0.6 A0.8 0.6 0.4 A
0.0 0.8 0.6 A
0.2 0.0 0.0 A0.2 0.8 0.0 A
0.4 0.0 0.6 A
0.4 0.6 0.6 A0.8 0.4 0.8 A0.8 0.6 0.2 A
0.0 0.0 0.6 A
0.0 0.0 0.8 A0.2 0.6 0.6 A0.6 0.6 0.2 A
0.8 0.0 0.4 A
0.2 0.8 0.8 B0.4 0.4 0.0 B0.4 0.8 0.8 B
0.6 0.2 0.2 B
0.6 0.2 0.4 B0.6 0.2 0.8 B
0.6 0.6 0.6 B
0.6 0.8 0.8 B0.0 0.6 0.0 B0.2 0.0 0.4 B
0.4 0.2 0.0 B
0.4 0.2 0.2 B0.4 0.8 0.2 B0.6 0.8 0.6 B
0.8 0.4 0.2 B
0.2 0.4 0.6 B0.6 0.6 0.4 B
0.8 0.8 0.2 B
0.2 0.2 0.6 B0.4 0.0 0.0 B0.4 0.4 0.4 B
0.0 0.2 0.6 B
0.4 0.2 0.8 B0.6 0.4 0.6 B0.8 0.4 0.6 B0.000000 0.500000 0.600000 A
0.000000 0.500000 0.800000 A
0.000000 0.750000 0.600000 A0.250000 0.000000 0.200000 A
0.250000 0.000000 0.400000 A
0.250000 0.000000 0.800000 A0.250000 0.250000 0.600000 A0.250000 0.500000 0.600000 A
0.500000 0.250000 0.000000 A
0.500000 0.500000 0.200000 A0.500000 0.500000 0.400000 A0.750000 0.000000 0.000000 A
0.750000 0.000000 0.600000 A
0.750000 0.250000 0.600000 A0.750000 0.500000 0.400000 A
0.750000 0.500000 0.600000 A
0.166667 0.083333 0.900000 A0.166667 0.333333 0.700000 A0.166667 0.583333 0.300000 A
0.166667 0.583333 0.700000 A
0.166667 0.833333 0.900000 A0.416667 0.083333 0.100000 A0.416667 0.333333 0.100000 A
0.416667 0.833333 0.900000 A
0.666667 0.333333 0.100000 A0.666667 0.333333 0.700000 A0.666667 0.833333 0.500000 A
0.666667 0.833333 0.700000 A
0.916667 0.083333 0.300000 A0.916667 0.083333 0.500000 A
0.916667 0.833333 0.500000 A
0.000000 0.000000 0.400000 B0.000000 0.500000 0.200000 B0.250000 0.500000 0.800000 B
0.250000 0.750000 0.000000 B
0.500000 0.000000 0.000000 B0.500000 0.000000 0.400000 B0.500000 0.000000 0.600000 B
0.500000 0.250000 0.600000 B
0.500000 0.500000 0.000000 B0.500000 0.500000 0.800000 B
0.500000 0.750000 0.200000 B
0.500000 0.750000 0.400000 B0.750000 0.000000 0.400000 B0.750000 0.250000 0.400000 B
0.750000 0.500000 0.200000 B
0.750000 0.750000 0.600000 B0.750000 0.750000 0.800000 B0.166667 0.083333 0.100000 B
(continued)10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 339Table 10.2 (continued)
125-atom FCC 125-atom BCC 160-atom HCP
0.0 0.0 0.8 C
0.2 0.2 0.2 C
0.2 0.2 0.8 C0.2 0.8 0.2 C
0.4 0.0 0.0 C
0.8 0.4 0.6 C0.0 0.2 0.0 C0.4 0.2 0.2 C
0.8 0.8 0.8 C
0.0 0.2 0.2 C0.0 0.6 0.4 C0.2 0.6 0.4 C
0.4 0.8 0.8 C
0.6 0.8 0.4 C0.8 0.6 0.0 C
0.8 0.6 0.2 C
0.8 0.6 0.4 C0.0 0.2 0.8 C0.6 0.4 0.2 C
0.0 0.0 0.4 C
0.0 0.2 0.4 C0.0 0.4 0.2 C0.0 0.6 0.0 C
0.4 0.8 0.0 C
0.6 0.4 0.0 C0.0 0.4 0.6 D0.0 0.8 0.4 D
0.6 0.2 0.4 D
0.6 0.2 0.8 D0.6 0.4 0.6 D
0.6 0.8 0.0 D
0.8 0.4 0.0 D0.8 0.6 0.6 D0.0 0.0 0.0 D
0.0 0.2 0.6 D
0.0 0.4 0.0 D0.0 0.4 0.8 D0.0 0.8 0.2 D
0.8 0.0 0.4 D
0.8 0.8 0.2 D0.4 0.4 0.4 D
0.2 0.0 0.4 D
0.2 0.6 0.0 D0.4 0.8 0.4 D0.8 0.0 0.6 D
0.0 0.6 0.2 D
0.4 0.4 0.2 D0.4 0.4 0.6 D0.6 0.0 0.8 D
0.6 0.2 0.6 D0.0 0.6 0.8 C
0.2 0.2 0.8 C
0.4 0.6 0.4 C0.8 0.2 0.0 C
0.0 0.6 0.6 C
0.2 0.2 0.0 C0.6 0.0 0.0 C0.8 0.2 0.4 C
0.8 0.8 0.4 C
0.0 0.4 0.0 C0.0 0.4 0.6 C0.2 0.6 0.2 C
0.4 0.6 0.2 C
0.4 0.8 0.4 C0.6 0.4 0.0 C
0.2 0.0 0.6 C
0.2 0.2 0.2 C0.6 0.8 0.2 C0.8 0.8 0.6 C
0.0 0.2 0.2 C
0.0 0.4 0.8 C0.4 0.6 0.0 C0.4 0.8 0.0 C
0.6 0.0 0.4 C
0.8 0.4 0.4 C0.0 0.0 0.2 D0.2 0.6 0.0 D
0.4 0.0 0.2 D
0.8 0.4 0.0 D0.8 0.6 0.0 D
0.0 0.4 0.2 D
0.0 0.8 0.4 D0.4 0.4 0.6 D0.6 0.0 0.8 D
0.8 0.0 0.8 D
0.6 0.4 0.2 D0.6 0.6 0.8 D0.8 0.2 0.8 D
0.0 0.0 0.0 D
0.2 0.0 0.2 D0.2 0.2 0.4 D
0.2 0.4 0.0 D
0.2 0.4 0.8 D0.2 0.8 0.2 D0.8 0.8 0.0 D
0.2 0.6 0.8 D
0.2 0.8 0.4 D0.2 0.8 0.6 D0.6 0.2 0.0 D
0.6 0.8 0.4 D0.166667 0.333333 0.300000 B
0.166667 0.333333 0.500000 B
0.166667 0.583333 0.100000 B0.166667 0.833333 0.100000 B
0.416667 0.083333 0.500000 B
0.416667 0.333333 0.900000 B0.416667 0.583333 0.100000 B0.416667 0.583333 0.900000 B
0.666667 0.333333 0.300000 B
0.666667 0.583333 0.100000 B0.916667 0.083333 0.900000 B0.916667 0.333333 0.300000 B
0.916667 0.333333 0.700000 B
0.916667 0.583333 0.700000 B0.000000 0.000000 0.600000 C
0.000000 0.250000 0.400000 C
0.000000 0.750000 0.800000 C0.250000 0.500000 0.000000 C0.250000 0.750000 0.200000 C
0.250000 0.750000 0.600000 C
0.250000 0.750000 0.800000 C0.500000 0.250000 0.400000 C0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 C
0.500000 0.750000 0.000000 C
0.750000 0.000000 0.800000 C0.750000 0.250000 0.000000 C0.166667 0.083333 0.700000 C
0.166667 0.333333 0.900000 C
0.166667 0.583333 0.500000 C0.166667 0.583333 0.900000 C
0.416667 0.083333 0.300000 C
0.416667 0.583333 0.700000 C0.416667 0.833333 0.500000 C0.666667 0.083333 0.500000 C
0.666667 0.083333 0.900000 C
0.666667 0.333333 0.500000 C0.666667 0.333333 0.900000 C0.666667 0.583333 0.500000 C
0.666667 0.833333 0.100000 C
0.916667 0.083333 0.100000 C0.916667 0.333333 0.100000 C
0.916667 0.333333 0.900000 C
0.916667 0.583333 0.300000 C0.916667 0.583333 0.900000 C0.916667 0.833333 0.300000 C
0.916667 0.833333 0.700000 C
0.000000 0.000000 0.000000 D0.000000 0.250000 0.600000 D0.000000 0.500000 0.000000 D
0.000000 0.750000 0.000000 D
(continued)340 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.2 (continued)
125-atom FCC 125-atom BCC 160-atom HCP
0.0 0.0 0.6 E
0.2 0.2 0.6 E
0.4 0.6 0.8 E0.0 0.0 0.2 E
0.2 0.2 0.4 E
0.2 0.4 0.8 E0.2 0.8 0.0 E0.4 0.2 0.8 E
0.8 0.2 0.6 E
0.2 0.0 0.2 E0.2 0.4 0.2 E0.2 0.6 0.8 E
0.2 0.8 0.8 E
0.4 0.2 0.4 E0.4 0.4 0.0 E
0.4 0.8 0.6 E
0.6 0.0 0.4 E0.6 0.8 0.2 E0.8 0.8 0.6 E
0.0 0.8 0.6 E
0.2 0.4 0.0 E0.6 0.6 0.4 E0.8 0.0 0.8 E
0.8 0.4 0.4 E
0.8 0.8 0.0 E
20-atom FCC [5]
Lattice vectors
0:52 :0/C00:5
0:5/C00:52 :0
1:0/C00:5/C00:50
@1
A
Atom positions
0.15 0.35 0.25 A0.40 0.60 1.00 A0.55 0.95 0.25 A
0.45 0.05 0.75 A
0.20 0.80 1.00 B0.05 0.45 0.75 B0.60 0.40 1.00 B
0.95 0.55 0.25 B
0.65 0.85 0.75 C0.80 0.20 1.00 C0.85 0.65 0.75 C
0.90 0.10 0.50 C
0.35 0.15 0.25 D0.50 0.50 0.50 D
0.75 0.75 0.25 D
0.70 0.30 0.50 D0.10 0.90 0.50 E0.4 0.4 0.8 E
0.6 0.0 0.2 E
0.6 0.4 0.4 E0.8 0.0 0.2 E
0.8 0.6 0.6 E
0.0 0.8 0.2 E0.8 0.0 0.0 E0.8 0.0 0.6 E
0.8 0.6 0.8 E
0.0 0.4 0.4 E0.0 0.8 0.0 E0.0 0.8 0.8 E
0.2 0.0 0.8 E
0.2 0.6 0.4 E0.4 0.2 0.4 E
0.6 0.0 0.6 E
0.0 0.0 0.4 E0.4 0.6 0.8 E0.6 0.8 0.0 E
0.8 0.2 0.6 E
0.0 0.2 0.8 E0.4 0.0 0.4 E0.4 0.8 0.6 E
0.6 0.6 0.0 E
0.8 0.2 0.2 E
20-atom HCP [5]
Lattice vectors
/C01:50:866 1 :633
01 :732 1
:633
/C011 :732 /C03:2660
@1
A
Atom positions
1.000000 1.000000 0.50 A0.200000 0.200000 0.70 A0.400000 0.400000 0.90 A
1.000000 1.000000 1.00 A
0.200000 0.200000 0.20 B0.400000 0.400000 0.40 B0.600000 0.600000 0.60 B
0.800000 0.800000 0.80 B
0.600000 0.600000 0.10 C0.800000 0.800000 0.30 C0.766666 0.433333 0.35 C
0.966666 0.633333 0.55 C
0.166666 0.833333 0.75 D0.766666 0.433333 0.85 D
0.966666 0.633333 0.05 D
0.166666 0.833333 0.25 D0.366666 0.033333 0.45 E0.250000 0.250000 0.000000 D
0.250000 0.250000 0.200000 D
0.250000 0.250000 0.800000 D0.250000 0.750000 0.400000 D
0.500000 0.000000 0.200000 D
0.500000 0.000000 0.800000 D0.500000 0.250000 0.200000 D0.750000 0.000000 0.200000 D
0.750000 0.250000 0.200000 D
0.750000 0.250000 0.800000 D0.750000 0.500000 0.000000 D0.750000 0.750000 0.400000 D
0.166667 0.083333 0.300000 D
0.166667 0.333333 0.100000 D0.166667 0.833333 0.300000 D
0.166667 0.833333 0.700000 D
0.416667 0.083333 0.700000 D0.416667 0.083333 0.900000 D0.416667 0.333333 0.500000 D
0.416667 0.583333 0.500000 D
0.416667 0.833333 0.100000 D0.416667 0.833333 0.300000 D0.416667 0.833333 0.700000 D
0.666667 0.083333 0.300000 D
0.666667 0.583333 0.700000 D0.916667 0.333333 0.500000 D0.916667 0.583333 0.100000 D
0.916667 0.833333 0.100000 D
0.000000 0.000000 0.200000 E0.000000 0.000000 0.800000 E
0.000000 0.250000 0.000000 E
0.000000 0.250000 0.200000 E0.000000 0.250000 0.800000 E0.000000 0.750000 0.200000 E
0.000000 0.750000 0.400000 E
0.250000 0.000000 0.000000 E0.250000 0.000000 0.600000 E0.250000 0.250000 0.400000 E
0.250000 0.500000 0.200000 E
0.250000 0.500000 0.400000 E0.500000 0.250000 0.800000 E
0.500000 0.750000 0.600000 E
0.500000 0.750000 0.800000 E0.750000 0.500000 0.800000 E0.750000 0.750000 0.000000 E
0.750000 0.750000 0.200000 E
0.166667 0.083333 0.500000 E0.166667 0.833333 0.500000 E0.416667 0.333333 0.300000 E
(continued)10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 341Table 10.2 (continued)
125-atom FCC 125-atom BCC 160-atom HCP
1.00 1.00 1.00 E
0.30 0.70 0.50 E
0.25 0.25 0.75 E0.566666 0.233333 0.65 E
0.366666 0.033333 0.95 E
0.566666 0.233333 0.15 E0.416667 0.333333 0.700000 E
0.416667 0.583333 0.300000 E
0.666667 0.083333 0.100000 E0.666667 0.083333 0.700000 E
0.666667 0.583333 0.300000 E
0.666667 0.583333 0.900000 E0.666667 0.833333 0.300000 E0.666667 0.833333 0.900000 E
0.916667 0.083333 0.700000 E
0.916667 0.583333 0.500000 E0.916667 0.833333 0.900000 E
Lattice vectors and atomic positions (in fractional coordinates) are given for the unrelaxed lattices
Table 10.3 250-atom quinary ABCDE SQS in FCC/BCC/HCP structures [ 18]
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
Lattice vectors
0/C02:52:5
02 :52:5
/C050 00
@1
A
Atom positions
0.1 0.5 0.9 A0.3 0.5 0.1 A0.5 0.7 0.9 A
0.7 0.5 0.1 A
0.9 0.1 0.1 A0.9 0.7 0.1 A0.2 0.4 0.6 A
0.6 0.6 0.4 A
1.0 0.6 0.2 A0.1 0.7 0.9 A
0.1 0.9 0.5 A
0.5 0.3 0.9 A0.5 0.7 0.1 A0.7 0.5 0.3 A
0.8 1.0 0.4 A
1.0 0.2 0.6 A0.1 0.3 0.7 A0.1 0.9 0.9 A
0.5 0.3 0.5 A
0.5 0.9 0.5 A0.9 0.9 0.5 A
0.2 0.4 0.2 A
0.4 0.2 0.6 A0.4 0.4 1.0 A0.4 0.8 0.2 A
0.8 0.4 0.2 A
0.8 0.4 0.8 ALattice vector
500
0500050
@1
A
Atom positions
0.0 0.0 0.2 A0.0 0.4 0.0 A0.0 0.6 0.6 A
0.0 0.8 0.8 A
0.2 0.0 0.2 A0.2 0.0 0.6 A0.2 0.2 0.0 A
0.2 0.2 0.2 A
0.2 0.2 0.4 A0.2 0.6 0.2 A
0.2 0.6 0.4 A
0.2 0.8 0.2 A0.4 0.0 0.0 A0.4 0.0 0.2 A
0.4 0.2 0.8 A
0.4 0.4 0.0 A0.6 0.0 0.2 A0.6 0.0 0.8 A
0.6 0.2 0.8 A
0.6 0.4 0.2 A0.6 0.6 0.8 A
0.8 0.0 0.8 A
0.8 0.4 0.0 A0.8 0.6 0.4 A0.8 0.8 0.0 A
0.8 0.8 0.6 A
0.8 0.8 0.8 ALattice vectors
50 0
/C02:54:33 0
00 8 :1650
@1
A
Atom positions
0.000000 0.000000 0.200000 A0.000000 0.000000 0.800000 A0.000000 0.600000 0.600000 A
0.000000 0.600000 0.800000 A
0.200000 0.200000 0.400000 A0.200000 0.600000 0.000000 A0.200000 0.600000 0.200000 A
0.200000 0.600000 0.400000 A
0.200000 0.800000 0.200000 A0.400000 0.000000 0.200000 A
0.400000 0.000000 0.600000 A
0.400000 0.000000 0.800000 A0.400000 0.200000 0.200000 A0.400000 0.400000 0.600000 A
0.400000 0.600000 0.000000 A
0.400000 0.600000 0.200000 A0.400000 0.600000 0.800000 A0.600000 0.200000 0.600000 A
0.600000 0.400000 0.600000 A
0.600000 0.600000 0.200000 A0.800000 0.200000 0.400000 A
0.133333 0.066667 0.500000 A
0.133333 0.066667 0.700000 A0.133333 0.266667 0.900000 A0.133333 0.466667 0.500000 A
0.133333 0.866667 0.300000 A
0.133333 0.866667 0.700000 A
(continued)342 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.3 (continued)
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
1.0 0.2 0.2 A
1.0 0.2 0.8 A
0.1 0.3 0.5 A0.3 0.1 0.7 A
0.3 0.5 0.7 A
0.5 0.1 0.5 A0.5 0.7 0.3 A0.9 0.9 0.1 A
0.4 0.2 0.8 A
0.6 0.4 0.8 A0.6 0.6 0.8 A1.0 0.8 0.8 A
0.1 0.1 0.5 A
0.1 0.3 0.3 A0.3 0.3 0.3 A
0.9 0.3 0.7 A
0.4 0.4 0.4 A0.4 0.8 0.4 A0.6 0.2 0.6 A
0.6 0.4 0.2 A
0.6 1.0 0.2 A0.8 1.0 0.2 A1.0 0.6 0.6 A
0.1 0.1 0.9 B
0.3 0.7 0.5 B0.3 0.9 0.7 B0.5 0.3 0.7 B
0.5 0.9 0.9 B
0.7 0.9 0.5 B0.9 0.5 0.1 B
0.2 0.6 0.6 B
0.6 0.2 0.4 B0.8 0.2 1.0 B1.0 1.0 0.2 B
0.1 0.9 0.3 B
0.3 0.9 0.1 B0.4 0.2 0.2 B0.4 0.2 0.4 B
0.4 0.4 0.2 B
0.4 0.8 0.6 B0.6 0.2 0.8 B
0.8 0.2 0.2 B
0.1 0.3 0.1 B0.2 1.0 0.4 B0.4 0.6 0.2 B
0.4 0.6 1.0 B
0.4 1.0 0.4 B0.6 0.4 0.4 B0.6 0.8 1.0 B0.1 0.3 0.9 A
0.1 0.5 0.1 A
0.1 0.5 0.3 A0.1 0.5 0.9 A
0.1 0.7 0.1 A
0.1 0.9 0.3 A0.3 0.1 0.5 A0.3 0.3 0.9 A
0.5 0.1 0.7 A
0.5 0.3 0.3 A0.5 0.3 0.9 A0.5 0.7 0.1 A
0.5 0.7 0.5 A
0.5 0.9 0.3 A0.7 0.3 0.9 A
0.7 0.5 0.9 A
0.7 0.9 0.1 A0.7 0.9 0.9 A0.9 0.1 0.5 A
0.9 0.3 0.1 A
0.9 0.3 0.3 A0.9 0.7 0.1 A0.9 0.9 0.3 A
0.0 0.0 0.0 B
0.0 0.0 0.4 B0.0 0.2 0.4 B0.0 0.8 0.6 B
0.2 0.4 0.6 B
0.2 0.8 0.4 B0.2 0.8 0.6 B
0.4 0.2 0.2 B
0.4 0.2 0.6 B0.4 0.4 0.4 B0.4 0.4 0.8 B
0.4 0.6 0.2 B
0.4 0.6 0.4 B0.4 0.6 0.8 B0.4 0.8 0.2 B
0.6 0.4 0.0 B
0.6 0.4 0.6 B0.6 0.4 0.8 B
0.6 0.6 0.0 B
0.8 0.0 0.2 B0.8 0.4 0.2 B0.8 0.4 0.4 B
0.8 0.4 0.8 B
0.8 0.8 0.2 B0.8 0.8 0.4 B0.1 0.1 0.5 B0.333333 0.066667 0.700000 A
0.333333 0.466667 0.300000 A
0.333333 0.666667 0.100000 A0.333333 0.866667 0.100000 A
0.333333 0.866667 0.700000 A
0.533333 0.066667 0.500000 A0.533333 0.266667 0.900000 A0.533333 0.466667 0.700000 A
0.533333 0.466667 0.900000 A
0.533333 0.666667 0.300000 A0.533333 0.666667 0.700000 A0.533333 0.866667 0.700000 A
0.733333 0.266667 0.900000 A
0.733333 0.466667 0.300000 A0.733333 0.666667 0.300000 A
0.733333 0.866667 0.700000 A
0.933333 0.066667 0.100000 A0.933333 0.266667 0.500000 A0.933333 0.466667 0.900000 A
0.933333 0.666667 0.500000 A
0.933333 0.666667 0.700000 A0.933333 0.866667 0.500000 A0.933333 0.866667 0.900000 A
0.000000 0.400000 0.200000 B
0.000000 0.400000 0.400000 B0.000000 0.800000 0.400000 B0.000000 0.800000 0.600000 B
0.200000 0.000000 0.200000 B
0.200000 0.000000 0.800000 B0.200000 0.400000 0.400000 B
0.200000 0.400000 0.600000 B
0.200000 0.400000 0.800000 B0.200000 0.800000 0.400000 B0.400000 0.000000 0.000000 B
0.400000 0.400000 0.000000 B
0.400000 0.400000 0.200000 B0.400000 0.600000 0.400000 B0.400000 0.800000 0.400000 B
0.600000 0.000000 0.200000 B
0.600000 0.200000 0.400000 B0.600000 0.600000 0.000000 B
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 B
0.600000 0.800000 0.600000 B0.800000 0.000000 0.000000 B0.800000 0.000000 0.600000 B
0.800000 0.400000 0.400000 B
0.800000 0.600000 0.600000 B0.800000 0.800000 0.200000 B0.800000 0.800000 0.600000 B
(continued)10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 343Table 10.3 (continued)
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
0.8 0.4 1.0 B
0.8 0.6 0.2 B
0.3 0.1 0.9 B0.3 0.7 0.1 B
0.5 0.1 0.7 B
0.5 0.3 0.1 B0.7 0.7 0.7 B0.7 0.7 0.9 B
0.7 0.9 0.9 B
0.9 0.1 0.3 B0.2 0.8 0.6 B0.2 1.0 0.6 B
0.4 1.0 0.8 B
0.6 0.6 1.0 B0.8 0.4 0.4 B
1.0 0.8 1.0 B
0.3 0.5 0.3 B0.3 0.9 0.3 B0.3 0.9 0.9 B
0.5 0.9 0.1 B
0.9 0.1 0.5 B0.4 0.8 0.8 B1.0 0.8 0.4 B
1.0 1.0 0.8 B
0.1 0.9 0.7 C0.3 0.5 0.5 C0.5 0.5 0.9 C
0.7 0.5 0.5 C
0.7 0.7 0.3 C0.9 0.1 0.7 C
0.9 0.1 0.9 C
0.2 0.6 0.4 C1.0 0.4 0.6 C0.1 0.3 0.9 C
0.1 0.7 0.7 C
0.3 0.3 0.9 C0.5 0.7 0.5 C0.7 0.9 0.1 C
0.2 0.8 0.8 C
0.4 1.0 1.0 C0.6 0.2 0.2 C
0.6 0.8 0.6 C
0.6 1.0 0.4 C1.0 0.4 0.2 C0.5 0.1 0.3 C
0.7 0.5 0.9 C
0.9 0.7 0.5 C0.2 0.4 0.4 C0.4 0.2 1.0 C
0.6 0.2 1.0 C0.1 0.3 0.1 B
0.1 0.7 0.5 B
0.1 0.9 0.1 B0.3 0.3 0.1 B
0.3 0.3 0.3 B
0.3 0.3 0.7 B0.3 0.5 0.9 B0.3 0.7 0.1 B
0.3 0.9 0.1 B
0.3 0.9 0.5 B0.3 0.9 0.7 B0.3 0.9 0.9 B
0.5 0.3 0.1 B
0.5 0.3 0.5 B0.5 0.5 0.7 B
0.5 0.9 0.7 B
0.7 0.5 0.5 B0.7 0.7 0.5 B0.9 0.1 0.7 B
0.9 0.3 0.9 B
0.9 0.5 0.7 B0.9 0.7 0.5 B0.9 0.7 0.7 B
0.9 0.9 0.5 B
0.0 0.2 0.6 C0.2 0.0 0.0 C0.2 0.0 0.4 C
0.2 0.0 0.8 C
0.2 0.4 0.2 C0.2 0.4 0.8 C
0.4 0.0 0.8 C
0.4 0.6 0.0 C0.4 0.8 0.4 C0.4 0.8 0.6 C
0.4 0.8 0.8 C
0.6 0.0 0.6 C0.6 0.2 0.6 C0.6 0.6 0.6 C
0.6 0.8 0.2 C
0.6 0.8 0.8 C0.8 0.0 0.0 C
0.8 0.0 0.4 C
0.8 0.0 0.6 C0.8 0.2 0.6 C0.1 0.1 0.9 C
0.1 0.3 0.3 C
0.1 0.3 0.7 C0.1 0.7 0.7 C0.3 0.1 0.7 C
0.3 0.1 0.9 C0.133333 0.066667 0.900000 B
0.133333 0.266667 0.100000 B
0.133333 0.266667 0.300000 B0.133333 0.266667 0.700000 B
0.133333 0.466667 0.100000 B
0.133333 0.866667 0.500000 B0.333333 0.066667 0.300000 B0.333333 0.266667 0.900000 B
0.333333 0.466667 0.700000 B
0.533333 0.066667 0.100000 B0.533333 0.066667 0.700000 B0.533333 0.266667 0.100000 B
0.533333 0.466667 0.100000 B
0.533333 0.466667 0.500000 B0.533333 0.666667 0.900000 B
0.533333 0.866667 0.100000 B
0.533333 0.866667 0.300000 B0.533333 0.866667 0.500000 B0.533333 0.866667 0.900000 B
0.733333 0.066667 0.700000 B
0.733333 0.266667 0.300000 B0.733333 0.266667 0.700000 B0.933333 0.066667 0.900000 B
0.933333 0.266667 0.300000 B
0.000000 0.000000 0.000000 C0.000000 0.000000 0.600000 C0.000000 0.200000 0.200000 C
0.000000 0.600000 0.000000 C
0.000000 0.600000 0.400000 C0.000000 0.800000 0.200000 C
0.000000 0.800000 0.800000 C
0.200000 0.000000 0.000000 C0.200000 0.000000 0.600000 C0.200000 0.200000 0.000000 C
0.200000 0.200000 0.800000 C
0.200000 0.400000 0.000000 C0.200000 0.600000 0.800000 C0.200000 0.800000 0.800000 C
0.400000 0.200000 0.400000 C
0.400000 0.200000 0.800000 C0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 C
0.400000 0.400000 0.800000 C
0.400000 0.800000 0.200000 C0.400000 0.800000 0.800000 C0.600000 0.000000 0.000000 C
0.600000 0.200000 0.800000 C
0.600000 0.400000 0.400000 C0.800000 0.200000 0.200000 C0.800000 0.400000 0.200000 C
0.800000 0.600000 0.000000 C
(continued)344 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.3 (continued)
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
0.6 1.0 0.8 C
0.8 0.2 0.8 C
0.8 0.8 0.6 C0.8 1.0 1.0 C
1.0 0.2 0.4 C
0.3 0.1 0.5 C0.7 0.3 0.3 C0.2 0.6 0.2 C
0.6 0.4 1.0 C
0.6 0.6 0.6 C0.6 0.8 0.4 C0.8 0.2 0.6 C
1.0 1.0 0.4 C
1.0 1.0 1.0 C0.3 0.7 0.7 C
0.5 0.1 0.1 C
0.5 0.5 0.1 C0.7 0.1 0.7 C0.9 0.3 0.5 C
0.9 0.9 0.9 C
0.2 0.6 0.8 C0.2 0.8 0.4 C0.6 0.8 0.2 C
1.0 0.4 0.4 C
0.5 0.5 0.3 D0.7 0.3 0.1 D0.2 0.2 0.4 D
0.4 0.6 0.4 D
0.8 0.2 0.4 D0.8 0.6 0.8 D
0.8 0.8 0.2 D
0.8 1.0 0.8 D1.0 0.4 1.0 D1.0 0.6 1.0 D
1.0 0.8 0.6 D
0.1 0.1 0.1 D0.1 0.5 0.3 D0.3 0.7 0.9 D
0.7 0.1 0.1 D
0.7 0.1 0.9 D0.9 0.5 0.9 D
0.2 0.6 1.0 D
0.2 1.0 0.8 D0.4 0.4 0.8 D1.0 0.8 0.2 D
0.3 0.1 0.3 D
0.5 0.5 0.7 D0.7 0.3 0.5 D0.7 0.7 0.5 D
0.9 0.5 0.7 D0.3 0.5 0.1 C
0.3 0.7 0.5 C
0.3 0.7 0.7 C0.3 0.7 0.9 C
0.3 0.9 0.3 C
0.5 0.1 0.3 C0.5 0.1 0.9 C0.5 0.3 0.7 C
0.5 0.7 0.9 C
0.5 0.9 0.1 C0.7 0.1 0.9 C0.7 0.3 0.3 C
0.7 0.5 0.1 C
0.7 0.5 0.3 C0.7 0.7 0.3 C
0.7 0.7 0.7 C
0.7 0.9 0.3 C0.7 0.9 0.5 C0.9 0.1 0.9 C
0.9 0.3 0.5 C
0.9 0.5 0.3 C0.9 0.5 0.9 C0.9 0.9 0.7 C
0.9 0.9 0.9 C
0.0 0.0 0.8 D0.0 0.4 0.4 D0.0 0.4 0.6 D
0.0 0.6 0.2 D
0.0 0.6 0.8 D0.0 0.8 0.4 D
0.2 0.2 0.8 D
0.2 0.4 0.4 D0.2 0.6 0.6 D0.2 0.6 0.8 D
0.2 0.8 0.0 D
0.4 0.0 0.4 D0.4 0.2 0.0 D0.4 0.2 0.4 D
0.4 0.6 0.6 D
0.4 0.8 0.0 D0.6 0.2 0.2 D
0.6 0.2 0.4 D
0.8 0.2 0.0 D0.8 0.2 0.2 D0.8 0.4 0.6 D
0.8 0.6 0.6 D
0.1 0.1 0.1 D0.1 0.1 0.3 D0.1 0.5 0.5 D
0.1 0.5 0.7 D0.800000 0.600000 0.800000 C
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 C
0.133333 0.266667 0.500000 C0.133333 0.866667 0.100000 C
0.133333 0.866667 0.900000 C
0.333333 0.066667 0.900000 C0.333333 0.266667 0.300000 C0.333333 0.266667 0.700000 C
0.333333 0.666667 0.700000 C
0.333333 0.666667 0.900000 C0.533333 0.266667 0.500000 C0.533333 0.666667 0.100000 C
0.533333 0.666667 0.500000 C
0.733333 0.066667 0.300000 C0.733333 0.066667 0.500000 C
0.733333 0.266667 0.500000 C
0.733333 0.466667 0.900000 C0.733333 0.666667 0.100000 C0.733333 0.666667 0.500000 C
0.733333 0.666667 0.700000 C
0.933333 0.066667 0.300000 C0.933333 0.266667 0.100000 C0.933333 0.466667 0.100000 C
0.933333 0.866667 0.300000 C
0.000000 0.000000 0.400000 D0.000000 0.200000 0.800000 D0.000000 0.400000 0.000000 D
0.000000 0.400000 0.800000 D
0.200000 0.200000 0.600000 D0.200000 0.600000 0.600000 D
0.200000 0.800000 0.000000 D
0.200000 0.800000 0.600000 D0.400000 0.000000 0.400000 D0.400000 0.200000 0.000000 D
0.400000 0.200000 0.600000 D
0.400000 0.600000 0.600000 D0.400000 0.800000 0.000000 D0.600000 0.000000 0.600000 D
0.600000 0.000000 0.800000 D
0.600000 0.200000 0.000000 D0.600000 0.200000 0.200000 D
0.600000 0.400000 0.000000 D
0.600000 0.400000 0.200000 D0.600000 0.600000 0.400000 D0.600000 0.800000 0.400000 D
0.600000 0.800000 0.800000 D
0.800000 0.000000 0.400000 D0.800000 0.000000 0.800000 D0.800000 0.400000 0.000000 D
0.800000 0.400000 0.600000 D
(continued)10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 345Table 10.3 (continued)
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
0.9 0.7 0.7 D
0.9 0.7 0.9 D
0.6 0.6 0.2 D0.8 1.0 0.6 D
1.0 0.4 0.8 D
0.1 0.1 0.3 D0.3 0.3 0.5 D0.7 0.7 0.1 D
0.9 0.5 0.5 D
0.9 0.7 0.3 D0.2 0.8 0.2 D0.2 1.0 0.2 D
0.2 1.0 1.0 D
0.4 1.0 0.6 D0.8 0.8 1.0 D
1.0 1.0 0.6 D
0.1 0.5 0.5 D0.1 0.7 0.5 D0.7 0.1 0.3 D
0.9 0.3 0.3 D
0.9 0.5 0.3 D0.8 0.4 0.6 D0.8 0.6 1.0 D
0.8 0.8 0.8 D
0.1 0.1 0.7 E0.1 0.9 0.1 E0.3 0.5 0.9 E
0.3 0.9 0.5 E
0.7 0.9 0.3 E0.2 0.2 0.6 E
0.2 0.4 0.8 E
0.2 0.4 1.0 E0.2 0.8 1.0 E1.0 0.6 0.8 E
0.1 0.7 0.1 E
0.5 0.3 0.3 E0.5 0.7 0.7 E0.5 0.9 0.3 E
0.7 0.3 0.9 E
0.7 0.5 0.7 E0.2 0.2 0.8 E
0.2 0.2 1.0 E
0.4 0.6 0.6 E0.4 0.8 1.0 E0.4 1.0 0.2 E
0.6 1.0 0.6 E
0.6 1.0 1.0 E0.8 0.6 0.4 E0.1 0.5 0.1 E
0.1 0.7 0.3 E0.1 0.9 0.9 D
0.3 0.1 0.1 D
0.3 0.1 0.3 D0.3 0.3 0.5 D
0.3 0.5 0.3 D
0.3 0.5 0.7 D0.3 0.7 0.3 D0.5 0.1 0.5 D
0.5 0.5 0.1 D
0.5 0.7 0.3 D0.5 0.7 0.7 D0.5 0.9 0.5 D
0.7 0.1 0.3 D
0.7 0.1 0.7 D0.7 0.3 0.1 D
0.7 0.7 0.1 D
0.7 0.7 0.9 D0.7 0.9 0.7 D0.9 0.1 0.1 D
0.9 0.1 0.3 D
0.9 0.3 0.7 D0.9 0.5 0.1 D0.9 0.5 0.5 D
0.9 0.9 0.1 D
0.0 0.0 0.6 E0.0 0.2 0.0 E0.0 0.2 0.2 E
0.0 0.2 0.8 E
0.0 0.4 0.2 E0.0 0.4 0.8 E
0.0 0.6 0.0 E
0.0 0.6 0.4 E0.0 0.8 0.0 E0.0 0.8 0.2 E
0.2 0.2 0.6 E
0.2 0.4 0.0 E0.2 0.6 0.0 E0.2 0.8 0.8 E
0.4 0.0 0.6 E
0.4 0.4 0.2 E0.4 0.4 0.6 E
0.6 0.0 0.0 E
0.6 0.0 0.4 E0.6 0.2 0.0 E0.6 0.4 0.4 E
0.6 0.6 0.2 E
0.6 0.6 0.4 E0.6 0.8 0.0 E0.6 0.8 0.4 E
0.6 0.8 0.6 E0.800000 0.600000 0.400000 D
0.800000 0.800000 0.000000 D
0.133333 0.066667 0.100000 D0.133333 0.666667 0.100000 D
0.133333 0.666667 0.500000 D
0.333333 0.266667 0.100000 D0.333333 0.266667 0.500000 D0.333333 0.466667 0.900000 D
0.333333 0.866667 0.500000 D
0.333333 0.866667 0.900000 D0.533333 0.066667 0.300000 D0.533333 0.066667 0.900000 D
0.533333 0.266667 0.300000 D
0.733333 0.066667 0.900000 D0.733333 0.466667 0.500000 D
0.733333 0.466667 0.700000 D
0.733333 0.866667 0.100000 D0.733333 0.866667 0.300000 D0.733333 0.866667 0.900000 D
0.933333 0.066667 0.700000 D
0.933333 0.466667 0.500000 D0.933333 0.666667 0.100000 D0.933333 0.666667 0.900000 D
0.933333 0.866667 0.700000 D
0.000000 0.200000 0.000000 E0.000000 0.200000 0.400000 E0.000000 0.200000 0.600000 E
0.000000 0.400000 0.600000 E
0.000000 0.600000 0.200000 E0.000000 0.800000 0.000000 E
0.200000 0.000000 0.400000 E
0.200000 0.200000 0.200000 E0.200000 0.400000 0.200000 E0.400000 0.800000 0.600000 E
0.600000 0.000000 0.400000 E
0.600000 0.400000 0.800000 E0.600000 0.600000 0.800000 E0.600000 0.800000 0.000000 E
0.600000 0.800000 0.200000 E
0.800000 0.000000 0.200000 E0.800000 0.200000 0.000000 E
0.800000 0.200000 0.600000 E
0.800000 0.200000 0.800000 E0.800000 0.400000 0.800000 E0.800000 0.600000 0.200000 E
0.800000 0.800000 0.400000 E
0.133333 0.066667 0.300000 E0.133333 0.466667 0.300000 E0.133333 0.466667 0.700000 E
0.133333 0.466667 0.900000 E
(continued)346 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.3 (continued)
250-atom FCC 250-atom BCC 250-atom HCP
0.3 0.3 0.1 E
0.3 0.7 0.3 E
0.7 0.9 0.7 E0.9 0.3 0.9 E
0.8 0.6 0.6 E
0.3 0.1 0.1 E0.5 0.5 0.5 E0.7 0.3 0.7 E
0.9 0.3 0.1 E
0.2 0.2 0.2 E1.0 0.6 0.4 E0.1 0.5 0.7 E
0.3 0.3 0.7 E
0.5 0.1 0.9 E0.5 0.9 0.7 E
0.7 0.1 0.5 E
0.9 0.9 0.3 E0.9 0.9 0.7 E0.4 0.4 0.6 E
0.4 0.6 0.8 E
0.6 0.4 0.6 E0.6 0.8 0.8 E0.8 0.8 0.4 E
1.0 0.2 1.0 E0.8 0.2 0.4 E
0.8 0.2 0.8 E
0.8 0.6 0.0 E0.8 0.6 0.2 E
0.8 0.6 0.8 E
0.1 0.1 0.7 E0.1 0.3 0.5 E0.1 0.7 0.3 E
0.1 0.7 0.9 E
0.1 0.9 0.5 E0.1 0.9 0.7 E0.3 0.5 0.5 E
0.5 0.1 0.1 E
0.5 0.5 0.3 E0.5 0.5 0.5 E
0.5 0.5 0.9 E
0.5 0.9 0.9 E0.7 0.1 0.1 E0.7 0.1 0.5 E
0.7 0.3 0.5 E
0.7 0.3 0.7 E0.7 0.5 0.7 E0.9 0.7 0.3 E
0.9 0.7 0.9 E0.133333 0.666667 0.300000 E
0.133333 0.666667 0.700000 E
0.133333 0.666667 0.900000 E0.333333 0.066667 0.100000 E
0.333333 0.066667 0.500000 E
0.333333 0.466667 0.100000 E0.333333 0.466667 0.500000 E0.333333 0.666667 0.300000 E
0.333333 0.666667 0.500000 E
0.333333 0.866667 0.300000 E0.533333 0.266667 0.700000 E0.533333 0.466667 0.300000 E
0.733333 0.066667 0.100000 E
0.733333 0.266667 0.100000 E0.733333 0.466667 0.100000 E
0.733333 0.666667 0.900000 E
0.733333 0.866667 0.500000 E0.933333 0.066667 0.500000 E0.933333 0.266667 0.700000 E
0.933333 0.266667 0.900000 E
0.933333 0.466667 0.300000 E0.933333 0.466667 0.700000 E0.933333 0.666667 0.300000 E
0.933333 0.866667 0.100000 E
Lattice vectors and atomic positions (in fractional coordinates) are given for the unrelaxed lattices
Fig. 10.1 The input unrelaxed atomic structures of 64-atom quaternary SQS [ 18] for ( a) FCC,
(b) BCC, and ( c) HCP lattices in equal molar compositions. One color represents one element10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 34710.4 Applications of SQS
Building up the appropriate atomic structure for HEAs is the ﬁrst step toward
reliable predicting of materials properties of HEAs based on DFT methods, includ-ing thermodynamic, kinetic, electronic, vibrational, and magnetic properties. Con-sidering the infancy of present HEA research, reports on SQS and its applications toHEAs in the literature have been very limited [ 5,18]. This section presents the
applications of those SQS presented in the prior section to several model single-phase HEAs, including their phase stability at zero temperature, phonon vibrationalproperties, electronic entropy and free energies, and mechanical properties.
All the calculations were performed using VASP (Vienna ab initio simulation
package) [ 19,20], a plane-wave pseudo-potential software. Projector-augmented
wave (PAW) potentials [ 21] were used as supplied with VASP and the Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof [ 22] gradient approximation for the exchange-correlation func-
tional. All structures (both lattice parameters and atomic coordinates) were fullyrelaxed under zero pressure until the energy convergence reached 1 meV/atom.Collinear magnetism was considered for compositions that contain magnetic ele-ments such as Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, and Ni, and three typical magnetisms (ferromagnetism,
antiferromagnetic, and ferrimagnetic) as well as nonmagnetic state are all tested in
order to identify the lowest energy state for each composition. Note that only a limitednumber of magnetic conﬁgurations for antiferromagnetism and ferrimagnetism percomposition were examined due to computational facility limitations.
Fig. 10.2 The unrelaxed atomic structures of quinary SQS [ 18] for ( a) 125-atom FCC,
(b) 125-atom BCC, and ( c) 160-atom HCP lattices in equal molar compositions348 M.C. Gao et al.10.4.1 Phase Stability at T¼0K
To date there have been no experimental reports on the enthalpies of formation
ΔHfðÞ of HEAs in the literature, and thus providing such data is crucial to the
materials science community, for example, in establishing the HEA formation rulesas detailed in Chap. 2. Previous studies on the HEA formation rules (e.g., [ 23]) have
used the enthalpy of mixing in liquid using the semiempirical Miedema model [ 24].
ΔH
fis calculated by subtracting the composition-weighted total energies of the
constituent elements from the total energy of the compound after full relaxation of
the structure at zero temperature. In the example of a quaternary compound with an
arbitrary formula of AmBnCoDp(here m,n,o, and prepresent the molar ratio of each
element), ΔHfwas determined by
ΔHfAmBnCoDp ðÞ¼EAmBnCoDp/C01
mþnþoþpmE AþnEBþoECþpED ðÞ ð 10:1Þ
where EAmBnCoDp,EA,EB,EC, and EDare the total energy of compound AmBnCoDp,
element A, B, C, and D, respectively. These energies are direct output from VASP
calculations without manipulation. A similar equation was used to calculate ΔHffor
quinary alloys. The calculated enthalpy of formation and lattice parameters of mostreported single-phase equimolar HEAs are listed in Table 10.4. For simplicity, the
zero-point energy is neglected in the present study, which might be important in
other cases.
The agreement in lattice parameter between calculations and experiments where
available is excellent. For CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi, the energies in both FCCand HCP structures are provided since they are important for stacking fault energycalculations. For other alloys, only the energy of the experimentally observed stablestructure is calculated. Comparison in the energy between the FCC and HCPstructures also provides a benchmark test on the accuracy of the SQS generated.At zero temperature, the ground state structure is HCP, BCC, BCC, and FCC for
element Co, Cr, Fe, and Ni, respectively. For CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi, the FCC
phase is the stable structure observed above room temperature. The present studydemonstrated that the formation enthalpies are sensitive to the SQS cell size andthat the energy difference between the FCC and HCP structures is very small(Table 10.4 and Fig. 10.3). For small cells (16-, 20-, and 24-atom SQS), the
calculations incorrectly predict that the HCP phase is stable. For large cells(64 and more atoms), the calculations predict that the FCC phase is stable, inagreement with experimental observation. However, it is worth noting that the
energy is expected to ﬂuctuate with respect to both the atomic position of SQS
and the magnetism setting. The degree of their ﬂuctuations depends on the alloycomposition, as addressed in Sect. 10.5 of this chapter. For those SQS of large cell
sizes ( /C2164 atoms), exhaustive examination of all possible magnetic conﬁguration in
each SQS shown in Fig. 10.3 represents a formidable task, and thus only several
representative magnetic states were examined and the lowest energy was used.10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 349The cell size dependence of the total energy of SQS can be understood from the
underlying atomic structure. It is expected that a larger SQS cell represents betterthe disordered structure of HEAs. The pair distribution function (PDF) of relaxedFCC CoCrFeNi in 16-, 20-, and 64-atom SQS is illustrated in Fig. 10.4. For clarity,
only the ﬁrst nearest-neighbor PDF is shown. It is apparent that with increasing SQScell size, both the pair distance and the intensity evolve toward equality. Note the108-atom structure using the hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics (MC/MD)simulations exhibits clear preference in the Co-Ni and Cr-Ni pairs over Fe-Fe pair,
in contrast to the three SQS models. In all cases, the Cr-Cr pair has the lowest
probability (Fig. 10.4) than other pairs for FCC CoCrFeNi, suggesting that Cr
prefers to bond with other elements.Table 10.4 Calculated enthalpy of formation [ ΔHf, kJ/mol] and lattice parameters [ Å] using SQS
Alloy No. atoms PhasesΔHf Lat. para.
FCCa(FCC/BCC)
a, c, c/a (HCP)
CoCrFeNi 16 FCC +7.562 3.546
HCP +6.308 2.507, 4.061, 1.62
24 FCC +7.103 3.543
HCP +6.501 2.515, 4.036, 1.61
64 FCC +6.897 3.548; 3.575 [ 5]
HCP +7.145 2.506, 4.056, 1.62
CoCrFeMnNi 20 FCC +8.434 3.536
HCP +7.855 2.500, 4.043, 1.62
125 FCC +7.065 3.559; 3.597 [ 5]
160 HCP +7.323 2.503, 4.014, 1.6250 FCC +7.581 3.529
HCP +7.703 2.5, 4.027, 1.61
CoCrMnNi 64 FCC +7.593 3.544CoFeMnNi 64 +3.903 3.512MoNbTaW 64 BCC /C07.313 3.237; 3.2134 [ 25]
MoNbTaVW 125 /C04.272 3.188; 3.1832 [ 25]
250 /C03.852 3.200
HfNbTaTiZr 125 +8.353 3.403; 3.404 [ 26]
250 +7.946 3.411
CoOsReRu 64 HCP +3.846 2.7, 4.282, 1.59
ErGdHoTbY 160 +0.130 3.625, 5.641, 1.56
250 +0.090 3.624, 5.641, 1.56
DyGdLuTbY 160 /C00.003 3.618, 5.631, 1.56;
3.64, 5.73, 1.57 [ 27]
DyGdLuTbTm 160 /C00.079 3.601, 5.602, 1.56;
3.59, 5.65, 1.57 [ 27]
The experimental lattice parameters where available are also included. The second column denotes
the number of atoms in the SQS cellThe data for 16-, 20- and 24-atom cells were taken from [ 5] and the rest from [ 18]350 M.C. Gao et al.The PDFs for FCC CoCrFeMnNi in 20-, 125- and 250-atom SQS are shown in
Fig. 10.5. The Cr-Cr pair distribution improves substantially than the case of
CoCrFeNi, but the Cr-Mn pair distribution is far from ideal in the 20-atom cell
and becomes much better in the 125- and especially 250-atom cells. Note that the
Cr-Cr pair has the lowest probability in the 250-atom cell. The cell size sensitivity
of the structure may contribute partially to the calculated energy ﬂuctuation shown
in Fig. 10.3 and Table 10.4.
10.4.2 Vibrational and Electronic Entropies
Besides the conﬁgurational entropy in HEAs, other entropy sources need to be
quantiﬁed, including vibrational entropy, magnetic entropy, and electronic entropy
[28], depending on the composition and structure of the materials. Although the
Boltzmann equation of entropy ( Sconf¼kBlnΩ, where kBis the Boltzmann constant
andΩis the number of conﬁgurations) has been widely used to calculate the
conﬁgurational entropy, Ωcan strongly depend on temperature. For a solid solu-
tion, as the temperature decreases, atomic ordering or separation intensiﬁes, which
reduces the conﬁgurational entropy. At zero temperature, all entropy sources
vanish. Such examples are shown in refractory HEAs by Widom et al. [ 29] using
MC/MD simulations, as detailed in Chap. 8. In this subsection, the vibrationalFig. 10.3 Effect of SQS cell size on the lattice stability of CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi at zero
temperature [ 18]. The calculations were done on a randomly chosen conﬁguration of the
lattice type10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 351entropies of three single-phase HEAs are presented, namely, FCC CoCrFeNi,
BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP CoOsReRu using the SQS presented in this chapter.CoOsReRu was predicted by Gao and Alman based on phase diagrams [ 30].
Phonon frequencies of the SQS were calculated in the harmonic approximation
by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix based on the interatomic force constants
reported by VASP. The vibrational free energy ( f
vib) was then calculated by
integrating the vibrational density of states gωðÞusing the following equation:
fvibTðÞ ¼ kBTð
gωðÞln 2 sin h/C22hω
2kBT/C18/C19 /C20/C21
dω ð10:2Þ
where kBis the Boltzmann constant, /C22his the reduced Planck constant, and Tis the
absolute temperature. The vibrational entropy ( Sph) is calculated by
SphV;TðÞ ¼ 3kBð1
0nphfBEþ1 ðÞ lnfBEþ1 ðÞ /C0 fBElnfBE ½/C138 dε ð10:3Þ2.4 2.5 2.6
r [Å]468101214gαβ(r)Cr-Cr
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Niab
cd2.4 2.5 2.6
r [Å]468101214gαβ(r)Cr-Cr
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Ni
2.4 2.5 2.6
r [Å]468101214gαβ(r)Cr-Cr
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Ni
2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7
r [Å]02468101214gαβ(r)Cr-Cr
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Ni
Fig. 10.4 Comparison in the ﬁrst nearest-neighbor pair distribution function of FCC CoCrFeNi
in (a) 16-, ( b) 20-, and ( c) 64-atom SQS models and ( d) 108-atom MC/MD model after full
relaxation at zero temperature352 M.C. Gao et al.where nphis the phonon density of states, and fBEis the Bose-Einstein distribution
function. At high temperatures, the electronic entropy due to electron excitationacross the Fermi level needs to be considered, and the equations to determine theelectronic entropy and free energy are described in Eqs. 8.17 and8.18.
Figure 10.6 compares the calculated phonon density of states (DOS) and heat
capacity at constant volume ( C
v). At low energies (less than 10 meV), the phonon
DOS is comparable for FCC CoCrFeNi and BCC MoNbTaW; both are larger than
HCP CoOsReRu. In contrast, the heat capacity Cvappears to be very similar for all
three alloys although it is slightly larger for CoOsReRu and MoNbTaW thanCoCrFeNi at T/C20400 K.
The calculated vibrational entropy, electronic entropy, and their corresponding
Helmholtz free energy are shown in Fig. 10.7. The vibrational entropy is similar for
BCC MoNbTaW and HCP CoOsReRu, while it is smaller for FCC CoCrFeNi. It iszero at zero temperature and increases rapidly with increasing temperature. At
room temperature, it is already more than twice the ideal conﬁgurational entropy
that is shown by the dashed line in Fig. 10.7a . In contrast, the electronic entropy is
small for all three compositions even at high temperatures (Fig. 10.7b ).2.35 2.4 2.45 2.5 2.55 2.6
r [Å]468101214gαβ(r)
gαβ(r)gαβ(r)Cr-Cr
Cr-Mn
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Mn-Mn
Mn-Fe
Mn-Co
Mn-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Ni
2.35 2.4 2.45 2.5 2.55 2.6
r [Å]468101214Cr-Cr
Cr-Mn
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Mn-Mn
Mn-Fe
Mn-Co
Mn-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Ni
2.35 2.4 2.45 2.5 2.55 2.6
r [Å]468101214Cr-Cr
Cr-Mn
Cr-Fe
Cr-Co
Cr-Ni
Mn-Mn
Mn-Fe
Mn-Co
Mn-Ni
Fe-Fe
Fe-Co
Fe-Ni
Co-Co
Co-Ni
Ni-Nia
cb
Fig. 10.5 Comparison in the ﬁrst nearest-neighbor pair distribution function of FCC
CoCrFeMnNi in ( a) 20-, ( b) 125-, and ( c) 250-atom SQS models after full relaxation at zero
temperature10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 3530 1 02 03 04 0
Energy [meV]00.010.020.030.040.050.060.07Phonon DOS [states/meV/atom]CoCrFeNi
MoNbTaW
CoOsReRua b
Fig. 10.6 Calculated vibrational DOS and constant-volume heat capacity of FCC CoCrFeNi,
BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP CoOsReRu using 64-atom SQS
ab
cd
Fig. 10.7 Calculated ( a) vibrational entropy, ( b) electronic entropy, ( c) vibrational Helmholtz
free energy, and ( d) electronic Helmholtz free energy of FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC MoNbTaW, and
HCP CoOsReRu using 64-atom SQS354 M.C. Gao et al.Accordingly, it is expected that, at ﬁnite temperatures, vibrational free energy
dominates compared to conﬁgurational free energy and electronic free energy(Fig. 10.7c, d ).
To determine the mixing behavior of the alloy, the property of the constituent
elements need to be subtracted. The vibrational entropy of mixing ( ΔS
vib
mix) and
vibrational Helmholtz free energy of mixing ( ΔFvib
mix) of an HEA are calculated by
ΔSvib
mix¼Svib
HEA/C0XN
i¼1xiSvib
i ð10:4Þ
ΔFvib
mix¼Fvib
HEA/C0XN
i¼1xiFvib
i ð10:5Þ
where Svib
HEA(Fvib
HEA) is the vibrational entropy (Helmholtz free energy) of the HEA,
Svib
i(Fvib
i) is the vibrational entropy (Helmholtz free energy) of the ith element, xiis
the molar composition of the ith element, and Nis the total number of elements in
the HEA. The electronic entropy of mixing ( ΔSelec
mix) and electronic free energy of
mixing ( ΔFelec
mix) of an HEA are calculated in a similar fashion:
ΔSelec
mix¼Selec
HEA/C0XN
i¼1xiSelec
i ð10:6Þ
ΔFelec
mix¼Felec
HEA/C0XN
i¼1xiFelec
i ð10:7Þ
where Selec
HEA(Felec
HEA) is the electronic entropy (free energy) of the HEA, and Selec
i
(Felec
i) is the electronic entropy (free energy) of the ith element.
The corresponding vibrational entropy (free energy) of mixing and electronic
entropy (free energy) of mixing for CoCrFeNi, MoNbTaW, and CoOsReRu areshown in Fig. 10.8 using Eqs. 10.4,10.5,10.6, and 10.7. The calculations predict
that, at T/C21~400 K, the vibrational entropies of mixing for all three alloys approach
a constant value, namely, +2.8, /C03.6, and /C00.4 J/K/mol for FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC
MoNbTaW, and HCP CoOsReRu, respectively. In other words, lattice phononvibration increases the total entropy in FCC CoCrFeNi in contrast to BCCMoNbTaW. The magnitude of the vibrational free energy of mixing is small atlow temperatures but scales up rapidly with increasing temperature for CoCrFeNi
and MoNbTaW. Both ΔS
vib
mixandΔFvib
mixare negligible for CoOsReRu. On the other
hand, the electronic entropy of mixing is all truly negligible for all three alloys.
The total entropy and entropy of mixing for selected single-phase HEAs are also
examined using the CALPHAD (acronym of calculation of phase diagrams)
approach, as presented in Chap. 12. The CALPHAD calculations predict that the10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 355a
fb
cd
e
Fig. 10.8 Calculated ( a–c) vibrational and electronic entropies of mixing and ( d–f) vibrational
and electronic Helmholtz free energies of mixing for FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP
CoOsReRu using 64-atom SQS356 M.C. Gao et al.excess entropy, which is the total entropy subtracted by the ideal conﬁgurational
entropy, is +2.5 J/K/mol for FCC CoCrFeNi and +1.3 J/K/mol for CoCrFeNiMnat 1000
/C14C. The present DFT calculations suggest that the positive vibrational
entropy of mixing (+2.8 J/K/mol) in CoCrFeNi mainly accounts for the positive
excess entropy.
To account for anharmonic phonon effect at high temperatures, quasi-harmonic
approximation can be a reasonable choice to start with in order to improvethe accuracy of lattice phonon vibration and more importantly to predict thecoefﬁcient of thermal expansion. It is assumed that the magnetic entropy due tomagnetic spin ﬂuctuation in reported FCC HEAs (such as CoCrFeNi andCoCrFeMnNi) is small because the magnetic ordering temperature is well below
room temperature [ 31,32].
10.4.3 Mechanical Properties
The elastic properties of any crystal can be calculated using the basic elastic stress–
strain relationship:
σi¼X6
j¼1Cijεj ð10:8Þ
where σi,εj;andCijare the elastic stress, strain, and tensor in the Voigt notation,
respectively. Cijcan be derived from this relation by performing six ﬁnite distor-
tions of the lattice as implemented in VASP [ 3,33]. Although the atoms are on an
FCC (or BCC, HCP) lattice, the chemical distribution in small SQS cells may leadto an anisotropic environment and, thus, more scattering in the predicted elasticconstants. For larger SQS cells, the chemical distribution will be better representedand should approach the real material. Therefore, in using a smaller SQS, one routeto overcome this issue is to use an averaging scheme [ 3] to obtain single-crystal C
11,
C12,andC44for cubic structures:
C11¼C11þC22þC33
3SQSj
C12¼C12þC23þC13
3SQSj
C44¼C44þC55þC66
3SQSjð10:9Þ
Alternatively, the total energy approach [ 5,34–36] can be used by performing
pressure-volume equation of states (EOS) and applying a volume-conservingorthorhombic and monoclinic deformation to solve for C
11,C12, and C44obtained
for a single cell without averaging. The bulk modulus here was obtained by ﬁttingthe energy-volume data to the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state, designated as10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 357BEOS, to differentiate it from the bulk modulus ( B) calculated from stress-strain
relation B¼C11þ2C12 ðÞ =3, although the bulk modulus obtained from
both methods should be equal within computing errors. The original manuscript
[5] used the Murnaghan equation of state. Tetragonal shear modulus
C0¼C11/C0C12 ðÞ =2 ðÞ can be obtained by ﬁtting the energies to E¼E0þ2VC0δ2
by applying volume-conserving orthorhombic strain to the base lattice [ 5,34–36]:
Iþεo¼1þδ 00
01 /C0δ 0
001
1/C0δ2/C0/C10
BBB@1
CCCAð10:10Þ
where δis strain, Iis the identity matrix, and ε
ois the strain tensor.
The elastic constant C44can be obtained by ﬁtting the energies to E¼E0þ2V
C44δ2equation by applying the monoclinic strain ( δ) to the base lattice [ 5,34–36]:
Iþεm¼10 0
δ10
001
1/C0δ2/C0/C10
BBB@1
CCCAð10:11Þ
Polycrystalline elastic properties can be derived using the elastic constants and
the Voigt-Reuss (V-R) averaging method – the polycrystalline bulk modulus of anisotropic crystal is the same as its single crystalline bulk modulus, while the shearmodulus ( G) can be estimated as an average of the upper ( G
V) and lower ( GR)
bounds given by [ 3,35,36]
GV¼C11/C0C12þ3C44 ðÞ
5
GR¼5C11/C0C12 ðÞ C44
4C44þ3C11/C0C12 ðÞð10:12Þ
Poisson ’s ratio ( ν) and Young ’s modulus ( E) can be derived from the bulk
modulus ( B) and the shear modulus ( G):
ν¼3B/C02G
23BþG ðÞ;E¼9BG
3BþGð10:13Þ
The calculated elastic properties for CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi using smaller
cell SQS are listed in Table 10.5. The disagreement in Cijand polycrystalline
properties ( B,G,E, and ν) for both alloys is obvious among three methods, EMTO-
CPA, stress–strain relation, and total energy approach. Note that the total energyapproach using the Birch-Murnaghan approach leads to a more physical Poisson ’s358 M.C. Gao et al.Table 10.5 Calculated lattice parameter [ a,Å] elastic properties of CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi: Poisson ’s ratio [ ν], Young ’s modulus [ E, GPa], bulk
modulus [ B, GPa], and elastic constants [ Cij, GPa] from EMTO-CPA and VASP-SQS
Structure a ν GE B EOS BC 11 C12 C44 Method
CoCrFeNi SQS-16 3.552 0.248 88.3 220.2 145.4 210.7 113.2 131.9 Stress [ 18]
SQS-24 3.543 0.311 74.4 195 171.6 227.1 143.8 109.6 Energy [ 5]
SQS-24 3.551 0.275 85.6 218.2 161.5 161.9 224.1 131.8 130.5 Stress [ 18]
EMTO-CPA 3.582 0.319 85.2 225 208.6 259.2 183.3 146.3 [ 5]
CoCrFeMnNi SQS-20 3.536 0.250 96.4 241.1 160.2 229.3 125.6 146.0 Energy
SQS-20 3.545 0.261 95.6 241.1 167.5 168.1 243.0 134.2 141.1 Stress [ 18]
EMTO-CPA 3.600 0.313 78.8 207 184.5 229.7 161.9 138.2 [ 5]
The bulk modulus BEOSobtained from the pressure-volume equation of state (EOS) is also listed10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 359ratio for the quinary CoCrFeMnNi HEA than that published [ 5] using the
Murnaghan approach. This is not surprising as the Murnaghan equation of state ismore sensitive to strain ranges used in energy vs. volume ﬁts. Note that different
treatments of magnetic properties between EMTO-CPA and VASP-SQS may
partially account for the observed discrepancy. The EMTO-CPA calculations aredone with disordered local moment (DLM) approximation for the paramagneticstate in an attempt to represent the real alloy. Further ferromagnetic calculationusing EMTO-CPA predicts lower total energy at 0 K and elastic constants in closeragreement to the VASP calculations despite that the CPA method lacks atomicrelaxation. Besides, the difference in the setup of the calculations between thosethree methods among research groups may attribute to difference in energy and
elastic properties.
The Poisson ’s ratio predicted using the stress–strain approach on 24-atom
CoCrFeNi and 20-atom CoCrFeMnNi is 0.275 and 0.261, respectively. Thesevalues seem to be contradictory to the experimentally observed extraordinaryductility in CoCrFeMnNi [ 37]. However, alloy ductility is an extremely compli-
cated issue since it is sensitive to both intrinsic (alloy chemistry) and extrinsic(processing, temperature, impurities, microstructure, etc.) factors. Intuitively onemay not expect both alloys to be intrinsically ductile given such high concentration
of brittle elements of Cr and Mn. On the other hand, experiments showed that
extraordinarily high density of nano-twinning may be partially responsible for theunusually large ductility in CoCrFeMnNi [ 37] especially at low temperatures while
other factors may deserve further investigation.
Generally speaking, a low stacking fault energy improves ductility of an alloy.
The stacking fault energy in an FCC alloy is the energy expense required to removea close-packed plane from the ABC stacking of the FCC lattice. Ideally the stackingfault energy of HEAs can be independently predicted by DFT calculations. Due to
the compositional complexity in HEAs, direct calculation of stacking fault energy
of HEAs is a daunting task. Instead, Zaddach et al. [ 5] managed to combine
mechanical properties from DFT and stacking fault probability measurementsto obtain the stacking fault energies of CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi HEAs.The stacking fault energy was calculated in this case as
γ¼
K111ω0G111ðÞa0A/C00:37
πﬃﬃﬃ
3p /C1ε2
αð10:14Þ
where K111ω0is assumed to be a constant (i.e., 6.6) for all FCC crystals, G(111)is the
shear modulus in the (111) plane, a0is the lattice parameter, A¼2C44=C11/C0C12 ðÞ ,
ε2is the mean square microstrain, and αis the measured stacking fault probability.
The experimentally measured values of ε2/αfor various FeNi, CrFeNi, CoCrFeNi,
and CoCrFeMnNi alloys are reported [ 5]. Using the elastic constants from
Table 10.5 (only those using the total energy approach), the stacking fault energies
of equiatomic CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi are calculated (Table 10.6). Compared
to EMTO-CPA, VASP-SQS produces very close results for the quaternaryCoCrFeNi HEAs but larger for the quinary CoCrFeMnNi HEAs. From these360 M.C. Gao et al.calculations, one may reach the conclusion that VASP calculations with small SQS
(20–24 atoms) may lead to less accurate elastic properties of the random solidsolution HEAs. Convergence of the calculated property will be very sensitive to the
property of interest within the VASP + SQS method. As noted by von Pezold et al.,
high-quality elastic constants are obtained for a binary Al-Ti alloy from a small32-atom SQS [ 11]. In this approach, the elastic constants were averaged over
different permutations of the strain of the tensors presented in Eqs. 10.8 and10.9
to better account for the chemical distributions in the bulk. This approach could alsobe done to improve the convergence of the small VASP-SQS cells presented here.Fluctuations in the measured stacking fault energy were observed with respect tothe measurements, suggesting possible existence of chemical and/or structural
inhomogeneity of the samples.
10.5 Comparison with Other Methods and Future Work
So far three methods to model the structure of HEAs have been introduced,
MC/MD in Chap. 8, CPA in Chap. 9, and SQS in this chapter. They all capture
the atomic structure of HEAs one way or the other and can be used to predict thebasic structure information including the lattice parameters, thermodynamic prop-erties including enthalpy of formation, the elastic properties such as elastic con-stants C
ijand bulk moduli, electronic structure properties such as the density of
states (DOS), and the magnetic properties such as the atomic magnetic moment.Compared to MC/MD and CPA, one striking advantage of SQS is its capability to
capture the random solid solution in a “physical” crystal lattice with ease.
The MC/MD simulations are computationally intense, and they require a user to
have the skills in both molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations. Theinterpretation of the results is also nontrivial. On the other hand, due to the single-site approximation used for CPA, it cannot include short-range order effects. Addi-tionally, CPA has limitations for systems with large size mismatch, and, mostTable 10.6 Stacking fault energies (SFE) of FCC CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi [ 5]
Material Input source SFE (mJ/m2)
CoCrFeNi VASP (SQS-24, energy) [ 5] 27.8
VASP (SQS-16, stress) [ 18] 32.7
VASP (SQS-24, stress) [ 18] 31.3
EMTO [ 5] 27.8
CoCrFeMnNi VASP (SQS-20, energy) [ 5]a26.4
VASP (SQS-20, stress) [ 18] 27.2
VASP (SQS-20, energy)b26.4
EMTO [ 5] 19.0
These SFEs are average values of the three points for CoCrFeNi and two points for CoCrFeMnNi
aThe Murnaghan equation of states was used
bThe Birch-Murnaghan equation of states was used10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 361importantly, neglects anisotropic lattice distortions. Moreover, lattice phonon calcu-
lations based on CPA approximation can be a formidable obstacle. SQS, being anatomic model, can overcome these shortcomings to large degrees. Local chemicalenvironment, including short-range order effects, can be easily investigated with anSQS. In this subsection, we ﬁrst compare the electronic structure and PDF of selectedHEAs predicted from SQS and MC/MD and then discuss some drawbacks of SQS.Energy  [eV]-1.5-1-0.500.51 MC/MD-108SQS-64
spin up
spin down00.511.522.5Electronic DOS  [states/eV/atom]total
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4ab
c00.511.52Electronic DOS  [states/eV/atom]
Energy  [eV]-1-0.500.51SQS-64
MC/MD-96
spin up
spin down
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 -10total
Energy  [eV]00.511.52Electronic DOS  [states/eV/atom]SQS-64
MC/MD-128
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4
Fig. 10.9 Comparison [ 18] of the electronic DOS of ( a) FCC CoCrFeNi, ( b) HCP CoOsReRu,
and (c) BCC MoNbTaW generated from SQS and MC/MD methods362 M.C. Gao et al.10.5.1 Electronic Structure
The MC/MD structures for CoCrFeNi, CoOsReRu, and MoNbTaW were generated
using a 108-, 96-, and 128-atom supercell after a total of 50, 40, and 10 ps MC/MDsimulations at T¼1473, 2173, and 1673 K, respectively, followed by full relaxation at
zero temperature. The comparison in the electronic DOS is illustrated in Fig. 10.9[18].
The overall agreement is excellent for both CoCrFeNi and CoOsRreRu, and the Fermilevel is located at the local pseudo-gap. It is noteworthy that the predicted electronicDOS for CoCrFeNi (Fig. 10.9a ) differs greatly from that generated using CPA
(Fig. 9.4). For MoNbTaW, SQS produces a slightly higher DOS at the Fermi level
than MC/MD, and this could be because a much larger cell was used for MC/MD.
10.5.2 Atomic Structure
The SQS method also has its own limitations compared to other atomic models. The
hypothesis of SQS is to assume its completely random solid solution in the ﬁrst fewnearest–neighbor interaction, and thus preferred interatomic interaction may beabsent. An example is shown in Fig. 10.10a for BCC MoNbTaW: the intensity of
various atomic pairs in the ﬁrst nearest neighbor ﬂuctuates within a small range of9.2–10.2 [ 18]. However, real alloys most often exhibit more or less short-range
ordering or clustering depending on the composition and especially the tempera-
ture. In comparison with MC/MD as detailed in Chap. 8, the SQS lacks the variation
of atomic positions, and thus, potentially, the preferred atomic pair interaction incertain alloys may not be captured. Previous MC/MD simulations by Widomet al. [ 29] have shown preferred interatomic interaction between Nb/Ta and
Mo/W in MoNbTaW, as shown in Fig. 10.10b . Nonetheless, for single-phase
HEAs that are close to ideal random mixing behavior especially at high temperature2.767891011gαβ(r)
gαβ(r)a SQS
2.75 2.8
r [Å]2.85 2.767891011b MC/MD
2.75 2.8
r [Å]2.85Nb-Nb
Nb-Mo
Nb-Ta
Nb-W
Mo-Mo
Mo-Ta
Mo-W
Ta-Ta
Ta-W
W-WNb-Nb
Nb-Mo
Nb-Ta
Nb-W
Mo-Mo
Mo-Ta
Mo-W
Ta-Ta
Ta-W
W-W
Fig. 10.10 Comparison of the BCC MoNbTaW structure generated from ( a) 64-atom SQS and ( b)
128-atom MC/MD [ 18]10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 363(relative to their melting points), SQS can be a quick and near-perfect choice for the
structure prediction. Furthermore, one always can apply the MC/MD procedure toSQS to obtain more realistic atomic structure as a function of temperature.
The subtle difference in PDF generated from SQS versus MC/MD is also
observed in CoOSReRu as shown in Fig. 10.11 . The distribution in the nearest-
neighbor pairs is much more uniform in SQS, while clear preference in the Co-Os
and Re-Ru pairs against the Re-Re pair is present in the MC/MD structure. Similar
observation in PDF of CoCrFeNi is presented in Fig. 10.4.
10.5.3 Sensitivity to Atomic Positions
The second drawback of SQS for HEAs is that the total number of atomic
conﬁgurations for a structure is fairly large (e.g., permutation in the atomic
position between A/B/C/D/E elements in a quinary alloy), and thus potentiallythere is uncertainty in the energy of those conﬁgurations especially for anisotropiclattices (e.g., HCP) or compositions for which no small ordering (e.g., magnetic or
chemical) exists. For an equal molar HEAs, the total number of atomic conﬁgu-
rations are 24, 120, 720, 5040, and 40320 for quaternary, quinary, senary,septenary, and octonary alloys, respectively. To examine this uncertainty, theenthalpy of formation of FCC CoCrFeNi, HCP CoOsReRu, and BCC MoNbTaWversus their atomic conﬁgurations are plotted in Fig. 10.12 . The results demon-
strate that CoOsReRu (MoNbTaW) is most (least) sensitive to the atomic conﬁg-
uration. The amplitude in the variation of ΔH
fvalue (i.e., ΔHmax
f/C0ΔHmin
f/C12/C12/C12/C12)i s
1.7, 0.8, and 0.3 kJ/mole for CoOsReRu, CoCrFeNi, and MoNbTaW, respec-
tively, and the corresponding simple averaged enthalpies of formation are2.724 /C60.49, 8.354 /C60.266, and /C07.407 /C60.069 kJ/mol, respectively. The sen-
sitivity to the atomic conﬁguration is presumably determined by the anisotropy of2.55 2.6 2.65 2.7 2.75
R [Å]67891011121314gαβ(r)Co-Co
Co-Ru
Co-Re
Co-Os
Ru-Ru
Ru-Re
Ru-Os
Re-Re
Re-Os
Os-Osab
2.55 2.6 2.65 2.7 2.75
r [Å]67891011121314gαβ(r)Co-Co
Co-Ru
Co-Re
Co-Os
Ru-Ru
Ru-Re
Ru-Os
Re-Re
Re-Os
Os-Os
Fig. 10.11 Comparison of the HCP CoOsReru structure generated from ( a) SQS and
(b) MC/MD [ 18]364 M.C. Gao et al.the lattice and the chemical similarity of the constituent elements in terms of
electronegativity, valence electron concentration, crystal structure, and atomic
size. It is further assumed that this sensitivity decreases with increasing the SQS
cell size.
10.5.4 Other Issues
The third drawback of the SQS method lies in its limitation to a few “special”
compositions such as A 1/3BCDE, ABCDE, and A 2/3BCDE, while the CPA tech-
nique is capable of exploring any composition of an alloy with any components. In
addition, both MC/MD and SQS suffer from cumbersome handling of magnetic
materials especially in the paramagnetic state. They are computationally more
expensive than CPA by many orders of magnitude. For those SQS of large cell
sizes, calculation of elastic properties especially for magnetic compositions is a
difﬁcult task because of the limitation of computing capabilities.Fig. 10.12 Enthalpy of formation ( ΔHf) as a function of atomic conﬁgurations of the quaternary
BCC MoNbTaW and HCP CoOsReRu SQS10 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 36510.6 Conclusions
In summary, this chapter provided SQS models for quaternary and quinary equi-
molar HEAs and detailed applications of SQS to predict the thermodynamic,vibrational, electronic, and mechanical properties of selected single-phase HEAs.Comparison between SQS, MC/MD, and CPA is provided. The following conclu-sions were drawn:
1. Quaternary and quinary SQS models are generated for disordered FCC,
BCC, and HCP equimolar HEAs using ATAT package. The lattice vector andatomic positions are provided for the 16-, 20-, 24-, 64-, 125-, and 250-atom cellsizes.
2. The accuracy of these SQS models is sensitive to the cell size, and larger cells
produce more reliable results. For CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi, largersupercells ( /C2164 atoms) predict that FCC structures are more stable than HCP,
in agreement with experiments. The enthalpy of formation and lattice parame-
ters of known single-phase HEAs are calculated.
3. At room temperature, the vibrational entropy of HEAs studied is more than twice
the ideal conﬁgurational entropy. However, the vibrational entropy of mixing isvery small. At T>400 K, the calculated vibrational entropy of mixing is +2.8,
/C03.6, and /C00.3 J/K/mol for FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP
CoOsReRu, respectively. The calculated positive vibrational entropy of mixingfor CoCrFeNi agrees with a positive excess entropy of +2.5 J/K/mol predicted
from CALPHAD as presented in Chap. 12.
4. The electronic entropy is very small, and the electronic entropy of mixing is truly
negligible for FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP CoOsReRu.
5. The agreement in the electronic density of states is excellent using 64-atom SQS
versus MC/MD for FCC CoCrFeNi, BCC MoNbTaW, and HCP CoOsReRu.
6. MC/MD is more capable to reveal chemical ordering than SQS.
Acknowledgments MCG acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by the Cross-Cutting Technologies
Program at the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) – Strategic Center for Coal,
managed by Robert Romanosky (technology manager) and Charles Miller (technology monitor).The research was executed through NETL ’s Ofﬁce of Research and Development ’s Innovative
Process Technologies (IPT) Field Work Proposal under the RES contract DE-FE-0004000. MCG
thanks Mike Widom, Dan Sorescu, Jeffrey Hawk, David Alman, and Bryan Morreale for inspiringdiscussion on HEAs. CN and DLI acknowledge the support from the National Science Foundationunder grant DMR-1104930 and also fruitful conversations with Carl Koch, Alex Zaddach, Levente
Vitos, Gus Hart, Malcolm Stocks, Stefano Curtarolo, Elizabeth Dickey, James LeBeau, Ram /C19on
Collazo, and Donald W. Brenner.
Disclaimer This chapter authored by M.C.G. was funded by the Department of Energy,
National Energy Technology Laboratory, an agency of the United States Government, througha support contract with AECOM. Neither the U nited States Government nor any agency
thereof, nor any of their employees, nor AECOM, nor any of their employees, makes any
warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any le gal liability or responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed,or represents that its use would not infringe pr ivately owned rights. Reference herein to any366 M.C. Gao et al.speciﬁc commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation,or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinionsof authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the United States
Government or any agency thereof.
References
1. Zunger A, Wei SH, Ferreira LG, Bernard JE (1990) Special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev
Lett 65(3):353–356. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.65.353
2. Wei SH, Ferreira LG, Bernard JE, Zunger A (1990) Electronic properties of random
alloys: special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev B 42(15):9622–9649. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.42.9622
3. Gao MC, Suzuki Y, Schweiger H, Do /C21gan O ¨N, Hawk J, Widom M (2013) Phase stability
and elastic properties of Cr-V alloys. J Phys Cond Matter 25:075402. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/
25/7/075402
4. Tasna ´di F, Ode ´n M, Abrikosov IA (2012) Ab initio elastic tensor of cubic Ti 0.5Al0.5N alloys:
dependence of elastic constants on size and shape of the supercell model and their conver-
gence. Phys Rev B 85(14):144112. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.85.144112
5. Zaddach AJ, Niu C, Koch CC, Irving DL (2013) Mechanical properties and stacking fault
energies of NiFeCrCoMn high-entropy alloy. JOM 65(12):1780–1789. doi: 10.1007/s11837-
013-0771-4
6. Lu ZW, Wei SH, Zunger A (1992) Electronic-structure of ordered and disordered Cu 3Au and
Cu3Pd. Phys Rev B 45(18):10314–10330. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.45.10314
7. Wei SH, Zunger A (1995) Band offsets and optical bowings of chalcopyrites and Zn-based
II-VI alloys. J Appl Phys 78(6):3846–3856. doi: 10.1063/1.359901
8. Jiang C, Stanek CR, Sickafus KE, Uberuaga BP (2009) First-principles prediction
of disordering tendencies in pyrochlore oxides. Phys Rev B 79(10):104203. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.79.104203
9. Jiang C, Wolverton C, Sofo J, Chen LQ, Liu ZK (2004) First-principles study of binary
bcc alloys using special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev B 69(21):214202, doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.69.214202
10. Shin D, Arroyave R, Liu ZK, Van de Walle A (2006) Thermodynamic properties of binary hcp
solution phases from special quasirandom structures. Phys Rev B 74(2):024204, doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.74.024204
11. von Pezold J, Dick A, Friak M, Neugebauer J (2010) Generation and performance of special
quasirandom structures for studying the elastic properties of random alloys: application to
Al-Ti. Phys Rev B 81(9):094203. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.094203
12. Shin DW, Liu ZK (2008) Enthalpy of mixing for ternary fcc solid solutions from special
quasirandom structures. CALPHAD 32(1):74–81. doi: 10.1016/j.calphad.2007.09.002
13. Jiang C (2009) First-principles study of ternary bcc alloys using special quasi-random struc-
tures. Acta Mater 57(16):4716–4726. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2009.06.026
14. van de Walle A, Asta M, Ceder G (2002) The alloy theoretic automated toolkit: a user guide.
CALPHAD 26(4):539–553. doi: 10.1016/S0364-5916(02)80006-2
15. van de Walle A (2009) Multicomponent multisublattice alloys, nonconﬁgurational entropy and
other additions to the alloy theoretic automated toolkit. CALPHAD 33(2):266–278. doi: 10.
1016/j.calphad.2008.12.005
16. van de Walle A, Tiwary P, de Jong M, Olmsted DL, Asta M, Dick A, Shin D, Wang Y, Chen
LQ, Liu ZK (2013) Efﬁcient stochastic generation of special quasirandom structures.CALPHAD 42:13–18. doi: 10.1016/j.calphad.2013.06.00610 Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy Alloys 36717. van de Walle A Alloy Theoretic Automated Toolkit (ATAT) Home Page. http://www.brown.
edu/Departments/Engineering/Labs/avdw/atat/
18. Gao MC, Jiang C, Widom M (2014) Unpublished work19. Kresse G, Hafner J (1993) Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys Rev B
47:558–561, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.47.558
20. Kresse G, Furthmu ¨ller J (1996) Efﬁcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calcula-
tions using a plane-wave basis set. Phys Rev B 54:11169–11186, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevB.54.11169
21. Blochl PE (1994) Projector augmented-wave method. Phys Rev B 50(24):17953, doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953
22. Perdew JP, Burke K, Ernzerhof M (1996) Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Phys Rev Lett 77:3865–3868, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865
23. Zhang Y, Zhou YJ, Lin JP, Chen GL, Liaw PK (2008) Solid-solution phase formation rules for
multi-component alloys. Adv Eng Mat 10(6):534–538. doi: 10.1002/adem.200700240
24. Miedema AR, de Boer FR, Boom R (1977) Model predictions for the enthalpy of formation of
transition metal alloys. CALPHAD 1(4):341–359. doi: 10.1016/0364-5916(77)90011-6
25. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Miracle DB, Chuang CP, Liaw PK (2010) Refractory high-entropy
alloys. Intermetallics 18(9):1758–1765. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2010.05.014
26. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Comp 509(20):6043–6048. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2011.02.171
27. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W (2014) High-entropy alloys with
hexagonal close-packed structure designed by equi-atomic alloy strategy and binary phase
diagrams. JOM 66(10):1984–1992. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1085-x
28. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mat Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.10.001
29. Widom M, Huhn WP, Maiti S, Steurer W (2014) Hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics
simulation of a refractory metal high entropy alloy. Metall Mater Trans A 45A(1):196–200.doi:10.1007/s11661-013-2000-8
30. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
31. Lucas MS, Mauger L, Munoz JA, Xiao Y, Sheets AO, Semiatin SL, Horwath J, Turgut Z
(2011) Magnetic and vibrational properties of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109
(7):07E307. doi: 10.1063/1.3538936
32. Lucas MS, Belyea D, Bauer C, Bryant N, Michel E, Turgut Z, Leontsev SO, Horwath J,
Semiatin SL, McHenry ME, Miller CW (2013) Thermomagnetic analysis of FeCoCrxNialloys: Magnetic entropy of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 113(17):17A923. doi: 10.1063/
1.4798340
33. Le Page Y, Saxe P (2002) Symmetry-general least-squares extraction of elastic data for
strained materials from ab initio calculations of stress. Phy Rev B 65:104104, doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.104104
34. Mehl MJ, Osburn JE, Papaconstantopoulos DA, Klein BM (1990) Structural properties of
ordered high-melting-temperature intermetallic alloys from ﬁrst-principles total-energy calcu-lations. Phys Rev B 41(15):10311–10323, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.41.10311
35. Vitos L (2007) Computational quantum mechanics for materials engineers: the EMTO method
and applications. Eng Mater Proc Springer London. doi: 10.1007/978-1-84628-951-4
36. Gao MC, Dogan ON, King P, Rollett AD, Widom M (2008) The ﬁrst-principles design of
ductile refractory alloys. JOM 60(7):61–65. doi: 10.1007/s11837-008-0092-1
37. Otto F, Dlouhy A, Somsen C, Bei H, Eggeler G, George EP (2013) The inﬂuences of
temperature and microstructure on the tensile properties of a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropyalloy. Acta Mater 61(15):5743–5755. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2013.06.018368 M.C. Gao et al.Chapter 11
Design of High-Entropy Alloys
Michael C. Gao
Abstract Identifying single-phase high-entropy alloys is extremely important to
understanding HEA formation and their intrinsic properties, but lack of effectiveguidelines has hindered their discovery. As a result, to date the total number ofsingle-phase HEAs is still very limited. This chapter overviews ﬁve major meth-odologies that may assist in HEA design, including CALPHAD modeling, exper-imental phase diagrams inspection, empirical parameters criteria, density
functional theory calculations, and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.
Strength and weakness of these methodologies are discussed. Experimentallyreported equimolar single-phase HEAs are reviewed, and a variety of new compo-sitions with the face-centered cubic (FCC), body-centered cubic (BCC), and hex-agonal closed-packed (HCP) structures predicted from modeling and phase diagraminspection are provided.
Keywords Single-phase • Multiphase • Bulk metallic glasses • Enthalpy of mixing
• Entropy of mixing • Atomic size difference • Electronegativity difference • Hume-
Rothery rules • Empirical rules • CALPHAD • Phase diagram inspection• Disordered solid solution • Solubility • Phase diagrams • First-principles• Density functional theory (DFT) • Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations(AIMD) • Face-centered cubic (FCC) • Hexagonal closed-packed (HCP) • Body-centered cubic (BCC) • Phase stability • Alloy design • High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
11.1 Introduction
The research on high-entropy alloys (HEAs) is still at its infancy stage as summa-rized in Chap. 1since the ﬁrst publications by Yeh [ 1] and Cantor [ 2] independently
in 2004. The two deﬁnitions for HEAs by Yeh, as detailed in Chap. 1, are very
broad and include wide ranges of microstructure. To date the majority of HEAspublished in research papers contain more than one phase in the microstructure(in the as-cast state or after annealing) as compiled in Chap. 2and elsewhere [ 3–6],
M.C. Gao ( *)
National Energy Technology Laboratory/AECOM, Albany, OR 97321, USAe-mail: mchael.gao@netl.doe.gov
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_11369and the total number of single-phase solid solution HEAs is still very limited mainly
due to lack of effective searching guidelines as pointed out by Gaoet al. [ 7,8]. Table 11.1 summarizes experimentally reported single-phase HEAs
in equimolar compositions with the face-centered cubic (FCC), body-centered
cubic (BCC), and hexagonal closed-packed (HCP) structures. The FCC alloys aremostly based on CoCrFeMnNi [ 2] and its subsystems and derivatives [ 7,9–11]. The
BCC alloys are based on refractory metals in quaternary [ 12–16], quinary [ 12–14,
17–20], senary [ 20–23], and septenary [ 20] compositions. Zhang et al. [ 3] ﬁrst
suggested formation of HCP HEAs among rare earth (RE) elements, because theseRE elements have extremely similar atomic size, electronegativity, and chemistry,Table 11.1 Single-phase
HEA compositions conﬁrmed
by experimentsAlloys Structure References
CoCrFeNi FCC [ 9]
CoFeMnNi FCC [ 7,10]
CoCrMnNi FCC [ 10]
CoFeNiPd FCC [ 28]
CoCrFeMnNi FCC [ 2]
CoCrFeNiPd FCC [ 11]
Al20Li20Mg 10Sc20Ti30 FCC [ 27]
AlNbTiV BCC [ 29]
HfNbTiZr BCC [ 16]
MoNbTaW BCC [ 12,13]
NbTaTiV BCC [ 14]
NbTiVZr BCC [ 15]
AlCrMoTiW BCC [ 18]
AlNbTaTiV BCC [ 14]
HfNbTaTiZr BCC [ 17]
HfNbTiVZr BCC [ 30]
MoNbTaVW BCC [ 12,13]
MoNbTaTiV BCC [ 20]
MoNbTiVZr BCC [ 19]
NbReTaTiV BCC [ 20]
MoNbReTaW BCC [ 20]
CrMoNbTaVW BCC [ 21]
HfNbTaTiVZr BCC [ 22]
MoNbTaTiVW BCC [ 23]
MoNbReTaVW BCC [ 20]
MoNbReTaTiVW BCC [ 20]
CoFeReRu HCP [ 8]
MoPdRhRu HCP [ 31]
DyGdHoTbY HCP [ 25]
DyGdLuTbTm HCP [ 25]
DyGdLuTbY HCP [ 32]
Al20Li20Mg 10Sc20Ti30 HCP [ 27]370 M.C. Gaoand they form isomorphous or extended solid solution in HCP structure according
to their binary phase diagrams [ 24]. Indeed, formation of RE HCP HEAs was later
conﬁrmed in DyGdLuTbY [ 25], DyGdLuTbTm [ 25], and DyGdHoTbY [ 26]. HCP
HEAs based on transition metals are experimentally conﬁrmed in CoFeReRu [ 8]
and predicted in CoOsReRu [ 7]. Youssef et al. [ 27] reported polymorphous trans-
formation in Al 20Li20Mg 10Sc20Ti30from the FCC to HCP structure by annealing at
500/C14C for 1 h, but whether the FCC and HCP phases are thermodynamically stable
requires further investigation.
Since the “virtual” variations in non-equimolar compositions for any
HEA system can be countless, especially for those HEAs where isomorphoussolid solution forms (e.g., Hf
xNbTaTiVZr, HfNb xTaTiVZr, HfNbTa xTiVZr,
HfNbTaTi xVZr, and HfNbTaTiVZr x[22]), this chapter mainly focuses on equimo-
lar compositions that are most representative of their alloying systems. This is not tosay that those non-equimolar compositions are not important. As a matter of fact,the maximum entropy of mixing of a solid solution may not necessarily occur at theequimolar compositions, since most alloys may deviate more, or less, from idealmixing, as shown in Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni (see Chap. 12), Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W
(see Chap. 12), Al-Cr-Cu-Fe-Ni [ 33], and Hf-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-Zr systems [ 22].
The empirical rules on single-phase solid solution HEA formation are reviewed
in Chap. 2from the consideration of topological, thermodynamic, and physical
parameters including atomic size difference ( δ)[34], enthalpy of mixing ( ΔH
mix)
[34], valence electron concentration (VEC) [ 35],Ω-parameter [ 4], and electroneg-
ativity difference ( χ)[36]. Out of those parameters, ΔHmixandδcarry the most
signiﬁcance, and it has been regarded [ 4] that 15 /C20ΔHliq
mix/C20+5 kJ/mol, Ω/C211 and δ
/C206.6 % would favor forming disordered solid solution HEAs. However, the ΔHmix
values taken from the empirical Miedema model [ 37], as proposed in Reference
[34], are for liquid state regardless of the crystal structure of the solid solution
phase. Furthermore, these empirical rules do not address any competing phasesagainst the solid solution phase. As a result, it is not surprising to observe that theserules fail sometimes. For example, AlLiMgSnZn has ΔH
mix¼/C06.08 kJ/mol, δ¼
5.52 %, Ω¼1.56, VEC ¼5.4, and Δχ¼0.33, but more than four phases formed in
the alloy [ 38]. Multiphases were observed in HfMoNbTaTiVWZr [ 39] although
it has ΔHmix¼/C02.9 kJ/mol, δ¼5.49 %, Ω¼15.7, and Δχ¼0.36. Note that lattice
topological instability [ 40], a single-parameter ( ϕ)[6], and an intrinsic residual
strain model [ 5] have also been proposed recently to address single-phase solid
solution formation.
On the other hand, Gao and Alman [ 7] proposed an effective searching strategy
by combining experimental phase diagram inspection, CALPHAD (acronym ofCALculation of PHA seDiagram) modeling and ab initio molecular dynamics
(AIMD) simulations. Accelerating HEA design using CALPHAD approach has
been addressed in literature by Zhang et al. [ 23,41,42], Gao et al. [ 8,22], and
Senkov et al. [ 43]. Very recently, Troparevsky et al. [ 30] proposed a simple model
that compares the ideal conﬁgurational entropy of equimolar solid solution with theenthalpy of formation of the most stable binary compound in the alloy11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 371system, which are taken from ﬁrst-principles density functional theory (DFT) in
literature.
This chapter overviews and compares these major methodologies pertaining to
the design of single-phase HEAs. Theoretical background on DFT and its applica-
tions to HEAs are presented in Chaps. 8,9, and 10, while the detailed methodology
in CALPHAD and its database development are presented in Chap. 12. A variety of
model-predicted equimolar compositions with FCC, BCC, and HCP structures aresuggested. This chapter concludes by comparing the strength and weakness of thesemethodologies and outlook for future development for more robust screeningapproaches. Note that composite HEAs are very important in balancing materialproperties for many challenging applications, and the readers are referred to Chap. 6
and Refs. [ 44–46] for details.
11.2 CALPHAD Modeling
The essence of CALPHAD method is to develop a reliable thermodynamic data-
base that consists of self-consistent descriptions of Gibbs energy for each phase inthe system in interest using semiempirical equations as a function of temperatureand composition based on reliable experimental data and accurate DFT results.Once the database has been developed, then it can be used to predict phase diagramsand thermodynamic properties of this system. Therefore, CALPHAD can be
regarded as the most direct approach to design HEAs [ 8,22,23,41–43].
Previously, Otto et al. [ 47] studied phase stability in six alloys CoCrFeMnNi,
CoCrCuFeMn, CoCrMnNiV, CoFeMnMoNi, CoFeMnNiV, and CrFeMnNiTi, andthey found that a single-phase FCC solid solution formed only in CoCrFeMnNi,while the other ﬁve alloys consisted of more than one phase after annealing at1000
/C14C or 800/C14C. Using TCNI7 database that covers all the edge binaries and
some ternaries of these alloys (except that TTNI8 database was used forCoCrCuFeMn and CoFeMnNiV), the experimental observation by Otto et al. is
qualitatively reproduced by the CALPHAD calculations as shown in Fig. 11.1.
A single FCC phase was predicted only in CoCrFeMnNi by both databases. AnFCC matrix phase and minor μphase were correctly predicted in CoFeMnMoNi,
and complex microstructure of four phases were predicted in CrFeMnNiTi. ForCoFeMnNiV, the FCC phase was predicted to be stable over a narrow temperaturerange, and minor σphase forms at lower temperatures. It seems that both databases
underestimate the thermal stability of the σphase in the systems since it was
observed in CoCrCuFeMn and CoCrMnNiV by Otto et al. [ 47]. This also indicates
that both databases require further improvement especially on descriptions on all
ternary systems.
Aiming to design solid solution alloys with three to six principal components
that have a useable temperature /C211000
/C14C, density <10 g · cm/C03, Young ’s modulus
/C21100 GPa, and cost /C20$200 per kg, Senkov et al. [ 43] carried out CALPHAD
calculations using various thermodynamic databases developed by CompuTherm [ 48].372 M.C. GaoThey categorized the results into solid solution (SS) phases, intermetallic
(IM) phases, and SS + IM phases. They found that, with increasing the numberof principal components, the fraction of SS phases decrease, while the fraction ofSS + IM increases, as shown in Fig. 11.2. This suggests that although increasing
the number of principal components ( N) increases the maximum conﬁgurational
entropy of SS phases by Rln(N)( w h e r e Ris ideal gas constant), it also lowers the
enthalpy of competing intermetallics, thus favoring formation of composites of
SS and IM phases.1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4Mole fraction
Mole fraction
Mole fraction
0.2
01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4Mole fraction
Mole fraction
Mole fraction
0.2
01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.211: BCC#1
2: C14
11
0500 1000FCC CoCrFeMnNi
CoFeMnMoNi CoFeMnNiV CrFeMnNiTiCoCrCuFeMn CoCrMnNiV LIQ LIQ#2
LIQ#1
4
4
4: LIQσ
σFCC
FCC
FCC
FCCBCC
BCCFCC
L12
s
33: FCC
5
55: σ2
7 7: BCC#2
22
66: D024
6μTemperature [°C]1500 500 1000
Temperature [°C]1500 500 1000
Temperature [°C]1500
500 1000
Temperature [°C]1500 500 1000
Temperature [°C]1500 500 1000
Temperature [°C]1500BCCLIQ
LIQ LIQ
Fig. 11.1 Calculated equilibrium phase mole fraction versus temperature for CoCrFeMnNi,
CoCrCuFeMn, CoCrMnNiV, CoFeMnMoNi, CoFeMnNiV, and CrFeMnNiTi that were experi-mentally studied by Otto et al. [ 47]
Fig. 11.2 Distributions of multi-principal element alloys by categories. Fractions of ( a)S S
phases, ( b) IM phases, and ( c) (SS + IM) phases equimolar alloys in 3- to 6-component alloy
systems at solidus temperature ( Tm) and 600/C14C[43]11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 373The distribution (in fraction) of different phases at solidus temperature and
600/C14C are shown in Fig. 11.3. The top four most frequently observed phases in
descending order are BCC, M 5Si3, FCC, and B2 (CsCl-type) phases. In terms of
solid solution phases, BCC structure dominates over FCC and HCP structures.
To design HCP HEAs, Gao et al. [ 8] designed CoFeReRu, CoPtReRu,
CoCrReRu, and CoCrFeReRu using TCNI7 database, and a single HCP phase inas-cast CoFeReRu was veriﬁed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning elec-tron microscopy (SEM) as shown in Fig. 11.4. Assisted by CALPHAD modeling
using TCNI7 database, Gao and coworkers have also successfully designed severalsenary refractory HEAs including CrMoNbTaVW [ 21], HfNbTaTiVZr [ 22],
and MoNbTaTiVW [ 23], and a single-phase BCC solid solution was experimen-
tally conﬁrmed in these alloys in the as-cast state. Other BCC HEAs they
Fig. 11.3 Fractions of different phases in ( a) all alloys and ( b) solid solution alloys [ 43]
ab
1.0
0.8
0.6HCP#2HCP LIQUID
BCC0.4
0.2
0
400 800 1200 1600
Temperature [°C]Phase mole fraction
2000 2400
Fig. 11.4 (a) Equilibrium phase mole fraction versus temperature and ( b) SEM micrograph and
XRD plot for as-cast CoFeReRu [ 8]374 M.C. Gaodesigned using CALPHAD modeling as well as empirical parameters include
HfMoNbTiZr, HfMoTaTiZr, NbTaTiVZr, HfMoNbTaTiZr, HfMoTaTiVZr, andMoNbTaTiVZr [ 39].
One important reason for the successful application of TCNI7 database to
refractory BCC HEA design lies in the fact that there are few stable compoundsin the vast majority of their binaries and ternaries for those nine refractory metals(Cr, Hf, Mo, Nb, Ta, Ti, V, W, and Zr); although the database only covers all theedge binaries. However, optimization of all constituent ternary systems will abso-lutely enhance the reliability of the database, and thus the success rate of HEAscreening using the database. Typical optimization for ternaries involve introduc-ing ternary interaction parameters, ﬁtting the phase boundaries between BCC,
HCP, Laves, and other phases, and reproducing experimental liquidus surface,
etc. Note that attention also needs to be paid to the energies of those hypotheticalcompounds that are required for the sake of database compatibility (see Chap. 12
for details).
To ascertain whether an alloy would form single-phase solid solution in the
as-cast state, one can perform nonequilibrium solidiﬁcation simulation using theScheil-Gulliver models [ 49,50]. The Scheil simulation predicts formation of a
single BCC phase during the entire solidiﬁcation in MoNbTaTiVW (see Fig. 12.19
in Chap. 12) and sequential formation of multiphase in Al
xCoCrFeNi ( x/C210.8, see
Fig. 12.17 in Chap. 12). Alternatively, one can also make an educated guess by
examining the temperature range ( ΔT) over which the solid solution phase is stable
from the plot of equilibrium phase mole fraction versus temperature (e.g. Figs. 11.1
and11.4a ). Experience reveals that ΔT/C21~0.3Tsol(where Tsolstands for solidus
temperature at which the solid solution phase is the primary crystallization phase)typically favors a single-phase solid solution in the as-cast state. Since chemicalsegregation inevitably exists in the as-cast dendritic structure due to constitutional
undercooling and nonequilibrium solidiﬁcation path (see Chap. 5for details on
manufacturing routes), proper homogenization and/or thermomechanical treatmentat higher temperature will be required to obtain equiaxed grain microstructure andachieve acceptable chemical homogeneity.
The single-phase HEA compositions predicted using CALPHAD modeling by
Senkov [ 43], Gao et al. [ 7,8], and this work are compiled in Table 11.2, but future
experiments are required to verify the microstructure of these compositions. Aspointed out in Chap. 12, most commercial CALPHAD databases are developed for
traditional alloys that are based on single principal element (e.g., Al-, Mg-, Fe-,
Ni-, or Ti-based alloys, etc.), and they are most accurate for the compositionslocated at the corner rich in the principal element. As a result, caution should bepaid when extrapolating the compositions to the center of a multicomponent phasediagram.
To achieve accurate results, the databases should at least cover all the constituent
binary and ternary systems because the descriptions for higher-order compositionsare routinely obtained by extrapolation from the lower-order systems. Therefore,
one should not overestimate the CALPHAD prediction when the database does not
cover all the constituent binaries or ternaries. For example, experiments show11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 375Table 11.2 Single-phase HEA compositions predicted by modeling
and phase diagram inspection
Alloys Structure References
CuMnNiZn FCC This study
CuNiPdPt FCC [ 7]
CoFeIrOsRh *a[30]
CoIrNiOsRh *a[30]
CoIrNiRhPd *a[30]
CoIrOsPtRh *a[30]
CuNiPdPtRh FCC [ 7]
IrNiOsPtRh *a[30]
IrOsPtRhRu *a[30]
NiOsPtRhRu *a[30]
CoCrFeMnNiOs *a[30]
CoCrFeNiOsRh *a[30]
CoCrFeNiOsRe *a[30]
CoFeIrNiOsRh *a[30]
CoFeIrNiRhPd *a[30]
CoIrNiOsPtRh *a[30]
CoIrNiRhPdPt *a[30]
IrNiOsPtRhRu *a[30]
CoCrFeMnNiOsRh *a[30]
CoCrFeMnOsReRh *a[30]
CoCrFeMnNiOsRe *a[30]
CoCrFeNiOsReRh *a[30]
CoCrFeNiReRhPd *a[30]
CoCrMnNiOsReRh *a[30]
CoCrMnNiOsReW *a[30]
CoFeMnNiOsReRh *a[30]
CoIrFeMnNiOsRh *a[30]
CrMnNiOsReRuW *a[30]
CoFeMnOsReZn *a[30]
AlCrFeMn BCC [ 43]
AlCrFeMo BCC [ 43]
AlCrFeV BCC [ 43]
AlCrMnMo BCC [ 43]
AlCrMnTi BCC [ 43]
AlCrMnV BCC [ 43]
AlCrMoV BCC [ 43]
AlCrVW BCC [ 43]
AlFeMnV BCC [ 43]
AlFeMoV BCC [ 43]
AlFeTiV BCC [ 43]
AlMnTiV BCC [ 43]
AlMoNbV BCC [ 43]
(continued)376 M.C. GaoTable 11.2 (continued)
Alloys Structure References
AlNbVW BCC [ 43]
BaCaEuSr BCC This work
BaCaEuYb BCC This work
BaEuSrYb BCC This workBaCaEuYb BCC This workCaEuSrYb BCC This work
CrFeMnV BCC [ 43]
CrFeTiV BCC [ 43]
CrMnTiV BCC [ 43]
CrMoNbV BCC [ 43]
CrMoTiV BCC [ 43]
FeMoTiV BCC [ 43]
MoNbReTa BCC This workMoNbReTi BCC This workMoNbReV BCC This work
MoNbTaTi BCC This work
MoNbTaV BCC This workMoNbTiV BCC [ 43], this work
MoNbTiW BCC This work
MoNbVW BCC This work
MoReTaTi BCC This workMoReTaV BCC This workMoReTaW BCC This work
MoReTiV BCC This work
MoReTiW BCC This workMoReVW BCC This workMoTiVW BCC This work
NbReTaTi BCC This work
NbReTaV BCC This workNbReTaW BCC This workNbReTiV BCC This work
NbReTiW BCC This work
NbReVW BCC This workNbTaTiW BCC This workNbTaVW BCC This workNbTiVW BCC This work
ReTaTiV BCC This work
ReTaTiW BCC This workReTaVW BCC This workReTiVW BCC This work
TaTiVW BCC This work
BaCaEuSrYb BCC This work
(continued)11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 377Table 11.2 (continued)
Alloys Structure References
AlCrFeMnV BCC [ 43]
AlCrFeMoV BCC [ 43]
AlCrMnTiV BCC [ 43]
AlCrNbVW BCC [ 43]
HfMoNbTiZr BCC [ 39]
HfMoTaTiZr BCC [ 39]
MoNbTaTiW BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTiW BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTaTi BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTaV BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTiV BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReVW BCC [ 20], this work
MoReTaTiV BCC [ 20], this work
MoReTaTiW BCC [ 20], this work
MoReTaVW BCC [ 20], this work
MoReTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
MoTaTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
NbReTaTiW BCC [ 20], this work
NbReTaVW BCC [ 20], this work
NbReTaTiV BCC This workNbReTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
NbTaTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
NbTaTiVZr BCC [ 39]
ReTaTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
AlCrMoNbVW BCC [ 43]
HfMoNbTaTiZr BCC [ 39]
HfMoTaTiVZr BCC [ 39]
MoNbReTaTiV BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTaTiW BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbReTaVW BCC This work
MoNbReTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
MoNbTaTiVZr BCC [ 39]
MoReTaTiVW BCC [ 20], this work
NbReTaTiVW BCC [
20], this work
CoCrReRu HCP [ 8]
CoOsReRu HCP [ 7,8]
CoPtReRu HCP [ 8]
CrIrMoRh HCP [ 8]
CrIrRhW HCP [ 8]
CrMoOsRu HCP [ 8]
CrOsRuW HCP [ 8]
(continued)378 M.C. Gaomultiphase formation in CoReRuV in instead of single HCP phase predicted by
TCNI7 database [ 8]. Experimental study on AlNbTaTiV by Yang et al. [ 14] shows
appearance of a single-phase BCC solid solution in the as-cast state, but TCNI7database predicts formation of BCC and σphase. These disagreements demonstrate
the importance of the reliability of the thermodynamic database.Table 11.2 (continued)
Alloys Structure References
CoPtReRu HCP [ 8]
IrMoPdRu HCP [ 8]
IrMoRhW HCP [ 8]
IrMoPtRu HCP [ 8]
MoOsRuW HCP [ 8]
MoPdRhRu HCP [ 8]
MoPtRhRu HCP [ 8]
CoCrFeReRu HCP [ 8]
CoFeOsReRu HCP [ 8]
CoIrOsReRu HCP [ 8]
CoNiOsReRu HCP [ 8]
CoOsPdReRu HCP [ 8]
CoOsPtReRu HCP [ 8]
CoOsReRhRu HCP [ 8]
CoOsReRuTc HCP [ 8]
CrIrMoRhW HCP [ 8]
CrMoOsRuW HCP [ 8]
MoPdRhRuTc HCP [ 51]
210 quaternary RE*bHCP [ 8]
378 quinary RE*bHCP [ 8]
210 senary RE*bHCP [ 8]
120 septenary RE*bHCP [ 8]
45 octonary RE*bHCP [ 8]
10 ennead RE*bHCP [ 8]
1 decadal RE*bHCP [ 8]
CeNdPmPr DHCP [ 8]
CeLaPmPr DHCP [ 8]
CeLaNdPr DHCP [ 8]
CeLaNdPm DHCP [ 8]
LaNdPmPr DHCP [ 8]
CeLaNdPmPr DHCP [ 8]
*aThe crystal structures of these compositions were not suggested in
Ref. [ 30], although the majority of them likely prefer an FCC structure
*bThese numbers represent the total number of equimolar composi-
tions for quaternary, quinary, senary, septenary, octonary, ennead, and
decadal systems, respectively, which comprises arbitrary selection of
RE elements from the Dy-Er-Gd-Ho-Lu-Sc-Sm-Tb-Tm-Y system [ 8]11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 37911.3 Phase Diagram Inspection
Phase diagram inspection becomes especially important if necessary CALPHAD
databases are not available or are not sufﬁciently accurate (e.g., they do not coverall edge binaries or ternaries). Inspection of phase diagrams of those single-phaseHEAs listed in Table 11.1 reveals some common important characteristics among
their systems [ 7]: They either exhibit isomorphous solid solution (e.g., Nb-Mo-Ta-W,
Hf-Nb-Ta-Ti-Zr), or the terminal solubilities are quite large (e.g., Co-Fe-Mn-Ni)in their constituent binaries and ternaries. The key of phase diagram inspection is tolook for wide solubilities (i.e., compositional homogeneity range of the solid solution
phase in interest). In order to search for lightweight HEAs for aerospace applications,
Cotton et al. [ 52] exclusively used terminal solubility in binary phase diagrams as an
important parameter in their screening. Mainly there are three types of solid solutionsin a phase diagram as shown in Fig. 11.5, which carry most signiﬁcance in HEA
0400800120016002000240028003200
0 20 40 60 80 100
Ru [at. %]Temperature [  C]HCPLiquida
Re Ru05001000150020002500
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT RUTemperature [  C]HCPLiquidb
Cr RuBCC σCr3Ru
0400800120016002000
0 20 40 60 80 100
Rh [at. %]Temperature [  C]HCPFCC BCC
Cr3RhLiquidc
Cr Rh
Fig. 11.5 Example experimental binary phase diagrams [ 53] that show isomorphous HCP solid
solution in Re-Ru, large terminal HCP and BCC solubilities in Cr-Ru, and large homogeneityrange of an intermediate HCP phase in Cr-Rh binary380 M.C. Gaoformation: (a) isomorphous solid solution (e.g., Re-Ru), (b) extended terminal solid
solubility (e.g., BCC and HCP in Cr-Ru binaries), and (c) intermediate solid solution(e.g., HCP phase in Cr-Rh binary).
11.3.1 Exclusively Isomorphous Solid Solution
in All Edge Binaries
Phase diagram inspection is actually a powerful screening tool, since it allows
immediate HEA design without need of other input. For example, one may expectsingle-phase BCC solid solution formation for quaternary, quinary, and senaryalloys at equimolar compositions within Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W system, since all the
edge binaries exhibit isomorphous BCC solid solution. As a result, the total number
of equimolar HEA compositions of this system amount to 22:
C
4
6þC5
6þC6
6¼15þ6þ1¼22: ð11:1Þ
Previously, Gao et al. [ 7] suggested formation of single-phase HCP solid solu-
tion in CoOsReRu, since all six constituent binaries form isomorphous HCP solid
solution. Another example of HCP HEAs is based on rare earth elements Dy, Er,Gd, Ho, Lu, Sc, Sm, Tb, Tm, and Y, as proposed by Gao et al. [ 8]. These RE
elements all have stable HCP structure, and they form isomorphous HCP solidsolution in their binaries. As a result, the total number of equimolar HEA compo-sitions of this system equals 974, as determined as follows:
C
4
10þC5
10þC6
10þC7
10þC8
10þC9
10þC10
10
¼210þ378þ210þ120þ45þ10þ1:ð11:2Þ
The individual items in Eq. ( 11.2) represent the total number of compositions for
quaternary, quinary, senary, septenary, octonary, ennead, and decadal systems,
respectively. Since several of these elements transform to the BCC structure atvery high temperatures before melting, some of the proposed HEAs may requiresubsequent annealing in the HCP phase ﬁeld in order to decompose the primaryBCC phase, if any should exist.
Phase diagram inspection also suggests that isomorphous double HCP (DHCP)
solid solution may form among La, Ce, Pr, Nd, and Pm that all have a stable DHCPstructure at lower temperatures [ 24]. As a result, single-phase DHCP solid solution
is expected to form in CeLaNdPmPr, CeNdPmPr, CeLaPmPr, CeLaNdPr,
CeLaNdPm, and LaNdPmPr. FCC solid solution was proposed in CuNiPdPt andCuNiPdPtRh [ 7]; since isomorphous solid solution forms in all six edge binaries of
Cu-Ni-Pd-Pt system, and Rh also forms isomorphous solid solution with Cu, Ni, Pd,and Pt, respectively. Another example of phase diagram inspection is BaCaEuSrYband its subsystem alloys (namely BaCaEuSr, BaCaEuYb, BaEuSrYb, BaCaEuYb,11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 381and CaEuSrYb) in which a single-phase BCC solid solution may form since
isomorphous BCC solid solution forms in all edge binaries where available.Although Eu-Sr and Sr-Yb binary phase diagrams are not available in literature,
it is expected that they may resemble Ca/Ba-Eu and Ca/Ba-Yb binaries,
respectively.
11.3.2 Combination of Isomorphous Solid Solution
and Large Terminal Solubility
Even though most binary phase diagrams do not exhibit aforementioned isomor-
phous solid solution, combination of isomorphous solid solution and large terminal
solubility in lower-order systems also favor solid solution formation in higher-order
systems. For example, for the well-studied CoCrFeMnNi alloy, Co-Fe, Co-Ni,Fe-Mn, Fe-Ni, and Mn-Ni binaries exhibit isomorphous FCC solid solution, whileCo-Cr, Co-Mn, and Cr-Ni show large FCC terminal solubilities. As a result, FCCsolid solution forms in CoCrFeMnNi despite of existence of stable σphase in Co-Cr
and Cr-Mn and absence of stable FCC solid solution in Cr-Mn. Likewise, FCC solidsolution may form in CuMnNiZn, since isomorphous FCC solid solution existsin Cu-Mn, Cu-Ni, and Mn-Ni, while Zn solubilities in Cu, FCC γ-Mn, and Ni are
very large.
Once single-phase HEA compositions are identiﬁed based on exclusively iso-
morphous solid solution as described in Sect. 11.3.1 , then new alloys can be
designed by substituting one element by a new element (or add a new element)that exhibit extended terminal solubility with majority of the elements in the basealloy. For example, one may consider Mo-Nb-Re-Ta-Ti-V-W system, since Mo,Nb, Ta, Ti, V, and W all have substantially large solubility for Re. Accordingly, thetotal number of equimolar HEA compositions within this system could reach
C
4
7þC5
7þC6
7þC7
7¼35þ21þ7þ1¼64: ð11:3Þ
11.3.3 Intermediate Phases with Wide Compositional
Homogeneity Range
Formation of HCP MoPdRhRu HEA [ 31] belongs to the case of intermediate phase
with large homogeneity in the middle of their binary phase diagrams (e.g.,Mo
0.46Pd0.54in Mo-Pd, Mo 0.4Rh0.6in Mo-Rh, and Mo 0.63Ru0.37in Mo-Ru). Chem-
ical similarity between Pd and Pt and between Rh and Ir suggests that it is possibleto form several HCP solid solutions that are variants of MoPdRhRu, e.g.,MoPtRhRu, MoIrPtRu, MoIrPtRhRu, and MoIrPdPtRhRu. Intermediate HCP382 M.C. Gaophase with wide compositional homogeneity also forms between the group (Cr,Mo,
W) and the group (Ir,Rh) [ 24]; therefore, Gao et al. [ 8] proposed compositions that
may favor forming HCP HEAs: CrIrMoRh, CrIrRhW, IrMoRhW, (Cr,Mo,
W)0.5(IrRh) 0.5, and CrIrMoRhW.
In summary, phase diagram inspection offers useful information on solid solu-
tion versus intermetallic compounds and can help quick select of elements that areimportant for the solid solution phase in interest. Isomorphous solid solution, largeterminal solubilities, and intermediate phases of wide homogeneity are the mostimportant features that one should pay attention to during HEA design or screeningactivities. These features in edge binaries and ternaries are listed in descendingorder of importance pertaining to HEA formation:
1. Isomorphous solid solution in all edge binaries
2. Isomorphous solid solution in most ternary isothermal and isopleth sections3. Isomorphous solid solution in most edge binaries + large terminal solubility in
some edge binaries (e.g., 20 /C21at%) + absence of stable compounds or complete
immiscibility in the solid state
4. Isomorphous solid solution in some binaries + large terminal solubility in most
edge binaries (e.g., 20 /C21at%) + compounds that are not too stable + absence of
complete immiscibility in the solid state
5. Intermediate solid solution phases with wide compositional homogeneity in the
middle of phase diagrams for the majority of the constituent binaries andternaries
11.4 Empirical Parameters
To date, the most widely studied empirical parameters are ΔHmix,δ, VEC, Δχ, and
Ω-parameter. Praveen et al. [ 54] studied the phase evolution in AlCoCrCuFe and
CoCrCuFeNi HEAs after mechanical alloying and spark plasma sintering. TheΔH
mix(δ) values are /C02.56 (4.99 %) kJ/mol and 3.20 (1.07 %) kJ/mol for
AlCoCrCuFe and CoCrCuFeNi, respectively. They concluded that conﬁgurational
entropy is not sufﬁcient to suppress the formation of Cu-rich FCC and σphases, and
they emphasized the role of enthalpy of mixing in analyzing phase stability ofHEAs. Singh and Subramaniam [ 55] studied phase formation in CoFeNi, CrFeNi,
CoCrFeNi, CuCoFeNi, AlCrFeNi, and AlCuCoFeNi after annealing 24 h at 850
/C14C
and found that only FCC solid solution forms in CoFeNi and CoCrFeNi, while morethan one phase appear in other alloys. They concluded that ΔH
mixandδcan be
thought of as the most important parameters determining the formation of disor-dered solid solutions, while the role of Ω-parameter is not clear in their examples.
Very recently, Gao et al. [ 39] studied these empirical parameters and thermo-
dynamic properties for 16 refractory HEAs. The thermodynamic properties werecalculated using TCNI7 database via CALPHAD method. Figure 11.6 compares
ΔH
liq
mix,ΔHBCC
mix, and Ω-parameter using the Miedema model via the Takeuchi table11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 383[56] and CALPHAD prediction. Overall, the agreement in ΔHliq
mixis very good using
the Takeuchi table [ 56] and CALPHAD, yielding negative values except for
NbTaTiVZr, HfNbTaTiVZr, and HfNbTaTiZr, where the HCP metals constitute
/C2150 at%. However, both the sign and absolute value of ΔHBCC
mixare not necessarily
in accord with ΔHliq
mix: For example, nine alloys exhibit opposite sign while seven
alloys show signiﬁcant contrast in their absolute values. Nonetheless, both
Miedema model and CALPHAD calculations predict that MoNbTaW possesses
the most negative values of both ΔHliq
mixandΔHBCC
mix. HfNbTaTiZr is predicted to
have the most positive ΔHliq
mix, while HfNbTaTiVZr has the most positive ΔHBCC
mix.
The calculated Ω-parameters (Fig. 11.6b ) are all relatively large (e.g., Ω/C214.5 if
ΔHliq
mixis used, and Ω/C213.6 if ΔHBCC
mix is used), and surprisingly multiphase
compositions of HfMoNbTaTiVZr, HfMoNbTaTiVWZr, and CrHfMoNb-
TaTiVWZr show larger values than MoNbTaW, which has the lowest Ω-parameter
because it has the most negative enthalpy of mixing. Furthermore, Ω-parameter
shows much more pronounced contrast between liquid and BCC phases for severalalloys. In short, the Ω-parameter does not differentiate single-phase HEAs from
multiphase HEAs at least in this set of alloys, although it exhibits better function in
prior studies to separate disordered solid solution from composites and bulk metal-lic glasses [ 4,19].
The relationships of ΔH
liq
mix,Ω, andΔχwith respect to δfor all sixteen alloys are
shown in Fig. 11.7. Single-phase BCC solid solution is predicted and/or experi-
mentally veriﬁed in all alloys except HfMoNbTaTiVZr, HfMoNbTaTiVWZr, andCrHfMoNbTaTiVWZr. However, these plots cannot clearly separate these threeab
6 120
100
80
60
40
20
04
2
−2
12
1 HfMoNbTiZr
HfMoNbTaTiZr2 HfMoTaTiZr
3 MoNbTaTiZr
4 NbTaTiVZr
5 CrMoNbTaVW
6
HfNbTaTiVZr7
HfMoTaTiVZr89 MoNbTaTiVW
MoNbTaW10 MoNbTaTiVZr
11 HfMoNbTaTiVZr
12 HfMoNbTaTiVWZr
13 CrHfMoNbTaTiVWZr
14
MoNbTaVW15
HfNbTaTiZr16345LIQ-Takeuchi
LIQ-CALPHAD
BCC-CALPHADLIQ-Takeuchi
LIQ-CALPHAD
BCC-CALPHAD
678
Alloys
W–parameterEnthalpy of mixing [kj/mol]
9 1 01 11 21 31 41 51 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Alloys9 1 01 11 21 31 41 51 6−4
−6
−8
−100
Fig. 11.6 Comparison in ( a) enthalpy of mixing, and ( b)Ω-parameter for the liquid and BCC
phases for 16 equimolar refractory alloys [ 39]. Both the empirical data taken from Takeuchi table
[56] and CALPHAD modeling are shown [ 39]384 M.C. Gaomultiphase alloys from the rest of the 13 solid solution alloys. This result together
with prior studies [ 47,54,55] demonstrate that (1) conﬁgurational entropy does not
always dominate and (2) these existing empirical parameters are not conclusive interms of disordered solid solution formation.
It is worth mentioning two newly proposed parameters may be of importance in
HEA design, a single-parameter ( ϕ)[6] and intrinsic residual strain model via the
root mean square (RMS) residual strain <ε
2>1=2[5]. These two parameters nicely
separate the single-phase HEAs from multiphase alloys. The single-parameter ϕ
was originally deﬁned by Ye et al. [ 6]a s4ab
c2
−2
−4
−6
−80120
100
60
0.45
0.40HfMoNbTiZr
HfMoTaTiZr
MoNbTaTiZr
NbTaTiVZr
CrMoNbTaVW
HfMoNbTaTiZr
HfNbTaTiVZr
HfMoTaTiVZr
HfMoNbTaTiVZr
HfNbTaTiZr [Senkov]HfMoNbTaTiVWZr
CrHfMoNbTaTiVWZrMoNbTaTiVW
MoNbTaTiVZr
MoNbTaW [Senkov]
MoNbTaVW [Senkov]
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.200.15
0.1040
20
080
2DHmix [kJ/mol]
Dc
W
34
d [%]567 234
d [%]567
234
d [%]567
Fig. 11.7 Calculated empirical parameters: ( a)ΔHliq
mixfrom Miedema model, ( b)Ω, and
(c)Δχwith respect to δ[39]. Note that single-phase BCC solid solution is predicted and/or
experimentally veriﬁed in all alloys except HfMoNbTaTiVZr, HfMoNbTaTiVWZr, and
CrHfMoNbTaTiVWZr11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 385ϕ¼/C0RXN
i¼1xilnxi/C0/C12/C12X
i6¼j4Hijxixj/C12/C12=Tm
SEjjð11:4Þ
where N is the total number of components in the solid solution, xi(xj) is the mole
fraction of component i(j),Ris the ideal gas constant, Tmis the estimated melting
point, Hijis the enthalpy of mixing in liquid at equimolar composition estimated
using Miedema model [ 56], and SEis the excess entropy estimated using a hard ball
model that considers overall packing efﬁciency as a function of composition,atomic diameter, and number density [ 57]. The ϕ-parameter that combines ideal
conﬁgurational entropy, excess entropy, and enthalpy of mixing nicely separates
single-phase HEAs from multiphase alloys, as shown in Fig. 11.8. The main
difference between the ϕ-parameter [ 6] and the Ω-parameter [ 4,19] lies in that
the former considers excess entropy. It should be pointed out that the excess entropyvalue and accordingly ϕ-parameter may vary depending on the model used, and the
readers can refer to Chaps. 8,10, and 12for guidance on obtaining the excess
entropy using CALPHAD and DFT methods.
The models used to calculate the RMS residual strain <ε
2>1=2are detailed in
Reference [ 5] and will not be repeated here. Figure 11.9 shows that the single-phase
HEAs, multiphase alloys, and amorphous alloys are nicely separated by RMS
residual strain. Single-phase HEAs are favored when <ε2>1=2is less than 0.05,
while amorphous alloys form when <ε2>1=2is greater than 0.08. Multiphase alloys
form in between these values.
Fig. 11.8 The plot of
conﬁgurational entropy ( Sc)
versus ϕfor single-phase
and multiphase HEAs [ 6]386 M.C. Gao11.5 DFT Calculations
The empirical rules use the enthalpy of mixing of the liquid phase, and thus
questions arise: How will the enthalpy of formation of HEAs vary with respect totheir crystal structures? How will this in turn impact those existing empirical rules?Using the special quasi-random structure (SQS) to represent the solid solution(details are provided in Chap. 10), the enthalpy of formation ( ΔH
f) of representative
equimolar single-phase HEAs as well as ﬁve multiphase compositions studied byOtto et al. [ 47] were calculated. The results are shown in Fig. 11.10 . For those
single-phase HEAs, the FCC and HCP HEAs have positive ΔH
f, while ΔHfvaries
between /C08 and +8 kJ/mol for BCC HEAs. Regarding the atomic size difference
(δ), it is the smallest for FCC alloys ( /C201 %). Alternatively, it varies from 1 to 4 %
for HCP and from 2 to 4 % for BCC alloys.
As for the composite alloys, CoCrCuFeMn has a very large positive ΔHfof
+16 kJ/mol, while CrFeMnNiTi has slightly larger δof 6.2 %. On the other hand,
the other three composites (CoFeMnNiV, CoCrMnNiV, and CoFeMnMoNi) haveΔH
fandδvalues that are similar to those single-phase HEAs, and they satisfy the
empirical ΔH-δrules. Binary phase diagram information [ 24] reveals that V forms
very stable σphase in Co-V, Fe-V, Mn-V, and Ni-V systems. Consequently,
presence of σphase in an FCC matrix in CoFeMnNiV was observed even after
annealing at 1000/C14C for 3 days. Apparently for these three composite alloys, the
Fig. 11.9 The plot of the heat of mixing versus the root mean square residual strain for single-
phase HEAs, multiphase alloys, and amorphous alloys [ 5]11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 387enthalpy of the competing compound phases outweighs the conﬁgurational entropy
of the solid solution phase.
In short, even with accurate enthalpy data from DFT calculations, the ΔH-δrule
[34] does not always work especially for systems where very stable intermetallic
compounds form in the majority of the edge binaries. Apparently, more strictscreening rules are required, which involve the competing phases. Computationalidentiﬁcation of stable compounds in 4-, 5-, and higher-order systems through DFTcalculations is computationally formidable [ 58–61], and including the temperature
effect will make the computation even more difﬁcult (see Chap. 8for details). In
order to circumvent the computing difﬁculty, Troparevsky et al. [ 30] proposed
using the most stable binary compound predicted at T¼0 K to represent the
competing intermetallic phase and argued that equimolar single-phase HEAwould form if the following criterion is satisﬁed:
/C0RT
critXN
i¼1xilnxi/C21 Hij/C8/C9/C12/C12/C12/C12
maxð11:5Þ
where Tcritrefers to a critical temperature that can be set according to target
applications, e.g., Tcrit¼0:55/C240:6 ðÞ Tm(where Tmis the estimated melting
point of the alloy). j{Hij}jmaxrefers to the absolute enthalpy value of the most
stable binary compound in the system. Troparevsky [ 30] applied this model to those
six alloys studied by Otto et al. [ 47] and found that only CoCrFeMnNi satisﬁes
Eq. ( 11.5), forming single-phase solid solution, while the other ﬁve alloys do
not comply with Eq. ( 11.5) and multiple phases form as a result (see Fig. 11.11 ).
They further applied this model as a screening tool and suggested a series of new20
16
12
8
4
−4
−8
−120
0123
Atomic size difference [ d, %]Enthalpy [ DHf, KJ/mol]
456CoCrFeNi
CoCrMnNi
CoFeMnNi
CoCrFeMnNi
MoNbTaW
MoNbTaVW
MoRhRuPd
ErGdHoTbY
DyGdLuTbY
DyGdLuTbTm
CoOsReRu
CoFeReRu
CoCrCuFeMr
CoCrMnNiV
CoFeMnMoNi
CoFeMnNiVCrFeMnNiTiMoNbTaV
NbTaVW
NbTaTiVHfNbTaTiZr
7
Fig. 11.10 DFT calculated enthalpy of formation of various single-phase HEAs in FCC ( green-
ﬁlled symbols )[2,7,9,10], BCC ( red-ﬁlled symbols )[12,13,17], and HCP ( blue open symbols )
[25] structures and ﬁve alloys that exhibit more than one phase (hybrid-ﬁlled symbols)388 M.C. Gaosingle-phase HEA compositions in ﬁve to seven component systems as compiled in
Table 11.2.
This approach allows straightforward computer screening, since phase stability
of all the binary transition metal binary systems at zero temperature have been
studied using DFT methods and the enthalpy data of binary compounds are avail-able in literature. However, a noticeable drawback of this approach is that itseverely underestimates the total number of possible equimolar single-phase HEAcompositions. For example, those equimolar compositions containing Al and Tior Al and Nb that are experimentally veriﬁed in Table 11.1 do not satisfy Eq. 11.5.
Since the most stable Al-Ti binary compound has an enthalpy of formationof/C0428 meV/at [ 30], it would require an equimolar alloy of 50 components at
T/C211000
/C14C in order to compensate for the enthalpy effect! In addition, the model
used does not predict the crystal structure of those compositions that satisfyEq. ( 11.5), and thus, additional computational work is still required to determine
the phase stability of each composition with respect to FCC, BCC, and HCPstructures.
Furthermore, discrepancy has been observed in phase formation in several
quinary BCC composition between model prediction by Troparevsky et al. [ 30]
and CALPHAD prediction using TCNI7 database. CALPHAD calculations predict
multiphase formation in MoNbTaWZr and MoNbTaVZr and single-phase solid
Fig. 11.11 Graphical representation [ 30] of the enthalpies of formation of the binary compounds
from DFT calculations for the alloys studied in Ref. [ 47]. Marked “HEA” represents CoCrFeMnNi11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 389solution formation in HfMoNbTaW, HfMoNbTaV, and HfMoNbTaTi. However,
Troparevsky et al. [ 30] predicted single BCC phase formation in the former two
alloys and multiple phase formation in the latter three alloys. As a result, these ﬁve
compositions are not listed in Table 11.2, and future experimental veriﬁcation is
needed to clarify the discrepancy.
11.6 AIMD Simulations
Identifying all the competing intermetallic phases against the solid solution phase ina multicomponent system is a daunting task if the phase diagram is not available.For example, in Chap. 8, Widom illustrates a DFT approach to predict phase
stability of three quaternary refractory HEA systems [ 58–60]. The tendency to
form intermetallic compounds during solidiﬁcation is strongly correlated to the
interatomic bond strength; i.e., the stronger the bond, the greater is the tendency to
form compounds. Computing the bond strength of all possible compounds in a HEAsystem is not trivial, since they are crystal structure dependent. However, AIMDsimulations in the liquid state can reveal useful information about the preferredinteratomic bonding that may impact formation of disordered solid solution duringsolidiﬁcation [ 3,7,62] while tremendously reducing computational effort. Previous
AIMD simulations [ 3,7,62] show that preferred bond pairs of AlNi, CrFe, and
CuCu in liquid Al
1.25CoCrCuFeNi may serve as precursors to nucleating B2, BCC,
and FCC phases, respectively, during solidiﬁcation. By comparing the partial pair
distribution function (PDF) among single-phase HEAs, multiphase HEAs, andhigh-entropy bulk metallic glasses, Zhang et al. [ 3,7,62] proposed that a liquid
structure that lacks strong elemental segregation, or potent short-range order, willpromote the formation of disordered solid solutions during solidiﬁcation. Anothersigniﬁcant advantage of AIMD simulations is that there is no need for developingempirical interaction potentials compared to classical MD simulations.
Previously, Gao and coworkers ran AIMD simulations on single-phase solid
solution HEAs (e.g., HfNbTaTiZr [ 3,7], HfNbTaTiVZr [ 22], GdDyLuTbY [ 8],
CoOsReRu [ 8], and MoPdRhRu [ 8]), multiphase alloy Al
1.3CoCrCuFeNi [ 3,7,62],
and high-entropy bulk metallic glass-forming alloys (i.e., CuNiPPdPt [ 3,7] and
AlErDyNiTb, CuHfNiTiZr, and BeCuNiTiZr (see Chap. 13)). All the AIMD
simulations were performed using acronym of Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Pack-age (VASP) in a canonical ensemble, i.e., constant mole, volume, and temperature,with atomic-conﬁguration relaxation and temperature controlled by a Nose-Hooverthermostat [ 63]. PAW potentials [ 64] and the revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof [ 65]
gradient approximation to the exchange-correlation functional were used.
The partial PDF gives information about the probability of interatomic bond
formation by measuring the intensity of near-neighbor pairs against the totalrandom distribution. Partial PDF ( g
ab) was calculated using390 M.C. GaogabrðÞ¼V
NaNb1
4πr2XNa
i¼1XNb
j¼1δrij/C12/C12/C12/C12/C0r/C0/C1/C10/C11
ð11:6Þ
where Vis the volume of the super cell, NaandNbare the number of element a and
b,jrijjis the distance between element a and b, and the bracket <> denotes the time
average of different conﬁgurations.
The partial PDF of four FCC HEAs in liquid at 1800/C14C is shown in Fig. 11.12 .
The peak intensity of the ﬁrst-nearest-neighbor (FNN) pairs are all comparableexcept CrCr pair. That the CrCr pair has the lowest peak intensity indicates that Crprefers to bond with other elements rather than itself. In other words, Cr prefers notto segregate in the liquid, and this is consistent with the atomic structures inCoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi in the solid state as predicted using DFT methods(see Chap. 10for details). The NiNi pair has slightly higher peak intensity than
other pairs (Fig. 11.12 ).
The partial PDFs of two BCC HEAs (i.e., MoNbTaVW and HfNbTaTiZr) in
liquid are shown in Fig. 11.13 . For MoNbTaVW, the MoTa and TaW pairs have
slightly higher FNN peak intensity than the other. For HfNbTaTiZr, the FNN peak0012CoCoab
cd
CoCo
CoCr
CoMn
CoNi
CrCr
CrMn
CrNi
MnMn
MnNi
NiNiCoCo
CoCr
CoFe
CrCr
CrFe
CrNi
FeFe
FeNi
NiNiCoFe
CoMn
CoNi
FeFe
FeMn
MnMn
MnNi
NiNiFeNigab(r)
gab(r)34
012gab(r)34
012gab(r)3401234
24
r[Å]6 8 10 0 2 4
r[Å]68 1 0
024
r[Å]6 81 0 0 2 4
r[Å]68 1 0CoCr
CoCr
CoFe
CoMn
CoNi
CrCr
CrMn
CrNi
FeFe
FeMn
FeNi
MnMn
MnNi
NiNi
Fig. 11.12 AIMD simulated partial PDF of FCC HEAs: ( a) CoFeMnNi, ( b) CoCrFeNi,
(c) CoCrMnNi, and ( d) CoCrFeMnNi at T¼1800/C14C11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 391intensities are comparable for all pairs, although the intensity for TaTa, HfTa, and
NbTa pairs are slightly higher than the other pairs (Fig. 11.13 ).
Figure 11.14 compares the partial PDFs of three representative HCP HEAs,
namely DyGdLuTbY, CoOsReRu, and MoPdRhRu, in liquid. Both DyGdLuTbYand CoOsReRu alloys exhibit isomorphous HCP solid solution in their constituentbinary phase diagrams. As expected, all the partial PDFs for DyGdLuTbY havelittle variation in the FNN peak intensity and pair distance. As for CoOsReRu, theFNN peak intensities seem very uniform except that g
CoCo andgReRe are slightly
lower. MoPdRhRu comprises transition metal elements that form intermediate HCP
phases with large compositional homogeneity in the middle of Mo-M (M ¼Pd, Rh,
Ru) binaries. The FNN peak intensities of partial PDFs of liquid MoPdRhRu arealso comparable for all pairs except the MoMo pair. The peak value of g
MoMo is
noticeably lower than the other pairs, suggesting that Mo prefers to bond with Pd,Rh, or Ru rather than itself, which is consistent with the corresponding binary phasediagrams. The AIMD simulation results suggest the lack of strong chemical order orsegregation in DyGdLuTbY and CoOsReRu, while Mo prefers to bond with other
elements in MoPdRhRu (Fig. 11.14 ).
In contrast to the aforementioned partial PDFs for single-phase HEAs,
noticeable preference in pair correlations can be seen in AlCoCrFeNi andAl
1.25CoCrCuFeNi at 1800/C14C as shown in Fig. 11.15 . For AlCoCrFeNi, the most
preferred pair is AlNi followed by AlCo and CrFe. The least-favored interaction isthe CrNi pair followed by the FeNi and AlAl pairs. For Al
1.25CoCrCuFeNi, the
preferred pair correlations are CrFe, AlNi, and CuCu, and the least favored one isCrCu pair followed by the CuFe and AlAl pairs. These results suggest the existence
of preferred short-range ordering of AlNi, CoCr, and CrFe pairs in the liquid for
both alloys, while Cu has the strong tendency for segregation in Al
1.25CoCrCuFeNi.
These predicted structural features at the atomic scale in the liquid are consistentwith experimental observation of formation of B2-NiAl [ 62,66] and (Cr-Co-Fe)-
rich BCC phase [ 62,67] during solidiﬁcation in both alloys and Cu-rich FCC3ab
2
1
002468 1 0 02468 1 03
2
1
0
r[Å] r[Å]gab(r)
gab(r)MoMo
MoNb
MoTa
MoV
MoW
NbNb
NbTa
NbV
NbW
TaTa
TaWTaV
VV
VW
WWHfHf
HfNb
HfTa
HfTi
HfZr
NbNb
NbTa
NbTi
NbZr
TaTa
TaTi
TaZr
TiTi
TiZr
ZrZr
Fig. 11.13 AIMD-simulated partial correlation functions of BCC HEAs: ( a) MoNbTaVW at
T¼3100/C14C and ( b) HfNbTaTiZr at T¼2500/C14C392 M.C. Gaophases [ 62,66,68] for Al 1.25CoCrCuFeNi. An earlier experimental study by Tong
et al. [ 68] also conﬁrmed Cu segregation in all seven Al xCoCrCuFeNi ( x/C203) HEAs
studied, showing that the Cu content can be as high as 78.5 at% in the interdendriticregions in the as-solidiﬁed state (Fig. 11.15 ).012gab(r)34ab
012gab(r)34
024
r[Å]6 8 10 0 2 4
r[Å]68 1 0AlAl
AlCo
AlCu
AlCr
AlFe
AlNi
CoCo
CoCr
CoCu
CoFe
CoNi
CrCr
CrCu
CrFe
CrNi
CuCu
CuFe
CuNi
FeFe
FeNi
NiNiAIAI
AICo
AICr
AIFe
AINi
CoCo
CoCr
CoFe
CoNi
CrCr
CrFe
CrNi
FeFe
FeNi
NiNi
Fig. 11.15 AIMD simulated partial PDFs of ( a) AlCoCrFeNi and ( b)A l 1.25CoCrCuFeNi at
T¼1800/C14C3
MoMo
MoPd
MoRh
MoRu
PdPd
PdRh
PdRu
RhRh
RhRu
RuRu2
1
002468 1 0
3
2
1
0r[Å]02468 1 0
r[Å]
02468 1 0
r[Å]gab(r)3
2
1
0gab(r)gab(r)ab
cDyDy
DyGd
DyLu
DyTb
DyY
GdGd
GdLu
GdTb
GdY
LuLu
LuTbLuY
TbTb
TbY
YYCoCo
CoOs
CoRe
CoRu
OsOs
OsRe
OsRuReRe
ReRu
RuRu
Fig. 11.14 Partial PDFs predicted from AIMD simulations for ( a) GdDyLuTbY at 1800/C14C,
(b) CoOsReRu at 2800/C14C, and ( c) MoPdRhRu at 2800/C14C[8]11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 39311.7 Summary and Outlook
This chapter presents various methodologies that can be used to design single-phase
HEAs, including CALPHAD modeling, phase diagram inspection, empiricalparameters, DFT calculation, and AIMD simulation. Existing equimolar single-phase HEAs are reviewed and new compositions are suggested using these meth-odologies. Despite their apparent difference in length scale and approach, these ﬁvemethodologies point to some common guidelines in HEA design. Diminishingenthalpy of mixing (i.e., close to zero), low atomic size difference, high conﬁgu-rational entropy ( /C211.5R), and the lack of very stable intermetallic compounds in the
majority of the binaries favor formation of disordered solid solution phases in a
multicomponent alloy system. However, diminishing enthalpy of mixing in liquiddoes not necessarily accompany absence of very stable intermetallic compounds,and this basically explains why these existing empirical rules (involving ΔS,ΔH,δ,
Δχ, and Ω-parameter) may not always work. However, the recently proposed single
ϕ-parameter and the root mean square residual strain show great promise in
separating single-phase HEAs from multiphase alloys and bulk metallic glassesand are worth further exploiting using more physically grounded methods such
as DFT.
The ﬁve methodologies addressed in this chapter have their own strengths and
weaknesses. CALPHAD modeling can be regarded as the most direct method foralloy design, since it involves global minimization of Gibbs free energy of thesystem as a function of temperature and composition, but it suffers from insufﬁ-ciently reliable databases that covers all edge binaries and ternaries for HEAsystems. Inspection of experimental binary and ternary phase diagrams can provideuseful guidance on proper combination of elements in forming solid solutions and is
a powerful screening tool that looks for isomorphous solid solution, large terminal
solubility, and intermediate phases of large homogeneity range. Some strikingexamples include the large number of single HCP phase (974) HEAs in Dy-Er-Gd-Ho-Lu-Sc-Sm-Tb-Tm-Y system and single BCC phase (64) HEAs inMo-Nb-Re-Ta-Ti-V-W system in equimolar composition. However, it is notknown exactly how the edge binaries/ternaries will extend into higher-order sys-tems or whether there are other possible intermetallic compounds in higher-ordersystems. To date there is only a fraction of ternary phase diagrams that have been
experimentally studied.
The DFT screening method through Eq. ( 11.5) makes screening possible using
DFT-calculated enthalpy data of binary compounds available in literature, but thisapproach severely underestimates the total number of single-phase HEAs. Morerobust screening tools based on DFT methods are still to be developed. WhileAIMD simulations in the liquid can be used to indirectly correlate solid solutionphase formation, the predicted atomic structures in the liquid are useful in quicklyidentifying the intensity of short-range order/segregation (if present in the system).
Thus, AIMD simulations provide complementary information to supplement
CALPHAD modeling and phase diagram inspection. Direct AIMD simulations of394 M.C. Gaophase transformations in the solid state remains as a signiﬁcant hurdle due to
computing limitation on the one hand and trapping of atoms at low-potential-energysites on the other hand. As such, hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics simula-
tions (see Chaps. 8and10for details) may be very useful in quickly achieving the
equilibrium state.
Acknowledgements M.C.G. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by the Cross-Cutting Technol-
ogies Program at the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) – Strategic Center for Coal,managed by Robert Romanosky (Technology Manager) and Charles Miller (Technology Moni-
tor). The Research was executed through NETL ’s Ofﬁce of Research and Development ’s Innova-
tive Process Technologies (IPT) Field Work Proposal under the RES contract DE-FE-0004000.M.C.G. wish to thank Mike Widom, O ¨mer N. Do /C21gan, Shemgnin Guo, Junwei Qiao, Dan Sorescu,
Jeffrey A. Hawk, Bryan Morreale, and David E. Alman for discussions on the HEA topic.
Disclaimer This chapter authored by M.C.G. was funded by the Department of Energy, National
Energy Technology Laboratory, an agency of the United States Government, through a support
contract with AECOM. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of
their employees, nor AECOM, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressed orimplied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or
usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use
would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product,process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarilyconstitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Govern-
ment or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily
state or reﬂect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
References
1. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design
concepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mat 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
2. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mat Sci Eng A 375–377:213–218. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.
2003.10.257
3. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mat Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.10.001
4. Zhang Y, Lu ZP, Ma SG, Liaw PK, Tang Z, Cheng YQ, Gao MC (2014) Guidelines in
predicting phase formation of high-entropy alloys. MRS Commun 4(2):57–62. doi: 10.1557/
mrc.2014.11
5. Ye YF, Liu CT, Yang Y (2015) A geometric model for intrinsic residual strain and phase
stability in high entropy alloys. Acta Mater 94:152–161. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2015.04.051
6. Ye YF, Wang Q, Lu J, Liu CT, Yang Y (2015) Design of high entropy alloys: a single-
parameter thermodynamic rule. Scr Mater 104:53–55. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2015.03.023
7. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
8. Gao MC, Zhang B, Guo SM, Qiao JW, Hawk JA (2016) High-entropy alloys in hexagonal
close packed structure. Metall Mater Trans A (in press). doi: 10.1007/s11661-015-3091-1
9. Lucas MS, Wilks GB, Mauger L, Munoz JA, Senkov ON, Michel E, Horwath J, Semiatin SL,
Stone MB, Abernathy DL, Karapetrova E (2012) Absence of long-range chemical ordering in11 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 395equimolar FeCoCrNi. Appl Phys Lett 100(25):251907–251904. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/
1.4730327
10. Wu Z, Bei H, Otto F, Pharr GM, George EP (2014) Recovery, recrystallization, grain growth
and phase stability of a family of FCC-structured multi-component equiatomic solid solution
alloys. Intermetallics 46:131–140. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2013.10.024
11. Lucas MS, Mauger L, Munoz JA, Xiao Y, Sheets AO, Semiatin SL, Horwath J, Turgut Z
(2011) Magnetic and vibrational properties of high-entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(7)
07E307. doi: 10.1063/1.3538936
12. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Miracle DB, Chuang CP, Liaw PK (2010) Refractory high-entropy
alloys. Intermetallics 18(9):1758–1765. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2010.05.014
13. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Scott JM, Miracle DB (2011) Mechanical properties of
Nb25Mo 25Ta25W25and V 20Nb20Mo 20Ta20W20refractory high entropy alloys. Intermetallics
19(5):698–706. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2011.01.004
14. Yang X, Zhang Y, Liaw PK (2012) Microstructure and compressive properties of
NbTiVTaAlx high entropy alloys. Iumrs International Conference in Asia 36:292–298.
doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2012.03.043
15. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward C (2013) Mechanical properties of
low-density, refractory multi-principal element alloys of the Cr-Nb-Ti-V-Zr system. Mater
Sci Eng A Struct Mater Prop Microstruct Proc 565:51–62. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.12.018
16. Wu YD, Cai YH, Wang T, Si JJ, Zhu J, Wang YD, Hui XD (2014) A refractory
Hf25Nb25Ti25Zr25high-entropy alloy with excellent structural stability and tensile properties.
Mater Lett 130:277–280. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.05.134
17. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Compd 509(20):6043–6048. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2011.02.171
18. Gorr B, Azim M, Christ HJ, Mueller T, Schliephake D, Heilmaier M (2015) Phase equilibria,
microstructure, and high temperature oxidation resistance of novel refractory high-entropy
alloys. J Alloys Compd 624:270–278. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.11.012
19. Zhang Y, Yang X, Liaw PK (2012) Alloy design and properties optimization of high-entropy
alloys. JOM 64(7):830–838. doi: 10.1007/s11837-012-0366-5
20. Bei H (2013) Multi-component solid solution alloys having high mixing entropy. USA Patent
US 2013/0108502 A1, 2 May 2013
21. Zhang B, Gao MC, Zhang Y, Guo SM (2016) Senary refractory high-entropy alloy
Cr
xMoNbTaVW. CALPHAD 51:193–201
22. Gao MC, Zhang B, Yang S, Guo SM (2016) Senary refractory high-entropy alloy
HfNbTaTiVZr. Metall Mater Trans A (in press). doi: 10.1007/s11661-015-3105-z
23. Zhang B, Gao MC, Zhang Y, Yang S, Guo SM (2015) Senary refractory high-entropy alloy
MoNbTaTiVW. Mat Sci Tech 31:1207–1213. doi: 10.1179/1743284715Y.0000000031
24. Okamoto H (2000) Desk handbook: phase diagrams for binary alloys. ASM International,
Materials Park, OH 44073
25. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W (2014) High-entropy alloys with
hexagonal close-packed structure designed by equi-atomic alloy strategy and binary phase
diagrams. JOM 66(10):1984–1992. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1085-x
26. Feuerbacher M, Heidelmann M, Thomas C (2014) Hexagonal high-entropy alloys. Mat Res
Lett. doi: 10.1080/21663831.2014.951493
27. Youssefa KM, Zaddach AJ, Niu C, Irving DL, Koch CC (2015) A novel low-density, high-
hardness, high-entropy alloy with close-packed single-phase nanocrystalline structures. MaterRes Lett 3(2):95–99. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21663831.2014.985855
28. Kozak R, Alla Sologubenko A, Steurer W (2014) Single-phase high-entropy alloys –an
overview. Z Kristallogr 230(1):55–68. doi: 10.1515/zkri-2014-1739
29. Stepanov ND, Shaysultanov DG, Salishchev GA, Tikhonovsky MA (2015) Structure and
mechanical properties of a light-weight AlNbTiV high entropy alloy. Mater Lett
142:153–155. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.11.162396 M.C. Gao30. Troparevsky MC, Morris JR, Kent PRC, Lupini AR, Stocks GM (2015) Criteria for predicting
the formation of single-phase high-entropy alloys. Phys Rev X 5(1):011041. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevX.5.011041
31. Paschoal JOA, Kleykamp H, Thummler F (1983) Phase-equilibria in the quaternary molyb-
denum-ruthenium-rhodium-palladium system. Z Metallkd 74(10):652–664
32. Feuerbacher M, Heidelmann M, Thomas C (2014) Hexagonal high-entropy alloys. Mater Res
Lett 3:1–6. doi: 10.1080/21663831.2014.951493
33. Yong L, Ma SG, Gao MC, Zhang C, Zhang T, Yang H, Wang Z, Qiao JW (2015) Tribological
properties of AlCrCuFeNi 2high-entropy alloy in different conditions. Metall Mater Trans A
(in press). doi: 10.1007/s11661-016-3396-8
34. Zhang Y, Zhou YJ, Lin JP, Chen GL, Liaw PK (2008) Solid-solution phase formation rules for
multi-component alloys. Adv Eng Mat 10(6):534–538. doi: 10.1002/adem.200700240
35. Guo S, Ng C, Lu J, Liu CT (2011) Effect of valence electron concentration on stability of fcc or
bcc phase in high entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(10):103505. doi: 10.1063/1.3587228
36. Poletti MG, Battezzati L (2014) Electronic and thermodynamic criteria for the occurrence of
high entropy alloys in metallic systems. Acta Mater 75:297–306. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2014.
04.033
37. Miedema AR, de Boer FR, Boom R (1977) Model predictions for the enthalpy of formation of
transition metal alloys. CALPHAD 1(4):341–359. doi: 10.1016/0364-5916(77)90011-6
38. Yang X, Chen SY, Cotton JD, Zhang Y (2014) Phase stability of Low-density, multiprincipal
component alloys containing aluminum, magnesium, and lithium. JOM 66(10):2009–2020.doi:10.1007/s11837-014-1059-z
39. Gao MC, Carney CS, Do /C21gan O ¨N, Jablonksi PD, Hawk JA, Alman DE (2015) Design of
refractory high-entropy alloys. JOM 67(11):2653–2669. doi: 10.1007/s11837-015-1617-z
40. Guo S, Ng C, Wang ZJ, Liu CT (2014) Solid solutioning in equiatomic alloys: limit set by
topological instability. J Alloys Compd 583:410–413. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.08.213
41. Zhang F, Zhang C, Chen SL, Zhu J, Cao WS, Kattner UR (2014) An understanding of high
entropy alloys from phase diagram calculations. CALPHAD 45:1–10
42. Zhang C, Zhang F, Chen SL, Cao WS (2012) Computational thermodynamics aided high-
entropy alloy design. JOM 64(7):839–845. doi: 10.1007/s11837-012-0365-6
43. Senkov ON, Miller JD, Miracle DB, Woodward C (2015) Accelerated exploration of multi-
principal element alloys with solid solution phases. Nature Commun 6(1–10):6529. doi: 10.
1038/ncomms7529
44. Lu Y, Dong Y, Guo S, Jiang L, Kang H, Wang T, Wen B, Wang Z, Jie J, Cao Z, Ruan H, Li T
(2014) A promising new class of high-temperature alloys: eutectic high-entropy alloys. SciRep 4:1–5. doi: 10.1038/srep06200
45. Liu S, Gao MC, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (2015) Microstructures and mechanical properties of
AlxCrFeNiTi
0.25 alloys. J Alloys Compd 619:610–615. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallcom.2014.09.073
46. Miracle DB, Miller JD, Senkov ON, Woodward C, Uchic MD, Tiley J (2014) Exploration and
development of high entropy alloys for structural applications. Entropy 16:494–525
47. Otto F, Yang Y, Bei H, George EP (2013) Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the phase
stability of equiatomic high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 61:2628–2638. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.
2013.01.042
48. PandatTMThermodynamic Calculations and Kinetic Simulations. CompuTherm LLC, Madi-
son, WI 53719, USA. http://www.computherm.com
49. Scheil E (1942) Comments on the layer crystal formation. Z Metallkd 34:70–7250. Gulliver GH (1913) The quantitative effect of rapid cooling upon the constitution of binary
alloys. J Ins Met 9:120–157
51. Middleburgh SC, King DM, Lumpkin GR (2015) Atomic scale modelling of hexagonal
structured metallic ﬁssion product alloys. R Soc Open Sci 2:140292. doi: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1098/rsos.14029211 Design of High-Entropy Alloys 39752. Cotton JD (2014) Forget entropy: an informatics approach to identifying useful complex alloy
compositions, presentation at Compositionally complex alloys workshop, Munich, Germany,July 16–18, 2014
53. ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Database. http://www1.asminternational.org/asmenterprise/apd/
54. Praveen S, Murty BS, Kottada RS (2012) Alloying behavior in multi-component
AlCoCrCuFe and NiCoCrCuFe high entropy alloys. Mat Sci Eng A 534:83–89. doi: 10.1016/
j.msea.2011.11.044
55. Singh AK, Subramaniam A (2014) On the formation of disordered solid solutions in multi-
component alloys. J Alloys Compd 587:113–119. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.10.133
56. Takeuchi A, Inoue A (2005) Classiﬁcation of bulk metallic glasses by atomic size difference,
heat of mixing and period of constituent elements and its application to characterization of the
main alloying element. Mater Trans 46(12):2817–2829. doi: 10.2320/matertrans.46.2817
57. Ye YF, Wang Q, Lu J, Liu CT, Yang Y (2015) The generalized thermodynamic rule for
phase selection in multicomponent alloys. Intermetallics 59:75–80. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.
2014.12.011
58. Mihalkovic ˇM, Widom M (2004) Ab initio calculations of cohesive energies of Fe-based glass-
forming alloys. Phys Rev B 70(14):144107. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.70.144107
59. Widom M, Huhn WP, Maiti S, Steurer W (2014) Hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics
simulation of a refractory metal high entropy alloy. Metall Mater Trans A 45A(1):196–200.
doi:10.1007/s11661-013-2000-8
60. Huhn WP, Widom M, Cheung AM, Shiﬂet GJ, Poon SJ, Lewandowski J (2014) First-
principles calculation of elastic moduli of early-late transition metal alloys. Phys Rev B
89(10). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.104103
61. Ganesh P, Widom M (2008) Ab initio simulations of geometrical frustration in
supercooled liquid Fe and Fe-based metallic glass. Phys Rev B 77(1):014205. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.77.014205
62. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish CM, Gao MC, Weber RJK, Neuefeind JC,
Tang Z, Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distribu-tions of a multi-principal-element alloy. Nature Commun 6:5964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6964
63. Nose S (1984) A uniﬁed formulation of the constant temperature molecular-dynamics
methods. J Chem Phys 81(1):511–519
64. Blochl PE (1994) Projector augmented-wave method. Phys Rev B 50(24):17953. doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953
65. Perdew JP, Ruzsinszky A, Csonka GI, Vydrov OA, Scuseria GE, Constantin LA, Zhou XL,
Burke K (2008) Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces.Phys Rev Lett 100(13):136406. doi:136406 10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.136406
66. Singh S, Wanderka N, Murty BS, Glatzel U, Banhart J (2011) Decomposition in multi-
component AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater 59(1):182–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
actamat.2010.09.023
67. Singh S, Wanderka N, Kiefer K, Siemensmeyer K, Banhart J (2011) Effect of decomposition
of the Cr-Fe-Co rich phase of AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy on magnetic properties.
Ultramicroscopy 111(6):619–622. doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2010.12.001
68. Tong CJ, Chen YL, Chen SK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Lin SJ, Chang SY (2005)
Microstructure characterization of Al
xCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with
multiprincipal elements. Metall Mat Trans A 36A(4):881–893. doi: 10.1007/s11661-005-
0283-0398 M.C. GaoChapter 12
CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys
Chuan Zhang and Michael C. Gao
Abstract Phase diagrams are the key to understanding of high-entropy alloy
formation. This chapter ﬁrst presents the basics of CALPHAD (acronym of Calcu-lation of Phase Diagrams) methodology and then details the procedures used indeveloping self-consistent thermodynamic databases tailored for HEA systems. Aself-consistent thermodynamic database (PanHEA) has been developed for theAl-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system that covers the complete compositional ranges for all its
constituent binaries and ternaries, and it will be useful for future HEA design and
processing optimization. HEA formation from the thermodynamic point of view isthen illustrated for three HEA systems using TCNI7 database: FCC-forming Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni, FCC- and BCC-forming Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni, and BCC-forming Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W systems. The FCC system shows large positive excess entropy whilethe BCC system shows small negative excess entropy, and these results are consis-tent with their vibrational entropies of mixing predicted from ﬁrst-principle calcu-lations presented in Chap. 10 “Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to
High-Entropy Alloys.” Addition of Al to CoCrFeNi stabilizes the BCC phase via
the dominating enthalpy effect. The present study demonstrates that conﬁgurationalentropy does not always dominate, and enthalpy and competing phases need to beconsidered in terms of phase stability. Applications of CALPHAD to high-entropyalloy design and microstructure development are then presented for the case ofseveral alloys and satisfactory agreement between modeling calculations andexperimental results is observed. Various isotherms and isopleths of the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system are predicted. Future perspectives on CALPHAD development
including short-range ordering and kinetic database development pertaining to
HEAs conclude this chapter.
Keywords Single phase • Multiphase • Enthalpy of mixing • Entropy of mixing
• Gibbs energy of mixing • Excess entropy • CALPHAD • Phase diagrams
C. Zhang ( *)
CompuTherm, LLC, Madison, WI 53719, USAe-mail: chuan.zhang@computherm.com
M.C. Gao
National Energy Technology Laboratory/AECOM, Albany, OR 97321, USAe-mail: Michael.Gao@netl.doe.gov
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_12399• Thermodynamic databases • Kinetics • Phase transformations • Solidiﬁcation
• Disordered solid solution • Solubility • Face-centered cubic (FCC) • Hexagonalclose packed (HCP) • Body-centered cubic (BCC) • Phase stability • Alloy design
• High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
12.1 Introduction
The core of the high-entropy alloy (HEA) [ 1,2] concept is the ideal conﬁgurational
entropy maximization in solid solution alloys with multi-principal elements inequimolar composition. This is in contrast to the traditional alloy design, which isusually based on one or at most two key elements. However, to date the vastmajority of alloys with multi-principal elements reported in the literature containmultiple phases, while only those carefully chosen compositions can form single-
phase solid solution [ 3]. Arbitrary mixing of elements from the periodic table does
not render formation of single-phase solid solution but composite structures. Forexample, Cantor et al. [ 4] investigated 20- and 16-component alloys in equimolar
ratios and found that both alloys contained multiple phases and were brittle in theas-cast ingot and melt-spin ribbon forms. Although they fabricated a single-phaseFCC alloy of CoCrFeMnNi with success, their attempt to add additional 1–4elements all failed. Otto et al. [ 5] investigated ﬁve quinary alloys based on the
composition of CoCrFeMnNi by replacing one element at a time using a chemically
similar element, but again all ﬁve new alloys consisted of more than one phase in
the as-cast state. These experiments demonstrated that the conﬁgurational entropydoes not, at least not always, play a dominant role in the determination of phasestability and therefore the microstructure of an alloy.
On the other hand, establishing universal rules for HEA formation is not trivial,
which involve a number of empirical parameters, including atomic size difference,enthalpy, and valence electron concentration (VEC), as detailed in Chap. 2. In spite
of the usefulness of these empirical rules, they may not be able to convincingly
explain the experiments by Cantor [ 4], Otto [ 5], and others. In fact, the most
intuitive way of representing the phase stability in a material is by its phase diagram[6–8]. Thus one rational key to understanding of HEA formation may be phase
diagrams as pointed by Zhang et al. [ 9,10] and Gao and Alman [ 3].
Phase diagrams are typically determined using equilibration experiments
followed by thermal analysis and phase identiﬁcation using diffraction and micros-copy techniques and thus can be costly and time consuming especially for thehigher-order systems. The CALPHAD method [ 11,12] makes it possible to obtain
multicomponent phase diagrams not only for basic materials research in related
areas such as solidiﬁcation and solid state transformation but also for alloy designand processing development and improvement. It is based on the well-knownthermodynamic law that a system reaches its equilibrium when it attains the lowestGibbs energy at a given composition, temperature, and pressure. Provided that theGibbs energy (as a function of pressure, temperature, and composition) is known400 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaofor the individual phases, then it is possible to calculate the equilibrium state of the
system by an energy minimization procedure.
One important advantage of the CALPHAD method is to enable predicting
higher-order phase diagrams via extrapolation from its constituent lower-order
systems, such as binary and ternary systems. This is especially useful for commer-cial alloy systems, which are normally multicomponent systems and lack sufﬁcientexperimental data. For example, Haynes 282 has ~57 wt.% Ni with addition ofalloying elements of Cr, Co, Mo, Ti, Al, Fe, Mn, Si, C, and B in various amounts.Stainless steel 316 contains alloying elements of Cr, Ni, Mo, Mn, C, and N with Feas the dominant element. Prediction of multicomponent phase diagrams can in turnreduce the number of experiments required to determine the complete phase
diagram in the space of temperature, composition, and pressure if compared with
a complete trial-and-error approach. The application of CALPHAD methodrequires both computational software and thermodynamic databases. Over thepast three decades, several commercial software packages, such as Pandat
TM
[13], Thermo-Calc [ 14], FactSage [ 15], etc., have become available. The demand
for consistent multicomponent thermodynamic databases has grown steadily. Twodatabases are used mainly in this chapter: PanHEA [ 13] and TCNI7 [ 14]. The
PanHEA contains all constituent binary and ternary descriptions for the Al-Co-Cr-
Cu-Fe-Mn-Ni while TCNI7 contains all binary and limited ternary systems that are
important to Ni-based alloys.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst provide a concise description on the CALPHAD meth-
odology, followed by the optimization procedure tailored for HEA systems. Thenwe demonstrate thermodynamic analysis on HEA formation in the well-knownquinary Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni FCC HEA system. The σphase becomes unstable with
increasing the number of components in the system. The mixing behavior in theGibbs free energy, enthalpy, and entropy among key phases are analyzed and the
excess entropy is highlighted. A contrasting example is then introduced by adding
Al to the Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system, which destabilizes the FCC solid solution whilestabilizes the BCC phase. Similar thermodynamic analysis is then applied to theBCC Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W senary HEA system to illustrate how the C15 Laves phaseis destabilized by the entropy of BCC phase. Applications of CALPHAD modelingto the microstructure evolution of several HEA systems are then presented. Weconclude by presenting outlooks on CALPHAD modeling of HEAs such asaddressing short-range ordering and developing mobility databases, followed by
conclusions.
12.2 CALPHAD Methodologies
The CALPHAD method [ 11] adopts a phenomenological methodology to obtain a
self-consistent thermodynamic description of a multicomponent system as shown inFig.12.1. The term “thermodynamic database” means that the parameters for the
Gibbs energies of a large number of binary and ternary systems have been12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 401assembled that are important for the intended compositional ranges. The ﬁrst step in
developing a thermodynamic database of a multicomponent system is to collect thethermochemistry and phase equilibrium data from the literature for the lower-ordersystems, normally binaries and ternaries. However, if such data are not available, itbecomes necessary to design and carry out experiments. In this regard, the thermo-dynamic data obtained from ﬁrst-principles calculations will be useful to supple-
ment experimental data. The model parameters of the phases involved are then
determined through the optimization procedure. Care is always taken to ensure thatthe parameters of these Gibbs energies are physically realistic instead of relyingpurely on the optimization [ 7]. This is particularly important if available experi-
mental data are very limited.
Once reliable thermodynamic descriptions of lower-order constituent systems,
usually binaries and ternaries, are obtained, the higher-order thermodynamic data-base can be achieved via extrapolation as the ﬁrst step [ 16]. In fact, extensive
experience has shown that a reliable description of a quaternary system can be
obtained from those of the lower-order systems. However, if there is a newquaternary phase form, then one needs to provide its Gibbs free energy descriptionthat is consistent with the database through the optimization procedure. However,readjustment of the binary and ternary systems may be required if the agreementbetween the as-extrapolated and experimental phase diagrams is not satisfactory.Especially high attention needs to be paid to the Gibbs energy descriptions of“hypothetical” phases that are unstable or metastable within some of the constituent
binaries and/or ternaries, and more discussions are given in Sect. 12.5.
Traditionally, a multicomponent thermodynamic database for a speciﬁc material
system, such as Al alloys, steels, or Ni-base superalloys, focuses only on the
Fig. 12.1 The CALPHAD or phenomenological approach used to obtain a thermodynamic
description of a multicomponent system402 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaokey-element-rich corner. However, a thermodynamic database applicable to HEAs
needs to cover its whole composition range since the composition of a HEA islocated in the center of the multidimension composition space. This requires much
more effort to develop the HEA thermodynamic database than the traditional
alloying system with the same number of components. Proper thermodynamicmodels need to be selected in order to describe the Gibbs energies of all the phasesinvolved in the HEA system.
12.2.1 Elements
The Gibbs energy of the pure element i, with a certain structure φ, referred to the
enthalpy of its standard state at room temperature, is described as a function oftemperature by the following equation:
0Gφ
iTðÞ ¼ aþbTþcTlnTþdT2þeT3þfT/C01þgT7þhT/C09ð12:1Þ
The values of the coefﬁcients a...hare taken from Dinsdale [ 17].
For elements that display a magnetic ord ering, such as Ni, an additional term
magGφ
mis added to the molar Gibbs energy on the right hand side of Eq. ( 12.1):
magGφ
m¼RTlnβ*þ1/C0/C1
fT
T*/C18/C19
ð12:2Þ
where T*is the critical temperature for magnetic ordering and β* is the average
magnetic moment per atom of the element expressed in Bohr magnetons. Values ofthe coefﬁcient β* and the expression of function fare also taken from Dinsdale [ 17].
12.2.2 Substitutional Solution Model
The most common substitutional solution phases in HEA systems are liquid, BCC,
FCC, and HCP. All components in each substitutional solution phase are equiva-lently distributed in the phase, regardless of the number of components in thesolution, whereas deviation from it is described by the excess free energy. Themolar Gibbs energy of a substitutional solid solution phase ( φ) is described as
G
φ
m¼refGmφmþidGφ
mþexGmφmþmagGmφmð12:3Þ
The termrefGφ
mdeﬁnes a reference, which is
refGφ
m¼X
ixi/C10Gmφ
m ð12:4Þ12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 403where xiis the mole fraction of element iand the quantity0Gφ
iis the molar Gibbs
energy of the element iwith the structure φ. The termexGφ
mdescribes the excess free
energy of the phase in the nonmagnetic state, and an additional termmagGφ
mis
required to describe the excess due to magnetic contribution of the alloy.
The termidGφ
mis related to the molar ideal conﬁgurational entropy, which is
idGφ
m¼RTX
ixilnxi ð12:5Þ
and the nonmagnetic excess Gibbs energyexGφ
mfor a quinary system is
exGφ
m¼X
i6¼jxixjLφ
i,jþX
i6¼j6¼kxixjxkLφ
i,j,kþX
i6¼j6¼k6¼lxixjxkxlLφ
i,j,k,lþxixjxkxlxmLφ
i,j,k,l,m
ð12:6Þ
The three summations are done over all components and account for binary,
ternary, and quaternary excess free energy contributions in the nonmagnetic state,
respectively. The terms Lφ
i;j,Lφ
i;j;k,Lφ
i;j;k;l, and Lφ
i;j;k;l;mare the interaction parameters
from the constituent binary, ternary, and quinary, respectively.
The binary interaction parameter Lφ
i;j, which can be described by polynomials
which are most commonly the Redlich-Kister polynomial [ 18] with temperature-
dependent coefﬁcients, is as follows:
Lφ
i,j¼Xn
ν¼0νLφ
i,jxi/C0xj/C0/C1νð12:7Þ
νLφ
i,j¼νaφ
i,jþνbφ
i,jTþνcφ
i,jTlnTðÞ þ ... ð12:8Þ
The coefﬁcientsνaφ
i;j,νbφ
i;j,νcφ
i;j, etc., are the parameters to be optimized.
The ternary interaction parameter Lφ
i;j;kis expressed by
Lφ
i,j,k¼viLφ
iþvjLφ
jþvkLφ
k ð12:9Þ
where vi¼xi/C01/C0xi/C0xj/C0xk
3,vj¼xj/C01/C0xi/C0xj/C0xk
3, and vk¼xk/C01/C0xi/C0xj/C0xk
3;
andLφ
i,Lφ
j, and Lφ
krepresent the interaction on the Gibbs energy surface in the
three corners of the ternary system, respectively.
The termmagGφ
mapplies only if the solution phase exhibits magnetic ordering
and is described similarly as Eq. ( 12.2). The compositional dependence of the
critical ordering temperature ( T/C3
m) and magnetic moment ( β/C3
m) is expressed by
T*
m¼X
ixiT*
iþexT*mð12:10Þ404 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoβ*
m¼X
ixiβ*
iþexβ*mð12:11Þ
Both the excess term ofexT/C3
mandexβ/C3mare represented by an equation similar to
Eqs. ( 12.7 and12.8).
It should be noted that quaternary and quinary excess terms as shown in
Eq. (12.6) are very rarely used. They play a less signiﬁcant role compared to binary
and ternary interaction parameters, because the product of the molar compositions(i.e., x
ixjxkxlfor quaternary, xixjxkxlxmfor quinary, etc.) become negligible
for quaternary and quinary systems. This effect is demonstrated in Fig. 12.2 for
compositions in equimolar ratio in 2- to 6-component systems.
12.2.3 Stoichiometric Compound Model
The intermetallic phases with zero or negligible homogeneity range are usually
described by the stoichiometric compound model. The Gibbs energy of a binarystoichiometric compound A
pBq,Gφ
m, is described as a function of temperature only:
Gφ
m¼X
ixi0Gφ
iþΔfGApBq/C0/C1
ð12:12Þ
where xiis the mole fraction of component iand0Gφ
irepresents the Gibbs energy of
component iwith the φstructure; ΔfG(ApBq), which is normally a function of
temperature (Eq. 12.1), represents the Gibbs energy of formation of the stoichio-
metric compound. If ΔfG(ApBq) is a linear function of temperature,
ΔfGApBq/C0/C1
¼ΔfHApBq/C0/C1
/C0T/C1ΔfSApBq/C0/C1
ð12:13ÞNumber of components234560.000.050.100.150.200.250.30 Fig. 12.2 Product of
equimolar compositions
versus the number of
components12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 405where ΔfH(ApBq) andΔfS(ApBq) are the enthalpy and entropy of formation of the
stoichiometric compound, respectively. Equations ( 12.12 and12.13 ) can be readily
extended to a multicomponent stoichiometric compound phase.
12.2.4 Compound Energy Formalism (CEF)
An ordered intermediate phase can be described by a variety of sublattice models,such as the compound energy formalism [ 19,20] and the bond energy model
[21,22]. In these models, the Gibbs energy is a function of the sublattice species
concentrations and temperature. For example, the B2 phase in the PanHEA data-base is described using a two-sublattice model (Al,Co,Cr,Fe,Ni)
1:(Co,Cr,Fe,Ni,
Va) 1, and the σphase is described using a three-sublattice model (Al,Co,Fe,
Ni)8(Cr) 4(Al,Co,Cr,Fe,Ni) 18. For a clear demonstration, here we only show the
Gibbs energy of a binary ordered phase described by a two-sublattice compound
energy formalism (A, B) p: (A, B) q:
Gϕ
m¼X
i¼A,BX
j¼A,ByI
iyIIjGϕ
i:jþRT pX
i¼A,ByI
ilnyI
iþqX
i¼A,ByII
ilnyII
i"#
þX
j¼A,ByI
AyI
ByIIjX
vyI
A/C0yI
B/C0/C1vLv
A,B:jþX
i¼A,ByI
iyIIAyIIBX
vyIIA/C0yII
B/C0/C1vLv
i:A,B
þyI
AyI
ByIIAyIIBLA,B:A,B
ð12:14Þ
where yI
iandyII
iare the species concentrations of component iin the ﬁrst and second
sublattices, respectively. Note that a comma is usually used to separate species in
the same sublattice, while a colon sign is used to separate species belonging todifferent sublattices for the Gibbs energy expression such as in Eq. ( 12.14 ). The ﬁrst
term on the right hand of the equation represents the reference state with themechanical mixture of the stable or hypothetical compounds: A, A
pBq,BpAqand B.
Gφ
i:jis the Gibbs energy of the stoichiometric compound ipjqwith the φstructure.
The value of Gφ
i:jcan be obtained experimentally if ipjqis a stable compound or by the
optimization. If the ipjqphases are unstable or metastable in their binary/ternary
systems, then it is extremely difﬁcult to measure their thermodynamic propertiesexperimentally, and accordingly a physics-based optimization of these phasesbecomes challenging. In this regard, their thermodynamic properties predicted fromﬁrst-principles density functional theory (DFT) can be important and used as input tothe optimization procedure [ 23–27].
The second term in Eq. ( 12.14 ) is the ideal mixing Gibbs energy which corre-
sponds to the random mixing of species on the ﬁrst and second sublattices. The last
three terms are the excess Gibbs energies of mixing. The “ L” parameters in these406 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoterms are the model parameters whose values are to be optimized using the
experimental phase equilibrium and thermodynamic data. Lv
A;B:jand Lv
i:A;Bare
the so-called “regular interaction” parameters and represent the next nearest neigh-
bor interactions between constituents A and B in one sublattice when the othersublattice is occupied by A and B, respectively. L
A,B : A,B is the so-called reciprocal
parameter and represents the interactions between constituents A and B in bothsublattices simultaneously. More discussion of the reciprocal parameter within theCEF model will be given in detail at Sect. 12.5.1 . The compound energy formalism
can be applied to phases in a multicomponent system by considering the interac-
tions from all the constituent binaries. Additional ternary and higher-order interac-tion terms may also be added to the excess Gibbs energy term in a similar fashion toEq. ( 12.14 ).
For the (A,B)
8(B)4(A,B) 18model, there are elements mixing in the ﬁrst and third
sublattices except the second sublattice. Therefore, the total mixing entropy resultsonly from the ﬁrst and third sublattices. The Gibbs energy of this phase can beexpressed as follows:
G
φ
m¼yI
AyIIIA0
GA:B:AþyI
AyIIIB0
GA:B:BþyI
ByIIIA0
GB:B:AþyI
ByIIIB0
GB:B:B
þ8RT yI
AlnyI
A/C0/C1
þyI
BlnyI
B/C0/C1 /C2/C3
þ18RT yIII
AlnyIII
A/C0/C1
þyIII
BlnyIII
B/C0/C1 /C2/C3
þexGφ
m
ð12:15Þ
0Gφ
i:B:j¼80Gφ
iþ40Gφ
Bþ180Gφ
j ð12:16Þ
exGφ
mis the excess energy in the nonmagnetic state and can be described as
exGφ
m¼X
k¼A,ByI
iyI
jyIIIkX
nLn
i,j:B:kyI
i/C0yI
j/C16/C17n
þX
k¼A,ByI
kyIIIiyIIIjX
nLn
k:B:i,jyIII
i/C0yIII
j/C16/C17n
ð12:17Þ
where nis the order to interaction parameters, such as 0, 1, 2 ...
Note that the magnetic contribution to the Gibbs free energy of phases described
by the CEF model can use Eq. ( 12.2) as well.
12.2.5 Optimization
The optimization is the processing to ultimately obtain the parameters of the Gibbs
energy function of each phase, which will make the thermodynamic descriptionaccount for the known experimental data but also be able to extrapolate beyond theranges of temperature and composition where data are available. This is achievedwhen proper thermodynamic models are used for the phases in question. Needlessto say, the broad thermodynamic knowledge of the user who performs the12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 407optimization also matters. The following steps are general guidelines for the
thermodynamic optimization of HEA systems using the CALPHAD approach [ 28]:
(a) Collect all published thermodynamic databases for the constituent binary and
ternary systems, and then evaluate the reliability of and compatibility amongthese databases.
(b) Select the proper thermodynamic models based on crystallographic informa-
tion for all phases in the system.
(c) For a system whose database is not available or requires re-optimization, ﬁrst
collect and categorize the thermodynamic and phase equilibrium data. Inprinciple any kind of experimental datum that is explicitly or implicitly linkedto the Gibbs energy can be used as input for optimization. For those “hypo-thetical” phases, obtaining the thermodynamic data from DFT calculations canbe a viable option.
(d) Evaluate the collected data critically by essentially eliminating bad and con-
tradictory data. Critical evaluation requires considerable expertise in phase
diagrams and some familiarity with different experimental techniques. It is
important to consider the details such as the technique used, the phasespresent, the purity of the samples, the experimental conditions, the quantitiesmeasured and their reliability, etc. Frequently, difﬁculties occur during theoptimization primarily due to poorly evaluated experimental data such ascontradictory data or theoretically unacceptable data as the inputs! However,contradictions between different types of data, for example, phase diagramdata and thermochemical data, may only be revealed during the optimization
process.
(e) Assign the proper starting values for the computerized thermodynamic opti-
mization of phase diagrams. This is important because if bad starting valuesare used for the parameters to be optimized, the nonlinear equations may notyield any solution. Accordingly, it is more practical to begin the optimizationwith a “minimal” data set, comprising only a few vital experimental data.Including too many experimental data in the very beginning stage of theoptimization may prove unwieldy. In the case of binary systems, for example,
it is often sufﬁcient to use a well-deﬁned three-phase invariant-phase equilib-
rium, a congruent transformation, and the enthalpy of formation of the com-pound undergoing the congruent transformation.
(f) After completing optimization of all necessary binary and ternary systems
over the entire compositional ranges, try calculations on HEAs, and thencompare the calculation results with experimental data where available.Readjust the descriptions of those critical phases (especially those hypothet-ical ones) until satisfaction is reached.
These procedures have been exercised to develop the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni database
using Pandat
TM[13], and a satisfactory agreement has been obtained for most of the
reliable experimental data for all the constituent 10 binaries and 10 ternaries of this
important HEA system. Upon report of new experimental data on this system,
improvement on the database will be continued. This database is part of the408 C. Zhang and M.C. GaoPanHEA database. Since there are no quaternary or quinary compounds reported in
this system, the phase diagrams and thermodynamic properties for this quinary andits ﬁve quaternary systems can be obtained via extrapolation [ 16] within the whole
compositional ranges. Comparisons of CALPHAD predictions using the PanHEA
database with experimental data will be presented and discussed in detail inSect. 12.4 of this chapter.
12.3 Thermodynamic Analysis of HEA Formation
From the physical standpoint of view, those empirical parameters, such as the
difference in atomic size difference, VEC and electronegativity, etc., should be
reﬂected at least partially in the free energy of the system. The essence of phase
stability concerns energy competition among phases, and thus it is of fundamentalimportance to study and analyze the Gibbs free energies of individual phases in thesystem. For a disordered solid solution phase ( φ), the mixing properties refer to the
thermodynamic quantities that can be obtained via excluding the mechanical
mixing parts. For example, the Gibbs energy of mixing ΔG
φ
mixcan be determined
by excluding the term ofrefGφ
min Eq. ( 12.3); therefore, we have
ΔGφ
mix¼idGφ
mþexGφ
mþmagGφ
m¼ΔHφ
mix/C0TΔSφ
mix ð12:18Þ
where ΔHφ
mixandΔSφ
mixare the enthalpy of mixing and entropy of mixing, respec-
tively, and they are determined by
ΔHφ
mix¼Hφ
m/C0X
ixiHφ
i ð12:19Þ
ΔSφ
mix¼Sφ
m/C0X
ixiSφ
i ð12:20Þ
Hφ
m(Sφ
m) is the total enthalpy (entropy) of the alloy, and Hφ
i(Sφ
i) is enthalpy
(entropy) of each component with the structure φ. The total excess entropy of the
alloy including the magnetic contribution is determined by
exSφ
m¼Sφ
mþRX
ixilnxi ð12:21Þ
The total excess Gibbs free energy (the termsexGφ
m+magGφm) includes all other
contributions except ideal conﬁgurational entropy, such as vibrational free energy
of mixing, magnetic free energy of mixing, electronic entropy of mixing, anddestruction of conﬁgurational entropy due to presence of short-range chemicalordering/clustering. As a result, itemizing these contributions individually fromCALPHAD method can be a daunting task. However, this can be carried out usingpredictive DFT calculations as detailed in Chaps. 8and10.12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 409In the following, we present three case studies to illustrate the evolution of the
Gibbs energy, enthalpy, and entropy as a function of system size and alloycomposition. They are the FCC-forming Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni, FCC- and
BCC-forming Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni, and BCC-forming Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W systems.
The TCNI7 database is used for consistency and its sublattice model for the σ
phase allows extension to the entire compositional range. Note that TCNI7 uses asingle phase description for both disordered and ordered contributions for the FCCand BCC phases, and no attempt was made to differentiate these contributions inthe presentation in this section. It is also expected that more accurate results on thephase diagrams of these systems will be obtained once the thermodynamicdescriptions for all the constituent ternaries are included in the database in the
future.
12.3.1 FCC Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni HEA System
To date, the Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni system is the only FCC HEA system that has ever
been studied extensively. The major phases in the solid state that compete againstFCC solid solution include BCC solid solution, σphase, and HCP solid solution
phase. The σphase originates from the Co-Cr binary system (see Fig. 12.3a ) with a
complex tetragonal crystal structure (Pearson symbol tP30, space group P4
2/mnm),
but it has a range of solubility for other transition metals [ 29]. Using the TCNI7
database, the binary Co-Cr and pseudo-binary CoFe-Cr, CoFeNi-Cr, and
CoFeMnNi-Cr phase diagrams are plotted in Fig. 12.3. By increasing the number
of components of the system, the σphase ﬁeld shrinks and ﬁnally becomes unstable
in the vertical section of the quinary system. However, the phase ﬁeld of the FCCphase is the broadest in the quaternary section (e.g., the largest Cr solubility and thehighest thermal stability) despite that the ideal conﬁgurational entropy is the highestin the quinary system. This suggests that other factors (e.g., enthalpy, competingphases such as liquid and BCC, etc.) may outweigh the conﬁgurational entropy ofthe FCC phase.
Phase stability concerns free energy competition among all phases in a system
using the same reference states. For the four systems shown in Fig. 12.3, the sigma
(σ), BCC, and HCP phases occur in equilibrium with the FCC solid solution phase,
and thus the thermodynamic properties including the Gibbs free energy, enthalpy,and entropy for all these four phases are examined at a series of temperatures withvarying Cr contents. For clarity, only the results for binary Co-Cr and pseudo-binary (CoFeMnNi)-Cr systems at T¼1000
/C14C are shown in Fig. 12.4. Note that the
TCNI7 database adopts a sublattice model of (Co,Cr,Fe,Mn,Ni) 10(Co,Cr,Fe,Mn,
Ni)4(Co,Cr,Fe,Mn,Ni) 16for the σphase in this quinary system, which differs from
the one introduced in Sect. 12.2.4 used in the PanHEA database. For binary systems,
the tie lines for two-phase regions lie within the Gibbs energy – composition planeand the common-tangent-line method can be used to determine the phase equilibrium410 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao(i.e., equilibrium phases and their compositions). For example, the common tangent
lines shown in Fig. 12.4a clearly deﬁne two two-phase regions of FCC + σand
σ+ BCC, respectively. For multicomponent systems, the equilibrium phase compo-
sitions for regions of two or more phases are determined by the common-tangent-plane method. However, most often the tie lines determined by the common-tangent-plane method for multicomponent system and thus the equilibrium phase composi-
tions may lie out of the two-dimensional (2D) Gibbs energy – composition plane
(such as the case of CoCr
xFeMnNi as shown in Fig. 12.4d–f ). Consequently, thermo-
dynamic analysis within the 2D plane for these scenarios is only meaningful for thesingle-phase regions and should not be used for global phase equilibrium determina-tion for regions of coexisting phases.ab
cd
Fig. 12.3 (a) Co-Cr binary and pseudo-binary, ( b) CoFe-Cr, ( c) CoFeNi-Cr, and ( d) CoFeMnNi-
Cr phase diagrams calculated using TCNI7 database. The major phase ﬁelds are labeled12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 411a
b
cd
e
f
Fig. 12.4 Calculated thermodynamic properties of the FCC, σ, BCC, and HCP phases (labeled as
1–4, respectively, in the plot) for ( a–c) binary Co-Cr and ( d–f) pseudo-binary (CoFeMnNi)-Cr
systems: ( a,d) the Gibbs free energy, ( b,e) enthalpy, and ( c,f) entropy as a function of Cr contents
atT¼1000/C14C. The reference states are the stable structure of the pure elements at P¼1 atm and
T¼25.15/C14C. The dashed lines in (a) denote the tie lines (or common tangent lines), which deﬁne
the two-phase region where the chemical potential of the component is equal in both phases. The
tie line is out of the 2D plane in ( d)Nonetheless, the analysis on the compositional dependence of the thermody-
namic properties within the 2D plane still offers enriched information on theirmagnitude and the trend among various phases over the entire compositional ranges
for multicomponent systems. Figure 12.3 shows that the effect of number of
components on each individual phase varies, and both FCC and BCC phasesbecome much more stable than the σand HCP phases in the quinary system,
compared to the binary system. The stabilization effect actually comes from bothenthalpy and entropy contributions. Addition of Fe, Mn, and Ni to CoCr lowers thetotal enthalpy (i.e., making it more negative) for all phases except the HCP phase.In terms of entropy, the BCC phase has the highest entropy followed by the FCCphase in CoCr
xFeMnNi, but yet the FCC phase has lower energy for alloys
containing up to 40 at.% Cr. The results suggest that both enthalpy and entropy
need to be considered for phase stability analysis.
The mixing behavior in the Gibbs energy, enthalpy, and entropy of the FCC
phase in these systems is presented in Fig. 12.5.ΔGmixdecreases monotonically for
the whole composition range with increasing the number of components in thesystem (Fig. 12.5a ). This is due to both lowering ΔH
mixand increasing ΔSmix.
Figure 12.5b shows that ΔHmixdecreases and eventally becomes negative for
CoCr xFeMnNi (with less than 40 at.% Cr). Achieving a more negative ΔHmix
implies formation of stronger bonds among elements. At 20 at.% Cr, the decrease
inΔHmixis about 6.5 kJ/mol for the quinary compared to the binary alloy, while the
increase in ΔSmixis about 7 J/K/mol that corresponds to an energy of
7/C21273¼8911 J/mol /C259 kJ/mol at 1000/C14C.
Figure 12.5c shows that, for all four systems studied, they deviate notably from
ideal mixing by exhibiting positive excess entropy. Especially, the mixingentropy, ΔS
mix, for the binary FCC CoCr alloy already exceeds the maximum
ideal conﬁgurational entropy of a ternary system. The predicted positive excess
entropy is +3.9, +2.9, +2.5, and +1.3 J/K/mol for FCC CoCr, CoCrFe, CoCrFeNi,
and CoCrFeMnNi, respectively. Furthermore, the maximum ΔSmixoccurs at
Cr¼44.2, 35.3, 35.9, and 22.8 at.% for 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-component systems,
respectively. The deviation of these compositions from their maximum idealconﬁgurational entropy case is not big except for the quaternary CoCr
xFeNi
system, which is x¼35.9 at.% – 25 at.% ¼10.9 at.%. The deviation in the
composition of the maximum entropy and the presence of large positive excessentropy suggest the presence of other entropy contributions besides the conﬁgu-
rational entropy. As a matter of fact, Gao et al. (see Chap. 10) predicted a positive
vibrational entropy of mixing of +2.8 J/K/mol for FCC CoCrFeNi usingDFT methods, agreeing well with the calculated positive excess entropy of+2.5 J/K/mol using TCNI7 database. However, DFT calculations on the vibra-tional, magnetic, electronic, and conﬁgurational entropies for CoCr, CoCrFe, andCoCrFeMnNi will be desirable to verify the calculated positive excess entropiesusing TCNI7.12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 41312.3.2 HEA Formation of Al xCoCrFeNi in Comparison
to CoCrFeMn xNi
The thermodynamic analysis of the Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni system presented above
demonstrates the importance of both enthalpy and entropy in terms of phase
stability. In the next example, we compare the mixing behavior of thermodynamic
properties of solid solution phases of FCC, BCC, and HCP in CoCrFeMn xNi and
AlxCoCrFeNi as shown in Fig. 12.6. For CoCrFeMn xNi, the FCC phase has the
lowest ΔGmixfollowed by the BCC and then HCP phases (Fig. 12.6a ). Addition ofab
c
Fig. 12.5 Calculated mixing properties of the FCC phase at T¼1000/C14C: (a) the Gibbs free
energy of mixing, ( b) enthalpy of mixing, and ( c) entropy of mixing of CoCr x, CoCr xFe,
CoCr xFeNi, and CoCr xFeMnNi as a function of Cr contents. The reference states are FCC at
T¼1000/C14C. The dashed lines in (c) denote the maximum conﬁgurational entropy of mixing, and
Nsigniﬁes the total number of components414 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoa
b
cd
e
f
Fig. 12.6 Calculated thermodynamic properties of FCC, BCC, and HCP phases (labeled as 1–3,
respectively, in the plot) for ( a–c) CoCrFeMn xNi and ( d–f)A l xCoCrFeNi alloys: ( a,d) the Gibbs
free energy of mixing, ( b,e) enthalpy of mixing, and ( c,f) entropy of mixing as a function of Mn or
Al contents at T¼1000/C14C. The reference states are FCC, BCC, and HCP at T¼1000/C14C12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 415Mn to CoCrFeNi lowers ΔHmixfor all three phases by a small amount ( <5 kJ/mol),
and clearly the FCC phase has the lowest ΔHmix(Fig. 12.6b ). Similar to the case of
CoCr xFeMnNi, the BCC phase has the highest ΔSmix, but the difference among
these 3 solution phases is quite small (Fig. 12.6c ). In addition, it is noteworthy that
the maximum entropy occurs at 13.2 at.% Mn for the FCC phase, 12.2 at.% Mnfor the BCC phase, and 13.2 at.% Mn for the HCP phase, deviating substantiallyfrom the equimolar composition (i.e., 20 at.%). The examples of bothCoCr
xFeMnNi and CoCrFeMn xNi demonstrate that even for solid solution phases
in the same system, enthalpy of mixing is as important as entropy of mixing.
In contrast to the case of CoCrFeMn xNi, addition of Al to CoCrFeNi changes its
thermodynamics dramatically as shown in Fig. 12.6d–f . The ΔGmixandΔHmix
curves of the FCC and BCC phases cross at about 20 at.% Al; at higher Al contents,
the BCC phase has lower ΔGmixandΔHmixthan the FCC phase. The entropy curves
of the FCC and BCC phases cross at about 30 at.% Al but they are fairly close forthe entire composition ranges. Clearly the stabilization of the BCC phase from Aladdition is dictated by the enthalpy effect rather than the entropy effect. Comparedto CoCrFeMn
xNi, the maximum ΔSmixis apparently smaller for all phases in
AlxCoFeMnNi, and it occurs for both FCC and BCC phases at less than 5 at.% Al
for Al xCoFeMnNi and then drops rapidly with increasing Al contents.
12.3.3 BCC Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W HEA System
Formation of single-phase senary BCC HEA MoNbTaTiVW is reported in a veryrecent study [ 30] following the HEA search strategy [ 3]. For this senary system,
formation of isomorphous BCC solid solution is observed in all 15 edge binarysystems [ 29]. Most of the solid solutions cover extremely wide ranges of temper-
atures, except the Ta-V system where C15 TaV
2Lave phase is stable from room
temperature up to 1300/C14C[29]. Using DFT methods, Widom predicts formation of
stable C15 NbV 2at low temperatures in the Nb-V binary system as presented in
Chap. 8[31]. In this subsection, we perform phase diagram calculations and present
thermodynamic analysis of BCC HEA formation against the C15 phase. TheTCNI7 database is used since it has complete descriptions for all binaries of thissenary system. The sublattice model adopted for the C15 phase is (Mo,Nb,Ta,Ti,V,W)
2(Mo,Nb,Ta,Ti,V,W) in the TCNi7 database.
Figure 12.7 illustrates the calculated phase diagrams for the binary Ta-V and
pseudo-binary systems of MoTa-V, MoTaW-V, MoNbTaW-V, and MoNbTaTiW-V. For the equimolar compositions, the temperature range within which the BCC
phase is stable increases from binary to ternary, quaternary, and quinary and then
starts to decrease for the senary system. This is understandable since Ti has thelowest melting point, and the melting point of the constituent elements in thedescending order is 3422 (W), 3017 (Ta), 2623 (Mo), 2477 (Nb), 1910 (V), and1668
/C14C (Ti). It is often observed that the liquidus temperature of substitutional
solid solution alloys is high if the constituent elements have high melting points.416 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoab
cd
e
Fig. 12.7 (a) Ta-V binary and pseudo-binary ( b)( M o T a ) - V ,( c) (MoNbTa)-V, ( d) (MoNbTaW)-V,
(e) (MoNbTaTiW)-V phase diagrams calculated using TCNI7 database. The major phase ﬁelds are
labeled12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 417In other words, one needs to avoid addition of elements that have too low melting
points while they are chemically similar, if high melting points and high strengthare important for the applications. Although the senary BCC phase has the highest
conﬁgurational entropy, its phase ﬁeld is smaller than in the quaternary and quinary
systems. This again demonstrates that the conﬁgurational entropy of a phase maynot always dominate its phase stability and other factors such as competing phasesand enthalpy need to be considered. This conclusion is consistent with the phasediagram and thermodynamic analysis of the Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni and Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Nisystems presented in Sects. 12.3.1 and12.3.2 .
Next we analyze the underlying thermodynamic quantities for these systems.
The comparison in the Gibbs energy, enthalpy, and entropy between the binary and
the senary systems at T¼1000
/C14C is shown in Fig. 12.8 for the BCC, C15, and HCP
phases. The C15 phase is stable in Ta-V (Fig. 12.8a ), but becomes unstable in the
senary (Fig. 12.8d ). The trend in the enthalpy is similar between the binary and the
senary. Both systems have a minimum in the enthalpy curve for the C15 phase,which occurs at ~65 at.% V (50 at.%V) for the binary (senary). The destabilizationof the C15 phase in the senary is mainly due to the contrasting trend in entropy forC15 and competing BCC and HCP phases. Note that the entropy for the C15 phaseis fairly close to that of the BCC phases except for small ranges in the vicinity of
60 at.% V in Ta-V binary, and both are much higher than the entropy of the HCP
phase. This is somewhat counterintuitive considering the intermetallic nature of theC15 phase; therefore, further theoretical and experimental study on the entropysources of the C15, BCC, and HCP phases in Ta-V is needed. However, the HCPphase is unstable in Ta-V, so experimental measurement of its thermodynamicproperties will be extremely difﬁcult.
In contrast to the Ta-V binary system, the reduction of entropy for the C15 phase
in the senary system is obvious and the entropy has a minimum in the vicinity of
52.2 at.% V (Fig. 12.8f ). The reduction corresponds well to the enthalpy proﬁle
(Fig. 12.8e ), suggesting potent chemical ordering in the compound results in the
sharp decrease in its entropy. For the senary system at 52.2 at.% V, the entropy ofthe C15 phase is by 27 J/K/mol (i.e., S
BCC-SC15) lower than that of the BCC phase
and outweighs the enthalpy gain of 5.1 kJ/mol (i.e., H BCC-HC15). In other words,
entropy effect clearly outweighs the enthalpy effect by almost 7 times, which isresponsible for destabilization of C15 phase in the senary system at T¼1000
/C14C.
The thermodynamic mixing properties of the BCC phase are shown in Fig. 12.9.
The combination of monotonic increase in entropy and complex change in enthalpy
causes the ΔGmixto become signiﬁcantly lower in higher-order systems than the binary
system. But the lowering trend in ΔGmixis not monotonic, and it is in descending order:
binary /C29ternary >quaternary >senary >quinary (Fig. 12.9a ). In other words, the
quinary system has the lowest ΔGmixover the whole composition range. The results
indicate that more components may not always result in the lower Gibbs energy ofmixing. Figure 12.9b shows that the decrease in ΔH
mixis not monotonic with respect to
the number of components in the system. At <20 at.% V, the ΔHmixvaries
in descending order from binary >senary >quaternary >quinary >ternary (i.e., ternary
has the most negative ΔHmix). Between 20 and 50 at.% V, the order becomes418 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoad
be-81-78-75-72-69-66-63-60-57-54G [kJ/mol]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V123
1: BCC
2: C15_LAVES
3: HCP
Ta V-90-85-80-75-70-65-60-55-50G [kJ/mol]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V12
3
(MoNbTaTiW) V1: BCC
2: C15_LAVES
3: HCP
cf  2628303234363840H [kJ/mol]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V123
Ta V202224262830323436384042H (kJ/mol]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V1
23
(MoNbTaTiW) V
687072747678808284S [J/mol/K]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V1
23
3
Ta V5560657075808590S [J/mol/K]
0 20 40 60 80 100
MOLE_PERCENT V1
23
(MoNbTaTiW) V
Fig. 12.8 Calculated thermodynamic properties of BCC, C15, and HCP phases (labeled as 1–3,
respectively, in the plot) for ( a–c) binary Ta-V and ( d–f) pseudo-binary (MoNbTaTiW)-V
systems: ( a,d) the Gibbs free energy, ( b,e) enthalpy, and ( c,f) entropy as a function of V contents
atT¼1000/C14C. The reference states are the stable structure of the pure elements at P¼1 atm and
T¼25.15/C14C. The dashed lines in (a) denote the common tangent lines, which deﬁne the
two-phase regionsbinary >senary >ternary >quinary >quaternary. For alloys >50 at.% V, the order
becomes binary >ternary >senary >quinary >quaternary. Figure 12.9c shows that the
entropy of mixing in Ta-V binary follows ideal mixing in entropy and the maximumentropy of mixing equals the maximum conﬁgurational entropy at 50 % V. With
increasing of the number of components in the system, ΔS
mixincreases as expected,
but the solution deviates from the ideal solution, and the excess entropy becomesnegative. The calculated excess entropy is 0.0, /C00.9,/C02.1,/C01.7, and /C01.5 J/K/mol for
TaV, MoTaV, MoTaVW, MoNbTaVW, and MoNbTaTiVW, respectively. Note thata
cb
Fig. 12.9 Calculated mixing properties of the BCC phase at T¼1000/C14C: (a) the Gibbs free
energy of mixing, ( b) enthalpy of mixing, and ( c) entropy of mixing of TaV x, MoTaV x,
MoTaV xW, and MoTaTiV xW as a function of V contents. The reference state is the BCC phase
atP¼1 atm and T¼1000/C14C. The dashed lines in (c) denote the maximum conﬁgurational entropy
of mixing and Nsigniﬁes the total number of components420 C. Zhang and M.C. GaoDFT calculations predict a negative vibrational entropy of mixing of /C03.6 J/K/mol for
MoNbTaW (see Chap. 10). The deviation in the composition that has the maximum
entropy of mixing from the ideal mixing case is very small though.
12.4 Computational Thermodynamics-Aided HEA Design
The expression “computational thermodynamics” is frequently used in place of“calculation of phase diagrams.” This reﬂects the fact that the phase diagram is onlya portion of the information that can be obtained from these calculations [ 32]. As a
valuable tool, the applications of the computational thermodynamics to alloy designand development in various systems have been well established for decades [ 7,33–35].
In recent years, hundreds of research papers on HEAs have been published (see
Chap. 1). However, very few studies employed the computational thermodynamic
approach for aiding the HEA development [ 3,9,10,36–38]. As mentioned previously,
the phase diagram is the crucial key to understanding of HEA formation. Phasediagrams contain succinct information about the thermodynamic properties of stablephases in equilibrium. In previous Sect. 12.3, we illustrated the understanding of
HEA formation from the thermodynamic standpoint of view and analyzed theeffects of different alloying elements on the thermodynamic properties, such asthe Gibbs energy, enthalpy, and entropy. In this section, we ﬁrst present experimen-
tal validation of PanHEA database by comparing model calculations and experi-
mental results in several case studies. They are the phase relation as a function of Alcontents as reﬂected in the Al
xCoCrFeNi isopleth, phase evolution in
Al0.3CoCrFeNi and Al 0.875CoCrFeNi, and equilibration study in Al 0.7CoCrFeNi.
Then applications to other phase diagram calculations and modeling solidiﬁcationare presented.
12.4.1 Phase Diagrams of the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni System
12.4.1.1 Isopleth of Al xCoCrFeNi
The Al xCoCrFeNi system has been one of the most thoroughly studied HEAs to
date [ 39–46]. The effects of Al addition on the microstructure, mechanical proper-
ties, thermophysical properties, and magnetic and electrical properties have beensystematically investigated. Figure 12.10 shows the calculated vertical section of
the Al
xCoCrFeNi with xvarying between 0 and 2 using the PanHEA database [ 13].
This ﬁgure clearly demonstrates that the phase relation is very sensitive to Alcontents in Al
xCoCrFeNi. It is seen that when x<0.78, the primary solidiﬁed
phase is FCC, and when x>0.78, B2 solidiﬁes ﬁrst. Figure 12.10 also indicates
that single-phase FCC will only be developed if Al ratio is kept small, while BCCand/or B2 phases will be developed if higher Al ratio is used, and a mixture of12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 421FCC + BCC phases and/or B2 phase should form in between. This is exactly what
was observed by many experimental studies on Al xCoCrFeNi alloys [ 39–46]. In
addition, Kao et al. [ 39] characterized the structural evolution of the homogenized
AlxCoCrFeNi HEAs at 1100/C14C for 24 h. Their experimental results indicated that
the FCC +BCC and/or B2 multiphase region is at 0.3 <x<1.17, while our
CALPHAD predictions show that the same region is at 0.31 <x<1.18, as revealed
by the horizontal line at 1100/C14C in Fig. 12.10 .
The liquidus and solidus temperatures of structural alloys are important to
determine their working temperatures, and good agreement in these temperatureswith experimental data is demonstrated in Fig. 12.10 . The solidus temperatures
were measured by Wang et al. [ 42] using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
while the liquidus temperatures of four Al
xCoCrFeNi alloys (with x¼0.1, 1, 1.5,
and 2) were measured by the present authors and their collaborator using differen-tial thermal analysis (DTA) at 10
/C14C/min for both heating and cooling cycles
between room temperature and 1600/C14C.
Fig. 12.10 Calculated isopleth of the Al xCoCrFeNi alloys with x¼0 ~ 2 using our current
thermodynamic description with DSC/DTA experimental data422 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao12.4.1.2 Phase Evolution in Al 0.3CoCrFeNi and Al 0.875CoCrFeNi
To reveal the phase evolution in an alloy as a function of temperature, one can draw
a vertical line in the isopleth (as shown in Fig. 12.10 ). However, unless the isopleth
is a true quasi-binary section where all tie lines are in the plane of the section, the
relative phase fractions cannot be obtained from such a section. Next we show in
Fig.12.11 two examples of 1D equilibrium thermodynamic calculation for ﬁxed
compositions of Al 0.3CoCrFeNi and Al 0.875CoCrFeNi and compare them with
available experimental results.
Figure 12.11 predicts that the majority phase in Al 0.3CoCrFeNi at elevated
temperatures is FCC, and the B2 phase forms below the solvus temperature1060
/C14C. Shu et al. [ 46] investigated the microstructure and tensile behaviors of
the Al 0.3CoCrFeNi HEA. They found the as-cast structure of this alloy is FCC and
the B2 phase precipitates out when aged at 900/C14C for 72 h. The tensile strength of
this alloy after heat treatment was signiﬁcantly improved. Although the results ofref. [ 46] were not used for the development of our Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni database, our
prediction agrees with their experimental observation.
Chou et al. [ 47] investigated the phase transformation of Al
0.875CoCrFeNi alloys
at low temperatures using DTA and high-temperature X-ray diffraction (HTXRD).The precipitation of the σphase was observed only at temperatures higher than
600
/C14C. Our CALPHAD calculation (shown in Fig. 12.11b ) predicts that the σphase
forms in the temperature range of 375–860/C14C (highlighted in the blue area). The
main reason why Chou et al. [ 47] did not observe the σphase below 600/C14C could be
the sluggish kinetics of σformation at such low temperatures. Formation of
complex σphase involves typical nucleation and growth process, for which long-
range diffusion is a rate-controlling factor at low temperatures. It is known that thekinetics of σformation is very sluggish such as in the high-Cr steels [ 48]. Secondly,
the heating rates used in typical DTA and HTXRD experiments usually do not
ab
Fig. 12.11 1D equilibrium calculations of the ( a)A l 0.3CoCrFeNi and ( b)A l 0.875CoCrFeNi high-
entropy alloys. The shaded region in ( b) signiﬁes the temperature range where σphase forms12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 423allow thermodynamic equilibration at low temperatures because of slow atomic
diffusivity that follows an Arrhenius relationship with temperature. Future thermalequilibration experiments at 400–550
/C14C will be desirable to further validate the
present CALPHAD predictions.
12.4.1.3 Phase Evolution in Al 0.7CoCrFeNi
It is possible that phase equilibria were not reached in previous experiments on
AlxCoCrFeNi alloys [ 39–46] since the annealing times were not long enough.
Therefore, the present authors and their collaborators annealed an alloyAl
0.7CoCrFeNi at 1250/C14C for 1000 h to ensure that the equilibrium state was
reached. The alloy was prepared using arc melter from constituent elements ofpurity greater than 99 wt.% in a vacuum of at least 0.01 torr under a Ti-getteredargon atmosphere. The sample was remelted several times to improve its homoge-
neity. The obtained button was about 300 g in weight and 10 mm in thickness. The
ﬁnal composition of the alloy is conﬁrmed through quantitative analysis by induc-tively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometers (ICP-OESs), which is veryclose to the nominal composition. The as-cast alloy was then cut into cuboid andwrapped by Ta foil before being sealed in the quartz tube with backﬁlled argonatmosphere. The encapsulated sample was placed in a box furnace at 1250
/C14C for
1000 h and then water-quenched at the end of the heat treatment. The identiﬁcationof phases within the heat-treated sample was carried out by using a high-energy
synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) includ-
ing energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and orientation image mapping(OIM), electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), as well as atom probe tomography(ATP).
The 1D equilibrium calculation for Al
0.7CoCrFeNi (see Fig. 12.12 ) shows that
there is no single-solid-phase region. The FCC phase coexists with both thedisordered BCC and ordered B2 phases at elevated temperatures(850 <T<1340
/C14C). The σphase precipitates out from the FCC phase at lower
temperatures ( <850/C14C). At 1250/C14C as indicated by the green dashed line, the
majority phase is FCC at about 64 % mole percent. The amount of the BCC and B2phases are comparable (~20 % for each phase).
The microstructure of the equilibrated Al
0.7CoCrFeNi alloy is shown in
Fig.12.13a . It contains two distinct phases (gray and dark). The phase identiﬁcation
results using XRD and SEM/EDS indicate that the gray phase is FCC and the darkone is BCC. The EBSD phase mapping shows in Fig. 12.13b and the measured
phase fraction of the FCC is about 67 %, which agrees with our thermodynamic
prediction 64 %. Note that the XRD and EBSD may not be able to distinguish the
disordered BCC and ordered B2 phases due to their similarity on crystal structure.In order to clarify this issue, the high-accuracy atom probe investigation wasperformed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Figure 12.14 shows the
detected elemental distributions within different phases. Figure 12.14a shows that
each element uniformly distributes within the FCC phase, which conﬁrms the red424 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaophase region within Fig. 12.14b is a single solid solution phase. Conversely,
Fig. 12.14b shows obvious elemental segregation within the blue-phase region.
As shown in Fig. 12.14b–f , there are two concentration-rich regions: one is the NiAl
rich and the other one is the CrFe rich. Coupling with our XRD results, they areconﬁrmed to be the NiAl-rich B2 and CoCrFe-rich BCC phases individually, whichvalidates the reliability of our thermodynamic prediction. On the basis of our
current APT results (as shown in Fig. 12.14 ), the BCC and B2 phases areFig. 12.12 Equilibrium calculation of the Al 0.7CoCrFeNi HEA using the PanHEA database
Fig. 12.13 Microstructure of Al 0.7CoCrFeNi HEA annealed at 1250/C14C for 1000 h ( a) SEM;
(b) EBSD12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 425concomitant. Small NiAl-rich B2 particles were found in the vicinity of the CrFe-
rich BCC phase region.
The chemical compositions for the FCC, BCC, and B2 phases in Al 0.7CoCrFeNi
at 1000/C14C calculated from PanHEA are listed in Table 12.1, and the agreement
with experimental measurements is good. Note that a previous study by Liu
et al. [ 49] also shows good agreement in the chemical composition of the BCC
and B2 phases in Al 0.5CrFeNiTi 0.25between CALPHAD prediction and TEM
measurements.
In summary, taking into account the uncertainties from both experimentation
and thermodynamic calculation, the agreement in phase diagrams betweenCALPHAD modeling using the PanHEA database and the available experimentsfor the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system is considered acceptable overall.
Fig. 12.14 Concentration mapping using the atom probe tomography, ( a) all elements distribution
within the FCC phase region; ( b–f) distribution of each component within the BCC-based phase
region
Table 12.1 Calculated chemical composition of stable phases in comparison with experimental
measurements for the Al 0.7CoCrFeNi alloy equilibrated at 1250/C14C for 1000 h
PhasesComposition (at.%)
Al Co Cr Fe NiCal. Exp. Cal. Exp. Cal. Exp. Cal. Exp. Cal. Exp.
FCC 9.54 10.2 23.95 22.7 22.32 23.1 24.69 23.6 19.50 20.1
BCC 8.68 5.1 21.14 21.1 34.59 37.1 27.14 27.2 8.45 9.5B2 37.5 35.8 12.86 15.6 6.23 4.4 5.21 7.8 38.2 36.4426 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao12.4.1.4 Phase Diagram Predictions
Taking advantage of computational thermodynamics, more phase diagrams of the
Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system are calculated using the current PanHEA database forbetter understanding the compositional and temperature effects on the microstruc-
ture of HEAs in the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system. Figure 12.15 shows how the calculated
isothermal section at 1000
/C14C evolves with respect to the alloy system. For the Cr-
Fe-Ni ternary system, FCC solid solution phase dominates at low Cr contents andBCC is stable at the Cr-rich region. With the addition of Al to the Cr-Fe-Ni system,the order BCC structure (i.e., B2) forms and the phase ﬁeld of BCC + B2 dominates.The ordered FCC structure (i.e., Fcc_ L1
2) only forms at the Ni-rich corner.
a
bc
d
Fig. 12.15 Calculated 1000/C14C isothermal sections for ( a) Cr-Fe-Ni, ( b) Cr-Fe-Ni-0.25Al, ( c)
Cr-Fe-Ni-0.25Co, and ( d) Cr-Fe-Ni-0.2Al-0.2Co systems using our current thermodynamic
database12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 427(The terms L12and Fcc_ L12are used interchangeably in this chapter.) With the
addition of Co to the Cr-Fe-Ni system, FCC solid solution phase dominates, and ithas much larger Cr solubility than that in the ternary Cr-Fe-Ni system. Note that the
σphase forms at the Cr-rich corner since the σphase is stable in both the Cr-Fe and
Co-Cr binary systems. Especially for the Co-Cr system, the σphase can be stable up
to 1283
/C14C. Thus Co has the side effect of stabilizing the σphase although it is a
potent FCC stabilizer for the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system. With the additions of both Aland Co, the phase relationships (Fig. 12.15d ) are similar to those obtained when
adding Al only (Fig. 12.15b ). These ﬁndings indicate that Al has a stronger effect
than Co on the stability of solution phases within the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system. Thisis due to the remarkable enthalpy lowering of the BCC phase with Al addition as
shown in Sect. 12.3. Nonetheless, the phase ﬁeld of BCC + B2 in Cr-Fe-Ni-0.2Al-
0.2Co is much smaller than Cr-Fe-Ni-0.25Al.
Previous examples have shown the effect of Al addition on the FCC/BCC phase
transition since it impacts tremendously the microstructure and mechanical prop-erties of various HEA systems [ 50]. It will be interesting to fully understand the
effect of other alloying elements in this regard, and such examples are shown inFig.12.16 for the isopleths of Al
xCo1.5CrFeNi, Al xCoCr 1.5FeNi, Al xCoCrFe 1.5Ni,
and Al xCoCrFeNi 1.5with x¼0 ~ 2. Figure 12.16a indicates that the higher Co ratio
has insigniﬁcant effect on the BCC/FCC phase transformation, compared to
AlxCoCrFeNi (Fig. 12.10 ). Higher Cr ratio (Fig. 12.16b ) stabilizes the disordered
BCC phase against both ordered B2 and FCC. It has been found that both Al and Crare stabilizers of the BCC -based structure [ 45,51], which is consistent with our
thermodynamic calculations. In addition, our calculations also indicate that Alstabilizes both BCC and B2 phases, yet more in favor of B2 phase, while Crstabilizes BCC phase but destabilizes B2 phase. The isopleth with higher Fe ratioshown in Fig. 12.16c indicates that Fe can also stabilize the BCC phase especially at
elevated temperatures. But the BCC stabilizing effect of Fe is much weaker than
that of Al and Cr. Figure 12.16d shows the higher ratio of Ni stabilizes the FCC
phase to higher Al ratio.
12.4.1.5 Modeling Solidiﬁcation
As demonstrated in Figs. 12.10 ,12.11 ,12.12 ,12.13 ,12.14 ,12.15 , and 12.16 , the
phases within under the equilibrium conditions can be directly predicted on thebasis of thermodynamic calculations at constant compositions or constant temper-atures. While in some cases, the HEAs were obtained in the as-cast conditions,which are not in thermodynamic equilibrium. The as-cast microstructure of HEAs,
such as the degree of the microsegregation and the types and amounts of the
secondary phases, will signiﬁcantly impact the mechanical properties of thesolidiﬁed alloys. Thus, accurate prediction of the solidiﬁcation paths andmicrosegregation of multicomponent alloys under a given solidiﬁcation conditionis important in optimizing the composition and processing parameters in develop-ing new HEAs. Based on the CALPHAD approach, two crude models are428 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaocommonly employed to simulate the solidiﬁcation process in simple and efﬁcient
ways without evoking kinetic calculations: equilibrium (lever-rule) and
non-equilibrium (Scheil-Gulliver) models [ 52,53]. They both assume complete
solute mixing in the liquid. For the solid, the lever-rule model assumes the solutediffusion is inﬁnity, while the Scheil-Gulliver model assumes no solute diffusionwithin the solid. These two models describe the two extreme cases of solidiﬁcation.Most HEAs usually are made via the drop-casting or arc-melting techniques withrelatively high cooling rates; thus we can employ the Scheil-Gulliver model aspresented next.
Kao et al. [ 40] also did systematic microstructure investigations of the as-cast
Al
xCoCrFeNi HEAs with various Al contents. Based on their experimental obser-
vation of microstructure dependence on the Al content, they found that it is single-phase FCC when x<0.45 and BCC/B2 when x>0.88. The FCC + BCC/B2 duplex
structure was seen when the Al ratio is in the midrange, i.e., 0.45 <x<0.88.
Figure 12.17a shows the simulated solidiﬁcation paths of the Al
xCoCrFeNi HEAsab
cd
Fig. 12.16 Calculated isopleths of ( a)A l xCo1.5CrFeNi, ( b)A l xCoCr 1.5FeNi, ( c)A l xCoCrFe 1.5Ni,
and (d)A l xCoCrFeNi 1.5with x¼0 ~ 2 using PanHEA thermodynamic database12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 429with x¼0.1, 0.5, and 0.8 using the Scheil-Gulliver model. Following the black line
shown in Fig. 12.17a , the solidiﬁcation path of the Al 0.1CoCrFeNi alloy can be
directly forecast, which is liquid!liquid + FCC !liquid + FCC + BCC !liquid
+ FCC + BCC + B2 !FCC + BCC + B2. It indicates that the FCC + BCC/B2 struc-
ture solidiﬁed together from liquid even for x¼0.1. However, 99.8 % of the liquid
forms the primary FCC phase, and the total amount of BCC + B2 formed from thecalculation is only 0.2 %, which is hardly seen even if it does exist. When x¼0.5,
the calculated solidiﬁcation path is the same as for Al
0.1CoCrFeNi. It is seen from
the blue line of Fig. 12.17a that 28 % liquid is still there to form FCC + BCC/B2
duplex structure when x¼0.5. The simulation shows that the total mole fraction of
BCC + B2 that may form in this case is 8.7 %, which is sufﬁcient to be observed inthe microstructure. The simulation for x¼0.8 shows very interesting features (red
line in Fig. 12.17a ). The calculated solidiﬁcation path is liquid!liquid
+B 2!liquid + FCC + B2 !liquid + FCC + BCC + B2 !FCC + BCC + B2. The
primary solidiﬁed phase is B2(total 1.8 %), while 98.2 % liquid is to form the
mixture of B2 + BCC + FCC . The solidiﬁcation of this alloy ﬁnishes in a narrow
temperature range, from 1342 to 1294
/C14C. This composition is close to the so-called
deep eutectic point and may develop into an amorphous structure upon very highcooling rates [ 35].
Figure 12.17b shows the simulated solidiﬁcation paths for x>0.8 of the
Al
xCoCrFeNi alloys, which indicate that the primary solidiﬁed phase is B2.
According to our simulations, their solidiﬁcation paths are the same:liquid !liquid + B2 !Liquid + B2 + BCC !L i q u i d+F C C+B C C+B 2 !FCC
+B C C+B 2 . When x¼1.0, only 12.8 % of the liquid is consumed to form the
primary B2and the next 8.4 % of liquid forms BCC -base phases (both BCC and
B2). Then the rest of liquid forms FCC + BCC/B2 structures. It should also be
pointed out that, when x>1.0, the simulation shows that the BCC structure is a
mixture of ordered B2 and disordered BCC, which is consistent with manypublished experimental results [ 39,45,47]. The simulation shows that FCC phaseab
Fig. 12.17 Calculated solidiﬁcation paths of the Al xCoCrFeNi alloys with x¼0 ~ 2 using our
current thermodynamic description and the Scheil-Gulliver model430 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoshould appear even when x¼2, while in reality it may not be observed due to its
insigniﬁcant amount (0.3 %). As is seen, with the increasing of x, the amount of
liquid left for the L !B2 + BCC + FCC reaction becomes smaller, and the solidi-
ﬁcation temperature range becomes narrower. Both factors make it difﬁcult to
observe the FCC phase in the as-solidiﬁed microstructure under high cooling rate.
Using the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni quinary system as an example, we show how to apply
proper thermodynamic calculations to understand the experimental results andguide HEA design. It should be pointed out that the alloy properties are determinedby their microstructures that depend on not only the alloy chemistry but alsoprocessing and heat treatment. Most of the HEAs were usually prepared by arcmelting and then drop casting, which tend to maintain the structure of primary
solidiﬁed phase. However, in case if the equilibrium phase is not the disordered
solid solution phase, then other phases will form upon annealing at high tempera-tures for long enough time. The alloy with the FCC structure shows good ductilitybut low strength while the B2-type intermetallic compounds generally show excel-lent strength but low ductility. Therefore, it is expected that a composite of FCCmatrix with B2 precipitates may provide the optimal balance in strength andductility such as Al
0.3CoCrFeNi. It is expected that similar microstructure could
also be obtained in Al xCo1.5CrFeNi, Al xCoCrFe 1.5Ni, and Al xCoCrFeNi 1.5with
wider ranges of xvalues based on the phase diagram information shown in
Fig.12.16 .
12.4.2 Phase Diagrams of Al-Cr-Cu-Fe-Ni System
Previously the microstructures of the as-cast Al xCrCuFeNi 2alloys ( x¼0.2 ~ 2.5)
were investigated by Guo et al. [ 54]. They showed that only the FCC solid solution
was detected when x/C200.7 and that the BCC disordered solid solution started to be
detected at x¼0.8 by XRD. Formation of ordered BCC (the B2 phase) started to
form at x¼0.9 seen from those superlattice diffraction peaks from the XRD. At
x/C211.8, FCC solid solutions could not be detected, suggesting this phase either no
longer exists or its amount was tiny. Based on the as-cast microstructures ofAl
xCrCuFeNi 2alloys, it was concluded that Al 1.2CrCuFeNi 2is a eutectic
composition.
The calculated isopleth using the PanHEA database is shown in Fig. 12.18 . The
agreement with Guo et al. ’s experiments [ 54] is very good. As illustrated in
Fig. 12.18 , with x/C200.6 ~ 0.74 at the temperature range of 1100–1150/C14C, only
FCC phase exists. With increasing Al ratio, the BCC-typed phases (ordered B2
and/or disordered BCC) form and the amount of FCC phase decreases. At x/C251.1,
the calculated liquidus temperature reaches a local minimum implying that theeutectic point is in the vicinity of this composition. When x/C211.8, the FCC amount
becomes negligible. This indicates that our thermodynamic calculation can welldescribe the experimental observation [ 54], which give us great conﬁdence on our12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 431thermodynamic database capabilities to assist alloy design in the Al-Cr-Cu-Fe-Ni
system.
12.4.3 Phase Diagrams of Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W System
The phase diagrams and thermodynamic p roperties of the Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W
system were presented in the Sect. ( 12.3.3 ). Here we present the phase compo-
sition evolution during non-equilibrium solidiﬁcation in an alloy with nominalcomposition of MoNbTaTiVW in comparison with experiments, as shown inFig. 12.19 . The non-equilibrium solidiﬁcation simulated using the Scheil-
Gulliver model indicates the formation of a single-phase BCC structure in the
as-cast state. The simulations predict a liquidus temperature of 2533
/C14C, equi-
librium solidus temperature 2246/C14C[30], and a (non-equilibrium) solidus
temperature of 1661/C14C. The simulations also predict that elements of high
melting points are depleted in the liquid in descending order W >Ta>Mo>Nb
while it is enriched with Ti and V. At the v ery beginning of solidiﬁcation, BCC
phase is enriched in W followed by Ta but is depleted of V and Ti, while Mo andNb seem to be close to the nominal composition. Therefore, due to the contin-uous cooling in a non-equilibrium path during typical arc-melting process for
ingot preparation, compositional ﬂuctu ation in wide ranges especially for W, Ta,
Ti, and V is anticipated in the as-cast alloy. The predicted micro-segregation
behavior actually agrees well with experimental measurement using SEM-EDXa ss h o w ni nF i g . 12.19d . The dendrites form ﬁrst during solidiﬁcation and are
truly enriched in W followed by Ta, while the interdendritic regions form atlower temperatures and are enriched in Ti, V, and Nb. The distribution of Moseems fairly uniform, and there is small Nb segregation to the interdendritic
Fig. 12.18 Calculated isopleth of Al xCrCuFeNi 2(x¼0 ~ 2.5) [ 55] (The SEM picture is
reproduced from [ 54])432 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoregions. It is expected that the agreement can be improved if atomic diffusion can
be considered in the simulation provided that the mobility database is available.
12.5 Outlook
The CALPHAD approach adopts a semiempirical methodology and the coefﬁ-
cients of many interaction parameters may not have true physical meaning. The
thermodynamic database development using the CALPHAD method critically
relies on the availability of reliable experimental data on phase diagrams and
ab
cd
Temperature [ °C]
Temperature [ °C]Temperature [ °C]Mole fraction of BCC1: LIQUID
2: LIQUID BCC
Equilibrium
Scheil21
2 631 5 4
X(LIQUID,*)1: X(LIQUID,Mo)
2: X(LIQUID,Nb)
3: X(LIQUID,Ta)
4: X(LIQUID,Ti)
5: X(LIQUID,V)
6: X(LIQUID,W)
X(BCC,*)1: X(BCC,Mo)
2: X(BCC,Nb)
3: X(BCC,Ta)
4: X(BCC,Ti)
5: X(BCC,V)
6: X(BCC,W)2 6
315
4
Fig. 12.19 Non-equilibrium solidiﬁcation using the Scheil-Gulliver model: ( a) mole fraction of
solids, ( b) liquid composition, and ( c) BCC phase composition. ( d) Composition proﬁle across
dendrites and interdendrites (Reproduced from Ref. [ 30])12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 433thermochemistry of phases. Extrapolation of binaries and ternaries into higher-
order systems may not always guarantee satisfactory agreement with experiments,especially if there are stable quaternary and/or quinary compounds. When using
thermodynamic databases for HEA design, the user needs to consider the following
key issues:
1. How reliable are the binary and ternary descriptions? Do they cover the entire
composition and temperature ranges?
2. Are the Gibbs energy descriptions for those “hypothetical” phases and pure
elements physically reasonable? For example, the competing phases againstFCC in Al-Co-Cr-Cu-Fe-Mn-Ni-Ti include σ, BCC, B2, and HCP phases, but
σphase is not stable for those binary systems containing Al or Cu. Similar
questions arise for those BCC HEA systems based on refractory metals. TheLaves phases (C14, C15, and C36) are only stable in certain binaries (e.g., Crwith Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta; Mo/W with Hf/Zr; etc.) and not stable in many others(e.g., Cr with V/Mo/W, Ti with V/Nb/Ta/Mo/Ta, etc.). But the Gibbs energies
for these hypothetical/unstable compounds are still needed for a self-consistent
database development (see Eqs. 12.13 and12.14 ). It is not sufﬁcient to select the
Gibbs energy descriptions that will make those hypothetical phases unstable, butwhether they are physically meaningful remains a big question. Without doubts,the energies of these hypothetical phases will impact the phase stability formulticomponent systems such as HEAs and thus the rationale of these datacannot be ignored during CALPHAD database development.
3. Since HEAs are still at their infancy stage, there are few experimental data
dedicated to their phase equilibrium and thermochemistry data. This makes
direct validation of thermodynamic databases very difﬁcult.
With recent progress in ﬁrst-principles DFT calculations, the enthalpy of for-
mation [ 23–27,56] and even the Gibbs free energy of compounds can be predicated
without experimental input. The application of these data to the hypotheticalcompounds in binary and ternary systems is particularly important for developingphysically meaningful databases for HEA systems.
Due to the prevalence in partially disordered solid solution and partially ordered
intermetallics in HEA systems as pointed out by Santodonato et al. [ 57] who studied
the solidiﬁcation behavior in Al
1.3CoCrCuFeNi, it will be important to quantify the
true conﬁgurational entropy and then other entropy sources in HEAs within the
CALPHAD framework. Developing kinetic databases using the CALPHAD
method is equally important as developing thermodynamic databases, which willallow users to simulate more realistic solidiﬁcation behavior and phase transfor-mations kinetics. The following subsections provide brief discussions along thesedirections.434 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao12.5.1 Impact of Chemical Ordering on Entropy
The term “order” in metallurgical parlance denotes the presence of crystallinity as
opposed to an amorphous arrangement of atoms. Orderliness over distance compa-rable to interatomic distances is called short-range order (SRO), whereas orderli-ness repeated over inﬁnitely great distances is called long-range order (LRO). LROdistinguishes a crystalline solid solution in which the atomic species, two or more,reside on distinct sublattices. SRO distinguishes a solid in which atoms of onespecies have more nearest neighbors of the other species than would be found if
environments were entirely random [ 58]. The disordered solution and LRO have
been well handled in the CALPHAD assessments by thermodynamic models [ 59].
In thermodynamics, entropy is deﬁned as a measure of the disorder in the
arrangements of atoms in a system. According to the third law of thermodynamics[60], the crystalline phases have the perfect “ordered” structures and the entropy is
zero at absolute zero temperature. In order to reveal the temperature effect on theentropy of HEAs, the total entropy and entropy of mixing of BCC, FCC, and HCPphases in the compositions of CoCr, CoCrFe, CoCrFeMn, and CoCrFeMnNi are
calculated and are presented in this subsection. The same crystal structure as the
according phase of each component is used as the reference state. For example,thermodynamic properties of pure Co and Cr in the BCC structure are used as theirreference states to calculate the entropy mixing of BCC CoCr phase.
Figure 12.20a shows the declining trend in the total entropy of BCC phase with
decreasing temperature, obeying the third law of thermodynamics. Note that theinﬂexion point on each line of Fig. 12.20a is due to the BCC phase separation:
BCC¼BCC#1 + BCC#2. The second inﬂexion point for the CoCrFeMnNi system
at lower temperature is according to the reaction of BCC ¼BCC#1 + BCC#2
+ BCC#3. The calculated mixing entropy ( ΔS
mix) of each alloy using Eq. 12.19 is
shown in Fig. 12.20b . It indicates that the ΔSmixslightly increases with decreasing
temperature till the vicinity of 565/C14C (CoCr binary) and then drops quickly at
ab
Fig. 12.20 Calculated entropies for the BCC phase within different systems at the equi-atomic
ratio: ( a) total entropy; ( b) entropy of mixing12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 435lower temperatures when phase separation occurs. It is understandable that the
phase separation will make the system less disordering; thus ΔSmixdecreases with
decreasing temperature. However, the trend of ΔSmixvs. temperature before the
phase separation occurs seems very counterintuitive, so we compare ΔSmixfor BCC
CoCr with and without considering the magnetic contributions. The results areshown in Fig. 12.21 and clearly indicate that the magnetic contribution causes the
slight increase of ΔS
mixwhen the temperature decreases. On the other hand, without
considering the magnetic contribution, the entropy of mixing is constant for
T/C21450/C14C, and this means that SRO is not considered in the database. Note that
very similar trends are found for both the total entropies and entropies of mixing ofCoCr, CoCrFe, CoCrFeMn, and CoCrFeMnNi alloys in FCC and HCP structures asshown in Fig. 12.22 .
SRO not only exists in the solid (see Chap. 10for examples) but also liquid (see
Chap. 11for details and refs. [ 2,3]) states of HEAs. The conﬁgurational entropy of
a solid solution phase should decrease as the temperature decreases as shown inBCC MoNbTaW in Chap. 8. Therefore, for a more physical modeling of the
conﬁgurational entropy in HEA system using CALPHAD approach, one needs to
consider proper treatment of SRO. However, the lack of explicit SRO has beenrecognized as one of the major expression shortcomings to consider the order/disorder phase transformation using the CALPHAD approach. The Bragg-William-Gorsky (BWG) approximation [ 61] was the ﬁrst model used to calculate the ordered
prototype FCC phase diagrams [ 62]. But it shows large discrepancies with the real0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500024681012
DSmix with magnetic
DSmix without magneticEntropy of mixing DSmix (J/mole.K)
Temperature (°C)BCC phase of CoCr
Fig. 12.21 Comparison of the calculated mixing entropy of the BCC phase of the CoCr alloy
with/without magnetic contribution436 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaoorder phase diagrams because of the neglect of the SRO contributions in either the
ordered (within a sublattice) or disordered phases. Currently, several models have
been developed and gradually improved to describe the effect of SRO. The clustervariation method (CVM) [ 63] and Monte Carlo (MC) techniques [ 64] were devel-
oped by using the improved approximations of the Ising model to consider the SROcontribution and reproduced the main features of the experimental phase diagrams.However, thermodynamic modeling using CVM and MC is mainly in binarysystems due to their complexity of model parameters and heavy computationallyexpensive for multicomponent systems. The CEF model has been widely used for
several years to model chemical ordering in alloys. In this model, the LRO is
described by sublattices and the SRO contribution to the Gibbs energy is approx-imated by the means of the quasi-chemical pair approximation. In the framework ofthe CEF, the SRO for the phase with both two sublattices and four sublattices hasbeen explicitly expressed by Sundman et al. [ 65,66]. In this context cluster/site
approximation (CSA) approach is the simplest thermodynamic model capable ofproducing quantitative ordered phase diagrams. It permits only sharing corners butab
cd
Fig. 12.22 Calculated entropies for the FCC and HCP phases within different systems at the equi-
atomic ratio: ( a) total entropy of FCC phase; ( b) mixing entropy of FCC phase; ( c) total entropy
of HCP phase; ( d) mixing entropy of HCP phase12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 437not faces and edges and can be used to describe both LRO and SRO, which
drastically reduces the number of variables and increases the computational efﬁ-ciency especially for multicomponent systems. The CSA ﬁrst introduced by Fowler
[67] for treating atom/molecule equilibria was found suitable in describing the
thermodynamics of the FCC phases by Oates et al. [ 68]. The CSA model is
implemented in the Pandat
TMsoftware [ 13] and has been successfully used to
describe the phase stability of the FCC and HCP phase diagrams [ 69–72]. At
present, the CSA model is limited to these phase diagrams.
12.5.2 Kinetics Modeling of HEAs
The materials presented hitherto focus on developing thermodynamic databases forHEA systems and their applications to phase diagrams and alloy design and
processing via the CALPHAD approach. In addition, the CALPHAD method can
be extended to model atomic mobilities and diffusivities as well. Using the methodas described in ref. [ 73], a compatible mobility database with the current PanHEA
thermodynamic database has been developed. The self-, impurity, and chemicaldiffusivities of each component within the liquid, BCC, FCC, and B2 phases wereincluded. By combining the thermodynamic and mobility databases, kinetic reac-tions during solidiﬁcation and subsequent heat treatment processes can then be
Fig. 12.23 Simulated concentration proﬁles for Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni diffusion couple at 1000/C14Ci n
comparison with experimental results by Tsai et al. [ 74]438 C. Zhang and M.C. Gaosimulated. The mobility data for Liquid, BCC, FCC, and B2 phases are available in
current PanHEA database, which enables us to carry out diffusion simulations.
Simulated concentration proﬁles for Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni diffusion couple at 1000
oC in comparison with experimental results by Tsai et al. [ 74] are superimposed in
the same ﬁgure for comparison. It shows that our simulated results are in goodagreement with the experimental measurements (Fig. 12.23 ).
12.6 Conclusions
The application of the CALPHAD method to HEAs is presented in this chapter, and
strategies in developing thermodynamic databases for HEA systems are illustrated.Analysis of the Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, and entropy of key phases of Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni, Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni, and Mo-Nb-Ta-Ti-V-W systems is carried out using
PanHEA and TCNI7 databases. Applications of these databases to assist HEA
design in terms of phase diagrams and microstructure evolution during solidiﬁca-tions are shown for several HEA systems. The following conclusions are reached:
1. The thermodynamic database for the Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Ni system was developed
based on the available experimental data and is included in the PanHEAdatabase. The optimization covers all 10 binaries and 10 ternaries. Variousphase diagrams were predicted using this database, which may be useful forfuture HEA design and processing. Acceptable agreement between model cal-culations and experiments is observed in various alloys such as Al
0.3CoCrFeNi,
Al0.7CoCrFeNi, Al 0.875CoCrFeNi, and Al xCrCuFeNi 2.
2. Thermodynamic analysis using the TCNI7 database predicts positive excess
entropy of +3.9, +2.9, +2.5, and +1.3 J/K/mol for FCC CoCr, CoCrFe,
CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi, respectively. The CALPHAD-predicted excessentropy for CoCrFeNi agrees well with the positive vibrational entropy ofmixing of +2.8 J/K/mol predicted by DFT calculations (see Chap. 10). Further-
more, the maximum ΔS
mixoccurs at Cr ¼44.2 %, 35.3 %, 35.9 %, and 22.8 %
for 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-component systems, respectively, which deviate noticeablyfrom the equimolar compositions.
3. Thermodynamic analysis using the TCNI7 database predicts small negative
excess entropy of /C00.9,/C02.1,/C01.7, and /C01.5 J/K/mol for MoTaV, MoTaVW,
MoNbTaVW, and MoNbTaTiVW, respectively.
4. Addition of Al to CoCrFeNi stabilizes the BCC phase signiﬁcantly because of
the dominating enthalpy effect. The maximum ΔS
mixfor both FCC and BCC
phases occur at less than 5 % Al and then drop rapidly with further increasing Alcontents.
5. More principal elements in HEAs may not necessarily result in broader phase
ﬁeld of the solution phase. This is because the enthalpy factors as well as
competing phases cannot be ignored when addressing phase stability. For exam-
ple, the FCC phase ﬁeld in CoCrFeNi is broader than in CoCrFeMnNi, and the12 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 439BCC phase ﬁeld in MoNbTaTiVW is smaller than in MoNbTaW and
MoNbTaVW.
6. Outlook to address short-range ordering and develop mobility database are
discussed.
Acknowledgments M.C.G. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by the Crosscutting Technology
Research Program at the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) – Strategic Center forCoal – managed by Robert Romanosky (Technology Manager) and Charles Miller (Technology
Monitor). The research was executed through NETL ’s Ofﬁce of Research and Development ’s
Innovative Process Technologies (IPT) Field Work Proposal under the RES contract DE-FE-0004000. The authors thank Prof. P.K. Liaw ’s group for providing experimental support.
C.Z. thanks Fan Zhang and Shuanglin Chen for inspiring discussions on CALPHAD modeling.
M.C.G. thanks Mike Widom, Jeffrey A. Hawk, David E. Alman, and Bryan Morreale for their
general discussion on HEAs.
Disclaimer This chapter co-authored by M.C.G. was funded by the Department of Energy,
National Energy Technology Laboratory, an agency of the United States Government, through asupport contract with AECOM. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, norany of their employees, nor AECOM, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressed
or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or
usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its usewould not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product,process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily
constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Govern-
ment or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarilystate or reﬂect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
References
1. Yeh JW, Chen YL, Lin SJ, Chen SK (2007) High-entropy alloys – a new era of exploitation.
Mater Sci Forum 560:1–9. doi: 10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/MSF.560.1
2. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.10.001
3. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
4. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 375–377:213–218. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.
2003.10.257
5. Otto F, Yang Y, Bei H, George EP (2013) Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the phase
stability of equiatomic high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 61:2628–2638. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.
2013.01.042
6. Ohtania H, Ishida K (1998) Application of the CALPHAD method to material design.
Thermochimica Acta 314:69–77. doi: 10.1016/S0040-6031(97)00457-7
7. Chang YA, Chen SL, Zhang F, Yan XY, Xie FY, Schmid-Fetzer R, Oates WA (2004) Phase
diagram calculation: past, present and future. Prog Mater Sci 49:313–345. doi: 10.1016/S0079-
6425(03)00025-2
8. Olson GB, Kuehmann CJ (2014) Materials genomics: from CALPHAD to ﬂight. Scr Mater
70:25–30. doi: 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2013.08.032
9. Zhang C, Zhang F, Chen S, Cao W (2012) Computational thermodynamics aided high-entropy
alloy design. JOM 64(7):839–845. doi: 10.1007/s11837-012-0365-6440 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao10. Zhang F, Zhang C, Chen S, Zhu J, Cao W, Kattner UR (2014) An understanding of high
entropy alloys from phase diagram calculations. Calphad 45:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.calphad.
2013.10.006
11. Kaufman L, Bernstein H (1970) Computer calculation of phase diagrams. Academic,
New York
12. Hillert M (1968) Phase transformations. ASM, Cleveland13. Pandat
TMThermodynamic Calculations and Kinetic Simulations. CompuTherm LLC,
Madison, WI, USA – 53719
14. Thermo-Calc thermodynamic equilibrium calculations. Thermo-Calc Software, Stockholm,
Sweden
15. FactSage Thermochemical Software. Montreal, Canada
16. Chou KC, Chang YA (1989) A study of ternary geometrical models. Berichte der Bunsenge-
sellschaft fu ¨r physikalische Chemie 93(6):735–741. doi: 10.1002/bbpc.19890930615
17. Dinsdale AT (1991) SGTE data for pure elements. Calphad 15(4):317–425. doi: 10.1016/0364-
5916(91)90030-N
18. Redlich O, Kister AT (1948) Algebraic representation of thermodynamic properties and the
classiﬁcation of solutions. Ind Eng Chem 40:345–348. doi: 10.1021/ie50458a036
19. Ansara I (1979) Comparison of methods for thermodynamic calculation of phase diagrams. Int
Met Rev 24(1):20–53. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/imtr.1979.24.1.20
20. Anderson JO, Guillermet AF, Hillert M, Jason B, Sundman B (1986) A compound-energy
model of ordering in a phase with sites of different coordination numbers. Acta Metall 34(3):437–445. doi: 10.1016/0001-6160(86)90079-9
21. Oates WA, Wenzl H (1992) The bond energy model for ordering in a phase with sites of
different coordination numbers. Calphad 16(1):73–78. doi: 10.1016/0364-5916(92)90040-5
22. Chen SL, Kao CR, Chang YA (1995) A generalized quasi-chemical model for ordered multi-
component, multi-sublattice intermetallic compounds with anti-structure defects. Intermetal-
lics 3(3):233–242. doi: 10.1016/0966-9795(95)98934-z
23. Gao MC, Unlu N, Shiﬂet GJ, Mihalkovic M, Widom M (2005) Reassessment of Al-Ce and
Al-Nd binary systems supported by critical experiments and ﬁrst-principles energy calcula-tions. Metall Mater Trans A Phys Metall Mater Sci 36A(12):3269–3279. doi: 10.1007/s11661-
005-0001-y
24. Gao MC, Rollett AD, Widom M (2006) First-principles calculation of lattice stability
of C15-M
2R and their hypothetical C15 variants (M ¼Al, Co, Ni; R ¼Ca, Ce, Nd, Y).
Calphad Comput Coupling Phase Diagrams Thermochem 30(3):341–348. doi: 10.1016/j.
calphad.2005.12.005
25. Gao MC, Rollett AD, Widom M (2007) The lattice stability of aluminum-rare earth binary
systems: a ﬁrst principles approach. Phys Rev B 75:174120. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.75.174120
26. Mihalkovic M, Widom M (2004) Ab initio calculations of cohesive energies of Fe-based glass-
forming alloys. Phys Rev B 70(14):144107. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.70.144107
27. Gao MC, Suzuki Y, Schweiger H, Dogan ON, Hawk J, Widom M (2013) Phase stability and
elastic properties of Cr-V alloys. J Phys Condensed Matter 25(7):075402. doi: 10.1088/0953-
8984/25/7/075402
28. Kumar KCH, Wollants P (2001) Some guidelines for thermodynamic optimisation of phase
diagrams. J Alloys Compd 320(2):189–198. doi: 10.1016/S0925-8388(00)01491-2
29. Ishida K, Nishizawa T (1990) Co-Cr phase diagram, vol 3, Alloy phase diagrams. ASM
International, Materials Park
30. Zhang B, Zhang Y, Gao MC, Yang S, Guo SM (2015) Senary refractory high-entropy alloy
MoNbTaTiVW. Mat Sci Tech 31(10):1207–1213. doi: 10.1179/1743284715Y.0000000031
31. Widom M (2015) Prediction of structure and phase transformations. In: Gao MC, Yeh JW,
Liaw PK, Zhang Y (eds) High entropy alloys: fundamentals and applications. Springer, Cham
32. Kattner UR (1997) The thermodynamic modeling of multicomponent phase equilibria. JOM
49(12):14–19. doi: 10.1007/s11837-997-0024-512 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 44133. Schmid-Fetzer R, Grobner J (2001) Focused development of magnesium alloys using the
calphad approach. Adv Eng Mater 3(12):947–961. doi: 10.1002/1527-2648(200112)
3:12<947::AID-ADEM947 >3.0.CO;2-P
34. Saunders N, Fahrmann M, Small CJ (2000) The application of CALPHAD to Ni-based
superalloys. Superalloys. TMS (The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society). In “Superalloys
2000” eds. K. A. Green, T. M. Pollock and R. D. Kissinger (TMS, Warrendale, 2000), 803–811
35. Chang YA (2006) Phase diagram calculations in teaching, research, and industry. Metall Mater
Trans A 37(2):273–305. doi: 10.1007/s11661-006-0001-6
36. Hsieh KC, Yu CF, Hsieh WT, Chiang WR, Ku JS, Lai JH, Tu CP, Yang CC (2009) The
microstructure and phase equilibrium of new high performance high-entropy alloys. J AlloysCompd 483(1–2):209–212. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.08.118
37. Miracle DB, Miller JD, Senkov ON, Woodward C, Uchic MD, Tiley J (2014) Exploration and
development of high entropy alloys for structural applications. Entropy 16(1):494–525. doi: 10.
3390/e16010494
38. Senkov ON, Zhang F, Miller JD (2013) Phase composition of a CrMo
0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr high
entropy alloy: comparison of experimental and simulated data. Entropy 15(9):3796–3809.
doi:10.3390/e15093796
39. Kao YF, Chen TJ, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2009) Microstructure and mechanical property of
as-cast, /C0homogenized, and -deformed AlxCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys.
J Alloys Compd 488:57–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2009.08.090
40. Kao YF, Chen SK, Chen TJ, Chu PC, Yeh JW, Lin SJ (2011) Electrical, magnetic, and hall
properties of AlxCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 509(5):1607–1614. doi: 10.
1016/j.jallcom.2010.10.210
41. Lin CM, Tsai HL (2011) Evolution of microstructure, hardness, and corrosion properties of
high-entropy Al 0.5CoCrFeNi alloy. Intermetallics 19(3):288–294. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.
2010.10.008
42. Wang WR, Wang WL, Yeh JW (2014) Phases, microstructure and mechanical properties of
AlxCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys at elevated temperatures. J Alloys Compd 589:143–152.doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.11.084
43. Li C, Li JC, Zhao M, Jiang Q (2010) Effect of aluminum contents on microstructure and
properties of AlxCoCrFeNi alloys. J Alloys Compd 504:S515–S518. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.
2010.03.111
44. Wang WR, Wang WL, Wang SC, Tsai YC, Lai CH, Yeh JW (2012) Effects of Al addition on
the microstructure and mechanical property of AlxCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloys. Intermetal-
lics 26:44–51. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2012.03.005
45. Li C, Zhao M, Li JC, Jiang Q (2008) B2 structure of high-entropy alloys with addition of
Al. J Appl Phys 104:113504–113506. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3032900
46. Shun TT, Du YC (2009) Microstructure and tensile behaviors of FCC Al
0.3CoCrFeNi high
entropy alloy. J Alloys Compd 479(1–2):157–160. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.12.088
47. Chou HP, Chang YS, Chen SK, Yeh JW (2009) Microstructure, thermophysical and electrical
properties in AlxCoCrFeNi (0 /C20x/C202) high-entropy alloys. Mater Sci Eng B 163(3):184–189.
doi:10.1016/j.mseb.2009.05.024
48. Vitek JM, David SA (1986) The sigma phase transformation in austenitic stainless steels. Weld
Res Suppl 65:106–111
49. Liu S, Gao MC, Liaw PK, Zhang Y (2015) Microstructures and mechanical properties of
AlxCrFeNiTi0.25 alloys. J Alloys Compd 619:610–615. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallcom.2014.09.073
50. Tang Z, Gao MC, Diao HY, Yang T, Liu J, Zuo T, Zhang Y, Lu Z, Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Dahmen
KA, Liaw PK, Egami T (2013) Aluminum alloying effects on lattice types, microstructures,
and mechanical behavior of high-entropy alloys systems. JOM 65(12):1848–1858. doi: 10.
1007/s11837-013-0776-z442 C. Zhang and M.C. Gao51. Tung CT, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK, Huang YS, Cheng HC (2007) On the elemental effect
of AlCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system. Mater Lett 61(1):1–5. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.
2006.03.140
52. Scheil E (1942) Z Metallkd 34:70–72
53. Gulliver GH (1913) The quantitative effect of rapid cooling upon the constitution of binary
alloys. J Ins Met 9:120–157
54. Guo S, Ng C, Liu CT (2013) Anomalous solidiﬁcation microstructures in Co-free
AlxCrCuFeNi 2high-entropy alloys. J Alloys Compd 557:77–81. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.
01.007
55. Liu Y, Ma SG, Gao MC, Zhang C, Zhang T, Yang H, Wang ZH, Qiao JW (2016) Tribological
properties of AlCrCuFeNi 2high-entropy alloy in different conditions. Metallurgical and
Materials Transactions A (in press). doi: 10.1007/s11661-016-3396-8
56. Ghosh G, Asta M (2005) First-principles calculation of structural energetics of Al-TM
(TM¼Ti, Zr, Hf) intermetallics. Acta Mater 53(11):3225–3252. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2005.
03.028
57. Santodonato LJ, Zhang Y, Feygenson M, Parish CM, Gao MC, Weber RJK, Neuefeind JC,
Tang Z, Liaw PK (2015) Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distribu-tions of a multi-principal-element alloy. Nat Commun 6:5964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6964
58. Cahn RW (1991) Mechanisms and kinetics in ordering and disordering. In: Yavari AR
(ed) Odering and disordering in alloys. Elsevier Science Publishers LTD, Grenoble, pp 3–12
59. Lukas HL, Fries SG, Sundman B (2007) Computational thermodynamics – the Calphad
method. Cambridge University Press, New York, doi: www.cambridge.org/9780521868112
60. Greven A, Keller G, Warnercke G (2003) Entropy, Princeton series in applied mathematics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
61. Grosky W (1928) X-ray analysis of transformations in the alloy Cu Au. Zeitschrift fu ¨r Physik
50(1–2):64–81. doi: 10.1007/BF01328593
62. Shockley W (1938) Theory of order for the copper gold alloy system. J Chem Phys 6
(3):130–144. doi: 10.1063/1.1750214
63. deFontaine D, Kikuchi R (1978) Fundamental calculations of phase diagrams using the cluster
variation method, vol 2, Applications of phase diagrams in metallurgy and ceramics. NBS,
National Bureau of Standards, Gaithersburg
64. Ackermann H, Crusius S, Inden G (1986) On the ordering of face-centered-cubic alloys with
nearest neighbour interactions. Acta Metall 34(12):2311–2321. doi: 10.1016/0001-6160(86)
90134-3
65. Sundman B, Fries SG, Oates WA (1998) A thermodynamic assessment of the Au-Cu system.
Calphad 22(3):335–354. doi: 10.1016/S0364-5916(98)00034-0
66. Abe T, Sundman B (2003) A description of the effect of short range ordering in the compound
energy formalism. Calphad 27(4):403–408. doi: 10.1016/j.calphad.2004.01.005
67. Fowler RH (1938) Statistical mechanics, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge68. Oates WA, Wenzl H (1996) The cluster/site approximation for multicomponent solutions – a
practical alternative to the cluster variation method. Scr Mater 35(5):623–627. doi: 10.1016/
1359-6462(96)00198-4
69. Cao W, Zhu J, Yang Y, Zhang F, Chen S, Oates WA, Chang YA (2005) Application of the
cluster/site approximation to fcc phases in Ni–Al–Cr system. Acta Mater 53(15):4189–4197.
doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2005.05.016
70. Zhang C, Zhu J, Bengtson A, Morgan D, Zhang F, Cao W-S, Chang YA (2008) Modeling of
phase stability of the fcc phases in the Ni–Ir–Al system using the cluster/site approximationmethod coupling with ﬁrst-principles calculations. Acta Mater 56(11):2576–2584. doi: 10.
1016/j.actamat.2008.01.056
71. Zhang C, Zhu J, Bengtson A, Morgan D, Zhang F, Yang Y, Chang YA (2008) Thermodynamic
modeling of the Cr–Pt binary system using the cluster/site approximation coupling with ﬁrst-principles energetics calculation. Acta Mater 56(19):5796–5803. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2008.
07.05712 CALPHAD Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys 44372. Zhang F, Chang YA, Du Y, Chen S-L, Oates WA (2003) Application of the cluster-site
approximation (CSA) model to the f.c.c. phase in the Ni–Al system. Acta Mater51(1):207–216. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6454(02)00392-0
73. Campbell CE, Boettinger WJ, Kattner UR (2002) Development of a diffusion mobility
database for Ni-base superalloys. Acta Mater 50(4):775–792. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6454(01)
00383-4
74. Tsai K-Y, Tsai M-H, Yeh J-W (2013) Sluggish diffusion in Co–Cr–Fe–Mn–Ni high-entropy
alloys. Acta Mater 61(13):4887–4897. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2013.04.058444 C. Zhang and M.C. GaoChapter 13
High-Entropy Metallic Glasses
Akira Takeuchi, Michael C. Gao, Junwei Qiao, and Michael Widom
Abstract This chapter applies the concept of high entropy to metallic glasses
(MGs), in particular, to those in a bulk shape: bulk metallic glasses (BMGs). Theresultant target materials in this chapter are mainly high-entropy bulk metallicglasses (HE-BMGs), which have recently been developed as alloys with character-istics of both high-entropy alloys (HEAs) and BMGs. The contents in this chapterstart by introducing historic background of HE-BMGs and by summarizing the
differences between HEAs and BMGs. Then, the fundamental properties of repre-
sentative HE-BMGs found to date are described mainly in terms of thermodynamicand mechanical behaviors. Besides the experiments, the latest computationalapproach for clarifying the features of HE-BMGs is described based on the resultsusing ab initio molecular dynamics simulations for the atomic structure, chemical
interaction, and diffusivity in this unique class of materials. The current status andfuture prospects of the HE-BMGs by utilizing their unique features are outlined fortheir future applications.
Keywords Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs)  Amorphous  Glass-forming ability
 Multiphase  Enthalpy of mixing  Entropy of mixing  Atomic size difference Phase diagrams  Thermodynamics  Kinetics  Phase transformations Solidiﬁcation  Phase stability  ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
(AIMD)  Diffusion constants  High-entropy alloys (HEAs)
A. Takeuchi ( *)
Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japane-mail: takeuchi@imr.tohoku.ac.jp
M.C. Gao
National Energy Technology Lab/AECOM, Albany, OR 97321-2198, USAe-mail: michael.gao@contr.netl.doe.gov ;michael.gao@netl.doe.gov
J. Qiao
College of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology,
Taiyuan 030024, Chinae-mail: qiaojunwei@gmail.com
M. Widom
Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USAe-mail: widom@cmu.edu
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_1344513.1 Introduction
In this chapter, the focus is put on the formation mechanisms, mechanical proper-
ties, and atomic structure of metallic glasses (MGs) that are associated with high-entropy alloys (HEAs) [ 1,2]. In particular, descriptions principally include MGs in
a bulk form named bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), with a compositional feature ofHEAs: high-entropy bulk metallic glasses (HE-BMGs) [ 3]. The HE-BMGs are
mathematical intersection of sets of bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) and HEAs.Speciﬁcally, HE-BMGs possess both features of MGs with sample dimensions ofa couple of millimeter or more and of HEAs for exact or near equi-atomic
composition. In fact, BMGs and HEAs possess different crystallographic structures,
BMGs as well as MGs and HEAs, respectively, and are formed into a glassy and acrystalline phase. However, HE-BMGs that have been recently discovered haveacademically contributed in a major way to widening the deﬁnition of HEAs fromcrystalline solid solutions only to whole solid solutions including a glassy phase.Furthermore, new BMGs as well as MGs have been developed by utilizing theunique nature of HEAs. Thus, HE-BMGs play a role in leading HEAs and BMGstoward their future research orientations.
This introduction starts with describing similarities and differences in charac-
teristics of BMGs and HEAs, leading to the resultant HE-BMGs with characteris-tics of both HEAs and BMGs. Subsequent sections in this chapter deal with thealloy design of HE-BMGs, followed by individual characteristics of the HE-BMGsfound to date.
13.1.1 Differences Between BMGs and HEAs
It has long been believed that the BMGs differ from HEAs because of the manydifferent characteristics between these alloys. For instance, BMGs differ fromHEAs in terms of (1) crystallographic structure, (2) thermodynamic state, and
(3) compositional feature. First, BMGs are deﬁned as bulk-shaped noncrystalline
metallic solids that exhibit the so-called glass transition temperature ( T
g). Con-
versely, HEAs are crystalline materials. Although some HEAs can be fabricatedinto a noncrystalline structure in thin ﬁlm form, this thin-ﬁlm HE-MG will not becovered in this chapter. Secondly, the BMGs are formed into a non-equilibriumstate through quenching at a cooling rate of the order of ~10
3K/s or slower by
avoiding nucleation and growth of crystalline phases during solidiﬁcation. On theother hand, the HEAs are thermodynamically stable, and so far HEAs in bcc and fcc
structures [ 4] are frequently reported, and those in hcp structures [ 5–8] have very
recently been suggested or reported. Thirdly, the BMGs possess one or twoprincipal elements from Zr, La, Fe, Mg, Pd, Cu, and Ca [ 9], whereas there is no
dominating element in HEAs with equal molar ratio among elements. Thesefundamental differences between BMGs and HEAs have promoted their separatedevelopment since the early 1990s.446 A. Takeuchi et al.13.1.2 Historical Background of HE-BMGs and Derivation
of HE-BMGs from BMGs
The widely accepted belief regarding the differences between BMGs and HEAs
mentioned above, however, has been broken due to the appearance of new alloysthat have both the features of HEAs for their composition and those of metallic
glasses for their noncrystalline struc ture. These new alloys are regarded as
H E - B M G so rh i g h - e n t r o p yb u l kg l a s s ya lloys. At present, several HE-BMGs
have been found in sequence, since the ﬁrst report in 2002 in aCu
20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20alloy [ 10]. These HE-BMGs found to date are summarized
in Table 13.1, together with representative BMGs that include the prototypical
ones for HE-BMGs. The Cu 20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20alloy is the ﬁrst HE-BMG fabri-
cated by referring to the “confusion principle” proposed by Greer in 1993[11]. Speciﬁcally, Greer argued that the confusion principle works for glass
f o r m a t i o ni ns u c haw a yt h a tt h em o r ee l ements involved, the lower the chance
that the alloy can select viable crystal structures and the greater the chance ofglass formation. In con trast, Cantor et al. [ 12] reported in 2004 that “the confu-
sion principle does not apply, and other factors are more important in promoting
glass formation,” based on experimental results that glassy structures are not
formed by casting or melt spinning of lat e-transition metal-rich equi-atomic
multicomponent alloys. After these arguments, researchers overlookedHE-BMGs for years.
However, the subsequent HE-BMGs have been found in sequence in 2011
in a Ca
20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Sr20Yb20Zn20alloy [ 13] and a Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20
alloy [ 14], and the two alloys [ 15] related to the Ca-(Li,Mg)-Sr-Yb-Zn
of Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20and Ca 20Cu10Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn10[13], and an
Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20alloy [ 15]. Here, Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20has been studied
for biomedical applications [ 16]. Furthermore, Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20[17] and
Be16.7Cu16.7Ni16.7Hf16.7Ti16.7Zr16.7[18] alloys have very recently been reported
as the latest HE-BMGs. These ﬁndings of HE-BMGs are achieved by selecting ﬁveor more principal alloying elements in equal molar ratio but still forming BMG. Asfrequently applied to MGs and BMGs, the HE-BMGs can be classiﬁed into two setsof metal–metal and metal–metalloid, depending on whether or not the alloysinclude metalloid elements, such as B, C, Si, P, and Ge. The HE-BMGs in metal–
metalloid type have only been found in Cu
20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20alloy. The lineups of
HE-BMGs are shown in Table 13.1. The constituent elements of the HE-BMGs are
mixtures of early- and late-transition metals, s-block elements, metalloids, lantha-nides, and p-block metallic elements. These combinations of constituent elementsindicate that classiﬁcation of BMGs [ 9] can be used as a guide for ﬁnding out
unprecedented BMGs as well as HE-BMGs.
Some of the HE-BMGs mentioned above resemble prototypical BMGs in their
constituent elements and compositions. As usual in alloy development, the ele-
ments in the same group in the periodic table or those with similar chemical
properties are added or substituted in order to search for new alloys. Taking13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 447HE-BMGs for example, Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20and Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20
HE-BMGs, respectively, were developed by referring to Pd 40Ni40P20[14,19] and
Zr41.2Ti13.9Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5[20] BMGs, by modifying the compositions of the
constituent elements to meet the equi-atomicity.Table 13.1 HE-BMGs found to date and representative BMGs that include the prototypical ones
for HE-BMGs for their maximum sample thickness ( dc) and year published
No. Alloy dc/mmYear
published References
HE-BMG-1 Cu 20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20 1.5 2002 [ 10]
HE-BMG-2 Ca 20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Sr20Yb20Zn20 3 2011 [ 13]
HE-BMG-3 Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20 10 2011 [ 14]
HE-BMG-4 Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20 2/C25m m2
(sheet sample)2011 [ 15]
HE-BMG-5 Ca 20Cu10Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn10 5 2011 [ 15]
HE-BMG-6 Al 20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20 2 2011 [ 15]
HE-MGB-7 Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20 3 2013 [ 17]
HE-BMG-8 Be 16.7Cu16.7Ni16.7Hf16.7Ti16.7Zr16.7>15 2014 [ 18]
BMG-01 Pd 40Cu30Ni10P20 72 1997 [ 21]
BMG-02 Zr 41.2Ti13.9Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5(Vit1) >50 1996 [ 20]
BMG-03 Pd 35Pt15Cu30P20 30 2005 [ 22]
BMG-04 Zr 55Al10Ni5Cu30 30 1996 [ 23]
BMG-05 Mg 59.5Cu22.9Ag6.6Gd11 27 2007 [ 24]
BMG-06 Mg 54Cu26.5Ag8.5Gd11 25 2005 [ 25]
BMG-07 Zr 48Cu36Ag8Al8 25 2008 [ 26]
BMG-08 Pd 40Ni40P20 25 1996 [ 19]
BMG-09 Y 36Sc20Al24Co20 25 2003 [ 27]
BMG-10 (La 0.7Ce0.3)65Co25Al10 25 2007 [ 28]
BMG-11 La 62(Cu 5/6Ag1/6)14Ni5Co5Al14 >20 2006 [ 29]
BMG-12 Zr 57Ti5Cu20Ni8Al10 20 1997 [ 30]
BMG-13 Pt 42.5Cu27Ni9.5P21 20 2004 [ 31]
BMG-14 (Fe 0.8Co0.2)48Cr15Mo 14C15B6Tm 2 18 2008 [ 32]
BMG-15 Pt 60Cu16Ni2P22 16 2004 [ 31]
BMG-16 Mg 54Cu28Ag7Y11 16 2005 [ 25]
BMG-17 Ca 65Mg 15Zn20 >15 2004 [ 33]
BMG-18 Zr 58.5Nb2.8Cu15.6Ni12.8Al10.3 15 1998 [ 34]
BMG-19 Ni 50Pd30P20 21 2009 [ 35]
BMG-20 Pd 40Ni40Si4P16 20 2011 [ 36]
BMG-21 Zr 61Ti2Nb2Al7.5Ni10Cu17.5 20 2009 [ 37]
BMG-22 Zr 60Ti2Nb2Al7.5Ni10Cu18:5 20 2009 [ 37]
BMG-23 Ti 40Zr25Cu12Ni3Be20 14 2005 [ 38]
BMG-24 Fe 48Cr15Mo 14Er2C15B6 12 2004 [ 39]
The HE-BMGs from Nos. 1 to 8 are sorted according to the year published, whereas the BMGs
with dcover 10 mm from Nos. 1 to 24 are in the order of dc448 A. Takeuchi et al.13.1.3 Similarities Between BMGs and HEAs in Their
Alloy Designs
Interestingly, some of the BMGs and HEAs have been developed under the same
alloy design principles, including the following factors:
1. The number of elements ( N)
2. Atomic size mismatch (difference in atomic size)3. Heat of mixing (mixing enthalpy, ΔH
mix)
The details of the three factors for the development of BMGs and HEAs are
described as follows. The BMGs are usually restricted to N/C213, excepting a couple
of binary BMG alloys, such as Cu-Zr [ 40,41] and Ni-Nb [ 42], whereas HEAs have
N/C215, together with an additional restriction requiring equi-atomic or near equi-
atomic composition. The second and third factor for BMGs are simply described as12 % or more speciﬁcally mismatch and negative heat of mixing, respectively[43]. On the other hand, the second and third factor for HEAs are more compli-
cated than BMGs and are associated with values of parameter ( δ)a n d ΔH
mixin a
δ-ΔHmixdiagram [ 44], to form zone S for disordered and zone S0for ordered HEAs
as detailed in Chap. 2of this book. Here, it should be noted that the order and
disorder mentioned above refer to chemical species (elements), and not the atom-istic positions in crystallography. In addition, zones for BMGs are also indicated aszone Bs in the δ-ΔH
mixdiagram.
Furthermore, a new parameter ( Ω) comprising average melting temperature
multiplied by conﬁgurational entropy and divided by mixing enthalpy has beenproposed to form δ-Ωdiagrams [ 45] for predicting HEAs as well as BMGs. The
details of these criteria for HEAs are described in Chap. 2in this book. As
mentioned above, all three factors in the alloy design for HEAs and BMGs deal
with numerical and thermodynamic quantities, enabling alloy design of HEAs aswell as BMGs. Here, it should be noted that there are several ways to calculate thevalues of ΔH
mix, such as thermodynamic method based on CALPHAD [ 46]a s
described in Chap. 12of this book as well as electronic density functional theory as
described in Chaps. 8,9,10, and 11of this book. Besides, Miedema ’s empirical
method [ 47] is also widely utilized for evaluating ΔHmixfor BMGs as well as
HEAs. The exact data on ΔHmixfor 2628 atomic pairs from combination of
73 elements that are available in Miedema ’s model taken 2 at a time ( 73C2)a t
equi-atomic binary alloy composition are provided in the authors ’previous
work [ 9].
Classiﬁcations of BMGs as well as MGs were reported since 1980s by Hafner
[48], Masumoto [ 49], and Inoue [ 43] and Takeuchi and Inoue [ 9,50]. Inoue [ 43]
has summarized the BMGs with ﬁve groups comprising (1) Zr and La based,(2) Fe-ETM based, (3) Fe (Al, Ga) based, (4) Mg based, and (5) Pd and Pt basedwhere ETM stands for early-transition metals, and the following two supplemental
groups have been added later by Takeuchi and Inoue [ 9,50]: (6) LTM (late-
transition metals)-based and (7) Ca-based BMGs. The classiﬁcations by Takeuchi13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 449and Inoue [ 9] were made basically by taking into account the subgroups of ETM,
Ln, LTM, BM, and IIA corresponding to early-transition, lanthanide, late-transition, group IIIB–IVB, and group IIA metals, respectively. On the other
hand, the latest classiﬁcation of BMGs proposed by Takeuchi and Inoue [ 50]
was based on four subgroups of s, d
Ef, d Lp, and p from s-, d-, f-, and p-block
elements on the periodic table that correspond to s-block elements, early-transitionmetals and lanthanides, late-transition metals and p-block metallic elements, andmetalloids in p-block. These classiﬁcations provide a hint to discover unknownHE-BMGs. The HE-BMGs have been found by referring to and modifying thecomponents and compositions of the BMGs. Takeuchi and Inoue [ 50] eventually
succeeded in obtaining a universal trend of BMG formation on the basis of the
regular tetrahedral composition diagram comprising s, d
Ef, d Lp, and p. It appears
that a compositional band connects BMGs on the surface of the regular tetrahedralcomposition diagram.
The guiding principle of the alloy design for HE-BMGs has two stages. First,
one should ﬁnd out the prototypical alloy compositions from the early studies ofBMGs. Second, one should approximate the compositions of the prototypicalBMGs by taking into account the chemical similarities in elements, such as thesame group of the periodic table. Table 13.2 [51] summarizes the relationships
between the representative BMGs and the corresponding HE-BMGs found to date
summarized by class, subgroups, as well as the relative atomic size for BMGs,s–d
Ef–dLp–p description, and corresponding HE-BMGs.
Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20and Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20are chemically near
La60Al15Ni20[52,55], Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20between Mg 50Ni30La20[56] and
Mg 65Cu25Y10[57], Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20near Pd 40Ni40P20[19,58], and
Cu20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20near Cu 23Ni11Fe7Ti52Mo 7[59]. These HE-BMGs surely
possess exact or near equi-atomicity, but chemical similarity among the constituent
elements reduces HE-BMGs to conventional BMGs.
13.2 HE-BMGs, Relevant Alloys and Their Characteristics
This subsection deals with three types of alloys: Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20-,
Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20-, and Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs. The ther-
modynamic properties are mainly explained for the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20
HE-BMG and its relevant HEAs. The mechanical properties are explained forBe
20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20- and Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs that belong
to the metal–metal type comprising metallic elements only, while the
Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG from metal–metalloid type including metalloid
elements from B, C, Si P, and Ge is eliminated for its mechanical properties dueto the brittle nature inherent to the inclusion of the metalloid elements.450 A. Takeuchi et al.Table 13.2 Relationships between seven classes of BMGs and HE-BMGs
ClassSubgroup
Representative BMGs References s–d Ef–dLp–p description Corresponding HE-BMGs References sd Efd Lpp
IM LS — L a 60Al15Ni25 [52]( d Ef)60s15(dLp)25 Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20 [15]
S LM— Z r 41.2Ti13.9Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5 [20]( d Ef)55(dLp) 22.5s22.5 Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20 [17]
II — L M S (Fe 0.8Co0.2)48Cr15Mo 14Tm 2C15B6[32] (dLp) 48(dEf)31p21 ——
III L — MSF e 73Al5Ga2P11C5B4 [53]( d Lp)73p20 ——
IV ML S —M g 59.5Cu22.9Ag6.6Gd11 [25]s 59.5(dLp)29.5(dEf)11 Ca20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20 [15]
V— — LS P d 40Ni40P20 [19]( d Lp)80p20 Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20 [14]
Pd40Cu30Ni10P20 [21]
VI — L S— C u 60Zr30Ti10 [52]( d Lp)60(dEf)40 —
VI-I — LS — — — ( d Ef)60(dLp) 40 Cu20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20 [10]
VII L—S — C a 65Mg 15Zn20 [33]s 80(dLp)20 —
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 51]
The letters “L, M, and S” indicate the relative atomic size (large, medium, or small) of the constituent elements. The bold and underlined letter in eac h class
indicates the main constituent element. It should be noted that C-VI-I is not the result of classiﬁcation of BMGs, but is shown for comparison for
Cu20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG. The BMGs do not list their constituents alphabetically, but in an empirical way to show the principal element
dEf early-transition metals from d-block, and lanthanides from f-block, d Lp late-transition metals from d-block and metallic elements in p-block, p metalloid
elements in p-block, s s-block elements where Al and Sn are supposed to belong to either s or d Lp depending on the other constituent elements13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 45113.2.1 Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG and Relevant Alloys
Of the HE-BMGs found to date, the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20[14] as well as
Be16.7Cu16.7Ni16.7Hf16.7Ti16.7Zr16.7[18] HE-BMGs exhibit sample dimensions
reaching a centimeter. The outer appearance and the XRD proﬁle taken from across-sectional area of the Cu
20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG are shown in Fig. 13.1.
The Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG was designed from a prototypical BMG of
Pd40Ni40P20with dc¼25 mm [ 19] by replacing half moles of Pd with Pt and those
of Ni with Cu. These replacements, ironically, degrade glass-forming ability
(GFA), resulting in decreasing dcfrom 25 for the Pd 40Ni40P20BMG to 10 mm for
the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG. The degrading GFA indicates that the best
BMG compositions are not always the ones for HEAs. Another peculiar featureof the Cu
20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG is seen for the reduced glass transition
temperature ( Tg/Tl), which is evaluated by glass transition temperature ( Tg) nor-
malized with liquidus temperature ( Tl). It is widely accepted that Tg/Tl/C210.6 is a
condition for an alloy with a high GFA. The value of Tg/Tlof the
Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG is as high as 0.71, which is the highest value
among BMGs with dc/C2110 mm, but it seemingly contradicts the low dc¼10 mm.
Including Tg/Tl, 12 GFA parameters in all have been proposed to evaluate
GFA where the features of each parameter are well summarized in literature[60]. The representative GFA parameters include T
g/Tl, supercooled liquid region
(ΔTx¼Tx–Tg) exhibiting the temperature interval between onset temperature of
crystallization ( Tx) and Tg,γparameter deﬁned by Tx/(Tg+Tl). However, these
GFA parameters exhibit a critical issue that there is no absolutely reliable GFAparameter that makes it possible to evaluate GFA universally over different kinds of
BMGs with different compositions. Accordingly, the 12 GFA parameters each
preferentially characterize BMG families with speciﬁc base elements. For instance,the evaluation of GFA with T
g/Tlprovides the best ﬁt for Co-based BMGs [ 60]. In
this sense, the GFA parameters fall into utter confusion. The existence of prefer-ential base element for each GFA parameter prevents description of HE-BMGs with
Fig. 13.1 (a) Outer appearance and ( b) XRD proﬁle taken from the cross-sectional area of
Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG with a diameter of 10 mm (Reproduced with permission from
Ref. [ 14])452 A. Takeuchi et al.no principal elements and raises a question on the utility of presently known GFA
parameters. Further study of the GFA parameters is required in the near future.
In a process of fabricating the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG, other possible
combinations were examined by ﬁxing Pd, Pt, and P and changing LTMs from
Cu and Ni, and it was found that the P 20Pd20Pt20TM1 20TM2 20alloys form into a
glassy phase only by (TM1, TM2) ¼(Cu, Ni) as shown in Fig. 13.2 [61].
Besides, Takeuchi et al. examined three types of alloys with ETM 60LTM 40,
ETM 50LTM 50, and ETM 40LTM 60alloys, such as (a) Hf 20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20,
(b) Cu 16.7Ni16.7Hf16.7Pd16.7Ti16.7Zr16.7, and (c) Cu 20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20alloy rib-
bons, and found that the Cu 20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20alloy from ETM 40LTM 60type can
be a candidate for HE-BMGs because of formation of a glassy phase in the ribbon
specimen. However, it was impossible to obtain Cu 20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20HE-BMGs
even with a sample diameter as small as 1 mm. Instead, it was found that that halfmole of addition of Al (Al
0.5) to an ETM 40LTM 60type, Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy, is
formed into an HEA with bcc structure when prepared by a cylindrical shape with adiameter of 1.5 mm as shown in Fig. 13.3 [62]. It should be noted in Fig. 13.3 that
Al
0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy resulted in failure to obtain HEAs, although
Cu20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20alloy is an HE-BMG [ 10]. The XRD proﬁles in Fig. 13.3
indicate that the Al 0.5addition, which works efﬁciently to obtain HEA, does not
always work well for enhancing GFA. In any case, the Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy
exhibits unique forming ability to be into a glassy phase as well as crystalline HEAdepending on the sample size and the cooling rate. Thus, it is considered thatAl
0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy can be a high-entropy metallic glass to bridge HEAs and
MGs (BMGs) scientiﬁcally.
Fig. 13.2 XRD proﬁles of P 20Pd20Pt20TM1 20TM2 20cylindrical alloys cast into diameters of 3 and
5m m[ 61]13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 453The possible reason for the peculiar characteristics of the Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy
to appear in two different phases, either glassy or bcc depending on the cooling rate,is considered with a schematically illustrated continuous cooling transformation(CCT) diagram shown in Fig. 13.4. A C-curve for a bcc phase is drawn at a high
temperature range in Fig. 13.4. This is due to allotropic transformation of pure Ti
and Zr [ 63] as well as a widely accepted fact that the bcc structure is often the high-
temperature structure of a metal that has a close-packed structure at lower temper-ature [ 63]. Thus, the authors [ 63] think that the allotropic transformation of pure Ti
and Zr could provide a symptom of the Al
0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy to be formed into a
bcc phase at high temperatures. One such symptom would be provided as formulaeof nucleation sites or embryos. In casting the alloy in the process (2) in Fig. 13.4, the
alloy remains a bcc phase because of limited diffusions of atoms at a mediumcooling rate ( R). On the other hand, a glassy phase is obtained in the process (1) at a
high R, whereas a bcc phase may transform into stable phases at a low Rin the
process (3). In addition to Ti and Zr, it should be noted that Al can be regarded as abcc former in HEAs [ 64], supporting the presence of a bcc phase at a high
temperature.
The peculiarity of the Al
0.5CuNiPdTiZr HEA can be seen in Table 13.3 for the
values of δandΔHmixfor the Cu 20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20,A l 0.5CuNiPdTiZr, and
Al0.5CuNiHfTiZr alloys. The δ-ΔHmixvalues were calculated using the equations
Fig. 13.3 XRD proﬁles of
(a) and ( b)
Al0.5CuNiPdTiZr and ( c)
and (d)A l 0.5CuNiHfTiZr
alloys formed into ( a) and
(c) cylindrical specimens
with 1.5 mm in diameter
and (b) and ( d) ribbons
(Reproduced withpermission from Ref. [ 62])454 A. Takeuchi et al.presented in Chap. 2in this book. It is also important that Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr HEA is
located in a less dense area in the δ-ΔHmixdiagram covered by the ternary
amorphous alloys [ 44]. These features of the Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr HEA encourage
us to search for new HEAs by referring to the δ-ΔHmixdiagram.
The Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG exhibits poor mechanical properties. In
short, it is mechanically brittle. This is expected from the fact that some of theBMGs belonging to metal–metalloid type are brittle in the as-cast state. It is
Fig. 13.4 A schematic illustration of the continuous cooling transformation (CCT) diagram of the
Al0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy with different processes (1) to (3). Atomic arrangements in 2 dimensions
for phases of liquid, supercooled liquid, glass, bcc, and stable phases are given to demonstrate the
statuses of atomic bonding of the Al 0.5CuNiPdTiZr alloy for bcc (Ti, Zr, and Al) and fcc (Pd, Cu,
and Ni) formers. The atomic arrangements exhibit a tendency that the bcc and fcc formers areseparately percolated in an atomistic level in liquid, supercooled liquid, glassy and stable crystal-line phases statistically. The bcc and fcc formers occupy the sites in the bcc structure randomly
where the bcc structure is drawn as a hypothetical layered structure intentionally to distinguish it
from the stable phase(s) (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 62])
Table 13.3 Mixing enthalpy ( ΔHmix), Delta parameter ( δ), phases in the forms of ribbon and
1.5 mm rod specimens and reference of the HEAs
ΔHmix/kJ mol/C01δ Phase in a form of ribbon/(1.0)* 1.5 mm rod
Cu20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20/C045.1 9.2 Glass/(fcc + hcp + Laves + unknown)*
Cu20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20/C027.4 10.3 Glass/glass
Al0.5CuNiPdTiZr /C046.7 8.8 Glass/bcc
Al0.5CuNiHfTiZr /C031.6 9.9 Glass/(fcc + Laves)
*Only this case (Cu20Ni20Pd20Ti20Zr20), the sample diameter is 1.0 mm while that of the others
are 1.5 mm. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 62]13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 455possible that local atomic arrangements of HE-BMGs are associated with those of
intermetallic compounds. Other treatments can worsen the brittleness including
structural relaxation and crystallization upon annealing.
13.2.2 Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG and Its Mechanical
Properties
One can list the Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG as a representative HE-BMG of
metal–metal type based on the prototypical BMG Zr 41.2Ti13.9Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5
(Vit1) [ 20]. The Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG was prepared by arc melting the
mixture of the pure Zr, Ti, Be, Cu, and Ni in a water-cooled Cu crucible under a
Ti-gettered high purity argon atmosphere. Rodlike samples with a diameter of
3 mm and a length of about 70 mm were obtained. Figure 13.5 shows the SEM of
the Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20high-entropy alloys (HEAs). The contrast is featureless,
indicating an amorphous structure for the present alloy. Thermodynamic charac-
teristics of the Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG were reported as follows:
Tg¼683 K and Tx¼729 K. High thermal stability and strength is attributed to
the high-entropy (equal atomic) nature of this HE-BMG as well as an increase in
Ni concentration. After annealing under vacuum at 813 K for 1 h, three
Fig. 13.5 SEM of Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HEA456 A. Takeuchi et al.phases including fcc, bcc solid solutions together with Ni 7Zr2intermetallic phase
precipitated.
Examples of the uniaxial compressive tests are shown in Fig. 13.6 that were
performed on 6-mm-long sections cut from the 2-mm-diameter cylinders using the
MTS 809 material testing machine at room temperature (RT) with a strain rate of
2/C210/C04s/C01. For the compression testing, the samples were sandwiched between
two WC platens, and two blades were mechanically ﬁxed on the side surface of
the WC platens. Figure 13.6a exhibits the engineering stress–strain curve of
Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20at RT. This HEA has a brittle fracture, and no plasticity
can be observed from Fig. 13.6a . It is noted that it exhibits the maximum strength of
about 2600 MPa and elastic limit of about 1.9 %. Figure 13.6b presents the
fractographies of the current amorphous HEA. From Fig. 13.6b , it is seen that
multiple facets are dominant features, suggesting that more fracture energy is
needed to convert to surface energy during fracture. A high magniﬁcation of a
localized fracture surface is shown in Fig. 13.6c revealing a radiating pattern. In the
front of this pattern, profuse molten liquids could be found, associated with shear
adiabatic heating. Besides, a mirror area is present in the core of the radiating
pattern.
In contrast to Zr-based BMGs, the Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG exhibits a
brittle behavior, although the fracture strength is as high as over 2000 MPa. In part,
this brittle nature is due to the precipitation of Ni 7Zr2intermetallic phase besides
the conventional simple solid solutions with fcc and bcc structures. The brittle
nature of the Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG is supported by the value of
ΔHmix¼/C030.24 kJ/mol estimated from Miedema ’s model, which is extremely
large and negative relative to that for conventional HEAs. The large and negative
nature of ΔHmixsuggests the tendency to form intermetallic compounds which
leads to the brittle nature of the alloy.
Fig. 13.6 (a) The engineering stress–strain curve of Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20and (b,c) presents the
fractographies of the current amorphous HEA13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 45713.2.3 Ca 20Mg20Sr20Yb20Zn20-Based HE-BMGs and Their
Unique Mechanical Properties
This subsection describes the peculiar mechanical properties of
Ca20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs. In principle, crystalline and glassy
alloys reveal different mechanical properties when subjected to forces [ 63]. The
appearance of different mechanical properties is caused by some factors, such aschemical bonding, macroscopic morphology with and without grain boundaries anddislocations as a result of the atomic arrangements, and so on. These factorsdetermine the properties of materials. Among various properties, mechanical prop-
erties are the most sensitive to the inhomogeneity included in the materials where the
inclusions here are represented by defects, cracks, secondary phases, pores, and soon. The key phenomenon to determine the mechanical properties of materials can bea stress concentration generated at the sharp corners and edges by the inclusions, suchas dislocations and cracks for crystalline and glassy alloys, respectively.
In principle, HE-BMGs behave as a glassy material in mechanical tests. As is
similar to oxide and other glassy materials, HE-BMGs with a macroscopic denserandom packing structure without long-range atomic periodicity exhibit the brittleness
in mechanical tests at room temperature. This brittle nature of HE-BMGs originates
from the absence of dislocations inherent to crystalline alloys, and thus, crack propa-gations via shear band formation and propagation lead to fracture without exhibitingplastic deformation. In contrast to the crystalline alloys with dislocations that releasethe stress concentrations by their movements by forming networks with resultantmacroscopic deformations, in glassy alloys, stress concentration takes place at thepoints of inclusions, leading to crack propagation and resultant fracture. As a result, thestress–strain curves of glassy materials in tensile test are very brittle or exhibit a strain
(ε) of ~ 0.2 %, which is extremely smaller than ductile metallic crystalline alloys with ε
reaching a couple of tens % or more. As an exceptional case, some glassy alloys, suchas Cu
60Zr30Ti10BMG [ 54], exhibit plastic deformation at room temperature, but its
deformation can be observed in compression tests only. The comparison of representa-tive features of glassy alloys with crystalline alloys is summarized as follows: (1) rela-tively higher tensile strength and lower Young ’s modulus and (2) absence of distinct
plastic elongation at room temperature due to inhomogeneous deformation modes.
Here, one can see the relatively low Young ’s modulus of HE-BMG in Fig. 13.7[13].
In general, the latter feature of glassy alloys in mechanical tests makes it difﬁcult
to utilize the glassy alloys as structural materials. In contrast, glassy alloys exhibitadvantageous aspects at relatively high temperature near T
g, which can be widely
accepted as viscous ﬂow. The viscous ﬂow of glassy materials takes place as a resultof a homogeneous deformation mode at a temperature range called the supercooledliquid region ΔT
xdeﬁned as the temperature interval between Tgand Tx. Thus,
HE-BMGs as well as BMGs with extremely low Tgprovide us an opportunity to
overcome the brittle nature in mechanical tests. An example can be seen in
Ca20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs tested at RT in Fig. 13.8 [13]. The latest
results of HE-BMGs regarding mechanical properties including the ones inFigs. 13.7 and13.8 are also summarized in Ref. [ 65].458 A. Takeuchi et al.13.2.4 Factors Affecting the Mechanical Properties
of HE-BMGs
This subsection focuses on two factors that would affect the mechanical properties
of HE-BMGs. The ﬁrst one are the types of HE-BMGs, MGs, and BMGs: metal–metal and metal–metalloid types. In principle, metal–metalloid type MGs andBMGs only tend to be more brittle than metal–metal type ones [ 66] because of
the presence of covalent-like atomic bonding between the metal and the metalloid
Fig. 13.7 The comparison of Young ’s modulus and shear modulus of a series of MGs. The
Ca20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Sr20Yb20Zn20BMG has the smallest elastic constant among other typical
BMGs (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 13])
Fig. 13.8 The photo image of the compressed Ca 20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Sr20Yb20Zn20HE-BMG,
which can be compressed up to 70 % of its original height without shear banding and cracking[13] (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 13])13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 459and easiness in promoting chemically induced structural relaxation as well as
topological ones. The second one is the values of ΔHmix[67], which indicate the
tendency of forming glassy and intermetallic phases. Generally, HE-BMGs as well
as MGs possess larger and more negative ΔHmixand larger δthan HEAs in the δ-Δ
Hmixdiagram [ 44]. In reality, the values of ΔHmixare approximately in the range
of 0 to /C010 kJ/mol, which forms zone S in the δ-ΔHmixdiagram. On the other
hand, Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMG has ΔHmix¼/C030.24 kJ/mol and
Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20HE-BMG has ΔHmix¼/C025 kJ/mol, which are considerably
larger and negative than those for HEAs. However, Ca 20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based
HE-BMGs have ΔHmix¼/C010 to/C012 kJ/mol, which are within the ΔHmixrange of
those crystalline HEAs. This feature of ΔHmixof the HE-BMGs could determine
the mechanical properties for ductility or brittleness to some extent. The values of
ΔHmixare closely related to the interatomic interaction and bonding in the alloys,
which are explained in the next subsection by showing the results of ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations for model HE-BMGs.
13.2.5 AIMD Simulations
The atomic structures of model HE-BMG alloys including Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20,
Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20,C u 20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20, and Be 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20were
studied using canonical ensemble (NVT) AIMD simulations at T¼1400 K [ 68].
A cell of 200 atoms was used except 100 for Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20, and the data
were collected over 50 ps. The calculated partial pair distribution functions (PDF)are presented in Fig. 13.9. As is similar to the classiﬁcation of BMGs described in
Sect. 13.1.3 , we group chemically similar elements as a “single element.” In the
case of CuNiPPdPt, we group Ni, Pd, and Pt as “N” for “nickel group.” The partialCuN PDF was obtained by averaging over CuNi, CuPd, and CuPt pairs and likewisefor partial PDFs over NN and PN pairs. Clearly, P binds more strongly to the nickelgroup than to Cu. This follows expectation, as the enthalpies of formation of P with
the Ni group are approximately four times larger than with Cu. Equally dramatic is
the absence of a P–P near neighbor peak, reﬂecting the strong preference of P tosurround itself with metal atoms. A complete presentation of the partial PDFs ofCu
20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20atT¼1200 K was shown in Ref. [ 7].
It is well known that the rare earth lanthanide series consists of chemically
similar elements, because the strongly localized 4f electrons hardly participate inchemical bonding. Hence, the RX (R ¼Er, Dy, Tb; X ¼Al, Ni) correlations exhibit
little dependence on rare earth element “R” in Al
20Dy20Er20Ni20Tb20, and we
choose to average the correlation functions over the R elements. The strongest
correlations occur between chemically dissimilar pairs of elements. Hence, the rareearths strongly bind both Al and Ni, while the Al–Ni correlation is also strong,consistent with the strong compound formation and chemical ordering prevalent insolid Al–Ni alloys. The preference for binding with unlike elements leads to strongreductions in the strength of the nearest-neighbor Al–Al and Ni–Ni peaks.460 A. Takeuchi et al.The Ti group shares a common valence of 4+and a relatively large radius and
low electronegativity since they are positioned early in the transition metal rows.Hence, we group these elements under the label “T” and average their correlationfunctions. This group binds strongly to both of the strongly electronegative andrelatively small late-transition metals Cu and Ni. The relative sizes of atoms are
evident in the positions of the peaks, starting with the late–late pairs at the shortest
distances, followed by late–early pairs, and ﬁnally early–early.
For the last compound, Be
20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20, we separately group the early-
transition metals Ti and Zr (label “TZ”) and the late-transition metals Ni and Cu(label “CN”). A hierarchy of sizes is apparent, in the order Be, CN, TZ. Thestrongest binding occurs between CN and TZ, again reﬂecting their large electro-negativity difference, with Be intermediate in both electronegativity and in bindingstrength to CN and to TZ.
The diffusion constants were obtained by plotting the mean square displacement
(MSD) versus time. The plot is fairly linear for all species, and the obtaineddiffusion constants are shown in Fig. 13.10 and Table 13.4 [68]. With the smallest
atomic size, P has the slowest diffusivity at T¼1400 K due to strong chemical6 0 24 8 1 0
r [Å]012345gαβ(r)
gαβ(r)gαβ(r)
gαβ(r)CuCu
CuP
PP
CuN
PN
NNa
6 02 4 81 0
r [Å]012345AlAl
AlNi
NiNi
AlR
NiR
RRb
6 024 8 1 0
r [Å]012345CuCu
CuNi
NiNi
CuT
NiT
TTc
6 024 8 1 0
r [Å]012345
BeBe
BeCN
BeTZ
CNCN
CNTZ
TZTZd
Fig. 13.9 Calculated partial PDF pertaining to Ni in ( a)C u 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20(where N ¼Ni, Pd,
Pt) (b)A l 20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20(where R ¼Dy, Er, Tb), ( c)C u 20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20(where T ¼Hf,
Ti, Zr), and ( d)B e 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20(where TZ ¼Ti, Zr, and CN ¼Cu, Ni) [ 68]13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 461bonding between P and metallic elements. For the rest three alloys, the atomic
diffusivity largely is inversely correlated to their atomic size, namely, element oflarge atomic radii diffuses slowly. Note that atomic diffusivity is also systemsensitive. The diffusivity of Ni in Cu
20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20is nearly twice that in
Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20.
The glass structure of Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20was obtained by quenching the liquid
atT¼1200 K to 500 K at a cooling rate of 8.75 /C21013K/s followed by full
relaxation at T¼0K[ 68]. The resulting partial PDF and atomic structure are
shown in Fig. 13.11 . In consistent with liquid simulation, the PNi pair ordering
has the highest probability at shortest bond length.ab
cd
Fig. 13.10 Diffusion constants obtained from MSD plots for ( a)C u 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20,(b)
Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20,(c)B e 20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20, and ( d)C u 20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20from AIMD
simulations at T¼1400 K [ 68]
Table 13.4 Diffusion
constants [10/C05cm2/s] at
T¼1400 K obtained from
AIMD simulations [ 68]Cu20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20 Cu Ni P Pd Pt
2.35 1.98 1.55 1.70 1.77
Al20Er20Dy20Ni20Tb20 Al Er Dy Ni Tb
1.17 1.09 0.95 1.78 1.11
Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20 Be Cu Ni Ti Zr1.11 0.94 0.81 0.83 0.69
Cu
20Hf20Ni20Ti20Zr20 Cu Hf Ni Ti Zr
1.05 0.63 0.98 0.88 0.75462 A. Takeuchi et al.13.3 Expected Applications of HE-BMGs
A recent report on the application of products of BMGs [ 3] focused on the
mechanical properties of BMGs for Zr-, Ti -based, and Fe-based alloys where the
former two are metal–metal and the las t one is metal–metalloid type. Of these
three alloys, there is little prospect to discover new HE-BMGs as magnetic
alloys comprising iron-group elemen ts because of the li mited selection of
metal and metalloid elements wi th approximate composition of
(metal) 80(metalloid) 20. Exceptionally, it has recently been reported [ 69]t h a t
alloys comprising iron-group element and metalloids with compositions of
Alx/2CoFeNiSi x/2(0/C20/C2/C20 0.8) can be formed into HEAs as soft magnetic alloys,
but the magnetization of these soft ma gnetic HEAs is restricted to around 1.3 T
due to the limited content of iron-group el ements. Thus, it is expected that new
HE-BMGs belonging to metal–metal t ype could be used as materials in the
application ﬁelds where the BMGs have already reached to date. The expected
applications depend on the characteristi cs of porous behavior, imprintability in
nanoscale, and so forth which all are achi eved by utilizing the viscous behavior
of BMGs. In fact, it was reported that the Ca 20(Li0.55Mg 0.45)20Sr20Yb20Zn20
alloy was applied to imprinted material [ 13]. Besides, low Young ’s modulus
can also be utilized for applications of HE-BMGs where it was previouslyapplied to head materials of go lf clubs made of Zr-based BMGs [ 43]. In addition
to the unique mechanical propertie s of HE-BMGs, HE-BMGs as well as BMGs
c a nb eu s e da sc o a t i n gm a t e r i a l s[ 3] by utilizing the glassy nature of the alloys
that do not contain defects. It is expec ted that HE-BMGs will ﬁnd both similar
and new applications by making the most of the unique properties inherent toglassy materials.2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
r [Å]02468101214gαβ(r)PP
PNi
PCu
PPd
PPt
NiNi
NiCu
NiPd
NiPt
CuCu
CuPd
CuPt
PdPd
PdPt
PtPtP
Cu
Pd
Pt
Niab
Fig. 13.11 Partial PDF of Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20glass and the cross section along [100]
projection [ 68]13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 46313.4 Conclusions
High-entropy BMGs have been successfully produced by substituting chemically
similar elements to known BMG. For example, the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20and
Be20Cu20Ni20Ti20Zr20HE-BMGs are derived from the prototypical BMGs of
Pd40Ni40P20and Zr 41.2Ti13.9Cu12.5Ni10Be22.5, respectively. However, the glass-
forming ability of HE-BMG to date is signiﬁcantly poorer than conventionalBMG. These HE-BMGs exhibit brittle nature inherited from the glass materials.Their enthalpies of mixing ( ΔH
mix) are much more negative than the threshold in
forming crystalline HEAs, suggesting a preference to form intermetallic com-
pounds. Besides, inclusion of metalloid elements in the Cu 20Ni20P20Pd20Pt20
HE-BMG may intensify its brittle characteristics. In sharp contrast,
Ca20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs are ductile and are characterized by
peculiar mechanical properties exceeding those of the HEAs and BMGs. Anextremely low glass transition temperature near RT of theCa
20Mg 20Sr20Yb20Zn20-based HE-BMGs leads to extremely large deformation at
RT, which cannot be achieved by any other BMGs. Unlike single-phase HEAs,AIMD simulations reveal preferred near-neighbor interaction in these HE-BMGs,
showing strong tendency in forming intermetallic compounds. The current and
upcoming HE-BMGs have a potential to be used as application products whichhave been accomplished by BMGs. In addition, it is possible that HE-BMGs have apotential to open a new research ﬁeld by utilizing the unique properties of HEAsand BMGs in the near future.
Acknowledgments A.T. acknowledges Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for
ﬁnancial support: Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (B) with a program title of “Fabrication of
High-Entropy Bulk Metallic Glasses based on Confusion Principle, Clariﬁcation of their Propertiesand their Application” (grant number 24360284). M.C.G. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support bythe Cross-Cutting Technologies Program at the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) –
Strategic Center for Coal, managed by Robert Romanosky (Technology Manager) and Charles
Miller (Technology Monitor). The Research was executed through NETL ’s Ofﬁce of Research and
Development ’s Innovative Process Technologies (IPT) Field Work Proposal under the RES
contract DE-FE-0004000. M.W. acknowledges support from the DOE under grant DE-SC0014506.
Disclaimer This chapter co-authored by M.C.G. was funded by the Department of Energy,
National Energy Technology Laboratory, an agency of the United States Government, through a
support contract with AECOM. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, norany of their employees, nor AECOM, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressedor implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or
usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use
would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product,process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarilyconstitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Govern-
ment or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily
state or reﬂect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.464 A. Takeuchi et al.References
1. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy designconcepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6(5):299–303. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567
2. Yeh JW (2006) Recent progress in high-entropy alloys. Annales De Chimie-Science Des
Materiaux 31(6):633–648. doi: 10.3166/acsm.31.633-648
3. Inoue A, Takeuchi A (2011) Recent development and application products of bulk glassy
alloys. Acta Mater 59(6):2243–2267. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2010.11.027
4. Murty BS, Yeh J-W, Ranganathan S (2014) High-entropy alloys. Butterworth-Heinemann,
London
5. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W (2014) High-entropy alloys with a
hexagonal close-packed structure designed by equi-atomic alloy strategy and binary phase
diagrams. JOM 66(10):1984–1992. doi: 10.1007/s11837-014-1085-x
6. Feuerbacher M, Heidelmann M, Thomas C (2015) Hexagonal high-entropy alloys. Mater Res
Lett 3(1):1–6. doi: 10.1080/21663831.2014.951493
7. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93. doi: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2013.10.001
8. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
9. Takeuchi A, Inoue A (2005) Classiﬁcation of bulk metallic glasses by atomic size difference,
heat of mixing and period of constituent elements and its application to characterization of themain alloying element. Mater Trans 46(12):2817–2829. doi: 10.2320/matertrans.46.2817
10. Ma LQ, Wang LM, Zhang T, Inoue A (2002) Bulk glass formation of Ti-Zr-Hf-Cu-M (M ¼Fe,
Co, Ni) alloys. Mater Trans 43(2):277–280. doi: 10.2320/matertrans.43.277
11. Greer AL (1993) Materials science – confusion by design. Nature 366(6453):303–304. doi: 10.
1038/366303a0
12. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A Struct Mater Proper Microstruct Proc
375:213–218. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2003.10.257
13. Zhao K, Xia XX, Bai HY, Zhao DQ, Wang WH (2011) Room temperature homogeneous ﬂow
in a bulk metallic glass with low glass transition temperature. Appl Phys Lett 98(14):141913-
1–141913-3. doi: 10.1063/1.3575562
14. Takeuchi A, Chen N, Wada T, Yokoyama Y, Kato H, Inoue A, Yeh JW (2011)
Pd
20Pt20Cu20Ni20P20high-entropy alloy as a bulk metallic glass in the centimeter. Intermetal-
lics 19(10):1546–1554. doi: 10.1016/j.intermet.2011.05.030
15. Gao XQ, Zhao K, Ke HB, Ding DW, Wang WH, Bai HY (2011) High mixing entropy
bulk metallic glasses. J Non Cryst Solids 357(21):3557–3560. doi: 10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.
2011.07.016
16. Li HF, Xie XH, Zhao K, Wang YB, Zheng YF, Wang WH, Qin L (2013) In vitro and
in vivo studies on biodegradable CaMgZnSrYb high-entropy bulk metallic glass. ActaBiomater 9(10):8561–8573. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.01.029
17. Ding HY, Yao KF (2013) High entropy Ti
20Zr20Cu20Ni20Be20bulk metallic glass. J Non Cryst
Solids 364:9–12. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.03.185
18. Ding HY, Shao Y, Gong P, Li JF, Yao KF (2014) A senary TiZrHfCuNiBe high entropy bulk
metallic glass with large glass-forming ability. Mater Lett 125:151–153. doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.
2014.03.185
19. He Y, Schwarz RB, Archuleta JI (1996) Bulk glass formation in the Pd-Ni-P system. Appl
Phys Lett 69(13):1861–1863. doi:10.1063/1.117458
20. Johnson WL (1996) Fundamental aspects of bulk metallic glass formation in multicomponent
alloys. Metastab Mech Alloyed Nanocryst Mater Pts 1 and 2 225:35–4913 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 46521. Inoue A, Nishiyama N, Kimura H (1997) Preparation and thermal stability of bulk amorphous
Pd40Cu30Ni10P20alloy cylinder of 72 mm in diameter. Mater Trans JIM 38(2):179–183.
doi:10.2320/matertrans1989.38.179
22. Nishiyama N, Takenaka K, Wada T, Kimura H, Inoue A (2005) Undercooling behavior and
critical cooling rate of Pd-Pt-Cu-P alloy. Mater Trans 46(12):2807–2810. doi: 10.2320/
matertrans.46.2807
23. Inoue A, Zhang T (1996) Fabrication of bulk glassy Zr 55Al10Ni5Cu30alloy of 30 mm in
diameter by a suction casting method. Mater Trans JIM 37(2):185–187. doi: 10.2320/
matertrans1989.37.185
24. Zheng Q, Xu J, Ma E (2007) High glass-forming ability correlated with fragility of Mg-Cu
(Ag)-Gd alloys. J Appl Phys 102(11):113519-1–113519-5. doi: 10.1063/1.2821755
25. Ma H, Shi LL, Xu J, Li Y, Ma E (2005) Discovering inch-diameter metallic glasses in three-
dimensional composition space. Appl Phys Lett 87(18):181915-1–181915-3. doi: 10.1063/1.
2126794
26. Zhang W, Zhang QS, Qin CL, Inoue A (2008) Synthesis and properties of Cu-Zr-Ag-Al glassy
alloys with high glass-forming ability. Mater Sci Eng B Adv Funct Solid State Mater 148
(1–3):92–96. doi: 10.1016/j.mseb.2007.09.064
27. Guo FQ, Poon SJ, Shiﬂet GJ (2003) Metallic glass ingots based on yttrium. Appl Phys Lett 83
(13):2575–2577. doi: 10.1063/1.1614420
28. Li R, Pang SJ, Ma CL, Zhang T (2007) Inﬂuence of similar atom substitution on glass
formation in (La-Ce)-Al-Co bulk metallic glasses. Acta Mater 55(11):3719–3726. doi: 10.
1016/j.actamat.2007.02.026
29. Jiang QK, Zhang GQ, Chen LY, Wu JZ, Zhang HG, Jiang JZ (2006) Glass formability, thermal
stability and mechanical properties of La-based bulk metallic glasses. J Alloys Compd 424(1–2):183–186. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2006.07.109
30. Xing LQ, Ochin P (1997) Bulk glass formation in the Zr-Ti-Al-Cu-Ni system. J Mater Sci Lett
16(15):1277–1280. doi: 10.1023/A:1018574808365
31. Schroers J, Johnson WL (2004) Highly processable bulk metallic glass-forming alloys in the
Pt-Co-Ni-Cu-P system. Appl Phys Lett 84(18):3666–3668. doi: 10.1063/1.1738945
32. Amiya K, Inoue A (2008) Fe-(Cr, Mo)-(C, B)-Tm bulk metallic glasses with high strength and
high glass-forming ability. Rev Adv Mater Sci 18(1):27–29
33. Park ES, Kim DH (2004) Formation of Ca-Mg-Zn bulk glassy alloy by casting into cone-
shaped copper mold. J Mater Res 19(3):685–688. doi: 10.1557/jmr.2004.19.3.685
34. Busch R, Masuhr A, Bakke E, Johnson WL (1998) Bulk metallic glass formation from strong
liquids. Mech Alloyed Metastab Nanocryst Mater Part 2 269(2):547–552
35. Zeng YQ, Nishiyama N, Yamamoto T, Inoue A (2009) Ni-rich bulk metallic glasses with high
glass-forming ability and good metallic properties. Mater Trans 50(10):2441–2445. doi: 10.
2320/matertrans.MRA2008453
36. Chen N, Yang HA, Caron A, Chen PC, Lin YC, Louzguine-Luzgin DV, Yao KF, Esashi M,
Inoue A (2011) Glass-forming ability and thermoplastic formability of a Pd
40Ni40Si4P16glassy
alloy. J Mater Sci 46(7):2091–2096. doi: 10.1007/s10853-010-5043-x
37. Inoue A, Zhang QS, Zhang W, Yubuta K, Son KS, Wang XM (2009) Formation, thermal
stability and mechanical properties of bulk glassy alloys with a diameter of 20 mm in Zr-(Ti,Nb)-Al-Ni-Cu system. Mater Trans 50(2):388–394. doi: 10.2320/matertrans.MER2008179
38. Guo FQ, Wang HJ, Poon SJ, Shiﬂet GJ (2005) Ductile titanium-based glassy alloy ingots. Appl
Phys Lett 86(9):091907-1–091907-3. doi: 10.1063/1.1872214
39. Ponnambalam V, Poon SJ, Shiﬂet GJ (2004) Fe-based bulk metallic glasses with diameter
thickness larger than one centimeter. J Mater Res 19(5):1320–1323. doi: 10.1557/jmr.2004.
0176
40. Wang D, Li Y, Sun BB, Sui ML, Lu K, Ma E (2004) Bulk metallic glass formation in the
binary Cu-Zr system. Appl Phys Lett 84(20): 4029–4031. doi:10.1063/1.1751219
41. Xu DH, Lohwongwatana B, Duan G, Johnson WL, Garland C (2004) Bulk metallic glass
formation in binary Cu-rich alloy series - Cu100-xZrx (x=34, 36 38.2, 40 at.%) and mechanical466 A. Takeuchi et al.properties of bulk Cu64Zr36 glass. Acta Mater 52(9):2621–2624. doi:10.1016/j.
actamat.2004.02.009
42. Xia L, Li WH, Fang SS, Wei BC, Dong YD (2006) Binary Ni-Nb bulk metallic glasses. J Appl
Phys 99(2). doi: 10.1063/1.2158130
43. Inoue A (2000) Stabilization of metallic supercooled liquid and bulk amorphous alloys. Acta
Mater 48(1):279–306. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6454(99)00300-6
44. Zhang Y, Zhou YJ, Lin JP, Chen GL, Liaw PK (2008) Solid-solution phase formation rules for
multi-component alloys. Adv Eng Mater 10(6):534–538. doi: 10.1002/adem.200700240
45. Yang X, Zhang Y (2012) Prediction of high-entropy stabilized solid-solution in multi-
component alloys. Mater Chem Phys 132(2–3):233–238. doi: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2011.
11.021
46. Saunders N, Miodownik AP, Dinsdale AT (1988) Metastable lattice stabilities for the ele-
ments. Calphad Comput Coupling Phase Diagrams Thermochem 12(4):351–374. doi: 10.1016/
0364-5916(88)90038-7
47. de Boer FR, Boom R, Mattens WCM, Miedema AR, Nissen AK (1988) Cohesion in metals:
transition metal alloys, vol 1, Cohesion and structure. North Holland Physics Publishing, a
division of Elsevier Science Publishers B.V, The Netherlands
48. Hafner J (1980) Theory of the formation of metallic glasses. Phys Rev B 21(2):406–426.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.21.406
49. Masumoto T (1982) Present status and prospects of rapidly quenched metals. In: Masumoto T,
Suzuki K (eds) The 4th international conference on rapidly quenched metals. The JapanInstitute of Metals, Sendai, pp 1–5
50. Takeuchi A, Murty BS, Hasegawa M, Ranganathan S, Inoue A (2007) Analysis of bulk
metallic glass formation using a tetrahedron composition diagram that consists of constituentclasses based on blocks of elements in the periodic table. Mater Trans 48(6):1304–1312.doi:10.2320/matertrans.MF200604
51. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W, Makino A (2014) Alloy designs of high-
entropy crystalline and bulk glassy alloys by evaluating mixing enthalpy and delta parameterfor quinary to decimal equi-atomic alloys. Mater Trans 55(1):165–170. doi: 10.2320/
matertrans.M2013352
52. Inoue A, Zhang T, Masumoto T (1990) Production of amorphous cylinder and sheet of
La
55AL25Ni20alloy by a metallic mold casting method. Mater Trans JIM 31(5):425–428.
doi:10.2320/matertrans1989.31.425
53. Inoue A, Shinohara Y, Gook JS (1995) Thermal and magnetic properties of bulk Fe-based
glassy alloys prepared by copper mold casting. Mater Trans JIM 36(12):1427–1433. doi: 10.
2320/matertrans1989.36.1427
54. Inoue A, Zhang W, Zhang T, Kurosaka K (2001) High-strength Cu-based bulk glassy alloys in
Cu-Zr-Ti and Cu-Hf-Ti ternary systems. Acta Mater 49(14):2645–2652. doi: 10.1016/S1359-
6454(01)00181-1
55. Inoue A, Zhang T, Masumoto T (1989) Al-La-Ni amorphous-alloys with a wide supercooled
liquid region. Mater Trans JIM 30(12):965–972. doi: 10.2320/matertrans1989.30.965
56. Inoue A, Kohinata M, Tsai AP, Masumoto T (1989) Mg-Ni-La amorphous-alloys with a wide
supercooled liquid region. Mater Trans JIM 30(5):378–381. doi: 10.2320/matertrans1989.30.378
57. Inoue A, Kato A, Zhang T, Kim SG, Masumoto T (1991) Mg-Cu-Y amorphous-alloys with
high mechanical strengths produced by a metallic mold casting method. Mater Trans JIM 32
(7):609–616. doi: 10.2320/matertrans1989.32.609
58. Kui HW, Greer AL, Turnbull D (1984) Formation of bulk metallic-glass by ﬂuxing. Appl Phys
Lett 45(6):615–616. doi: 10.1063/1.95330
59. Nishiyama N, Amiya K, Inoue A (2004) Bulk metallic glasses for industrial products. Mater
Trans 45(4):1245–1250. Elsevier Ltd. (Published online) doi: 10.2320/matertrans.45.1245
60. Suryanarayana C, Inoue A (2011) Bulk metallic glasses. CRC Press, Boca Raton13 High-Entropy Metallic Glasses 46761. Takeuchi A, Chen N, Wada T, Zhang W, Yokoyama Y, Inoue A, Yeh JW (2011) Alloy design
for high-entropy bulk glassy alloys. In: IUMRS international conference in Asia (ProcediaEngineering). Procedia Engineering, pp 226–235. doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2012.03.035
62. Takeuchi A, Wang JQ, Chen N, Zhang W, Yokoyama Y, Yubuta K, Zhu SL (2013)
Al
0.5TiZrPdCuNi high-entropy (H-E) alloy developed through Ti 20Zr20Pd20Cu20Ni20H-E
glassy alloy comprising inter-transition metals. Mater Trans 54(5):776–782. doi: 10.2320/
matertrans.M2012370
63. Understanding Solids (2004) The science of materials. Wiley, West Sussex
64. Guo S, Ng C, Lu J, Liu CT (2011) Effect of valence electron concentration on stability of fcc or
bcc phase in high entropy alloys. J Appl Phys 109(10)103505-1–103505-5. doi: 10.1063/1.
3587228
65. Wang WH (2014) High-entropy metallic glasses. JOM. 66(10):2067–2077: doi: 10.1007/
s11837-014-1002-3
66. Chen HS (1980) Glassy metals. Rep Prog Phys 43(4):353–432. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/43/4/001
67. Takeuchi A, Amiya K, Wada T, Yubuta K, Zhang W, Makino A (2013) Entropies in alloy
design for high-entropy and bulk glassy alloys. Entropy 15(9):3810–3821. doi: 10.3390/
e15093810
68. Gao MC, Widom M (2015) On the structural, electronic, thermodynamic, and elastic proper-
ties of high-entropy metallic glasses: a ﬁrst-principles study (Unpublished work)
69. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Cheng YQ, Liaw PK (2013) High-entropy alloys with high saturation
magnetization, electrical resistivity, and malleability. Sci Rep 3:1455-1–1455-7. doi: 10.1038/
srep01455468 A. Takeuchi et al.Chapter 14
High-Entropy Coatings
Jien-Wei Yeh, Su-Jien Lin, Ming-Hung Tsai, and Shou-Yi Chang
Abstract High-entropy alloys (HEAs) can be deposited on substrates as thick or
thin alloy ﬁlms for protection against wear, corrosion, and heat, and for functionenhancement and decorative purposes. In addition, various HEA nitride coatingsbased on HEAs can be easily deposited using reactive coating technology byallowing the atoms or ions from the targets to react with N
2-containing Ar ﬂow
during deposition. Similarly, HEA carbides, oxides, and carbonitrides could be
deposited under CH 4-containing, O 2-containing, and CH 4+N 2-containing Ar ﬂow,
respectively. Such HEA ceramic coatings also show the four core effects observedin HEAs: high-entropy, sluggish diffusion, severe lattice distortion, and cocktaileffects. The structure is, in general, much simpler than expected. Amorphous,nanocrystalline, and nanocomposite ﬁlms are often obtained. The properties ofHEA coatings or HEA ceramic coatings can be outstanding, and these coatingshave great potential for various applications if proper compositions and depositionparameters are used.
Keywords High-entropy alloy coating • High-entropy alloy nitride coating • High-
entropy alloy carbide coating • Amorphous coating • Nanocomposite coating
14.1 Introduction
Surface coating is an effective method to improve the performance, durability, anddecorativeness of materials. For cutting tools, a protective surface layer withsuperior mechanical behavior and thermal stability can maintain the functionality
of tools even under severe conditions and prolong lifetime. Protective coatings for
J.-W. Yeh ( *) • S.-J. Lin • S.-Y. Chang
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of China
e-mail: jwyeh@mx.nthu.edu.tw ;sjlin@mx.nthu.edu.tw ;changsy@mx.nthu.edu.tw
M.-H. Tsai
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan 40227, Republic of Chinae-mail: mhtsai@nchu.edu.tw
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_14469tools and dies that have high hardness, low friction coefﬁcient, good adhesion to the
substrate, and high oxidation and wear resistance have been pursued in the lastdecades. Similarly, superior chemical resistance is a requirement for coatings used
in corrosive environments. Modern requirements for surface coatings also include
better diffusion barrier, biomedical, antibacterial, EMI shielding, anti-ﬁngerprint,nonstick, and hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties.
Since the 1980s, transition metal nitrides have been commonly used to provide
wear protection to component surfaces in many industrial applications [ 1]. Among
binary nitride systems, titanium nitride (TiN) has been the most widely used materialfor machining and cutting tools because of its excellent mechanical properties andcorrosion resistance. In the 1990s, titanium aluminum nitride (Ti
1/C0xAlxN) hard
coatings were also developed to improve the hardness and stability of TiN ﬁlms
for higher-speed machining [ 2]. It has been reported that aluminum addition in TiN
ﬁlms increases its oxidation resistance from 500 to 800/C14C, which is attributed to a
protective aluminum-rich oxide layer formed on the ﬁlm surface. Adding elementssuch as chromium or zirconium to form a ternary system (Ti
1/C0xCrxNo rT i 1/C0xZrxN)
was also found to enhance its performance and capability [ 3]. It has been demon-
strated that alloying appropriate elements into a binary nitride coating is an effectiveway to modify the coating properties. However, most studies on coatings are still
limited to ternary or quaternary systems. In 2004 and 2005, Chen et al. deposited two
multi-element nitride ﬁlms with more than ﬁve elements (not including nitrogen)from HEA targets for the ﬁrst time [ 4,5]. Subsequently, more and more studies on
HEA and HEA-based coatings have been performed and reported because of theirhigh potential for achieving outstanding properties.
Thin-ﬁlm-coating processes mainly include electroless plating, electroplating,
physical vapor deposition (PVD), and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). However,because of the difference in the reduction potentials among different metal ions, it is
difﬁcult to produce coatings with homogenous HEA compositions using electroless
plating or electroplating. Similarly, CVD using different precursors simultaneouslyis also difﬁcult for HEA and HEA-based coatings. In addition, achieving simulta-neous evaporation of different elements for HEA coatings by the evaporationmethod (a kind of PVD) is also not easy because of their different melting andboiling temperatures and the need for separate crucibles for different elements. Onthe contrary, PVD techniques including cathode arc deposition, ion plating, andmagnetron sputtering are feasible for fabricating HEA and HEA-based coatings
with desired properties, because different elements in the targets can be sputtered
simultaneously through application of high-energy processes such as arc and ionbombardments until the steady state is obtained. Thus, such PVD methods caneasily achieve the desired compositions.
By using suitable reaction gases, HEA ceramic coatings can be obtained. HEA
nitride (HEAN) coating can be deposited by allowing the atoms or ions from asingle HEA target (or a segmented target fabricated by combining several pieceswith different compositions) to react with N
2-containing Ar during deposition.
Similarly, HEA carbides (HEACs) can be deposited in the presence of CH 4-
containing Ar or co-deposited with a graphite target, HEA oxides (HEAOs) in the470 J.-W. Yeh et al.presence of O 2-containing Ar, and HEA carbonitrides (HEACNs) in the presence of
CH 4+N 2-containing Ar.
On the other hand, thermal spray methods including ﬂame spraying, plasma
spraying, detonation spraying, wire arc spraying, and high velocity oxy-fuel coating
spraying (HVOF) are used to deposit thick layers ranging from 20 μm to several
millimeters. Cladding methods using laser, electron beam, plasma, or arc weldingcan be used to produce thick surface layers for surface modiﬁcations. As a result,most studies on coatings have been conducted on HEA coatings deposited by usingthe sputtering, thermal spray, arc, and cladding methods and on HEA-based coat-ings such as HEANs and HEACs deposited using a sputtering method. This chapterwill mainly review the research progress in the area of surface coatings based on the
HEA concept. Fabrication routes of traditional liquid solidiﬁcation and mechanical
alloying for bulk HEAs, and laser cladding and PVD techniques for HEAs andHEA-based surface coating, are reviewed in Chap. 5of this book.
14.2 HEA Coatings
HEA coatings have been fabricated by different techniques including thermal
spraying, gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), laser cladding, and sputtering.
These coatings have been tested for applications such as protective surface coatings
and diffusion barriers. Because HEA coatings have a small thickness and areformed via rapid solidiﬁcation such as thermal spraying and laser cladding, or viavapor deposition such as sputtering, they would suffer a high cooling rate whichincreases the nucleation rate to yield small grain size and tends to inhibit phaseseparation to cause a supersaturated state. However, this cooling rate effect alsooccurs in conventional alloy coatings. Despite this, it should be noted that sluggishdiffusion effect of HEAs could strengthen the effects from high cooling rate
because multicomponents are involved during deposition. That means the efﬁ-
ciency of microstructure reﬁning and second-phase inhibition is much strongerthan conventional alloy coatings under similar cooling rate. Furthermore, sluggishdiffusion of HEA coatings generally reduces the coarsening rate of grains andphases and retards the crystallization of amorphous structure at high temperatures.Besides these, high entropy and severe lattice distortion effects also affect micro-structure and properties of HEA coatings in different aspects, which could bringadvantages for special applications.
14.2.1 Thermal-Sprayed Coatings
Protective surface coatings can signiﬁcantly improve the wear, erosion, corrosion,and oxidation resistance of a component. The ﬁrst work done in this regard isthermally sprayed AlCrFeMo
0.5NiSiTi and AlCoCrFeMo 0.5NiSiTi alloys for14 High-Entropy Coatings 471producing a protective layer with a thickness of around 200 μm on a substrate [ 1].
The powders for the spray process were prepared by crushing arc-melted alloyingots and then ball milling the crushed particles into ﬁner powders. Both coatings
are composed of a primary BCC phase, but there are also other unknown phases
present. The coatings exhibit a lamellar structure typical of thermal-sprayed coat-ings. The hardness of the as-sprayed AlCrFeMo
0.5NiSiTi and AlCoCrFe-
Mo 0.5NiSiTi coatings is around 525 and 485 HV, respectively, because of the
supersaturated concentration of solutes in the matrix. Both coatings harden signif-icantly at high temperature because of the precipitation of the Cr-silicide phase. Forexample, the hardness of both coatings is around 925 HV after heat treatment at800
/C14C for 1 h. Both coatings exhibit superior abrasion wear resistance, as shown in
Fig.14.1. Despite the apparently lower hardness of the as-sprayed coatings, they
show wear resistance similar to SUJ2 bearing steel (AISI 52100). Annealed coat-ings, owing to their higher hardness, are evidently more wear resistant than SUJ2and SKD61 tool steel (AISI H13). For example, the wear resistance (wear distanceper unit volume loss) of AlCrFeMo
0.5NiSiTi (18.8 m/mm3) measured using the pin-
on-belt method is nearly twice that of SKD61 (10.2 m/mm3). The oxidation
resistance of these coatings is also good. It is mainly attributed to the formationof a dense aluminum oxide layer on the top surface. The weight gains of
AlCrFeMo
0.5NiSiTi and AlCoCrFeMo 0.5NiSiTi coatings maintained at 1100/C14C
for 150 h are about 8.2 and 9.2 mg/cm2, respectively, and are comparable with that
of commercial oxidation-resistant NiCrAlY alloys. The results demonstrate thatthese coatings hold great potential for components that require both oxidationresistance and wear resistance.
Fig. 14.1 Wear resistance and hardness of SKD61, SUJ2, and as-sprayed and annealed
AlCrFeMo 0.5NiSiTi and AlCoCrFeMo 0.5NiSiTi coatings [ 1]472 J.-W. Yeh et al.14.2.2 Claddings
Chen et al. [ 2] prepared Al-Co-Cr-Fe-Mo-Ni layer claddings via the GTAW
technique (also known as tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding). The iron source isnot from mixed elemental powder, but from the low carbon steel substrate. There-fore, the iron content changes in each cladding layer. The single layer coating(directly on top of the substrate) contains about 50 at.% Fe. The double layercoating (in which a second layer was cladded on top of the ﬁrst layer using thesame powder source) contains about 15.3 at.% Fe, leading to a near-equimolar
senary HEA coating. Both coatings are composed of a soft Fe-rich BCC phase and a
hard Mo-rich tetragonal phase. Hardness of the single layer coating is about500 HV, and that of the double layer coating is about 800 HV. This is owing tothe decreased amount of Fe in the latter that leads to a reduced amount of the softFe-rich BCC phase. The wear resistance of the double layer coating is more thanthree times better than the steel substrate.
Lin et al. studied AlCoCrNiW and AlCoCrNiSi HEA coatings that were also
prepared via GTAW [ 3]. The AlCoCrNiW coating is composed of a W-based
phase, a NiAl-based phase, and a Cr-Fe-C carbide phase. The AlCoCrNiSi coating
is composed mainly of a BCC phase. Both coatings have a hardness of around700 HV. However, the former shows signiﬁcantly higher resistance than the latter.The authors explain that the higher wear resistance is due to the stronger mechan-ical interlocking between the complex phases and microstructure of theAlCoCrNiW clad layer.
Zhang et al. [ 4] fabricated AlCoCrFe
6NiSiTi coatings about 1.2 μm in thickness
via laser cladding. The coating is composed of equiaxed polygonal grains
surrounded by interdendritic regions. The compositions of the two regions are
very similar, except that the interdendritic region is slightly rich in Ti andSi. Therefore, the XRD pattern reveals only one set of peaks corresponding to theBCC structure. The hardness of this coating is about 780 HV. In a later study, theAlCoCrFe
6NiSiTi coatings were treated at various temperatures for 5 h. Annealing
at 500, 750, and 1000/C14C led to the coarsening of the interdendritic region, while the
Si and Ti contents in the interdendritic region evidently increased. This led to theformation of a SiTi-type phase at 1000
/C14C. At the highest annealing temperature
(1150/C14C), the (Si,Ti)-rich phase coarsened signiﬁcantly such that it formed large,
isolated islands embedded in the Fe-rich matrix. The formation of a SiTi 2-type
phase was also observed in the XRD pattern at this annealing temperature. Thehardness of the coating remains unchanged after annealing at 500 and 750
/C14C.
However, softening was observed after annealing at 1000 and 1150/C14C. The
hardness decreases to 700 and 650 HV, respectively. These values indicate thatthe coating has very good resistance to softening.
Huang et al. tested the thermal stability and oxidation resistance of 2-mm-thick
AlCrSiTiV HEA coating on Ti–6Al–4 V substrate prepared via laser cladding [ 5].
The as-cladded coating is composed of (Ti,V)
5Si3islands embedded in a BCC
matrix. The coating was then annealed at various temperatures for 3 days to obtain14 High-Entropy Coatings 473the near-equilibrium state at each temperature. It was found that the samples
quenched at 900/C14C or above are composed of a BCC solid solution and (Ti,
V)5Si3, while samples quenched at T/C20800/C14C are composed of (Ti,V) 5Si3,
Al8(V,Cr) 5, and a BCC solid solution. These results agree well with their calcula-
tions using the CALPHAD method. Metallographic observations and EDS analysis
together revealed that the Al 8(V,Cr) 5phase observed at 800/C14C and below is located
in the annealed matrix, probably because of the decomposition of the BCC phase.The weight gain after exposure to 800
/C14C for 50 h is about 4.2 mg/cm2, which is
signiﬁcantly better than that of the substrate (~19.3 mg/cm2). This result shows that
the coating can effectively protect the Ti–6Al–4 V alloy. The oxide scale of thecoating is thin and adherent and consists of SiO
2,C r 2O3, TiO 2,A l 2O3, and a small
amount of V 2O5[5]. The dry sliding wear tests also show that the wear resistance of
Ti–6Al–4 V is improved by laser cladding with AlCrSiTiV [ 6]. The appearance and
microstructure of the cladding layer are shown in Fig. 14.2. The enhancement in the
wear resistance is explained by the presence of the hard silicide phase dispersed in arelatively ductile BCC matrix, which allows sliding wear to occur in a mildoxidative regime for a wide range of testing conditions. In another report, anFCC-structured CoCrCuFeNi HEA was laser cladded on to a steel substrate [ 7]. It
was found that both the phase constitution and the dendritic morphology of thealloy coating showed an impressive stability up to 0.7 T
m(750/C14C), and a high level
of hardness could be retained even after annealing at 1000/C14C for 5 h.
14.2.3 Diffusion Barriers
The other important application of HEA coatings is diffusion barriers. Interlayers
are very important in the interconnect structures of integrated circuits. They are alsocalled “diffusion barriers” and are layers such as those between Cu or Al wires anddielectrics or between metal pads and solders. Robust interlayers with high thermal
Fig. 14.2 (a) Surface morphology of the laser-clad AlCrSiTiV coating. ( b) SEM micrograph of
the interface between the AlCrSiTiV coating and the Ti–6Al–4 V substrate [ 6]474 J.-W. Yeh et al.stability, low electrical resistivity, and good adhesion to adjoining layers are in high
demand to inhibit the rapid interdiffusion of adjacent materials (e.g., Cu and Si)and/or the formation of detrimental compounds (e.g., Cu silicides) that will lead to
the early failure of microelectronic devices [ 8]. Refractory transition metals, such
as Ti and Ta [ 8], and the nitrides of unitary transition metals including TiN and TaN
[9], were the ﬁrst materials used as diffusion barriers in interconnects, but have the
drawback of polycrystalline/columnar structures with boundaries that act as fastdiffusion paths. In recent years, thinner and more effective barriers have beendeveloped, which typically consist of (1) ternary components with an amorphousstructure to diminish diffusion paths, such as Ru-Ti-N and Ru-Ta-N [ 10–12], and
(2) layered structures with interface mismatches to elongate diffusion paths, such as
Ru/TaN and Ru/TaCN [ 13–15]. Nevertheless, more robust and ultrathin ( <3 nm)
barrier layers with a higher diffusion resistance are greatly demanded in themanufacturing of the next generation of integrated circuits below 20 nm.
In recent studies, HEA coatings such as AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr, NbSiTaTiZr, and
AlCrRuTaTiZr alloys with a simple solid-solution amorphous structure, high ther-mal stability, and low electrical resistivity below 250 μΩ· cm have been developed
as effective diffusion barriers [ 16–18]. They were deposited using a sputtering
method from a single alloy target. The quinary NbSiTaTiZr with a thickness of
20 nm prevents the interdiffusion of Cu and Si at a temperature of 800
/C14C for 30 min
[17], and the senary AlCrRuTaTiZr of only 5 nm thickness shows the same extreme
resistance to Cu/Si interdiffusion [ 18]. The senary AlCrRuTaTiZr of 500 nm
thickness, which is used as a diffusion barrier and an adhesion layer, also preventsCu pads on printed circuit boards from dissolution into the molten solders (Sn-Ag-Cu) at 250
/C14C for 60 min. Cu plates with a thickness of 1 mm completely dissolve
under these conditions. The high-endurance temperatures of HEA coatings againstthe interdiffusion of Cu and Si, and their dissolution in molten solders at a small
ﬁlm thickness, suggest their high potential as promising diffusion barriers for
practical applications in microelectronic devices.
In 2014, Chang et al. elucidated a mechanism for the high resistance of HEA
coatings to interdiffusion (i.e., the highly suppressed interdiffusion kinetics) fromstructural and thermodynamic perspectives [ 19]. They examined the diffusion
resistance of thin solid-solution alloy ﬁlms (a thickness of about 7 nm) systemat-ically with different metallic elements, including unitary Ti, binary TiTa, ternaryTiTaCr, quaternary TiTaCrZr, quinary TiTaCrZrAl, and senary TiTaCrZrAlRu.
While a Cu/Si structure (without a barrier) failed because of the severe interdiffu-
sion of Cu and Si at about 400
/C14C, the failure temperature of the alloy barriers
against interdiffusion markedly increased from 550 to 900/C14C when more metallic
elements were incorporated, as presented in Fig. 14.3. Through unitary Ti, the
diffusivity of Cu atoms reached a level as high as 4.1 /C210/C020m2/s at 600/C14C,
whereas through senary TiTaCrZrAlRu, it was only 1.6 /C210/C021m2/s at 700/C14C and
8.0/C210/C020m2/s at 900/C14C. The activation energy of Cu diffusion through the alloy
barriers was experimentally determined and increased with the number of added
metallic elements, from 110 kJ/mol (with unitary Ti) to 163 kJ/mol (with senary
TiTaCrZrAlRu), indicating the obvious suppression of interdiffusion by the14 High-Entropy Coatings 475multicomponent barriers. Chang ’s mechanistic analyses [ 19] suggest that structur-
ally severe lattice distortions caused by different atom sizes will inﬂuence the site of
vacancy formation and the direction of atom movement as well as elongate the
diffusion paths. Compared to the normal (regular, isotropic) lattice structure of
unitary Ti without any distortions, the lattice strain energy of senary TiTaCrZrAlRu
will theoretically increase to 14.6 kJ/mol. Thermodynamically, a strengthened and
anisotropic cohesion is expected to inhibit bond breaking for vacancy formation
and atomic diffusion, as well as change the direction of atomic diffusion. Relative
to the low cohesion energy of unitary Ti, the cohesive energy of senary
TiTaCrZrAlRu will theoretically increase to 38.1 kJ/mol.
In addition, the increased packing density of atoms caused by different atom sizes,
i.e., the shrinkage in free volume, is believed to diminish vacancy formation/concen-
tration. Compared to unitary Ti with an atom-size ratio of 1, the packing density of
senary TiTaCrZrAlRu will theoretically increase to a ratio of around 1.1. Combining
the contributions of lattice distortion strain energy, the increase in cohesive energy,
and the multiplied packing density, the theoretical (total) increase in the activation
energy of Cu diffusion in senary TiTaCrZrAlRu alloy (55 kJ/mol), which is nearly
equal to the measured increase (from 110 to 163 kJ/mol, i.e., 53 kJ/mol), is believed to
suppress the formation of vacancies and hinder the movements of atoms, thus
suppressing interdiffusion kinetics through multicomponent HEA barriers.
Fig. 14.3 Surface morphologies of thermally annealed Si/Barrier nA/Cu ﬁlm stacks in a tube
furnace at different temperatures for 30 min in a N 2/H2reducing atmosphere (total gas ﬂow rate of
500 sccm, H 2ﬂow ratio of 5 %; nA: the alloy with nelements). Dotted lines in the ﬁlm indicate
stacks with Barrier 1Aat 500/C14C and Barrier 2Aat 600/C14C: (left) not failed, ( right ) Cu ﬁlm
agglomeration into islands; insets: ( top left ) as-deposited with a typical Cu ﬁlm surface, ( bottom
right ) failed with a typical silicide formation [ 19]476 J.-W. Yeh et al.14.3 HEAN Coatings
High-entropy alloy nitrides (HEANs) have drawn great attention in the past decade
(2004–2014). More than 30 different nitride systems have been prepared andstudied, mainly by reactive DC/RF sputtering techniques. The target applicationsof these materials include hard protective coatings and diffusion barriers. Althoughnitrogen is involved to form HEANs, it is not proper to regard nitrogen as acomponent except the coating is still in the metallic state. A HEAN is in fact amixture of constituent binary nitrides. Because most strong binary nitrides such asTiN, CrN, TaN, HfN, ZrN, and NbN have NaCl-type FCC structure with similar
lattice constant, their mixture tends to form the solid solution of binary nitrides with
the NaCl-type FCC structure mainly under high-entropy effect since overallnitrogen-metal bonding is almost the same before and after mixing. For example,the above six binary nitrides could form (Ti,Cr,Ta,Hf,Zr,Nb)
50N50HEANs with
NaCl-type FCC structure in which metal elements occupy Na site and nitrogen doesCl site. Besides high-entropy effect, lattice distortion and sluggish diffusion effectscan also affect microstructure and properties in different aspects. As a result, propercomposition design by utilizing the advantages of these effects could be helpful to
obtain required properties.
14.3.1 Hard Coatings
The use of transition metal nitrides as a protective coating layer for cutting tools,
dies, and molds began in the 1980s. Because of their high hardness, wear resistance,
and good oxidation resistance, transition metal nitride coatings such as TiN, TiAlN,
TiAlSiN, TiC, CrN, and TiCN can signiﬁcantly enhance the lifetime of the parts.Because HEAs have many outstanding properties, it is anticipated that their nitrideforms may also possess these advantages. Most of the reported HEANs are based onstrong nitride-forming elements such as Al, Cr, Ti, Si, Ta, Zr, Hf, Nb, etc. Table 14.1
shows the structure, hardness, modulus, substrate bias, and oxidation resistance ofpublished HEAN hard coatings under the process conditions that yield the highesthardness. It demonstrates that HEAN hard coatings with suitable composition and
processing can have outstanding properties such as hardness larger than 40 GPa
(minimum level for superhard coatings) and an excellent oxidation resistance, onlyforming 80 nm thick oxide layer after annealing at 900
/C14C for 2 h.
1.Phenomena relating to composition and process factors
The concentration of nitrogen in the coatings can be controlled by the nitrogen
ﬂow ratio ( Rn) in the deposition gas. For HEANs based mostly on strong nitride-
forming elements, an Rnof around 15 % is usually sufﬁcient to fabricate
M50N50-type stoichiometric nitrides (M: metal, N: nitrogen, metal:
nitrogen ¼1:1) [ 20]. Higher Rncan lead to overstoichiometric nitrides, but the
deviation from the 1:1 composition is usually small [ 20,21]. Because many14 High-Entropy Coatings 477Table 14.1 Various properties of reported HEAN ﬁlms under the process conditions that yield the highest hardness
Composition Structure Hardness (GPa) Modulus (GPa) Substrate bias (V)Oxidation condition
and oxide thickness Ref.
(Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi) 59N41 Amorphous 10.4 146 /C0100 – [ 30]
(AlCoCrCuFeMnNi) 65N35 Amorphous 11.8 – /C0150 – [ 30]
(AlCrNiSiTi) 82.3N17.7 Amorphous 15.1 157 N/A – [ 31]
(AlCrMoTaTiZr) 50N50 FCC (NaCl) 40 400 N/A – [ 24]
(AlCrTaTiZr) 50N50 FCC (NaCl) 36 360 /C0150 – [ 27]
(AlCrMoSiTi) 67N33 FCC (M 2N) 34.8 325 /C0100 – [ 29]
(AlCrSiTiV) 41N59 FCC (NaCl) 31.2 300 N/A – [ 21]
(AlBCrSiTi) 47N53 Amorphous 25.1 260 N/A – [ 32]
(AlCrNbSiTiV) 50N50 FCC (NaCl) 42 350 /C0100 – [ 28]
(AlCrMnMoNiZrB 0.1)Nx FCC (NaCl) 10.3 180 N/A – [ 33]
(AlCrTiVZr)N FCC (NaCl) 15.2 204 /C0100 – [ 34]
(AlCrTaTiZr) 42.1Si7.9N50 Nanocomposite 34 343 N/A 330 nm, 1000/C14C, 2 h [ 25]
(AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr) 50N50 FCC (NaCl) 37 250 N/A – [ 23,35]
(AlCrSiTiZr) 77.8N22.2 Amorphous 20 228 /C0100 – [ 36]
(Al29.1Cr30.8Nb11.2Si7.7Ti21.2)50N50 FCC (NaCl) 36.7 390 /C0150 80 nm, 900/C14C, 2 h [ 37]
(Al0.34Cr0.22Nb0.11Si0.11Ti0.22)50N50 FCC (NaCl) 36 350 /C0100 290 nm, 1000/C14C, 2 h [ 26,38]
(HfNbTaTiZr) 50N50 FCC + compound 32.9 – /C0100 – [ 39]
(AlCrTaTiZr) 52N48 FCC (NaCl) 30 277 /C0100 – [ 40]
(AlCrTaTiZr) 48C9N43 Amorph. + FCC 35 279 /C0150 – [ 41]
(AlCrMoNiTi) 44N56 FCC (NaCl) 15.5 205 N/A – [ 42]
(AlCrMoTiZr) 34N66 FCC (NaCl) 19.6 236 N/A – [ 42]
(Hf 33.7Nb15Ti18.5V5.64Zr13.5)86.3N13.7 FCC (NaCl) 58 – /C0200 – [ 43]
(HfCrTiVZr) 55N45 FCC (NaCl) 31.2 305 /C0100 280 nm, 600/C14C, 2 h [ 44]478 J.-W. Yeh et al.binary stoichiometric nitrides have NaCl-type FCC structure (e.g., TaN, TiN,
ZrN, CrN, NbN, HfN, VN), near-stoichiometric HEANs that are composedmainly of these elements also have a NaCl-type FCC structure. These HEANs
can be considered as a solid solution of these binary nitrides. Huang
et al. annealed (AlCrNbSiTiV)N at 1000
/C14C for 5 h and observed the annealed
coating using TEM [ 22]. No evidence of phase separation was found. The
highest hardness is usually achieved when Rnis around 40–50 %.
Another important process parameter is the applied substrate bias. Substrate
bias hardly affects the composition of stoichiometric nitrides, but it signiﬁcantlychanges the microstructure and properties of the coatings. From Table 14.1,i t
can be seen that without substrate bias, the as-deposited coatings have scattered
hardness values (between 11 and 40 GPa) depending on the bonding strength,
density, grain size, and residual stress [ 20,21,23–26]. In general, HEAN shows
a solution hardening effect because different-sized atoms occupying the Na sitescause lattice distortion. An amorphous structure is softer than a crystallinestructure. Insufﬁcient nitrogen content results in reduced number of strongMe-N bonds and lower hardness. Incorporation of weaker nitride formers suchas Mn, Ni, and Cu decreases overall hardness. In addition, increased density,decreased grain size (but not down to below the critical grain size which begins
to activate signiﬁcant grain boundary sliding, and thus, softening in relation to
the inverse Hall–Petch relation), and higher compressive residual stress areuseful for improving hardness.
When deposited with suitable bias, crystalline HEANs based on strong
nitride-forming elements in general have hardness values between 30 and40 GPa, which are higher than the layers deposited without any bias. Theguaranteed high hardness level obtained by suitable bias voltage is due to ionbombardment under the acceleration caused by bias voltage. Because of this ion
bombardment, the structure of the coatings evolves from typical coarse colum-
nar grains to a ﬁne ﬁbrous structure and further to a dense, featureless structurethat eventually eliminates the voids between the columns and densiﬁes thecoatings. A more detailed explanation is that ion bombardment causes a strongerre-sputtering effect that suppresses the rate of grain growth and thus converselyincreases the nucleation rate. Thus, further grain reﬁnement and higher hardnessare obtained. Moreover, the ion bombardment effect can introduce excessinterstitial atoms into the lattice. This results in a compressive residual stress
in the coatings and increases their hardness. In general, a bias voltage of /C0100 to
/C0150 V can improve the hardness of the coatings best [ 27–29].
2.Deformation behavior of HEAN ﬁlms
Mechanical properties play an important role in determining the mechanicalperformance of protective ﬁlms. Thus, studies on the deformation behavior willprovide a better understanding of their performance. The deformation behaviorsof HEAN were examined recently by Chang and Lin et al. using (AlCrTaTiZr)N
0.7, (AlCrTaTiZr)N 0.9C0.2, and (AlCrTaTiZr)N 1.07Si0.15coatings with good
mechanical properties [ 40,41,45,46]. A localized mechanical deformation
was typically introduced on the coatings by high-load indentations, and the14 High-Entropy Coatings 479deformed regions under the indent marks were cut by a focused ion beam (at an
ultralow current) and observed in an electron microscope. In contrast to the
formation and extension of shear bands during the deformation of metallic
AlCrTaTiZr HEA coating with an amorphous structure, the deformation of
crystalline HEAN nanocomposite coatings is mainly mediated by dislocation
activities, with a large number of dislocation clusters observed [ 40]. However,
rather than high-angle complete dislocations, which are the dominant deformation
media of conventional crystalline materials, most stacking faults and extended
partial dislocations are formed in deformed HEAN coatings, as shown in
Fig.14.4a , possibly because of their large lattice distortions and high strain energy
[41,45]. The stacking faults and partial dislocations are believed to distribute and
slide along low-angle domain boundaries and to dominate the deformation of
HEAN coatings. Under high indentation stresses, a greater number of waved
lattices were formed compared to the original distorted lattices of nondeformed
regions, revealing the further development of lattice distortions. However, it was
found that in the regions where stress was released just adjacent to cracks, a near-
perfectly ordered lattice structure without distortions, stacking faults, or disloca-
tions was observed, as shown in Fig. 14.4b [41,45]. It has been suggested that as
the coatings crack, the high strain energy that has been stored in the form of lattice
distortions or established under the indentations is for the recovery of regularly
ordered lattices through the reversible low-angle partial dislocations and/or
low-energy stacking faults along near-parallel domain boundaries.
3.Oxidation resistance and mechanism of HEAN ﬁlms
Oxidation resistance of the protective ﬁlms is also an important property for
better performance. The current trend in machining is to minimize the use of
cutting ﬂuid in order to save cost, protect the environment, and avoid possible
health hazards to workers. However, high-speed cutting without cutting ﬂuid can
Fig. 14.4 TEM analyses of deformed (AlCrTaTiZr)N 1.07Si0.15coating: ( a) under an indent, solid
circles : complete dislocations; dashed circles : partial dislocations; ( b) around a crack [ 45]480 J.-W. Yeh et al.lead to excessive heat at the tool-chip interface. Therefore, oxidation resistance
becomes a critical issue. Conventionally, improvement in oxidation resistance isachieved mainly by alloying. For example, alloying of Al can increase the
oxidation resistance in TiN or TiSiN coatings [ 47–49]. HEANs have shown
great potential in this regard. For example, the (AlCrTaTiZr)Si
7.9N50.9coating
develops an oxide layer of only 330 nm after annealing at 1000/C14C for 2 h in air
[25]. The oxide layer can be roughly divided into two layers, and the top layer is a
dense protective layer, rich in Al and Cr. The second layer is also composed ofoxides without nitrogen but has a different composition from the top layer. Besidesthe formation of the Al- and Cr-rich protective layers, the high oxidation resistanceis also attributed to the abundant amount of amorphous SiN
xsegregated at the
grain boundaries. These amorphous structures can effectively block the diffusion
of oxygen and are thus beneﬁcial for antioxidative properties. In 2013, Hsiehet al. reported the oxidation properties of (Al
23.1Cr30.8Nb7.7Si7.7Ti30.7)N50and
(Al29.1Cr30.8Nb11.2Si7.7Ti21.2)N50coatings [ 37]. They exhibited a high hardness
of 36–37 GPa and good oxidation resistance. After annealing at 900/C14Cf o r2hi n
air, the surface oxide layer on the (Al 23.1Cr30.8Nb7.7Si7.7Ti30.7)N50is only 100 nm
thick, and that on (Al 29.1Cr30.8Nb11.2Si7.7Ti21.2)N50is only 80 nm thick. These
values are truly remarkable. For example, advanced antioxidative
Al0.53Si0.2Ti0.27N coatings have a 100 nm thick oxide layer after annealing at
850/C14C for only 1 h [ 48], and the oxide scale on Al 0.52Ti0.43Cr0.03Y0.02Nc o a t i n g s
is 400 nm thick after annealing at 950/C14Cf o r1h[ 50].
Shen et al. investigated the oxidation behavior and structure of oxide scales
on the (Al 0.34Cr0.22Nb0.11Si0.11Ti0.22)50N50coating [ 38]. This coating exhibits
excellent resistance to oxidation. The thickness of the oxide scale after airannealing at 900
/C14C for 50 h is merely 290 nm. The weight gain during
continuous thermal ramping to 1300/C14C was merely 0.015 mg/cm2. These values
are among the best known in nitrides. Detailed TEM investigation was carried
out on the oxide scale of this coating, as shown in Fig. 14.5. Eight individual
layers were distinguished (Fig. 14.5a ). EDS results (Fig. 14.5b ) reveal that these
eight layers are all oxides. Below these oxides, the nitride coatings remainunreacted, as shown in Fig. 14.5c . The ﬁrst layer of the oxide is an Al-rich
layer. High-resolution TEM analysis (Fig. 14.5d ) indicates that its structure is
identical to α-Al
2O3. Layer 2 is an Al- and Cr-rich oxide layer and contains
nanograins about 5–8 nm in diameter (Fig. 14.5e ). These grains are surrounded
by a thin amorphous layer about 2–5 nm thick. Layers 3–8 exhibit alternating
light and dark contrast. Further inspection reveals that the light layers (3, 5, and7) have an amorphous structure, while the dark layers (4, 6, and 8) are composedof nanograins 5–10 nm in size. Fig. 14.5f shows the typical microstructure in
layers 3–8. In some areas, the lighter regions can even penetrate the dark layers,suggesting that the amorphous phase forms a continuous network in layers 3–8.EDS results show that the light regions are Al and Si rich, while the dark layersare Ti, Nb, and Cr rich. The excellent oxidation resistance of the
(Al
0.34Cr0.22Nb0.11Si0.11Ti0.22)50N50coatings is attributable to the formation of
the dense surface α-Al2O3layer, and the rich amorphous networks of these
structures effectively hinder the inward diffusion of oxygen and, thus, signiﬁ-cantly enhance the oxidation resistance.14 High-Entropy Coatings 481Fig. 14.5 (a) Cross-sectional TEM micrograph of the oxide scale on
(Al0.34Cr0.22Nb0.11Si0.11Ti0.22)50N50coating after annealing at 900/C14C for 50 h. ( b) EDS results
of the oxide layers in (a). ( c) TEM image and diffraction pattern of the un-oxidized nitride ﬁlm
underneath the oxide layer. ( d) TEM micrograph and nanobeam electron diffraction pattern of
α-Al2O3oxide particles at surface. ( e) HRTEM image of layer 2 (Cr rich). ( f) HRTEM image of
layers 4–6 in (a) [ 38]14.3.2 Diffusion Barriers
Another important potential application of HEAN thin ﬁlms is as diffusion barriers
in microelectronics, i.e., a thin ﬁlm to prevent rapid interdiffusion and reaction of
Cu and Si. Similar applications of HEA thin ﬁlms for diffusion barriers have been
reviewed in Sect. 14.2.3 . Although HEAN thin ﬁlms may have disadvantages such
as high electrical resistivity and low interface adhesion, they can show outstanding
thermal stability, which is crucial to diffusion barriers because of their strong metal-
nitrogen bonding [ 35,51–55]. The ﬁrst study in this regard uses a 70 nm thick
amorphous HEAN, (AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr) 50N50. This nitride ﬁlm successfully pre-
vents the reaction between Si and Cu at 850/C14C for 30 min [ 35]. Later, an
(AlCrTaTiZr)N ﬁlm with a thickness of 10 nm was developed and was found to
endure Cu/Si interdiffusion at 900/C14C for 30 min [ 52]. To further enhance the
diffusion resistance of HEAN barriers at an even lower thickness as well as
decrease the electrical resistivity and improve their adhesion to Cu, Ru was added
and the N content was reduced so as to form (AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5with senary
metallic elements. Merely a 5 nm thick ﬁlm could achieve resistance to a temper-
ature of 800/C14C after annealing for 30 min [ 53]. Furthermore, the stacked
structures of HEAN and HEA ﬁlms could enhance performance. Bi-layered
(AlCrTaTiZr)N x/AlCrTaTiZr (10/5 nm thick) could be achieved after annealing
at 900/C14C for 30 min [ 54]. A quaternary-layered (AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5/
AlCrRuTaTiZr/(AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5/AlCrRuTaTiZr (each layer 1 nm thick) ﬁlm
could be achieved after annealing at 800–900/C14C for 30 min, as shown in Fig. 14.6
[55]. The latter, with an ultralow thickness of only 4 nm has a lower electrical
resistivity and better interfacial adhesion than individual HEAN ﬁlms, but exhibits
Fig. 14.6 TEM images of ( a) as-deposited and ( b) 800/C14C-annealed Si/QL/Cu ﬁlm, where
QL represents the stacked structure of quaternary-layered diffusion barrier of (AlCrRuTaTiZr)
N0.5/AlCrRuTaTiZr/(AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5/AlCrRuTaTiZr; inset: magniﬁed image around QL bar-
rier [ 55]14 High-Entropy Coatings 483the same excellent resistance to Cu/Si interdiffusion at 800–900/C14C. This can
possibly be attributed to not only severe lattice distortions and strengthened cohe-sion but also large interface mismatches [ 19,55]. All these results demonstrate that
the high-stability HEAN barriers would perform well for much longer durations in
the thermal cycles of IC manufacturing (300–400
/C14C) and operation (100–200/C14C),
which suggests their high potential for practical applications in microelectronicdevices.
14.4 Other HEA-Based Coatings
14.4.1 Low-Friction Hard Coatings
Similar to HEAN coatings, HEA carbides (HEACs) can be deposited using CH 4-
containing Ar or co-deposited with a graphite target, HEA oxides (HEAOs) using
O2-containing Ar, and HEa carbonitrides (HEACNs) using CH 4+N 2-containing
Ar. For HEAC and HEACN ﬁlms, Lin et al. ﬁrst used two targets, AlCrTaTiZr andgraphite, to co-deposit the ﬁlms on Si substrates at 350
/C14C and under a bias voltage
of/C0100 V [ 56–58]. By ﬁxing the sputtering power at 100 W and 250 W, and
controlling the nitrogen ﬂow ratio, N 2/(Ar + N 2), the ﬁlm composition could be
varied from (Ta,Ti,Zr) 50C50to (Al,Cr,Ta,Ti,Zr) 30C32N38, respectively, as shown in
Fig.14.7. The negligible concentrations of Al and Cr in the carbide ﬁlm are due to
their weak bonding with carbon in vacuum, whereas their appreciable concentra-
tions in the carbonitride ﬁlm are due to their strong bonding with nitrogen. The two
ﬁlms have nanohardness values of 39 GPa and 24 GPa and friction coefﬁcients of0.43 and 0.29, respectively. As a comparison, these values for (Al,Cr,Ta,Ti,Zr)
50N50are 31 GPa and 0.80, respectively. By using the ball-on-disk method
50
40302010
0
40Al
Cr
Ta
ZrTi
C
N
O
30 20
Nitrogen Flow Ratio(%)Atomic Percent (%)
10 0Fig. 14.7 EPMA chemical
composition variation ofHEACN ﬁlms with nitrogenﬂow ratio, N
2/(Ar + N 2).
Two targets, AlCrTaTiZr
and graphite, were used toco-deposit the ﬁlms on Si
substrate at 350
/C14C and
under a bias of /C0100 V484 J.-W. Yeh et al.(AISI 52100 bearing-steel ball) to measure the wear resistance, (Al,Cr,Ta,Ti,
Zr)30C32N38ﬁlms display an even lower wear rate than the (Ta,Ti,Zr) 50C50ﬁlm.
The low wear rate of both ﬁlms is attributed to the formation of a graphite-likesubstance at the wear surface, which acts as a lubricant.
HEAC coatings based on CrNbSiTiZr were developed by Lin et al. using two
targets: one was equimolar CrNbSiTiZr and another was graphite [ 59]. Films were
co-deposited from both targets on Si substrates at 400
/C14C and under a bias of /C0100
V. By ﬁxing the sputtering power at 40 W for the alloy target and varying the power
from 120 to 260 W for graphite target, they obtained a series of HEAC ﬁlms with
compositions shown in Fig. 14.8a . Although the HEA alloy ﬁlm obtained without
graphite co-sputtering is amorphous, all the HEAC ﬁlms have simple NaCl-typeFCC structure. Using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, it wasdetermined that as the carbon content increases from 43.0 to 53.3 at.% (from120 to 260 W), the C-C bonding of amorphous carbon increases from 1.6 to7.7 %, based on the total number of bonds with carbon. The hardness and Young ’s
modulus are shown in Fig. 14.8b . A small decrease in both properties with the
carbon content is believed to be due to the higher proportion of amorphous carbon.
Table 14.2 shows carbon content, friction coefﬁcient, wear rate, and hardness of
HEAC ﬁlms obtained under different applied powers on a graphite target. A targetpower of 260 W gives the ﬁlm a carbon content of 53.3 at.%, the lowest frictioncoefﬁcient of 0.11, and the lowest wear rate of 0.45 /C210
/C06mm3/N · m. This ﬁlm is
obviously superior to a TiC ﬁlm with similar carbon content and hardness.
Lin et al. also developed HEACs from an equimolar CrNbTaTiZr target by
reaction sputtering under different CH 4/(Ar + CH 4) ﬂow ratios of 0, 3, 7, 10, 15, and
20 % [ 60]. The structure is amorphous under pure Ar and becomes a simple FCC
structure when the ﬂow ratio is 7 %. Figure 14.9 shows the chemical compositions,
hardness, and Young ’s modulus of HEAC ﬁlms with different CH 4ﬂow ratio,
120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260010203040506070Concentration (at%)
Power of graphite target (W)Cr Nb
Si Ti
Zr Cab
Fig. 14.8 (a) EPMA chemical composition variation of HEAC ﬁlms with the power applied to the
graphite target. Two targets, CrNbSiTiZr and graphite, were used to co-deposit the ﬁlms on Si
substrates at 400/C14C and under a bias of /C0100 V and ( b) hardness and Young ’s modulus variation
with carbon content14 High-Entropy Coatings 485which was sputtered on Si substrates without any bias. A stoichiometric carbon
content can be obtained when the ﬂow ratio is between 10 and 15 %. The hardnessis about 21.5 GPa. When a bias of /C0100 V is applied, the carbon content of the ﬁlm
becomes 59.3, 70.6, and 83.4 at.% for ﬂow ratios of 10 %, 15 %, and 20 %,respectively, and the ﬁlm hardness is 33.2, 24.4, and 14.7 GPa. The ball-on-diskwear test gave friction coefﬁcients of 0.2, 0.14, and 0.09 and wear rates of 1.21,0.89, and 0.4 /C210
/C06mm3/N·m. All the above results demonstrate that HEAC and
HEACN coatings can provide excellent wear resistance and lower the friction force
for punches, dies, molds, and wear parts.
Braic et al. also studied HEAC coatings [ 39,61,62]. (AlCrNbTiY)C coatings
were prepared by co-sputtering of separate, pure metallic Al, Cr, Nb, Ti, and Ytargets in an Ar + CH
4reactive atmosphere [ 60]. The metals in the carbide ﬁlms
were controlled to form an almost equiatomic ratio, whereas the carbon contentvaried from about 46–82 at.%. The ﬁlms consisted of a mixture of carbides,intermetallic compounds, and carbon, having a proportion that depends on theCH
4/(CH 4+ Ar) ﬂow ratio. For ﬁlm compositions close to stoichiometry, a singleTable 14.2 Carbon content, friction coefﬁcient, wear rate, and hardness of HEAC ﬁlms obtained
under different applied powers on a graphite target
Power of
graphite (W)Carbon content
(at.%) Friction coefﬁcientWear rate
(10/C06mm3/N · m) Hardness (GPa)
120 43.0 0.24 0.89 /C60.06 31.2
150 43.8 0.29 2.94 /C60.49 30.3
180 46.4 0.17 1.60 /C60.21 29.6
200 48.1 0.15 1.18 /C60.44 28.1
230 50.7 0.15 0.72 /C60.04 28.4
260 53.3 0.11 0.45 /C60.04 27.5
TiC 57.9 0.20 1.47 /C60.11 28.8
Fig. 14.9 (a) Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) chemical composition variation and ( b)
hardness and Young ’s modulus variations with the CH 4ﬂow ratio for HEAC ﬁlms sputtered on
Si substrate without bias486 J.-W. Yeh et al.FCC solid-solution phase was detected, whereas ﬁlms with higher carbon concen-
trations (69–82 at.%) exhibited an amorphous structure. The ﬁlm hardness(13–23 GPa) was found to depend on the carbon content. A ball-on-disk tribometer
with a sapphire ball 6 mm in diameter was used to test the tribology behavior.
The results show that the dry friction coefﬁcients were in the range 0.05–0.25 andthe wear resistance is good. Because of their ﬁne microstructures, good wearresistance, and dry friction characteristics, the coatings can be considered aspotential candidates for various tribological and anticorrosive applications[61]. Furthermore, (HfNbTaTiZr)C coatings were deposited on C45 and M2 steel
substrates by co-sputtering of pure metallic Hf, Nb, Ta, Ti, and Zr targets in anAr + CH
4atmosphere [ 39]. The ﬁlm hardness is higher than TiC by 6 GPa.
The friction coefﬁcient and wear rate of the (HfNbTaTiZr)C ﬁlm were 0.15
and 0.8 /C210/C06mm3/N/C1m, respectively, better than that of TiC ﬁlm (0.18 and
9.4/C210/C06mm3/N/C1m) [39].
14.4.2 Biomedical Coatings
For biomedical applications, (HfNbTaTiZr)N and (HfNbTaTiZr)C coatings were
deposited on Ti-6Al-4 V alloy by co-sputtering of Hf, Nb, Ta, Ti, and Zr metallic
targets in Ar + N 2and Ar + CH 4reactive atmospheres, respectively [ 62]. All the
ﬁlms showed simple FCC solid-solution phases with (111) preferred orientationsand crystallite sizes in the range of 7.2–13.5 nm. The highest hardness value wasmeasured for the carbide coating with the highest carbon content, which alsoexhibited the best friction performance ( μ¼0.12) and the highest wear resistance
(K¼0.20/C210
/C06mm3/N/C1m) measured using the ball-on-disk tribometer and
performed in a solution of simulated body ﬂuids (SBFs). In addition, electrochem-ical measurements showed that all coatings exhibited good protective properties in
SBF solution. Biocompatibility tests showed that the investigated coatings did not
induce any cytotoxic response due to osteoblasts, and a good morphology of theattached cells was observed. Cell viability analysis showed a very high ratio of livecells compared to dead cells for all the investigated groups. Hence, it was demon-strated that the mechanical, tribological, and anticorrosive characteristics of thebiocompatible Ti-6Al-4 V alloy could be signiﬁcantly improved using HEAN andHEAC coatings. They possess high hardness, low friction coefﬁcient, and superiorwear–corrosion resistance, as well as good biocompatible properties [ 62].
14.5 Conclusions and Perspective
In this chapter, we reviewed typical HEAs and HEA-related thick layer and thin
layer coatings. They can be produced by suitable coating technologies and canprovide additional functions to parts or components for improving performance14 High-Entropy Coatings 487such as wear, corrosion, diffusion, and heat resistance. Thermal spray technology
can deposit thick HEA layers with a thickness from tens to hundreds of micrometersand even to millimeters on substrates. Arc welding and laser welding may produce
HEA cladding with a thickness over a similar range. Sputtering technology can
deposit thin-ﬁlm HEA coatings that are submicron to micrometers thick on sub-strates, and if a suitable reactive gas is used during deposition, HEAN, HEAC,HEACN, or HEAO could be deposited on substrates from HEA targets or splittargets. Therefore, HEA and HEA-based ceramic coatings are easily deposited byusing suitable conventional coating technologies despite the fact that many com-ponents are involved during the coating process. Most importantly, HEA andHEA-based ceramic coatings can display outstanding properties, and thus, have a
potential for use in various applications. The mechanisms for the formation of
crystal structure and microstructure, and for the improved properties presented inthis chapter, demonstrate that HEA and HEA-based ceramic coatings also havehigh-entropy, lattice distortion, and sluggish diffusion effects observed in bulkHEAs and are a new attractive ﬁeld providing many opportunities for developingeven better coatings with improved performance and lifetime. Although not empha-sized in this chapter, modern requirements for surface coatings with biomedical,antibacterial, EMI shielding, anti-ﬁngerprint, nonstick, hydrophilic, or hydrophobic
properties are also future directions for value-added development.
Acknowledgments J.W.Y, S.J.L, M.H.T, and S.Y.C. would like to thank Dr. Michael C. Gao for
his patience to provide review comments and suggestions from himself and invited experts. Theyalso acknowledge all the ﬁnancial supports from Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of
Economic Affairs, and National Tsing Hua University, R.O.C.
References
1. Huang PK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK (2004) Multi-principal-element alloys with improved
oxidation and wear resistance for thermal spray coating. Adv Eng Mater 6:74–78
2. Chen JH, Hua PH, Chen PN, Chang CM, Chen MC, Wu W (2008) Characteristics of multi-
element alloy cladding produced by TIG process. Mater Lett 62:2490–2492
3. Lin YC, Cho YH (2008) Elucidating the microstructure and wear behavior for multicomponent
alloy clad layers by in situ synthesis. Surf Coat Technol 202:4666–4672
4. Zhang H, Pan Y, He YZ (2011) Grain reﬁnement and boundary misorientation transition by
annealing in the laser rapid solidiﬁed 6FeNiCoCrAlTiSi multicomponent ferrous alloy coat-ing. Surf Coat Technol 205:4068–4072
5. Huang C, Zhang YZ, Shen JY, Vilar R (2011) Thermal stability and oxidation resistance of
laser clad TiVCrAlSi high entropy alloy coatings on Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Surf Coat Technol
206:1389–1395
6. Huang C, Zhang YZ, Vilar R, Shen JY (2012) Dry sliding wear behavior of laser clad
TiVCrAlSi high entropy alloy coatings on Ti-6Al-4V substrate. Mater Des 41:338–343
7. Zhang H, He YZ, Pan Y, Guo S (2014) Thermally stable laser cladded CoCrCuFeNi high-
entropy alloy coating with low stacking fault energy. J Alloys Compd 600:210–214
8. Kouno T, Niwa H, Yamada M (1998) Effect of TiN microstructure on diffusion barrier
properties in Cu metallization. J Electrochem Soc 145:2164–2167488 J.-W. Yeh et al.9. Alen P, Ritala M, Arstila K, Keinonen J, Leskela M (2005) Atomic layer deposition of
molybdenum nitride thin ﬁlms for Cu metallizations. J Electrochem Soc 152:G361–G366
10. Kwon SH, Kwon OK, Min JS, Kang SW (2006) Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of
Ru-TiN thin ﬁlms for copper diffusion barrier metals. J Electrochem Soc 153:G578–G581
11. Chen CW, Chen JS, Jeng JS (2008) Effectiveness of Ta addition on the performance of Ru
diffusion barrier in Cu metallization. J Electrochem Soc 155:H1003–H1008
12. Fang JS, Lin JH, Chen BY, Chin TS (2011) Ultrathin Ru-Ta-C barriers for Cu metallization.
J Electrochem Soc 158:H97–H102
13. Leu LC, Norton DP, McElwee-White L, Anderson TJ (2008) Ir/TaN as a bilayer diffusion
barrier for advanced Cu interconnects. Appl Phys Lett 92:111917–111917-3
14. Kim SH, Kim HT, Yim SS, Lee DJ, Kim KS, Kim HM, Kim KB, Sohn H (2008) A bilayer
diffusion barrier of ALD-Ru/ALD-TaCN for direct plating of Cu. J Electrochem Soc 155:
H589–H594
15. Xie Q, Jiang YL, Musschoot J, Deduytsche D, Detavernier C, Van Meirhaeghe RL, Van den
Berghe S, Ru GP, Li BZ, Qu XP (2009) Ru thin ﬁlm grown on TaN by plasma enhanced atomic
layer deposition. Thin Solid Films 517:4689–4693
16. Tsai MH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2008) Diffusion barrier properties of AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr high-
entropy alloy layer between copper and silicon. Thin Solid Films 516:5527–5530
17. Tsai MH, Wang CW, Tsai CW, Shen WJ, Yeh JW, Gan JY, Wu WW (2011) Thermal stability
and performance of NbSiTaTiZr high-entropy alloy barrier for copper metallization.J Electrochem Soc 158:H1161–H1165
18. Chang SY, Wang CY, Chen MK, Li CE (2011) Ru incorporation on marked enhancement of
diffusion resistance of multi-component alloy barrier layers. J Alloys Compd 509:L85–L89
19. Chang SY, Li CE, Huang YC, Hsu HF, Yeh JW, Lin SJ (2014) Structural and thermodynamic
factors of suppressed interdiffusion kinetics in multi-component high-entropy materials. SciRep 4:4162
20. Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW, Chang SY (2006) Preparation and characterization of AlCrTaTiZr
multi-element nitride coatings. Surf Coat Technol 201:3275–3280
21. Lin CH, Duh JG, Yeh JW (2007) Multi-component nitride coatings derived from Ti-Al-Cr-Si-
V target in RF magnetron sputter. Surf Coat Technol 201:6304–6308
22. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2010) Inhibition of grain coarsening up to 1000
/C14C in (AlCrNbSiTiV)N
superhard coatings. Scr Mater 62:105–108
23. Tsai MH, Lai CH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2008) Effects of nitrogen ﬂow ratio on the structure and
properties of reactively sputtered (AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr)N xcoatings. J Phys D Appl Phys
41:235402
24. Cheng KH, Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2011) Structural and mechanical properties of multi-
element (AlCrMoTaTiZr)N xcoatings by reactive magnetron sputtering. Thin Solid Films
519:3185–3190
25. Cheng KH, Tsai CW, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2011) Effects of silicon content on the structure and
mechanical properties of (AlCrTaTiZr)-Si x-N coatings by reactive RF magnetron sputtering.
J Phys D Appl Phys 44:205405
26. Shen WJ, Tsai MH, Chang YS, Yeh JW (2012) Effects of substrate bias on the structure and
mechanical properties of (Al 1.5CrNb 0.5Si0.5Ti)N xcoatings. Thin Solid Films 520:6183–6188
27. Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW, Davison A (2006) Effect of substrate bias on the structure and
properties of multi-element (AlCrTaTiZr)N coatings. J Phys D Appl Phys 39:4628
28. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2009) Effects of substrate bias on structure and mechanical properties of
(AlCrNbSiTiV)N coatings. J Phys D Appl Phys 42:115401
29. Chang HW, Huang PK, Yeh JW, Davison A, Tsau CH, Yang CC (2008) Inﬂuence of substrate
bias, deposition temperature and post-deposition annealing on the structure and properties of
multi-principal-component (AlCrMoSiTi)N coatings. Surf Coat Technol 202:3360–3366
30. Chen TK, Shun TT, Yeh JW, Wong MS (2004) Nanostructured nitride ﬁlms of multi-element
high-entropy alloys by reactive DC sputtering. Surf Coat Technol 188:188–19314 High-Entropy Coatings 48931. Chen TK, Wong MS, Shun TT, Yeh JW (2005) Nanostructured nitride ﬁlms of multi-element
high-entropy alloys by reactive DC sputtering. Surf Coat Technol 200:1361–1365
32. Tsai CW, Lai SW, Cheng KH, Tsai MH, Davison A, Tsau CH, Yeh JW (2012) Strong
amorphization of high-entropy AlBCrSiTi nitride ﬁlm. Thin Solid Films 520:2613–2618
33. Ren B, Liu ZX, Shi L, Cai B, Wang MX (2011) Structure and properties of
(AlCrMnMoNiZrB 0.1)Nxcoatings prepared by reactive DC sputtering. Appl Surf Sci
257:7172–7178
34. Chang ZC, Liang SC, Han S (2011) Effect of microstructure on the nanomechanical properties
of TiVCrZrAl nitride ﬁlms deposited by magnetron sputtering. Nucl Instrum Methods PhysRes, Sect B 269:1973–1976
35. Tsai MH, Wang CW, Lai CH, Yeh JW, Gan JY (2008) Thermally stable amorphous
(AlMoNbSiTaTiVZr)
50N50nitride ﬁlm as diffusion barrier in copper metallization. Appl
Phys Lett 92:052109
36. Hsueh HT, Shen WJ, Tsai MH, Yeh JW (2012) Effect of nitrogen content and substrate bias on
mechanical and corrosion properties of high-entropy ﬁlms (AlCrSiTiZr) 100-xNx. Surf Coat
Technol 206:4106–4112
37. Hsieh MH, Tsai MH, Shen WJ, Yeh JW (2013) Structure and properties of two Al-Cr-Nb-Si-Ti
high-entropy nitride coatings. Surf Coat Technol 221:118–123
38. Shen WJ, Tsai MH, Tsai KY, Juan CC, Tsai CW, Yeh JW, Chang YS (2013) Superior
oxidation resistance of (Al 0.34Cr0.22Nb0.11Si0.11Ti0.22)50N50 high-entropy nitride.
J Electrochem Soc 160:C531–C535
39. Braic V, Vladescu A, Balaceanu M, Luculescu CR, Braic M (2012) Nanostructured multi-
element (TiZrNbHfTa)N and (TiZrNbHfTa)C hard coatings. Surf Coat Technol 211:117–121
40. Chang SY, Lin SY, Huang YC, Wu CL (2010) Mechanical properties, deformation behaviors
and interface adhesion of (AlCrTaTiZr)N xmulti-component coatings. Surf Coat Technol
204:3307–3314
41. Lin SY, Chang SY, Huang YC, Shieu FS, Yeh JW (2012) Mechanical performance and
nanoindenting deformation of (AlCrTaTiZr)NC ymulti-component coatings co-sputtered
with bias. Surf Coat Technol 206:5096–5102
42. Ren B, Yan SQ, Zhao RF, Liu ZX (2013) Structure and properties of (AlCrMoNiTi) N xand
(AlCrMoZrTi)N xﬁlms by reactive RF sputtering. Surf Coat Technol 235:776–772
43. Pogrebnjak AD, Yakushchenko IV, Abadias G, Chartier P, Bondar OV, Beresnev VM,
Takeda Y, Sobol OV, Oyoshi K, Andreyev AA, Mukushev BA (2013) The effect of the
deposition parameters of nitrides of high-entropy alloys (TiZrHfVNb)N on their structure,
composition, mechanical and tribological properties. J Superhard Mater 35:356–368
44. Tsai DC, Chang ZC, Kuo LY, Lin TJ, Lin TN, Shieu FS (2013) Solid solution coating of
(TiVCrZrHf)N with unusual structural evolution. Surf Coat Technol 217:84–87
45. Lin SY, Chang SY, Chang CJ, Huang YC (2014) Nanomechanical properties and deformation
behaviors of multi-component (AlCrTaTiZr)N xSiyhigh-entropy coatings. Entropy
16:405–417
46. Veprek S (2013) Recent search for new superhard materials: go nano! J Vac Sci Technol
A 31:050822
47. Munz WD (1986) Titanium aluminum nitride ﬁlms: a new alternative to TiN coatings. J Vac
Sci Technol A 4:2717
48. Vaz F, Rebouta L, Andritschky M, da Silva MF (1998) Oxidation resistance of (Ti, Al, Si)N
coatings in air. Surf Coat Technol 98:912–917
49. PalDey S, Deevi SC (2003) Single layer and multilayer wear resistant coatings of (Ti, Al)N:
a review. Mater Sci Eng A 342:58–79
50. Donohue LA, Smith IJ, Munz WD, Petrov I, Greene JE (1997) Microstructure and oxidation-
resistance of Ti 1-x-y-z AlxCryYzN layers grown by combined steered-arc/unbalanced-magne-
tron-sputter deposition. Surf Coat Technol 94–95:226–231
51. Chang SY, Chen MK, Chen DS (2009) Multiprincipal-element AlCrTaTiZr-nitride
nanocomposite ﬁlm of extremely high thermal stability as diffusion barrier for Cu metalliza-
tion. J Electrochem Soc 156:G37–G42490 J.-W. Yeh et al.52. Chang SY, Chen DS (2009) 10-nm-thick quinary (AlCrTaTiZr)N ﬁlm as effective diffusion
barrier for Cu interconnects at 900/C14C. Appl Phys Lett 94:231909
53. Chang SY, Wang CY, Li CE, Huang YC (2011) 5 nm-thick (AlCrTaTiZrRu)N 0.5multi-
component barrier layer with high diffusion resistance for Cu interconnects. Nanosci
Nanotechnol Lett 3:289–293
54. Chang SY, Chen DS (2010) Ultra-thin (AlCrTaTiZr)N x/AlCrTaTiZr bilayer structures of high
diffusion resistance to Cu metallization. J Electrochem Soc 157:G154–G159
55. Chang SY, Li CE, Chiang SC, Huang YC (2012) 4-nm thick multilayer structure of multi-
component (AlCrRuTaTiZr)N xas robust diffusion barrier for Cu interconnects. J Alloy
Compd 515:4–7
56. Gu WB, Lin SJ (2008) Study on the structure and properties of (AlCrTaTiZr)(CN) thin ﬁlms.
Master ’s thesis, Department of Materials and Science Engineering, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan
57. Liu TW, Lin SJ (2009) Study on the microstructure and properties of multi-element carbide
and carbonitride thin ﬁlms. Master ’s thesis, Department of Materials and Science Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
58. Cheng KH, Liu TW, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2009) Effect of carbon contents on the structural and
mechanical properties of sputtered (AlCrTaTiZr)C xcoatings. E-MRS 2009 Fall Meeting,
Warsaw, September 14–18, Paper No. 18410
59. Lin JW, Lin SJ (2010) Study on the microstructure and properties of multi-element
(CrNbSiTiZr)Cx coatings. Master ’s thesis, Department of Materials and Science Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
60. Chen SH, Lin SJ (2012) The mechanical properties and microstructures of the (CrNbTaTiZr)
CX coating. Master ’s thesis, Department of Materials and Science Engineering, National
Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
61. Braic M, Braic V, Balaceanu M, Zoita CN, Vladescu A, Grigore E (2010) Characteristics of
(TiAlCrNbY)C ﬁlms deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering. Surf Coat Technol
204:2010–2014
62. Braic V, Balaceanu M, Braic M, Vladescu A, Panseri S, Russo A (2012) Characterization of
multi-principal-element (TiZrNbHfTa)N and (TiZrNbHfTa)C coatings for biomedical appli-
cations. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 10:197–20514 High-Entropy Coatings 491Chapter 15
Potential Applications and Prospects
Jien-Wei Yeh, An-Chou Yeh, and Shou-Yi Chang
Abstract High-entropy alloys (HEAs) inherently have four core effects that enable
improvement in microstructure and properties. During the course of research onHEAs, other special materials, such as high-entropy (HE) superalloys, HE refrac-tory alloys, HE bulk metallic glasses, HE carbides, HE nitrides, and HE oxides,have also been developed. All these materials have promising potential applica-tions, e.g., in fabricating machine components, dies and molds, corrosion-resistant
parts, cutting tools, functional coatings, hard-facing, thin-ﬁlm resistors, diffusion
barriers, and high-temperature structural components. Greater understanding of thebasic science, accumulated knowledge and experience, and effective simulationand modeling will lead to the successful development of numerous HE materialswith better properties in the future. This chapter ﬁrst addresses several importanthigh-entropy materials with promising potential applications and ﬁnally forecaststhe trends and prospects in their research and development.
Keywords High-entropy superalloys • High-entropy refractory alloys •
High-entropy ceramics • High-entropy alloys (HEAs) • Medium-entropy alloys
15.1 Introduction
Many compositions have been designed and studied with the new alloy designconcept of utilizing high mixing entropy. Among these, many special kinds ofHEAs have been reported, such as high-entropy superalloys (HESAs), high-entropyrefractory alloys (HERAs), and high-entropy bulk metallic glasses (HEBMGs). In
addition, high-entropy ceramics (HECs), such as high-entropy carbides (HEACs),
high-entropy nitrides (HEANs), and high-entropy oxides (HEAOs), have beendeveloped. Composites, such as sintered carbide with HEA binders and cermetswith HEA binders, have also recently been reported. It is very fortunate that all theprocesses and methods used to prepare conventional materials can be applied to
J.-W. Yeh ( *) • A.-C. Yeh • S.-Y. Chang
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of Chinae-mail: jwyeh@mx.nthu.edu.tw ;yehac@mx.nthu.edu.tw ;changsy@mx.nthu.edu.tw
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5_15493HE-related materials (HEMs) as long as suitable selections are made. Moreover,
different measurements, facilities, and apparatuses used to characterize conven-tional materials can be used similarly for HEMs as long as the intended purposes are
determined. It is for this reason that scientists can easily gain access to research and
develop HEMs. In addition, the combinations of compositions and processes arecountless and could lead to a potentially wide range of microstructures and prop-erties of HEMs and thus broad applications in different areas where conventionalmaterials have been applied.
Research on HEMs not only satisﬁes our scientiﬁc curiosity but also leads to the
development of new materials with better performance than conventional materials.Although the research on HEMs is still very limited, the studies available show
evidence of their potential for applications. In this chapter, important examples
from previous chapters are selected to show their promising potential applications.Based on these and other similar examples, further development could generatebetter HEMs for improving our life and environment. However, during the courseof research, it has been found that information related to the basic science of HEMsis also very important. This not only makes the related materials science informa-tion more comprehensive but also accelerates the development of better HEMs.Finally, future trends and prospects extrapolated from the current state described in
previous chapters are forecasted at the end of this chapter.
15.2 Potential Applications
15.2.1 High-Entropy Superalloys
Ni-based superalloys have made many high-temperature engineering technologies
possible, especially in the aerospace, energy, and oil and gas sectors [ 1,2]. These
superalloys have relied on dispersion of coherent γ0precipitates in the γmatrix for
excellent high-temperature mechanical properties; for example, creep deformationis typically restricted to the γchannels that lie between the precipitates of γ
0.
Compositions of superalloys have continued to evolve to meet demanding opera-
tion conditions [ 3]. The recent additions of Re and Ru to superalloys have led to
improved creep strength [ 4–12]. However, Re and Ru additions can lead alloys to
possess high density and high cost, and thus traditional alloy design methods thatrely on the addition of refractory elements appear to have reached the limit. In thissection, a new type of high-entropy alloy, which allows the four core effects ofHEAs to be exploited for high-temperature applications, is introduced.
Novel alloy systems (density <8.0 g/cm
3) based on non-equimolar
AlxCo1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti(0.5/C0x)containing an FCC γmatrix with a uniform dispersion
of L1 2γ0particles have been developed [ 13]. Since alloy compositions are designed
according to the HEA concept and their microstructures also resemble that ofconventional superalloys, the term “high-entropy superalloys” (HESAs) has been494 J.-W. Yeh et al.used. After a solution heat treatment at 1423 K for 6 h followed by precipitation
aging at 1023 K for 50 h, the microstructure of Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5consists of an
FCC matrix and γ0particles of 63 % by volume (Fig. 15.1)[13]. Its potential to
replace conventional superalloys in high-temperature applications was illustrated in
Fig. 15.2, which shows that Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5exhibits higher hardness than
IN718 from room temperature to 1273 K and has performed well in interior
components of a high-temperature wear-testing machine. Furthermore, beyond
973 K, where the hardness of IN718 drops dramatically due to the transformation
ofγ00into the δphase [ 14], the hardness values of HESAs remain high. At 1273 K,
Fig. 15.1 TEM analyses on Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5after a solution heat treatment at 1423 K for 6 h
followed by precipitation aging at 1023 K for 50 h: ( a) a dark ﬁeld image shows γ0particles in a γ
matrix, and ( b) a diffraction pattern shows the superlattice reﬂection of γ0
Fig. 15.2 (a) High-temperature hardness of Ti0.5 (Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5), Al0.1Ti0.4
(Al0.1Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.4), Al0.2Ti0.3 (Al 0.2Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.3), and Al0.3Ti0.2
(Al0.3Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.2) alloys and ( b) pin-on-disk wear-testing machine for testing up to
1000/C14C, interior connecting rods made of cast Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5HEA to support the wear pin
and exert the applied load and disk holder to ﬁx the alumina disk in the recess15 Potential Applications and Prospects 495the hardness of Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5is HV 280, which is almost three times that of
IN718. The high-temperature strength of HESAs has been attributed to the highvolume fraction of γ
0precipitates. However, in Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5, the γ0phase can
transform to the ηphase in a sluggish manner after prolonged exposure above
1073 K, as shown in Fig. 15.3; the solvus temperature of the ηphase is close to
1423 K. Although similar transformation behavior can also be observed in several
superalloys, such as X-750, 740, and 706 strengthened by Ni 3Tiγ0phase, this γ0
phase can transform rapidly into the detrimental ηphase beyond 923 K with a
solvus temperature around 1227 K [ 15,16]. However, both γ0particles and the η
phase in the high-entropy system possess better thermal stability, a phenomenonthat may be attributed to the high-entropy composition of γ
0andη, which is (Co, Fe,
Ni)3(Cr, Ti) [ 13]. Interestingly, the mixing entropy of γ0in HESAs is 1.49R (where
R is the ideal gas constant), which compares to 1.06R for γ0in conventional
superalloys, such as CM247LC [ 17]; hence, lattice distortion and sluggish diffusion
effects are expected to affect the properties of the ordered γ0phase, resulting in
higher strength and more sluggish phase transformation. Actually, the ηphase in
superalloys has been utilized to control the grain size of polycrystalline superalloysduring thermal mechanical processes. The presence of the ηphase in
Co
1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5may not entirely be detrimental for processing. Minor ηphases
in HESAs have been observed to pin the migration of grain boundaries for grainsize control [ 18]. Hence, wrought HESAs can be developed to replace conventional
superalloys, such as IN718.
To improve the high-temperature microstructural stability of
Co
1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5, partial substitution of Ti content by Al can further stabilize
theγ0phase by eliminating the formation of the ηphase, as shown in Fig. 15.3.
20 30Ti0.5
η (202)
η (203)γ (200)
γ (220)
γ (311)
γ (222)γ (111)
Al0.1Ti0.4Al0.2Ti0.3Al0.3Ti0.2Al0.5
40 50 60
2q (degree)Intensity (a.u.)
70 80 90 100
Fig. 15.3 XRD analyses of Ti0.5 (Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5), Al0.1Ti0.4 (Al 0.1Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.4),
Al0.2Ti0.3 (Al 0.2Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.3), and Al0.3Ti0.2 (Al 0.3Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.2) alloys after
aging at 1173 K for 6 h496 J.-W. Yeh et al.However, comparisons between Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5and Al 0.3Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.2
indicate that the ordering temperature of the γ0phase decreases with the mixing
entropy of γ0compositions from 1.49R to 1.54R, and the γ0volume fraction also
decreases from 63 to 41 %. Hence, the hardness of HESAs decreases with higher Al
contents. The complete substitution of Ti by Al can result in the formation of aminor βphase instead of the γ
0phase, so Al 0.5Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5is not considered a
HESA, although its structure is mainly FCC, as shown in Fig. 15.3.
Conventional superalloys can be cast into single-crystal components to increase
their resistance to high-temperature creep [ 1,2]. Single-crystal casting trials have
been conducted on HESAs with success using the conventional Bridgman process[19]. Previous work on casting single-crystal Co
1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5has shown that its
elemental partitioning behaviors are similar to those of commercial superalloys.
γ0-forming elements, such as Ti and Ni, tend to partition toward interdendritic
regions, and Co, Cr, and Fe partition toward the dendritic region [ 7,9]. The
solid-liquid partitioning ratios could be an indication of the possibility of densityinversion during the single-crystal casting process for superalloys, and the partitioncoefﬁcients of elements in HESAs are comparable to those of typical superalloys,such as CMSX-4 and RR2000 [ 20,21]. Thus, the single-crystal castability of HESA
should be as good as that of the commercial superalloys with a minimal tendency to
form freckle defects [ 22]. This work suggests that HESAs can potentially be cast
into complex shapes as a single crystal, such as turbine blades.
To increase the γ
0solvus temperature, an alloy design based on CALPHAD
simulation has been carried out. By enlarging the mixing enthalpy relative to themixing entropy of γ
0compositions in HESAs, the γ0solvus can be increased while
maintaining relatively high mixing entropy in the HESA alloy system [ 19]. Further-
more, high-temperature oxidation resistance can be enhanced through the cocktaileffect of HEA by the formation of a continuous and protective Al
2O3layer, since
the Cr and Ti contents in HESAs can enhance the Al activity for the rapid formation
of alumina [ 19].
To increase the high-temperature creep strength of HESAs, alloys can be
designed to control the coarsening kinetics of the γ0phase. In conventional super-
alloys, the directional coarsening of the γ0precipitates, known as “rafting,” is an
important microstructural evolution during high-temperature creep [ 23–27]. It has
been established that rafting occurs when superalloys are subject to loading attemperatures higher than 1173 K. In addition, numerous experimental results
have shown that rafting is strongly dependent on the sign of the applied loading,
lattice misﬁt, and the elastic constants of the γandγ
0phases [ 28–32]. Lattice misﬁt
(δ) is deﬁned by the following equation, where aγ0is the lattice parameter of the γ0
phase and aγis the lattice parameter of the γphase:
δ¼2aγ0/C0aγ/C16/C17 .
aγ0þaγ/C16/C17
When δis negative, γ0can raft in the direction perpendicular to the stress axis,
effectively hindering the climbing of dislocations and resulting in excellent creep15 Potential Applications and Prospects 497resistance [ 33]. Furthermore, the denser interfacial dislocation network in high-
misﬁt alloys can contribute to decreasing the minimum creep strain rate, since adense dislocation network can hinder pairs of dislocations in the γchannels from
cutting through the γ/γ
0interfaces [ 34]. Thus, HESAs can be designed to possess
negative lattice misﬁt, which can be achieved by the addition of various γ- and
γ0-forming elements, not restricted to Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Ni, and Ti. With an increasing
amount of data being generated for HESAs, the alloy design of HESAs can beconducted more effectively in the future.
15.2.2 Refractory High-Entropy Alloys
Refractory high-entropy alloys (or high-entropy refractory alloys, HERAs) repre-sent another approach to increase the temperature capability of alloys beyond that
of conventional superalloys and comprise of refractory elements (melting points
higher than 1650
/C14C in a broad sense, thus including Ti) as the principal constit-
uent elements. The ﬁrst two reports revealed that MoNbTaW and MoNbTaVWrefractory HEAs possess a simple body-centered cubic (BCC) microstructure andpronounced solution hardening [ 35,36]. Both alloys maintained yield strengths of
405 and 477 MPa at 1600
/C14C, respectively. Later, Senkov et al. reported the BCC
alloy HfNbTaTiZr [ 37] with slightly lower yield strength than the ﬁrst two
refractory HEAs but excellent compression ductility exceeding 50 % and high
strain hardening. Apparently, this alloy is unique in terms of its large room-
temperature ductility, since most BCC alloys and ordered BCC (B2-type) inter-metallic phases are brittle and tend to fracture by cleavage. In addition, this alloyalso has quite high strength at elevated temperatures and thus is promising forhigh-temperature applications. As a result, this ﬁnding provides a good basis orreference for developing ductile BCC HEAs. By modifying the composition, otherrefractory HEAs with various molar ratios of the constituent elements weredeveloped [ 38–47]. Among these, Senkov et al. reported four high-hardness and
low-density refractory HEAs in the Cr–Nb–Ti–V–Zr system [ 43,46] and two
Al-containing refractory HEAs: AlMo
0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr and Al 0.4Hf0.6NbTaTiZr
[45,46]. NbTiVZr, NbTiV 2Zr, CrNbTiZr, and CrNbTiVZr have densities of
6.52, 6.34, 6.67, and 6.57 g/cm3, respectively. Figure 15.4 compares the compres-
sion curves of these alloys from 298 to 1273 K. Some alloys reached a compres-sion of 50 % without fracturing [ 43]. It is interesting to note that, although the
room-temperature ductility of Cr-containing HEAs is somewhat low, their high-temperature strength is much higher than that of NbTiVZr and NbTiV
2Zr alloys.
In addition, the speciﬁc strengths of CrNbTiZr and CrNbTiVZr alloys are far
higher than those of most other high-temperature alloys. Among these two, theCrNbTiVZr alloy shows the most attractive properties, such as considerablyimproved elevated-temperature strength, reduced density, and much higher melt-ing point. Based on this observation, a better combination of strength, ductility,and low density could be expected if compositions and microstructure are498 J.-W. Yeh et al.properly adjusted. In the two Al-containing refractory HEAs [ 45,46], it was noted
that the addition of Al stabilized the BCC crystal structure and reduced the densityof the refractory HEAs. The partial substitution of Hf with Al in the HfNbTaTiZralloy was shown to reduce the density by /C249 %, increase the RT hardness by
29 %, and enhance the yield strength by 98 %. However, complete substitution ofCr with Al in the CrMo
0.5NbTa 0.5TiZr alloy reduced the alloy density by 10.1 %,
increased the RT hardness and yield strength by 12 %, noticeably improved the
RT ductility, and considerably increased, by more than 50 %, the high-
temperature strength in the temperature range from 1073 to 1473 K. Therefore,it is clear that Al addition could have positive effects on the microstructures andproperties of such refractory HEAs.
The research on HERAs mentioned above has apparently demonstrated
that the alloy compositions could be further modiﬁed, which is verypromising for the development of excellent HERAs for ultrahigh-temperatureapplications.
Fig. 15.4 Engineering compression stress vs. strain curves of ( a) NbTiVZr, ( b) NbTiV 2Zr, (c)
CrNbTiZr, and ( d) CrNbTiVZr alloys at T¼298, 873, 1073, and 1273 K [ 43]15 Potential Applications and Prospects 49915.2.3 Carbides and Cermets with HEA Binders
Because suitable alloy design of HEAs has been proven to give promising proper-
ties, such as high hardness, softening resistance at high temperature, wear resis-tance, and corrosion resistance, some of them have been identiﬁed as goodcandidates for binders in cemented carbides and cermets to improve propertiesand reduce cost. Among these candidates, Al
0.5CoCrCuFeNi HEA with an FCC
structure has recently been reported to be a promising binder for wetting WC andinhibiting WC coarsening [ 48]. The sintered WC/HEA carbide displays a higher
hardness-toughness level at room temperature than sintered WC/Co, as shown in
Table 15.1. In addition, it has higher hot hardness. This superiority is attributed to
the much ﬁner WC grains of WC/HEA carbide. The grain size of WC can bedivided into two ranges: ~0.66 μm for the larger grain size and ~0.15 μm for the
smaller grain size. In contrast, the WC/Co composite has a larger grain size of about9.95 μm and a smaller grain size of about 4.5 μm. This reﬁnement demonstrates that
HEA binder could inhibit grain growth considerably. In addition, the hardness ofWC/20 wt% Al
0.5CrCoCuFeNi carbide is HV 300 higher than that of the WC/Co
composite at 700/C14C, indicating that the HEA binder has good high-temperature
softening resistance.
Similarly, new TiC/Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5cermets with superior properties have
been developed [ 49] by considering that FCC Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5HEA (or T12), as
mentioned in Sect. 15.2.1 . It has higher contents of Ni, Cr, and Ti to wet TiC during
liquid phase sintering and also the high hardness and toughness necessary to be astrong binder [ 50,51]. The results show that TiC/Co
1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5(TiC + 20 %
T12) cermet has a much better combination of hardness and toughness than typical
TiC/Ni, TiC/Ni 13Mo 7, and commercial TiC cermets, as shown in Table 15.2.
Table 15.1 Comparison of the hardness and fracture toughness of commercial WC/Co carbides
and WC/Al 0.5CrCoCuFeNi carbide [ 48]
Carbides Grade Binder (%) HV 30 KIC(MPa m/C01/2)
WC/Al 0.5CrCoCuFeNi EA 20 1413 17.4
WC/Co (commercial) EF05 10 1900 9.1
EF20 18 1450 13
Table 15.2 Hardness and
fracture toughness of sinteredTiC + 20 %T12, TiC + 20 %
Ni, and TiC +20 %(Ni
13Mo 7).
Other data are also listed forcomparison [ 49]Cermets HV
30 KIC(MPa m/C01/2)
TiC + 20 %T12 1876 9.0
TiC + 20 %Ni 1372 11.8
TiC + 20 %Ni 1295 11.1TiC + 20 %(Ni
13Mo 7) 1639 8.5
Commercial TiC
Cermeta1685 9.1
aThe composition in weight percentage is (TiC,WC,TaC)
+ 20 %(Ni,Co,Mo) in which TiC/WC/TaC ¼16:2:2 and
Co/Ni/Mo ¼5:3:2500 J.-W. Yeh et al.Given the coarsening behavior of TiC grains, the coarsening process of TiC in these
three binders (HEA, Ni, and Ni 13Mo 7) was found to be diffusion-controlled. The
activation energies of TiC + 20 %Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5, TiC + 20 %Ni, and
TiC/Ni 13Mo 7are 788.8, 265.3, and 422.4 kJ/mol, respectively. The high activation
energy of the Co 1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5binder is attributed to its high content of carbon-
strong-binding elements, cooperative diffusion, and higher packing density ofmultiple, different-sized atoms. The low diffusion coefﬁcient and low surfaceenergy of TiC grains and low solubility of Ti in the HEA liquid explain the slowcoarsening of TiC grains. In brief, the two examples above show that suitable HEAscould be excellent HEA binders for WC carbides or TiC cermets.
15.2.4 HEA Hard Coatings
In 2004, the ﬁrst six papers on HEAs were published [ 52–57]. One was on the
concept of HEAs, three were on the investigation of cast bulk HEAs, and the othertwo papers were on thermal-spray HEA coatings and HEAN coatings [ 52,57]. That
is, the concept of HEAs was not only extended from bulk form to coatings but alsofrom HEAs to HEANs in the ﬁrst year of journal publication on HEAs. Throughalloy designs with an aim to increase the hardness, wear resistance, and oxidationresistance of components in high-temperature applications, two alloy powders ofAlCoCrFeMo
0.5NiSiTi and AlCrFeMo 0.5NiSiTi were prepared by arc melting,
crushing, and ball milling to below 325 meshes (44 μm) and then plasma sprayed
on alumina and 304 stainless steel substrates as a coating layer of about 160 μmi n
thickness [ 52]. Both alloys, in the as-deposited condition, were supersaturated with
solutes in the matrix due to rapid solidiﬁcation and had hardness values of HV486and HV524, respectively, which were about one-half of their corresponding hard-ness values of HV933 and HV944 in the as-cast state. After aging at 500, 800, and1000
/C14C, they showed signiﬁcant precipitation hardening and achieved hardness
levels of HV962 and HV990, respectively. Their wear resistances in the
as-deposited condition were similar to those of wrought SUJ2 and SKD61 steels
with much higher hardness but became superior to them by around 60 % in the800
/C14C-aged condition. Furthermore, both coating layers possessed good oxidation
resistance at 1000/C14C and even up to 1100/C14C, because their weight gains due to the
formation of oxides approached a constant level after about 50–100 h. The excellentoxidation resistance is mainly attributed to the chromium oxide layer, which formsnext to the top layer of titanium oxide. Therefore, thick coatings of HEAs arepromising for environments where high-temperature oxidation resistance and abra-
sion resistance are critical, and more compositions with excellent high-temperature
properties can be designed.
The ﬁrst HEAN thin-ﬁlm coating was deposited from a HEA target of
FeCoNiCrCuAl
0.5alloy using reactive magnetron sputtering [ 57]. HEA ﬁlm with-
out the incorporation of nitrogen had FCC structure and a hardness of 4.4 GPa, andthe HEAN ﬁlm with 41 at% N had a mixture of nanocrystalline HE nitride and15 Potential Applications and Prospects 501amorphous phase and a hardness of 10.4 GPa. Soon, Lai et al. reported a large
improvement in hardness and achieved a level of 36 GPa for HEAN coatings byusing strong nitride forming elements [ 58,59], i.e., using a target of equiatomic
AlCrTaTiZr to deposit nitride ﬁlms. Afterward, many HEANs were developed and
researched as described in Chap. 14. The main purpose of hard coatings is to
protect the substrate by providing superior wear resistance and oxidation resistanceto extend the lifetime of tools or molds. A lower friction coefﬁcient is alsobeneﬁcial in reducing the operation power, improving the surface quality, andlengthening lifetime. As an example to show the promising potential applicationsof HEAN coatings in cutting or milling tools, AlCrNbSiTiV HEAN ﬁlm displaysexcellent thermal stability in terms of both nanostructure and superhardness [ 60]. It
remains a simple NaCl-type FCC structure with a grain size around 12 nm, even
after annealing at 1000
/C14C for 5 h. It also maintains a hardness level around 41 GPa
up to 900/C14C, as shown in Fig. 15.5. The ﬂank wear of cutting tools coated with this
HEAN coating was measured by a dry-cutting test and compared with that of toolswithout coating and tools with commercial TiN or TiAlN coatings [ 61]. Fig-
ure15.6a shows the test with a 304 stainless steel workpiece, triangular carbide
insert cutting tool, and milling machine, and Fig. 15.6b shows the ﬂank wear
depths obtained with different coatings. The comparison of ﬂank wear depth
demonstrates the signiﬁcant improvement of HEAN coatings in terms of wear
resistance and lifetime.
Fig. 15.5 Effect of annealing temperature on the hardness and grain sizes (according to XRD and
TEM analyses) of AlCrNbSiTiV HEAN ﬁlm. The samples were vacuum-sealed and annealed ateach temperature for 6 h [ 60]502 J.-W. Yeh et al.15.2.5 HEA Diffusion Barriers
Besides being investigated as protective hard coatings that require good mechanical
and tribological properties as mentioned above, HEA and HEAN coatings with high
thermal stability have also been considered for applications as diffusion barriers[62]. Diffusion barriers are important interlayers, particularly in the interconnect
structures of integrated circuits, e.g., between Cu wires and dielectrics or betweenmetal pads and solders, to inhibit the rapid interdiffusion of adjacent materials (e.g., Cuand Si) or the formation of detrimental compounds (Cu silicides) that will lead to theearly failure of microelectronic devices [ 61]. Other applications including refractory
transition metals, such as Ti and Ta [ 63], and nitrides of unitary transition metals,
including TiN and TaN [ 64,65], were ﬁrst practically used as diffusion barriers in
interconnects in recent decades. However, they are unsuitable for next-generationinterconnects due to their high solid solubility to Cu and polycrystalline/columnarstructures with boundaries as fast diffusion paths. Thinner and more effective barriershave been developed in recent years, which are typically composed of (1) ternarycomponents with an amorphous structure to diminish diffusion paths, such as Ru-Ti-Nand Ru-Ta-N [ 66–68], and/or (2) layered structures with interface mismatches to
elongate diffusion paths, such as Ru/TaN and Ru/TaCN [ 69–71]. Nevertheless, in
the manufacturing generation of integrated circuits below 20 nm, robust and ultrathin
(<3 nm) barrier layers with a much higher diffusion resistance are required.
Recent studies indicated that HEA and HEAN coatings with a simple solid
solution, amorphous or nanocomposite structure, and very high thermal stability
Fig. 15.6 (a) The dry-cutting test with a workpiece, triangular carbide insert cutting tool, and
milling machine. ( b) Flank wear depth versus cutting velocity for uncoated, TiN-coated, TiAlN-
coated, and HEAN-coated insert cutting tools. Tool materials: WC/Co with a hardness of HV1516;
ﬁlm thickness, 1 μm; workpiece, 304 stainless steel; depth of cut, 0.1 mm; feed rate, 0.1 mm; and
total cutting length, 460 m [ 61]15 Potential Applications and Prospects 503present extreme resistance to the interdiffusion of Cu and Si [ 62]. Various effective
HEA and HEAN coatings were then developed as suitable diffusion barriers forpractical processing times within 30 min, including quinary NbSiTaTiZr (thickness,
20 nm; endurance temperature, 800
/C14C; endurance time, 30 min [ 72]) and senary
AlCrRuTaTiZr (5 nm, 800/C14C, 30 min [ 73]) alloys as well as (AlCrTaTiZr)N
(10 nm, 900/C14C, 30 min [ 74]) and (AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5(5 nm, 800/C14C, 30 min
[75]) nitrides. The stacking structures of HEA and HEAN ﬁlms, such as
(AlCrTaTiZr)N x/AlCrTaTiZr (10/5 nm, 900/C14C, 30 min [ 76]) and
(AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5/AlCrRuTaTiZr/(AlCrRuTaTiZr)N 0.5/AlCrRuTaTiZr (4 nm,
each layer 1 nm, 900/C14C, 30 min [ 77]), have also been developed. Despite some
practical demands including a low electrical resistivity, good adhesion to both
metal wires (Cu or Al) and dielectrics, and high resistance to current leakage, the
ultrahigh endurance temperatures (800 /C0900/C14C) of HEA and HEAN coatings
against the interdiffusion of Cu and Si at a small ﬁlm thickness (down to only4–5 nm) suggest that they are promising materials for practical applications asdiffusion barriers in microelectronic devices.
A mechanism for the high resistance to interdiffusion of HEA and HEAN
coatings (i.e., highly suppressed interdiffusion kinetics) has been suggested byChang et al. from structural and thermodynamic perspectives by examining the
diffusion resistance of thin alloy ﬁlms with different numbers of metallic elements
(also refer to Sect. 14.2.3 of Chap. 14). The alloys include unitary Ti, binary TiTa,
ternary TiTaCr, quaternary TiTaCrZr, quinary TiTaCrZrAl, and senaryTiTaCrZrAlRu [ 78]. They found that the failure temperature of the barriers against
interdiffusion of Cu and Si increased obviously from 550 to 900
/C14C as more metallic
elements were incorporated. The activation energy of Cu diffusion through senaryTiTaCrZrAlRu markedly increased from 110 kJ/mol (through unitary Ti) to 163 kJ/mol as well, according to measurements. Mechanistic analyses suggest that severe
lattice distortion strains and a high packing density caused by different atom sizes
affected the structure, and a strengthened cohesion affected the thermodynamics,which hindered the formation of vacancies and the movements of atoms, providinga total increase of 53 kJ/mole in the activation energy of substitutional Cu diffusion.This in turn suppressed interdiffusion kinetics through multicomponent HEA andHEAN barriers.
15.2.6 Irradiation-Resistant HEAs
To ensure the safe operation of nuclear reactors and maintain a sustainable energy
supply, new and advanced nuclear materials are in high demand. Much effort has
been exerted to develop better nuclear materials. It is important to understand theirdegradation under irradiation, determine their optimal operating conditions, andevaluate their lifetimes [ 79]. However, there is a diminishing return to improve
various conventional nuclear materials that have matured in the last century.Therefore, HEAs might provide a new possibility for a larger advance in materials504 J.-W. Yeh et al.for nuclear reactors. Egami et al. [ 79,80] proposed that HEAs are characterized not
only by high values of entropy but also by high atomic-level stresses originatingfrom the mixing of elements with different atomic sizes. Particle irradiation on
solids produces atomic displacements and thermal spikes. However, the high
atomic-level stresses in HEAs facilitate amorphization upon particle irradiation,followed by local melting and recrystallization due to thermal spikes. This processleaves far fewer defects in HEAs than in conventional alloys. For this reason, theymay be excellent candidates for new nuclear materials. They also conducted anelectron microscopy study of Hf-Nb-Zr alloys to support this speculation anddemonstrated the extremely high irradiation resistance of these alloys againstelectron damage. In addition, simulations of Hf-Nb-Zr alloys led to the conclusion
that HEAs with atomic-level volume strain close to 0.1 are self-healing and highly
irradiation resistant.
Furthermore, Egami et al. [ 81] reported the irradiation-induced structural
changes and phase stability of CoCuCrFeNi HEAs under fast-electron irradiationby high-voltage electron microscopy. They found that FCC solid solution showshigh phase stability against irradiation, and the FCC phase remained as the mainconstituent phase after over 40 dpa of irradiation at 298 and 773 K. This is the ﬁrststudy to provide experimental evidence for high phase stability in a ﬁve-component
HEA against irradiation. In addition, irradiation produced minor structural changes,
while grain coarsening was not observed under irradiation.
Therefore, these results demonstrate that suitable HEAs might have excellent
irradiation resistance. If high-temperature strength and toughness, high oxidationresistance, and a low absorption cross section for neutrons are also achieved, suchHEAs would be promising for broader applications in nuclear power plants.
15.3 Future Trends and Prospects
Although there are over 650 journal papers (by the end of 2014) on HEA and
HE-related materials and more groups entering into this ﬁeld, our current under-
standing of HEMs is just the tip of an iceberg. However, several future trends andprospects can still be forecasted based on the known literature on HEMs andmaterials science as reviewed in previous chapters:
1. More fundamental and basic scientiﬁc studies
Because materials science and solid-state physics are mainly based on researchon conventional materials with one or two principal elements, correspondingresearch on HEMs will have academic value. Because HEMs can be single phaseor multiphase, the best approach to understand the basic science is to investigatesingle-phase HEMs because a multiphase material is an aggregate of differentphases. Any property or behavior is in fact the overall manifestation of all
constituent phases and the phase boundaries between them. In a single-phase
HEA, the phase is a solid solution with the whole-solute matrix, and many issues15 Potential Applications and Prospects 505in conventional physical metallurgy must be reconﬁrmed with the four core
effects of HEAs: high-entropy, severe lattice distortion, sluggish diffusion, andcocktail effects. They must all be understood according to their mechanisms and
theories, which may not be a simple extension of the properties of conventional
alloys. Chapter 2(Formation rules) and Chap. 3(Physical metallurgy) present
the preliminary understanding of these mechanisms. They include phase forma-tion, mixing entropy, mixing enthalpy, atomic size difference, atomic-levelstress, strain and energy of lattice distortion, diffusion coefﬁcients, dislocationstructure and energy, stacking fault structure and energy, grain boundary struc-ture and energy, serration phenomenon, slip, twinning, and strengthening. Moreexperimental results and explanations related to basic science on superplasticity,
fatigue, creep, wear, corrosion, oxidation, magnetism, electrical and thermal
conductivity, superconductivity, etc. can be found in Chap. 6(Mechanical
Properties of High-Entropy Alloys), Chap. 7(Functional Properties), Chap. 13
(High-Entropy Metallic Glasses), and Chap. 14(High-Entropy Coatings). Fur-
thermore, direct observations and support for mechanisms and theoriesaccording to basic science are very important and can be achieved by usingadvanced technologies, as described in Chap. 4(Advanced Characterization
Techniques), which include high-resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy or analytical TEM, three-dimensional atom probes, and neutron
scattering to characterize HEAs.
2. Further development of single-phase HEMs
Among HEAs, CoCrFeMnNi [ 19,82–84], HfNbTaTiZr [ 37,41], and
DyGdHoTbY [ 85] are typical representatives for equiatomic single-phase
HEAs in FCC, BCC, and HCP lattices for basic science investigations. Moresimilar equiatomic systems will be found or designed through various means,such as CALPHAD, ab initio density functional theory calculations, hybrid
Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics simulations, and combinatorial methods, as
detailed in Chap. 11(Design of High-Entropy Alloys) and Refs. [ 86,87]. In
addition, searching for single-phase HEA compositions with more than ﬁveprincipal components will be important for both theoretical understanding andtechnological applications.
In addition to equiatomic single-phase HEAs, non-equiatomic single-phase
HEAs are also valuable for basic science since they can be compared withequiatomic single-phase HEAs to complete our understanding. It is also easier
to ﬁnd and prepare non-equiatomic single-phase HEAs by simply analyzing the
single phase of interest in multiphase HEAs with EDS (energy-dispersive X-rayspectroscopy) and EPMA (electron probe microanalysis). It should be men-tioned that both equiatomic single-phase and non-equiatomic single-phaseHEAs might provide practical properties for applications. They can be furthermodiﬁed to improve their properties by changing the composition ratio andadding more components while maintaining a single phase or forming a secondphase for precipitation strengthening or composite strengthening. In fact, con-
ventional single-phase materials and multiphase materials have their own merits506 J.-W. Yeh et al.and have been widely used in many engineering applications. This status would
be similar for HEAs.
Compared to other HECs, single-phase HEANs and HEACs are much easier
to obtain, especially by reactive sputtering with reacting gases, such as N 2and
CH 4, respectively. This is because many binary nitrides and binary carbides have
similar NaCl-type crystal structures, and the direct formation from the vaporstate, bypassing the liquid state, could also prevent phase separation duringsolidiﬁcation.
3. More research on computational methods
Because HEMs cover many combinations of new compositions, processes, andproperties, effective alloy designs and predictions by effective computational
methods are very important to save time and reduce cost in material develop-
ment. Chapter 8(Prediction of Structure and Phase Transformations), Chap. 9
(Applications of Coherent Potential Approximation to High-Entropy Alloys),Chap. 10(Applications of Special Quasi-random Structures to High-Entropy
Alloys), Chap. 11(Design of High-Entropy Alloys), and Chap. 12(CALPHAD
Modeling of High-Entropy Alloys) provide various approaches with differentmodeling and computer software. However, as HEMs involve multiple compo-nents and different microstructures, the complexity makes computations more
difﬁcult than those for conventional materials. Furthermore, databases of con-
ventional materials are still far from complete for HEMs, and the calculationresults and predictions using these databases may deviate signiﬁcantly from thecorresponding experimental results of HEMs. Therefore, there is urgent need indeveloping reliable and robust databases dedicated for HEMs as detailed inChap. 12. Needless to say, advanced computing methodologies that can model
dislocation-related properties in HEMs are highly desirable.
4. More research on performance challenges unattainable by traditional materials
HEMs have many opportunities to overcome the bottlenecks of conventional
materials. They include room-temperature superconductors, alloys exceedingthe performance and temperature capability of superalloys, and tools with veryhigh hot hardness and long lifespan. For example, it is well known that metal-type, intermetallic-type, and oxide-type superconductors can attain a criticaltemperature around 10 K, 23 K, and 160 K, respectively. However, the highestrecord of each type of superconductor is based on a conventional design of theircompositions. It is very possible to use the high-entropy concept to further
promote the critical temperature. Room-temperature or near room-temperature
superconductors could be realized in the future.
5. Further development of MEAs
Although conventional concentrated alloys, such as some superalloys and someBMGs, belong to the category of MEAs, there still exists a large uncharted areain MEAs. This is reasonable because MEAs are viewed differently from thehigh-entropy side than from the conventional low-entropy side, i.e., conven-tional alloys. It is very probable that the HEA concept will generate ideas in the
area of MEAs. The MEAs could be Fe-based, Ni-based, Co-based, Cr-based, and
Cu-based alloys and two-base, three-base, and four-base alloys. In addition to15 Potential Applications and Prospects 507different alloy design strategies for MEAs, it is suggested that suitable compo-
sitions of MEAs might be easily obtained from phases rich in some speciﬁcelements during the investigation of microstructures and their correlations with
properties of HEAs. Similar to the fact that outstanding compositions exist in
conventional alloys, it is expected that new outstanding compositions of MEAswill be discovered.
6. Assessments of existing databases to ﬁnd possible applications
Because the number of papers on HEMs exceeded 650 by the end of 2014 andthere is also much unpublished work, the accumulated results with promisingproperties have become sufﬁcient to provide suitable assessments to ﬁnd feasibleapplications. The gap between academic research and commercialization is
often small if a mutual connection is built. It can be expected that a researcher
might consider using or modifying current HEAs and HECs to ﬁt the applicationrequirements through this connection. According to this academic and industrialcorrelation model, many applications of HEMs will be generated in the future.
Acknowledgment J.W.Y, A.C.Y, and S.Y.C. would like to thank Dr. Michael C. Gao for his
patience to provide review comments and suggestions from himself and invited experts. They also
acknowledge all the ﬁnancial supports from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of
Economic Affairs, and National Tsing Hua University, R.O.C.
References
1. Sims CT, Stoloff NS, Hagel WC (1987) Superalloys II. Wiley, New York
2. Reed RC (2006) The superalloys: fundamentals and applications. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
3. Reed RC, Tao T, Warnken N (2009) Alloys-by-design: application to nickel-based single
crystal superalloys. Acta Mater 57:5898–5913
4. Walston S, Cetel A, MacKay R, O ’Hara KS, Duhl D, Dreshﬁeld R (2004) Joint development of
a fourth generation single crystal superalloy. In: Green KA (ed) Proceedings of Superalloys2004, (The 10th international symposium on superalloys, champion, Pennsylvania, USA).
TMS (The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society), pp 15–24
5. Zhang JX, Murakumo T, Koizumi Y, Kobayashi T, Harada H, Masaki S (2002) Interfacial
dislocation networks strengthening a fourth-generation single-crystal TMS138 superalloy.Metall Mater Trans A 33:3741–3746
6. Frasier DJ, Whetstone JR, Harris K, Erickson GL, Schwer RE (1990) Process and alloy
optimization for CMSX-4 superalloy single crystal airfoil. In: High temperature materialsfor power engineering. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 1281–1300
7. Reed RC, Yeh AC, Tin S, Babu SS, Miller MK (2004) Identiﬁcation of the partitioning
characteristics of ruthenium in single crystal superalloys using atom probe tomography. Scr
Mater 51:327–331
8. Yeh AC, Tin S (2005) Effects of Ru and Re additions on the high temperature ﬂow stresses of
Ni-base single crystal superalloys. Scr Mater 52:519–524
9. Yeh AC, Tin S (2006) Effects of Ru on the high-temperature phase stability of Ni-base single-
crystal superalloys. Metall Mater Trans A 37:2621–2631
10. Yeh AC, Sato A, Kobayashi T, Harada H (2008) On the creep and phase stability of advanced
Ni-base single crystal superalloys. Mater Sci Eng A 490:445–451508 J.-W. Yeh et al.11. Kawagishi K, Sato A, Harada H, Yeh AC, Koizumi Y, Kobayashi T (2009) Oxidation resistant
Ru containing Ni base single crystal superalloys. Mater Sci Technol 25:271–275
12. Kawagishi K, Yeh AC, Yokokawa T, Kobayashi T, Koizumi Y, Harada H (2012) Develop-
ment of an oxidation-resistant high-strength sixth-generation single-crystal superalloy
TMS-238. In: Huron ES (ed) Proceedings of Superalloys 2012 (The 12th international
symposium on superalloys). Wiley, New York, pp 189–195
13. Yeh AC, Chang YJ, Tsai CW, Wang YC, Yeh JW, Kuo CM (2014) On the solidiﬁcation and
phase stability of a Co-Cr-Fe-Ni-Ti high-entropy alloy. Metall Mater Trans A 45:184–190
14. Azadian S, Wei LY, Warren R (2004) Delta phase precipitation in Inconel 718. Mater Charact
53:7–16
15. Smith GD, Patel SJ (2005) The role of niobium in wrought precipitation-hardened nickel-base
alloys. In: Loria EA (ed) Proceedings of The 6th international superalloys symposium:
superalloys 718, 625, 706 and derivatives 2005, champion, Pennsylvania, USA. TMS, pp135–154
16. Shibata T, Shudo Y, Yoshino Y (1996) Effects of aluminum, titanium and niobium on the
time-temperature-precipitation behavior of alloy 706. In: Kissinger RD (ed) Proceedings of
superalloys 1996 (The 8th international symposium on superalloys, champion, Pennsylvania,USA). TMS, pp 153–162
17. Yeh AC, Yang KC, Yeh JW, Kuo CM (2014) Developing an advanced Si-bearing DS Ni-base
superalloy. J Alloys Compd 585:614–621
18. Chang YJ, Yeh JW, Yeh AC (2014) High-entropy superalloys. Doctoral thesis in progress,
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
19. Tsao TK, Yeh JW (2014) On high entropy effect and sluggish diffusion effect of high-entropy
alloys. Doctoral thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
20. Hobbs RA, Tin S, Rae CMF (2005) A castability model based on elemental solid–liquid
partitioning in advanced nickel-base single-crystal superalloys. Metall Mater Trans A
36:2761–2773
21. Wills VA, McCartney DG (1991) A comparative study of solidiﬁcation features in nickel-base
superalloys: microstructural evolution and microsegregation. Mater Sci Eng A 145:223–232
22. Tin S, Pollock TM (2004) Predicting freckle formation in single crystal Ni-base superalloys.
J Mater Sci 39:7199–7205
23. Webster GA, Sullivan CP (1967) Some of temperature cycling on the creep behaviour of
nickel-base alloy. J Inst Met 95:138–142
24. Tien JK, Gamble RP (1972) Effects of stress coarsening on coherent particle strengthening.
Metall Trans 3:2157–2162
25. Mackay RA, Ebert LJ (1983) The development of directional coarsening of the γ
0precipitate in
superalloy single crystals. Scr Mater 17:1217–1222
26. Ichitsubo T, Koumoto D, Hirao M, Tanaka K, Osawa M, Yokohawa T, Harada H (2003)
Rafting mechanism for Ni-base superalloy under external stress: elastic or elastic-plasticphenomena? Acta Mater 51:4033–4044
27. Serin K, Gobenli G, Eggeler G (2004) On the inﬂuence of stress state, stress level and
temperature on γ-channel widening in the single crystal superalloy CMSX-4. Mater Sci Eng
A 387:133–137
28. Nabarro FRN, Cress CM, Kotschy P (1996) The thermodynamic driving force for rafting in
superalloys. Acta Mater 44:3189–3198
29. Nabarro FRN (1996) Rafting in superalloys. Metall Mater Trans A 27:513–53030. Laberge CA, Fratzl P, Lebowitz JL (1997) Microscopic model for directional coarsening of
precipitates in alloys under external load. Acta Mater 45:3949–3962
31. Svoboda J, Lukas P (1996) Modelling of kinetics of directional coarsening in Ni-superalloys.
Acta Mater 44:2557–2565
32. Tien JK, Copley SM (1971) The effect of orientation and sense of applied uniaxial stress on the
morphology of coherent gamma prime precipitates in stress annealed nickel-base superalloy
crystals. Metall Trans 2:543–55315 Potential Applications and Prospects 50933. Zhang JX, Wang JC, Harada H, Koizumi Y (2005) The effect of lattice misﬁt on the
dislocation motion in superalloys during high-temperature Low-stress creep. Acta Mater53:4623–4633
34. Zhang JX, Murakumo T, Harada H, Koizumi Y (2003) Dependence of creep strength on the
interfacial dislocations in a fourth generation SC superalloy TMS-138. Scr Mater 48:287–293
35. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Miracle DB, Chuang CP, Liaw PK (2010) Refractory high-entropy
alloys. Intermetallics 18:1758–1765
36. Senkov ON, Wilks GB, Scott JM, Miracle DB (2011) Mechanical properties of
Nb
25Mo 25Ta25W25and V 20Nb20Mo 20Ta20W20refractory high entropy alloys. Intermetallics
19:698–706
37. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2011) Microstructure and
room temperature properties of a high-entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Alloys Compd
509:6043–6048
38. Zhu G, Liu Y, Ye JW (2014) Early high-temperature oxidation behavior of Ti(C, N)-based
cermets with multi-component AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy binder. Int J Refract Met Hard
Mater 44:35–41
39. Zhang Y, Zuo TT, Tang Z, Gao MC, Dahmen KA, Liaw PK, Lu ZP (2014) Microstructures and
properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog Mater Sci 61:1–93
40. Couzinie ´JP, Dirras G, Perrie `re L, Chauveau T, Leroy E, Champion Y, Guillot I (2014)
Microstructure of a near-equimolar refractory high-entropy alloy. Mater Lett 126:285–287
41. Senkov ON, Scott JM, Senkova SV, Meisenkothen F, Miracle DB, Woodward CF (2012)
Microstructure and elevated temperature properties of a refractory TaNbHfZrTi alloy. J Mater
Sci 47:4062–4074
42. Senkov ON, Senkova S, Miracle DB, Woodward C (2013) Mechanical properties of
Low-density, refractory multi-principal element alloys of the Cr-Nb-Ti-V-Zr system. MaterSci Eng A 565:51–62
43. Senkov ON, Senkova S, Woodward C, Miracle DB (2013) Low-density, refractory multi-
principal element alloys of the Cr-Nb-Ti-V-Zr system: microstructure and phase analysis. ActaMater 61:1545–1557
44. Yang X, Zhang Y, Liaw PK (2012) Microstructure and compressive properties of
NbTiVTaAlx high entropy alloys. Procedia Eng 36:292–298
45. Senkov ON, Senkova SV, Woodward C (2014) Effect of aluminum on the microstructure and
properties of two refractory high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 68:214–228
46. Senkov ON, Woodward C, Miracle DB (2014) Microstructure and properties of aluminum-
containing refractory high-entropy alloys. JOM 66:2030–2042
47. Zhang B, Gao MC, Zhang Y, Yang S, Guo SM (2015) Senary refractory high-entropy alloy
MoNbTaTiVW. Mater Sci Tech 31:1207–1213
48. Chen CS, Yang CC, Chai HY, Yeh JW, Chau JLH (2014) Novel cermet material of WC/multi-
element alloy. Int J Refract Hard Met 43:200–204
49. Lin CM, Tsai CW, Huang SM, Yang CC, Yeh JW (2014) New TiC/Co
1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5cermet
with slow TiC coarsening during sintering. JOM 66:2050–2056
50. Chou YL, Yeh JW, Shih HC (2011) Effect of molybdenum on the pitting resistance of
Co1.5CrFeNi 1.5Ti0.5Mo xalloys in chloride solutions. Corrosion 67:085002
51. Chuang MH, Tsai MH, Wang WR, Lin SJ, Yeh JW (2011) Microstructure and wear behavior
of Al xCo1.5CrFeNi 1.5Tiyhigh-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 59:6308–6317
52. Huang PK, Yeh JW, Shun TT, Chen SK (2004) Multi-principal-element alloys with improved
oxidation and wear resistance for thermal spray coating. Adv Eng Mater 6:74–78
53. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Lin SJ, Gan JY, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004)
Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design
concepts and outcomes. Adv Eng Mater 6:299–303
54. Hsu CY, Yeh JW, Chen SK, Shun TT (2004) Wear resistance and high-temperature compres-
sion strength of Fcc CuCoNiCrA l0.5Fe alloy with boron addition. Metall Mater Trans A
35:1465–1469510 J.-W. Yeh et al.55. Cantor B, Chang ITH, Knight P, Vincent AJB (2004) Microstructural development in
equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater Sci Eng A 375–377:213–218
56. Yeh JW, Chen SK, Gan JY, Lin SJ, Chin TS, Shun TT, Tsau CH, Chang SY (2004) Formation
of simple crystal structures in Cu-Co-Ni-Cr-Al-Fe-Ti-V alloys with multiprincipal metallic
elements. Metall Mater Trans A 35:2533–2536
57. Chen TK, Shun TT, Yeh JW, Wong MS (2004) Nanostructured nitride ﬁlms of multi-element
high-entropy alloys by reactive DC sputtering. Surf Coat Technol 188–189:193–200
58. Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW, Chang SY (2006) Preparation and characterization of AlCrTaTiZr
multi-element nitride coatings. Surf Coat Technol 201:3275–3280
59. Lai CH, Lin SJ, Yeh JW, Davison A (2006) Effect of substrate bias on the structure and
properties of multi-element (AlCrTaTiZr)N coatings. J Phys D Appl Phys 39:4628–4633
60. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2010) Inhibition of grain coarsening up to 1000/C14C in (AlCrNbSiTiV)N
superhard coatings. Scr Mater 62:105–118
61. Huang PK, Yeh JW (2009) On high-entropy alloy and nitride coatings sputtered from
AlCrNbSiTiV target. Doctoral thesis, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
62. Chang SY, Chen MK, Chen DS (2009) Multiprincipal-element AlCrTaTiZr-nitride
nanocomposite ﬁlm of extremely high thermal stability as diffusion barrier for Cu metalliza-tion. J Electrochem Soc 156:G37–G42
63. Kaloyeros AE, Eisenbraun E (2000) Ultrathin diffusion barriers/liners for gigascale copper
metallization. Annu Rev Mater Sci 30:363–385
64. Kouno T, Niwa H, Yamada M (1998) Effect of TiN microstructure on diffusion barrier
properties in Cu metallization. J Electrochem Soc 145:2164–2167
65. Ale ´n P, Ritala M, Arstila K, Keinonen J, Leskela ¨M (2005) Atomic layer deposition of
molybdenum nitride thin ﬁlms for Cu metallizations. J Electrochem Soc 152:G361–G366
66. Kwon SH, Kwon OK, Min JS, Kang SW (2006) Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition
of Ru-TiN thin ﬁlms for copper diffusion barrier metals. J Electrochem Soc 153:G578–G584
67. Chen CW, Chen JS, Jeng JS (2008) Improvement on the diffusion barrier performance
of reactively sputtered Ru-N ﬁlm by incorporation of Ta. J Electrochem Soc 155:H438–H442
68. Fang JS, Lin JH, Chen BY, Chin TS (2011) Ultrathin Ru-Ta-C barriers for Cu metallization.
J Electrochem Soc 158:H97–H102
69. Leu LC, Norton DP, McElwee L, Anderson TJ (2008) Ir/TaN as a bilayer diffusion barrier for
advanced Cu interconnects. Appl Phys Lett 92:111917
70. Xie Q, Jiang YL, Musschoot J, Deduytsche D, Detavernier C, Vanmeirhaeghe R, Van den
Berghe S, Ru GP, Li BZ, Qu XP (2009) Ru thin ﬁlm grown on TaN by plasma enhanced atomic
layer deposition. Thin Solid Films 517:4689–4693
71. Kim SH, Kim HT, Yim SS, Lee DJ, Kim KS, Kim HM, Kim KB, Sohn HC (2008) A bilayer
diffusion barrier of ALD-Ru/ALD-TaCN for direct plating of Cu. J Electrochem Soc 155:
H589–H594
72. Tsai MH, Wang CW, Tsai CW, Shen WJ, Yeh JW, Gan JY, Wu WW (2011) Thermal stability
and performance of NbSiTaTiZr high-entropy alloy barrier for copper metallization.J Electrochem Soc 158:H1161–H1165
73. Chang SY, Wang CY, Chen MK, Li CE (2011) Ru incorporation on marked enhancement of
diffusion resistance of multi-component alloy barrier layers. J Alloy Compd 509:L85–L89
74. Chang SY, Chen DS (2009) 10 nm-thick quinary (AlCrTaTiZr)N ﬁlm as effective diffusion
barrier for Cu interconnects at 900
/C14C. Appl Phys Lett 94:231909
75. Chang SY, Wang CY, Li CE, Huang YC (2011) 5 nm-thick (AlCrTaTiZrRu)N 0.5multi-
component barrier layer with high diffusion resistance for Cu interconnects. NanosciNanotechnol Lett 3:289–293
76. Chang SY, Chen DS (2010) Ultrathin (AlCrTaTiZr) Nx/AlCrTaTiZr bilayer structures with
high diffusion resistance for Cu interconnects. J Electrochem Soc 157:G154–G159
77. Chang SY, Li CE, Chiang SC, Huang YC (2012) 4-nm thick multilayer structure of multi-
component (AlCrRuTaTiZr)N
xas robust diffusion barrier for Cu interconnects. J Alloy
Compd 515:4–715 Potential Applications and Prospects 51178. Chang SY, Li CE, Huang YC, Hsu HF, Yeh JW, Lin SJ (2014) Structural and thermodynamic
factors of suppressed interdiffusion kinetics in multi-component high-entropy materials. SciRep 4:4162
79. Egami T, Guo W, Rack PD, Nagase T (2014) Irradiation resistance of multicomponent alloys.
Metall Mater Trans A 45:180–183
80. Nagase T, Anada S, Rack PD, Noh JH, Yasuda H, Mori H, Egami T (2013) MeV electron-
irradiation-induced structural change in the BCC phase of Zr–Hf–Nb alloy with an approxi-
mately equiatomic ratio. Intermetallics 38:70–79
81. Nagase T, Rack PD, Noh JH, Egami T (2015) In-situ TEM observation of structural changes in
nano-crystalline CoCrCuFeNi multicomponent High-Entropy Alloy (HEA) under fast electronirradiation by high voltage electron microscopy (HVEM). Intermetallics 59:32–42
82. Otto F, Yang Y, Bei H, George EP (2013) Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the phase
stability of equiatomic high-entropy alloys. Acta Mater 61:2628–2638
83. Tsai KY, Tsai MH, Yeh JW (2013) Sluggish diffusion in Co–Cr–Fe–Mn–Ni high-entropy
alloys. Acta Mater 61:4887–4897
84. Otto F, Dlouhy A, Somsen C, Bei H, Eggeler G, George EP (2013) The inﬂuences of
temperature and microstructure on the tensile properties of a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropyalloy. Acta Mater 61:5743–5755
85. Feuerbacher M, Heidelmann M, Thomas C (2015) Hexagonal high-entropy alloys. Mater Res
Lett 3:1–6
86. Gao MC, Alman DE (2013) Searching for next single-phase high-entropy alloy compositions.
Entropy 15:4504–4519. doi: 10.3390/e15104504
87. Gao MC, Zhang B, Guo SM, Qiao JW, Hawk JA (2015) High-entropy alloys in hexagonal
close-packed structure. Metall Mater Trans A, doi: 10.1007/s11661-015-3091-1512 J.-W. Yeh et al.Index
A
Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
(AIMD), 13, 17, 68, 371, 390–394,
460–464
Alloy design, 17, 62, 63, 72, 77, 109, 323, 394,
400, 421, 428, 431–432, 475, 476, 479,480, 482, 483, 489, 490
Alloying effect, 83, 174, 185–189, 202
Amorphous, 5, 12, 13, 22, 25, 31–33, 40, 41,
45, 71, 72, 78, 79, 89, 165, 166, 168,
169, 174–176, 246, 248, 386, 387,
437–439, 453, 457, 460–463, 465,467, 469, 484, 485
coating, 453, 457, 462
Atomic scale, 63, 72, 78, 83, 91, 133, 238, 392
Atomic size difference, 9, 13, 23–25, 45,
54–56, 58, 65, 67, 71, 72, 74, 79, 82,84, 86, 103, 105, 371, 387, 394, 400,
409, 488
B
Binary alloys, 64, 66, 67, 91, 99, 272, 413, 431
BMGs. SeeBulk metallic glasses (BMGs)
Body-centered cubic (BCC), 16, 17, 22, 26–31,
36, 37, 40–46, 53, 55–57, 64, 66–69,
75, 94, 97–101, 104, 106, 108, 116,118–122, 129–133, 138, 140, 142, 153,162, 163, 169, 170, 183, 186, 188, 202,
221, 239–242, 245, 253, 271–275,
277–279, 282, 287–293, 295, 301, 304,305, 309, 311–320, 323, 327–329,335–350, 352–357, 362–366, 370, 372,
374–382, 384, 385, 387–392, 394, 401,403, 410–416, 418–422, 424, 425, 428,
435–437, 439, 454–456, 480, 481, 488
Bridgman method, 16Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), 7, 8, 11, 12, 15,
23–25, 34, 35, 55, 154, 155, 201, 221,
222, 315, 390, 394, 428–435, 437–442,
445, 446, 489
C
CALculation of PHAse Diagrams
(CALPHAD), 13, 17, 36, 140, 268,
292, 295, 355, 366, 371–380, 383, 384,
386, 389, 394, 399–425, 431, 456, 479,488, 489
Cell size effect, 351
Cluster expansion, 272–275, 278, 288, 291,
295, 335
Cocktail effect, 52, 62–64, 238, 488Coherent potential application (CPA), 17, 273,
295, 300–311, 316, 317, 321, 323–329,
358–363, 365, 366
Compression, 16, 78, 97, 98, 182, 189, 194,
200, 202, 208, 210–211, 214–216, 226,
227, 439, 440, 480, 481
Conﬁgurational entropy, 8–13, 22, 54, 65, 68,
69, 118, 169, 287, 291, 295, 296, 351,
353, 366, 371, 385, 386, 388, 400, 404,
409, 410, 413, 414, 418, 420, 431
CPA. SeeCoherent potential application (CPA)
©Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M.C. Gao et al. (eds.), High-Entropy Alloys , DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5513D
Density functional theory (DFT), 17, 36,
269–271, 274, 276, 279, 280, 288, 300,
301, 304, 325, 334, 335, 348, 357, 360,
372, 386–391, 394, 406, 408, 409, 413,416, 421, 431, 488
Density of states (DOS), 37, 40, 43, 135, 242,
280, 281, 283, 294, 305, 318, 327, 334,352–354, 361–363, 366
DFT. SeeDensity functional theory (DFT)
Diffusion constants, 443, 444
Disordered solid solution, 22, 55, 58, 140, 175,
371, 384, 385, 390, 394, 409
DOS. SeeDensity of states (DOS)
E
e/a ratio, 37–40, 45, 46, 65
Elastic constants, 303, 304, 307, 309, 313, 314,
317, 319, 321, 322, 324, 358–361, 497
Elasticity, 17, 329
Electrical property, 238–243, 262, 421
Electrochemical property, 79, 248–259Electronegativity difference, 44Electronic entropy, 295, 348, 351–357, 366,
409
Electronic structure, 300, 301, 317–318, 325,
327, 361–363
Empirical rules, 23, 46, 67, 168, 371,
387, 394, 400
EMTO. SeeExact mufﬁn-tin orbitals (EMTO)
Enthalpy of mixing, 9–11, 13, 22–25, 36, 45,
54, 55, 65, 67, 79, 301, 328, 349, 371,
383, 384, 386, 387, 394, 409, 414–416,420, 431, 437, 479, 488
Entropy of mixing, 5, 6, 8–13, 22, 23, 25, 54,
55, 57, 60, 65–69, 72, 76, 140, 288, 296,
355, 357, 366, 371, 407, 409, 413–416,420, 421, 475, 478, 479, 488
Entropy sources, 16, 17, 23, 140, 351
Exact mufﬁn-tin orbitals (EMTO), 16,
301–316, 321, 323–325, 329, 358–361
Excess entropy, 77, 357, 366, 386, 401, 409,
413, 420
F
Fabrication routes, 16, 151–176, 453
Face-centered cubic (FCC), 4, 5, 7, 17, 22,
25–31, 36, 37, 39–46, 53, 55–57, 60, 64,66–69, 73–75, 79, 82–86, 88, 91, 93,
95–97, 99–101, 105, 106, 108, 116,
118–122, 124, 125, 129, 135, 143–146,163, 169, 170, 175, 182, 183, 185, 186,188, 202, 207, 208, 221, 225, 239, 240,
243, 245, 253, 258, 271, 287, 301,
303–305, 307–316, 319, 323, 324,327–329, 335–357, 360–362, 364, 366,
370–372, 374, 376, 381–383, 387–392,
400–403, 410–416, 421–424, 428, 437,439, 456, 459–461, 467, 469, 476, 477,479, 482–484, 487, 488
Fatigue, 16, 52, 102, 124, 125, 127, 128, 182,
217–222, 226, 227, 488
FCC. SeeFace-centered cubic (FCC)
First-principles, 16, 36, 37, 43, 46, 140, 372,
402, 406
G
Gibbs energy of mixing, 406, 409, 413, 418Glass-forming ability, 434
H
Hardness, 6, 16, 35, 58, 59, 99, 100,
106–108, 160, 161, 163, 164, 167,
172, 174, 182–190, 202, 210–211,
221, 225–227, 253, 258, 327, 452,454–456, 459–461, 463, 467–469,477–485, 489
HCP. SeeHexagonal close-packed (HCP)
HEAC coating. SeeHigh-entropy alloy carbide
(HEAC) coating
HEA coating. SeeHigh entropy alloy (HEA)
coating
HEAN coating. SeeHigh-entropy alloy nitride
(HEAN) coating
HECs. SeeHigh-entropy ceramics (HECs)
Helmholtz free energies, 275, 277, 294,
353–356
HERAs. SeeHigh-entropy refractory alloys
(HERAs)
HESAs. SeeHigh-entropy superalloys
(HESAs)
Hexagonal close-packed (HCP), 17, 27, 36–38,
44, 53, 55, 56, 64, 66, 75, 83, 94, 97,100, 101, 116, 260, 271, 290, 291, 295,316, 335–350, 352–357, 362, 364–366,
370–372, 374, 375, 378–384, 387–389,
392, 394, 403, 410, 412–416, 418, 419,428, 437, 488
High-entropy alloy carbide (HEAC) coating,
466–469
High-entropy alloy (HEA) coating, 1–17,
22–25, 34–37, 39–46, 52–109, 116, 118,
120, 123, 124, 126, 127, 133, 134, 136,
138, 140, 143, 144, 146–148, 152–164,514 Index166–171, 176, 181–228, 237–246,
248–263, 267–269, 273, 274, 287–296,
299–329, 333–367, 369–395, 399–425,428, 429, 431–432, 434–439, 442, 445,
446, 452–459, 462, 465–470, 475–477,
479–490
High-entropy alloy nitride (HEAN) coating,
452, 453, 459–466, 469, 483–486
High-entropy ceramics (HECs), 7, 475,
489, 490
High entropy effect, 6, 12, 52–56, 65, 66,
68–70, 260, 459
High-entropy refractory alloys (HERAs),
475–481
High-entropy superalloys (HESAs), 105,
475–480
High-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM), 248, 464
HRTEM. SeeHigh-resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM)
Hume-Rothery (H-R) rules, 23, 37, 38, 40, 67Hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics
(MC/MD), 16, 17, 284, 289, 291, 293,
295, 302, 350–352, 361–366, 395
Hydrogen storage property, 16, 260–262
K
Kinetics, 13, 16, 23, 35, 42, 52, 71, 76, 91, 92,
164, 168, 248–251, 260, 261, 269, 270,
348, 423, 457, 458, 479, 486
Korringa–Kohn–Rostoker (KKR), 302,
325–329
L
Laser cladding, 152, 160–164, 176, 453,
455, 456
Liquid melting, 152, 174
Local strain, 147, 148
M
Magnetic property, 243–248, 262, 305–307,
327, 328, 348, 360, 361
Magnetism, 348, 349, 488
MC/MD. SeeHybrid Monte Carlo/molecular
dynamics (MC/MD)
Mean-ﬁeld theory (MFT), 182, 211–215, 227
MEAs. SeeMedium-entropy alloys (MEAs)
Mechanical alloying, 12, 16, 71, 84, 152,
164–170, 174–176, 245, 383Mechanical properties, 16, 22, 52, 63, 68, 96,
133, 153, 174, 176, 181–228, 245, 258,
348, 357–361, 366, 432, 437, 440–442,445, 446, 452, 461, 476
Medium-entropy alloys (MEAs), 11, 64, 66,
489, 490
MFT. SeeMean-ﬁeld theory (MFT)
Micro-segregation, 153, 162
Microstructure, 3, 6, 7, 13–16, 52, 53, 55, 62,
68, 69, 72, 88, 97, 98, 109, 116, 118,121–124, 127, 129, 130, 133, 147, 153,154, 158–163, 165, 169, 171, 175, 176,
186, 188, 208, 219, 227, 243, 245, 248,
249, 251, 253, 258, 311, 360, 369, 372,375, 400, 401, 421, 423, 424, 453, 455,
456, 459, 461, 463, 469, 470, 476, 477,
480, 481, 489, 490
Microstructure characterization, 16, 147Multi-component alloys, 8
Multi-phase, 63
Multi-principal-element alloys, 6, 22, 69
N
Nanocomposite coating, 462Nanoindentation, 163, 164, 182, 221–227Nanoscale, 83, 118, 124, 131, 132, 148, 155,
162, 169, 445
Nanostructure, 6, 7, 147, 169, 484Nano-twins, 127
Neutron scattering, 16, 116, 117, 134–136,
138, 140, 141
P
Pair distribution function (PDF), 116, 136, 138,
139, 147, 207, 220, 285, 289, 291, 293,350–353, 362, 364, 390–393, 442–445
Phase diagrams, 3, 7, 8, 12, 13, 17, 38, 53, 64,
65, 67, 69, 70, 166, 167, 267, 268, 277,279, 280, 282, 295, 352, 355, 371, 372,
376, 380–383, 387, 390, 392, 394,
400–402, 408–411, 416, 417, 421–425
inspection, 371, 376, 380–383, 394
Phase stability, 16, 37, 39–43, 45, 46, 72, 164,
295, 327, 348–351, 372, 383, 389, 400,
410. 413. 418, 487
Phase transformations, 13, 16, 52, 59, 60,
64–72, 76, 243, 267–296, 311–313, 395,
423, 478, 489
Phonon vibration, 348, 357Physical metallurgy, 3, 12, 16, 45, 51–109, 488Index 515S
Serration, 94–95, 147, 182, 194, 196, 201, 204,
211–217, 226, 227, 488
Severe lattice distortion effect, 52, 56–59, 63,
72, 78, 80, 238–241, 453, 458, 466, 488
SFE. SeeStacking fault energy (SFE)
Single crystal, 16, 104, 157–160, 173, 176,
309, 310, 315, 357, 358, 479
Single phase, 10, 13, 17, 22, 57, 69, 90, 99, 124,
129–131, 140, 158, 161, 162, 166, 170,
182, 185, 201, 202, 204, 207, 225, 239,
267, 272, 310, 323, 324, 349, 352, 355,363, 366, 370–372, 374–376, 379–382,384–390, 394, 400, 410, 411, 416, 421,
446, 487–489
Sluggish diffusion effect, 12, 52, 59–62, 68,
71–72, 104, 108, 174, 459, 470
Solidiﬁcation, 5, 16, 22, 24, 68, 70–72, 80,
152–158, 161–163, 165, 167, 174, 176,201, 256, 375, 390, 392, 400, 421, 428,453, 483, 489
Solid solution, 3–13, 22–25, 34–38, 40–46,
53–58, 60, 63, 64, 66–69, 71, 72, 77–79,92, 95, 96, 102–105, 108, 116, 118, 119,124, 125, 127, 129, 130, 134, 135, 138,
140, 153, 161, 162, 165–169, 174–176,
185, 186, 188, 202, 214, 215, 238, 241,246, 258, 272, 273, 277–279, 282, 288,
290, 291, 295, 300, 302–304, 311, 319,
321, 323, 324, 329, 334, 336, 361, 363,370–375, 379–388, 390, 392, 394, 400,401, 403, 409, 410, 414, 416, 425, 428,
439, 456, 457, 459, 461, 469, 487
Solubility, 10, 53, 55, 66–68, 91, 166, 167,
272, 279, 312, 323, 380–383, 394, 410,483, 485Special quasi-random structures (SQS), 17,
273, 277, 280, 284, 287, 288,
290, 291, 295, 301, 302, 308,333–367, 387, 489
Stacking fault energy (SFE), 82–87, 95–97,
100, 103–105, 170, 323–325, 329, 349,360, 361
T
Temperature effect, 96, 189, 196–199, 202,
204, 215
Tension, 16, 36, 78, 105, 124, 127, 182, 208,
210–211, 217, 226, 227
Thermodynamics, 8, 11, 13, 16, 17, 23–35, 43,
45, 52, 54, 65, 69, 158, 174–175, 267,
268, 270–273, 276, 278, 282, 286–295,302, 315, 335, 348, 361, 366, 371, 372,379, 383, 400–403, 406–425, 428, 431,
438, 457, 458, 486
databases, 295, 372, 379, 401–403, 408
Thin ﬁlm, 6, 12, 16, 138, 168, 171–173, 176,
182, 428, 452, 465, 470, 483
Three-dimension (3D) atom probe
tomography, 13
V
Valence electron concentration (VEC), 11, 13,
25, 26, 28, 30, 32, 37–46, 65,
312, 319–322, 365, 371, 383,
400, 409
Vapor deposition, 171, 175, 453Vibrational entropy, 280, 282, 288, 290,
351–357, 366, 413, 421516 Index