The characteristic of the sequencing batch reactor (SBR), anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR) and 
sequencing batch biofilm reactor (SBBR) 
Koobum Kim 
 
Abstract 
Improvements in aeration devices and controls have allowed sequencing batch reactor (SBR) to successfully 
compete with conventio nal activated sludge systems. SBRs can ac hieve equalization, primary clarification, 
biological treatment, and secondary cl arification in a single reactor. The pro cesses of SBR system are five or six 
steps as anoxic fill, aerated fill, r eact, settle decant. SBR system is shown high removal efficiency for nitrogen, 
phosphate and heavy metal. But the effi ciency of SBR system is affected on salt and heavy metals. The removal 
efficiency of pollutants between SBR and sequencing batch biofilm reactor (SBBR) shows that th e efficiency of 
SBBR system is higher than SBR system for COD, BOD. Media and granular are used in SBBR system to 
complement some disadvantages of SBR system such as lots of sludge amount and high sludge volume index. 
 
Keywords : SBR, ASBR, SBBR, nitrification and denitrification, nutrient. 
 
Introduction 
The SBR processor that can effectivel y compete with conventional activated sludge systems such as continuous 
stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) is not considered in wastew ater treatment until the improvements in aeration devices 
and controls in the late 1 950s and early 1960s. (EPA, 1999 )  Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) systems ha ve benefits 
to alternative conventional flow systems for the biologic al treatment of both domesti c and industrial wastewater. 
(Ying-Chih et al., 2007) There are some disadvantages such as lots of sludge amount and high sludge volume index 
in SBR process. (Sirianuntapiboona, et  al., 2007) The Sequencing Batch R eactor (SBR) is operated under non-
steady state conditions and same tank with an activated slu dge process. The process consists of repetition of a cycle 
including five separate steps: feed, react, settle, draw and idle. Anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR) and 
sequencing batch biofilm reactor (SBBR) system is developed to complement disadvantage of SBR system. 
(Arnaldo et al., 2007; Li et al., 2003) The using of ASBR is attributed to a growing revaluation of advantages of anaerobic processes and studying about the anaerobic biochemistry and microbiology. Anaerobic sequencing batch 
reactors (ASBR) are currently used for the treatment of wa stewaters with amounts of par ticulate organic matter such 
as swine manure, leachate and dairy. (Arnaldo et al., 2007) The sequencing batch biofilm reactor (SBBR) have been 
shown that it has the high efficiency of  nitrogen removal. ( Li et al., 2003) 
Some advantages and disadvantages of SBRs are listed below: (EPA, 1999) Advantages of SBRs 
• Equalization, primary clarification, biological treatment, and secondary cl arification can be achieved in a 
single reactor vessel. 
• Operating flexibility and control. 
• Minimal footprint. 
• Potential capital cost savings by eliminating clarifiers and other equipment. 
 
 Disadvantages of SBRs 
• A higher level of sophistication is required especially for larger systems, of timing units and controls. 
• Higher level of maintenance asso ciated with more sophisticated controls, automated switches, and 
automated valves. 
• Potential of discharging floating or settled sludge du ring the DRAW or decant phase with some SBR 
configurations. 
• Potential plugging of aeration devices during selected operating cycles, depending on the aeration system 
used by the manufacturer. 
• Potential requirement for equalization after the SBR, depending on the downstream processes. 
 
Operation of SBR, ASBR and SBBR system 
The procedure of operation of SBR 
Normally, the process follows basic st eps of Fill, React, Settle and Decant. Figure 1 shows the process of SBR 
worked on one tank. In Figure 1, picture 1, 2 is sorted as fill phases and picture 3, 4, 5, 6 are non-fill phases. The 
ability to create aerobic or anoxic conditions within the reactor results in flexible operation, better treatment of waste.  
 
 
 
  
1. Anoxic Fill 2. Aerated Fill 3. React 
 
  
  
4. Settle 5. Decant 6. Idle 
 
Fig.1. SBR process. (www.liquitek.com) 
The below process explain about the each step  from fill to idle. (www.liquitek.com) 
1. Anoxic Fill - Most of this period occurs without aeratio n to create an environment that favors the procreation of 
microorganisms with good settling characteristics.  
2. Aerated Fill - Nitrification and denitrificat ion occurs at the beginning of this stage. 
3. React - some microorganisms will di e because of the lack of food and w ill help reduce the volume of the settling 
sludge. 
4. Settle – liquids should not enter or leave the tank to avoid turbulence in the supernatant. 
5. Decant - This removal must be done without disturbing the settled sludge. 
6. Idle - The wasted sludge is pumped to an anaerobic digester to reduce the volume of the sludge to be discarded.  
 The operation of ASBR and SBBR 
Generally, SBR, ASBR and SBBR system have similar pr ocedure for treating polluta nts. The process of ASBR 
consist of five step of fill, react, settle, draw and idle. AS BR system is that in SBR system, anaerobic step is adapted 
in total process instead of anoxic and aerated step. The di fferent of systems is that ASBR has anaerobic condition in 
first step and SBBR has a biofilm in SBR system. In anaerobic status, granular biomass has some advantages over 
processes, including better solids retention, operating control and absence of settling. (Arnaldo et al., 2007; Sirianuntapiboona et al., 2007 ) As adding the biofilm in SBR, the removal efficiency of pollutants in conventional 
SBR is increased. The process is no t changed in SBR; however, to achieve the ideal operating condition for 
efficiency of biofilm, the reactor conditio n such as DO concentration should be considered. (Sirianuntapiboona et al., 
2005;  Li et al., 2003) Figure 2. illu strates the granular biomass used in  ASBR reactor[a] and media adapted in 
SBBR.[b]  
 
 
[a] [b] 
Fig. 2 granular biomass in ASBR[a] (Bing et al., 2005) and media included SBBR system.[b] (Sirianuntapiboona et 
al., 2005) 
 
The comparison among SBR, ASBR and SBBR 
Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) 
Removal about nutrient in SBR system was studied about n itrification, denitrification, biological phosphorous and 
monitoring and control. (Obaja et al., 2003; Akin et al., 2005; Ahmet, 2006) For nitrification, denitrification, Obaja et al. (2003) studied about nutrients in piggery wastewater with high organic matter, nitrogen (N) and phosphorus 
(P) content in a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) with anaero bic, aerobic and anoxic stages. The SBR proved to be a 
very flexible tool, and was particularly suitable for the treatment of piggery wastewater, characterized by high nutrient content.  
Nitrification is a two-step  reaction: ammonium (NH
4+) is first oxidized to nitrite (NO 2−) by autotrophic ammonia 
oxidizers, nitrite is then oxidized to nitrate (NO 3−) by autotrophic nitrite-oxidizers (R eactions (I) and (II)). In anoxic 
denitrification, nitrite/nitrate is reduced to nitrogen gas (N 2) by heterotrophic denitrifiers  with the presence of extra 
carbon source (acid) as electro n donor (Reaction (III)). Ni trification can only be succes sfully operated under low 
chemical oxygen demand (COD), sufficient dissolved oxygen (DO) and long sludge retention time (SRT), while denitrification needs sufficient COD under anoxic conditi on. These different requirements pose challenges for 
nitrogen removal in sequencing batch reactor (SBR) system s, where nitrification and de nitrification occur in the 
same tank:(Le et al., 2007) 
• 2NH
4+ +3O 2→ 2NO 2− + 4H+ +2H 2O    (I) 
• 2NO 2− +O 2→ 2NO 3−      (II) 
• 5CH 3COOH + 8NO 3−→ 4N 2 + 10CO 2 + 6H 2O + 8OH−  (III) Obaja et al. (2003) could get some results about treatment of nutrient in SBR system. In working with initial 
concentrations of 1500 mg/l NH+
4 –N and 144 mg/l PO3- 4–P, A removal efficiency of 99.7% for nitrogen and 97.3% 
for phosphate was attained. The ratio C/N must be higher than 1.7 to obtain complete denitrification to molecular 
nitrogen during the denitrification stage. The SBR can also remove high concentrations of NH+
4–N even at 
temperatures as low as 16 ˚C. (Obaja et al., 2003) 
Chiu et al. (2007) told that both the ammonium and the organic loading rates affect the occurrence of the 
simultaneous nitrification –denitrification (SND) proces s in the SBR system. The nitrogen removal efficiency 
decreased gradually with increasing ammonium-loading rate s at constant COD loading. Therefore, appropriate 
control of the carbon source concentra tion can inspire the SND in a traditional SRB to optimize biological nutrient 
removal. 
Ahmet, (2006) reported that effects of salt concentration (0–6%, w/v) on specific nutrient removal rates from saline 
wastewater in a sequencing batch r eactor (SBR). Specific nutrient (COD, NH 4-N and PO 4-P) removal rates 
decreased with increasing sa lt concentration due to adverse effects of  salt on microorganisms. Fig . 3 shows the 
removal rate of COD, NH 4-N and PO 4-P.  
 
Fig. 3 Variation of specific COD, NH 4-N and PO 4-P removal rate with salt content. (Ahmet, 2006) 
Akin et al. (2005), Obaja et al. (2003) and Li et al. (2007) studied to establish control strategies for biological 
phosphorus and nitrogen removal using Oxidation–reduction potential (ORP), dissolved oxygen (DO) and pH profiles in a Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) reactor. To monitor and control biological  nutrient removal process, 
ORP, pH and DO can be used. The ORP can be used as a monitoring parameter to manage biological nitrogen 
removal in SBR systems. The regulation of ORP allows N of the effluents to be controlled by constantly adapting 
aeration to the amount of reducing matter present in the sludge. (Obaja et al., 2003) The change in the ORP and pH 
appears to be related to nitrate concentration and th ese parameters show a nitrate ‘‘knee’’ and the ammonia 
‘‘valley’’ during the operation. Therefore, the experimental study showed that pH and ORP values can be used as 
control parameters for denitrification and biological phosph orus removal. However, it is observed that pH profile 
provide much information during the oxic phase, whereas ORP in the anoxic phase. The pH, ORP, nitrate and 
phosphate profiles observed in these studies are shown in Fi g. 4. The nitrate break poin t measured by ORP indicates 
the end of the denitrification period (anoxic to anaerobic  conditions), whereas the DO break point indicates the end 
of the nitrification period. (Akin et al., 2005) 
 Cycle time (a) Cycle time (b) 
Fig. 4. (a) Nitrate and phosphate, (b) ORP and pH profiles. . (Akin et al., 2005) 
 
Li et al. (2007) reported that both alkalinity and ORP exhibited clear variations in a SBR cycle under different 
operating conditions (COD, DO, and HRT), but alkalinity presented a better indication for effluent nitrogen concentration than ORP did. The involvement of COD and DO in ORP hindered its clear correlation with effluent 
nitrogen concentration. Alkalinity exhibited a linear revers e correlation with effluent nitrogen concentration (Alk 
=−4.26[N] + 216, R
2 = 0.92). Alkalinity lower than 100 mg/L indicated  insufficient denitrifi cation, while alkalinity 
higher than 200–250 mg/L was related with insufficient nitrification. (Li et al., 2007) 
Sirianuntapiboona, et al. (2007) studied about removal of Zn2+, Cu2+, Pb2+ and Ni2+ by bio-sludge in sequencing 
batch reactor and granular activated carbon-SBR (GAC-SBR) systems. In th is study, Sirianuntapiboona, et al. 
(2007) used both resting (living) a nd autoclaved (dead) bio-sludge. The re sults are that The maximum adsorption 
capacities of Zn2+ and Cu2+ were about 17 –19 mg/g of bio-sludge. The results show that the bio-sludge could adsorb 
Zn2+ and Cu2+ from the wastewater, independently. The resting bio-sludge showed COD and BOD 5 removal abilities 
while dead bio-sludge did not. Cu2+ and Zn2+ could reduce COD and BOD 5 removal abilities of the bio-sludge, 
because they masked the adso rption site on the bio-sludge, in competit ion with organic matters. The heavy metals 
adsorption efficiency of  the system increased with th e increase of MLSS concentration of the system. Table 1 shows 
the efficiency of the removal of heavy metals (Zn2+, Cu2) by bio-sludge in sequencing batch reactor.  
The SBR system with short SRT operation was found to be suitable to treat the wastewat er containing heavy metals 
especially Pb2+ and Ni2+, because, it could remove both organic matter and heavy metals form the wastewater with 
high efficiency. The heavy metals (Pb2+, Ni2+) removal efficiency of both SBR and GAC-SBR systems were 
increased with the increase of  hydraulic retention time (HRT), or the decrease of organic loading. The SBR system 
showed higher heavy metals removal efficiency than GAC- SBR system at the same orga nic loading or HRT. Both 
organic and heavy metals (Pb2+ and Ni2+) adsorption abilities of bio-sludge were 10 –30% reduced by autoclaving at 
110 ˚C for 10 min. However, the dead bio-sludge was more suitable to use as the adsorbent of metal ions even the 
heavy metals adsorption capacity of dead bio-sludge was 10 –30% lower than that of living bio-sludge. 
(Sirianuntapiboona, et al., 2007)  
Table 1. The effluent concentration and removal efficiency of wastewater in SBR system (Sirianuntapiboona, et al., 
2007) 
 He et al. (2007) studied about  influence of  the addtion of  zeolite powder in SBR system. The results show that the 
addition of zeolite powder could improve the activity of  the activated sludge in SBR reactor, and COD, NH 3-N, TN 
and TP could be removed in a shorter cycle time and could also improve the nitrification rate and settling property 
of activated sludge, which is helpful to inhabit the sludge bulking and to enhance the performance of biological nitrogen removal.  
 
Anaerobic sequencing Batch Reactor (ASBR) 
Anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (A SBR) is a newly developed technology and has been extensively studied due 
to its advantages: (Xiangwen et al., 2007) 
• No short circuit, as in  the case of fixed-bed continuous systems. 
• High efficiency for both COD removal and gas production. 
• No primary and secondary settles. 
• Flexible control. 
Despite its operational advantages, the ASBR has not been us ed as widely in the wastew ater treatment industry as 
other anaerobic processes. One of the reasons is its low perf ormance efficiency if overloa ded. (Cheong et al., 2007) 
Gregor et al. (2007) reported that about  the treatment of brewery slurry, the process phases were adapted to fit the 
brewery slurry discharge schedule. ASBR experiments were conducted under different organic loading rates (OLR) 
from 3.23 to 8.57 kg of COD/m
3 day of reactor and control was con ducted with OLR of 3.0 kg of COD/m3 day. The 
ASBR COD degradation efficiency was from 79.6% to 88.9%, control experiment efficiency was 65%. ASBR VSS 
removal efficiency was from 78.5% to 90.5%, cont rol experiment efficiency was 54%. The ASBR methane 
production yield was from 371 to 418L/kg COD inserted, control experiment methane yield was 248L/kg COD inserted. 
Combined ASBR –UASB treatment can increase the biogas yield compared to conventional up-flow anaerobic 
sludge blanket (UASB) treatment for all brewery wastewater. Combined ASBR –UASB treatment can also reduce 
overall reactor volume by 25% compared to conve ntional UASB treatment. (Gregor et al., 2007) 
Sarti et al. (2007) told that pioneering efforts in react ors design have led to the development of new high rate 
reactors that can operate at higher loadings than conventio nal digesters, and systems capable of treating medium to 
low-strength wastewaters. Therefore, (S arti et al., 2007) studied that the comparative performa nce of three pilot-
scale anaerobic sequencing batch reactors treating domestic sewage, and the removal efficiencies in the two ASBR1 
and ASBR2 reactors operated under mi xed liquor recirculation show mean values of COD and TSS removals 
efficiencies of 40% and 65%, and aver age removal efficiencies of 60% and 80%  for COD and TSS, respectively. Fig. 
5 shows the result of the experi ment of (Sarti et al., 2007). 
 Fig. 5 the COD removal efficiency of two kinds of ASBR and organic loading rate. (Sarti et al., 2007) 
 
Sequencing Batch Biofilm Reactor (SBBR) and Anae robic Sequencing Batch Biofilm Reactor (ASBBR) 
Sirianuntapiboon et al. (2005) reported that a SBBR system installed plastic media on the bottom of the SBR system 
could increase the removal efficiencies, improve sludge quality, reduce the amount of excess bio-sludge, and also 
reduce the acclimatization period of the system. The SBBR system was 2–3 d faster than the SBR system in 
reaching steady state and mainta ined almost stable removal efficiencies due to the low standard derivation values. 
Table 2 shows the comparison of th e treatment result of SBR and SBBR. Table 2. The effluent qualities and removal efficiencies of SBR and SBBR system (Sirianuntapiboon, et al., 2005) 
SBR system 
 
SBBR system 
 
Venkata Mohan et al. (2007) reported that Biofilm configured sequencing batch reactor (SBR) showed 
comparatively higher efficiency to the corresponding su spended growth and granul ar activated carbon (GAC) 
configured systems studied with same wastewater and sulf ate removal efficiency of 20% was observed due to the 
prevailing anoxic microenvironment during the sequence phase operation and the existing internal anoxic zones in 
the biofilm. Table 3 presents the comparison among Biofilm, Suspended GAC and Suspended. 
Table 3. Comparative performance evalua tion of SBBR with other reactor config urations studied (Venkata Mohan et 
al., 2007) 
 
Pinho et al. (2005) reported that th e anaerobic sequencing batch biofilm reactor (ASBBR) containing biomass 
immobilized in inert support and homoge nized by mechanical stirring offers a potential alterna tive for accelerating 
the hydrolysis process, and stirring can help hasten the reduction of the particle diameter of particulate organic 
matter. The bioparticle size exerted a decisive influenc e on the performance of the anaerobic process under the 
conditions tested. The dissolution rates were apparently influenced mainly by the foam packing, whereas the consumption of filtered COD was probably influenced  by more complex factors. (Pinho et al., 2005) 
 Conclusion 
Advantages of SBRs are that equaliza tion, primary clarification, biological  treatment, and seco ndary clarification 
can be achieved in a single reactor vessel. These advantages can reduce the treatment area and cost. 
The pollutant removal efficiency of SBR system is shown high removal efficiency for nitrogen and phosphate. And 
the SBR system can remove heavy metal such as Zn2+, Cu2+, Pb2+ and Ni2+ with organic pollutant and nitrogen.  
The efficiency of SBR system to  treat specific nutrient (COD, NH 4-N and PO 4-P) is affected on salt concentration in 
wastewater due to adverse effects of salt on microorganisms. And the heavy metals such as Cu2+ and Zn2+ in 
competition with organic matters could reduce COD and BOD 5 removal abilities, because the heavy metals 
adsorption efficiency of th e system increased with the increase of MLSS concentration of the system. 
The comparison of removal efficiency between SBR and S BBR shows that the efficiency of SBBR system is higher 
than SBR system for COD, BOD. To complement some disadv antages of SBR system such as lots of sludge amount 
and high sludge volume index, SBBR or ASBBR system is used to treatment of wastewater. 
 
Reference 
 
EPA (1999), Wastewater Technology F act Sheet Sequencing Batch Reactors 
 
Ying-Chih, C.; Li-Ling L.; Cheng-Nan C.; Allen C. Ch ao. (2007) Control of carbon and ammonium ratio for 
simultaneous nitrification and denitrifi cation in a sequencing batch bioreactor. International Biodeterioration & 
Biodegradation , 59 1–7 
 
Sirianuntapiboon, S.; and Hongsrisuwan, T. (2007) Removal of Zn2+ and Cu2+ by a sequencing batch reactor 
(SBR) system. Bioresource Technology  98, 808-818. 
 
Muhammad Farhan, A.; Sun-Kee H.; Sang-Hyun, K.; Dong-Hoon, K.; and Hang-Sik, S. (2007) Sludge 
characteristics in anaerobic SBR system producing hydrogen gas. WATER RESEARCH , 41,1177-1184. 
 
Sheng-bing, H.; Gang, X; Hai-nan, K.; Xin, L. (2007) Improving the performance of sequencing batch reactor 
(SBR) by the addition of zeolite powder. Journal of Hazardous Materials  142, 493–499 
 
Arnaldo, S.; Bruna, S. F.; Marcelo Z.; Eugenio, F. (2007) Anaerobic sequencing batch reactors in pilot-scale for 
domestic sewage treatment. Desalination  216, 174–182 
 
Sirianuntapiboona, S.; Jeeyachokb, N.; Larplaia, R. ( 2005) Sequencing batch reactor biofilm system for 
treatment of milk in dustry wastewater. Journal of Environmental Management , 76 177–183 
 
Li, J.; Xing, X.H.; Wang, B.Z. (2003) Characteristics of phosphorus removal from wastewater by biofilm 
sequencing batch reactor (SBR). Biochemical-Engineering-Journal , 16(3): 279-285 
 
Bing, L.; Ying, l. S.; Yu, y. L. (2005) Pretreatment of coking wastewater using anaerobic sequencing batch 
reactor (ASBR). Journal of Zhejiang University Science  
 
Obaja, D. S.; Mace, J.; Costa, C.; Sa ns, J. Mata-Alvarez (2003) Nitrifica tion, denitrificati on and biological 
phosphorus removal in piggery wastewater using a sequencing batch reactor. Bioresource Technology , 87:103–
111 
 
Ak ın, B.S.; Ugurlu, A. (2005) Monitoring and control of biological nutrient removal in a Sequencing Batch 
Reactor. Process Biochemistry,  40: 2873–2878 
 Ahmet Uygur. (2006) Specific nutrient removal rates in saline wastewater treatment  using sequencing batch 
reactor, Process Biochemistry,  41: 61–66 
 
Baikun Li.; Shannon Irvin. (2007) The comparison of alkalinity and ORP as indicators for nitrification and denitrification in a sequen cing batch reactor (SBR). Biochemical Engineering Journal , 34: 248–255 
 
Sirianuntapiboon, S.; Ungkaprasatcha O. (2007) Removal of Pb
2+ and Ni2+ by bio-sludge in sequencing batch 
reactor (SBR) and granular activat ed carbon-SBR (GAC-SBR) systems. Bioresource Technology  98: 2749 –
2757 
 
Xiangwen, S.; Dangcong, P.; Zhaohua, T.; Xinghua, J. (2007) Treatment of brewery wastewater using 
anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR). Bioresource Technology . 
 
Cheong, D.Y.; Conly L. H. (2007) Effect of feeding strategy on the stability of anaerobic sequencing batch 
reactor responses to or ganic loading conditions. Bioresource Technology . 
 
Gregor, D.; Zupanbib.; Straqinbar, M.; Milenko, R. (2007) Treatment of brewery slurry in thermophilic 
anaerobic sequencing batch reactor. Bioresource Technology  98: 2714 –2722 
 
Pinho, S. C.; Ratusznei, S. M.; Rodrigues A. D.; Foresti E.; Zaiat, M. (2005) Influence of bioparticle size on the 
degradation of partially soluble wastewater in an  anaerobic sequencing batch biofilm reactor (ASBBR). Process 
Biochemistry  40; 3206–3212 
 
Mohana S. V.; Rao N. C.; Sarma, P. N. (2007) Low-biod egradable composite chemical wastewater treatment by 
biofilm configured sequen cing batch reactor (SBBR). Journal of Hazardous Materials  144:108–117 
 
http://www.sequencertech.com/ 
 http://www.liquitek.com.au/ 
 
http://www.anaerobictechnologies.com/  
http://www.rpi.edu/ 