Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationPart 1000        INTRODUCTION
1010        INTRODUCTION
1010  A.        Scope and Application of Methods
 The procedures described in these standards are intended for the examination of waters of a
wide range of quality, including water suitable for domestic or industrial supplies, surface water,
ground water , cooling or circulating water, boiler water, boiler feed water, treated and untreated
municipal or industrial wastewater, and saline wa ter. The unity of the fields of water supply,
receiving water quality, and wastewater treatment and disposal is recogniz ed by presenting
methods of analysis for each constituent in a single section for all types of waters. 
An effort has been made to present methods that apply generally. Where alternative methods
are necessary for samples of different composition, the basis  for selecting the most appropriate
method is presented as clearly as possible. However, samples with extreme concentrations or
otherwise unusual compositions or characteristics may present difficulties that preclude the
direct use of these methods. Hence,  some modification of a procedure may be necessary in
specific instances. Whenever a procedure is modified, the analyst should state plainly the nature
of modification in the report of results. 
Certain procedures are intended for use with sludges and sedi ments. Here again, the effort
has been to present methods of the widest po ssible application, but when chemical sludges or
slurries or other samples of highly unusual composition are encountered, the methods of this
manual may require modification or may b e inappropriate. 
Most of the methods included here have been endorsed by regulatory agencies. Procedural
modification without formal approval may be unacceptable to a regulatory body. 
The analysis of bulk chemicals received for water treatment is not inc luded herein. A
committee of the American Water Works Association prepares and issues standards for water
treatment chemicals. 
Part 1000  contains information that is common to, or useful in, laboratories desiring to
produce analytical results of known qua lity, that is, of known accuracy and with known
uncertainty in that accuracy. To accomplish this, apply the quality assurance methods described
herein to the standard methods described elsewhere in this publication. Other sections of Part
1000  address labo ratory equipment, laboratory safety, sampling procedures, and method
development and validation, all of which provide necessary information. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1010  B.        Statistics
1.  Normal Distribution
 If a measurement is repeated many times under essentially  identical conditions, the results
of each measurement, x, will be  distributed randomly about a mean value (arithmetic average)
because of uncontrollable or experimental e rror. If an infinite number of such measurements
were to be accumulated, the individual  values would be distributed in a curve similar to those
shown in  Figure 1010:1 . The left curve illustrates the Gaussian or normal  distribution, which is
described pr ecisely by the mean, µ, and the  standard deviation, σ. The mean, or average, of the
distribution  is simply the sum of all values divided by the number of values  so summed, i.e., µ
= (∑ixi)/n. Because no measurements are  repeated an infinite number of t imes, an estimate  of
the mean is  made, using the same summation procedure but with n equal to  a finite number of
repeated measurements (10, or 20, or. . .). This  estimate of µ is denoted by x. The standard
deviation of the normal distribution is defined  as σ = [∑(x−µ)2/n]1/2. Again, the  analyst can only
estimate the standard deviation because the number of observations made is finite; the estimate
of σ is denoted  by s and is calculated as follows: 
 
The standard deviation fixes the width, or spread, of the normal  distribution, and also includes a
fixed fraction of the values making up the curve. For example, 68.27% of the measurements lie
between µ ± 1σ, 95.45% between µ ± 2σ, and 99.70% between  µ ± 3σ. It is sufficiently accurate
to state that 95%  of the values  are within ±2 σ and 99% within ±3 σ. When values are assigned
to the ±σ multiples, they are confidence limits. For example, 10  ± 4 indicates that the
confidence limits are 6 and 14, while values  from 6 to 14 represent the confidence interv al. 
Another useful statistic is the standard error of the mean, σµ,  which is the standard deviation
divided by the square root of the  number of values, or 
 . This is an estimate of the accuracy
of the mean and implies that another sample from the same p opulation would have a mean within
some multiple of this. Multiples of this statistic include the same fraction of the values as stated
above for σ. In practice, a relatively small number of average  values is available, so the
confidence intervals of the  mean are  expressed as 
  where t has the following values for
95%  confidence intervals: 
 
 n     t  
  2 12.71 
  3   4.30 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation n     t  
  4   3.18 
  5   2.78 
10   2.26 
 ∞   1.96 
The use of t compensates for the tendency of a small number of  values to underestimate
uncertainty. For n > 15, it is common to  use t = 2 to estimate the 95% confidence interval. 
Still another statistic is the relative standard deviation, σ/µ,  with its  estimate s/x, also known
as the coefficient of variation  ( CV), which commonly is expressed as a percentage. This statistic
normalizes the standard deviation and sometimes facilitates making direct comparisons among
analyses that include a wide range  of  concentrations. For example, if analyses at low
concentrations  yield a result of 10 ± 1.5 mg/L and at high concentrations 100±  8 mg/L, the
standard deviations do not appear comparable. However, the percent relative standard deviations
are 100 (1.5/10) =   15% and 100 (8/100) = 8%, which indicate the smaller variability obtained by
using this parameter. 
2.  Log-Normal Distribution
 In many cases the results obtained from analysis of environmental samples will not be
normally distributed, i.e., a graph of the data will be obviously skewed, as shown at right in
Figure 1010:1 , with the mode, median, and me an being distinctly different. To obtain a nearly
normal distribution, convert the results to logarithms and then calculate x and s. The
antilogarithms of these two values are estimates of the geometric mean and the geometric
standard deviation, xg and sg. 
3.  Rejection of Data
 Quite often in a series of measurements, one or more of the results will differ greatly from
the other values. Theoretically, no result should be rejected, because it may indicate either a
faulty technique that casts doubt on all r esults or the presence of a true variant in the distribution.
In practice, reject the result of any analysis in which a known error has occurred. In
environmental studies, extremely high and low concentrations of contaminants may indicate the
existence of areas with problems or areas with no contamination, so they should not be rejected
arbitrarily. 
An objective test for outliers has been described.1 If a set of data is ordered from low to high:
xL, x2 . . . xH, and the average and standard deviation are c alculated, then suspected high or low
outliers can be tested by the following procedure. First, calculate the statistic T : Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
Second, compare the value of T  with the value from Table 1010:I  for either a 5% or 1% level of
significance. If the calculated T  is larger than the table value for the number of measurements, n,
then the xH or xL is an outlier at that level of significance. 
Further information on statistical techniques is available elsewhere.2,3 
4.  References
         1.    BARNETT, V. & T. LEWIS.  1984. Outliers in Statistical Data. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, N.Y.
         2.    NATRELLA, M.G.  1963. Experimental Statistics. National Bur. Standards Handbook 91,
Washington, D.C.
         3.    SNEDECOR, G.W. & W.G.  COCHRAN.  1980. Statistical Methods. Iowa State University
Press, Ames.
1010  C.        Glossary
1.  Definition of Terms
 The purpose of this glossary is to define concepts, not regulatory terms; it is not intended to
be all-inclusive. 
Accuracy —combination of bias and precision of an analytical procedure, which reflects the
closeness of a measured value to a true value. 
Bias—consistent deviation of measured values from the true value, caused by systematic errors
in a procedure. 
Calibration check standard —standard used to determine the state of calibration of an instrument
between periodic recalibr ations. 
Confidence coefficient —the probability, %, that a measurement result will lie within the
confidence interval or between the confidence limits. 
Confidence interval —set of possible values within which the true value will lie with a specified
level of probability. 
Confidence limit —one of the boundary values defining the confidence interval. 
Detection levels —Various levels in increasing order are: 
Instrumental detection level (IDL) —the constituent concentration that produces a signal
greater than f ive times the signal/ noise ratio of the instrument. This is similar, in many
respects, to ‘‘critical level’’ and ‘‘criterion of detection.’’ The latter level is stated asStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.645 times the s of blank analyses. 
Lower level of detection (LLD) —the constituent  concentration in reagent water that produces
a signal 2(1.645) s above the mean of blank analyses. This sets both Type I and Type II
errors at 5%. Other names for this level are ‘‘detection level’’ and ‘‘level of detection’’
(LOD). 
Method detection level (MDL) —the constituent concentration that, when processed through
the complete method, produces a signal with a 99% probability that it is different from
the blank. For seven replicates of the sample, the mean must be 3.14 s above the blank
where s is the st andard deviation of the seven replicates. Compute MDL from replicate
measurements one to five times the actual MDL. The MDL will be larger than the LLD
because of the few replications and the sample processing steps and may vary with
constituent and matrix . 
Level of quantitation (LOQ)/minimum quantitation level (MQL) —the constituent
concentration that produces a signal sufficiently greater than the blank that it can be
detected within specified levels by good laboratories during routine operating condition s.
Typically it is the concentration that produces a signal 10 s above the reagent water blank
signal. 
Duplicate —usually the smallest number of replicates (two) but specifically herein refers to
duplicate samples, i.e., two samples taken at the same time f rom one location. 
Internal standard —a pure compound added to a sample extract just before instrumental analysis
to permit correction for inefficiencies. 
Laboratory control standard —a standard, usually certified by an outside agency, used to
measure the b ias in a procedure. For certain constituents and matrices, use National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) Standard Re ference Materials when they are available. 
Precision —measure of the degree of agreement among replicate analyses of a sample, u sually
expressed as the standard deviation. 
Quality assessment —procedure for determining the quality of laboratory measurements by use
of data from internal and external quality control measures. 
Quality assurance —a definitive plan for laboratory operati on that specifies the measures used to
produce data of known precision and bias. 
Quality control —set of measures within a sample analysis methodology to assure that the
process is in control. 
Random error —the deviation in any step in an analytical proced ure that can be treated by
standard statistical techniques. 
Replicate —repeated operation occurring within an analytical procedure. Two or more analyses
for the same constituent in an extract of a single sample constitute replicate extract analyses. 
Surro gate standard —a pure compound added to a sample in the laboratory just before
processing so that the overall efficiency of a method can be determined. 
Type I error —also called alpha error, is the probability of deciding a constituent is present whenStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationit actually is absent. 
Type II error —also called beta error, is the probability of not detecting a constituent when it
actually is present. 
1020        QUALITY ASSURANCE
1020  A.        Introduction
 This section applies primarily to chemical analyses. See Section 9020  for quality assurance
and control for microbiological analyses. 
Quality assurance (QA) is the definitive program for laboratory operation that specifies the
measures required to produce defensible data of known precision and accuracy. This program
will be defined in a documented laboratory quality system. 
The laboratory quality system will consist of a QA manual, written procedures, work
instructions, and  records. The manual should include a quality policy that defines the statistical
level of confidence used to express the precision and bias of data, as well as the method
detection limits. Quality systems, which include QA policies and all quality control  (QC)
processes, must be in place to document and ensure the quality of analytical data produced by
the laboratory and to demonstrate the competence of the laboratory. Quality systems are essential
for any laboratory seeking accreditation under state or fe deral laboratory certification programs.
Included in quality assurance are quality control ( Section 1020B ) and quality assessment
(Section 1020C ). See Section 1030  for evaluation of data quality. 
1.  Quality Assurance Planning
 Establish a QA program and prepare a QA manual or plan. Include in the QA manual and
associated documents the following items1-4: cover sheet with approval signatures; quality
policy statement; organizational structure; st aff responsibilities; analyst training and performance
requirements; tests performed by the laboratory;  procedures for handling and receiving samples;
sample control and documentation procedures; procedures for achieving traceability of
measurements; major  equipment, instrumentation, and reference measurement standards used;
standard operating procedures (SOPs) for each analytical method; procedures for generation,
approval, and control of policies and procedures; procedures for procurement of reference
materials and supplies; procedures for procurement of subcontractors’ services; internal quality
control activities; procedures for calibration, verification, and maintenance of instrumentation
and equipment; data-verification practices including interlaborat ory comparison and
proficiency-testing programs; procedures to be followed for feedback and corrective action
whenever testing discrepancies are detected; procedures for exceptions that permit departure
from documented policies; procedures for system and p erformance audits and reviews;
procedures for assessing data precision and accuracy and determining method detection limits;Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationprocedures for data reduction, validation, and reporting; procedures for records archiving;
procedures and systems for control of t he testing environment; and procedures for dealing with
complaints from users of the data. Also define and include the responsibility for, and frequency
of, management review and updates to the QA manual and associated documents. 
On the title page, includ e approval signatures and a statement that the manual has been
reviewed and determined to be appropriate for the scope, volume, and range of testing activities
at the laboratory,4 as well as an indication that management has made a commitment to assure
that the quality systems defined in the QA manual are implemented and followed at all times. 
In the QA manual, clearly specify and document the managerial responsibility, authority,
quality goals, objectives, and commitment to quality. Write the manual so th at it is clearly
understood and ensures that all laboratory personnel understand their roles and responsibilities. 
Implement and follow chain-of-custody procedures to ensure that chain of custody is
maintained and documented for each sample. Institute pro cedures to permit tracing a sample and
its derivatives through all steps from collection through analysis to reporting final results to the
laboratory’s client and disposal of the sample. Routinely practice adequate and complete
documentation, which is cri tical to assure data defensibility and to meet laboratory
accreditation/certification requirements, and ensure full traceability for all tests and samples. 
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) describe the analytical methods to be used in the
laboratory i n sufficient detail that a competent analyst unfamiliar with the method can conduct a
reliable review and/or obtain acceptable results. Include in SOPs, where applicable, the
following items2-5: title of referenced, consensus test method; sample matrix or matrices; method
detection level (MDL); scope and application; summary of SOP; definitions; interferences;
safety considerations; waste management; apparatus, equipment, and supplies; reagents and
standards; sample collection, preservation, shipment, and s torage requirements; specific quality
control practices, frequency, acceptance criteria, and required corrective action if acceptance
criteria are not met; calibration and standardization; details on the actual test procedure,
including sample preparation;  calculations; qualifications and performance requirements for
analysts (including number and type of analyses); data assessment/data management; references;
and any tables, flowcharts, and validation or method performance data. At a minimum, validate a
new SOP before use by first determining the MDL and performing an initial demonstration of
capability using relevant regulatory guidelines. 
Use and document preventive maintenance procedures for instrumentation and equipment.
An effective preventive mainten ance program will reduce instrument malfunctions, maintain
more consistent calibration, be cost-effective, and reduce downtime. Include measurement
traceability to National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Standard Reference
Materials (SRMs) or  commercially available reference materials certified traceable to NIST
SRMs in the QA manual or SOP to establish integrity of the laboratory calibration and
measurement program. Formulate document-control procedures, which are essential to data
defensibil ity, to cover the complete process of document generation, approval, distribution,
storage, recall, archiving, and disposal. Maintain logbooks for each test or procedure performedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwith complete documentation on preparation and analysis of each sample, incl uding sample
identification, associated standards and QC samples, method reference, date/time of
preparation/analysis, analyst, weights and vol umes used, results obtained, and any problems
encountered. Keep logbooks that document maintenance and calibratio n for each instrument or
piece of equipment. Calibration procedures, corrective actions, internal quality control activities,
performance audits, and data assessments for precision and accuracy (bias) are discussed in
Section 1020B  and  Section 1020C . 
Data reduction, validation, and reporting are the final steps in the data-generation process.
The data obtained from an analytical instrument must first be subjected to the data reduction
processes described in the applicable SOP before the final result can b e obtained. Specify
calculations and any correction factors, as well as the steps to be followed in generating the
sample result, in the QA manual or SOP. Also specify all of the data validation steps to be
followed before the final result is made availabl e. Report results in standard units of mass,
volume, or concentration as specified in the method or SOP. Report results below the MDL in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in the SOP. Ideally, include a statement of uncertainty
with each result. See references and bibliography for other useful information and guidance on
establishing a QA program and developing an effective QA manual. 
2.  References
         1.    STANLEY, T.T. & S.S. VERNER.  1983. Interim Guidelines and Specifications for
Preparing Quality Assurance Project Pl ans. EPA-600/4-83-004, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
         2.    QUALITY SYSTEMS COMMITTEE, NAT IONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LABORATORY
ACCREDITATION CONFERENCE.  1996. National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Conference, 2nd Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. [available online].
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
         3.    QUALITY SYSTE MS COMMITTEE, NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LABORATORY
ACCREDITATION CONFERENCE.  1997. National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Conference, 2nd Interim Meeting, Bethesda, Md. [available online]. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
         4.    INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION.  1996. General
Requirements for the Competence of Testing and Calibration Laboratories, ISO/IEC
Guide 25-Draft Four. International Org. for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
         5.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PR OTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Guidance for the Preparation of
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) fo r Quality-Related Documents. EPA QA/G-6,
Washington, D.C.
3.  Bibliography
 DELFINO, J.J.  1977. Quality assurance in water and wastewater analysis laboratories. Water Sew.
Works  124:79.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation INHORN, S.L.,  ed. 1978. Quality Assurance Practices for Health Laboratories. American Public
Health Assoc., Washington, D.C.
 STANLEY, T.W. & S.S. VERNER.  1983. Interim Guidelines and Specifications for Preparing
Quality Assurance Project Plans. EPA- 600/4-83-004, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Washington, D.C.
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1997. Manual for the Ce rtification of Laboratories
Analyzing Drinking Water. EPA-815-B-97-001, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, D.C.
 INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION.  1990. General Requirements for the
Competence of Testing and Calibration Laborat ories, ISO/IEC Guide 25. International Org.
for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Conference (NELAC) Notice of Conference and Availability of Standards.
Federa l Register  59, No. 231.
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Good Automated Laboratory Practices.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agen cy, Research Triangle Park, N.C.
 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR LABORATORY ACCREDITATION.  1996. General Requirements for
Accreditation. A2LA, American Assoc. La boratory Accreditation, Gaithersburg, Md. 
1020  B.        Quality Control
 Include in each analytical method or SOP the minimum required QC for each analysis. A
good quality control program consists of at least the following elements, as applicable: initial
demonstration of capability, ongoing d emonstration of capability, method detection limit
determination, reagent blank (also referred to as method blank), laboratory-fortified blank (also
referred to as blank spike), laboratory-fortified matrix (also referred to as matrix spike),
laboratory-for tified matrix duplicate (also referred to as matrix spike duplicate) or duplicate
sample, internal standard, surrogate standard (for organic analysis) or tracer (for radiochemistry),
calibration, control charts, and corrective action, frequency of QC indic ators, QC acceptance
criteria, and definitions of a batch. Section 1010  and Section 1030  describe calculations for
evaluating data quality. 
1.  Initial Demonstration of Capability
 The laboratory should conduct an initial demonstration of capability (IDC) at least once, by
each analyst, before analysis of any sample, to demonstrate proficiency to perform the method
and obtain acceptable resu lts for each analyte. The IDC also is used to demonstrate that
modifications to the method by the laboratory will produce results as precise and accurate as
results produced by the reference method. As a minimum, include a reagent blank and at least
four l aboratory-fortified blanks (LFBs) at a concentration between 10 times the method detection
level (MDL) and the midpoint of the calibration curve or other level as specified in the method.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationRun the IDC after analyzing all required calibration standards. Ensu re that the reagent blank
does not contain any analyte of interest at a c oncentration greater than half the MQL or other
level as specified in the method. See Section 1010C , for definition of MQL. Ensure that
precision and accuracy (percent recovery) calcu lated for the LFBs are within the acceptance
criteria listed in the method of choice. If no acceptance criteria are provided, use 80 to 120%
recovery and ≤20% relative standard deviation (RSD), as a starting point. If details of initial
demonstration of ca pability are not provided in the method of choice, specify and reference the
method or procedure used for demonstrating capability. 
2.  Ongoing Demonstration of Capability
 The ongoing demonstration of capability, sometimes referred to as a ‘‘laboratory control
sample or laboratory control standard,’’ ‘‘quality control check sample,’’ or
‘‘laboratory-fortified blank,’’ is used to ens ure that the laboratory remains in control during the
period when samples are analyzed, and separates laboratory performance from method
performance on the sample matrix. See ¶ 5 below for further details on the laboratory-fortified
blank. Preferably obtai n this sample from an external source (not the same stock as the
calibration standards). Analyze QC check samples on a quarterly basis, at a minimum. 
3.  Method Detection Level Determination and Application
 Determine the method detection level (MDL) for each analyte of interest and method to be
used before data from any samples are reported, using the procedure described in Section 1030C .
As a starti ng point for determining the concentration to use in MDL determination, use an
estimate of five times the estimated detection limit. Perform MDL determinations as an iterative
process. If calculated MDL is not within a factor of l0 of the value for the kno wn addition, repeat
determinations at a more suitable concentration. Conduct MDL determinations at least annually
(or other specified frequency) for each analyte and method in use at the laboratory. Perform or
verify MDL determination for each instrument. Perform MDL determinations over a period of at
least 3 d for each part of the procedure. Calculate recoveries for MDL samples. Recoveries
should be between 50 and 150% and %RSD values ≤ 20% or repeat the MDL determination.
Maintain MDL and IDC data and hav e them available for inspection. 
Apply the MDL to reporting sample results as follows: 
•  Report results below the MDL as ‘‘not detected.’’ 
•  Report results between the MDL and MQL with qualification for quantitation. 
•  Report results above the MQL w ith a value and its associated error. 
4.  Reagent Blank
 A reagent blank or method blank consists of reagent water (See Section 1080 ) and all
reagents that normally are in contact with a sample during the entire analytical procedure. The
reagent blank is used to determine the contribution of  the reagents and the preparative analytical
steps to error in the measurement. As a minimum, include one reagent blank with each sample
set (batch) or on a 5% basis, whichever is more frequent. Analyze a blank after the dailyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcalibration standard and afte r highly contaminated samples if carryover is suspected. Evaluate
reagent blank results for the presence of contamination. If unacceptable contamination is present
in the reagent blank, identify and eliminate source of contamination. Typically, sample resu lts
are suspect if analyte(s) in the reagent blank are greater than the MQL. Samples analyzed with
an associated contaminated blank must be re-prepared and re-analyzed. Refer to the method of
choice for specific acceptance criteria for the reagent blank. G uidelines for qualifying sample
results with consideration to reagent blank results are as follows: 
•  If the reagent blank is less than the MDL and sample results are greater than the MQL, then no
qualification is required. 
•  If the reagent blank is gr eater than the MDL but less than the MQL and sample results are
greater than the MQL, then qualify the results to indicate that analyte was detected in the
reagent blank. 
•  If the reagent blank is greater than the MQL, further corrective action and quali fication is
required. 
5.  Laboratory-Fortified Blank
 A laboratory-fortified blank is a reagent water sample to which a known concentration of the
analytes of interest has been added. A LFB is used to evaluate laboratory performance and
analyte recovery in a blank matrix. As a minimum, include one LFB with each sample set
(batch) or on a 5% basis, whichever is more frequent. The definition of a batch is typically
method-specific. Process the LFB through all of the sample preparation and analysis steps. Use
an added concentrati on of at least 10 times the MDL, the midpoint of the calibration curve, or
other level as specified in the method. Prepare the addition solution from a different reference
source than that used for calibration. Evaluate the LFB for percent recovery of the added
analytes. If LFB results are out of control, take corrective action, including re-preparation and
re-analysis of associated samples if required. Use the results obtained for the LFB to evaluate
batch performance, calculate recovery limits, and plot c ontrol charts (see ¶ 12 below). Refer to
the method of choice for specific acceptance criteria for the LFB. 
6.  Laboratory-Fortified Matrix
 A laboratory-fortified matrix (LFM) is an additional portion of a sample to which known
amounts of the analytes of interest are added before sample preparation. The LFM is used to
evaluate analyte recovery in a sample mat rix. As a minimum, include one LFM with each sample
set (batch) or on a 5% basis, whichever is more frequent. Add a concentration of at least 10 times
the MRL, the midpoint of the calibration curve, or other level as specified in the method to the
selected  sample(s). Preferably use the same concentration as for the LFB to allow the analyst to
separate the effect of matrix from laboratory performance. Prepare the LFM from a reference
source different from that used for calibration. Make the addition such tha t sample background
levels do not adversely affect the recovery (preferably adjust LFM concentrations if the known
sample is above five times the background level). For example, if the sample contains the analyte
of interest, make the LFM sample at a conce ntration equivalent to the concentration found in theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationknown sample. Evaluate the results obtained for LFMs for accuracy or percent recovery. If LFM
results are out of control, take corrective action to rectify the effect or use another method or the
method  of standard addition. Refer to the method of choice for specific acceptance criteria for
LFMs until the laboratory develops statistically valid, laboratory-specific performance criteria.
Base sample batch acceptance on results of LFB analyses rather than LFMs alone, because the
matrix of the LFM sample may interfere with the method performance. 
7.  Laboratory-Fortified Matrix  Duplicate/Duplicate Sample
 A LFM duplicate is a second portion of the sample described in ¶ 6 above to which a known
amount of the analyte of interest is added before sample preparation. If sufficient sample volume
is col lected, this second portion of sample is added and processed in the same way as the LFM.
If sufficient sample volume is not collected to analyze a LFM duplicate, use an additional
portion of an alternate sample to obtain results for a duplicate sample to g ather data on precision.
As a minimum, include one LFM duplicate or one duplicate sample with each sample set (batch)
or on a 5% basis, whichever is more frequent . Evaluate the results obtained for LFM duplicates
for precision and accuracy (precision alone  for duplicate samples). If LFM duplicate results are
out of control, take corrective action to rectify the effect or use another method or the method of
standard addition. If duplicate results are out of control, reprepare and reanalyze the sample and
take additional corrective action as needed (such as reanalysis of sample batch). Refer to the
method of choice for specific acceptance criteria for LFM duplicates or duplicate samples until
the laboratory develops statistically valid, laboratory-specific per formance criteria. If no limits
are included in the method of choice, calculate preliminary limits from initial demonstration of
capability. Base sample batch acceptance on results of LFB analyses rather than LFM duplicates
alone, because the matrix of the  LFM sample may interfere with the method performance. 
8.  Internal Standard
 Internal standards (IS) are used for organic analyses by GC/MS, some GC analyses, and
some metals analyses by ICP/MS. An internal standard is an analyte included in each standard
and added to each sample or sample extract/digestate  just before sample analysis. Internal
standards should mimic the analytes of interest but not interfere with the analysis. Choose an
internal standard having retention time or mass spectrum separate from the analytes of interest
and eluting in a represent ative area of the chromatogram. Internal standards are used to monitor
retention time, calculate relative response, and quantify the analytes of interest in each sample or
sample extract/digestate. When quantifying by the internal standard method, measure all analyte
responses relative to this internal standard, unless interference is suspected. If internal standard
results are out of control, take corrective action, including reanalysis if required. Refer to the
method of choice for specific internal stand ards and their acceptance criteria. 
9.  Surrogates and Tracers
 Surrogates are used for organic analyses; tracers are used for radiochemistry analyses.
Surrogates and tracers are used to evaluate method performance in each sample. A surrogateStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationstandard is a compound of a known amount added to each sample before extraction. Surrogates
mimic the analytes of interest and are compound(s) unlikely to be found in environmental
samples, such as fluorinated compounds or stable, isotopically labeled analogs of the analytes of
interest. Tracers are a different isotope of the analyte or element of interest. Surrogates and
tracers are introduced to samples before extraction to monitor extraction efficiency and percent
recovery in each sample. If surrogate or tracer results are out of control, take correc tive action,
including repreparation and reanalysis if required. Refer to the method of choice for specific
surrogates or tracers and their acceptance criteria, until the laboratory develops statistically valid,
laboratory-specific performance criteria. 
10.  Calibration
a.  Instrument calibration:  Perform instrument calibration, as well as maintenance, according
to instrument manual instructions. Use instrument manufacturer’s recommendations for
calibration. Perform instrument performance checks, such as those for GC/MS  analyses,
according to method or SOP instructions. 
b.  Initial calibration:  Perform initial calibration with a minimum of three concentrations of
standards for linear curves, a minimum of five concentrations of standards for nonlinear curves,
or as specified by the method of choice. Choose a lowest conce ntration at the reporting limit, and
highest concentration at the upper end of the calibration range. Ensure that the calibration range
encompasses the analytical concentration values expected in the samples or required dilutions.
Choose calibration standa rd concentrations with no more than one order of magnitude between
concentrations.
 Use the following calibration functions as appropriate: response factor for internal standard
calibration, calibration factor for external standard calibration, or calibrat ion curve. Calibration
curves may be linear through the origin, linear not through the origin, or nonlinear through or not
through the origin. Some nonlinear functions can be linearized through mathematical
transformations, e.g., log. The following accepta nce criteria are recommended for the various
calibration functions. 
If response factors or calibration factors are used, the calculated %RSD for each analyte of
interest must be less than the method-specified value. When using response factors (e.g., for
GC/MS analysis), evaluate the performance or sensitivity of the instrument for the analyte of
interest against minimum acceptance values for the response factors. Refer to the method of
choice for the calibration procedure and acceptance criteria on the re sponse factors or calibration
factors for each analyte. 
If linear regression is used, use the minimum correlation coefficient specified in the method.
If the minimum correlation coefficient is not specified, then a minimum value of 0.995 is
recommended. C ompare each calibration point to the curve and recalculate. If any recalculated
values are not within the method acceptance crite ria, identify the source of outlier(s) and correct
before sample quantitation. Alternately, a method’s calibration can be judge d against a reference
method by measuring the method’s ‘‘calibration linearity’’ or %RSD among the ‘‘responseStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfactors’’ at each calibration level or concentration.2 
Use initial calibration, with any of the above functions (response factor, calibration fac tor, or
calibration curve), for quantitation of the analytes of interest in samples. Use calibration
verification, described in the next section, only for checks on the initial calibration and not for
sample quantitation, unless otherwise specified by the method of choice. Perform initial
calibration when the instrument is set up and whenever the calibration verification criteria are
not met. 
c.  Calibration verification:  Calibration verification is the periodic confirmation by analysis
of a calibration standard that the instrument pe rformance has not changed significantly from the
initial calibration. Base this verification on time (e.g., ev ery 12 h) or on the number of samples
analyzed (e.g., after every 10 samples). Verify calibration by analyzing a single standard at a
concentration near or at the midpoint of the calibration range. The evaluation of the calibration
verification analysis is  based either on allowable deviations from the values obtained in the
initial calibration or from specific points on the calibration curve. If the calibration verification is
out of control, take corrective action, including reanalysis of any affected samp les. Refer to the
method of choice for the frequency of calibration verification and the acceptance criteria for
calibration verification.
11.  QC Calculations
 The following is a compilation of equations frequently used in QC calculations. 
a.  Initial calibrations:
 Relative response factor (RRF): 
where: 
            RRF =   relative response factor, 
                A  =   peak area or height of characteristic ion measured, 
                C  =   concentration, 
                is  =   internal standard, and 
                  x =   analyte of interest. 
Respo nse factor (RF): 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwhere: 
                RF =   response factor, 
                  A =   peak area or height, 
                  C =   concentration, and 
                  x =   analyte of interest. 
Calibration factor (CF): 
Relative standard deviation (%RSD): 
where: 
                  s  =   standard deviation, 
                  n =   total num ber of values, 
                  xi =   each individual value used to calculate mean, and 
                  x =   mean of n values.
b.  Calibration verification:
 % Difference (%D) for response factor: 
where: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
% Recovery: 
c.  Laboratory-fortified blank (laboratory control sample):
 
d.  Surrogates:
 
e.  Laboratory-fortified matrix (LFM) sample (matrix spike sample):
 
f.  Duplicate sample:
 Relative percent difference (RPD): 
g.  Method of standards addition:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
where: 
                  C =   concentration of the standard solution, mg/L, 
                S1 =   signal for fortified portion, 
                S2 =   signal for unfortified portion, 
                V1 =   volume of standard addition, L, and 
                V2 =   volume of sample portion us ed for method of standard addition, L. 
12.  Control Charts
 Two types of control charts commonly used in laboratories are as follows: accuracy or
means charts for QC samples, including reagent blanks, laboratory control standards, calibration
check standards, laboratory fortified blanks, labo ratory fortified matrices, and surrogates; and
precision or range charts, %RSD or relative percent difference (RPD), for replicate or duplicate
analyses. These charts are essential tools for quality control. Computer-generated and maintained
lists or datab ases with values, limits, and trending may be used as an alternate to control charts. 
a.  Accuracy (means) chart:  The accuracy chart for QC samples is constructed from the
average and standard deviation of a specified numbe r of measurements of the analyte of interest.
The accuracy chart includes upper and lower warning levels (WL) and upp er and lower control
levels (CL). Common practice is to use ±2 s and ±3 s limits for the WL and CL, respectively,
where s represents standard deviation. These values are derived from stated or measured values
for reference materials. The number of measuremen ts, n or n-1, used to determine the standard
deviation, s, is specified relative to statistical confidence limits of 95% for WLs and 99% for
CLs. Set up an accuracy chart by using either the calculated values for mean and standard
deviation or the percent recovery. Percent recovery is necessary if the concentration varies.
Construct a chart for each analytical method. Enter results on the chart each time the QC sample
is analyzed. Examples of control charts for accuracy are given in Figure 1020:1 .
b.  Precision (range) chart:  The precision chart also is constructed from the average and
standard deviation of a specified number of meas urements of the analyte of interest. If the
standard deviation of the method is known, use the factors from Table 10 20:I to construct the
central line and warning and control limits as in Figure 1020:2 . Perfect agreement between
replicates or duplicates results in a difference of zero when the values are subtracted, so the
baseline on the chart is zero. Therefore for pr ecision charts, only upper warning limits and upper
control limits are meaningful. The standard deviation is converted to the range so that the analyst
need only subtract the two results to plot the value on the precision chart. The mean range is
computed as:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
the control limit as 
and the warning limit as 
where: 
                D2 =   factor to convert s to the range (1.128 for duplicates, as given in Table 1020:I ), 
              s(R) =   standard deviation of the range, and 
                D4 =   factor to convert mean range to 3 s(R) (3.267  for duplicates, as given in Table
1020:I ). 
A precision chart is rather simple when duplicate analyses of a standard are used ( Figure
1020:2 ). For duplicate analyses of samples, the plot will appear different because of the variation
in sample concentrat ion. If a constant relative standard deviation in the concentration range of
interest is assumed, then R, D4R etc.,  may be computed as above for several concentrations, a
smooth curve drawn through the points obtained, and an acceptable range for duplicat es
determined. Figure 1020:3  illustrates such a chart. A separate table, as suggested below the
figure, will be needed to track precision over time. 
More commonly, the range can be expressed as a function of the relative standard deviation
(coefficient of  variation). The range can be normalized by dividing by the average. Determine
the mean range for the pairs analyzed by 
and the variance (square of the standard deviation) as 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationThen draw lines on the chart at R + 2sR and R + 3sR and, for each duplicate  analysis,
calculate normalized range and enter the result on the chart. Figure 1020:4  is an example of such
a chart. 
c.  Chart analyses:  If the warning limits (WL) are at the 95% confidence level, 1 out of 20
points, on the average, would exceed that limit, whereas only 1 out of 100 would exceed the
control limits (CL). Use the following guidelines, based on these stat istical parameters, which
are illustrated in Figure 1020:5  :
 Control limit—If one measurement exceeds a CL , repeat the analysis immediately. If the
repeat measurement is within the CL, continue analyses; if it exceeds the CL, discontinue
analyses and corr ect the problem. 
Warning limit—If two out of three successive points exceed a WL, analyze another sample.
If the next point is within the WL, continue analyses; if the next point exceeds the WL, evaluate
potential bias and correct the problem. 
Standard d eviation—If four out of five successive points exceed 1 s, or are in decreasing or
increasing order, analyze another sample. If the next point is less than 1 s, or changes the order,
continue analyses; otherwise, discontinue analyses and correct the problem.  
Trending—If seven successive samples are on the same side of the central line, discontinue
analyses and correct the problem. 
The above considerations apply when the conditions are either above or below the central
line, but not on both sides, e.g., four  of five values must exceed either +1 s or −1s. After
correcting the problem, reanalyze the samples analyzed between the last in-control measurement
and the out-of-control one. 
Another important function of the control chart is assessment of improvements i n method
precision. In the accuracy and precision charts, if measurements never or rarely exceed the WL,
recalculate the WL and CL using the 10 to 20 most recent data points. Trends in precision can be
detected sooner if running averages of 10 to 20 are ke pt. Trends indicate systematic error;
random error is revealed when measurements randomly exceed warning or control limits. 
13.  QC Evaluation for Small Sample Sizes
 Small sample sizes, such as for field blanks and duplicate samples, may not be suitable for
QC evaluation with control charts. QC evaluation techniques for small sample sizes are
discussed elsewhere.3 
14.  Corrective Action
 Quality control data outside the acceptance limits or exhibiting a trend are evidence of
unacceptable error in the analytical process. Take corrective action promptly to determine and
eliminate the source of the error. Do not repo rt data until the cause of the problem is identified
and either corrected or qualified. Example data qualifiers are listed in Table 1020:II . Qualifying
data does not eliminate the need to take corrective actions, but allows for the reporting of data of
known quality when it is either not possible or practical to reanalyze the sample(s). MaintainStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationrecords of all out-of-control events, determined causes, and corrective action taken. The goal of
corrective action is not only to eliminate such events, but also t o reduce repetition of the causes. 
Corrective action begins with the analyst, who is responsible for knowing when the
analytical process is out of control. The analyst should initiate corrective action when a QC
check exceeds the acceptance limits or exhi bits trending and should report an out-of-control
event to the supervisor. Such events include QC outliers, hold-time failures, loss of sample,
equipment malfunctions, and evidence of sample contamination. Recommended corrective
action to be used when QC d ata are unacceptable are as follows: 
•  Check data for calculation or transcription error. Correct results if error occurred. 
•  Check to see if sample(s) was prepared and analyzed according to the approved method and
SOP. If it was not, prepare and/or analyze again. 
•  Check calibration standards against an independent standard or reference material. If
calibration standards fail, reprepare calibration standards and/or recalibrate instrument and
reanalyze affected sample(s). 
•  If a LFB fails, reanaly ze another laboratory-fortified blank. 
•  If a second LFB fails, check an independent reference material. If the second source is
acceptable, reprepare and reanalyze affected sample(s). 
•  If a LFM fails, check LFB. If the LFB is acceptable, qualify the data for the LFM sample or
use another method or the method of standard addition. 
•  If a LFM and the associated LFB fail, reprepare and reanalyze affected samples. 
•  If reagent blank fails, analyze another reagent blank. 
•  If second reagent blank fai ls, reprepare and reanalyze affected sample(s). 
•  If the surrogate or internal standard known addition fails and there are no calculation or
reporting errors, reprepare and reanalyze affected sample(s). 
If data qualifiers are used to qualify samples no t meeting QC requirements, the data may or
may not be usable for the intended purposes. It is the responsibility of the laboratory to provide
the client or end-user of the data with sufficient information to determine the usability of
qualified data. 
15.  References
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1990. Quality Assurance/Quality Control
Guidance for Removal Activities, Sampling QA/QC Plan and Data Validation
Procedures. EPA-540/G-90/004, U.S. Envir onmental Protection Agency, Washington,
D.C.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1997. 304h Streamlining Proposal Rule.
Federal Register , March 28, 1997 (15034).
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. National Functional Guidelines forStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationInorganic Data Review. EPA-540/R-94- 013, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Contract Laboratory Program, Office of  Emergency and Remedial Response,
Washington, D.C.
1020  C.        Quality Assessment
 Quality assessment is the process used to ensure that quality control measures are being
performed as required and to determine the quality of the data produced by the laboratory. It
includes such items as proficiency samples, laboratory intercomparison samples, and
performance audits. These are applied to test the precision, accuracy, and detection limits of the
methods in use, and to assess adherence to standard operating procedure requirements. 
1.  Laboratory Check Sample s (Internal Proficiency)
 The laboratory should perform self-evaluation of its proficiency for each analyte and method
in use by periodically analyzing laboratory check samples. Check samples with known amounts
of the analytes of interest supplied by an outside organization or blind additions can be prepared
independently within the laboratory to determine pe rcent recovery of the analytes of interest by
each method. 
In general, method performance will have been established befo rehand; acceptable percent
recovery consists of values that fall within th e established acceptance range. For example, if the
acceptable range of recovery for a substance is 85 to 115%, then the analyst is expected to
achieve a recovery within that range o n all laboratory check samples and to take corrective
action if results are outside of the acceptance range. 
2.  Laboratory Intercomparison Samples
 A good quality assessment program requires participation in periodic laboratory
intercomparison studies. Commercial and some governmental programs supply laboratory
intercomparison samples containing one or multipl e constituents in various matrices. The
frequency of participation in intercomparison studies should be adjusted relative to the quality of
results produced by the analysts. For routine procedures, semi-annual analyses are customary. If
failures occur, tak e corrective action and analyze laboratory check samples more frequently until
acceptable performance is achieved. 
3.  Compliance Audits
 Compliance audits are conducted to evaluate whether the laboratory meets the applicable
requirements of the SOP or consensus method claimed as followed by the laboratory.
Compliance audits can be conducted by internal or external p arties. A checklist can be used to
document the manner in which a sample is treated from time of receipt to final reporting of the
result. The goal of compliance audits is to detect any deviations from the SOP or consensus
method so that corrective action can be taken on those deviations. An example format for aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationchecklist is shown in Table 1020:III . 
4.  Laboratory Quality Systems Audits
 A quality systems audit program is designed and conducted to address all program elements
and provide a review of the quality system. Quality systems audits should be conducted by a
qualified auditor(s) who is knowl edgeable about the section or analysis being audited. Audit all
major elements of the quality system at least annually. Quality system audits may be conducted
internally or externally; both types should occur on a regular scheduled basis and should be
hand led properly to protect confidentiality. Internal audits are used for self-evaluation and
improvement. External audits are used for accreditation as well as education on client
requirements and for approval of the end use of the data. Corrective action sho uld be taken on all
audit findings and its effectiveness reviewed at or before the next scheduled audit. 
5.  Management Review
 Review and revision of the quality system, conducted by laboratory management, is vital to
its maintenance and effectiveness. Management review should assess the effectiveness of the
quality system and corrective action implementat ion, and should include internal and external
audit results, performance evaluation sample results, input from end user complaints, and
corrective actions. 
6.  Bibliography
 JARVIS, A.M. & L. SIU.  1981. Environmental Radioactivity Laboratory Intercomparison Studies
Program. EPA-600/4-81-004, U.S. Environmenta l Protection Agency, Las Vegas, Nev.
 INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION.  1990. General Requirements for the
Competence of Testing and Calibration Laboratories, ISO/IEC Guide 25. International Org.
for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1996. Standard Practice for Determination
of Precision and Bias of Applicable Test Methods of Committee D-19 on Water. ASTM
D2777-96, American Society Testing & Materials, West Conshohocken, Pa. 
1030        DATA QUALITY
1030  A.        Introduction
 The role of the analytical laboratory is to produce measurement-based information that is
technically valid, legally defensible, and of known quality. Quality assurance is aimed at
optimizing the reliability of the measureme nt process. All measurements contain error, which
may be systematic (with an unvarying magnitude) or random (with equal probability of being
positive or negative and varying in magnitude). Determination of the systematic and random
error components of an a nalytical method uniquely defines the analytical performance of thatStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmethod.1 Quality control (QC) procedures identify and control these sources of error. 
1.  Measures of Quality Control
 Random error (precision) and systematic error (bias) are two routine indicators of
measurement quality used by analysts to assess validity of the analytical process. Precision is the
closeness of agreement between repeate d measurements. A measurement has acceptable
precision if the random errors are low. Accuracy is the closeness of a measurement to the true
value. A measurement is acceptably accurate when both the systematic and random errors are
low. QC results outside t he acceptance limits, as set by the data quality objectives, are evidence
of an analytical process that may be out of control due to determinant errors such as
contaminated reagents or degraded standards. 
2.  Measurement Error and Data Use
 Measurement error, whether random or systematic, reduces the usability of laboratory data.
As a measured value decreases, its relative error (e.g., relative standard deviation) may increase
and its usable information d ecrease. Reporting tools, such as detection or quantitation limits,
frequently are used to establish a lower limit on usable information content. 
Laboratory data may be used for such purposes as regulatory monitoring, environmental
decision-making, and pr ocess control. The procedures used to extract information for these
different purposes vary and may be diametrically opposed. For example, a measurement for
regulatory monitoring may be appropriately qualified when below the detection level because the
error bar is relatively large and may preclude a statistically sound decision. Data collected over a
period of time, however, may be treated by statistical methods to provide a statistically sound
decision even when many of the data are below detection levels .2 
3.  The Analyst’s Responsibility
 The analyst must understand the measures of quality control and how to apply them to the
data quality objectives of process control, regulatory monitoring, and environmental field
studies. It is important that the qualit y objectives for the data be clearly defined and detailed
before sample analysis so that the data will be technically correct and legally defensible. 
4.  Reference
         1.    YOUDEN, W.J.  1975. Statistical Manual of the Association of Official Analytical
Chemists. Assoc. Official Analytical Chemists, Arlington, Va.
         2.    OSBORN, K.E.  1995. You Can’t Compute with Less Thans. Water Environment
Laboratory  Solutions , Water Environment Federation, Alexandria, Va.
1030  B.        Measurement UncertaintyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Introduction
 Even with the fullest possible extent of correction, every measurement has error that is
ultimately unknown and unknowable. The description of this unknown error is ‘‘measurement
uncertainty.’’ 
Reporting uncertainty along with a measu rement result is good practice, and may spare the
user from making unwarranted or risky decisions based only on the measurement. 
Whereas measurement error ( E) is the actual, unknown deviation of the measurement ( M)
from the unknown true value ( T), measure ment uncertainty ( U) is the state of knowledge about
this unknown deviation, and is often expressed as U, as in M ± U. U may be defined as an
uncertainty expression.1,2 This section concerns the definition of U, how to compute it, a
recommendation for repo rting uncertainty, the interpretation and scope of uncertainty, and other
ways of expressing measurement uncertainty. 
2.  Error
 A measurement can be related to the unknown true value and unknown measurement error
as follows: 
M = T + E
This is a simple additive relationship. There are other plausible relationships between M and
E, such as multiplicative or arbitrary fu nctional relationships, which are not discussed here. 
Because E is unknown, M must be regarded as an uncertain measurement. In some practical
situations, a value may be treated as known. T * may be, for example, a published reference
value, a traceable va lue, or a consensus value. The purpose of the substitution may be for
convenience or because the measurement process that produced T * has less bias or variation
than the one that produced M. For example, based on the average of many measurements, a
vessel  might be thought to contain T * = 50 µg/ L of salt in water. It then may be sampled and
routinely measured, resulting in a reported concentration of M = 51 µg/L. The actual
concentration may be T  = 49.9 µg/L, resulting in E = 51 − 49.9 = 1.1 µg/L. 
To ge neralize the nature of uncertainty, measurement error may be negligible or large in
absolute terms (i.e., in the original units) or relative terms (i.e., unitless, E ÷ T  or T *). The
perceived acceptability of the magnitude of an absolute error depends on  its intended use. For
example, an absolute error of 1.1 µg/L may be inconsequential for an application where any
concentration over 30 µg/L will be sufficient. However, if it is to be used instead as a standard
for precision measurement (e.g., of pharmace utical ingredients), 1.1 µg/L too much could be
unacceptable. 
3.  Uncertainty
 Reported measurement uncertainty will contain the actual measurement error with a statedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationlevel of confidence. For example, if M ± U is presented as a 95% confidence interval,
approximately 95% of the time, the measurement error E will fa ll within the range of ± U. 
4.  Bias
 Bias is the systematic component of error. It is defined as the signed deviation between the
limiting average measured value and the true value being measured as the number of
measurements in the average tends to infinity and the uncertainty ab out the average tends to
zero. For example, the reason the T  = 49.9 µg/L salt solution is thought to be T * = 50 µg/L
could be a bias, B = 0.1 µg/L. The ‘‘leftover’’ error, 1.1 − 0.1 = 1.0 µg/L, is the random
component. This random component (also called stochastic error) changes with each
measurement. The bias is fixed, and may be related to the laboratory method used to produce T
.* Usually, a recognized method will be used to produce or certify the traceable standard, a
sample with a certificate stating  the accepted true value T .* The method may be the best method
available or simply the most widely accepted method. It is chosen to have very low error, both
bias and random. Such a traceable standard may be purchased from a standards organization
such as  NIST. 
5.  Bias and Random Variation
 Measurement error, E, (and measurement uncertainty) can be split into two components,
random and systematic: 
E = Z + B
Random error, Z, is the component of the measurement error that changes from one
measurement to the nex t, under certain conditions. Random measurement errors are assumed to
be independent and have a distribution, often a ssumed to be Gaussian (i.e., they are normally
distributed). The normal distribution of Z is characterized by the distribution mean, µ, and
standard deviation, σE. In discussion of measurement error distribution, µ is assumed to be zero
because any non-zero component is part of  bias, by definition. The population standard
deviation, σE, can be used to characterize the random component of meas urement error because
the critical values of the normal distribution are well known and widely available. For example,
about 95% of the normal distribution lies within the interval µ ± 2σE. Hence, if there is no
measurement bias, and measurement errors are  independent and normally distributed, M ± 2σE
(95% confidence, assumed normal) is a suitable way to report a measurement and its uncertainty.
More generally, normal probability tables and statistical software give the proportion of the
normal distribution  and thus the % confidence gained that is contained within ± kσE for any value
of scalar k. 
Usually, however, the population standard deviation, σE, is not known and must be estimated
by the sample standard deviation, sE. This estimate of the standard devi ation is based on multiple
observations and statistical estimation. In this case, the choice of the scalar k must be based notStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationon the normal distribution function, but on the Student’s t distribution, taking into account the
number of degrees of freedom as sociated with sE. 
Systematic error ( B) is all error that is not random, and typically is equated with bias.
Systematic error also can contain outright mistakes (blunders) and lack of control (drifts,
fluctuations, etc.).3 In this manual, the terms ‘‘syste matic error’’ and ‘‘bias’’ are used
interchangeably. 
Systematic uncertainty often is more difficult to estimate and make useful than is random
uncertainty. Knowledge about bias is likely to be hard to obtain, and once obtained it is
appropriately and like ly to be exploited to make the measurement less biased. If measurement
bias is known exactly (or nearly so), the user can subtract it from M to reduce total measurement
error. 
If measurement bias is entirely unknown, and could take on any value from a wid e but
unknown distribution of plausible values, users may adopt a worst-case approach and report an
extreme bound, or they may simply ignore the bias altogether. For example, historical data may
indicate that significant interlaboratory biases are present,  or that every time a measurement
system is cleaned, a shift is observed in QC measurements of standards. In the absence of
traceable standards, it is hard for laboratory management or analysts to do anything other than
ignore the potential problem. 
The r ecommended practice is to conduct routine QA/QC measurements with a suite of
internal standards. Plot measurements on control charts, and when an out-of-control condition is
encountered, recalibrate the system with traceable standards. This permits the lab oratory to
publish a boundary on bias, assuming that the underlying behavior of the measurement system is
somewhat predictable and acceptably small in scale in between QA/QC sampling (e.g., slow
drifts and small shifts). 
6.  Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Sources of Bias and Variation
a.  Sources and measurement:  The sources of bias and variability in measurements are many;
they include sampling error, sample preparation, interference by matrix or other measurement
quantities/qualities, calibration error variation, software errors, co unting statistics, deviations
from method by analyst, instrument differences (e.g., chamber volume, voltage level),
environmental changes (temperature, humidity, ambient light, etc.), contamination of sample or
equipment (e.g., carryover and ambient contam ination), variations in purity of solvent, reagent,
catalyst, etc., stability and age of sample, analyt e, or matrix, and warm-up or cool-down effects,
or a tendency to drift over time.
 The simplest strategy for estimating typical measurement bias is to me asure a traceable
(known) standard, then compute the difference between the measured value M and the known
value T, assumed to be the true value being measured. 
M − T = B + Z
The uncertainty in the measurement of the traceable standard is assumed to be sm all,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationalthough in practice there may be situations where this is not an appropriate assumption. If
random measurement uncertainty is negligible (i.e., Z 8 0), the difference, M − T , will provide
an estimate of bias ( B). If random uncertainty is not negligi ble, it can be observed and quantified
by making a measurement repeatedly on the same test specimen (if the measurement process is
not destructive). This may be part of a QA/QC procedure. 
b.  Repeatability:  As quantified by the repeatability standard deviation ( σRPT), repeatability
is the minimal variability of a measurement system obtained by repeatedly measuring the same
specimen while allowing no controllable sources of variability to affect the measurement.
Repeatability also can be obtained by pooling sample standard deviations of measurements of J
different specimens, as follows:
 
Repeatability also is called ‘‘intrinsic measurement variability,’’ and is considered an
approximate l ower boundary to the measurement standard deviation that will be experienced in
practice. The repeatability standard deviation sometimes is used to compute uncertainty
intervals, ± U, that can be referred to as ultimate instrument variability, based on the Student’s t
distribution function (± U = ±ksRPT). 
Common sense and application experience demonstrate that repeatability is an overly
optimistic estimate to report as measurement uncertainty for routine measurement. In routine
use, measurements will be sub ject to many sources of bias and variability that are intentionally
eliminated or restrained during a repeatability study. In routine use, uncertainty in both bias ( B)
and variability ( Z) are greater. 
c.  Reproducibility:  As quantified by the reproducibility standard deviation ( σRPD),
reproducibility is the variability of a measurement system obtained by repeatedly measuring a
sample while allowing (or requiring) selected sources of bias or variabilit y to affect the
measurement. With σRPD, provide list of known applicable sources of bias and variability, and
whether or not they were varied.
 Barring statistical variation (i.e., variation in estimates of variability, such as the noisiness in
sample stan dard deviations), the reproducibility standard deviation always is greater than the
repeatability standard deviation, because it has additional components. Typically, one or more of
the following is varied in a reproducibility study: instrument, analyst, l aboratory, or day.
Preferably design a study tailored to the particular measurement system (see 1030B.7). If the
sample is varied, compute reproducibility standard deviations separately for each sample, then
pool results if they are homogeneous. Treat fact ors varied in the study as random factors and
assume them to be independent normal random variables with zero mean. However, thisStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationassumption often can be challenged, because the sample and possibly the target populations may
be small (they may even be iden tical), and there may be a question of ‘‘representativeness.’’ For
example, six laboratories (or analysts, or instruments) may report usable measurements out of a
total population of twenty capable of doing tandem mass spectrometry for a particular analyte
and matrix. It is hard to know how representativ e the six are of the twenty, especially after a
ranking and exclusion process that can follow a study, and whether the biases of the twenty are
normally distributed (probably not discernible from six measure ments, even if the six are
representative). 
It may be more appropriate to treat each fact or with few, known factor values (i.e., choices
such as laboratories) as fixed factors, to use th e statistical term. Fixed factors have fixed effects.
That is, each l aboratory has a different bias, as might each analyst, each instrument, and each
day, but these biases are not assumed to have a known (or knowable) distribution. Therefore, a
small sample cannot be used to estimate distribution parameters, particularly a standard
deviation. For example, assuming that variables are random, normal, and have zero mean may be
inappropriate in an interlaboratory round-robin study. It must be assumed that every laboratory
has some bias, but it is difficult to characterize the bi ases because of laboratory anonymity, the
small number of laboratories contributing usable data, and other factors. 
Because of these concerns about assumptions and the potential ambiguity of its definition, do
not report reproducibility unless it is accom panied with study design and a list of known sources
of bias and variability and whether or not they were varied. 
7.  Gage Repeatability and Reproducibility,  and the Measurement Capability Study
 Combining the concepts of repeatability and reproducibility, the Gage Repeatability and
Reproducibility (Gage R&R) approach has been developed.4 It treats all factors as ra ndom
(including biases), and is based on the simplest nontrivial model: 
Z = ZRPT  + ZL
where: 
          ZRPT  =   normally distributed random variable with mean equal to zero and variance equal
to σRPT 2, and 
                ZL =   normally distributed random variable with mean equal to zero and with the
variance of the factor (e.g., interlaboratory) biases, σL2. 
The overall measurement variation then is quantified by 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationEstimates for σRPT and σRPD usually are obtained by conducting a nested designed study
and analyzing varianc e components of the results. This approach can be generalized to reflect
good practice in conducting experiments. The following measurement capability study (MCS)
procedure is recommended. The objective of such studies is not necessarily to quantify the
contribution of every source of bias and variability, but to study those considered to be
important, through systematic error budgeting. 
To perform a measurement capability study to assess measurement uncertainty through
systematic error budgeting, proceed as follows: 
Identify sources of bias and variation that affect measurement error. This can be done with a
cause-and-effect diagram, perhaps with source categories of: equipment, analyst, method (i.e.,
procedure and algorithm), material (i.e., aspects of t he test specimens), and environment. 
Select sources to study, either empirically or theoretically. Typically, study sources that are
influential, that can be varied during the MCS, and that cannot be eliminated during routine
measurement. Select models fo r the sources. Treat sources of bias as fixed factors, and sources
of variation as random factors. 
Design and conduct the study, allowing (or requiring) the selected sources to contribute to
measurement error. Analyze the data graphically and statisticall y (e.g., by regression analysis,
ANOVA, or variance components analysis). Identify and possibly eliminate outliers
(observations with responses that are far out of line with the general pattern of the data), and
leverage points (observations that exert hig h, perhaps undue, influence). 
Refine the models, if necessary (e.g., based on residual analysis), and draw inferences for
future measurements. For random effects, this probably would be a confidence interval; for fixed
effects, a table of estimated biases . 
8.  Other Assessments of Measurement Uncertainty
 In addition to the strictly empirical MCS approach to assessing measurement uncertainty,
there are alternative procedures, discussed below in order of increasing empiricism. 
a.  Exact theoretical:  Some measurement methods are tied closely to exact first-principles
models of physics or chemistry. For example, measurement systems that count or track the
position and velocity of atomic particles can have exact formulas for meas urement uncertainty
based on the known theoretical behavior of the particles.
b.  Delta method (law of propagation of uncertainty):  If the measurement result can be
expressed as a function of input variables with known error distributions, the distribution of the
measurement result sometimes can be computed exactly.
c.  Linearized:  The mathematics of the delta method may be difficult, so a linearized form of
M = T  + E may be used instead, involving a first-or der Taylor series expansion about key
variables that influence E:
 (M + δM) = T  + δM/δG1 + δM/δG2 + δM/δG3 + ...Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfor sources G1, G2, G3, etc. of bias and variation that are continuous variables (or can be
represented by continuous variables). The distribution of this expression may be simpler to
determine, as it involves the linear combination of scalar multipl es of the random variables. 
d.  Simulation:  Another use of the delta method is to conduct computer simulation. Again
assuming that the distributions of measurement errors in input variables are known or can be
approximated, a computer (i.e., Monte Carlo) simulation can obtain empir ically the distribution
of measurement errors in the result. Typically, one to ten thousand sets of random deviates are
generated (each set has one random deviate for each variable), and the value of M is computed
and archived. The archived distribution is  an empirical characterization of the uncertainty in M.
e.  Sensitivity study (designed experiment):  If the identities and distributions of sources of
bias and variation are known and these sources are continuous factors, but the functional form of
the relationship between them and M is not known, an empirica l sensitivity study (i.e., MCS) can
be conducted to estimate the low-order coefficients ( δM/δG) for any factor G. This will produce
a Taylor series approximation to the δM, which can be used to estimate the distribution of δM, as
in ¶ c above.
f.  Random effects study:  This is the nested MCS and variance components analysis described
in ¶ 7 above.
g.  Passive empirical (QA/QC-type data):  An even more empirical and passive approach is to
rely solely on QA/QC or similar data. The estimated standard deviation of sample measurements
taken on many different days, by diffe rent analysts, using different equipment, perhaps in
different laboratories can provide a useful indication of uncertainty.
9.  Statements of Uncertainty
 Always report measurements with a statement of uncertainty and the basis for the statement. 
Develop uncertainty statements as follows:4-6 
Involve experts in the measurement principles and use of the measurement system,
individuals familiar with sampling contexts, and potential measurement users to generate a
cause-and-effect diagram for measurement error, with sources of bias and variation (‘‘factors’’)
identified and prioritized. Consult literature quantifying bias and va riation. If needed, conduct
one or more measurement capability studies incorporating those sources thought to be most
important. In some cases, Gage R&R studies may be sufficient. These studies will provide
‘‘snapshot’’ estimates of bias and variation. 
Institute a QA/QC program in which traceable or internal standards are measured routinely
and the results are plotted on X and R control charts (or equivalent charts). React to
out-of-control signals on the control charts. In particular, re-calibrate using t raceable standards
when the mean control chart shows a statistically significant change. Use the control charts,
relevant literature, and the MCSs to develop uncertainty statements that involve both bias and
variation. 
10.  ReferencesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         1.    YOUDEN, W.J.  1972. Enduring values. Technometrics  14:1.
         2.    HENRION, M. & B. FISCHHOFF.  1986. Assessing uncertainty in physical constant. Amer.
J. Phys.  54:791.
         3.    CURRIE, L.  1995. Nomenclature in evaluation of analytical  methods including detection
and quantification capabilities. Pure Appl. Chem.  67:1699.
         4.    MANDEL, J.  1991. Evaluation and Control of Measurements. Marcel Dekker, New
York, N.Y.
         5.    NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY.  1994. Technical n ote TN
1297. National Inst. Standards & Technology.
         6.    INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ORGANIZATION.  1993. Guide to the Expression of
Uncertainty in Measurement. International Standards Org., Geneva, Switzerland.
1030  C.        Method Detection Level
1.  Introduction
 Detection levels are controversial, principally because of inadequate definition and
confusion of terms. Frequently, the instrumental detection level is used for the method detection
level and vice versa . Whatever term is used, most ana lysts agree that the smallest amount that
can be detected above the noise in a procedure and within a stated confidence level is the
detection level. The confidence levels are set so that the probabilities of both Type I and Type II
errors are acceptably s mall. 
Current practice identifies several detection levels (see 1010C), each of which has a defined
purpose. These are the instrument detection level (IDL), the lower level of detection (LLD), the
method detection level (MDL), and the level of quantitatio n (LOQ). Occasionally the instrument
detection level is used as a guide for determining the MDL. The relationship among these levels
is approximately IDL:LLD:MDL:LOQ = 1:2:4:10. 
2.  Determining Detection Levels
 An operating analytical instrument usually produces a signal (noise) even when no sample is
present or when a blank is being analyzed. B ecause any QA program requires frequent analysis
of blanks, the mean and standard de viation become well known; the blank signal becomes very
precise, i.e., the Gaussian curve of the blank distribution becomes very narrow. The IDL is the
constituent concentration that produces a signal greater than three standard deviations of the
mean noi se level or that can be determined by injecting a standard to produce a signal that is five
times the signal-to-noise ratio. The IDL is useful for estimating the constituent concentration or
amount in an extract needed to produce a signal to permit calcula ting an estimated method
detection level. 
The LLD is the amount of constituent that produces a signal sufficiently large that 99% ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe trials with that amount will produce a detectable signal. Determine the LLD by multiple
injections of a standard at ne ar zero concentration (concentration no greater that five times the
IDL). Determine the standard deviation by the usual method. To reduce the probability of a Type
I error (false detection) to 5%, multiply s by 1.645 from a cumulative normal probability ta ble.
Also, to reduce the probability of a Type II error (false nondetection) to 5%, double this amount
to 3.290. As an example, if 20 determinations of a low-level standard yielded a standard
deviation of 6 µg/L, the LLD is 3.29 × 6 = 20 µg/L.1 
The MDL di ffers from the LLD in that samples containing the constituent of interest are
processed through the complete analytical method. The method detection level is greater than the
LLD because of extraction efficiency and extract concentration factors. The MDL c an be
achieved by experienced analysts operating well-calibrated instruments on a nonroutine basis.
For example, to determine the MDL, add a constituent to reagent water, or to the matrix of
interest, to make a concentration near the estimated MDL.2 Prepar e and analyze seven portions
of this solution over a period of at least 3 d to ensure that MDL determination is more
representative than measurements performed sequentially. Include all sample processing steps in
the determination. Calculate the standard d eviation and compute the MDL. The replicate
measurements should be in the range of one to five times the calculated MDL. From a table of
the one-sided t distribution select the value of t for 7 − 1 = 6 degrees of freedom and at the 99%
level; this value is  3.14. The product 3.14 times s is the desired MDL. 
Although the LOQ is useful within a laboratory, the practical quantitation limit (PQL) has
been proposed as the lowest level achievable among laboratories within specified limits during
routine laborator y operations.3 The PQL is significant because different laboratories will
produce different MDLs even though using the same analytical procedures, instruments, and
sample matrices. The PQL is about five times the MDL and represents a practical and routinel y
achievable detection level with a relatively good certainty that any reported value is reliable. 
3.  Description of Levels
 Figure 1030:1  illustrates the detection levels discussed above. For this figure it is assumed
that the signals from an analytical instrument are distributed normally and can be represented by
a normal (Gaussian) curve.4 The cur ve labeled B is representative of the background or blank
signal distribution. As shown, the distribution of th e blank signals is nearly as broad as for the
other distributions, that is σB = σI = σL. As blank analyses continue, this curve will become
narro wer because of increased degrees of freedom. 
The curve labeled I represents the IDL. Its average value is located kσB units distant from the
blank curve, and k represents the value of t (from the one-sided t distribution) that corresponds to
the confidenc e level chosen to describe instrument performance. For a 95% level and n = 14, k =
1.782 and for a 99% limit, k = 2.68. The overlap of the B and I curves indicates the probability of
not detecting a constituent when it is present (Type II error). 
The curv e at the extreme right of Figure 1030:1  represents the LLD. Because only a finiteStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationnumber of determinations is used for calculating the IDL and LLD, the curves are broader than
the blank but are similar, so it is reasonable to choose σI = σL. Therefore, the  LLD is kσI + kσL =
2kσL from the blank curve. 
4.  References
         1.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1983. Standard Practice for
Intralaboratory Quality Control Procedures  and a Discussion on Reporting  Low-Level
Data. Designation D4210-83, American Soc. Testing & Materials,  Philadelph ia, Pa.
         2.    GLASER, J.A., D.L. FOERST, J.D. MCKEE, S.A. QUAVE & W.L. BUDDE.  1981.  Trace
analyses for wastewaters. Environ. Sci. Technol.  15:1426.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1985. National Primary Drinking  Water
Standards: Synthetic  Organics, Inorganics, and Bact eriologicals. 40  CFR Part 141;
Federal Register  50: No. 219, November 13, 1985.
         4.    OPPENHEIMER, J. & R. TRUSSELL . 1984. Detection limits in water quality  analysis. In
Proc. Water Quality Technology Conference (Denver, Colorado,  December 2-5,
1984). American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.
1030  D.        Data Quality Objectives
1.  Introduction
 Data quality objectives are systematic planning tools based on the scientific method. They
are used to develop data collection designs and to establish specific criteria for the quality of
data to be collected. The process helps planner s identify decision-making points for data
collection activities, to determine the decisions to be made based on the data collected, and to
identify the criteria to be used for making each decision. This process documents the criteria for
defensible decisi on-making before an environmental data collection activity begins. 
2.  Procedure
 The data quality objective process comprises the stages explained in this section. 
a.  Stating the issue:  Sometimes the reason for performing analyses is straightforward, e.g.,
to comply with a permit or other regulatory requirement. However, at times the reason is far
more subjective; e.g., to gather data to support remedial decisions , or to track the changes in
effluent quality resulting from process changes. A clear statement of the reason for the analyses
is integral to establishing appropriate data quality objectives; this should include a statement of
how the data are to be used, e.g., to determine permit compliance, to support decisions as to
whether additional process changes will be necessary, etc.
b.  Identifying possible decisions and actions:  Initially, express the principal study question.
For example: Is the level of contaminant A in environmental medium B higher than regulatoryStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationlevel C? This example is relatively straightforward.
 Other quest ions may be more complex, for example: How is aquatic life affected by
discharges into receiving waters by publicly owned treatment works (POTWs)? Break such a
question down into several questions that might then be used to develop several decisions;
organ ize these questions in order of consensus priority of all participating parties. 
Identify alternative actions, including the no-action alternative, that could result from the
various possible answers to the principal study questions. 
In the first example  above, if the level of contaminant in the environmental medium is higher
than the regulatory level, some cleanup or treatment action may be indicated. If it is lower, the
no-action alternative may be indicated, or the study team may wish to look at other
environmental media and regulatory levels. 
Finally, combine the principal study question with alternative actions into a decision
statement. For the first example, the decision statement might be: Determine whether the mean
level of contaminant A in envir onmental medium B exceeds the regulatory level C and requires
remediation. 
A multi-tiered decision statement might be:  . . . if not, determine whether the maximum
level of contaminant A in environmental medium D exceeds the regulatory level E and require s
remediation. 
c.  Identifying inputs:  Identify the information needed to make the necessary decision. Inputs
may include measurements (including measurements of physical and chemical characteristics),
data sources (historical), applicable action levels, or health effe cts concerns.
 Identify and list the sources of information: previous data, historical records, regulatory
guidance, professional judgment, scientific literature, and new data. Evaluate qualitatively
whether any existing data are appropriate for the study.  Existing data will be evaluated
quantitatively later. Identify information needed to establish the action level. Define the basis for
setting the action levels: they may be based on regulatory thresholds or standards or may be
derived from issue-specific considerations, such as risk analysis. Determine only the criteria that
will be used to set the numerical value. The actual numerical action level is determined later. 
Confirm that the appropriate measurement methods exist to provide the necessary data.
Assure that there are analytical methods for the parameters or contaminants of interest, and that
they are appropriate for the matrix to be sampled. Consider the samples to be collected and the
analytical methods to determine the potential for matrix interf erences for each method. Assure
that the limits of the method (e.g., detection limit, quantitation limit, reporting limit) are
appropriate for the matrix (e.g., drinking wa ter, wastewater, groundwater, leachate, soil,
sediment, hazardous waste) and the par ameter to be measured. Ensure that a laboratory is
available to perform the analyses; determine its capacity, turn-around time, data product, and
cost. Include this information as input to the decision-making process. 
d.  Identifying study limits:  Identify both the geographical area and the time frame to which
the decision will apply. Also define the scale of decision-making. Identify the smallest, most
appropriate subsets of the total population for which decisions w ill be made. These subsets couldStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationbe based on spatial or temporal boundaries. For example, while spatial boundaries of the issue
may be a 300-acre site, samples may be collected from, and decisions made for, each square of a
grid made up of 50-ft squares dr awn on a site map. Also, while temporal boundaries of the issue
may be identified (as the duration of storm events), samples may be collected at, and decisions
made for, 2-h increments during a storm event.  A decision resulting from this type of study
migh t be to construct a stormwater bypass structure that would carry the first flow, which might
contain the highest nutrient load, but would not necessarily carry the peak flow.
 Identify any practical constraints on data collection. Identify any logistical i ssues that might
interfere with the data-collection process, including seasonal conditions, daily variations,
meteorological conditions, access conditions, availability of personnel, time, equipment, project
budget, regulatory limits, appropriate analytica l methods, matrix interferences, detection limits,
reporting limits, site access limitations, and expertise. 
e.  Developing a decision rule:  Define the parameter of interest, specify an action level, and
integrate outputs from the previous data quality objective process steps into a single statement
that describes a logical basis for choosing among alternative actions. A decision rule may be
worded as follows, substituting case-specific information for the underlined words:
 If the factor of interest  within the scale of decision making  is greater than the action level ,
then take alternative action A ; otherwise t ake alternative action B . 
The factor of interest is a descriptive measure (such as an instantaneous value, a mean, a
median, or a proportion) that specifies the characteristic (such as calcium level in water, PCB
level in soil, radon level in air) that th e decision-maker would like to know about the statistical
population affected by the potential decision (such as rivers or streams within a specific
watershed, the specified depth of soil within a site boundary, or in basements or crawlspaces
within a metr opolitan area). 
The scale of decision-making is the smallest, most appropriate subset for which separate
decisions will be made (such as each stream segment/river mile or each square of a grid
identified on a site map, or each section of township X, range  Y of county Z). 
The action level is a measurement threshold value of the parameter of interest that provides
the criterion for choosing among alternative actions (such as a stream standard to protect aquatic
life, a published regulatory standard, or a he alth-effects-related level). 
Alternative action A is the alternative of choice if the action level is exceeded (such as
initiate non-point-source controls, initiate cleanup of the soil to a specified depth, or distribute
technical information to property owners). Noncompliance with the action level is the alternative
hypothesis. (Either alternative action can be labeled A without making the decision rule any less
valid.) 
Alternative action B is the alternative of choice if the action level is not exceeded  (such as
continue routine monitoring, leave the soil in place, or provide a summary of the data collection
activity to potential developers). Compliance with the action level is the null hypothesis that is
generally the no-action alternative or baseline c ondition. Either alternative action can be labeled
B without making the decision rule any less valid. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationf.  Specifying limits on decision errors:  Establish limits on the decision error that the
decision-maker will tolerate. Use these limits to establish performance goals for design of the
data collection activity. Base limits on the consequences of making a wrong decision.
 Decision-makers are interested in knowing the tr ue state of some feature of the environment.
Environmental data can be only an estimate of this true state; decisions therefore are based on
environmental data that are in some degree of er ror. The goal is to develop a data-collection
design that reduces the chances of making a decision error to a level that is acceptable to the
decision-maker. Sources of uncertainty include sample design error and measurement error;
when combined, they repr esent the total study error. 
Sample design error refers to the error inherent in using a portion of a population to represent
the whole population. It is not practical, for example, to measure and record the concentration of
an analyte at every point in a  stream on a continuous basis; instead, measure analyte
concentration at well-defined locations and time intervals to represent this analyte concentration
continuum. 
Measurement error refers to the error inherent in the measurement process. A measurement
system does not measure, on a molecular level, the amount of an analyte in a sample; it measures
an indicator of the amount of an analyte in a sample. This indicator might be the amount of a
specific wavelength of light absorbed by a sample, the change in conductivity of a solution
containing the analyte, or the amount of an anal yte, in a gaseous or ionized form, that passes
through a membrane. 
Use data to choose between the one condition of the environment (the null hypothesis, H0)
and an alternative cond ition (the alternative hypothesis, Ha). A decision error occurs when the
decision-maker rejects the null hypothesis when it is t rue (false-positive decision error) or fails
to reject the null hypothesis when it is false (false-negative decision error).* #(1) 
The null hypothesis usually is treated as the baseline condition that is presumed to be true in
the absence of strong evidence to the contrary. Either condition may be selected as the null
hypothesis, but if the null hypothesis is chosen carefully, it prov ides a way to guard against
making the decision error that the decision-maker considers to have the more undesirable
consequences. 
While the possibility of a decision error never can be totally eliminated, it can be controlled
by various means, including collecting a large number of samples (to control sampling design
error), analyzing individual samples several times, or using more precise laboratory methods (to
control measurement error). Better sampling designs also can be developed to collect data that
more accurately represent the population of interest. Every study will use a different method of
controlling decision errors, depending on the source of the largest components of total decision
error in the data set and the ease of reducing those error co mponents. 
Reducing the probability of making decision errors generally increases study costs. In many
cases, however, it is not necessary to control decision error within very small limits to meet the
decision-maker’s needs. If the consequences of decisio n errors are minor, a reasonable decision
could be made on the basis of relatively crude data. If, on the other hand, consequences ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdecision errors are severe, the decision-maker will want to control sampling design and
measurements within very small lim its. 
Factors used to judge data quality include precision, bias, representativeness, completeness,
and comparability. Precision, bias, and completeness can be applied to the measurement (field
and laboratory) system. Most analytical laboratories have syst ems to quantify these factors.
Laboratory precision can be estimated through the analysis of laboratory replicates. Laboratory
bias can be estimated by the analysis of standards, known additions, and performance evaluation
(PE) samples. There is no common system in place to estimate field bias. A combination of field
and laboratory completeness can be estimated through comparison of the number of analytical
results provided by the laboratory with the number of analytical results specified in the sample
design. Laboratory representativeness and comparability involve the analytical method used and
the performance of the laboratory as compared to the performance of other laboratories (PE
studies), which are not commonly quantified. 
Precision, bias, representat iveness, completeness, and comparability can be applied to the
sample design: Precision would indicate how preci sely this sample design reflects the total
population. Bias would indicate how accurately th is sample design reflects the total population.
Repr esentativeness would indicate to what extent the sample design is representative of the total
population. Completeness would indicate how well the sample design reflects the complete
population. Comparability would indicate the similarity of the sample des ign to other sample
designs for similar situations. None of these usually is measured. 
While data quality factors provide some insight into sample measurement errors, they do not
provide any indication of sample design errors. These errors are additive, s o that if precision
were ±90%, bias were ±90%, and representativeness were ±90%, combined uncertainty could be
up to ±27%: 
(100% × 0.1)  +  (90% × 0.1)  +  (81% × 0.1) = 10%  +  9%  +  8% = 27%
Because most errors are not quantifiable, a study usually is designed with a balance between
acceptable decision errors and acceptable study cost. 
g.  Optimizing the design for collection:  Identify the most resource-effective design for the
study that will achieve the data quality objectives (DQOs). Use statistical techniques to develop
alternative data collection designs and evaluate their efficie ncy in meeting the DQOs. To
develop the optimal study design, it may be necessary to work through this step more than once
after revisiting previous steps of the process. 
Review the DQO outputs and existing environmental data, develop general data collect ion
design alternatives, and formulate the mathematical expressions needed to solve the design issue
for each data collection design alternative. Develop the following three mathematical
expressions: 
•  A method for testing the statistical hypothesis and  a sample size formula that corresponds to
the method (e.g., Student’s t test), Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation•  A statistical model that describes the relationship of the measured value to the ‘‘true’’ value.
Often the model will describe the components of error or bias believed to e xist in the measured
value, and 
•  A cost function that relates the number of samples to the total cost of sampling and analysis. 
Select the optimal sample size that satisfies the DQOs for each data collection design
alternative. Using the mathematical expressions specified above, calculate the optimal sample
size that satisfies the DQOs. If no design will meet the limits on decision errors within the
budget or other constraints, relax one or more constraints by, for example, increasing the budget
for sa mpling and analysis, increasing the width of the region of uncertainty, increasing the
tolerable decision error rates, relaxing other project constraints such as the schedule, or changing
the boundaries; it may be possible to reduce sampling and analysis c osts by changing or
eliminating subgroups that will require separate decisions. 
Select the most resource-effective data collection design that satisfies all of the DQOs and
document the operational details and theoretical assumptions of the selected desig n in the
sampling and analysis plan. 
3.  Bibliography
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Guidance for the Data Quality Objectives
Process. EPA QA/G-4, Quality Assurance Manage ment Staff, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Washington, D.C. 
1030  E.        Checking Correctness of Analyses
 The following procedures for checking correctness of analyses are applicable specifically to
water samples for which relatively complete analyses are made.1 These include pH,
conductivity, total dissolved  solids (TDS), and major anionic and cationic constituents that are
indications of general water quality. 
The checks described do not require additional laboratory analyses. Three of the checks
require calculation of the total dissolved solids and conduct ivity from measured constituents.
Sum concentrations (in milligrams per liter) of constituents to calculate the total dissolved solids
are as follows: 
Total dissolved solids   =   0.6 (alkalinity* #(2))   +   Na+   +   K+   +   Ca2+   +   Mg2+   +   Cl−
+   SO42−   +   SiO32−   +   NO3−   +   F−
Calculate electrical conductivity from the equation: 
G   =   λC   −   (k1λ   +   k2) (C)3/2Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwhere: 
                  G =   conductivity of salt solution, 
                  C =   concentration of salt solution, 
                  λ =   equivalent conductance of salt s olution at infinite dilution, 
            k1, k2 =   constants for relaxation of ion cloud effect  and electrophoretic effect  relative to
ion mobility.1                   
1.  Anion-Cation Balance2
 The anion and cation sums, when expressed as milliequivalents  per liter, must balance
because all potable waters are electrically  neutral. The test is based on the percentage difference
defined as 
follows: 
 
and the typical criteria for acceptance are as follows: 
 
Anion Sum
   meq/LAcceptable
Difference  
     0–3.0 ±0.2 meq/L 
  3.0–10.0 ± 2% 
10.0–800 5% 
2.  Measured TDS = Calculated TDS2
 The measured total dissolved solids concentration should be higher than the calculated one
because a significant contributor may not be included in the calculation. If the measured value is
less than the calculated one , the higher ion sum and measured value are suspect; the sample
should be reanalyzed. If the measured solids concentration is more than 20% higher than the
calculated one, the low ion sum is suspect and selected constituents should be reanalyzed. The
accep table ratio is as follows: 
3.  Measured EC = Calculated ECStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation If the calculated electrical conductivity (EC) is higher than the measured value, reanalyze
the higher ion sum. If the calculated EC is less than the measured one, reanalyze the lower ion
sum. The acceptable ratio is as f ollows: 
Some electrical conductivity values for ions commonly found in water are given in Table 1030:I . 
4.  Measured EC and Ion Sums
 Both the anion and cation sums should be 1/100 of the measured EC value. If either of the
two sums does not meet this criterion, that sum is suspect; reanalyze the sample. The acceptable
criteria are as follows: 
100  ×  ani on (or cation) sum, meq/L   =   (0.9–1.1) EC
5.  Calculated TDS to EC Ratio
 If the ratio of calculated TDS to conductivity falls below 0.55, the lower ion sum is suspect;
reanalyze it. If the ratio is above 0.7, the higher ion sum is suspect; reanalyze it. If reanalysis
causes no change in the low er ion sum, an unmeasured constituent, such as ammonia or nitrite,
may be present at a significant concentration. If poorly dissociated calcium and sulfate ions are
present, the TDS may be as high as 0.8 times the EC. The acceptable criterion is as follows : 
calculated TDS/conductivity = 0.55–0.7
6.  Measured TDS to EC Ratio
 The acceptable criteria for this ratio are from 0.55 to 0.7. If the ratio of TDS to EC is outside
these limits, measured TDS or measured conductivity is suspect; reanalyze. 
A more complete exposition3 of the above quality-c ontrol checks has been published. 
7.  References
         1.    ROSSUM, J.R.  1975. Checking the accuracy of water analyses through the use  of
conductivity. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  67:204.
         2.    FRIEDMAN, L.C. & D.E. ERDMANN . 1982. Quality Assurance Practices for  Analyses of
Water and Fl uvial Sediments. Tech. Water Resources Inc., Book  5, Chapter A6. U.S.
Government Printing Off., Washington, D.C.
         3.    OPPENHEIMER, J. & A.D. EATON . 1986. Quality control and mineral analysis.  In Proc.
Water Quality Technology Conference (Houston, Texa s, December 8-11,  1985).
American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1040        METHOD DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION
1040 A.        Introduction
 Although standard methods are available from many nationally recognized sources, there
may be occasions when they cannot be used or when no standard method exists for a particular
constituent or characteristic. Therefore, met hod development may be required. Method
development is the set of experimental procedures devised for measuring a known amount of a
constituent in various matrices, in the case of chemical analyses; or a known characteristic (e.g.,
biological or toxicologi cal) of various matrices. 
1040  B.        Method Validation
 Whether an entirely new method is developed by accepted research procedures or an
existing method is modified to meet special requirements, validation by a three-step process is
required: determination of single-operato r precision and bias, analysis of independently prepared
unknown samples, and determination of method ruggedness. 
1.  Single-Operator Characteristics
 This part of the validation procedure requires determining the method detection level (MDL)
as in Section 1030 ; the bias of the method, i.e., the systematic error of the method; and the
precision obtainable by a singl e operator, i.e., the random error introduced in using the method.
To make these determinations, analyze at least 7 but preferably 10 or more portions of a standard
at each of several concentrations in each matrix that may be used. Use one concentration at , or
slightly above, the MDL and one relatively high so that the range of concentrations for which the
method is applicable can be specified. 
The use of several concentrations to determine bias and precision will reveal the form of the
relationship betwee n these method characteristics and the concentration of the substance, the
characteristic toxicity of the substance, or the bi ological factor of interest. This relationship may
be constant, linear, or curvilinear and is a significant characteristic of the method that should be
explained clearly. Table 1040:I  shows calculation of precision and bias for a single concentration
in a single matrix from eight replicate analyses of a standard with a known concentration of 1.30
mg/L. 
The bias is 0.49/8 = 0.06 mg/L  and the precision is the square root of 
 ,
or 0.18 mg/L (note that this is similar to the calculation for standard deviation). 
2.  Analysis of Unknown Samples
 This step in the method validation procedure requires analysis of independently prepared
standards where the value is unknown to the analyst. Analyze each unknown in replicate byStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfollowing the standard operating procedure  for the method. The mean amount recovered should
be within three standard deviations ( s) of the mean value of the standard but preferably within 2
s. 
Obtain the unknowns from other personnel in the analyst’s laboratory using either purchased
analytical-g rade reagents or standards available from National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). If available for the particul ar constituent, performance evaluation samples
from EPA-Cincinnati are particularly useful. 
3.  Method Ruggedness
 A test of the ruggedness, i.e., stability of the result produced when steps in the method are
varied, is the final validation step. It is especially important to determine this characteristic of a
method if it is to be proposed as a standard or reference method. A properly conducted
ruggedness test will point out those procedural step s in which rigor is critical and those in which
some leeway is permissible. 
The Association of Official Analytical Chemists1 has suggested a method fo r this test in
which eight separate analyses can be used to dete rmine the effect of varying seven different steps
in an analytical procedure. To illustrate, suppose the effect of changing the factors in Table
1040:II  is to be determined. To make the determ ination, denote the nominal factors by capital
letters A through G and the variations by the corresponding lower-case letters. Then set up a
table of the factors as in Table 1040:III . 
If combination 1 is analyzed, the result will be s. If combination 2 is  analyzed, the result will
be t, and so on until all eight combinations have been analyzed. To determine the effect of
varying a factor, find the four results where the factor was nominal (all caps) and the four where
it was varied (all lower case) and com pare the averages of the two groups. For example, to
compare the effect of changing C to c, use results (s + u + w + y)/4 and (t + v + x + z)/4.
Calculate all seven pairs to get seven differences, which can then be ranked to reveal those with
a significant  effect on the results. If there is no outstanding difference, calculate the average and
standard deviation of the eight results s through z. The standard deviation is a realistic estimate
of the precision of the method. This design tests main effects, not  interactions. 
4.  Equivalency Testing
 After a new method has been validated by the procedures listed above, it may be prudent to
test the method for equivalency to standard methods, unless none exist. This requires analysis of
a minimum of three concentrations by the  alternate and by the standard method. If the range of
concentration is very broad, test more concentrations. Once an initial set of analyses (five or
more) has been made at each chosen concentration, apply the following statistical steps:2 
1.  Test the distribution of data for normality and transform the data if  necessary ( Section
1010B ). 
2.  Select an appropriate sample size based on an estimate of the standard  deviation.3 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Test the variances of the two methods using the F-ratio statistic. 
4.  Test the average values of the two methods using a Student- t statistic. 
An explanation of each of these steps with additional techniques and examples has been
published.4 Because the number of analyses can be very large, the calculations become complex
and familiarity with basic statistics is necessary. A listing of standard, reference, and equivalent
methods for water analysis is available.5 
5.  References
         1.    YOUDEN, W.J. & E.H. STEINER . 1975. Statistical Manual of AOAC. Assoc.  Official
Analytical Chemists, Washington, D.C.
         2.    WILLIAMS, L.R.  1985. Harmonization of Biological Testing Methodology: A
Performance Based Approach in Aq uatic Toxicology and Hazard Assessment. 8th
Symp. ASTM STP 891, R.C. Bahner & D.J. Hansen, eds. American Soc. Testing &
Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
         3.    NATRELLA, M.G.  1963. Experimental Statistics. National Bureau of  Standards
Handbook 91, Washingt on, D.C.
         4.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1983. Guidelines for Establishing
Method Equivalency to Standard Me thods. Rep. 600/X-83-037, Environmental
Monitoring Systems Lab., Las Vegas, Nev.
         5.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994.  Guidelines establishing test
procedures for the analysis of pollutants under the Clean Water Act. Final rule. 40 CFR
Part 136; Federal Register  59:20:4504.
1040  C.        Collaborative Testing
 Once a new or modified method has been developed and validated it is appropriate to
determine whether the method should be made a standard method. The procedure to convert a
method to standard status is the collabor ative test.1 In this test, different laboratories use the
standard operating procedure to analyze a select number of samples to determine the method’s
bias and precision as would occur in normal practice. 
In planning for a collaborative test, consider the  following factors: a precisely written
standard operating procedure, the number of variables to be tested, the number of levels to be
tested, and the number of replicates required. Because method precision is estimated by the
standard deviation, which its elf is the result of many sources of variation, the variables that
affect it must be tested. These may include the laboratory, operator, apparatus, and concentration
range. 
1.  VariablesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Test at least the following variables: Laboratory—Involve at least three different
laboratories, although more are desirable to provide a better estimate of the standard deviation;
Apparatus—Because model and manufacturer differences can b e sources of error, analyze at
least two replicates of each concentration per laboratory; Operators—To determine overall
precision, involve at least six analysts with not more than two from each laboratory; Levels—If
the method development has indicated th at the relative standard deviation is constant, test three
levels covering the range of the method. If it is not constant, use more levels spread uniformly
over the operating range. 
If matrix effects are suspected, conduct the test in each medium for whic h the method was
developed. If this is not feasible, use appropriate grades of reagent water as long as this is
stipulated in the resulting statement of method characteristics. 
2.  Number of Replicates
 Calculate the number of replicates after the number of variables to be tested has been
determined by using the formula: 
r > 1 + (30/ P)
where: 
                  r =   number of replicates and 
                  P =   the product of several variables. 
The minimu m number of replicates is two. As an example, if three levels of a substance are
to be analyzed by single operators in six laboratories on a single apparatus, then P is calculated
as follows: 
P = 3 × 1 × 6 × 1 = 18
and the number of replicates is 
r > 1 +  (30/18) > 2.7 or r = 3.
3.  Illustrative Collaborative Test
 Send each of five laboratories four concentrations of a compound (4.3, 11.6, 23.4, and 32.7
mg/L) with instructions to analyze in triplicate using the procedure provided. Tabulate results as
shown in Table 1040:IV  below (the results for only one concentration are shown). Because there
are no obviously aberrant values (use the method in Section 1010B  to reject outliers), use all the
data. 
Calculate the average and standard deviation for each laboratory; use all 15 resu lts to
calculate a grand average and standard deviation. The difference between the average of each
laboratory and the grand average reveals any significant bias, such as that shown for
Laboratories 1 and 3. The difference between the grand average and the  known value is theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmethod bias, e.g., 33.0 − 32.7 = 0.3 mg/L or 0.9%. The relative standard deviation of the grand
average (1.5 mg/L) is 4.5%, which is the method precision, and the s for each laboratory is the
single-operator precision. 
As noted in Table 1040:IV , the sum of the deviations from the known value for the
laboratories was 1.3, so the average deviation (bias) was 1.3/5 = 0.26, rounded to 0.3, which is
the same as the difference between the grand average and the known value. 
For all four unkno wns in this test, the percentage results indicated increasing bias and
decreasing precision as the concentration decreased. Therefore, to describe the method in a
formal statement, the precision would be given by a straight line with the formula y = mx + b;
where y is the relative standard deviation, m is the slope of the line, x is the concentration, and b
is the relative standard deviation at concentration = 0. The values found from the collaborative
test are shown in Table 1040:V . 
These results indicate  that the method is acceptable. However, concentrations of less than
about 10 mg/L require greater care in analysis. 
4.  Reference
         1.    YOUDEN, W.J. & E.H. STEINER . 1975. Statistical Manual of the AOAC. Assoc.  Official
Analytical Chemists, Washington, D.C.
1050        EXPRESSION OF RESULTS
1050  A.        Units
 This text uses the International System of Units (SI) and chemical and physical results are
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L). See Section 7020D  for expression of radioactivity
results. Record only the significant figures. I f concentrations generally are less than 1 mg/L, it
may be more convenient to express results in micrograms per liter ( µg/L). Use µg/L when
concentrations are less than 0.1 mg/L. 
Express concentrations greater than 10 000 mg/L in percent, 1% being equal t o 10 000 mg/L
when the specific gravity is 1.00. In solid samples and liquid wastes of high specific gravity,
make a correction if the results are expressed as parts per million (ppm) or percent by weight: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
In such cases, if the result is given as millig rams per liter, state specific gravity. 
The unit equivalents per million (epm), or the identical and less ambiguous term
milligram-equivalents per liter, or milliequivalents per liter (me/L), can be valuable for making
water treatment calculations and che cking analyses by anion-cation balance. 
Table 1050:I  presents factors for converting concentrations of common ions from milligrams
per liter to milliequivalents per liter, and vice versa. The term milliequivalent used in this table
represents 0.001 of an equivalent weight. The equivalent wei ght, in turn, is defined as the weight
of the ion (sum of the atomic weights of the atoms making up the ion) divided by the number of
charges normally associated with the particular ion. The factors for converting resul ts from
milligrams per liter to milliequivalents per liter were computed by dividing the ion charge by
weight of the ion. Conversely, factors for converting results from milliequivalents per liter to
milligrams per liter were calculated by dividing the wei ght of the ion by the ion charge. 
1050  B.        Significant Figures
1.  Reporting Requirements
 To avoid ambiguity in reporting results or in presenting directions for a procedure, it is the
custom to use ‘‘significant figures.’’ All digits in a reported result are expected to be known
definitely, except for the last dig it, which may be in doubt. Such a number is said to contain only
significant figures. If more than a single doubtful digit is carried, the extra digit or digits are not
significant. If an analytical result is reported as ‘‘75.6 mg/L,’’ the analyst should b e quite certain
of the ‘‘75,’’ but may be uncertain as to whether the ‘‘.6’’ should be .5 or .7, or even .4 or .8,
because of unavoidable uncertainty in the analytical procedure. If the standard deviation were
known from previous work to be ±2 mg/L, the an alyst would have, or should have, rounded off
the result to ‘‘76 mg/L’’ before reporting it. On the other hand, if the method were so good that a
result of ‘‘75.61 mg/L’’ could have been conscientiously reported, then the analyst should not
have rounded it  off to 75.6. 
Report only such figures as are justified by the accuracy of the work. Do not follow the
all-too-common practice of requiring that quantities listed in a column have the same number of
figures to the right of the decimal point. 
2.  Rounding OffStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Round off by dropping digits that are not signi ficant. If the digit 6, 7, 8, or 9 is dropped,
increase preceding digit by one unit;  if the digit 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 is dropped, do not alter preceding
digit. If the digit 5 is dropped, roun d off preceding digit to the nearest even number: thus 2.25
becomes 2.2 and 2.35 becomes 2.4. 
3.  Ambiguous Zeros
 The digit 0 may record a measured value of zero or it may serve merely as a spacer to locate
the decimal point. If the result of a sulfate determination is reported as 420 mg/L, the report
recipient may be in doubt whether the zero i s significant or not, because the zero cannot be
deleted. If an analyst calculates a total residue of 1146 mg/L, but realizes that the 4 is somewhat
doubtful and that therefore the 6 has no significance, the answer should be rounded off to 1150
mg/L and so  reported but here, too, the report recipient will not know whether the zero is
significant. Although the number could be expressed as a power of 10 (e.g., 11.5 × 102 or 1.15 ×
103), this form is not used generally because it would not be consistent with t he normal
expression of results and might be confusing. In most other cases, there will be no doubt as to the
sense in which the digit 0 is used. It is obvious that the zeros are significant in such numbers as
104 and 40.08. In a number written as 5.000, i t is understood that all the zeros are significant, or
else the number could have been rounded off to 5.00, 5.0, or 5, whichever was appropriate.
Whenever the zero is ambiguous, it is advisable to accompany the result with an estimate of its
uncertainty. 
Sometimes, significant zeros are dropped without good cause. If a buret is read as ‘‘23.60
mL,’’ it should be so recorded, and not as ‘‘23.6 mL.’’ The first number indicates that the
analyst took the trouble to estimate the second decimal place; ‘‘23.6 mL’ ’ would indicate a
rather careless reading of the buret. 
4.  Standard Deviation
 If, for example, a calculation yields a result of 1449 mg/L or 1451 mg/L with a standard
deviation of ±100 mg/L, report as 1449 ± 100 mg/L or 1451 ± 100 mg/L, respectively. Ensure
that the number of significant figures in the stan dard deviation is not reduced if the value is 100
± 1. This could cause incorrect rounding of data to 1400 or 1500 mg/L, respectively. 
5.  Calculations
 As a practical operating rule, round off the result of a calculation in which several numbers
are multiplied or divided to as  few significant figures as are present in the factor with the fewest
significant figures. Suppose that the f ollowing calculations must  be made to obtain the result of
an analysis: 
 
A ten-place calculator yields an answer of ‘‘4.975 740 998.’’  Round off this number to ‘‘5.0’’Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationbecause one of the measurements  that entered into the calculation, 56, has only tw o significant
figures. It was unnecessary to measure the other th ree factors to four  significant figures because
the ‘‘56’’ is the ‘‘weakest link in the  chain’’ and limits accuracy of the answer. If the other
factors were  measured to only three, instead  of four, significant figures, the  answer would not
suffer and the labor might be less. 
When numbers are added or subtracted, the number that has  the fewest decimal places, not
necessarily the fewest significant figures, puts the limit on the number of places that justifiably
may  be carried in the sum or difference. Thus the sum 
                          0.0072 
                        12.02 
                          4.0078 
                        25.9   
                    4886          
                    4927.9350 
must be rounded off to ‘‘4928,’’ no decimals, because one of the  addends, 4886, has no
decimal places. Notice that another addend,  25.9, has only three significant figures and yet it
does not set a  limit to the number of significa nt figures in the answer.The preceding discussion
is necessarily oversimplified. The  reader is referred to mathematical texts for more detailed
discussion. 
1060        COLLECTION AND PRESERVATION OF SAMPLES
1060  A.        Introduction
 It is an old axiom that the result of any testing method can be no better than the sample on
which it is performed. It is beyond the scope of this publication to specify detailed procedures
for the collection of all samples because of varied purposes and analytical procedures. Detailed
information is presented in specific methods. This section presents general considerations,
applicable primarily to chemical analyses. See appropriate sections for samples to be used in
toxicit y testing and microbiological, biologi cal, and radiological examinations. 
The objective of sampling is to collect a portion of material small enough in volume to be
transported conveniently and yet large enough for analytical purposes while still accurate ly
representing the material being sampled. This objective implies that the relative proportions or
concentrations of all pertinent components will be the same in the samples as in the material
being sampled, and that the sample will be handled in such a w ay that no significant changes in
composition occur before the tests are made. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationFrequently the objective of sampling and testing is to demonstrate whether continuing
compliance with specific regulatory requirements has been achieved. Samples are presented to
the laboratory for specific determinations with the sampler being responsible for collecting a
valid and representative sample. Because of the increasing importance placed on verifying the
accuracy and representativeness of data, greater emphasis is pla ced on proper sample collection,
tracking, and preservation techniques. Often, la boratory personnel help in planning a sampling
program, in consultation with the user of the test results. Such consultation is essential to ensure
selecting samples and analy tical methods that provide a sound and valid basis for answering the
questions that prompted the sampling and that  will meet regulatory and/or project-specific
requirements. 
This section addresses the collection and preservation of water and wastewater sa mples; the
general principles also apply to the sampling of solid or semisolid matrices. 
1.  General Requirements
 Obtain a sample that meets the requirements of the sampling program and handle it so that it
does not deteriorate or become contaminated or compromised before it is analyzed. 
Ensure that all sampling equipment is clean and qual ity-assured before use. Use sample
containers that are clean and free of contaminants. Bake at 450°C all bottles to be used for
organic-analysis sampling. 
Fill sample containers without prerinsing with sample; prerinsing results in loss of any
pre-added p reservative and sometimes can bias results high when certain components adhere to
the sides of the container. Depending on determinations to be performed, fill the container full
(most organic compound determinations) or leave space for aeration, mixing, e tc.
(microbiological and inorganic analyses). If a bottle already contains preservative, take care not
to overfill the bottle, as preservative may be lost or diluted. Except when sampling for analysis
of volatile organic compounds, leave an air space equiv alent to approximately 1% of the
container volume to allow for thermal expansion during shipment. 
Special precautions (discussed below) are necessary for samples containing organic
compounds and trace metals. Because many constituents may be present at lo w concentrations
(micrograms or nanograms per liter), they may be totally or partially lost or easily contaminated
when proper sampling and preservation procedures are not followed. 
Composite samples can be obtained by collecting over a period of time, de pth, or at many
different sampling points. The details of coll ection vary with local conditions, so specific
recommendations are not universally applicable. Sometimes it is more informative to analyze
numerous separate samples instead of one composite so t hat variability, maxima, and minima
can be determined. 
Because of the inherent instability of certain properties and compounds, composite sampling
for some analytes is not recommended where quantitative values are desired (examples include
oil and grease,  acidity, alkalinity, carbon dioxide, chlorine residual, iodine, hexavalent
chromium, nitrate, volatile organic compounds, radon-222, dissolved oxygen, ozone,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationtemperature, and pH). In certain cases, such as for BOD, composite samples are routinely
required  by regulatory agencies. Refrigerate composite samples for BOD and nitrite. 
Sample carefully to ensure that analytical results represent the actual sample composition.
Important factors affecting results are the presence of suspended matter or turbidity, the method
chosen for removing a sample from its container, and the physical and chemical changes brought
about by storage or aeration. Detailed procedures are essential when processing (blending,
sieving, filtering) samples to be analyzed for trace consti tuents, especially metals and organic
compounds. Some determinations can be invalidated by contamination during processing. Treat
each sample individually with regard to the substances to be determined, the amount and nature
of turbidity present, and other  conditions that may influence the results. 
Carefully consider the technique for collecting a representative sample and define it in the
sampling plan. For metals it often is appropriate to collect both a filtered and an unfiltered
sample to differentiate  between total and dissolved metals present in the matrix. Be aware that
some metals may partially sorb to filters. Beforehand, determine the acid requirements to bring
the pH to <2 on a separate sample. Add the same relative amount of acid to all samples;  use
ultrapure acid preservative to prevent contamination. Be sure that the dilution caused by
acidifying is negligible or sufficiently reproducible for a dilution correction factor. When filtered
samples are to be collected, filter them, if possible, in t he field, or at the point of collection
before preservation with acid. Filter samples in a laboratory-controlled environment if field
conditions could cause error or contamination; in this case filter as soon as possible. Often slight
turbidity can be tole rated if experience shows that it will cause no interference in gravimetric or
volumetric tests and that its influence can be corrected in colorimetric tests, where it has
potentially the greatest interfering effect. Sample collector must state whether or not the sample
has been filtered. 
Make a record of every sample collected and identify every bottle with a unique sample
number, preferably by attaching an appropriately  inscribed tag or label. Document sufficient
information to provide positive sample id entification at a later date, including the unique sample
identification number, the name of the sample collector, the date, hour, exact location, and, if
possible, sample type (e.g., grab or composite), and any other data that may be needed for
correlatio n, such as water temperature, weather conditions, water level, stream flow,
post-collection conditions, etc. If space for all pertinent information for label or attached tag is
insufficient, record information in a bound sample log book at the sampling sit e at the time of
sample collection. Use waterproof ink to record all information (preferably with black,
non-solvent-based ink). Fix sampling points by de tailed description in the sampling plan, by
maps, or with the aid of stakes, buoys, or landmarks in a manner that will permit their
identification by other persons without reliance on memory or personal guidance. Global
positioning systems (GPS) also are used and supply accurate sampling position data. Particularly
when sample results are expected to be in volved in litigation, use formal ‘‘chain-of-custody’’
procedures (see ¶ B.2 below), which trace sample history from collection to final reporting. 
Before collecting samples from distribution sy stems, flush lines with three to five pipeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationvolumes (or until w ater is being drawn from the main source) to ensure that the sample is
representative of the supply, taking into account the volume of pipe to be flushed and the flow
velocity. If the distribution system volume is unavailable, flush with tap fully open for  at least 2
to 3 min before sampling. An exception to these guidelines, i.e., collecting a first draw sample, is
when information on areas of reduced or restricted flow is desired or when samples for lead in
drinking water are being collected. 
Although we ll pumping protocols depend on the objectives of an investigation and other
factors such as well characteristics and available equipment, a general rule is to collect samples
from wells only after the well has been purged sufficiently (usually with three t o ten well
volumes) to ensure that the sample represents the groundwater. Purging stagnant water is critical.
Sometimes it will be necessary to pump at a specified rate to achieve a characteristic drawdown,
if this determines the zones from which the well is supplied; record purging rate and drawdown,
if necessary. By using methods with minimal drawdown, purging volumes can be reduced
significantly. 
When samples are collected from a river or stream, observed results may vary with depth,
stream flow, and di stance from each shore. Selection of the number and distribution of sites at
which samples should be collected depends on study objectives, stream characteristics, available
equipment, and other factors. If equipment is available, take an integrated sample  from top to
bottom in the middle of the main channel of the stream or from side to side at mid-depth. If only
grab or catch samples can be collected, preferably  take them at various points of equal distance
across the stream; if only one sample can be col lected, take it in the middle of the main channel
of the stream and at mid-depth. Integrated samples are described further in ¶ B.1c below. 
Rivers, streams, lakes, and reservoirs are s ubject to considerable variations from normal
causes such as seasonal s tratification, diurnal variations, rainfall, runoff, and wind. Choose
location, depth, and frequency of sampling depe nding on local conditions and the purpose of the
investigation. 
Use the following examples for general guidance. Avoid areas of excessive turbulence
because of potential loss of volatile constituents  and of potential presence of denser-than-air
toxic vapors. Avoid sampling at weirs if possible because such locations tend to favor retrieval
of lighter-than-water, immiscible compounds. General ly, collect samples beneath the surface in
quiescent areas and open sampling container below surface with the mouth directed toward the
current to avoid collecting surface scum unless oil and grease is a constituent of interest; then
collect water at the s urface. If composite samples are required, ensure that sample constituents
are not lost during compositing because of improper handling of portions being composited. If
samples will be analyzed for organic constituents, refrigerate composited portions. Do not
composite samples for VOC analysis because some of the components will be lost through
volatilization. 
2.  Safety Considerations
 Because sample constituents may be toxic, take adequate precautions during sampling and
sample handling. Toxic substances can enter through the skin and eyes and, in the case ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationvapors, also through the lungs. Ingestion can occ ur via direct contact of toxic materials with
foods or by adsorption of vapors onto foods. Precautions may be limited to wearing gloves or
may include coveralls, aprons, or other protective apparel. Often, the degree of protection
provided by chemical prot ective clothing (CPC) is specific for different manufacturers and their
product models1; ensure that the clothing chosen will offer adequate protection. Always wear
eye protection (e.g., safety glasses with side shields or goggles). When toxic vapors may b e
present, sample only in well-ventilated areas, or use an appropriate respirator or self-contained
breathing apparatus. In a laboratory, open sample containers in a fume hood. Never have food in
the laboratory, near samples, or near sampling locations; al ways wash hands thoroughly before
handling food.2 
Always prohibit eating, drinking, or smoking near  samples, sampling locations, and in the
laboratory. Keep sparks, flames, and excessive heat sources away from samples and sampling
locations. If flammable compounds are suspected or known to be present and samples are to be
refrigerated, use only specially designed explosion-proof  refrigerators.2 
Collect samples safely, avoiding situations that may lead to accidents. When in doubt as to
the level of safety  precautions needed, consult a knowledgeable industrial hygienist or safety
professional. Samples with radioactive contaminants may require other safety considerations;
consult a health physicist. 
Label adequately any sample known or suspected to be hazar dous because of flammability,
corrosivity, toxicity, oxidizing chemicals, or radi oactivity, so that appropriate precautions can be
taken during sample handling, storage, and disposal. 
3.  References
         1.    FORSBERG K. & L.H. KEITH.  1998. Instant Gloves and CPC Database. Instant Reference
Sources, Inc. Austin, Tex.
         2.    WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FEDERATION.  1986. Removal of Hazardous Wastes in
Wastewater Facilities—Halogenated Organi cs. Manual of Practice FD-11, Water
Pollution Control Fed., Alexandria, Va.
1060  B.        Collection of Samples
1.  Types of Samples
a.  Grab samples:  Grab samples are single samples collected at a specific spot at a site over a
short period of time (typically seconds or minutes). Thus, they represent a ‘‘snapshot’’ in both
space and time of a sampling area. Discrete grab samples are taken at a selected location, depth,
and time. Depth-integrated grab samples are collected over a predetermined part or the entire
depth of a water column, at a selected location and time in a given body of water.
 A sample can represent only the compositi on of its source at the time and place ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcollection. However, when a source is known to be relatively constant in composition over an
extended time or over substantial distances in all directions, then the sample may represent a
longer time period and/or a larger volume than the specific time and place at which it was
collected. In such circumstances, a source may be represented adequately by single grab
samples. Examples are protected groundwater supplies, water supplies receiving conventional
treatment, some well-mixed surface waters, but rarely, wastewater streams, rivers, large lakes,
shorelines, estuaries, and groundwater plumes. 
When a source is known to vary with time, grab samples collected at suitable intervals and
analyzed separately can document  the extent, frequency, and duration of these variations.
Choose sampling intervals on the basis of the expected frequency of changes, which may vary
from as little as 5 min to as long as 1 h or more. Seasonal variations in natural systems may
necessitate sampling over months. When the source composition varies in space (i.e., from
location to location) rather than time, collect samples from appropriate locations that will meet
the objectives of the study (for example, upstream and downstream from a point s ource, etc.). 
The same principles apply to sampling wa stewater sludges, sludge banks, and muds,
although these matrices are not specifically addressed in this section. Take every possible
precaution to obtain a representative sample or one conforming to a  sampling program. 
b.  Composite samples:  Composite samples should provide a more representative sampling of
heterogeneous matrices in which the concentration of the analytes of interest may vary over short
periods of time and/or space. Composite samples can be obtained by  combining portions of
multiple grab samples or by using specially designed automatic sampling devices. Sequential
(time) composite samples are collected by using continuous, constant sample pumping or by
mixing equal water volumes collected at regular tim e intervals. Flow-proportional composites
are collected by continuous pumping at a rate proportional to the flow, by mixing equal volumes
of water collected at time intervals that are i nversely proportional to the volume of flow, or by
mixing volumes of wa ter proportional to the flow collected during or at regular time intervals.
 Advantages of composite samples include reduced costs of analyzing a large number of
samples, more representative samples of heterogeneous matrices, and larger sample sizes when
amounts of test samples are limited. Disadvantages of composite samples include loss of analyte
relationships in individual samples, potential dilution of analytes below detection levels,
increased potential analytical interferences, and increased possibili ty of analyte interactions. In
addition, use of composite samples may reduce the number of samples analyzed below the
required statistical need for specified data quality objectives or project-specific objectives. 
Do not use composite samples with compone nts or characteristics subject to significant and
unavoidable changes during storage. Analyze individual samples as soon as possible after
collection and preferably at the sampling point. Examples are dissolved gases, residual chlorine,
soluble sulfide, te mperature, and pH. Changes in components such as dissolved oxygen or
carbon dioxide, pH, or temperature may produce secondary changes in certain inorganic
constituents such as iron, manganese, alkalinity, or hardness. Some organic analytes also may be
chan ged by changes in the foregoing components. Use time-composite samples only forStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetermining components that can be demonstrated to remain unchanged under the conditions of
sample collection, preservation, and storage. 
Collect individual portions in a wide -mouth bottle every hour (in some cases every half hour
or even every 5 min) and mix at the end of the sampling period or combine in a single bottle as
collected. If preservatives are used, add them to the sample bottle initially so that all portions of
the composite are preserved as soon as collected. 
Automatic sampling devices are available; however, do not use them unless the sample is
preserved as described below. Composite samplers running for extended periods (weeks to
months) should undergo routine cleaning of containers and sample lines to minimize sample
growth and deposits. 
c.  Integrated (discharge-weighted) samples:  For certain purposes, the information needed is
best provided by analyzing mixtures of grab  samples collected from different points
simultaneously, or as nearly so as po ssible, using discharge-weighted methods  such as
equal-width increment (EWI) or equal discharge-increment (EDI) procedures and equipment. An
example of the need for integrated sampling occurs in a river or stream that varies in
composition across its width and depth. To evaluate average composit ion or total loading, use a
mixture of samples representing various points in the cross-section, in proportion to their relative
flows. The need for integrated samples also may exist if combined treatment is proposed for
several separate wastewater streams , the interaction of which may have a significant effect on
treatability or even on composition. Mathematical prediction of the interactions among chemical
components may be inaccurate or impossible and testing a suitable integrated sample may
provide more  useful information.
 Both lakes and reservoirs show spatial variations of composition (depth and horizontal
location). However, there are conditions under which neither total nor average results are
especially useful, but local variations are more importa nt. In such cases, examine samples
separately (i.e., do not integrate them). 
Preparation of integrated samples usually requires equipment designed to collect a sample
water uniformly across the depth profile. Knowledge of the volume, movement, and composi tion
of the various parts of the water being sampled usually is required. Collecting integrated samples
is a complicated and specialized process that must be described adequately in a sampling plan. 
2.  Chain-of-Custody Procedures
 Properly designed and executed chain-of-custody forms will ensure sample integrity from
collection to data reporting. This includes the ability to trace possession and handling of the
sample from the time of collection th rough analysis and final disposition. This process is referred
to as ‘‘chain-of-custody’’ and is required to demonstrate sample control when the data are to be
used for regulation or litigation. Where litigati on is not involved, chain-of-custody procedures
are useful for routine control of samples. 
A sample is considered to be under a person’s custody if it is in the individual’s physical
possession, in the individual’s sight, secured and ta mper-proofed by that individual, or secured inStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationan area restricted to authorized personnel. The following procedures summarize the major
aspects of chain of custody. More detailed discussions are available.1,2 
a.  Sample labels (including bar-code labels):  Use labels to prevent sample misidentification.
Gummed paper labels or tags generally are adequate. Include at least the following information:
a unique sample number, sample type, name of collector, date an d time of collection, place of
collection, and sample preservative. Also include date and time of preservation for comparison
to date and time of collection. Affix tags or self-adhesive labels to sample containers before, or
at the time of, sample collecti on.
b.  Sample seals:  Use sample seals to detect unauthorized tampering with samples up to the
time of analysis. Use self-adhesive paper seals that include at least the following information:
sample number (identical with number on sample label), collector’s  name, and date and time of
sampling. Plastic shrink seals also may be used.
 Attach seal in such a way that it is necessary to break it to open the sample container or the
sample shipping container (e.g., a cooler). A ffix seal to container before sample l eaves custody
of sampling personnel. 
c.  Field log book:  Record all information pertinent to a field survey or sampling in a bound
log book. As a minimum, include the following in the log book: purpose of sampling; location of
sampling point; name and address of field contact; producer of m aterial being sampled and
address, if different from location; type of sample; and method, date, and time of preservation. If
the sample is wastewater, identify process pr oducing waste stream. Also provide suspected
sample composition, including concentrat ions; number and volume of sample(s) taken;
description of sampling point and sampling method; date and time of collection; collector’s
sample identification number(s); sample distribution and how transported; references such as
maps or photographs of the sampling site; field observations and measurements; and signatures
of personnel responsible for observations. Because sampling situations vary widely, it is
essential to record sufficient information so that one could reconstruct the sampling event
without  reliance on the collector’s memory. Protect log book and keep it in a safe place.
d.  Chain-of-custody record:  Fill out a chain-of-custody record to accompany each sample or
group of samples. The record includes the following information: sample number; signature of
collector; date, time, and address of collection; sample type; sample  preservation requirements;
signatures of persons involved in the chain of possession; and inclusive dates and times of
possession. 
e.  Sample analysis request sheet:  The sample analysis request sheet accompanies samples to
the laboratory. The collector completes the field portion of such a form that includes most of the
pertinent information noted in the log book. The laboratory por tion of such a form is to be
completed by laboratory personnel and includes: name of person receiving the sample,
laboratory sample number, date of sample receipt, condition of each sample (i.e., if it is cold or
warm, whether the container is full or not,  color, if more than one phase is present, etc.), and
determinations to be performed.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationf.  Sample delivery to the laboratory:  Deliver sample(s) to laboratory as soon as practicable
after collection, typically within 2 d. Where shorter sample holding times are required, make
special arrangements to insure timely delivery to the laboratory. Where samples are shipped by a
commercial carrier, include the waybill number in the sample custody documentation. Insure that
samples are accompanied by a completed chain-of-custody record and a sample analysis request
sheet. Deliver sample to sample cust odian.
g.  Receipt and logging of sample:  In the laboratory, the sample custodian inspects the
condition and seal of the sample and reconciles label information and seal against the
chain-of-custody record before the sample is accepted for analysis. After accep tance, the
custodian assigns a laboratory number, logs  sample in the laboratory log book and/or
computerized laboratory information management system, and stores it in a secured storage
room or cabinet or refrigerator at the specified temperature until it is assigned to an analyst.
h.  Assignment of sample for analysis:  The laboratory supervisor usually assigns the sample
for analysis. Once the sample is in the laboratory, the supervisor or analyst is responsible for its
care and custody.
i.  Disposal:  Hold samples for the prescribed amount of time for the project or until the data
have been reviewed and accepted. Document the disposition of samples. Ensure that disposal is
in accordance with local, state, and U.S. EPA approved methods.
3.  Sampling Methods
a.  Manual sampling:  Manual sampling involves minimal equipment but may be unduly
costly and time-consuming for routine or large-s cale sampling programs. It requires trained field
technicians and is often necessary for regulatory and research investigati ons for which critical
appraisal of field conditions and complex sample collection techniques are essential. Manually
collect certain samples, such as waters containing oil and grease.
b.  Automatic sampling:  Automatic samplers can eliminate human errors in manual sampling,
can reduce labor costs, may provide the means for more frequent sampling,3 and are used
increasingly. Be sure that the automatic sampler does not contaminate the sa mple. For example,
plastic components may be incompatible with certain organic compounds that are soluble in the
plastic parts or that can be contaminated (e.g., from phthalate esters) by contact with them. If
sample constituents are generally known, conta ct the manufacturer of an automatic sampler
regarding potential incompatibility of plastic components.
 Program an automatic sampler in accordance with sampling needs. Carefully match pump
speeds and tubing sizes to the type of sample to be taken. 
c.  Sorbent sampling: Use of solid sorbents, particularly membrane-type disks, is becoming
more frequent. These methods offer advantages of rapid, inexpensive sampling if the analytes of
interest can be adsorbed and desorbed efficiently and the water mat rix is free of particulates that
plug the sorbent .
4.  Sample ContainersStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation The type of sample container used is of utmost importance. Test sample containers and
document that they are free of analytes of interest, especially when sampling and analyzing for
very low analyte levels. Containers typically are  made of plastic or glass, but one material may
be preferred over the other. For example, silica, sodium, and boron may be leached from soft
glass but not plastic, and trace levels of some pesticides and metals may sorb onto the walls of
glass containers.4 Thus, hard glass containers* #(3) are preferred. For samples containing organic
compounds, do not use plastic containers except tho se made of fluorinated polymers such as
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).3 
Some sample analytes may dissolve (be absorbed) into t he walls of plastic containers;
similarly, contaminants from plastic containers may leach into samples. Avoid plastics wherever
possible because of potential contamination from phthalate esters. Container failure due to
breakdown of the plastic is possible . Therefore, use glass containers for all organics analyses
such as volatile organics, semivolatile organics, pesticides, PCBs, and oil and grease. Some
analytes (e.g., bromine-containing compounds and some pesticides, polynuclear aromatic
compounds, etc.)  are light-sensitive; collect them in amber-colored glass containers to minimize
photodegradation. Container caps, typically plastic, also can be a problem. Do not use caps with
paper liners. Use foil or PTFE liners but be aware that metal liners can conta minate samples
collected for metals analysis and they may also react with the sample if it is acidic or alkaline.
Serum vials with PTFE-lined rubber or plastic septa are useful. 
In rare situations it may be necessary to use sample containers not specifica lly prepared for
use, or otherwise unsuitable for the particular situation; thoroughly document these deviations.
Documentation should include type and source of container, and the preparation technique, e.g.,
acid washed with reagent water rinse. For QA p urposes the inclusion of a bottle blank may be
necessary. 
5.  Number of Samples
 Because of variability from analytical and sampling procedures (i.e., population variability),
a single sample is insufficient to reach any reasonable desired level of confidence. If an overall
standard deviation (i.e., the standar d deviation of combined sampling and analysis) is known, the
required number of samples for a mobile matrix such as water may be estimated as follows:4 
where: 
                  N =   number of samples, 
                  t =   Student- t statistic for a given confidence level, 
                  s =   overall standard deviation, and 
                  U =   acceptable level of uncertainty. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTo assist in calculations, use curves such as those in Figure 1060:1 . As an example, if s is 0.5
mg/L, U is ± 0.2 mg/L, and a 95% confidence level is desired, approximately 25 to 30 samp les
must be taken. 
The above equation assumes that total error (population variability) is known. Total
variability consists of all sources of variability, including: the distribution of the analytes of
interest within the sampling site, collection, prese rvation, preparation, and analysis of samples,
and data handling and reporting. In simpler terms, error (variability) can be divided into
sampling and analysis components. Sampling error due to population variability (including
heterogeneous distribution o f analytes in the environmental matrix) usually is much larger than
analytical error components. Unfortunately, sampling error usually is not available and the
analyst is left with only the published error of the measurement system (typically obtained by
using a reagent water matrix under the best analytical conditions). 
More accurate equations are available.5 These are based on the Z distribution for determining
the number of samples needed to estimate a mean concentration when variability is estimated in
absolute terms using the standard deviation. The coefficient of variation (relative standard
deviation) is used when variability is estimated in relative terms. 
The number of random samples to be collected at a site can be influenced partly by the
method  that will be used. The values for standard deviation (SD) or relative standard deviation
(RSD) may be obtained from each of the methods or in the literature.6 However, calculations of
estimated numbers of samples needed based only on this information will  result in
underestimated numbers of samples because only the analytical variances are considered, and the
typically larger variances from the sampling operations are not included. Preferably, determine
and use SDs or RSDs from overall sampling and analysi s operations. 
For estimates of numbers of samples needed for systematic sampling (e.g., drilling wells for
sampling groundwater or for systematically sampling large water bodies such as lakes),
equations are available7 that relate number of samples to sha pe of grid, area covered, and space
between nodes of grid. The grid spacing is a complex calculation that depends on the size and
shape of any contaminated spot (such as a groundwater plume) to be identified, in addition to the
geometric shape of the sampl ing grid. 
See individual methods for types and numbers of quality assurance (QA) and quality control
(QC) samples, e.g., for normal-level (procedural) or low-level (contamination) bias or for
precision, involving sampling or laboratory analysis (either ov erall or individually). Estimates of
numbers of QC samples needed to achieve specified confidence levels also can be calculated.
Rates of false positives (Type I error) and false negatives (Type II error) are useful parameters
for estimating required numbe rs of QC samples. A false positive is the incorrect conclusion that
an analyte is present when it is absent. A false negative is the incorrect conclusion that an
analyte is absent when it is present. If the frequency of false positives or false negatives d esired
to be detected is less than 10%, then Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
where: 
                  α =   (1 − desired confidence level), and 
                  Y =   frequency to detect (<10%). 
If the frequency that is desirable to detect is more than 10%, iterative solution of a binomial
equation is necessary.5,8 
Equations are available as a computer program† #(4) for computing sample number by the Z
distribution, for estimating samples needed in systematic sampling, and for estimating required
number of QC samples. 
6.  Sample Volumes
 Collect a 1-L sample for most physical and chemical analyses. For certain determinations,
larger samples may be necessary. Table 1060:I  lists volumes ordinarily required for analyses, but
it is strongly recommended that the laboratory  that will conduct the analyses also be consulted to
verify the analytical needs of sampling procedures as they pertain to the goals and data quality
objective of an investigation. 
Do not use samples from the same container for multiple testing requiremen ts (e.g., organic,
inorganic, radiological, bacteriological, and microscopic examinations) because methods of
collecting and handling are different for each type  of test. Always collect enough sample volume
in the appropriate container in order to comply w ith sample handling, storage, and preservation
requirements. 
7.  References
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1986. Test Methods for Evaluating Solid
Waste: Physical/Chemical Methods, 3rd ed. Publ. No. SW-846, Off. Solid Waste and
Emergency Response, Washington, D.C.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTI ON AGENCY.  1982. NEIC Policies and Procedures.
EPA-330/9/78/001/-R (rev. 1982).
         3.    WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FEDERATION.  1986. Removal of Hazardous Wastes in
Wastewater Facilities—Halogenated Organics. Manual of Practice FD-11, Water
Pollution Control F ed., Alexandria, Va.
         4.    Methods for the Examination of Waters and Associated Materials: General Principles
of Sampling and Accuracy of Results. 1980. Her Majesty’s Stationery Off., London,
England.
         5.    KEITH, L.H., G.L. PATTON, D.L. LEWIS & P.G. E DWARDS.  1996. Determining numbers andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationkinds of analytical samples. Chapter 1 in Principles of Environmental Sampling, 2nd
ed. ACS Professional Reference Book, Amer ican Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
         6.    KEITH, L.H.  1996. Compilation of EPA’s Sampling and Analysis Methods, 2nd ed.
Lewis Publ./CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
         7.    GILBERT, R.O.  1987. Statistical Methods for Environmental Pollution Monitoring. Van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, N.Y.
         8.    GRANT, E.L. & R.S. LEAVENWORTH.  1988. Statistical Qu ality Control, 6th ed.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, N.Y.
         9.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1996. 40 CFR Part 136, Table II.
       10.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1992. Rules and Regulations. 40 CFR
Parts 100-149.
1060  C.        Sample Storage and Preservation
 Complete and unequivocal preservation of samp les, whether domestic wastewater, industrial
wastes, or natural waters, is a practical impossibility because complete stability for every
constituent never can be achieved. At best, preservation techniques only retard chemical and
biological changes that inevitably continue after sample collection. 
1.  Sample Storage before Analysis
a. Nature of sample changes:  Some determinations are more affected by sample storage than
others. Certain cations are subject to loss by adsorption on, or ion exchange with, the walls of
glass containers. These include aluminum, cadmium, chromium, copper , iron, lead, manganese,
silver, and zinc, which are best collected in a separate clean bottle and acidified with nitric acid
to a pH below 2.0 to minimize precipitation and adsorption on container walls. Also, some
organics may be subject to loss by adsor ption to the walls of glass containers.
 Temperature changes quickly; pH may change significantly in a matter of minutes; dissolved
gases (oxygen, carbon dioxide) may be lost. Because changes in such basic water quality
properties may occur so quickly, det ermine temperature, reduction-oxidation potential, and
dissolved gases in situ and pH, specific conductance, turbidity, and alkalinity immediately after
sample collection. Many organic compounds are sensitive to changes in pH and/or temperature
resulting i n reduced concentrations during storage. 
Changes in the pH-alkalinity-carbon dioxide balance may cause calcium carbonate to
precipitate, decreasing the values for calcium and total hardness. 
Iron and manganese are readily soluble in their lower oxidation  states but relatively insoluble
in their higher oxidation states; therefore, these cations may precipitate or they may dissolve
from a sediment, depending on the redox potential of the sample. Microbiological activity may
affect the nitrate-nitrite-ammoni a content, phenol or BOD concentration, or the reduction of
sulfate to sulfide. Residual chlorine is reduced to chloride. Sulfide, sulfite, ferrous iron, iodide,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand cyanide may be lost through oxidation. Color, odor, and turbidity may increase, decrease, or
change in quality. Sodium, silica, and boron may be leached from the glass container.
Hexavalent chromium may be reduced to trivalent chromium. 
Biological activity taking place in a sample may change the oxidation state of some
constituents. Soluble co nstituents may be converted to organically bound materials in cell
structures, or cell lysis may result in release of cellular material into solution. The well-known
nitrogen and phosphorus cycles are examples of biological influences on sample composition . 
Zero head-space is important in preservation of samples with volatile organic compounds
and radon. Avoid loss of volatile materials by collecting sample in a completely filled container.
Achieve this by carefully filling the bottle so that top of menisc us is above the top of the bottle
rim. It is important to avoid spillage or air entrapment if preservatives such as HCl or ascorbic
acid have already been added to the bottle. After capping or sealing bottle, check for air bubbles
by inverting and gently t apping it; if one or more air bubbles are observed then, if practical,
discard the sample and repeat refilling bottle with new sample until no air bubbles are observed
(this cannot be done if bottle contained preservatives before it was filled). 
Serum via ls with septum caps are particularly useful in that a sample portion for analysis can
be taken through the cap by using a syringe,1 although the effect of pressure reduction in the
head-space must be considered. Pulling a sample into a syringe under vacuum  can result in low
bias data for volatile compounds and the resulting headspace precludes taking further
subsamples. 
b. Time interval between collection and analysis:  In general, the shorter the time that elapses
between collection of a sample and its analysis, the more reliable will be the analytical results.
For certain constituents and physical values, immediate ana lysis in the field is required. For
composited samples it is common practice to use the time at the end of composite collection as
the sample collection time.
 Check with the analyzing laboratory to determine how much elapsed time may be allowed
between sa mple collection and analysis; this depends on the character of the sample and the
stability of the target analytes under the conditions of storage. Many regulatory methods limit the
elapsed time between sample collection and analysis (see Table 1060:I ). Ch anges caused by
growth of microorganisms are greatly retarded by keeping the sample at a low temperature
(<4°C but above freezing). When the interval between sample collection and analysis is long
enough to produce changes in either the concentration or th e physical state of the constituent to
be measured, follow the preservation practices given in Table 1060:I . Record time elapsed
between sampling and analysis, and which preservative, if any, was added. 
2.  Preservation Techniques
 To minimize the potential for volatilization or biodegradation between sampling and
analysis, keep samples as cool as possible without freezing. Preferably pack samples in crushed
or cubed ice or commercial ice substitutes be fore shipment. Avoid using dry ice because it will
freeze samples and may cause glass containers to break. Dry ice also may effect a pH change inStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsamples. Keep composite samples cool with ice or a refrigeration system set at 4°C during
compositing. Analyze  samples as quickly as possible on arrival at the laboratory. If immediate
analysis is not possible, preferably store at 4°C.1 
No single method of preservation is entirely satisfactory; choose the preservative with due
regard to the determinations to be m ade. Use chemical preservatives only when they do not
interfere with the analysis being made. When they are used, add them to the sample bottle
initially so that all sample portions are preserved as soon as collected. Because a preservation
method for one determination may interfere with another one, samples for multiple
determinations may need to be split and preserved separately. All methods of preservation may
be inadequate when applied to suspended matter. Do not use formaldehyde as a preservative for
samples collected for chemical analysis because it affects many of the target analytes. 
Methods of preservation are relatively limited and are intended generally to retard biological
action, retard hydrolysis of chemical compounds and complexes, and reduce  volatility of
constituents. 
Preservation methods are limited to pH control, chemical addition, the use of amber and
opaque bottles, refrigeration, filtration, and freezing. Table 1060:I  lists preservation methods by
constituent. See Section 7010B  for sam ple collection and preservation requirements for
radionuclides. 
The foregoing discussion is by no means exhaustive and comprehensive. Clearly it is
impossible to prescribe absolute rules for prev enting all possible changes. Additional advice will
be found  in the discussions under individual determinations, but to a large degree the
dependability of an analytical determination rests on the experience and good judgment of the
person collecting the sample. Numbers of samples required for confidence levels in data quality
objectives, however, rely on statistical equations such as those discussed earlier. 
3.  Reference
         1.    WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FEDERATION.  1986. Removal of Hazardous Wastes in
Wastewater Facilities—Halogenated Organics. Manual of Practice FD-11, Water
Pollution Control Fed., Alexandria, Va.
4.  Bibliography
 KEITH , L.H., ed. 1996. Principles of Environm ental Sampling, 2nd ed. ACS Professional
Reference Book, American Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C. 
1080        REAGENT WATER
1080  A.        IntroductionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation One of the most important aspects of analysis is the preparation of reagent water to be used
for dilution of reagents and for blank analysis. Reagent water is water with no detectable
concentration of the compound or element  to be analyzed at the detection limit of the analytical
method. Reagent water should be free of substances that interfere with analytical methods. The
quality of water required is related directly to the analysis being made. Requirements for water
quality  may differ for organic, inorganic, and biological constituents depending on the use(s) for
which the water is intended. 
Any method of preparation of reagent water is acceptable provided that the requisite quality
can be met. Improperly maintained systems  may add contaminants. Reverse osmosis, distillation,
and deionization in various combinations all can produce reagent water when used in the proper
arrangement. Ultrafiltration and/or ultraviolet treatment also may be used as part of the process.
Section 1080  provides general guidelines for the preparation of reagent water. Table 1080:I  lists
commonly available processes for water purification and major classes of contaminants removed
by purification. 
For details on preparing water for microbiological tes ts, see Section 9020B.3 c. 
1080  B.        Methods for Preparation of Reagent Water
1.  Distillation
 Prepare laboratory-grade distilled water by distilling water from a still of all-borosilicate
glass, fused quartz, tin, or titanium. To remove ammonia distill from an acid solution. Remove
CO2 by boiling the water for 15 min and cooling  rapidly to room temperature; exclude
atmospheric CO2 by using a tube containing soda lime or a commercially available
CO2-remov ing agent.* #(5) 
Boiling the water may add other impurities by leaching impurities from the container.
Freshly replaced filters, ca rtridges and resins initially can release impurities. Pretreat feedwater
and provide periodic maintenance to minimize scale formation within the still. Pretreatment may
be required where the feedwater contains significant concentrations of calcium, magnesi um, and
bicarbonate ions; it may involve demineralization via reverse osmosis or ion exchange. 
2.  Reverse Osmosis
 Reverse osmosis is a process in which water is forced under pressure through a
semipermeable membrane removing a portion of dissolved constituents and suspended
impurities. Product water quality depends on feedwater quality. 
Select the reverse osmosis membrane module appropriate to the characteristics of the
feedwater. Obtain rejection data for contaminants in the feedwater at the operating pressure to be
used in preparing reagent water. Set overall water production to make the most economical use
of water without compromising the final quality of the permeate. Selection of spiral-wound or
hollow fiber configurations depends on fouling potential of the feedwater. Regardless ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconfiguration used, pretreatment may be required to minimi ze membrane fouling with colloids or
particulates and to minimize introduction of chlorine, iron, and other oxidizing compounds that
may degrade reverse osmosis membranes. Periodic flushing of the membrane modules is
necessary. 
3.  Ion Exchange
 Prepare deionized water by passing feedwater through a mixed-bed ion exchanger,
consisting of strong anion and strong cation resins  mixed together. When the system does not run
continuously, recirculate product water through ion-exchang e bed. 
Use separate anion and cation resin beds in applications where resin regeneration is
economically attractive. In such instances, position the anion exchanger downstream of the
cation exchanger to remove leachates from the cation resin. Proper bed s izing is critical to the
performance of the resins. In particular, set th e length-to-diameter ratio of the bed in accordance
with the maximum process flow rate to ensure that optimal face velocities are not exceeded and
that sufficient residence time is pr ovided. 
In applications where the feedwater has significant quantities of organic matter, remove
organics to minimize potential fouling of the re sins. Possible pretreatments include prefiltration,
distillation, reverse osmosis, or adsorption. 
4.  Adsorption
 Adsorption is generally used to remove chlorine and organic impurities. It is accomplished
typically with granular activated carbon. Efficiency  of organics removal depends on the nature of
the organic contaminants, the physical characteri stics of the activated carbon, and the operating
conditions. In general, organics adsorption efficiency is inversely proportional to solubility and
may be inadequate for the removal of low-molecular-weight, polar compounds. Performance
differences among ac tivated carbons are attributable to the use of different raw materials and
activation procedures. Select the appropriate activated carbon with regard to these differences.
Even with optimum activated carbon, proper performance will not be attained unless t he column
is sized to give required face velocity and residence time at the maximum process flow rate. 
Use of activated carbon may adversely affect resistivity. This effect may be controlled by use
of reverse osmosis, mixed resins, or special adsorbents. To achieve the lowest level of organic
contamination, use mixtures of polishing resins with special carbons in conjunction with
additional treatment steps, such as reverse osmosis, natural carbons, ultraviolet oxidation, or
ultrafiltration. 
1080  C.        Reagent Water Quality
1.  Quality Guidelines
 Several guidelines for reagent water quality, based on contaminant levels, are available, but
the final test is the appropriateness for the analysis. Table 1080:II  lists some characteristics ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationvarious qualities of reagent water. 
High-quality reagent water, having a minimum resistivity of 10 megohms-cm, 25°C (in line),
typically is prepared by distillation, deionization, or reverse osmosis treatment of feedwater
followed by polishing with a mixed-bed deionizer and passage through a 0.2-µm-pore membrane
filter. Alternatively treat by reverse osmosis followed by carbon adsorption and deionization.
Determine quality at the time of production. Mixed-bed deionizers typically add small amounts
of organic matter to water, especially if th e beds are fresh. Resistivity should be >10
megohm-cm at 25°C, measured in-line. Resistivity measurements will not detect organics or
nonionized contaminants, nor will they provide an accurate assessment of ionic contaminants at
the microgram-per-liter lev el. 
Medium-quality water typically is produced by distillation or deionization. Resistivity should
be >1 megohm-cm at 25°C. 
Low-quality water should have a minimum resistivity of 0.1 megohm-cm, and may be used
for glassware washing, preliminary rinsing o f glassware, and as feedwater for production of
higher-grade waters. 
The pH of high- or medium-quality water cannot be measured accurately without
contaminating the water. Measure other constituents as required for individual tests. 
High-quality water ca nnot be stored without significant degradation; produce it continuously
and use it immediately after processing. Medium-quality water may be stored, but keep storage
to a minimum and provide quality consistent with the intended use. Store only in materials  that
protect the water from contamination, such as TFE and glass for organics analysis or plastics for
metals. Store low-quality water in materials that protect the water from contamination. 
2.  Bibliography
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS. 1991.  Annual Book of ASTM Standards,
Vol. 11-01, D 1193-91. American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa. 
1090        LABORATORY OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY
1090  A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Achievement of a safe and healthful workplace is the responsibility of the organization, the
laboratory manager, the supervisory personnel and, finally, the laboratory personnel themselves.
All laboratory employees must make every  effort to protect themselves and their fellow workers
by conscientiously adhering to the health and safety program that has been developed and
documented specifically for their laboratory. 
2.  Organizing for SafetyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa.  Overall program:  The responsibility for establishing and enforcing a laboratory health
and safety (LH&S) program ultimately rests w ith the laboratory director. The LH&S program
must, at the minimum, address how to protect oneself from the hazards of working with
biological (1090H), chemical (1090J), and radi ological (1090I) agents. Such a program is a
necessary component of an overall laboratory quality system that provides for the health and
safety of the entire laboratory staff. As a part of the qua lity system, all aspects of the LH&S
program must be fully documented. Laboratory personnel must be trained. The LH&S program
must be fully implemented and its application audited periodically. Appropriate records of all
activities must be kept to document  performance, meet appropriate regulatory requirements, and
document the status of the LH&S program.
 In the United States, the minimum standard of practice for health and safety activities is
detailed in government documents.1,2 Each laboratory should app oint as needed a chemical
hygiene officer (CHO), a biological hygiene o fficer (BHO), a radiological hygiene officer
(RHO), and, where appropriate or desired, a LH&S committee. The CHO, the committee, and
laboratory management must develop, document, and im plement a ‘‘written’’ laboratory hygiene
plan (LHP), or chemical hygiene plan (CHP). 
b.  Specific responsibilities:  Specific responsibilities applicable at various levels within the
organization are as follows:
1)  The chief executive officer (CEO) has ultimate responsibility for LH&S within the
organization and must, with other managers and supervisors, provide continuous support for the
LH&S program. 
2)  The supervisor has primary responsibility for the LH&S program in his or her work
group. 
3)  The biological hygiene officer (BHO) has the responsibility to work with managers,
supervisors, and other employees to develop and implement appropriate biological hygiene
policies and practices; monitor procurement, use, and disposal of biological a gents used in the
laboratory; see that appropriate audits are conducted and that records are maintained; know the
current legal requirements concerning working with biological agents; and seek ways to improve
the biological hygiene program. 
4)  The chemical hygiene officer (CHO) has the same responsibilities as the biological
hygiene officer, but with respect to chemicals, and also is responsible for helping supervisors
(project directors) develop precautions and adequate facilities and for  keeping material safety
data sheets (MSDSs) available for review. 
5)  The radiological hygiene officer (RHO), refe rred to as radiation safety officer in most
regulatory language, has the same responsibilities as the chemical hygiene officer, but with
respect to radiological chemicals and exposure. 
6)  The laboratory supervisor has overall responsibility for chemical hygiene in the
laboratory, including responsibility to ensure that workers know and follow the chemical
hygiene rules, that protective equipment is available and in working order, and that appropriateStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationtraining has been provided; performs regul ar, formal chemical hygiene and housekeeping
inspections, including routine inspections of emergency equipment, and maintenance of
appropriate records; knows the current legal requirements concerni ng regulated substances;
specifies the required levels of protective apparel and equipment needed to perform the work;
and ensures that facilities and training for use of any material being ordered are adequate. 
7)  The project director (or a director of a specific operation) has primary responsibility for
biological, chemical, and/or radiological hygiene procedures as appropriate for all operations
under his or her control. 
8)  The laboratory worker has the responsibility for planning and conducting each operation
in accordance with the institutional chemical hygiene, biological hygiene, and radiological
hygiene procedures, and for developing good personal chemical, biologi cal, and radiological
hygiene habits. 
3.  Records
 Maintain records of all accidents including ‘‘near-misses,’’ medical care audits, inspections,
and training for specified time periods that depend on the nature of the requirement. Keep
records on standardized report forms containing suffici ent information to enable an investigator
to determine who was involved, what happened, when and where it happened, and what injuries
or exposures, if any, resulted. Most importantly, these records should enable the formulation of
appropriate corrective ac tions where warranted. The standard of practice for LH&S activities
requires that a log (record) be kept of those accidents causing major disability. Record not only
all accidents, but also ‘‘near-misses,’’ to permit full evaluation of safety program effec tiveness.
Maintain a file detailing all of the recommendations for the LH&S program. 
4.  Information and Training2 
The standard of practice for hazard communication or ‘‘right-to know’’ requires that
employees be notified about hazards in the workplace. 
Laboratory personnel must be under the direct supervision and regular observation o f a
technically qualified individual who must have knowledge of the hazards present, their health
effects, and related emergency procedures. The supervisor must educate laboratory personnel in
safe work practices at the time of initial assignment and when a new hazardous substance is
introduced into the workplace. Personnel have a right to know what hazardous materials are
present, the specific hazards created by those materials, and the required procedures to protect
themselves against these hazards. The h azard communication standard 2 requires information
and training on material safety data sheets (M SDSs), labeling, chemical inventory of all
hazardous substances in the workplace, and informing contractors of hazardous substances. 
Training dealing with he alth and safety techniques and work practices requires a concerted
effort by management, and must be conducted on a routine basis by competent and qualified
individuals to be effective. Records of training must be maintained. 
5.  ReferencesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         1.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Laboratory Standard.
Occupational Exposure to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories. 29 CFR 1910.1450.
         2.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  1985. Hazard
Communication. Final Rule. Federal Register  48:53280. 29 CFR 1910.1200.
6.  Bibliography
 DUX, J.P. & R.F. STALZER.  1988. Managing Safety in the Chemical Laboratory. Van Nostrand
Reinhold Co., Inc., New York, N.Y.
 FURR, A.K.,  ed. 1990. CRC Handbook of Laboratory Safe ty, 3rd ed. CRC Press, Inc., Boca
Raton, Fla.
1090  B.        Safe Laboratory Practices
 Use the information, rules, work practices, and/or procedures discussed below for essentially
all laboratory work with chemicals. 
1.  General Rules
a.  Accidents and spills:
1)  Eye contact—Promptly flush eyes with water for a prolonged period (minimum of 15
min) and seek immediate medical attention. 
2)  Ingestion—Encourage victim to drink large amounts of water. 
3)  Skin contact—Promptly flush affected area with water for approximately 15 min and
remove any contaminated clothing. If symptoms persist after washing, seek medical attention. 
4)  Clean-up—Promptly clean up spills, using appropriate protective apparel and equipment
and proper disposal procedures. 
5)  Working alone—Avoid working alone in a bu ilding; do not work alone in a laboratory if
the procedures to be conducted are hazardous. 
b.  Vigilance:  Be alert to unsafe conditions and see that they are corrected when detected.
2.  Work Practices/Rules
a.  Work habits:  Develop and encourage safe habits, avoid unnecessary exposure to
chemicals by any route, and avoid working alone whenever possible.
 b.  Exhaust ventilation:  Do not smell or taste chemicals. Vent any apparatus that may
discharge toxic ch emicals (vacuum pumps, distillation columns, etc.) into local exhaust devices. 
c.  Glove boxes:  Inspect gloves and test glove boxes before use.
d. Cold and/or warm rooms:  Do not allow release of toxic substances in cold rooms and/or
warm rooms, because these rooms usually have no provisions for exhausting contaminants.
e.  Use/choice of chemicals:  Use only those chemicals for which the quality of the availableStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationventilation system is appropriate.
f.  Eating, smoking, and related activities:  DO NOT eat, drink, smoke, chew gum, or apply
cosmetics in areas where laboratory chemicals are present. Always wash hands before
conducting these activities.
g.  Food storage:  DO NOT store, handle, or consume food or beverages in storage areas,
refrigerators, or glassware and utensils that also are used for laboratory operations.
h.  Equipment and glassware:  Handle and store laboratory glassware with care to avoid
damage. Do not use damaged glassware. Use extra care with Dewar flasks and other evacuated
glass apparatus; shield or wrap them to contain chemicals and fragments shoul d implosion occur.
Use equipment for its designed purpose only.
i.  Washing:  Wash areas of exposed skin well before leaving the laboratory.
j.  Horseplay:  Avoid practical jokes or other behavior that might confuse, startle, or distract
another worker.
k.  Mouth suction:  Do not use mouth suction for pipetting or starting a siphon.
 l.  Personal protective equipment:  Do not wear personal protective clothing or equipment in
nonlaboratory areas. Remove laboratory co ats immediately on significant contamina tion with
hazardous materials. 
m.  Personal apparel:  Confine long hair and loose clothing. Wear shoes at all times in the
laboratory but do not wear sandals or perforated shoes.
n.  Personal housekeeping:  Keep work area clean and uncluttered, with chemicals and
equipment properly labeled and stored. Clean up work area on completion of an operation or at
the end of each day. 
o.  Unattended operations:  Leave lights on, place an appropriate sign on the door, and
provide for containment of toxic substances in the event of failure of a utility service (such as
cooling water) to an unattended operation.
3.  Personal Protective Equipment
 Carefully plan a program addressing the need for, use of, and the training with personal
protective equipment. Such a program includes seeking information and advice about hazards,
developing appropriate protective proc edures, and proper positioning of equipment before
beginning any new operations. 
a.  Eye protection:  Wear appropriate eye protection (this applies to all persons, including
visitors) where chemicals are stored or handled. Avoid use of contact lenses in the laboratory
unless necessary; if contact lenses are used, inform supervisor so that special precautions can be
taken.
b.  Skin protection:  Wear appropriate gloves when the potential for contact with toxic
chemicals exists. Inspect gloves before each use, wash them before removal, and replace
periodically.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Respiratory protection:  Use appropriate respiratory equipment when engineering controls
are unable to maintain air contaminant concentrations below the action levels, i.e., one half the
permissible exposure limit (PEL)1 or threshold limit value (TLV7), i.e., levels below which no
irreversible health affects are expected. When work practices are used that are expected to cause
routine exposures that exceed the PEL or TLV, respiratory protection is required to prevent
overexposure to hazardous chemicals . If respirators are used or provided in the laboratory then
the LH&S standard of practice requires that a complete respiratory protection plan (RPP) be in
place. The minimum requirements for an RPP meeting the LH&S standard of practice are
published.1 Inspect respirators before use and check for proper fit.
d.  Other protective equipment:  Provide and use any other protective equipment and/or
apparel as appropriate.
4.  Engineering Controls
 Fume hoods:  Use the hood for operations that might result in the release of toxic chemical
vapors or dust. As a rule of thumb, use a hood or other local ventilation device when working
with any appreciably volatile substance wit h a TLV of less than 50 ppm. Confirm that hood
performance is adequate before use. Open hood minimally during work. Keep hood door closed
at all other times except when adjustments within the hood are being made. Keep stored
materials in hoods to a minimum , and do not block vents or air flow. Provide at least an 8-cm
space under and around all items used in hoods, and ensure that they are at least 15 cm from the
front of the hood. 
5.  Waste Disposal
 Ensure that the plan for each laboratory operation includes plans and training for waste
disposal. Deposit chemical waste in appropriately labeled receptacles and follow all other waste
disposal procedures of the Chemical Hygiene Plan  (see 1090J). Do not discharge any of the
following contaminants to the sewer: concentrat ed acids or bases; highly toxic, malodorous, or
lachrymatory substances; substances that might interfere with the biological activity of
wastewater treatment plants; a nd substances that may create fire or explosion hazards, cause
structural damage, or obstruct flow. For further information on waste disposal, see Section 1100 . 
6.  Work with Chemicals of Moder ate Chronic or High Acute Toxicity
 Examples of chemicals in this categor y include diisopropylfluorophosphate, hydrofluoric
acid, and hydrogen cyanide. The following rules are intended to supplement the rules listed
previo usly for routine laboratory operations. Their purpose is to minimize exposure to these
toxic substances by any exposure route using all reasonable precautions. The precautions are
appropriate for substances with moderate chronic or high acute toxicity used  in significant
quantities. 
a.  Location:  Use and store these substances only in areas of restricted access with special
warning signs. Always use a hood (previously evaluated to confirm adequate performance with a
face velocity of at least 24 m/min) or other containment device for  procedures that may result inStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe generation of aerosols or vapors containing th e substance; trap released vapors to prevent
their discharge with the hood exhaust.
b.  Personal protection:  Always avoid skin contact by use of gloves and long sleeves, and
other protective apparel as appropriate. Always wash hands and arms immediately after working
with these materials.
c.  Records:  Maintain records of the amounts of these materials on hand, amounts used, and
the names of the workers involved.
d.  Prevention of spills and accidents:  Be prepared for accidents and spills.
 Ensure that at least two people are present at all times if a compound in use is highly toxic or
of unknown toxicity. 
Store breakable containers of these substances in chemic ally resistant trays; also work and
mount apparatus above such trays or cover work and storage surfaces with removable, absorbent,
plastic-backed paper. If a major spill occurs outside the hood, evacuate the area; ensure that
cleanup personnel wear suitabl e protective apparel and equipment. 
e.  Waste:  Thoroughly decontaminate or incinerate contaminated clothing or shoes. If
possible, chemically decontaminate by chemical conversion. Store contaminated waste in closed,
suitably labeled, impervious containers (for liquids, in glass or plastic bottles half-filled with
vermiculite).
7.  Work with Chemicals of High Chronic Toxicity
 Examples of chemicals in this category include (where they are used in quantities above a
few milligrams, or a few grams, depending on the substance) dimethyl mercury, nickel carbonyl,
benzo(a)pyrene, N-nitrosodiethylamine, and other substances with high carcinogenic potency.
The following rules are intended to supplement the rules listed previously for routine laboratory
operations. 
a.  Access:  Conduct all transfers and work with these substances in a controlled area, i.e., a
restricted-access hood, glove box, or portion of a la boratory, designated for use of highly toxic
substances, for which all people with access are aware of the  substances being used and
necessary precautions.
b.  Approvals:  Prepare a plan for use and disposal of these materials and obtain the approval
of the laboratory supervisor.
c.  Non-contamination/decontamination:  Protect vacuum pumps against contamination by
scrubbers or HEPA filters and vent them into the hood. Decontaminate vacuum pumps or other
contaminated equipment, including glassware, in the hood before removing them from the
controlled area. Decontaminate the controlled area before routine work is resumed.
d.  Exiting:  On leaving a controlled area, remove any protective apparel (place it in an
appropriately labeled container), and thor oughly wash hands, forearms, face, and neck.
e.  Housekeeping:  Use a wet mop or a vacuum cleaner equipped with a HEPA filter. Do not
dry sweep if the toxic substance is a dry powder.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationf.  Medical surveillance:  If using toxicologically significant quantities of such a substance on
a regular basis (e.g., three times per week), consult a qualified physician about desirability of
regular medical surveillance.
g.  Records:  Keep accurate records of the amounts of these substances stored and used, the
dates of use, and names of users.
h.  Signs and labels:  Ensure that the controlled area is conspicuously marked with warning
and restricted access signs and that all containers of these substances are appropriately labeled
with identity and warning labels.
i.  Spills:  Ensure that contingency plans, equipment, and materials to minimize exposures of
people and property are available in case of accident.
j.  Storage:  Store containers of these chemicals only in a ventilated, limited-access area.
k.  Glove boxes:  For a negative-pressure glove box, ensure that the ventilation rate is at least
2 volume changes/h and the pressure drop at least 1.3 cm of water. For a positive-pressure glove
box, thoroughly check for leaks before each use. In either c ase, trap the exit gases or filter them
through a HEPA filter and then release them into the hood.
l.  Waste:  Ensure that containers of contam inated waste (including washings from
contaminated flasks) are transferred from the controlled area in a secondary container under the
supervision of authorized personnel.
8.  Physical Hazards
a.  Electrical:  Ensure that electrical wiring, connections, and apparatus conform to the
requirement of the latest National Electrical C ode. Fire, explosion, power outages, and electrical
shocks are all serious hazards that may result from incorrect use of electrical devices. Ground all
electrical equipment or use double-insulated e quipment. Use ground fault interrupter circuit
breakers to the maximum extent possible. Do not  locate electrical receptacles inside fume hoods,
and do not use equipment near vo latile flammable solvents. Use approved safety refrigerators.
Disconnect electrical equipment from the power suppl y before service or repair is attempted and
never bypass safety interlocks. Attempting to repair equipment using employees not thoroughly
acqu ainted with electrical principles may present particularly dangerous situations.
b.  Non-ionizing radiation:  Non-ionizing radiation, also called electromagnetic radiation, is
generally considered to be the radio frequency region of the radiation spectrum. For the purposes
of dealing with personal exposures in laboratories, it also in cludes the microwave frequency
region. Typical laboratory exposures to non-ioni zing radiation usually include ultraviolet,
visible, infrared, and microwave radiation.
 For normal environmental conditions and for incident electromagnetic energy of frequenci es
from 10 MHz to 100 GHz, the radiation protection guide is 10 mW/cm2. The radiation protection
applies whether the radiation is continuous or intermittent. This means a power density of 10
mW/cm2 for periods of 0.1 h or more, or an energy density of 1 mW -h/cm2 during any 0.1-h
period. These recommendations apply to both whole-body irradiation and partial bodyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationirradiation. 
Ultraviolet radiation (UV) and lasers are used frequently. With properly constructed and
operated instruments, it is not a significant  hazard but can be harmful when used for controlling
microorganisms in laboratory rooms or for sterilizing objects. 
When using devices that generate or use non-ionizing radiation, observe the following
precautions: Wear safety glasses or goggles with soli d side pieces whenever there is a possibility
of exposure to harmful (UV) radiation. Provide proper shielding (shiny metal surfaces reflect this
energy). Shut off all these devices (UV lamps) wh en not in use. Post warning signs and install
indicator lights  to serve as a constant reminder when these types of devices are in use (UV
lamps). 
c.  Mechanical:  Shield or guard drive belts, pulleys, chain drivers, rotating shafts, and other
types of mechanical power transmission a pparatus. Laboratory equipment requiring this
guarding includes vacuum pumps, mixers, blenders, and grinders.
 Shield portable power tools. Guard equipment such as centrifuges, which have high-speed
revolving parts, against ‘‘fly-aways.’’ Securely fasten equipment that has a tendency to vibrate
(e.g., centrifuges and air compressors) to prevent the tendency to ‘‘walk’’ an d locate them away
from bottles and other items that may fall from shelves or benches because of the vibration. 
d.  Compressed gases:  Gas cylinders may explode or ‘‘rocket’’ if improperly handled.
Leaking cylinders may present an explosion hazard if the contents are flammable; they are an
obvious health hazard if the contents are toxic; and they may lead to death by suffocation if the
contents are inert gases. The Compressed Gas Association has published procedures governing
use and storage of compressed gases. Transfer gas cylinders only with carts, hand trucks, or
dollies. Secure gas cylinders properly during sto rage, transport, and use, and leave valve safety
covers on cylinders during storage and transport. Avoid the use of adapters or couplers with
compressed gas. Properly identify cylinder contents.
9.  Chemical Hazards
a.  General precautions:  Chemical injuries may be external or internal. External injuries may
result from skin exposure to caustic or corrosive substances such as acids, bases, or reactive
salts. Take care to prevent accidents, such as splashes and conta iner spills. Internal injuries may
result from the toxic or corrosive effects of substances absorbed by the body. These internal
injuries may result from inhalation, skin contact, or ingestion.
 Table 1090:I , Table 1090:II , and  Table 1090:III  list PELs, T LVs, and/or short-term
exposure limits and ceilings for some chemical materials specified in Standard Methods , as
given in various published sources.1-8 The PEL values reported in these tables are in some
instances higher than the levels that some nations believe to be appropriate. Because the health
and safety program should be driven by meeting best industrial hygiene practice, always use the
lowest recommended exposure values when protecting human health. 
In addition, pay careful attention to equipment corrosion that ultimately may lead to safety
hazards from equipment failure. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Inorganic acids and bases:  Many inorganic acids and bases have PELs and TLVs. Table
1090:I  presents PELs (based on U.S. standards) and/or TLVs as well as short-term exposure
limits and ceilings for some inorganic chemicals specified in Standard Metho ds. These PELs and
TLVs indicate the maximum air concentration to which workers may be exposed. Fumes of these
acids and bases are severe eye and respiratory system irritants. Liquid or solid acids and bases
can quickly cause severe burns of the skin and e yes. When acids are heated to increase the rate
of digestion of organic materials, they pose a significantly greater hazard because fumes are
produced and the hot acid reacts very quickly with the skin.
 Store acids and bases separately in well-ventilated areas and away from volatile organic and
oxidizable materials. Use containers (rubber or plastic buckets) to transport acids and bases. 
Work with strong acids and bases only in a properly functioning chemical fume hood. Slowly
add acids and bases to water  (with constant stirring) to avoid spattering. If skin contact is made,
thoroughly flush the contaminated area with water and seek medical attention if irritation
persists. Do not wear contaminated clothing until after it has been cleaned thoroughly. Leath er
items (e.g., belts and shoes) will retain acids even after rinsing with water and may cause severe
burns if worn. If eye contact is made, immediately flush both eyes for at least 15 min with an eye
wash and seek medical attention. 
c.  Perchloric acid and other highly reactive chemicals:  Concentrated perchloric acid reacts
violently or explosively on contact with organic material and may form explosive heavy metal
perchlorates. Do not use laboratory fume hoods used with perchloric acid for organic reagents,
particularly volatile solvents. In addition to these hazards, perchloric acid produces severe burns
when contact is made with the skin, eyes, or respiratory tract. Preferably provide a dedicated
perchloric acid hood. Follow the m anufacturer’s instructions for proper cleaning, because
exhaust ducts become coated and must be washed down regularly.
 Use extreme caution when storing and handling highly reactive chemicals, such as strong
oxidizers. Improper storage can promote heat evo lution and explosion. Do not store strong
oxidizers and reducers in close proximity. 
d.  Organic solvents and reagents:  Most solvents specified in Standard Methods  have PELs
and/or TLVs as well as short-term exposure limits or ceilings for workplace exposures (see
Table 1090:II ).
 Many organic reagents, unlike most organic solvents, do n ot have PELs/TLVs or short-term
exposure limits and ceilings, but this does not mean that they are less hazardous. Table 1090:III
contains PELs/TLVs or short-term exposure limits and ceilings for some reagents specified in
Standard Methods . 
Some compounds  are suspect carcinogens and should be treated with extreme caution. These
compounds include solvents and reagents such as benzene, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform,
dioxane, perchloroethylene, and benzidine.  Lists of chemicals with special hazardous
chara cteristics are available from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. In the U.S., the lists of ‘‘Regulated
Carcinogens’’ and of ‘‘Chemicals Having Substantial Evidence of Carcinogeni city’’ areStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationespecially important. Developing and followi ng laboratory handling procedures for compounds
on such authoritative lists should significantly reduce the potential for exposures. 
Solvents used in the laboratory usually fall into several major cat egories: alcohols,
chlorinated compounds, and hydrocarbons. Exposure to each of these classes of compounds can
have a variety of health effects. Alcohols, in ge neral, are intoxicants, capable of causing irritation
of the mucous membranes and drowsiness. Ch lorinated hydrocarbons cause narcosis and damage
to the central nervous system and liver. Hydrocarbons, like the other two groups, are skin
irritants and may cause dermatitis after prolonged skin exposure. Because of the volatility of
these compounds, haza rdous vapor concentrations can occur (fire or explosion hazard). Proper
ventilation is essential. 
The majority of organic reagents used in this manual fall into four major categories: acids,
halogenated compounds, dyes and indicators, and pesticides. Most  organic acids have irritant
properties. They are predominantly solids from which aerosols may be produced. Dyes and
indicators also present an aerosol problem. Handle pesticides with caution because they are
poisons, and avoid contact with the skin. Wear gloves and protective clothing. The chlorinated
compounds present much the same hazards as the chlorinated solvents (narcosis and damage to
the central nervous system and liver). Proper labeling for the compound, including a date for
disposal based on the manufacturer’s recommendations, permits tracking chemical usage and
disposal of outdated chemicals. 
10.  References
         1.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Respiratory Protection. 29
CFR 1910.134.
         2.    U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE.  1980. Annual Report on Carcinogens. National
Toxicology Program, Dep. Health & Human Services, U.S. Govern ment Printing Off.,
Washington, D.C.
         3.    INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER.  (Various dates). IARC
monographs on the evaluation of the carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans. World
Health Org. Publications Center, Albany, N.Y.
         4.    NATION AL INSTITUTE FOR OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH.  1985. Occupational
Health Guidelines for Chemical Hazar ds. NIOSH/ OSHA-NIOSH Publ. No. 85-123,
U.S. Government Printing Off., Washington, D.C.
         5.    U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE, CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL.  1993. Registry of
Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances. U. S. Government Printing Off., Washington,
D.C.
         6.    SAX, N.I.  1989. Dangerous Properties of Industria l Materials. Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York, N.Y.
         7.    AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENTAL  INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS.  1992.
Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological
Exposure Indices. American Conf. Governme ntal Industrial Hygienists, Cincinnati,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationOhio.
         8.    U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE, CENTERS FOR DISEASE C ONTROL.  1990. NIOSH Pocket
Guide to Chemical Hazards. DHHS (NIOSH) Publ. No. 90-117, U.S. Government
Printing Off., Washington, D.C.
11.  Bibliography
 SLINEY, D.  1980. Safety with Lasers and Other Optical Sources: A Comprehensive Handbook.
Plenum Press, New York, N.Y.
 COMMITTEE ON HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES IN THE LABORATORY.  1981. Prudent Practices for
Handling Hazardous Chemicals in Lab oratories. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
 COMMITTEE ON HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES IN THE LABORATORY.  1983. Prudent Practices for
Disposal of Chemicals from Laboratories.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
 FURR, A.K.,  ed. 1990. CRC Handbook of L aboratory Safety, 3rd ed. CRC Press, Inc., Boca
Raton, Fla.
 COMPRESSED GAS ASSOCIATION, INC.  1990. Handbook of Compressed Gases. Van Nostrand
Reinhold Co., New York, N.Y.
 AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERN MENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS.  1992. Threshold Limit
Values. American Conf. Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Cincinnati, Ohio.
1090  C.        Laboratory Facility/Fixed Equipment
1.  Facility Design
 The laboratory facility must have a general ventilation system with air intakes and exhausts
located to avoid intake of contaminated air, well-ventilated stockrooms and/or storerooms,
laboratory hoods and sinks, miscellaneous safety equipment including eyewash fountains and
safety showers, and arrangements for the disposal of wastes and samples in accordance with
applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
2.  Facility and Fixed Equipment Maintenance
 Maintain facilities and equipment with scheduled maintenance and continual surveillance to
ensure proper operation. Give special attention to the adequacy of ventilation system. 
a.  Facility ventilation systems:
1)  The general laboratory ventilation should provide a source of air for breathing and for
input to local ventilation devices such as fume hoods. Do not rely on it for protection from
exposure to toxic substances used during the working day. The system should direct air flow into
the laboratory from nonlaboratory areas and then exhaust the air directly to the exterior of the
building in a manner that will prevent its re-entry. 
2)  Laboratory fume hoods—As a minimum, provide at least 1 linear m of hood space perStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationworker if workers spend most of their time wo rking with chemicals or if they work with
chemical substances with PELs or TLVs less than 100 ppm. Equip each hood with a c ontinuous
monitoring device to allow convenient confirmation of adequate hood performance before each
use. If this is not possible, avoid work with substances with PELs or TLVs less than 100 ppm or
with unknown toxicity, or provide other types of local ven tilation devices. 
3)  Other local ventilation devices—Provide ventilated chemical/biological cabinets, canopy
hoods and instrument/work station snorkels as needed. Many local ventilation devices require a
separate exhaust duct, as do canopy hoods and snorkels. 
4)  Special ventilation areas/devices—It may be necessary to pass exhaust air from special
ventilation areas or devices such as radiologi cal hoods, glove boxes, and isolation rooms through
HEPA filters, scrubbers, or other treatment before release into r egular exhaust system. Ensure
that cool rooms and warm rooms have provisions for rapid escape and for escape in the event of
electrical failure. 
5)  Ventilation system modifications—Make alteration in the ventilation system only in
consultation with an expert qualified in laboratory ventilation system design. Thoroughly test
changes in the ventilation system to demonstrate adequate worker protect ion. 
b.  Facility ventilation system performance:  A ventilation system rate of 4 to 12 room air
changes per hour is considered adequate where local exhaust ventilation devices such as fume
hoods are used as the primary method of control. General ventilation s ystem air flow should not
be turbulent and should be relatively uniform throughout the laboratory, with no high-velocity or
static areas; air flow into and within laboratory fume hoods should not be excessively turbulent;
fume hood face velocity should be adequate for the intended use (for general-purpose fume
hoods this is typically 18 to 30 m/min). The effective protection provided by a fume hood
depends on a number of factors including hood location and design, and cannot be determined
solely on the basi s of the face velocity.
c.  Facility ventilation system evaluation:  Evaluate performance characteristics (quality and
quantity) of the ventilation system on installation, re-evaluate whenever a change in local
ventilation devices is made, and monitor routinely. Schedule such mo nitoring with a frequency
dictated by the type, age, condition, and any accessories associated with the device, but at least
annually; monitor hoods at least quarterly. Document all ventilation system checks or actions
such as flow checks, calibration, alt erations, repairs, maintenance, or any other action that may
determine or change flow efficiency or characteristics.
3.  Bibliography
 AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERN MENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS.  1982. Industrial
Ventilation: A Manual of Recommended Practice, 17th ed. American Conf. Governmental
Industrial Hygienists, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE & AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING,
REFRIGERATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING ENGINEERS.  1985. Method of Testing Performance
of Laboratory Fume Hoods. ANSI/ ASHRAE 110-1985, American National Standards Inst.,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationInc., New York, N.Y.
 INSTITUTE OF ENVIRONMENTAL  SCIENCES.  1986. Recommended Practice for Laminar Flow
Clean Devices. RP-CC-002-86, Inst. Environm ental Sciences, Mount Prospect, Ill.
 NATIONAL SANITATION FOUNDATION.  1987. Class II Biohazard Cabinetry (Laminar Flow).
Standard 49-1987, National Sanitation  Found., Ann Arbor, Mich.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1988. Standard Guide for Good Laboratory
Practices in Laboratories Engaged in Sampling and Analysis of Water. ASTM D3856,
American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE & AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING,
REFRIGERATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING ENGINEERS.  1989. Ventilation for Acceptable
Indoor Air Quality. ANSI/ASHRAE 62-1989, Ameri can National Standards Inst., Inc., New
York, N.Y.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY O F HEATING, REFRIGERATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING ENGINEERS.  1989.
Handbook—Fundamentals. American Soc. H eating, Refrigerating & Air-Conditioning
Engineers. Inc., Atlanta, Ga.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1990. Emergency Eyewash and Shower
Equipmen t. ANSI Z358.1-990, American National Standards Inst., New York, N.Y.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1991. Fundamentals Governing the Design and
Operation of Local Exhaust Systems. ANSI Z9.2-1979 (rev. 1991), American National
Standards Inst., Inc ., New York, N.Y.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1991. Standard on Fire Protection for
Laboratories Using Chemicals. NFPA 45, Nati onal Fire Protection Assoc., Quincy, Mass.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTIT UTE & AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
ASSOC IATION.  1993. Standard for Laboratory Ve ntilation. ANSI/AIHA Z9.5, American
Industrial Hygiene Assoc., Fairfax, Va.
 AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1993. Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Code. NFPA 30, National Fire Protection Assoc., Quincy, Mass .
 AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING, REFRIG ERATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING ENGINEERS.  1993.
Handbook—Applications. American Soc. H eating, Refrigerating & Air-Conditioning
Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, Ga.
1090  D.        Hazard Evaluation
1.  Hazard Evaluation
 Hazard evaluation refers to the assessment of whether an employee has been overexposed to
a hazardous substance or if such an exposure episode is likely to occur and to what extent. 
The evaluation does not require monitoring airbo rne concentrations of the hazardous
substances involved. Such an assessment may be informal and simply involve considering,
among other factors, the chemical and physical properties of the substance and the quantity ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsubstance used. In addition, the expo sure assessment may be sufficient to estimate the
probability of an overexposure. 
Specify, document, and use hazard assessment criteria. Base such criteria on the toxicity of
the substances to be used, the exposure potential of the chemical procedures to be performed,
and the capacity of the available engineering control systems. 
In cases where continuous monitoring devices are used, include resulting exposure data in
the exposure evaluation. Air monitoring only provides information for inhalation exposur e.
Other means are required to determine whether overexposure could have occurred as a result of
ingestion, or dermal or eye contact. 
2.  Spills of Toxic or Hazardous Substances
 Spills are usually the result of loss of containment due to equipment failure or breakage
(uncontrolled releases). The loss of containment can result in overexposure episodes.
Calculations using data from mate rial safety data sheets, the chemical and physical properties of
the substance, known laboratory air changes, and work-station air volume will allow assessment
of the possibility of an overexposure episode. 
3.  Work Practice Assignment
 Use the information calculated from these exposure assessments to develop the written work
practices needed to protect the health of the employee while conducting the procedure. 
4.  Documentation of Hazard Assessments
 Document, validate, and authenticate all hazard assessments, preferably using a standard
form. 
5.  Bibliography
 DOULL, J., C.D. KLAASSEN & M.O. AMDUR.  1980. Casarett and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic
Science of Poisons, 2nd ed. Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York, N.Y.
 WILLIAMS, P.L. & J.L. BURSON.  1985. Industrial Toxicology: Safety and He alth Applications in
the Workplace. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, N.Y.
 BATTELLE MEMORIAL INSTITUTE.  1985. Guidelines for Hazard Evaluation Procedures.
American Inst. Chemical Engineers, New York, N.Y.
 PLOG, B.A.,  ed. 1988. Fundamentals of Industri al Hygiene, 3rd ed. National Safety Council,
Chicago, Ill.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  1988. Job Hazard Analysis. OSHA
Publ. No. 3071, U.S. Dep. Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Admin., Washington, D.C.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALT H ADMINISTRATION.  1988. Chemical Hazard
Communication. OSHA Publ. No. 3084, U.S. Dep. Labor, Occupational Safety & Health
Admin., Washington, D.C.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  1988. How to Prepare for Workplace
Emergencies. OSHA Publ. No . 3088, U.S. Dep. Labor, Occupational Safety & HealthStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationAdmin., Washington, D.C.
 BRETHERICK, L.,  ed. 1990. Bretherick’s Handbook of Reactive Chemical Hazards. Butterworths,
London, U.K.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  1990. Hazard Communicat ion
Guidelines for Compliance. OSHA Publ. No. 3111, U.S. Dep. Labor, Occupational Safety &
Health Admin., Washington, D.C.
 HAWKINS, N.C., S.K. NORWOOD & J.C. ROCK,  eds. 1991. A Strategy for Occupational Exposure
Assessment. American Industrial Hygiene Ass oc., Fairfax, Va.
 CLAYTON, G.D.  1991. Patty’s Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, N.Y.
 
Also see references 2 through 8, Section 1090B.10.
1090  E.        Personal Protective Equipment
1.  Introduction
 The employer must provide and maintain personal protective equipment (PPE) in condition
that is sanitary and reliable against hazards in the workplace. All PPE also must be properly
designed and constructed for the work to be performed.  Several general references on PPE are
available.1-3 . 
It is essential to select PPE based on an assessment of the hazards3 or potential hazards to
which an employee is exposed, to insure that the correct PPE will be obtained. Use personal
protective equi pment only when it is not possible or feasible to provide engineering controls.
Such personal protective equipment includes all clothing and other work accessories designed to
create a barrier against workplace hazards. 
The basic element of any personal p rotective equipment management program must be an
in-depth evaluation of the equipment needed to protect against the hazards at the workplace.
Management dedicated to the safety and health of employees must use that evaluation to set a
standard operating p rocedure for personnel, then encourage those employees to use, maintain,
and clean the equipment to protect themselves against those hazards. 
Using personal protective equipment requires hazard awareness and training on the part of
the user. Make employee s aware that the equipment does not eliminate the hazard. If the
equipment fails, exposure will occur. To reduce the possibility of failure, use equipment that is
properly fitted and maintained in a clean and serviceable condition. 
Selection of the proper  piece of personal protective equipment for the job is important.
Employers and employees must understand the equipment’s purpose and its limitations. Do not
alter or remove equipment even though an employee may find it uncomfortable (equipment may
be unco mfortable simply because it does not fit properly). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Eye Protection
 The LH&S standard of practice requires th e use of eye and face protective equipment3
where there is a reasonable probability of injury prevention through its use. Employers must
provide a type of protector suitable for work to be per formed, and employees must use the
protectors. These requirements also apply to supervisors and management personnel, and to
visitors while they are in hazardous areas. 
Protectors must provide adequate protection against particular hazards for which they are
designed, be reasonably comfortable when worn under the designated conditions, fit snugly
without interfering with the movements or vision of the wearer, and be durable, easy to disinfect
and clean, and kept in good repair. 
In selecting the protector,  consider the kind and degree of hazard. Where a choice of
protectors is given, and the degree of protecti on required is not an important issue, worker
comfort may be a deciding factor. 
Persons using corrective glasses and those who are required to wear e ye protection must
wear glasses with protective lenses providing op tical correction, goggles that can be worn over
corrective glasses without disturbing the adjustment  of the glasses, or goggles that incorporate
corrective lenses mounted behind the protect ive lenses. 
When limitations or precautions are indicated by the manufacturer, transmit them to the user
and observe strictly. Safety glasses require speci al frames. Combinations of normal wire frames
with safety lenses are not acceptable. 
Design, constr uction, testing, and use of eye and face protection must be in accordance with
national standards.4 
3.  Protective Work Gloves
 Match glove material to the hazard: such materials as nitrile, neoprene, natural rubber, PVC,
latex, and butyl rubber vary widely in chemical resistance. What may be safe with one chemical
may prove harmful with another (see Table 1090:IV  and Table 1090:V ). Glove thickness may be
as important as glove material in some cases. Many organic reagents, unlike most organic
solvents, do not have PELs/TLVs but this does not mean that they are less hazardous. 
Evaluate physical properti es of the glove material: In addition to chemical resistance, glove
materials vary in physical toughness. Select the gl ove that provides the abrasion, tear, flame, and
puncture resistance required for the job. 
Maximize comfort and dexterity. Lined gloves absorb perspiration and help insulate the
hand. Unlined gloves conform to the hand. Lighter-gauge gloves improve touch sensitivity and
flexibility, heavier-gauge gloves add protection and strength. 
Ensure a safe grip. Nonslip grips allow for easier and sa fer handling. Embossed, pebbled,
etched, and dotted coatings improve grip in wet or dry working conditions. 
Measure proper size and length. Loose-fitting gloves affect dexterity and can be hazardous.
Tight-fitting gloves may cause hand fatigue and tend to  wear out faster. Gloves should fitStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcomfortably without restricting motion and th ey should be long enough to protect the wrist,
forearm, elbow, or the entire arm, depending on the application. 
4.  Head Protection
 Water and wastewater laboratories seldom requi re this kind of personal protection, but field
work may require such protection. 
Head injuries are caused by falling or flying objects or by bumping the head against a fixed
object. Head  protection, in the form of protective hats, must both resist penetration and absorb
the shock of a blow. Make the shell of the hat of  a material hard enough to resist the blow, and
utilize a shock-absorbing lining composed of head band and crown straps to  keep the shell away
from the wearer’s skull. Protective materials used in helmets should be water-resistant and slow
burning. Helmets consist essentially of a shell and suspension. Ventilation is provided by a space
between the headband and the shell. Ens ure that each helmet is accompanied by instructions
explaining the proper method of adjusting and replacing the suspension and headband. 
Visually inspect daily all components, shells, suspensions, headbands, sweatbands, and any
accessories for signs of de nts, cracks, penetration or any other damage that might reduce the
degree of safety originally provided. 
Do not store or carry helmets on the rear window deck of an automobile because sunlight and
extreme heat may adversely affect the degree of protection . 
Further information is available elsewhere.3,5 
5.  Hearing Protection
 Exposure to high noise levels can cause hearing loss or impairment, and it can create
physical and psychological stress. There is no cure  for noise-induced hearing loss, so prevention
of excessive noise exposure is the only way to  avoid hearing damage. Specifically designed
protection is required, depending on the type of noise encountered. 
Use preformed or molded ear plugs fitted individually by a professional. Waxed cotton,
foam, or fiberglass wool earplugs are self-forming. Whe n properly inserted, they work as well as
most molded earplugs. Plain cotton is ineffective as protection against hazardous noise. 
Some earplugs are disposable, to be used one time and then thrown away. Clean
nondisposable types after each use for proper protection. 
Earmuffs need to make a perfect seal around the ear to be effective. Glasses, long sideburns,
long hair, and facial movements, such as ch ewing, can reduce protection. Special equipment is
available for use with glasses or beards. 
More specifi c information on hearing conservation is available.3 
6.  Foot and Leg Protection
 According to accident reviews most workers w ho suffered impact injuries to the feet were
not wearing protective footwear. Furthermore, mo st of their employers did not require them to
wear safety shoes. The typical foot injury  was caused by objects falling less than 1.2 m and theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmedian weight was about 30 kg. Most workers were injured while performing their normal job
activities at their worksites. 
Safety shoes should be sturdy and have an impact-resistant toe. In some shoes,  metal insoles
protect against puncture wounds. Additional protection, such as metatarsal guards, may be found
in some types of footwear. Safety shoes come in a variety of styles and materials, such as leather
and rubber boots and oxfords. 
Safety footwear  is classified according to its ability to meet minimum requirements for both
compression and impact test. Those requirements and testing procedures and further information
may be found elsewhere.3,6 
7.  References
         1.    AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERN MENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS.  1987.
Guidelines for the Selection of Chemical Protective Clothing, 3rd ed. American Conf.
Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio.
         2.    FORSBERG, K. & S.Z. MANSDORF.  1993. Quick Selection Guide To Chemical Protective
Clothing, 2nd ed. Van Nostra nd Reinhold, New York, N.Y.
         3.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  General Requirements for
Personal Protective Equipment. 29 CFR 1910.132.
         4.    AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1968. Design, Construction, Testing,
and Use of Eye and Face Protection. ANSI Z87 1-1968, American National Standards
Inst., Inc., New York, N.Y.
         5.    AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1986. Safety Require ments for
Industrial Head Protection. ANSI Z89.1-1986. Am erican National Standards Inst., Inc.,
New York, N.Y.
         6.    AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  1967 & 1983. Men’s Safety-Toe
Footware. ANSI Z41 1-1967 & Z41-1983, American National Standards In st., Inc.,
New York, N.Y. 
1090  F.        Worker Protection Medical Program
1.  Preventive Medicine Program
 The preventive medicine program should incl ude inoculations to provide protection from
tetanus and other diseases that are associated with the types of samples received and analyzed by
the laboratory. The scope of this pr ogram depends on the diseases prevalent in the area where the
samples originate. The program also must comply with the appropriate regulations. 
2.  Medical Surveillance
 Routine surveillance may be indicated for anyone whose work involves routine handling ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationhazardous chemical or biological substances. Consult a qualified occupational health physician
and/or toxicologist to determine whether a r egular schedule of medical surveillance is indicated. 
3.  Environmental Monitoring
a.  General:  The initiation of environmental monitoring (exposure monitoring) associated
with laboratory uses of hazardous chemical substances is triggered by exposures exceeding the
action level (usually defined as one-half the PEL or TLV), PEL, or TLV.  The employer is
responsible for ensuring that employees’ exposures to such substances do not exceed the PELs
specified in the regulations dealing with air contaminants.1 
b.  Employee exposure determination:  Determine a worker’s exposure to any hazardous
chemical substance if there is reason to believe that exposure levels for that substance routinely
exceed the action level. Where there is no action level for a substance  the worker exposure must
not exceed the PEL or TLV. If the initial monitoring confirms that an employee exposure
exceeds the action level, or in the absence of an action level, the PEL, the employer must
immediately comply with the exposure monitoring pro visions of the relevant national standard.
Monitoring may be terminated in accordance with the relevant standard (if one exists) or when
the exposures are found to be below the action level (one half the PEL or TLV) or in the absence
of an action level, be low the PEL or TLV. The workers are to be notified in accordance with
national standard; if none exists, they should at least be notified within 15 working days after
any monitoring results have become available to the employer, either by contacting the em ployee
individually or by posting the results in an appropriate location accessible to employees.
4.  Medical Consultation and Medical Examinations
 All employees who work with hazardous chemicals should have an opportunity to receive
medical attention (at no personal cost), including any follow up examinations that the examining
physician determines  to be necessary, under the following circumstances: 
•  Whenever an employee develops signs or symptoms associated with an exposure to a
hazardous chemical that the employee may have been using. 
•  Where exposure monitoring reveals an exposure level rou tinely above the action level (or in
the absence of an action level, the PEL or TLV). For a national regulated substance for which
there are exposure monitoring and medical surveillance requirements, establish medical
surveillance for the affected employee  as prescribed by the particular standard. 
•  Whenever an uncontrolled event, such as a spill, leak, explosion, or other occurrence, takes
place in the work area, resulting in the likelihood of a hazardous exposure. Provide the
affected employee an opport unity for a medical consultation to determine the need for a
medical examination. 
All medical examinations and consultations should be performed by, or under the direct
supervision of, a licensed physician, without cost to the employee or loss of pay, an d at aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationreasonable time and place. Inform the physician of the identity of the hazardous chemical(s) to
which the employee may have been exposed; the conditions under which the exposure occurred,
including quantitative exposure data, if available; and the s igns and symptoms of exposure that
the employee is experiencing, if any. The employer must obtain from the examining physician a
written opinion that includes any recommendation for further medical follow-up, the results of
the medical examination and any associated tests, notice of any medical condition revealed
during the examination that may place the employee at increased risk as a result of exposure to a
hazardous chemical found in the workplace, and a statement that the employee has been
informed by t he physician of the results of the consultation or medical examination and any
medical condition that may require further examination or treatment. The written opinion must
not reveal specific findings or diagnoses unrelated to occupational exposure. 
5.  Reference
         1.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION. Air Contaminants. 29 CFR
1910.1000.
6.  Bibliography
 DOULL, J., C.D. KLAASSEN & M.O. AMDUR.  1980. Casarett and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic
Science of Poisons, 2nd ed. Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York, N.Y.
 WILLIAMS, P.L. & J.L. BURSON.  1985. Industrial Toxicology: Safety and He alth Applications in
the Workplace. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, N.Y.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Access to Employee Exposure and
Medical Records. 29 CFR 1910.20.
 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Occupational Expo sure to Hazardous
Chemicals in Laboratories. 29 CFR 1910.1450.
1090  G.        Provisions for Work with Particularly Hazardous Substances
 The information outlined in the following paragraphs meets the LH&S standard of practice1
and also represents good industrial hygiene practices. 
1.  Designated Area
 Wherever appropriate, the employer must establish a ‘‘designated area,’’ that is, an area that
may be used for work with select carcinogens, reproductive toxins, or substances having a high
degree of acute toxicity. A designated area  may be the entire laboratory, an area of a laboratory,
or a device such as a laboratory hood. 
2.  Select Carcinogen
 In the U.S. a ‘‘select carcinogen’’ means any substance meeting at least one of the following
criteria: the substance is regulated by OSHA as a carcinogen; it is listed under the category,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation‘‘known to be carcinogenic,’’ by the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP);2 it is listed
under Group 1 (carcinogenic to humans) by the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC);3 or it is listed in either Group 2A or 2B by IARC3 or under the category, ‘‘reasonably
anticipated to be carc inogenic’’ by NTP,2 and causes statistically significant tumor incidence in
experimental animals after inhalation exposure of  6 to 7 h/d, 5 d/week, for significant portion of
a lifetime to dosages of less than 10 mg/m3, or after repeated skin application o f less than 300
mg/kg of body weight/week, or after oral dosages of less than 50 mg/kg of body weight/d. 
3.  Use of Containment Devices
 The work conducted and its scale must be appropriate to the physical facilities available and,
especially, to the quality of ventilation. 
The general laboratory ventilation system must be capable of providing air for brea thing and
for input to local ventilation devices. It shoul d not be relied on for protection from toxic
substances released into the laboratory, but should ensure that laboratory air is continually
replaced, preventing increase of air concentrations of toxi c substances during the working day,
and that air flows into the laboratory from nonla boratory areas and out to the exterior of the
building. 
4.  References
         1.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Laboratory Standard.
Occupational Exposure to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories. 29 CFR 1910.1450.
         2.    U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE,  NATIONAL TOXICOLOGY PROGRAM.  1980. Annual
Repor t on Carcinogens. Dep. Health & Human Services, U.S. Government Printing
Off., Washington, D.C.
         3.    INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER.  (Various dates). IARC
monographs on risk of chemicals to humans. World Health Org. Publications Center,
Albany, N.Y.
5.  Bibliography
 NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.  1981. Guidelines for the Laboratory Use of Chemical
Carcinogens. NIH Publ. No. 81-2385, U.S. G overnment Printing Off., Washington, D.C.
 
Also see Section 1090C.3 .
1090  H.        Biological Safety
1.  Introduction
 The analysis of environmental samples involves worker contact with samples that may be
contaminated with agents that present microbiological hazards. The majority of these agentsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationinvolve exposures to pathogenic microorganisms or viruses  that may produce human disease by
accidental ingestion, inoculation, injection, or  other means of cutaneous penetration. The
primary means of exposure to these microbiol ogical hazards involves hand-mouth contact while
handling the samples, contaminated la boratory materials and/or aerosols created by incubating,
pipetting, centrifuging, or blending of samples or cultures. Use the following rules, work
practices and/or procedures to control or minimize exposure to these agents. 
2.  General Rules
 Do not mix dilutions by blowing air through a pipet into a microbiological culture. 
When working with grossly polluted samples, such as wastewater or high-density microbial
cultures, use a pipetting device attached to a pipetting bulb  to prevent accidental ingestion (never
pipet by mouth). 
Because untreated waters may contain waterborne pathogens, place all used pipets in a jar
containing disinfectant solution for decontamin ation before glassware washing. Do not place
used pipets on t able tops, on laboratory carts, or in sinks without adequate decontamination. 
3.  Work Practices
 Good personal hygiene practices are essential to control contact exposures. Frequently
disinfect hands and working surfaces. Encourag e immunization of laboratory staff against
tetanus and possibly typhoid and other infectious agents t o minimize risk of exposure. 
Provide drinking water outside the laboratory, preferably from a foot-operated drinking
fountain. 
Eliminate flies and other insects to prevent contamination of sterile equipment, media,
samples, and bacterial cultures and to prevent spread of infectious organisms to personnel. 
Observe appropriate precautions in use of laboratory equipment. Use a leakproof blender
tightly covered during operation to minimize contamination. Use a centrifuge tightly covered to
minimize exposure if culture-containing tubes should shatter during centrifuging. The tube
breakage produces a cleanup problem and microbiological aerosols. Conduct activities such as
inserting a hot loop into a flask of broth culture in a manner that eliminates or minimize s the
hazards due to aerosolized microorganisms. Sterilize contaminated materials (cultures, samples,
used glassware, serological discards, etc.) by au toclaving before discarding them or processing
for reuse. Preferably use specially marked biohazard bags for disposal. Dispose of contaminated
broken glass in a specially marked container. 
4.  Procedures
 Quaternary ammonium compounds that include a compatible detergent, or solutions of
sodium hypochlorite are satisfactory disinfectants for pipet discard jars. Use the highest
concentrations recommended for these commercial products provide d that this concentration
does not cause a loss of markings or fogging of pipets. 
Sterilize biological waste materials to eliminate all infectious substances, and sterilize all
contaminated equipment or apparatus before washing, storage, or disposal, pref erably byStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationautoclaving. When decontaminating materials in the autoclave, heat them to at least 121°C under
a pressure of 103 kPa for a minimum of 30 min. The contact time is measured from time the
contact chamber reaches 121°C. If the waste is contained in bags, add water to the contents to
insure wet heat. Dry heat and chemical treatment also may be used for sterilizing nonplastic
items. After sterilization, the wastes can be ha ndled safely and disposed of by conventional
disposal systems in accordance with  local regulations. 
5.  Waste Disposal
 Sterilize contaminated materials by autoclaving (see ¶ 3 above) before discarding them. 
If combustible materials cannot be decontaminated, burn them with special precautions;
permits for burning may be required. Use temporary storage  for decay or permanent storage for
treating radioactive wastes when alternatives are not available. Collect contaminated
combustible wastes and animal carcasses in impermeable containers for disposal by incineration. 
6.  Bibliography
 NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.  1981. Guidelines for the Laboratory Use of Chemical
Carcinogens. NIH Publ. No. 81-2385, U.S. G overnment Printing Off., Washington, D.C.
 INSTITUTE OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES.  1986. Recommended Practice for Laminar Flow
Clean Devices. RP-CC-002-86. Inst. Environm ental Sciences, Mount Prospect, Ill.
 NATIONAL SANITATION FOUNDATION.  1987. Class II Biohazard Cabinetry (Laminar Flow).
Standard 49-1987, National Sanitation Found., Ann Arbor, Mich.
 AMERICAN SOCIET Y FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1988. Standard Guide for Good Laboratory
Practices in Laboratories Engaged in Sampling and Analysis of Water. ASTM D3856,
American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
 FURR, A.K.,  ed. 1990. CRC Handbook of Laboratory Sa fety, 3rd ed. CRC Press, Inc., Boca
Raton, Fla.
1090  I.        Radiological Safety
1.  Introduction
 This section discusses ionizing radiation safe ty related to gas chromatography detectors and
specific analytical procedures (see Table 1090:VI ). Ionizing radiation includes alpha particles,
beta particles, gamma rays, and X-rays. Non-io nizing radiation safety is discussed elsewhere
(Section 1090B.8) . 
All persons are exposed to ionizing radiation. The average annual radiation dose to the whole
body from cosmic, terrestrial, and internal sources , medical and dental X-rays, etc., is about 185
mrems/year (1.85 mSieverts/year). It is essential to prevent unnecessary continuous or
intermittent occupational exposures, and to take steps to eliminate accidents that may result in
dangerous radiation exposure. 
Personnel who work in laboratories ma y be exposed to ionizing radiation sources using bothStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationprocedures and instruments. Evaluate potential exposures and control the associated equipment
and procedures using work practices developed to minimize and/or eliminate exposures. 
Users of radioactive materials are responsible for compliance with the requirements of their
national nuclear regulatory body (in the Unite d States, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission)1
and/or related state regulations. In addition, administrative or local requirements may appl y at
specific facilities. The use of ‘‘exempt’’ quantities is regulated1 even though the facility may be
exempt from specific licensing requirements. 
Radionuclides are used in laboratories to develop and evaluate analytical methods, to prepare
counting st andards, and to calibrate detectors and counting instruments (see Part 7000 ). Sealed
sources, such as the nickel-63 detector cell used in electron capture gas chromatograph units,
also are common. 
2.  Exposures
a.  Exposure limits and control:  The LH&S standard of practice2 does not permit the use of
personal protective equipment for allowing employee exposures above the limits specified by the
NRC.1 The NRC exposure limits are the maximum permissible exposures  for 40 h in any
workweek of 7 consecutive days.
 The exposure limits may be adjusted proportionately (upward) for a period where the
exposure is less than 40 h. However, the limit must be adjusted proportionately (downward) for
periods where the exposure period is greater than 40 h. 
Limiting exposure to ionizing radiation include s providing engineering (physical safeguards)
and administrative (procedural) controls for using radioactive materials. Engineering controls
include shields, barriers, and interlo cks to limit external exposure, and exhaust ventilation
systems and personal protective equipment to limit internal contamination. Administrative
controls include conducting periodic surveys and reviews of activities, training in the use of
radioactive mat erials, and documented procedures (see below). 
Hazards associated with the use of devices, such as X-ray diffraction apparatus or an electron
microscope, can be minimized or eliminated by following the manufacturer’s operating
instructions and the laborat ory safety procedures. 
b.  Monitoring procedures and equipment:  Radiochemical exposure monitoring may be done
by collecting and analyzing wipe samples, using portable survey instruments, and/or by
collecting and analyzing air samples. More than one technique usually is require d.
 Survey equipment may either integrate the response over time (e.g., exposure, absorbed
dose), or results may be presented as a response rate (e.g., count rate or exposure rate). Typical
choices include ion chambers, G-M counters, and scintillation dete ctors. 
Thin-windowed GM-counters are suitable for wipe samples and for monitoring skin and
clothing. An alpha scintillation monitor is needed to detect alpha-emitters. An excellent
discussion of monitoring techniques for radioisotopes is available.3 
c.  Facility surveys:  Conduct periodic surveys to assess the effectiveness of physical andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationprocedural controls. Survey procedures generally use wipe tests for removable contamination
and/or portable measurement devices for locating or measuring fixed and  removable
radioactivity.
1)  Sealed sources—Check these sources for integrity by wipe tests at least every 6 months.
Electron capture detectors using 63Ni or 3H require counting wipes by liquid scintillation or
windowless gas-flow proportional counters to measure low-energy beta  radiation effectively. 
2)  Work and storage areas—Survey these areas periodically to assess possible contamination
or external radiation fields using portable surv ey instruments. The frequency of the surveys is
dictated by the documented contamination record for the laboratory . Usually the radioactivities
presented using the methods of Part 7000  are not measurable with routine survey instruments.
Therefore use blanks in the analytical process in determining the presence of low-level
contamination. 
3)  Documentation and records—Completely document each survey, identifying the
personnel involved, the location, the type, model, and serial numbers of survey instruments used,
the type and energy of radiations measured, the date and time of the survey, the instrument
response to a check source, the instrument background count or exposure rate, and the results of
each measurement.4 
d.  Personnel surveys and monitoring:  Conduct and document surveys after routine use of
unsealed radionuclide sources to confirm that personnel and the work area have not been
contaminated by the process. Wear monitoring devices if there is a reasonable probability of
exceeding 25% of the occupational exposure dose equivalent limit. Personal monitoring devices
include film badges, thermoluminescent dosimeters, and solid state electronic dosimeters. The
length of time the personal monitoring badges are wor n before evaluation depends on the ability
of the device to integrate the exposure over long periods, the probability and magnitude of the
exposure, and the need to assure that the device is available and used.
 Personnel performing procedures in Standard Methods  would not be expected to receive
exposures approaching 1.25 rem/quarter and may wish to consider 3-month wear periods if
dosimetry is required. 
Personal (external radiation) exposure is evaluated by using a personal dosimeter, preferably
the film dosimeter (badge). The dosimeter badge measures the accumulated radiation over a
period of time. Pocket ionization chambers, thermoluminescent dosimeters, and thimble
chambers also may be used to supplement the film dosimeter. 
Whole body or gamma spectrom etry radiation detectors may be used to determine the
presence of radioactive substances in the body, but these instruments are expensive and require
the operator to be specially trained. Evaluate equipment and supplies that have been, or are
suspected to have been, in contact with radioactive substances to determine if contamination is
present. Because body waste may contain radioactive contaminants evaluate it also for the
presence of contamination where personal exposures have been confirmed. 
3.  Work PracticesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Each individual should be familiar with procedures for dealing with radiation emergencies
from small spills to major accidents, depending on facility programs. Emergency procedures
should include notifications required, containment me thods, clean-up procedures, and survey
techniques. Emergency supplies should be readily available for coping with major accidents. 
Contamination is typically prevented through proper use of laboratory facilities and
procedures. Procedures include the use of gloves, aprons, safety glasses, and other protective
clothing to eliminate the possibility of skin contamination and transfer. Learn proper pipetting
and weighing techniques before working with radioactive sources. Conduct work with unsealed
radioactive  sources in unobstructed work areas with adequate means of containing and absorbing
potential spillage of liquids. 
4.  Procedures
 Develop and implement a radiation safety plan and provide a copy to all persons working
with radioactive materials or radiation-pr oducing machines, and provide both lecture and
practical training to all employees. 
a.  Safety plan elements:  The recommended minimum plan should include procedures for
obtaining authorization to use, order, handle, and store radionuclides; safe handling of unsealed
radioactive material; safe response to radiation accidents; decontamina tion of personnel and
facilities; personnel monitoring; laboratory monitoring; and disposal of radioactive materials.
b.  Handling radioactive materials:  Become knowledgeable about the hazards associated
with the materials to be used. Plan work activities to minimize the time spent handling
radioactive materials or in using radioactive sources. Work as far from radioact ive sources as
possible, use shielding appropriate for the materials to be used, and use radioactive materials
only in defined work areas. Wear protective clothing and dosimeters as appropriate. Monitor
work areas to ensure maximum contamination control. M inimize the accumulation of waste
materials in the work area. Use appropriate personal hygiene and self-monitor after using
radioactive materials and after each decontamination procedure.
c.  Training of users:  Train personnel working with radioactive materials in radiation safety
as part of the overall occupational health program. Address at least the following topics:
characteristics of ionizing radiation and radioactive contamination; radiation dose limits;
environmental radiation background; acute and chr onic effects; internal and external modes of
exposure; basic protective measures; responsibilities of employer and employees;  radiation
protection program responsibilities; posting, w arning signs, and alarms; radiation monitoring
programs; and emergency procedures.5
5.  Waste Disposal
 Generalized disposal criteria for radioactive wastes have been developed by the U.S.
National Committee on Radiation Protection and Measurements.4 Two general philosophies
govern the disposal of radioactive wastes: dilution and disper sion to reduce the concentration of
radionuclide by carrier dilution or dilution in a receiving medium, and concentration andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconfinement, usually involving reduction in waste volume with subsequent storage for decay
purposes. 
Airborne wastes can be treat ed by either method. Ventilation includes discharge from hooded
operations to the atmosphere. Typical radioactive gases include iodine, krypton, and xenon.
Iodine can be removed by scrubbing or by reaction with silver nitrate. Noble gases can be
removed by  absorption; standard techniques can be used for particulate. Dilution methods are
suitable for liquids with low activity. Intermediate levels may be treated by various
physical-chemical processes to separate the waste into a nonradioactive portion that ca n be
disposed of by dilution and a high-activity portion to be stored. Solid wastes may consist of
equipment, glassware, and other materials. When possible, decontaminate these materials and
reuse. Decontamination usually results in a liquid waste. 
Dispos e of all waste in conformance with the requirements of the regulatory authority having
jurisdiction. 
Determine the laboratory’s status and obtai n approval before storing, treating and/or
disposing of wastes. 
6.  References
         1.    NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION.  Standards for Protection Against Radiation. 10
CFR Part 20.
         2.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Ionizing Radiation. 29 CFR
1910.96.
         3.    FURR, A.K.,  ed. 1990. CRC Handbook of Lab oratory Safety, 3rd ed. CRC Press, Inc.,
Boca Raton, Fla.
         4.    NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS.  1976.
Environmental Radiation Measurements. Rep. No. 50, National Counc. Radiation
Protection & Measurements, Washington, D.C.
7.  Bibliography
 NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS.  1978. Instrumentation
and Monitoring Methods for Radiation Prot ection. Rep. No. 57, National Counc. Radiation
Protection & Measurements, Washington, D.C.
 NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RA DIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS.  1978. A Handbook of
Radioactivity Measurements Procedures. Re p. No. 58, National Counc. Radiation Protection
& Measurements, Washington, D.C.
 NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS.  1978. Operational
Radiation Safety Program. Rep. No. 59, National Counc. Radiation Protection &
Measurements, Washington, D.C. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1090  J.        Chemical Hygiene Plan
1.  Introduction
 The information presented in this section describes the intent and lists the minimum
requirements and critical elements of the OSHA laboratory standard.1 This standard is
performance-based and represents good industrial hygiene practice . Any organization that
chooses not to follow or use the OSHA standards to meet that standard’s requirements must
demonstrate that the procedures it uses meet the minimum level of employee protection afforded
by the OSHA standard. 
Much of the information presented in the preceding subsections of 1090 was provided as
guidance and should be used in developing and finalizing the laboratory chemical hygiene plan
(CHP). 
2.  Requirements
 Develop and implement a written CHP capable of protecting employees from health hazards
associated with the chemicals used in the laboratory. This CHP must be capable of keeping
exposures below the permissible exposure limits (PELs/TLVs ) and also must be readily available
to employees. The CHP must at minimum address the following elements, and must describe
specific measures the employer will undertake to ensure laboratory employee protection. 
a.  Standard operating procedures or work practices:  Include procedures and practices
relevant to safety and health considerations. These are to be followed when laboratory work
involves the use of hazardous chemicals. Include the information contained i n MSDSs for
hazardous chemicals when conducting a hazard assessment and developing work practices.
Some of the guidance presented in an MSDS is intended for use in industrial settings where
material is used in large quantities for a full work shift and not  for the small-volume,
short-duration exposures experienced in laboratories.
b.  Exposure hazard criteria and procedures:  These will be used to determine and implement
control measures for reducing employee exposure to hazardous chemicals while conducting
laboratory operations. They include engineering controls, the use of person al protective
equipment, and hygiene practices. Pay particular attention to the selection of control measures
for work activities that involve chemicals known to be extremely hazardous.
c.  Protective equipment performance procedures:  These include procedures for evaluating
the performance of fume hoods and other protective equipment and specific measures to be taken
to ensure proper and adequate performance of such equipment.
d.  Employee information and training:  This training must be timely, be refreshed
periodically, evaluated for effectiveness, and documented.
e.  Approval procedures:  The plan must state the circumstances under which a specific
laboratory operation, procedure, or activity requires prior approval before implementation.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationf.  Employee medical consultation and medical examinations.
g.  Safety personnel:  The plan must designate personnel responsible for implementation of
the CHP. This should include the formal assignment of a Chemical Hygiene Officer and, where
appropriate, the establishment of a Chemical Hygiene Committee.
h.  Additional employee protection:  The plan should include provisions for working with
particularly hazardous substances. These substances include ‘‘select carcinogens’’ (see Section
1090G.2 ), reproductive toxins, and substances that have a high degree of acute toxicity. Give
specific consideration to establishment of a designated area, use of containment devices such as
fume hoods or glove boxes, procedures for safe removal of containment waste, decontamination
procedures, emergency plans and procedure (test annually as a minimum), and employer review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the CHP at least annually and updating as necessary.
3.  Reference
         1.    OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.  Occupational Exposure to
Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories. 29 CFR 1910.1450.
1100        WASTE MINIMIZATION AND DISPOSAL
1100  A.        Introduction
 Waste minimization and disposal are part of integrated hazardous materials management.  It
is important to become familiar with federal regulations regarding the use and disposal of
hazardous materials prior to their purchas e, storage, and use for water and waste-water analysis.
Proper management of hazardous materials will reduce the amount of hazardous waste and
associated disposal costs. 
1100  B.        Waste Minimization
1.  General Considerations
 Waste minimization or pollution prevention in the laboratory is the preferred approach in
managing laboratory waste. Minimizing waste ma kes good economic sense: it reduces both costs
and liabilities associated with waste dispo sal. For certain hazardous-waste generators it also is a
regulatory requirement. 
2.  Waste Minimization Methods
 Waste minimization methods include source reduction, recycling, and reclamation.1 Waste
treatment, which also may be considered a form of waste minimization, is addressed in Section
1100C . Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSource reduction can be achieved  through the purchase and use of smaller quantities of
chemicals. While large-volume purchases may seem economical, the costs of disposing of
expired-shelf-life materials also must be cons idered. Date chemical inventory and use oldest
stock first, or if po ssible, use ‘‘just in time’’ material delivery. Commercial laboratories and
chemical users in general can return samples or unopened chemicals to sender or supplier for
recycling or disposal. Many suppliers will accept unopened containers of chemicals. 
Substitute nonhazardous materials for hazardous chemicals where possible. Wherever
possible use methods that do not require the use of hazardous chemicals or use micro-scale
analytical methods. 
Improving laboratory procedures, documentation, and training wi ll increase awareness of
waste minimization and proper disposal practices , and may allow different sections within a
laboratory to share standards and stock chemicals. Evaluate hazardous materials storage and use
areas for potential evaporation, spills, an d leaks. Segregate waste streams where possible to keep
nonhazardous waste from becoming hazardous waste through contact with hazardous waste.
Segregation also facilitates treatment and disposal. 
Transfer of unused stock chemicals to other areas of the l aboratory where they may be used
or to other institutions is a way to minimize waste.2 Check with laboratory’s legal counsel before
transferring chemicals. 
Recycling/reclamation has limited potential in water and waste-water laboratories. Volumes
generate d are generally too small for economical reclamation and purity requirements are often
too great. However, organic solvents often can be distilled and recovered for reuse and mercury
and silver can be recovered.3 
3.  References
         1.    ASHBROOK, P.C. & P.A. REINHARDT . 1985. Hazardous wastes in academia. Environ. Sci.
Technol.  19:1150.
         2.    PINE, S.H.  1984. Chemical management: A method for waste reduction. J. Chem. Educ.
61:A45.
         3.    HENDRICKSON, K.J., M.M.  BENJAMIN, J.F. FERGUSON & L. GOEBEL . 1984. Removal of
silver and mercury from spent COD test solutions. J. Water Pollut. Control. Fed.
56(5):468.
4.  Bibliography
 AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY . 1985. Less is Better. Dep. Public Affairs, American Chemical
Soc., Washington, D.C. 
1100  C.        Waste Treatment and DisposalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  General Considerations
 Stringent penalties exist for the improper disposal of hazardous wastes. Potential criminal
and civil liability exists for both organizations and individuals. Specific requirements vary by
state and local jurisdiction and are subject to change. Federal requirements for hazardous waste
generators and transporters and for treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) are found
in regulations pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) as
amended by  the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (HSWA). Many activities, in
particular treatment, storage, and disposal of  hazardous wastes, require a permit or license.1,2 
Develop a plan for the safe and legal disposal of chemical and biological substa nces in
conjunction with the laboratory supervisor and safety coordinator. Plan should address the
proper transport, storage, treatment, and dis posal of hazardous waste. Properly characterize
composites and document wastes. Refer to Section 1090  on Safety with regard to protective
equipment in the handling of hazardous materials. 
2.  Waste Treatment and Disposal Methods
 Treatment can be used to reduce volume, mob ility, and/or toxicity of hazardous waste where
expertise and facilities are available. Treatment, even on a small scale, may require a permit.
Consult with federal, sta te, and local regulatory officials. 
Waste treatment methods include thermal, ch emical, physical, and biological treatment, and
combinations of these methods.1 
a. Thermal treatment:  Thermal treatment methods include incineration and sterilization.
They involve using high temperatures to change  the chemical, physical, or biological character
or composition of the waste. Incineration is often used to destroy org anic solvents and is
preferred for infectious wastes, although steriliza tion through autoclaving and/or ultraviolet light
also may be allowed. Check with local health department officials.
b. Chemical treatment:  Methods include chemical reaction (oxidation/reduction,
neutralization, ion exchange, chemical fixation, photolysis, coagulation, precipitation) of the
waste material. Neutralization of acidic or alkaline wastes is the most common form of chemical
treatment. Elementary neutralization of corro sive wastes is exempt from federal RCRA
permitting requirements. Before discharge of wastes to a publicly owned treatment works
(POTW), ensure that they contain no pollutants (other than corrosi vity) exceeding the limits set
by the POTW. The oxidation of cyanide to cyanate with a strong chemical oxidant is an example
of a toxicity-reducing chemical treatment.
c. Physical treatment:  Methods include solidification, compaction, photo-induced reaction,
distillation, flocculation, sedimentation, flota tion, aeration, filtration, centrifugation, reverse
osmosis, ultrafiltration, gravity thickening, and carbon or res in adsorption. Physical treatment
generally reduces volume or mobility of waste materials.
d. Biological treatment:  Methods include using biosolids to destroy organic compounds,
composting organic-rich wastes, and using bi oreactors to promote decomposition.  BiologicalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationtreatment usually is economical on a scale larger than is possible in most water and wastewater
laboratories.
e. Ultimate disposal:  After waste minimization and treatment, remaining waste streams
require disposal. Nonhazardous wastes that cannot  be treated further can be discharged as
wastewater, emitted to the atmosphere, or placed on or in the ground.
 With ex treme caution, it may be permissible to dispose of limited quantities (at certain
concentrations) of laboratory wastes to the sanitary sewer system or to evaporate volatile wastes
in chemical ventilation hoods. Obtain written permission of local, state, an d federal authorities to
dispose of waste in this manner. With increasing regulatory constraints imposed by RCRA, the
Clean Air Act, and Clean Water Act, these disposal options are becoming increasingly limited.
Wastes disposed of in this manner may conta ct other substances in the sewer or ventilation
systems and produce hazardous reactions. 
Most hazardous wastes generated in laboratories must be sent off site for further treatment
and disposal. Exercise extreme care in selecting a reputable waste hauler and disposal firm.
Many firms will assist laboratories in packaging and manifesting ‘‘lab packs,’’ 19- to 208-L (5-
to 55-gal) drums containing several smaller containers of wastes.1 Liability does not disappear
when the waste leaves the generator’s facil ity. Ensure that the laboratory receives a copy of the
completed manifest and certificate of treatment a nd/or disposal. If possible, visit the disposal
facility in advance to observe how it will manage a waste. 
Certain wastes require special handling. As mentioned previously, incinerate infectious waste
or sterilize it before disposal. Before reuse, sterilize all nondisposable equipment that has come
into contact with infectious waste. 
Although most water and wastewater laboratories do not work with radio chemical wastes,
some do. Handle radiochemical wastes with extreme care. Generalized disposal criteria for
radioactive wastes have been developed by the National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements.3 Low-level radioactive waste must be in soli d form for final disposal on land.
Some firms will process liquid radioactive wastes into solids. Adding absorbent materials to
liquid radioactive wastes is not permissible. Ce rtain states allow low-level liquid radioactive
waste to be discharged to a per mitted publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
Other wastes that require special handli ng include polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
dioxin/furans and their precursors, petroleum products, and asbestos. Consult with federal and
state officials before dispos ing of these wastes. 
3.  References
         1.    AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY . 1983. RCRA and Laboratories. Dep. Public Affairs,
American Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1990. Standards for Owners and
Operators of Hazardous Waste Treatme nt, Storage, and Disposal Facilities. 40 CFR
Part 264.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . Standards for Protection AgainstStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationRadiation. 10 CFR Part 20.
4.  Bibliography
 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, NAT IONAL ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING  & INSTITUTE OF
MEDICINE . 1983. Prudent Practices for the Dispos al of Chemicals from Laboratories.
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
 KROFTA , M. & L.K. WANG . 1985. Haza rdous Waste Management in Institutions and Colleges.
PB86-194180/AS, U.S. National Technical Information Serv., Springfield, Va.
 SNIDER , E.H. 1992. Waste minimization. In L.K. Wang & M.H.S. Wang, eds., Handbook of
Industrial Waste Treatment, p.1. Marcel D ekker, Inc., New York, N.Y.
 DUFOUR , J.T. 1994. Hazardous Waste Management Guide for Laboratories. Dufour Group,
Sacramento, Calif.
Figures
Figure 1010:1 .  Normal (left) and skewed (right) distributions.  
Figure 1020:1 .  Control charts for means.  
Figure 1020:2 .  Duplicate analyses of a standard.  
Figure 1020:3 .  Range chart for variable concentrations.  
Figure 1020:4 .  Range chart for variable ranges.  
Figure 1020:5 .  Means control chart with out-of-control data (upper half).  
Figure 1030:1 .  Detection limit relationship.  
Figure 1060:1 .  Approximate number of samples required in estimating a mean
concentration.  Source: Methods for the Examination of Waters and Associated Materials:
General Principles of Sampling and Accuracy  of Results.  1980. Her Majesty’s Stationery
Off., London, England.  
TABLES
TABLE 1010:I.  CRITICAL VALUES FOR 5% AND 1% TESTS OF DISCORDANCY FOR A SINGLE
OUTLIER IN A NORMAL SAMPLE
Number of
Measurements
nCritical Value
5% 1%
    3 1.15 1.15
    4 1.46 1.49Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationNumber of
Measurements
nCritical Value
5% 1%
    5 1.67 1.75
    6 1.82 1.94
    7 1.94 2.10
    8 2.03 2.22
    9 2.11 2.32
  10 2.18 2.41
  12 2.29 2.55
  14 2.37 2.66
  15 2.41 2.71
  16 2.44 2.75
  18 2.50 2.82
  20 2.56 2.88
  30 2.74 3.10
  40 2.87 3.24
  50 2.96 3.34
  60 3.03 3.41
100 3.21 3.60
120 3.27 3.66
Source: BARNETT, V.  T. LEWIS . 1984. Outliers in Statistical Data. John Wiley  Sons, New York,
N.Y.
          
TABLE 1020:I.  FACTORS FOR COMPUTING LINES ON RANGE CONTROL CHARTS
Number of
Observations
nFactor for
Central Line
(D2)Factor for
Control Limits
(D4)
2 1.128 3.267
3 1.693 2.575
4 2.059 2.282
5 2.326 2.115
6 2.534 2.004Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSource: ROSENSTEIN, M.  A. S. GOLDEN.  1964. Statistical  Techniques for Quality Control of
Environmental Radioassays. AQCS Rep. Stat- 1. Public Health Serv., Winchester, Mass.
TABLE  1020:II.   EXAMPLE DATA QUALIFIERS
Symbol Explanation
B Analyte found in reagent blank. Indicates possible
reagent or background contamination.
E Reported value exceeded calibration range.
J Reported value is an estimate because concentration
is less than reporting limit or because certain QC
criteria were not met.
N Organic constituents t entatively identified.
Confirmation is needed.
PND Precision not determined.
R Sample results rejected because of gross deficiencies
in QC or method performance. Re-sampling and/or
re-analysis is necessary.
RND Recovery not determined.
U Compound was analyzed for, but not detected.
* Based on U.S. Environmental Protection Agency guidelines.1
TABLE 1020:III.  AUDIT OF A SOIL ANALYSIS PROCEDURE
Procedure Comment Remarks
1.a Sample entered into
logbookyes lab number assigned
2.a Sample weighed yes dry weight
3.a Drying procedure followed no maintenance of oven not
done
4a. Balance calibrated yes once per year
  b. Cleaned and zero adjusted yes weekly
5.a Sample ground yes to pass 50 mesh
6.a Ball mill cleaned yes should be after each
sample
   .Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationProcedure Comment Remarks
   .
   .
TABLE  1030:I.  C ONDUCTIVITY  FACTORS OF  IONS COMMONLY  FOUND IN  WATER
IonConductivity (25°C)
µmhos /cm
Per me/L Per mg/L
Bicarbonate 43.6  0.715
Calcium 52.0 2.60   
Carbonate 84.6 2.82   
Chloride 75.9 2.14   
Magnesium 46.6 3.82   
Nitrate 71.0 1.15   
Potassium 72.0 1.84   
Sodium 48.9 2.13   
Sulfate 73.9 1.54   
TABLE  1040:I.  P RECISION AND  BIAS FOR A  SINGLE  CONCENTRATIONIN A  SINGLE  MATRIX
Result
mg/LDifference
(−1.30)Squared
Difference
1.23 −0.07 0.0049
1.21 −0.09 0.0081
1.30 0.0         0.0000
1.59   0.29 0.0841
1.57   0.27 0.0729
1.21 −0.09 0.0081
1.53   0.23 0.0529
1.25 −0.05 0.0025
Sum   0.49 0.2335Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationResult
mg/LDifference
(−1.30)Squared
Difference
TABLE  1040:II.  V ARIATIONS IN  FACTORS FOR  METHOD  RUGGEDNESS  DETERMINATION
Factor Nominal Variation
Mixing time 10 min 12 min
Portion size 5 g 10 g
Acid concentration 1M 1.1M
Heat to 100°C 95°C
Hold heat for 5 min 10 min
Stirring yes no
pH adjust 6.0 6.5
TABLE  1040:III.  F ACTOR  MATRIX FOR  METHOD  RUGGEDNESS  DETERMINATION
Combinations
Factor value 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
A or a A A A A a a a a
B or b B B b b B B b b
C or c C c C c C c C c
D or d D D d d d d D D
E or e E e E e e E e E
F or f F f f F F f f F
G or g G g g G g G G g
Result s t u v w x y z
Source: YOUDEN, W. J.   E. H. STEINER . 1975. Statistical Manual of AOAC. Assoc. Official
Analytical Chemists, Washington, D.C.
TABLE  1040:IV.  S AMPLE  COLLABORATIVE  TEST RESULTS
DeviationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  1040:IV.  S AMPLE  COLLABORATIVE  TEST RESULTS
Deviation
LaboratoryResult
mg/LExperimental
x ± sFrom
KnownFrom Grand
Average
1 32.7
35.2 34.7 ± 1.8 −2.0 −1.7
36.3
2 32.6
33.7 33.3 ± 0.6 −0.6 −0.3
33.6
3 30.6
30.6 31.2 ± 1.0 −1.5 −1.8
32.4
4 32.6
32.5 33.0 ± 0.8 −0.3 −0   
33.9
5 32.4
33.4 32.6 ± 0.8 −0.1 −0.4
 32.9
(∑x)/n = 33   ∑ = 1.3 ∑ = −0.2
          s = 1.5   
TABLE  1040:V.  M ETHOD  PRECISION AND  BIAS
Known
Amount
mg/LAmount
Found
mg/LCV
(% Standard
Deviation)Bias
%
  4.3   4.8 12.5 11.5
11.6 12.2 10.2   5.6
23.4 23.8   5.4   1.9
32.7 33.0   4.5   0.9Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  1050:I.   C ONVERSION  FACTORS * (Milligrams per Liter—Milliequivalents per Liter)
    Ion
(Cation) me/L = mg/L× mg/L = me/L×   Ion
(Anion) me/L = mg/L× mg/L = me/L×
  Al3+ 0.111 2        8.994 BO2– 0.023 36    42.81
  B3+ 0.277 5        3.604 Br– 0.012 52    79.90
  Ba2+ 0.014 56    68.66  Cl– 0.028 21    35.45
  Ca2+ 0.049 90    20.04  CO32– 0.033 33    30.00
  Cr3+ 0.057 70    17.33  CrO42– 0.017 24    58.00
F– 0.052 64    19.00
  Cu2+ 0.031 47    31.77  HCO3–0.016 39    61.02
  Fe2+ 0.035 81    27.92  HPO42–0.020 84    47.99
  Fe3+ 0.053 72    18.62  H2PO4–0.010 31    96.99
  H+ 0.992 1        1.008 HS– 0.030 24    33.07
  K+ 0.025 58    39.10  HSO3–0.012 33    81.07
HSO4–0.010 30    97.07
  Li+ 0.144 1        6.941 I– 0.007 880 126.9  
  Mg2+ 0.082 29    12.15  NO2– 0.021 74    46.01
  Mn2+ 0.036 40    27.47  NO3– 0.016  13    62.00
  Mn4+ 0.072 81    13.73  OH– 0.058 80    17.01
  Na+ 0.043 50    22.99  PO43– 0.031 59    31.66
  NH4+0.055 44    18.04  S2– 0.062 37    16.03
  Pb2+ 0.009 653 103.6    SiO32– 0.026 29    38.04
  Sr2+ 0.022 83    43.81  SO32– 0.024 98    40.03
  Zn2+ 0.030 59    32.70  SO42– 0.020 82    48.03
* Factors are based on ion charge and not on redox reactions that may be possible for certain of
these ions. Cations and anions are listed separately in alphabetical order.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  1060:I.   SUMMARY OF SPECIAL SAMPLING AND HANDLING REQUIREMENTS *
Determination Container†Minimum
Sample
Size
mLSample
Type‡
Acidity P, G(B) 100 g Refrigerate
Alkalinity P, G 200 g Refrigerate
BOD P, G 1000 g, c Refrigerate
Boron P (PTFE ) or
quartz1000 g, c HNO3to pH < 2
Bromide P, G 100 g, c None required
Carbon, organic, total G (B) 100 g, c Analyze imme
H3PO4, or H2S
Carbon dioxide P, G 100 g Analyze imme
COD P, G 100 g, c Analyze as so o
refrigerate
Chloride P, G 50 g, c None required
Chlorine, total, residual P, G 500 g Analyze imme
Chlorine dioxide P, G 500 g Analyze imme
Chlorophyll P, G 500 g Unfiltered, dar
Filtered, dark, 
(Do not store i
Color P, G 500 g, c Refrigerate
Specific conductance P, G 500 g, c Refrigerate
Cyanide
    Total P, G 1000 g, c Add NaOH to p
Amenable to chlorination P, G 1000 g, c Add 0.6 g asc o
refrigerate
Fluoride P 100 g, c None required
Hardness P, G 100 g, c Add HNO3or H
Iodine P, G 500 g Analyze immeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDetermination Container†Minimum
Sample
Size
mLSample
Type‡
Metals, general P(A), G(A) 1000 g, c For dissolved m
pH <2
    Chromium VI P(A), G(A) 1000 g Refrigerate
    Copper by colorimetry*
    Mercury P(A), G(A) 1000 g, c Add HNO3to p
Nitrogen
    Ammonia P, G 500 g, c Analyze as so o
refrigerate
    Nitrate P, G 100 g, c Analyze as so o
    Nitrate + nitrite P, G 200 g, c Add H2SO4to 
    Nitrite P, G 100 g, c Analyze as so o
Organic, Kjeldahl* P, G 500 g, c Refrigerate, a d
Odor G 500 g Analyze as so o
Oil and grease G, wide-mouth
calibrated1000 g Add HCl or H2
Organic compounds
    MBAs P, G 250 g, c Refrigerate
    Pesticides* G(S),
PTFE-lined cap1000 g, c Refrigerate, a d
chlorine prese
    Phenols P, G,
PTFE-lined cap500 g, c Refrigerate, a d
    Purgeables* by purge and trap G, PTFE-lined
cap2 × 40 g Refrigerate; a d
acid/L if resid u
    Base/neut rals  acids G(S) amber 1000 g, c Refrigerate
Oxygen, dissolved G, BOD bottle 300
    Electrode Analyze imme
    Winkler Titration may b
Ozone G 1000 g Analyze immeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDetermination Container†Minimum
Sample
Size
mLSample
Type‡
pH P, G 50 g Analyze imme
Phosphate G(A) 100 g For dissolved p
Phosphorus, total P, G 100 g, c Add H2SO4to 
Salinity G, wax seal 240 g Analyze imme
Silica P (PTFE) or
quartz200 g, c Refrigerate, d o
Sludge digester gas G, gas bottle — g —
Solids9 P, G 200 g, c Refrigerate
Sulfat e P, G 100 g, c Refrigerate
Sulfide P, G 100 g, c Refrigerate; a d
NaOH to pH >
Temperature P, G — g Analyze imme
Turbidity P, G 100 g, c Analyze same 
refrigerate
* For determinations not listed, use glass or plastic containers; preferably refrigerate during
storage and analyze as soon as possible.
† P = plastic (polyethylene or equivalent); G = glass; G(A) or P(A) = rinsed with 1 + 1 HNO3;
G(B) = glass, borosilicat e; G(S) = glass, rinsed with organic solvents or baked.
‡ g = grab; c = composite.
§ Refrigerate = storage at 4°C ± 2°C; in the dark; analyze immediately = analyze usually within
15 min of sample collection.
i See citation10 for possible differences regard ing container and preservation requirements. N.S.
= not stated in cited reference; stat = no storage allowed; analyze immediately.
# If sample is chlorinated, see text for pretreatment.
TABLE 1080:I.  WATER PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Major Classes of Contaminants*
ProcessDissolved
Ionized SolidsDissolved
Ionized GasesDissolved
Organics Particulates BacteriaP
En
Distillation G–E† P G E EStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMajor Classes of Contaminants*
ProcessDissolved
Ionized SolidsDissolved
Ionized GasesDissolved
Organics Particulates BacteriaP
En
Deionization E E P P P
Reverse osmosis  G‡ P G E E
Carbon adsorption P  P§ G–E i P P
Filtration P P P E E
Ultrafiltration P P   G# E E
Ultraviolet oxidation P P G–E** P   G††
Permission to use this table from C3-A2, Vol. 11, No. 13, Aug. 1991, ‘‘Preparation and Testing
of Reagent Water in the Clinical Laboratory - Second Edition’’ has been granted by the National
Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. The complete current  standard may be obtained
from National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, 771 E. Lancaster Ave., Villanova,
PA 19085.
* E = Excellent (capable of complete or near total removal), G = Good (capable of removing
large percentages), P = Poor (little  or no removal).
† Resistivity of water purified by distillation is an order of magnitude less than water produced
by deionization, due mainly to the presence of CO2 and sometimes H2S, NH3, and other ionized
gases if present in the feedwater.‡ Resistivity of dissolved ionized solids in the product water
depends on original feedwater resistivity.
§ Activated carbon removes chlorine by adsorption.
i When used in combination with other purificati on processes, special grades of activated carbon
and other synthe tic adsorbents exhibit excellent capabilities for removing organic contaminants.
Their use, however, is targeted toward specific compounds and applications.
# Ultrafilters have demonstrated usefulness in reducing specific feedwater organic contaminants
based on the rated molecular weight cut-off of the membrane.
** 185 nm ultraviolet oxidation (batch process systems) is effective in removing trace organic
contaminants when used as post-treatment. Feedwater makeup plays a critical role in the
performance of these batch processors.
†† 254 nm UV sterilizers, while not physically re moving bacteria, may have bactericidal or
bacteriostatic capabilities limited by intensity, contact time, and flow rate.
TABLE 1080:II.  REAGENT WATER SPECIFICATIONS*
Quality Parameter High Medium Low
Resistivity, megohm-cm at 25°C >10       >1     0.1Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationQuality Parameter High Medium Low
Conductivity, µmho/cm at 25°C <0.1    <1     10
SiO2, mg/L <0.05   <0.1    <1
TABLE  1090:I.   PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LIMITS, TH RESHOLD LIMIT VALUES, SHORT-TERM
EXPOSURE LIMITS, AND/OR CEILINGS FOR SOME INORGANIC CHEMICALS SPECIFIED IN
STANDARD METHODS
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.PEL/TLV STE L
mg/m3
Chromic acid and chromates†‡ (as CrO3) 7440-47-3 0.1/0.05
Chromium, soluble chromic, chromous salts (as Cr) 7440-47-3 0.5/0.5
Chromium metal and insoluble salts 7440-47-3 1/0.5
Hydrogen chloride 7647-01-0 7.5(C)/7.5(C )
Hydrogen peroxide 7722-84-1 1.4/1.4
Lead‡ 7439-92-1 −/0.15
Mercury†§ 7439-97-6 0.1/0.05
Nitric acid 7697-37-2 5/5.2, 10(S)
Phosphoric acid 7664-38-2 1/1, 3(S)
Potassium hydroxide 1310-58-3 −/2(C)
Silver (metal and sol uble compounds, as Ag) 7440-22-4 0.01/0.1 met a
Sodium azide 26628-22-8 −/0.29(C)
Sodium hydroxide 1310-73-2 2(C)/2(C)
Sulfuric acid 7664-93-9 1/1, 3(S)
* Short-term exposure limit. See 29 CFR 1910.1028.
† (Suspect) carcinogen.
‡ Substance has a Biological Exposure Index (BEI).
§ Skin hazard.
TABLE  1090:II.   PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LIMITS, TH RESHOLD LIMIT VALUES, SHORT-TERM
EXPOSURE LIMITS, AND/OR CEILINGS FOR ORGANIC SOLVENTS SPECIFIED IN  STANDARD
METHODSStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationEXPOSURE LIMITS, AND/OR CEILINGS FOR ORGANIC SOLVENTS SPECIFIED IN  STANDARD
METHODS
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.PEL/TLV STEL(S)* o
ppm (v/ v
Acetic acid 64-19-7 10/10, 15(S)
Acetone 67-64-1 1000/750, 1000(S)
Acetonitrile 75-05-8 40/40, 60(S)
Benzene†‡ 71-43-2 10, 25(C), 50 peak 10 mi n
n-Butyl alcohol§ 71-36-3 100/50(C)
tert-Butyl alcohol 75-65-0 100/100, 150(S)
Carbon disulfide‡ 75-15-0 20, 30(C), 100 peak 30 m
Carbon tetrachloride†§ 56-23-5 10, 25, 200 peak 5 min/4 
Chloroform† 67-66-3 50(C)/10
Cyclohexanone§ 108-94-1 50/50
Dioxane§ (diethylene di oxide) 123-91-1 100/25
Ethyl acetate 141-78-6 400/400
Ethyl alcohol 64-17-5 1000/1000
Ethyl ether (diethyl ether) 60-29-7 400/400, 500(S)
Ethylene glycol 107-21-1 −/50(C)
n-Hexane‡ 110-54-3 100/50
Isoamyl alcohol (primary and secondary) 123-51-3 100/100, 1 25(S)
Isobutyl alcohol 78-83-1 100/50
Isopropyl alcohol 67-63-0 400/400, 500(S)
Isopropyl ether 108-20-3 500/250, 310(S)
Methyl alcohol§ 67-56-1 200/200, 250(S)
2-Methoxyethanol§ (methyl cellosolve) 109-86-4 25/5
Methylene chloride† 75-09-2 500, 1000(C), 2 000 peak 
Pentane 109-66-0 1000/600, 750(S)
Perchloroethylene†‡
(tetrachloroethylene)127-18-4 100, 200(C), 300 peak 5 
200(S)
n-Propyl alcohol§ 71-23-8 200/200, 250(S)
Pyridine 110-86-1 5/5
Toluene‡§ 108-88-3 200, 300(C), 500 peak 1 0Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.PEL/TLV STEL(S)* o
ppm (v/ v
Xylenes‡ ( o-, m-, p-isomers) 1330-20-7
(95-47-6, 108-38-3,
106-42-3)100/100, 150(S)
* Short-term exposure limit. See 29 CFR 1910.1028.
† (Suspect) carcinogen.
‡ Substance has a Biological Exposure Index (BEI).
§ Skin hazard.
TABLE  1090:III.   PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LIMITS, TH RESHOLD LIMIT VALUES, SHORT-TERM
EXPOSURE LIMITS, AND/OR CEILINGS FOR SOME OF THE REAGENTS SPECIFIED IN  STANDARD
METHODS
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.PEL/TLV STEL(S)* or C
ppm (v/v)
2-Aminoethanol (ethanolamine) 141-43-5 3/3, 6(S)
Benzidine†‡ 92-87-5 Confirmed human ca
Benzyl chloride 100-44-7 1/1
Chlorobenzene 108-90-7 75/10
Diethanolamine 111-42 -2 −/3
Naphthalene 91-20-3 10/10, 15(S)
Oxalic acid 144-62-7 1/1 mg/m3
Phenol‡ 108-95-2 5/5
2-Chloro-6-(trichloromethyl) pyridine
(nitrapyrin)1929-82-4
    Total dust 15/10 mg/m3
    Respirable fraction 5/− mg/m3
* Short-term exposure limit. See 29 CFR 1910.1028.
† (Suspect) carcinogen.
‡ Skin hazard.
TABLE  1090:IV.   GLOVE SELECTION FOR ORGANIC CHEMICAL HANDLINGStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  1090:IV.   GLOVE SELECTION FOR ORGANIC CHEMICAL HANDLING
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.Chemical
ClassButyl
Rubber Neoprene
Ethers: 241
Ethyl ether (diethyl ether) 60-29-7 241
Isopropyl ether 108-20-3 241
2-Methoxyethanol † (methyl cellosolve) 109-86-4 245 X
Halogen compounds: 261
Carbon tetrachloride* 56-23-5 261
Chloroform* 67-66-3 261
Methylene chloride 75-09-2 261
Perchloroethylene* (tetrachloroethylene) 127-18-4 261
Hydro carbons: 291
n-Hexane 110-54-3 291
Pentane 109-66-0 291
Benzene* 71-43-2 292
Toluene 108-88-3 292
Xylenes ( o-, m-, p-isomers) 1330-20-7 292
Hydroxyl compounds: 311
n-Butyl alcohol 71-36-3 311 X X
Ethyl alcohol 64-17-5 311 X
Methyl alcohol 67-56-1 311 X
n-Propyl alcohol 71-23-8 311
Isoamyl alcohol 123-51-3 311
Isobutyl alcohol 78-83-1 311 X
Isopropyl alcohol 67-63-0 312 X
tert-Butyl alcohol (2,2- methylpropanol) 75-65-0 313 X
Ethylene glycol 107-21-1 314 X X
Ketones: 391
Acetone 67-64-1 391 XStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCompoundChemical Abstract No.
CAS No.Chemical
ClassButyl
Rubber Neoprene
Cyclohexanone 108-94-1 391 X
Heterocyclic compounds: 271
Dioxane† (diethylene dioxide) 123-91-1 278 X
Pyridine 110-86-1 271 X
Miscellaneous organic compounds:
Acetic acid 75-07-0 102 X X
Ethyl acetate 141-78-6 222 X
Acetonitrile 75-05-8 431 X
Carbon disulfide 75-15-0 502
* (Suspect) carcinogen.
† Skin hazard.
TABLE  1090:V.   GLOVE SELECTION FOR INORGANIC CHEMICAL HANDLING
Suit
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
(CAS No.)Chemical
ClassButyl
RubberNatural
Rubber Ne
Inorganic acids: 370
Chromic acid,* (Cr+6) 7440-47-3 370 X
Hydrochloric acid, 30–70% solutions 10035- 10-6 370 X X
Hydrochloric acid, <30% solutions 10035-10-6 370 X X
Nitric acid, 30–70% solutions 7697-37-2 370 X
Nitric acid, <30% solutions 7697-37-2 370 X X
Phosphoric acid, >70% solutions 7664-38-2 370 X
Phosphoric aci d, 30–70% solutions 7664-38-2 370 X
Sulfuric acid, >70% solutions 7664-93-9 370 X
Sulfuric acid, 30–70% solutions 7664-93-9 370 X X
Sulfuric acid, <30% solutions 7664-93-9 370 X X
Inorganic bases: 380Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSuit
CompoundChemical Abstract No.
(CAS No.)Chemical
ClassButyl
RubberNatural
Rubber Ne
Ammonium hydroxide, 30–70%
solutions7664-41-7 380 X
Ammonium hydroxide, <30% solutions 7664-41-7 380 X
Potassium hydroxide, 30–70% solutions 1310-58-3 380 X X
Sodium hydroxide, >70% solutions 1310-73-2 380
Sodium hydroxide, 30–70% solutions 1310 -73-2 380 X X
Inorganic salt solutions: 340
Dichromate solutions, <30%,* (Cr+6) 7440-47-3 340
Inorganic miscellaneous:
Hydrogen peroxide, 30–70% solutions 7722-39-3 300 X
Mercury† 7439-97-6 560
* (Suspect) carcinogen.
† Skin hazard.
TABLE  1090:VI.   PROCEDURES INVOLVING POTENTIAL EX POSURE TO IONIZING RADIATION
Standard Methods  Section Radionuclide Type of Radiation
Part 6000  methods: GC with electron
capture detectors63Ni or 3H Low-energy beta (63Ni, 17 ke
7110  Gross Alpha and Gross Beta
RadioactivityAlpha: Uranium, 230Th,
239Pu, 241Am
Beta: 137Cs, 90SrAlpha; beta and gamma; or b
7500-Cs  Radioactive Cesium 134Cs, 137Cs Beta, gamma
7500-I  Radioactive Iodine 131I Beta, gamma
7500-Ra  Radium 226Ra Alpha, beta, gamma
7500-Sr A  Total Radioactive
Strontium and Strontium-9089Sr, 90Sr Beta-emitters
7500-3H Tritium3H Low-energy beta (6 keV avg)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationStandard Methods  Section Radionuclide Type of Radiation
7500-U  Uranium U series Alpha, beta, gamma
Part 2000        PHYSICAL & AGGREGATE PROPERTIES
2010        INTRODUCTION
 This part deals primarily with measurement of the physical properties of a sample, as
distinguished from the concentrations of ch emical or biological components. Many of the
determinations included here, such as color, electrica l conductivity, and turbidity, fit this
category unequivocally. However, physical proper ties cannot be divorced entirely from chemical
composition, and some of the techniques of this part measure aggregate properties resulting from
the presence of a number  of constituents. Others, for example, calcium carbonate saturation, are
related to, or depend on, chemical tests. Also included here are tests for appearance, odor, and
taste, which have been classified traditionally among physical properties, although th e point
could be argued. Finally, Section 2710 , Tests on Sludges, includes certain biochemical tests.
However, for convenience they are grouped with the other tests used for sludge. 
With these minor exceptions, the contents of this part have been kept rea sonably faithful to
its name. Most of the methods included are either inherently or at least traditionally physical, as
distinguished from the explicitly chemical, radi ological, biological, or bacteriological methods of
other parts. 
2020        QUALITY ASSURANCE/QUALITY CONTROL
 Part 2000  contains a variety of analytical methods, many of which are not amenable to
standard quality-control techniques. General information on quality control is provided in Part
1000  and  specific qualit y-control techniques are outlined in the individual methods. The
following general guidelines may be applied to many of the methods in this part: 
Evaluate analyst performance for each method. Determine competence by analyses of
samples containing known co ncentrations. 
Calibrate instruments and ensure that instrument measurements do not drift. 
Assess the precision of analytical procedures by analyzing at least 10% of samples in
duplicate. Analyze a minimum of one duplicate with each set of samples. 
Deter mine bias of an analytical procedure in each sample batch by analysis of blanks, known
additions with a frequency of at least 5% of sa mples, and, if possible, an externally providedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationstandard. 
2110        APPEARANCE* #(6)
 To record the general physical appearance of a sample, use any terms that briefly describe
its visib le characteristics. These terms may state the presence of color, turbidity, suspended
solids, organisms and their immature forms , sediment, floating material, and similar particulate
matter detectable by the unaided eye. Use numerical values when they are available, as for color,
turbidity, and suspended solids. 
2120        COLOR* #(7)
2120  A.        Introduction
 Color in water may result from the presence of natural metallic ions (iron and manganese),
humus and peat materials, plankton, weeds, and industrial wastes. Color is removed to make a
water suitable for general and industria l applications. Colored industrial wastewaters may
require color removal before discharge into watercourses. 
1.  Definitions
 The term ‘‘color’’ is used here to mean true color, that is, the color of water from which
turbidity has been removed. The term ‘‘apparent color’’ includes not only color due to
substances in solution, but also that due to suspended matt er. Apparent color is determined on
the original sample without filtration or centrifugation. In some highly colored industrial
wastewaters color is contributed principally by colloidal or suspended material. In such cases
both true color and apparent colo r should be determined. 
2.  Pretreatment for Turbidity Removal
 To determine color by currently accepted methods, turbidity must be removed before
analysis. Methods for removing turbidity without removing color vary. Filtration yields results
that are reproducible from day to d ay and among laboratories. However, some filtration
procedures also may remove some true color. Centrifugation avoids interaction of color with
filter materials, but results vary with the sample nature and size and speed of the centrifuge.
When sample dilu tion is necessary, whether it precedes or follows turbidity removal, it can alter
the measured color. 
Acceptable pretreatment procedures are incl uded with each method. State the pretreatment
method when reporting results. 
3.  Selection of Method
 The visual comparison method is applicable to nearly all samples of potable water. PollutionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationby certain industrial wastes may produce unusual colors that cannot be matched. In this case use
an instrumental method. A modification of the tristimulus and the spectrophotometric methods
allows calculation of a single color value representing uniform chromaticity differences even
when the sample exhibits color significantly differe nt from that of platinum cobalt standards. For
compariso n of color values among laboratories, calibrate the visual method by the instrumental
procedures. 
4.  Bibliography
 OPTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA . 1943. Committee Report. The concept of color. J. Opt. Soc.
Amer.  33:544.
 JONES, H.  et al. 1952. The Science of Color. Thomas Y. Crowell Co., New York, N.Y.
2120  B.        Visual Comparison Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Color is determined by visual comparison of the sample with known
concentrations of colored solutions. Comparison also may be made with special, properly
calibrated glass color disks. The platinum-cobalt method of measuring color is the sta ndard
method, the unit of color being that produced by 1 mg platinum/L in the form of the
chloroplatinate ion. The ratio of cobalt to platinum may be varied to match the hue in special
cases; the proportion given below is usually satisfactory to match the color of natural waters.
b. Application:  The platinum-cobalt method is useful for measuring color of potable water
and of water in which color is due to naturally occurring materials. It is not applicable to most
highly colored industrial wastewaters.
c. Interference:  Even a slight turbidity causes the apparent color to be noticeably higher than
the true color; therefore remove turbidity before approximating true color by differential reading
with different color filters1 or by differential scattering  measurements.2 Neither technique,
however, has reached the status of a standard method. Remove turbidity by centrifugation or by
the filtration procedure described under Method C. Centrifuge for 1 h unless it has been
demonstrated that centrifugation unde r other conditions accomplishes satisfactory turbidity
removal.
 The color value of water is extremely pH-dependent and invariably increases as the pH of
the water is raised. When reporting a color value, specify the pH at which color is determined.
For re search purposes or when color values are to be compared among laboratories, determine
the color response of a given water over a wide range of pH values.3 
d. Field method:  Because the platinum-cobalt standard method is not convenient for field
use, compare water color with that of glass disks held at the end of metallic tubes containing
glass comparator tubes filled with sample and colorless distilled wate r. Match sample color with
the color of the tube of clear water plus the calibrated colored glass when viewed by lookingStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationtoward a white surface. Calibrate each disk to correspond with the colors on the platinum-cobalt
scale. The glass disks give results in  substantial agreement with those obtained by the
platinum-cobalt method and their use is recognized as a standard field procedure.
e. Nonstandard laboratory methods:  Using glass disks or liquids other than water as
standards for laboratory work is permissible only if these have been individually calibrated
against platinum-cobalt standards. Waters of highly unusual color, such as th ose that may occur
by mixture with certain industrial wastes, may have hues so far removed from those of the
platinum-cobalt standards that comparison by the standard method is difficult or impossible. For
such waters, use the methods in Section 2120C  and  Section 2120D . However, results so
obtained are not directly comparable to those obtained with platinum-cobalt standards.
f. Sampling:  Collect representative samples in clean glassware. Make the color determination
within a reasonable period because biological or physical changes occurring in storage may
affect color. With naturally colored waters these changes invariably l ead to poor results.
2.  Apparatus
a. Nessler tubes,  matched, 50-mL, tall form.
b. pH meter,  for determining sample pH (see Section 4500-H).
3.  Preparation of Standards
a. If a reliable supply of potassium chloroplatinate cannot be purchased, use chloroplatinic
acid prepared from metallic platinum. Do not use commercial chloroplatinic acid because it is
very hygroscopic and may vary in platinum content. Potassium chloro platinate is not
hygroscopic.
b. Dissolve 1.246 g potassium chloroplatinate, K2PtCl6 (equivalent to 500 mg metallic Pt)
and 1.00 g crystallized cobaltous chloride, CoCl2⋅6H2O (equivalent to about 250 mg metallic
Co) in distilled water with 100 mL conc HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with d istilled water. This
stock standard has a color of 500 units.
c. If K2PtCl6 is not available, dissolve 500 mg pure metallic Pt in aqua regia with the aid of
heat; remove HNO3 by repeated evaporation with fresh portions of conc HCl. Dissolve this
product, together with 1.00 g crystallized CoCl2⋅6H2O, as directed abo ve.
d. Prepare standards having colors of 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60, and 70 by
diluting 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, 6.0, and 7.0 mL stock color standard with
distilled water to 50 mL in nessler tubes. Protect these stand ards against evaporation and
contamination when not in use.
4.  Procedure
a. Estimation of intact sample:  Observe sample color by filling a matched nessler tube to the
50-mL mark with sample and comparing it with standards. Look vertically downward through
tubes toward a white or specular surface placed at such an angle that l ight is reflected upwardStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthrough the columns of liquid. If turbidity is present and has not been removed, report as
‘‘apparent color.’’ If the color exceeds 70 units, dilute sample with distilled water in known
proportions until the color is within the ran ge of the standards.
b. Measure pH of each sample.
5.  Calculation
a. Calculate color units by the following equation:
 
where: 
                  A =   estimated color of a diluted sample and 
                  B =   mL sample taken for dilution. 
b. Report color results in whole numbers and record as follows:
Color Units Record to Nearest
    1–50               1
  51–100               5
101–250            10          
251–500            20          
c. Report sample pH.
6.  References
         1.    KNIGHT, A.G.  1951. The photometric estimation of color in turbid waters. J. Inst. Water
Eng. 5:623.
         2.    JULLANDER, I. & K. BRUNE . 1950. Light absorption measurements on turbid solutions.
Acta Chem. Scand.  4:870.
         3.    BLACK, A.P. & R.F. CHRISTMAN . 1963. Characteristics of colored surface waters. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  55:753.
7.  Bibliography
 HAZEN, A. 1892. A new color standard for natural waters. Amer.  Chem. J.  14:300.
 HAZEN, A.  1896. The measurement of the colors of natural waters. J. Amer. Chem. Soc.  18:264.
 Measurement of Color and Turbidity in Water. 1902. U.S. Geol.  Surv., Div. Hydrog. Circ. 8,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationWashington, D.C.
 RUDOLFS, W. & W.D. HANLON . 1951. Color in industrial wastes. Sewage Ind. Wastes  23:1125.
 PALIN, A.T.  1955. Photometric determination of the colour and turbidity of water. Water Water
Eng. 59:341.
 CHRISTMAN,  R.F. & M. GHASSEMI . 1966. Chemical nature of organic color in water. J. Amer.
Water Works Assoc.  58:723.
 GHASSEMI , M. & R.F. Christman. 1968. Properties of the yellow organic acids of natural waters.
Limnol. Oceanogr.  13:583. 
2120  C.        Spectrophotometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  The color of a filtered sample is expressed in terms that describe the sensation
realized when viewing the sample. The hue (red, green, yellow, etc.) is designated by the term
‘‘dominant wavelength,’’ the degree of brightness by ‘‘luminance ,’’ and the saturation (pale,
pastel, etc.) by ‘‘purity.’’ These values are best determined from the light transmission
characteristics of the filtered sample by means of a spectrophotometer.
b. Application:  This method is applicable to potable and surface waters and to wastewaters,
both domestic and industrial.
c. Interference:  Turbidity interferes. Remove by the filtration method described below.
2.  Apparatus
a. Spectrophotometer,  having 10-mm absorption cells, a narrow (10-nm or less) spectral
band, and an effective operating range from 400 to 700 nm.
b. Filtration system,  consisting of the following (see Figure 2120:1 ):
1)  Filtration flasks,  250-mL, with side tubes. 
2)  Walter crucible holder.  
3)  Glass Gooch filtering crucible with fritted disk , pore size 40 to 60 µm. 
4)  Calcined filter aid. *#(8) 
5)  Vacuum system.  
3.  Procedure
a. Preparation of sample:  Bring two 50-mL samples to room temperature. Use one sample at
the original pH; adjust pH of the other to 7.6 by using sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and sodium
hydroxide (NaOH) of such concentrations that the resulting volume change doe s not exceed 3%.
A standard pH is necessary because of the variation of color with pH. Remove excessive
quantities of suspended materials by centrifuging. Treat each sample separately, as follows:
 Thoroughly mix 0.1 g filter aid in a 10-mL portion of cent rifuged sample and filter to form aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationprecoat in the filter crucible. Direct filtrate to waste flask as indicated in Figure 2120:1 . Mix 40
mg filter aid in a 35-mL portion of centrifuged sample. With vacuum still on, filter through the
precoat and pass filtr ate to waste flask until clear; then direct clear-filtrate flow to clean flask by
means of the three-way stopcock and collect 25 mL for the transmittance determination. 
b. Determination of light transmission characteristics:  Thoroughly clean 1-cm absorption
cells with detergent and rinse with distilled water. Rinse twice with filtered sample, clean
external surfaces with lens paper,  and fill cell with filtered sample.
 Determine transmittance values (in percent) at each visible wavelength value presented in
Table 2120:I , using the 10 ordinates marked with an asterisk for fairly accurate work and all 30
ordinates for increased accuracy. Set instrument to read 100% transmi ttance on the distilled
water blank and make all determinations with a narrow spectral band. 
4.  Calculation
a. Tabulate transmittance values corresponding to wavelengths shown in Columns X, Y, and
Z in Table 2120:I . Total each transmittance column and multiply totals by the appropriate factors
(for 10 or 30 ordinates) shown at the bottom of the table, to obtai n tristimulus values X, Y, and Z.
The tristimulus value Y is percent luminance.
b. Calculate the trichromatic coefficients x and y from the tristimulus values X, Y, and Z by
the following equations:
 
Locate point ( x, y) on one of the chromaticity diagrams in Figure 2120:2  and  determine the
dominant wavelength (in nanometers) and the purity (in percent) directly from the diagram. 
Determine hue from the dominant-wavelength value, according to the ranges in Table
2120:II . 
5.  Expression of Results
 Express color characteristics (at pH 7.6 and at the original pH) in terms of dominant
wavelength  (nanometers, to the nearest unit), hue (e.g., blue, blue-green, etc.), luminance
(percent, to the nearest tenth), and purity  (perc ent, to the nearest unit). Report type of instrument
(i.e., spectrophotometer), number of selected ordi nates (10 or 30), and the spectral band width
(nanometers) used. 
6.  BibliographyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation HARDY, A.C.  1936. Handbook of Colorimetry. Technology Press, Boston, Mass.
2120  D.        Tristimulus Filter Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Three special tristimulus light filters, combined with a specific light source and
photoelectric cell in a filter photometer, may be used to obtain color data suitable for routine
control purposes.
 The percentage of tristimulus light trans mitted by the solution is determined for each of the
three filters. The transmittance values then are converted to trichromatic coefficients and color
characteristic values. 
b. Application:  This method is applicable to potable and surface waters and to wastewaters,
both domestic and industrial. Except for most exacting work, this method gives results very
similar to the more accurate Method C.
c. Interference:  Turbidity must be removed.
2.  Apparatus
a. Filter photometer. *#(9)
b. Filter photometer light source:  Tungsten lamp at a color temperature of 3000°C.† #(10)
c. Filter photometer photoelectric cells,  1 cm.‡ #(11)
d. Tristimulus filters.§#(12)
e. Filtration system:  See Section 2120C.2 b and  Figure 2120:1 .
3.  Procedure
a. Preparation of sample:  See Section 2120C.3 a.
b. Determination of light transmission characteristics:  Thoroughly clean (with detergent)
and rinse 1-cm absorption cells with distilled water. Rinse each absorption cell twice with
filtered sample, clean external surf aces with lens paper, and fill cell with filtered sample.
 Place a distilled water blank in another cell and use it to set the instrument at 100%
transmittance. Determine percentage of light transmission through sample for each of the three
tristimulus light filters, with the filter photomet er lamp intensity switch in a position equivalent
to 4 V on the lamp. 
4.  Calculation
a. Determine luminance value directly as the percentage transmittance value obtained with
the No. 2 tristimulus filter.
b. Calculate tristimulus values X, Y, and Z from the percentage transmittance ( T 1, T 2, T 3)
for filters No. 1, 2, 3, as follows:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation           X = T 3 × 0.06 + T1 × 0.25 
          Y = T 2 × 0.316 
          Z = T 3 × 0.374 
Calculate and determine trichr omatic coefficients x and y, dominant wavelength, hue, and
purity as in Section 2120C.4 b above. 
5.  Expression of Results
 Express results as prescribed in Section 2120C.5 . 
2120  E.        ADMI Tristimulus Filter Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  This method is an extension of Tristimulus Method 2120D. By this method a
measure of the sample color, independent of hue, may be obtained. It is based on use of the
Adams-Nickerson chromatic value formula1 for calculating single number col or difference
values, i.e., uniform color differences. For example, if two colors, A and B, are judged visually
to differ from colorless to the same degree, their ADMI color values will be the same. The
modification was developed by members of the American  Dye Manufacturers Institute (ADMI).2
b. Application:  This method is applicable to colored waters and wastewaters having color
characteristics significantly different from plati num-cobalt standards, as well as to waters and
wastewaters similar in hue to the standards.
c. Interference:  Turbidity must be removed.
2.  Apparatus
a. Filter photometer *#(13)  equipped with CIE tristimulus filters (see Section 2120D.2 d).
b. Filter photometer light source:  Tungsten lamp at a color temperature of 3000°C (see
Section 2120D.2 b).
c. Absorption cells and appropriate cell holders:  For color values less than 250 ADMI units,
use cells with a 5.0-cm light path;  for color values greater than 250, use cells with 1.0-cm light
path.
d. Filtration system:  See Section 2120C.2 b and  Figure 2120:1 ;  or a centrifuge capable of
achieving 1000 × g. (See Section 2120B .)
3.  Procedure
a. Instrument calibration:  Establish curves for each photometer; calibration data for one
instrument cannot be applied to another one. Prepare a separate calibration curve for each
absorption cell path length.
1)  Prepare standards as described in Section 2120B.3 . For a 5-cm cell length prepareStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationstandards having color values of 25, 50, 100, 200, and 250 by diluting 5.0, 10.0, 20.0, 40.0, and
50.0 mL stock color standard with distilled water to 100 mL in volumet ric flasks. For the shorter
pathlength, prepare appropriate standards with higher color values. 
2)  Determine light transmittance (see ¶ 3c, below) for each standard with each filter. 
3)  Using the calculations described in ¶ 3d below, calculate the tristimulus values ( Xs, Ys,
Zs) for each standard, determine the Munsell values, and calculate the intermediate value ( DE). 
4)  Using the DE values for each standard, calculate a calibration factor Fn for each standard
from the following equation: 
where: 
(APHA )n = APHA color value for standard n,             
     (DE)n =  intermediate value calculated for standard n, and             
             b =  cell light path, cm. 
Placing ( DE)n on the X axis and Fn on the Y axis, plot a curve for the standard solutions. Use
calibration curve to derive the F value from DE values obtained with samples. 
b. Sample preparation:  Prepare two 100-mL sample portions (one at the original pH, one at
pH 7.6) as described in Section 2120C.3 a, or by centrifugation. (N OTE: Centrifugation is
acceptable only if turbidity removal equivalent to filtration is achieved.)
c. Determination of light transmission characteristics:  Thoroughly clean absorption cells
with detergent and rinse with distilled water.  Rinse each absorption cell twice with filtered
sample. Clean external surfaces with lens paper and fill cell with sam ple. Determine sample light
transmittance with the three filters to obtain the transmittance values: T 1 from Filter 1, T 2 from
Filter 2, and T 3 from Filter 3. Standardize the instrument with each filter at 100% transmittance
with distilled water.
d. Calculation of color values:  Tristimulus values for samples are Xs, Ys, and Zs; for
standards Xr, Yr, and Zr; and for distilled water Xc, Yc, and Zc. Munsell values for samples are
Vxs, Vys, and Vzs; for standards Vxr, Vyr, and Vzr; and for distilled water Vxc, Yyc, and Vzc.
 For each standard or sample calculate the tristimulus values from the following equations: 
                    X = (T 3 × 0.1899) + ( T 1 × 0.791) Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                    Y = T 2 
                    Z = T 3 × 1.1835 
Tristimulus v alues for the distilled water blank used to standardize the instrument are always: 
                    Xc = 98.09 
                    Yc = 100.0 
                    Zc = 118.35 
Convert the six tristimulus values ( Xs, Ys, Zs, Xc, Yc, Zc) to the corres ponding Munsell values
using published tables 2, 3, 4† #(14)  or by the equation given by Bridgeman.3 
Calculate the intermediate valu e of DE from the equation: 
DE = {(0.23 ∆Vy)2 + [∆(Vx − Vy)]2 + [0.4 ∆(Vy − Vz)]2}1/2
where: 
                                  Vy = Vys − Vyc
 
                    ∆(Vx − Vy) = (Vxs − Vys) − (Vxc − Vyc)
 
                    ∆(Vy − Vz) = (Vys − Vzs) − (Vyc − Vzc)
 
when the sample is compared to distilled water. 
With the standard calibration curve, use the DE value to determin e the calibration factor F. 
Calculate the final ADMI color value as follows: 
where: 
                  b =   absorption cell light path, cm. 
Report ADMI color values at pH 7.6 and at the original pH. 
4.  Alternate Method
 The ADMI color value also may be determined spectrophotometrically, using a
spectrophotometer with a narrow (10-nm or less)  spectral band and an effective operating rangeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationof 400 to 700 nm. This method is an extension of 2120C. Trist imulus values may be calculated
from transmittance measurements, preferably by using the weighted ordinate method or by the
selected ordinate method. The method has been described by Allen et al.,2 who include work
sheets and worked examples. 
5.  References
         1.    MCLAREN, K.  1970. The Adams-Nickerson colour-difference formula. J. Soc. Dyers
Colorists  86:354.
         2.    ALLEN, W., W.B. PRESCOTT, R.E. DERBY, C.E. GARLAND, J.M. PERET & M. SALTZMAN .
1973. Determination of color of water and wastew ater by means of ADMI color values.
Proc. 28th Ind.  Waste Conf.,  Purdue Univ., Eng. Ext. Ser. No. 142:661.
         3.    BRIDGEMAN, T.  1963. Inversion of the Munsell value equation. J. Opt. Soc. Amer.
53:499.
6.  Bibliography
 JUDD, D.B. & G. WYSZECKI . 1963. Color in Business, Science, and Industry, 2nd ed. John Wiley
& Sons, New York, N.Y. (See Tables A, B, and C in Appendix.)
 WYSZECKI, G. & W.S. STILES . 1967. Color Science. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y . (See
Tables 6.4, A, B, C, pp. 462-467.)
2130        TURBIDITY* #(15)
2130  A.        Introduction
1.  Sources and Significance
 Clarity of water is important in producing products destined for human consumption and in
many manufacturing operations. Beverage produ cers, food processors, and potable water
treatment plants drawing from a surface water so urce commonly rely on fluid-particle separation
processes such as sedimentation and filtration to increase clarity and insure an acceptable
product. The clarity of a natural body of water is an important determinant of its condition and
productivity. 
Turb idity in water is caused by suspended and colloidal matter such as clay, silt, finely
divided organic and inorganic matter, and pla nkton and other microscopic organisms. Turbidity
is an expression of the optical property that causes light to be scattered a nd absorbed rather than
transmitted with no change in direction or flux level through the sample. Correlation of turbidity
with the weight or particle number concentration of suspended matter is difficult because the
size, shape, and refractive index of th e particles affect the light-scattering properties of the
suspension. When present in significant concentrations, particles consisting of light-absorbingStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmaterials such as activated carbon cause a negative interference. In low concentrations these
particle s tend to have a positive influence because they contribute to turbidity. The presence of
dissolved, color-causing substances that absorb light may cause a negative interference. Some
commercial instruments may have the capability of either correcting for a slight color
interference or optically blanking out the color effect. 
2.  Selection of Method
 Historically, the standard method for determination of turbidity has been based on the
Jackson candle turbidimeter; however, the lowest turbidity value that can be measured directly
on this device is 25 Jackson Turbidity Units (J TU). Because turbidities of water treated by
conventional fluid-particle separation processes usually fall within the range of 0 to 1 unit,
indirect secondary methods were developed to estimate turbidity. Electronic nephelometers are
the preferred instrume nts for turbidity measurement. 
Most commercial turbidimeters designed for measuring low turbidities give comparatively
good indications of the intensity of light scattered in one particular direction, predominantly at
right angles to the incident light. T urbidimeters with scattered-light detectors located at 90° to
the incident beam are called nephelometers. Nephelometers are relatively unaffected by small
differences in design parameters and therefore are specified as the standard instrument for
measureme nt of low turbidities. Instruments of different make and model may vary in
response.† #(16)  However, interinstrument variation may be  effectively negligible if good
measurement techniques are used and the characteristics of the particles in the measured
suspens ions are similar. Poor measurement technique can have a greater effect on measurement
error than small differences in instrument design. Turbidimeters of nonstandard design, such as
forward-scattering devices, may be more sensitive than nephelometers to th e presence of larger
particles. While it may not be appropriate to compare their output with that of instruments of
standard design, they still may be useful for process monitoring. 
An additional cause of discrepancies in turbidity analysis is the use of suspensions of
different types of particulate matter for instrument calibration. Like water samples, prepared
suspensions have different optical properties de pending on the particle size distributions, shapes,
and refractive indices. A standard reference s uspension having reproducible light-scattering
properties is specified for nephelometer calibration. 
Its precision, sensitivity, and applicability over a wide turbidity range make the
nephelometric method preferable to visual methods. Report nephelometric  measurement results
as nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). 
3.  Storage of Sample
 Determine turbidity as soon as possible after the sample is taken. Gently agitate all samples
before examination to ensure a representative measurement. Sample preservation is not practical;
begin analysis promptly. Refrigerate or  cool to 4°C, to minimize microbiological decomposition
of solids, if storage is required. For best resu lts, measure turbidity immediately without altering
the original sample conditions such as temperature or pH. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2130  B.        Nephelometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  This method is based on a comparison of the intensity of light scattered by the
sample under defined conditions with the intensity of light scattered by a standard reference
suspension under the same conditions. The higher the intensity of scattered light, the higher the
turbidity. Formazin polymer is used as the primary standard reference suspension. The turbidity
of a specified concentration of formazin suspension is defined as 4000 NTU.
b. Interference:  Turbidity can be determined for any water sample that is free of debris and
rapidly settling coarse sediment. Dirty glasswar e and the presence of air bubbles give false
results. ‘‘True color,’’ i.e., water color due to dissolved substanc es that absorb light, causes
measured turbidities to be low. This effect usually is not significant in treated water.
2.  Apparatus
a. Laboratory or process nephelometer  consisting of a light source for illuminating the
sample and one or more photoelectric detectors with a readout device to indicate intensity of
light scattered at 90° to the path of incident light. Use an instrument designed to minimize stray
light reaching the detector in the absence of turb idity and to be free from significant drift after a
short warmup period. The sensitivity of the instrument should permit detecting turbidity
differences of 0.02 NTU or less in the  lowest range in waters having a turbidity of less than 1
NTU. Several ranges may be necessary to obtain both adequate coverage and sufficient
sensitivity for low turbidities. Differences in instrument design will cause differences in
measured values for t urbidity even though the same suspension is used for calibration. To
minimize such differences, observe the following design criteria:
1) Light source—Tungsten-filament lamp operated at a color temperature between 2200 and
3000°K. 
2) Distance traversed by incident light and sca ttered light within the sample tube—Total not
to exceed 10 cm. 
3) Angle of light acceptance by detector—Centere d at 90° to the incident light path and not
to exceed ±30° from 90°. The detector and filter system, if used, shall have a spectral peak
response between 400 and 600 nm. 
b. Sample cells:  Use sample cells or tubes of clear, colorless glass or plastic. Keep cells
scrupulously clean, both inside and out, and dis card if scratched or etched. Never handle them
where the instrument’s light beam will strike them. Use tubes with sufficient extra length, or
with a protective case, so that they may be handled properly. Fill cells with samples and
standards that have been agitated thoroughly and allow sufficient time for bubbles to escape.
 Clean sample cells by thorough washing with  laboratory soap inside and out followed by
multiple rinses with distilled or deionized water; let cells air-dry. Handle sample cells only byStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe top to avoid dirt and fingerprints within the light path. 
Cells may be coated on the outside with a thin laye r of silicone oil to mask minor
imperfections and scratches that may contribute to stray light. Use silicone oil with the same
refractive index as glass. Avoid excess oil because it may attract dirt and contaminate the sample
compartment of the instrument.  Using a soft, lint-free cloth, spread the oil uniformly and wipe
off excess. The cell should appear to be nearly dry with little or no visible oil. 
Because small differences between sample cells significantly impact measurement, use either
matched pairs of cells or the same cell for both standardization and sample measurement. 
3.  Reagents
a. Dilution water:  High-purity water will cause some light scattering, which is detected by
nephelometers as turbidity. To obtain low-turbidity water for dilutions, nominal value 0.02 NTU,
pass laboratory reagent-grade water through a filter with pore si ze sufficiently small to remove
essentially all particles larger than 0.1 µm;*#(17)  the usual membrane filter used for
bacteriologic al examinations is not satisfactory. Rinse collecting flask at least twice with filtered
water and discard the next 200 mL.
 Som e commercial bottled demineralized waters have a low turbidity. These may be used
when filtration is impractical or a good grade of water is not available to filter in the laboratory.
Check turbidity of bottled water to make sure it is lower than the level  that can be achieved in
the laboratory. 
b. Stock primary standard formazin suspension:  
1) Solution I—Dissolve 1.000 g hydrazine sulfate, (NH2)2⋅H2SO4, in distilled water and
dilute to 100 mL in a volumetric flask. CAUTION : Hydrazine sulfate is a carcino gen; avoid
inhalation, ingestion, and skin contact. Formazin  suspensions can contain residual hydrazine
sulfate.  
2) Solution II—Dissolve 10.00 g hexamethylenetetramine, (CH2)6N4, in distilled water and
dilute to 100 mL in a volumetric flask. 
3) In a flask, mix 5.0 mL Solution I and 5.0 mL Solution II. Let stand for 24 h at 25 ± 3°C.
This results in a 4000-NTU suspension. Transfer stock suspension to an amber glass or other
UV-light-blocking bottle for storage. Make dilutions from this stock suspension. The stock
suspension is stable for up to 1 year when properly stored. 
c. Dilute turbidity suspensions:  Dilute 4000 NTU primary standard suspension with
high-quality dilution water. Prepare immediately before use and discard after use.
d. Secondary standards:  Secondary standards are standards that the manufacturer (or an
independent testing organization) has certified will give instrument calibration results equivalent
(within certain limits) to the results obtained when the instrument  is calibrated with the primary
standard, i.e., user-prepared formazin. Various secondary standards are available including:
commercial stock suspensions of 4000 NTU formazin, commercial suspensions of microspheres
of styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer,† #(18)  and items supplied by instrument manufacturers,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsuch as sealed sample cells filled with latex suspension or with metal oxide particles in a
polymer gel. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency1 designates user-prepared formazin,
commercial stock formazin su spensions, and commercial styrene-divinylbenzene suspensions as
‘‘primary standards,’’ and reserves the term ‘‘secondary standard’’ for the sealed standards
mentioned above.
 Secondary standards made with suspensions of microspheres of styrene-divinylbenze ne
copolymer typically are as stable as concentrated formazin and are much more stable than
diluted formazin. These suspensions can be instrument-specific; therefore, use only suspensions
formulated for the type of nephelometer being used. Secondary standa rds provided by the
instrument manufacturer (sometimes called ‘‘permanent’’ standards) may be necessary to
standardize some instruments before each reading and in other instruments only as a calibration
check to determine when calibration with the primary standard is necessary. 
All secondary standards, even so-called ‘‘permanent’’ standards, change with time. Replace
them when their age exceeds the shelf life. Deterioration can be detected by measuring the
turbidity of the standard after calibrating the in strument with a fresh formazin or microsphere
suspension. If there is any doubt about the integrity or turbidity value of any secondary standard,
check instrument calibration first with another secondary standard and then, if necessary, with
user-prepared formazin. Most secondary standards have been carefully prepared by their
manufacturer and should, if properly used, give good agreement with formazin. Prepare formazin
primary standard only as a last resort. Proper application of secondary standards is spe cific for
each make and model of nephelometer. Not all secondary standards have to be discarded when
comparison with a primary standard shows that their turbidity value has changed. In some cases,
the secondary standard should be simply relabeled with the new turbidity value. Always follow
the manufacturer’s directions. 
4.  Procedure
a. General measurement techniques:  Proper measurement techniques are important in
minimizing the effects of instrument variables as well as stray light and air bubbles. Regardless
of the instrument used, the measurement will be more accurate, precise, an d repeatable if close
attention is paid to proper measurement techniques.
 Measure turbidity immediately to prevent temperature changes and particle flocculation and
sedimentation from changing sample characteris tics. If flocculation is apparent, break up
aggregates by agitation. Avoid dilution whenever possible. Particles suspended in the original
sample may dissolve or otherwise change characteristics when the temperature changes or when
the sample is diluted. 
Remove air or other entrained gases in the s ample before measurement. Preferably degas
even if no bubbles are visible. Degas by appl ying a partial vacuum, adding a nonfoaming-type
surfactant, using an ultrasonic bath, or applying heat. In some cases, two or more of these
techniques may be combined f or more effective bubble removal. For example, it may be
necessary to combine addition of a surfactant w ith use of an ultrasonic bath for some severeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconditions. Any of these techniques, if misapplied, can alter sample turbidity; use with care . If
degassin g cannot be applied, bubble formation will be minimized if the samples are maintained
at the temperature and pressure of the water before sampling. 
Do not remove air bubbles by letting sample stand for a period of time because during
standing, turbidity-c ausing particulates may settle and sample temperature may change. Both of
these conditions alter sample turbidity, resulting in a nonrepresentative measurement. 
Condensation may occur on the outside surface of a sample cell when a cold sample is being
measured in a warm, humid environment. This interferes with turbidity measurement. Remove
all moisture from the outside of the sample cell before placing the cell in the instrument. If
fogging recurs, let sample warm slightly by letting it stand at room tempe rature or by partially
immersing it in a warm water bath for a short time. Make sure samples are again well mixed. 
b. Nephelometer calibration:  Follow the manufacturer’s operating instructions. Run at least
one standard in each instrument range to be used. Make certain the nephelometer gives stable
readings in all sensitivity ranges used. Follow techniques outlined i n ¶s 2b and 4a for care and
handling of sample cells, degassing, and dealing with condensation.
c. Measurement of turbidity:  Gently agitate sample. Wait until air bubbles disappear and
pour sample into cell. When possible, pour well-mixed sample into cell and immerse it in an
ultrasonic bath for 1 to 2 s or apply vacuum degassing, causing complete bubble release. Read
turbidity directly from instrument display.
d. Calibration of continuous turbidity monitors:  Calibrate continuous turbidity monitors for
low turbidities by determining turbidity of the water flowing out of them, using a
laboratory-model nephelometer, or calibrate the instruments according to manuf acturer’s
instructions with formazin primary standard or appropriate secondary standard.
5.  Interpretation of Results
Report turbidity readings as follows:
Turbidity Range
NTUReport to the
Nearest
NTU
     0–1.0 
    1–10 
  10–40 
    40–100 
 100–400 
   400–1000 
          >1000       0.05 
      0.1   
    1    
    5    
  10    
  50    
100    
When comparing water treatment efficiencies, do not estimate turbidity more closely than
specified above. Uncertainties and discrepancies in turbidity measurements make it unlikely thatStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationresults can be duplicated to greater precision than specified.
6.  Reference
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1993. Methods for Determination of
Inorganic Substances in Environmental Samples. EPA-600/R/93/100 - Draft.
Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
7.  Bibliography
 HACH, C.C., R.D. VANOUS & J.M. HEER . 1985. Understanding Turbidity Measurement. Hach Co.,
Technical Information Ser., Booklet 11, Loveland, Colo.
 KATZ, E.L.  1986. The stability of turbidity in raw water and its relationship to chlorine  demand.
J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  78:72.
 MCCOY, W.F. & B.H. OLSON . 1986. Relationship among turbidity, particle counts and
bacteriological quality within water distribution lines. Water Res.  20:1023.
 BUCKLIN, K.E., G.A. MCFETERS & A. AMIRTHARAJAH . 199 1. Penetration of coliform through
municipal drinking water filters. Water Res.  25: 1013.
 HERNANDEZ, E., R.A. BAKER & P.C. CRANDALL . 1991. Model for evaluating turbidity in cloudy
beverages. J. Food Sci.  56:747.
 HART, V.S., C.E. JOHNSON & R.D. LETTERMAN . 1992. An analysis of low-level turbidity
measurements. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.,  84(12): 40.
 LECHEVALLIER, M.W. & W.D. NORTON . 1992. Examining relationship between particle counts
and Giardia , Cryptosporidium , and turbidity. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc . 84(12):54.
2150        ODOR* #(19)
2150  A.        Introduction
1.  Discussion
 Odor, like taste, depends on contact of a stimulating substance with the appropriate human
receptor cell. The stimuli are chemical in nature and the term ‘‘chemical senses’’ often is applied
to odor and taste. Water is a neutral medium, a lways present on or at the receptors that perceive
sensory response. In its pure form, water is odor-free. Man and other animals can avoid many
potentially toxic foods and waters because of adverse sensory response. These senses often
provide the first war ning of potential hazards in the environment. 
Odor is recognized1 as a quality factor affecting acceptability of drinking water (and foods
prepared with it), tainting of fish and other aquatic organisms, and esthetics of recreational
waters. Most organic and some inorganic chemicals contribute taste or odor. These chemicalsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmay originate from municipal and industrial waste discharges, from natural sources such as
decomposition of vegetable matter, or from asso ciated microbial activity, and from disinfectan ts
or their products. 
The potential for impairment of the sensory quality of water has increased as a result of
expansion in the variety and quantity of waste materials, demand for water disposal of captured
air pollutants, and increased reuse of availabl e water supplies by a growing population. Domestic
consumers and process industries such as food, beverage, and pharmaceutical manufacturers
require water essentially free of tastes and odors. 
Some substances, such as certain inorganic salts, produce tast e without odor and are
evaluated by taste testing ( Section 2160 ). Many other sensations ascribed to the sense of taste
actually are odors, even though the sensation is not noticed until the material is taken into the
mouth. Because some odorous materials a re detectable when present in only a few nanograms
per liter, it is usually impractical and often impossible to isolate and identify the odor-producing
chemical. The human nose is the practical odor-testing device used in this method. Odor tests are
perfor med to provide qualitative descriptions and approximate quantitative measurements of
odor intensity. The method for intensity measurement presented here is the threshold odor  test,
based on a method of limits.2 This procedure, while not universally preferr ed,3 has definite
strengths.4 
Sensory tests are useful as a check on the quality of raw and finished water and for control of
odor through the treatment process.2,3,5 They can assess the effectiveness of different treatments
and provide a means of tracing  the source of contamination. 
Section 6040B  provides an analytical procedure for quantifying several organic
odor-producing compounds including geosmin and methylisoborneol. 
2.  References
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1973. Proposed Criteria for Water
Quality. Vol. 1, Washington, D.C.
         2.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS COMMITTEE E-18 . 1996. Sensory
Testing Methods: Second Edition. E. Chambers  & M.B. Wolf, eds. American Soc.
Testing & Materials, W. Conshohocken, Pa.
         3.    MALLEVIALLE, J. & I.H. SUFFET . 1987. Identification and Treatment of Tastes and
Odors in Drinking Water. American Water Works Association Research Foundation
and Lyonnaise d es Eaux. AWWARF, Denver, Colo.
         4.    BRUVOLD, W.H.  1989. A Critical Review of Methods Used for the Sensory Evaluation
of Water Quality. CRC Crit. Rev. Environ. Control . 19(4):291.
         5.    SUFFET, I., E. KAWCZYNSKI & J. MALLEVIALLE.  1995. Advances in Tast e and Odor
Treatment and Control. American Water Works Association Research Foundation and
Lyonnaise des Eaux, AWWARF, Denver, Colo.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Bibliography
 MONCRIEFF, R.W.  1946. The Chemical Senses. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
 BAKER, R.A.  1961. Problems of tastes and odors. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  33:1099.
 BAKER, R.A.  1963. Odor effects of aqueous mixtures of organic chemical s. J. Water Pollut.
Control Fed.  35:728.
 ROSEN, A.A., R.T. SKEEL & M.B. ETTINGER . 1963. Relationship of river water odor to specific
organic contaminants. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  35:777.
 WRIGHT, R.H.  1964. The Science of Smell. Basic Books, New Yor k, N.Y.
 AMERINE, M.A., R.M. PANGBORN & E.B. ROESSLER . 1965. Principles of Sensory Evaluation of
Food. Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
 ROSEN, A.A.  1970. Report of research committee on tastes and odors. J. Amer. Water Works
Assoc.  62:59.
 GELDARD, F.A.  1972. The Human Senses. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
 MEILGAARD, M.C.  1988. Sensory evaluation techniques applied to water works samples. Water
Quality Bull . 13(2/3):39. WHO Collaborating Centre  on Surface and Groundwater Quality,
Burlington, Ont., Canad a
2150  B.        Threshold Odor Test
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Determine the threshold odor by diluting a sample with odor-free water until
the least definitely perceptible odor is achieved. There is no absolute threshold odor
concentration, because of inherent va riation in individual olfactory capabi lity. A given person
varies in sensitivity over time. Day-to-day and within-day differences occur. Furthermore,
responses vary as a result of the characteristic, as well as concentration, of odorant. The number
of persons selected to measure threshold odor  will depend on the objective of the tests,
economics, and available personnel. Larger-sized panels are needed for sensory testing when the
results must represent the population as a whole or when great precision is desired. Under such
circumstances, panel s of no fewer than five persons, and preferably ten or more, are
recommended.1 Measurement of threshold levels by one person is often a necessity at water
treatment plants. Interpretation of the single tester result requires knowledge of the relative
acuit y of that person. Some investigators have used specific odorants, such as m-cresol or
n-butanol, to calibrate a tester’s response.2 Others have used the University of Pennsylvania
Smell Identification Test to assess an individual’s ability to identify odor s correctly.3
b.  Application:  This threshold method is applicable to samples ranging from nearly odorless
natural waters to industrial wastes with threshold numbers in the thousands. There are no
intrinsic difficulties with the highly odorous samples because they are  reduced in concentration
proportionately before being presented to the test observers.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Qualitative descriptions:  A fully acceptable system for characterizing odor has not been
developed despite efforts over more than a century. Nevertheless, Section 2170  (Flavor Profile
Analysis) specifies a set of 23 odor reference standards that may be used if qualitative
descriptions are important. These descriptors can be used with the Threshold Odor Test to
standardize methods for sensory analysis.
d.  Sampling and storage:  Collect samples for odor testing in glass bottles with glass or
TFE-lined closures. Complete tests as soon as possible after sample collection. If storage is
necessary, collect at least 500 mL of sample in a bottle filled to the  top; refrigerate, making sure
that no extraneous odors can be drawn into the sample as it cools. Do not use plastic containers.
e.  Dechlorination:  Most tap waters and some wastewaters are chlorinated. Often it is
desirable to determine the odor of the chlorinated sample as well as that of the same sample after
dechlorination. Dechlorinate with th iosulfate in exact stoichiometric  quantity as described under
Nitrogen (Ammonia), Section 4500-NH3 .
f.  Temperature:  Threshold odor values vary with temperature. For most tap waters and raw
water sources, a sample temperature of 60°C will permit detection of odors that otherwise might
be missed; 60°C is the standard temperature for hot threshold odor t ests. For some
purposes—because the odor is too fleeting or there is excessive heat sensation—the hot odor test
may not be applicable; where experience shows that a lower temperature is needed, use a
standard test temperature of 40°C. For special purposes,  other temperatures may be used. Report
temperature at which observations are made.
2.  Apparatus
 To assure reliable threshold measurements, use odor-free glassware. Clean glassware shortly
before use with nonodorous soap and acid cleaning solution and rinse with odor-free water.
Reserve this glassware exclusively for threshold testing . Do not use rubber, cork, or plastic
stoppers. Do not use narrow-mouth vessels. 
a.  Sample bottles,  glass-stoppered or with TFE-lined closures.
b.  Constant-temperature bath:  A water bath or electric hot plate capable of temperature
control of ± 1°C for odor tests at elevated temp eratures. The bath must not contribute any odor to
the odor flasks.
c.  Odor flasks:  Glass-stoppered, 500-mL (ST 32) erlenmeyer flasks, to hold sample dilutions
during testing.
d.  Pipets:
1)  Transfer and volumetric pipets or graduated cylinders:  200-, 100-, 50-, and 25-mL. 
2)  Measuring pipets:  10-mL, graduated in tenths. 
e.  Thermometer:  Zero to 110°C, chemical or metal-stem dial type.
3.  Odor-Free Water
a.  Sources:  Prepare odor-free water by passing distilled, deionized, or tap water throughStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationactivated carbon. If product water is not odor-free, rebuild or purify the system. In all cases
verify quality of product water daily.
b.  Odor-free-water generator  (Figure 2150:1 ):*#(20)  Make the PVC generator from a 2-ft
length of 4-in. PVC pipe approved for use for drinking water purposes (e.g., Schedule 80, or
National Water Council-approved in U.K.). Thread pipe end to accept threaded caps. Have a
small threaded nipple in the cap center for water inlet or outlet. To retain the activated carbon,
place coarse glass wool in top and bottom of generator. Regulate water flow to generator by a
needle valve and a pressure regulator to provide t he minimum pressure for the desired flow. Use
activated carbon of approximately 12 to 40 mesh grain size.† #(21)
c.  Generator operation:  Pass tap or purified water through odor-free-water generator at rate
of 100 mL/min. When generator is started, flush to remove carbon fines and discard product, or
pre-rinse carbon.
 Check quality of water obtained from the odor- free-water generator daily at 40 and 60°C
before use. The life of the carbon will vary w ith the condition and amount of water filtered.
Subtle odors of biological origin often are found if moist carbon filters stand idle between test
periods. Detection of odor in the water coming through the carbon indicates that a change of
carbon is needed. 
4.  Procedure
a.  Precautions:  Carefully select by preliminary tests the persons to make taste or odor tests.
Although extreme sensitivity is not required, exclude insensitive persons and concentrate on
observers who have a sincere interest in the test. Avoid extraneo us odor stimuli such as those
caused by smoking and eating before the test or those contributed by scented soaps, perfumes,
and shaving lotions. Insure that the tester is free from colds or allergies that affect odor response.
Limit frequency of tests to a  number below the fatigue level by frequent rests in an odor-free
atmosphere. Keep room in which tests are c onducted free from distractions, drafts, and odor.2 If
necessary, set aside a special odor-free room ventilated by air that is filtered through acti vated
carbon and maintained at a constant comfortable temperature and humidity.4
 For precise work use a panel of five or more testers. Do not allow persons making odor
measurements to prepare samples or to know dilution concentrations being evaluated.
Familiarize testers with the procedure before they participate in a panel test. Present most dilute
sample first to avoid tiring the senses with the concentrated sample. Keep temperature of
samples during testing within 1°C of the specified temperature. 
Beca use many raw and waste waters are colored or have decided turbidity that may bias
results, use opaque or darkly colored odor flasks, such as red actinic erlenmeyer flasks. 
b.  Characterization:  As part of the threshold test or as a separate test, direct each observer to
describe the characteristic sample odor using odor reference standards (see Section 2170 ).
Compile the consensus that may appear among testers and that aff ords a clue to the origin of the
odorous component. The value of the characterization test increases as observers become more
experienced with a particular category of odor, e.g., earthy, musty, chlorine.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Threshold measurement: ‡#(22)  The ‘‘threshold odor number,’’ designated by the
abbreviation TON, is the greatest dilution of sa mple with odor-free water yielding a definitely
perceptible odor. Bring total volume of sample and odor-free water to 200 mL in each test.
Follow dilutions and record corresponding TON presented in Table 2150:I . These numbers have
been computed thus:
 
where: 
                  A =   mL sample and 
                  B =   mL odor-free water. 
1)  Place proper volume of odor-free water in the flask first, add sample to water (avoiding
contact of pipet or sample with lip or neck of flask), mix by swirling, and proceed as follows: 
Determine approximate range of the threshold number by adding 20 0 mL, 50 mL, 12 mL,
and 2.8 mL sample to separate 500-mL glass-st oppered erlenmeyer flasks containing odor-free
water to make a total volume of 200 mL. Use a separate flask containing only odor-free water as
reference for comparison. Heat dilutions and ref erence to desired test temperature.
2)  Shake flask containing odor-free water, re move stopper, and sniff vapors. Test sample
containing least amount of odor-bearing water in the same way. If odor can be detected in this
dilution, prepare more dilute samples as described in ¶ 5) below. If odor cannot be detected in
first dilution, repeat above procedure using sample containing next higher concentration of
odor-bearing water, and continue this process until odor is detected clearly.
3)  Based on results obtained in the preliminary test, prepare a set of dilutions using Table
2150:II  as a guide. Prepare the five dilutions shown on the appropriate line and the three next
most concentrated on the next line in Table 2150:II . For example , if odor was first noted in the
flask containing 50 mL sample in the prelimin ary test, prepare flasks containing 50, 35, 25, 17,
12, 8.3, 5.7, and 4.0 mL sample, each diluted to 200 mL with odor-free water. This array is
necessary to challenge the range o f sensitivities of the entire panel of testers. 
Insert two or more blanks in the series near the expected threshold, but avoid any repeated
pattern. Do not let tester know which dilutions are odorous and which are blanks. Instruct tester
to smell each fla sk in sequence, beginning with the least concentrated sample, until odor is
detected with certainty. 
4) Record observations by indicating whether odor is noted in  each test flask. For example:
mL
Sample
Diluted to
200 mL 12 0 17 25 0 35 50  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationmL
Sample
Diluted to
200 mL 12 0 17 25 0 35 50  
Response −−− +− +−
5)  If the sample being tested requires more dilution than is provided by Table 2150:II ,
prepare an intermediate dilution consisting of 20 mL sample diluted to 200 L with odor-free
water. Use this dilution for the threshold determination. Multiply TON ob tained by 10 to correct
for the intermediate dilution. In rare cases more than one tenfold intermediate dilution step may
be required. 
5.  Calculation
 The threshold odor number is the dilution ratio at which odor  is just detectable. In the
example above, 4c4), the first detectable  odor occurred when 25 mL sample was diluted to 200
mL. Thus  the threshold is 200 divided by 25, or 8. Table 2150:I  lists the  threshold numbers
corresponding to common dilutions. 
The smallest TON that can be observed is 1, as in the case  where the odor flask contains 200
mL undiluted sample. If no  odor is detected at this concentration, report ‘‘No odor o bserved’’
instead of a threshold number. (In special applications, fractional  threshold numbers have been
calculated.6) 
Anomalous responses sometimes occur; a low concentration  may be called positive and a
higher concentration in the series  may be cal led negative. In such a case, designate the threshold
as the point after which no further anomalies occur. For instance:
Increasing Concentration →
Response −− +− + + + +
↓
Threshold
where: 
      −  signifies negative response and 
      +  signif ies positive response. 
Occasionally a flask contains residual odor or is contaminated  inadvertently. For precise
testing repeat entire threshold odor test  to determine if the last flask marked ‘‘ − ’’ was actually
a mislabelled blank of odor-free water  or if the previous ‘‘ + ’’ was  a contaminated sample. 
Use appropriate statistical methods to calculate the most probable average threshold from
large numbers of panel results. For  most purposes, express the threshold of a group as theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationgeometric  mean o f individual thresholds.
6.  Interpretation of Results
 A threshold number is not a precise value. In the case of the single observer it represents a
judgment at the time of testing. Panel results are more meaningful because individual differences
have less influence on the resu lt. One or two observers can develop useful data if comparison
with larger panels has been made to check their sensitivity. Do not make comparisons of data
from time to time or place to place unless all test conditions have been standardized carefully
and there is some basis for comparison of observed intensities. 
7.  References
         1.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS COMMITTEE E -18. 1996. Sensory
Testing Methods: Second Edition. E. Chambers & M.B. Wolf, eds. American Soc.
Testing & Materials, W. Conshohocken, Pa.
         2.    BAKER, R.A . 1962. Critical eval uation of olfactory measurement. J. Water Pollut.
Control Fed.  34:582.
         3.    DOTY, R.L., P. SHAMAN, M.S. DANN  & C.P. KIMMELMAN . 1984. University of
Pennsylvania smell identification test: a rapid quantitative olfactory function test for
the clinic. Laryn goscope,  94(2):176.
         4.    BAKER, R.A . 1963. Odor testing laboratory. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  35:1396.
         5.    INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION . 1985. ISO 6658 Sensory
Analysis–Methodology—General Guidance. International Org. for Stand ardization,
Geneva, Switzerland.
         6.    ROSEN, A.A., J.B. PETER  & F.M. MIDDLETON . 1962. Odor thresholds of mixed organic
chemicals. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  34:7.
8.  Bibliography
 HULBERT, R. & D. FEBEN . 1941. Studies on accuracy of threshold odor value. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  33:1945.
 SPAULDING, C.H . 1942. Accuracy and application of threshold odor test. J. Amer. Water Works
Assoc.  34:877.
 THOMAS, H.A., J R. 1943. Calculation of threshold odor. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  35:751.
 CARTWRIGHT, L.C., C.T. SNELL  & P.H. KELLY . 1952. Organoleptic panel testing as a research
tool. Anal. Chem.  24:503.
 LAUGHLIN, H.F . 1954. Palatable level with the threshold odor t est. Taste Odor Control J. 20:No.
8 (Aug.).
 SHELLENBERGER, R.D . 1958. Procedures for determining threshold odor concentrations in
aqueous solutions. Taste Odor Control J.  24:No. 5 (May).
 LAUGHLIN, H.F . 1962. Influence of temperature in threshold odor eva luation. Taste OdorStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationControl J.  28:No. 10 (Oct.).
 The threshold odor test. 1963. Taste Odor Control J.  29:Nos. 6, 7, 8 (June, July, Aug.).
 SUFFET, I.H . & S. SEGALL . 1971. Detecting taste and odor in drinking water. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  63:605.
 STA HL, W.H.,  ed. 1973. Compilation of Odor and Taste Threshold Values Data. Amer. Soc.
Testing & Materials Data Ser. DS 48, Philadelphia, Pa.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1973. Annual Book of ASTM Standards.
Part 23, D-1292-65, ASTM, Philadelp hia, Pa.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1986. Physical Requirement Guidelines for
Sensory Evaluation Laboratories. STP 913, American Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS COMMITTEE E -679. 1990 . Standard Practice
for Determination of Odor and Taste Thresholds by a Forced-Choice Ascending
Concentration Series Method of Limits. Ameri can Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia,
Pa.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1991. E1432 Standard Pr actice for
Defining and Calculating Individual and Group Sensory Thresholds from Forced Choice
Data Sets of Intermediate Size. American So ciety for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia,
Pa.
 BRUVOLD, W.H.  1989. A critical review of methods used for the sens ory evaluation of water
quality. Crit. Rev. Environ. Control  19:291.
 YOUNG, W.F., H. HORTH, R. CRANE, T. OGDEN & M. ARNOTT.  1996. Taste and odour threshold
concentration of potential potable water contaminants. Water Res.  30:331.
2160        TASTE* #(23)
2160 A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Taste refers only to gustatory sensations called bitter, salty, sour, and sweet that result from
chemical stimulation of sensory nerve endings located in the papillae of the tongue and soft
palate. Flavor refers to a complex of gu statory, olfactory, and trigeminal sensations resulting
from chemical stimulation of sensory nerve endings located in the tongue, nasal cavity, and oral
cavity.1 Water samples taken into the mouth for sensory analysis always produce a flavor,
although tast e, odor, or mouth-feel may predominate, depending on the chemical substances
present. Methods for sensory analysis presented herein require that the sample be taken into the
mouth, that is, be tasted, but technically the sensory analysis requires evaluatio n of the complex
sensation called flavor. As used here, taste refers to a method of sensory analysis in whichStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsamples are taken into the mouth but the resultant evaluations pertain to flavor. 
Three methods have been developed for the sensory evaluation of  water samples taken into
the mouth: the flavor threshold test (FTT), th e flavor rating assessment (FRA), and the flavor
profile analysis (FPA) ( Section 2170 ). The FTT is the oldest. It has been used extensively and is
particularly useful for determining i f the overall flavor of a sample of finished water is
detectably different from a defined standard.2 The FRA is especially valuable for determining if
a sample of finished water is acceptable for daily consumption,3 and the FPA is most useful for
identifyi ng and characterizing individual flavors in a water sample.4 
Make flavor tests only on samples known to be safe for ingestion. Do not use samples that
may be contaminated with bacteria, viruses, parasites, or hazardous chemicals, that contain
dechlorinati ng agents such as sodium arsenite or that are derived from an unesthetic source. Do
not make flavor tests on wastewaters or similar untreated effluents. Observe all sanitary and
esthetic precautions with regard to apparatus and containers contacting the sa mple. Properly
clean and sterilize containers before using th em. Conduct analyses in a laboratory free from
interfering background odors and if possible provi de non-odorous carbon-filtered air at constant
temperature and humidity. Use the procedure describ ed in Section 2150  with respect to taste-
and odor-free water to prepare dilution water and reference samples. 
2.  References
         1.    GELDARD, F.A.  1972. The Human Senses. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
         2.    BAKER, R.A.  1961. Taste and Odor in Water: A Critical Review. Manufacturing
Chemists’ Assoc., Washington, D.C.
         3.    BRUVOLD, W.H.  1968. Scales for r ating the taste of water. J. Appl. Psychol.  52:245.
         4.    MALLEVIALE, J. & I.H. SUFFET , eds. 1987. The Identification and Treatment of Tastes
and Odors in Drinking Water. American Water Works Association Research
Foundation, Denver, Colo.
2160 B.        Flavor Threshold Test (FTT)
1.  General Discussion
 Use the FTT to measure detectable flavor quantitatively. More precisely, use the method to
compare the sample flavor objectively with that of specified reference water used as diluent. 
The flavor threshold number (FTN) is the gre atest dilution of sample with reference water
yielding a definitely perceptible difference. The FTN is computed as follows: 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwhere: 
                  A =   sample volume, mL, and 
                  B =   reference water (diluent) volume, mL. 
Table 2160:I  gives the FTNs corresponding to various dilutions. 
2.  Procedure
a.  Panel selection:  Carefully select by preliminary trials interested persons to make flavor
tests. Exclude insensitive persons and insure that the testers are free from colds or allergies.
Familiarize testers with the procedure before they participate in a panel test, but do not let them
prepare samples or know dilution concentrations being evaluated. For precise work use a panel
of five or more testers.
b.  Taste characterization:  Have each observer describe the characteristic sample flavor of
the most concentrated sample. Compile the consensus that may appear among testers. The value
of characterization increases as observers become more experienced wi th a particular flavor
category such as chlorophenolic, grassy, or musty.
c.  Preliminary test:  To determine approximate range of the FTN, add 200-, 50-, 12-, and
4-mL sample portions to volumes of reference water (see Section 2150 ) designated in Table
2160:I  in separate 300-mL glass beakers to make a total of 200 mL in each b eaker, and mix
gently with clean stirrer. Use separate beaker containing only reference water for comparison.
Keep sample temperature during testing within 1°C of specified temperature. Present samples to
each taster in a uniform manner, with the reference  water presented first, followed by the most
dilute sample. If a flavor can be detected in this dilution, prepare an intermediate sample by
diluting 20 mL sample to 200 mL with reference water. Use this dilution for threshold
determination and multiply FTN  obtained by 10 to correct for intermediate dilution. In rare cases
a higher intermediate dilution may be required.
 If no flavor is detected in the most dilute sample, repeat using the next concentration.
Continue this process until flavor is detected cle arly. 
d.  FTN determination:  Based on results obtained in the preliminary test, prepare a set of
dilutions using Table 2160:II  as a  guide. Prepare the seven dilutions shown on the appropriate
line.  This array is necessary to challenge the range of sensitiviti es of  the entire panel of testers.
If the sample being tested requires more  dilution than is provided by Table 2160:II , make
intermediate  dilutions as directed in c above. 
Use a clean 50-mL beaker filled to the 25-mL level or use an  ordinary restauran t-style
drinking glass for each dilution and reference sample. Do not use glassware used in sensory
testing for  other analyses. Between tests, sanitize containers in an automatic  dishwasher
supplied with water at not less than 60°C. 
Maintain samples at 15± 1°C. However, if temperature of  water in the distribution system is
higher than 15°C, select an  appropriate temperature. Specify temperature in reporting results. 
Present series of samples to each tester in order of increasing  concentration. Pair e achStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsample with a known reference. Have  tester taste sample by taking into the mouth whatever
volume is  comfortable, moving sample throughout the mouth, holding it for  several seconds,
and discharging it without swallowing. Have  tester compare sample w ith reference and record
whether a flavor  or aftertaste is detectable. Insert two or more reference blanks in  the series
near the expected threshold, but avoid any repeated  pattern. Do not let tester know which
samples have flavor and  which are blanks.  Instruct tester to taste each sample in sequence,
beginning with the least concentrated sample, until flavor is detected with certainty. 
Record observations by indicating whether flavor is noted in  each test beaker. For example: 
mL Sample
Diluted to
200 mL 6 8 12 0 17 25 35 0 50  
Response −−−−− + +− + 
where: 
    −  signifies negative response and
    +  signifies positive response.
3.  Calculation
 The flavor threshold number is the dilution ratio at which flavor  is just detectable. In the
example above, the first detectable flavor  occurred when 25 mL sample was diluted to 200 mL
yielding a  threshold number of 8 ( Table 2160:I ). Reference blanks do not  influence calculation
of the threshold. 
The smallest FTN that can be observed is 1, where the beaker  contains 200 mL undiluted
sample. If no flavor is detected at this  con centration, report ‘‘No flavor observed’’ instead of a
threshold  number. 
Anomalous responses sometimes occur; a low concentration  may be called positive and a
higher concentration in the series  may be called negative. In such cases, designate the threshold
as  that point after which no further anomalies occur . The following  illustrates an approach to an
anomalous series (responses to reference blanks are excluded):  Response:
Increasing Concentration →
Response − +− + + + +
   ↓
Threshold
Calculate mean and standard deviation of all FTNs if the distribution is reasonably
symmetrical; otherwise, express the threshold of a group as the median or geometric mean of
individual  thresholds. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation4.  Interpretation of Results
 An FTN is not a precise value. In the case of the single observer it represents a judgment at
the time of testing. Panel results are more meaningful because individual differences have less
influence on the test result. One  or two observers can develop useful data if comparison with
larger panels has been made to check their sensitivity. Do not make comparisons of data from
time to time or place to place unless all test conditions have been standardized carefully and
there i s some basis for comparison of observed FTNs. 
5.  Bibliography
 HULBERT, R. & D. FEBEN . 1941. Studies on accuracy of threshold odor value. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  33:1945.
 SPAULDING, C.H.  1942. Accuracy and application of threshold odor test. J. Amer. Water Works
Assoc.  34:877.
 THOMAS, H.A.  1943. Calculation of threshold odor. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  35:751.
 COX, G.J. & J. W. NATHANS . 1952. A study of the taste of fluoridated water. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  44:940.
 LAUGHLIN, H.F.  1954. Palatable level with the threshold odor test. Taste Odor Control J.  20:1.
 COX, G.J., J.W. NATHANS & N. VONAU . 1955. Subthreshold-to-taste thresholds of sodium,
potassium, calcium and magnesium ions in water. J. Appl. Physiol.  8:283.
 LOCKHART, E.E., C.L. TUCKER & M.C. MERRITT . 1955. The effect of water i mpurities on the
flavor of brewed coffee. Food Res.  20:598.
 CAMPBELL, C.L., R.K. DAWES, S. DEOLALKAR & M.C. MERRITT.  1958. Effects of certain chemicals
in water on the flavor of brewed coffee. Food Res.  23:575.
 MIDDLETON, F.M., A.A. ROSEN & R.H. BRUTTSCH ELL. 1958. Taste and odor research  tools for
water utilities. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  50:231.
 SHELLENBERGER, R.D.  1958. Procedures for determining threshold odor  concentrations in
aqueous solutions. Taste Odor Control J.  24:1.
 COHEN, J.N., L.J. KAM PHAKE, E.K. HARRIS & R.L. WOODWARD.  1960. Taste threshold
concentrations of metals in drinking water. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  52:660.
 BAKER, R.A.  1961. Problems of tastes and odors. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  33:1099.
 ROSEN, A.A., J.B. PETER & F.M . MIDDLETON . 1962. Odor thresholds of mixed organic  chemicals.
J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  34:7.
 BAKER, R.A.  1962. Critical evaluation of olfactory measurement. J. Water Pollut.  Control Fed.
34:582.
 BAKER, R.A.  1963. Threshold odors of organic chemic als. J. Amer. Water Works  Assoc.  55:913.
 BAKER, R.A.  1963. Odor testing laboratory. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  35:1396.
 BAKER, R.A.  1963. Odor effects of aqueous mixtures of organic chemicals. J. Water Pollut.
Control Fed.  35:728.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation ROSEN, A.A., R.T. SKEEL & M.B. ETTINGER . 1963. Relationship of river water odor  to specific
organic contaminants. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  35:777.
 BRYAN, P.E., L.N. KUZMINSKI, F.M. SAWYER & T.H. FENG . 1973. Taste thresholds of halogens in
water. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  65:363. 
2160 C.        Flavor Rating Assessment (FRA)
1.  General Discussion
 When the purpose of the test is to estimate acceptability for daily consumption, use the
flavor rating assessment described below. This procedure has been used with samples from
public sources in laboratory research and consumer s urveys to recommend standards governing
mineral content in drinking water. Each tester is presented with a list of nine statements about
the water ranging on a scale from very favorable to very unfavorable. The tester’s task is to
select the statement that  best expresses his or her opinion. The individual rating is the scale
number of the statement selected. The panel rating for a particular sample is an appropriate
measure of central tendency of the scale numbers for all testers for that sample. 
2.  Samples
 Sample finished water ready for human consumption or use experimentally treated water if
the sanitary requirements given in Section 2160A.1  are met fully. Use taste- and odor-free water
as described in Section 2150  and  a solution of 2000 mg  NaCl/L prepared with taste- and
odor-free water as criterion samples. 
3.  Procedure
a.  Panel selection and preparation:  Give prospective testers thorough instructions and trial
or orientation sessions followed by questions and discussion of procedures. In tasting samples,
testers work alone. Select panel members on the basis of perform ance in these trial sessions. Do
not let testers know the composition or source of specific samples.
b.  Rating test:  A single rating session may be used to evaluate up to 10 samples, including
the criterion samples mentioned in ¶ 2 above. Allow at least 30 min rest between repeated rating
sessions.
 For glassware requirements, see Section 2160B2 d. 
Present samples at a temperature that the testers will find pleasant for drinking water;
maintain this temperature throughout testing. A temperature of 15°C is recommended, but in any
case, do not let the test temperature exceed tap water temperatures customa ry at the time of the
test. Specify test temperature in reporting results. 
 Independently randomize sample order for each tester. Instruct each to complete the
following steps: 1) Taste about half the sample by taking water into the mouth, holding it for
several seconds, and discharging it without swallowing; 2) Form an initial judgment on the
rating scale; 3) Make a second tasting in a similar manner; 4) Make a final rating and recordStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationresult on an appropriate data form; 5) Rinse mouth with reference water ; 6) Rest 1 min before
repeating Steps 1 through 5 on next sample. 
c.  Characterization:  If characterization of flavor also is required, conduct a final rating
session wherein each tester is asked to describe the flavor of each sample rated (see Section
2160B.2 b).
4.  Calculation
 Use the following scale for rating. Record ratings as integers ranging from one to nine, with
one given the highest quality rating. Calculate mean and standard deviation of all ratings if the
distribution is reasonably symmetrical, other wise express the most typical rating of a group as
the median or geometric mean of individual ratings. 
Action tendency scale : 
1)  I would be very happy to accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
2)  I would be happy to accept this water as my e veryday drinking water. 
3)  I am sure that I could accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
4)  I could accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
5)  Maybe I could accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
6)  I don’t think I coul d accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
7)  I could not accept this water as my everyday drinking water. 
8)  I could never drink this water. 
9)  I can’t stand this water in my mouth and I could never drink it.
5.  Interpretation of Results
 Values representing the central tendency and dispersion of quality ratings for a laboratory
panel are only estimates of these values for a defined consuming population. 
6.  Bibliography
 BRUVOLD, W.H. & R.M. PANGBORN.  1966. Rated acceptability of mineral taste in water. J. Appl.
Psychol.  50:22.
 BRUVOLD, W.H., H.J. ONGERTH & R.C. DILLEHAY.  1967. Consumer attitudes toward mineral taste
in domestic water. J. Amer. Water W orks Assoc.  59:547.
 DILLEHAY, R.C., W.H. BRUVOLD & J.P. SIEGEL.  1967. On the assessment of potability. J. Appl.
Psychol.  51:89.
 BRUVOLD, W.H.  1968. Mineral Taste in Domestic Water. Univ. California Water Resources
Center, Los Angeles.
 BRUVOLD, W.H. & H. J. ONGERTH.  1969. Taste quality of mineralized water. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  61:170.
 BRUVOLD, W.H. & W.R. GAFFEY.  1969. Rated acceptability of mineral taste in water. II:
Combinatorial effects of ions on quality and action tendency ratings. J. Appl. Psychol.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation53:317.
 DILLEHAY, R.C., W.H. BRUVOLD & J.P. SIEGEL.  1969. Attitude, object label, and stimulus factors
in response to an attitude object. J. Personal. Social Psychol.  11:220.
 BRUVOLD, W.H.  1970. Laboratory panel estimation of consumer assessment s of taste and flavor.
J. Appl Psychol.  54:326.
 PANGBORN, R.M., I.M. TRABUE & R.C. BALDWIN.  1970. Sensory examination of mineralized,
chlorinated waters. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  62:572.
 PANGBORN, R.M., I.M. TRABUE & A.C. LITTLE.  1971. Analysis of cof fee, tea and artifically
flavored drinks prepared from mineralized waters. J. Food Sci.  36:355.
 BRUVOLD, W.H. & P.C. WARD.  1971. Consumer assessment of water quality and the cost of
improvements. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  63:3.
 PANGBORN, R.M. & L.L. BE RTOLERO.  1972. Influence of temperature on taste intensity and
degree of liking of drinking water. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  64:511.
 BRUVOLD, W.H.  1975. Human perception and evaluation of water quality. Crit. Rev. Environ.
Control  5:153.
 BRUVOLD, W.H.  1976. Consumer Evaluation of the Cost and Quality of Domestic Water. Univ.
California Water Resources Center, Davis. 
2170        FLAVOR PROFILE ANALYSIS* #(24)
2170  A.        Introduction
1.  Discussion
 Flavor profile analysis (FPA) is a technique for identifying sample taste(s) and odor(s). For
general information on taste see Section 2160 ; for information on odor see Section 2150 . 
FPA differs from threshold odor number because the sam ple is not diluted and each taste or
odor attribute is individually characterized a nd assigned its own intensity rating. The single
numerical rating obtained in measuring threshold odor is controlled by the most readily
perceived odorant or mixture. Sample  dilution may change the odor attribute that is measured.1,2
FPA determines the strength or intensity of each perceived taste or odor without dilution or
treatment of the sample. 
2.  References
         1.    MALLEVIALLE, J. & I.H. SUFFET , eds. 1987. Identification and Treatment of Tastes and
Odors in Drinking Water. American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.
         2.    BRUCHET, A., D. KHIARI & I. SUFFET.  1995. Monitoring and analysis. In I. Suffet, J.
Mallevialle & E. Kawczynski, eds. Advances in Taste and Odor Treatment and
Control. American Water Works Assoc. Research Foundation & Lyonnaise des Eaux,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDenver, Colo.
2170  B.        Flavor Profile Analysis
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Flavor profile analysis uses a group of four or five trained panelists to examine
the sensory characteristics of samples. Flavor attributes are determined by tasting; odor attributes
(aroma) are determined by sniffing the sample. The metho d allows more than one flavor, odor
attribute, or feeling factor (e.g., drying, burning) to be determined per sample and each
attribute’s strength to be measured.
 Panelists must be able to detect and recognize various odors present. Flavor profile analysi s
requires well-trained panelists and data interpreters. Reproducibility of results depends on the
training and experience of the panelists. 
Initially, panelists record their perceptions without discussion. Once each individual has
made an independent ass essment of a sample, the panel discusses its findings and reaches a
consensus.1 
b.  Interference:  Fatigue (adaptation) denotes the decrease in the analyst’s sensory acuity
with continued exposure to stimulation.1 Because odor mixtures are more complex than taste
mixtures, olfactory adaptation is more serious.2 Factors that can induc e fatigue include odor
intensity, type of odorants (some compounds such as geosmin and chlorine induce more fatigue
than others), number of samples tested during a session, and rest interval between samples.1 The
rest interval also is important because it prevents carryover of odors between samples.
 Background odors present during analysis affect results. Analyst illness, i.e., cold or allergy,
can diminish or otherwise alter perception. 
c.  Application:  Flavor profile analysis has been applied to drinking water sources, finished
drinking water, sampling points within the drinking water treatment train, and bottled waters,
and for investigating customer complaints.
d.  Precautions:  Some compounds are health hazards when inhaled or ingested. Do not use
this method for industrial wastes or other sample s suspected of containing high concentrations of
hazardous compounds. Chemically analyze suspect samples to determine  whether hazardous
chemicals are present before making flavor prof ile analysis. Do not taste untreated drinking
water unless it is certain that no health threat (biological or chemical) exists.
 Because flavor profile analysis includes discussion during wh ich panelists reach consensus
description, avoid including on the panel a person with a dominating personality.3 The opinions
of a senior member or panel leader also may have this undesired effect.3 
2.  Apparatus4-8 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationReserve apparatus and glassware exclusively for flavor profile analysis. Prepare sample
bottles by washing bottle and cap with detergent. Rinse 10 times with hot water. Optionally rinse
with HCl (1:1). Rinse with odor-free water (see 21 50B.3) at least three times. If there is residual
odor, such as chalky, repeat cleaning. 
Prepare 500-mL erlenmeyer flasks by either of the two methods described below provided
that it imparts no odor to the sample. Make tests with freshly cleaned containe rs. 
1)  Without wearing rubber gloves wash flask with soapy water. Additionally, scrub outside
of flask with scouring pad to remove body oils. Rinse 10 times with hot water and 3 times with
odor-free water. To store flask add 100 to 200 mL odor-free water an d stopper. Before use, rinse
with 100 mL odor-free water. If there is residual odor, repeat cleaning. 
2)  Do not handle with rubber gloves. Before use, heat 200 mL odor-free water to boiling;
lightly lay stopper over flask opening, permitting water vapor to escape. Discard boiled water
and let flask cool to room temperature. If there is residual odor rep eat or use cleaning alternative
1). After analyzing a sample, discard sample, rinse 10 times with hot tap water, add 200 mL
odor-free water, stopper, and store. 
For flasks with persistent odor use commercial cleaning mixture* #(25)  or HCl (1:1). 
a.  Sample bottles:  Glass, 1-L, with TFE-lined closure.
b.  Containers for odor analysis:4 Select container for odor analysis depending on panelists’
preference, temperature of sample, and availability of container.
1)  Panel preference4-8—Plastic cups, 7- or 8-ounce disposable, are convenient. Some panels
have found that these plastic cups impart a plastic and/or floral aroma to samples. They prefer
500-mL erlenmeyer flasks with ST32 ground-glass stoppers. The pane l should determine the
acceptable, odor-free, test container. 
2)  Temperature4—If aroma samples are tested at 45°C, do not use plastic. If aroma samples
are tested at 25°C, use the same plastic cup and sample for both aroma and flavor analysis. 
3)  Availability4—Containers must be consistently available because the panel responses
may change when different containers are used. 
c.  Containers for flavor analysis:4 Use either plastic disposable, e.g., polyethylene,† #(26)  or
glass containers. Do not use wax- lined or paper cups. If using glass containers verify that they
contribute no taste to the sample. Wash glass containers as dire cted above.
d.  Watch glasses.
e.  Constant-temperature water bath  capable of maintaining a temperature ± 1°C. The bath
must not contribute any odor to the odor flasks or testing room.
f.  Thermometer,  graduated 0 to 110°C, chemical or metal-stem dial type.
g.  Syringes.
h. Ice chest .
i. Odor-free testing room:3,5 Hold flavor profile analysis sessions in a clean, well-lit quiet,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationaroma-free, and temperature-controlled room. Seat panel members around a common table to
facilitate exchange of responses during discussion. Place a blackboar d or easel pad in the room
so that all panelists are able to see it. Preferab ly use an easel pad with odor-free markers (such as
a wax, china marker).
j.  Refrigerator  capable of maintaining a temperature of 4°C. 
3.  Reagents
a.  Odor-free water:  See Section 2150B.3 .
b.  Crackers:  Use salt- and flavor-free crackers‡ #(27)  to cleanse the palate during taste
testing. Before tasting anything, use the crackers and taste-free water to cleanse the palate. Use
crackers between samples to reduce carryover of perceptions.
c.  Odor and flavor standards:  Odor and flavor reference standards are being developed for
use as a guide for qualitative descriptions (attributes). Aroma reference standards help panelists
come to agreement on the description of specific aromas.4-11 Table 2170:I , Table 2170:II , and
Table 2170:III  list some of the aroma references in use. New references are being added
continually. A taste and odor wheel has been developed from these lists.2 For odor identification
and training, place several drops of st ock solutions (producing moderately strong odors) onto
sterile cotton in 25-mL amber-colored vials with TFE-lined caps. Standards can be stored until
odor changes.
d.  Taste standards:  Chemicals used for taste standards are sucrose (sweet), citric acid (sour),
sodium chloride (salt), and caffeine (bitter). Table 2170:IV  lists the chemicals used and their
concentrations for basic taste standards at ‘‘slight,’’ ‘‘mod erate,’’ and ‘‘strong’’ levels.4,5 The
taste standards provide reference points for both taste and odor intensity ratings. The panelists
compare the intensity of what they are smelling or tasting to the intensity of the standards they
have tasted. Make tas te standards available during panel training. Because the tastes from all but
the sweet standard tend to overpower any subsequent tasting, use only the sweet taste standard
during actual sample analysis. If the panel meets as seldom as once a week, make sw eet
standards available so that panelists can ‘‘recalibrate’’ themselves. Panels that meet more than
once a week may not need to ‘‘recalibrate.’’ Make standards fresh each time they are used.4
4.  Scale
 The strength of a taste or odor is judged according to the following scale: 
—     (odor-free) 
 T      (threshold) 
  2     (very weak) 
  4     (weak) 
  6     
  8     (moderate) Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation10     
12     (strong) 
5.  Procedure
a.  Sample collection:  Collect sample in cleaned container. When sampling from a tap,
remove all screens and aerators, minimize turbulence. Flush tap at least 5 min. Reduce flow rate
during sampling. Rinse bottle with sample, then fill it to the top, wit h no headspace. Chill or
refrigerate sample immediately and analyze as soon after collection as possible, preferably
within 24 h, but no longer than 48 h.
b.  Sample preparation:4 Pour samples into properly prepared glassware or acceptable
disposable containers. Analyze samples at the same temperature. Adjust sample temperatures by
placing samples in a water bath 15 min before analysis. Prepare a sample fo r each panelist.
Examine odor samples before flavor samples.
1)  Odor analysis—When using 500-mL erlenmeyer flasks for odor analysis, place 200 mL
sample in the flask. Make transfer carefully to avoid loss of volatile components. When plastic
cups are used, place 60 mL sample in cup and cover it with a watch glass . 
2)  Taste analysis—Bring sample to 25°C befo re pouring into containers for tasting. Cover
with a watch glass if samples are not tasted immediately. If samples are tested at 25°C for odor,
use the same sample for flavor analysis. 
c.  Panelists:  Carefully screen and train panelists.8
d.  Pre-test considerations:  Notify panelists well in advance of panel session so a substitute
can be found if necessary. Panelists who have colds or allergic attacks the day of the panel are
unacceptable; they should ask the panel coordinator to find a substitute. Panelists must not
smoke or eat for 15 to 30 min before the sessi on. Wearing cologne or perfume or washing hands
with scented soap before the session is not permitted.
e.  Sample analysis:  The panel consists of four or five members. If fewer than four panelists
are available, store the sample until a full panel can meet.
 1)  Odor analysis—Heat samples to proper temperature. If erlenmeyer flasks are used,
sample temper ature is 45°C. If plastic cups are used, sample temperature is 25°C. Give each
panelist his/her own sample. If a flask is used, hold it with one hand on the bottom and the other
on the stopper. Do not touch flask neck. Gently swirl (do not shake) flask in a circular manner to
ensure that volatile compounds are released into the headspace. Bring flask close to nose,
remove stopper, and sniff at the flask opening. Reco rd impressions of odor attributes in the order
perceived and the assessment of each attribut e’s intensity. If a cup is used, gently swirl on the
table top for a few seconds. Remove watchglass, and keeping hands away from the cup, sniff
sample and record perceptions. CAUTION:  Sniff samples only if they are known to be
toxicologically safe.  For bot h the flask and the plastic cup method, smell all samples before
going on to the taste test. Do not discuss or interact with other panelists. 
2)  Taste analysis—When tasting, take sample into the mouth and roll it over the entireStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsurface of the tongue. Slurping enhances the odor aspect of flavor. CAUTION : Taste only samples
known to be biologically and toxicologically safe . Do not discuss or i nteract with other panelists. 
3)  Intensity—In both taste and odor analysis, each panelist determines intensity ratings by
matching intensity of the flavor or aroma perceived with the defined intensities of the basic taste
standards. Initially this may be difficult. Some panels have found it helpful to make basic taste
standards available throughout the analysis so that any panelist who wishes to ‘‘recalibrate’’ may
do so. 
4)  Re-examination of samples—First impressions are most important, particularly for
intensity. The intensity rating may diminish upon re-examination because of fatigue and
volatility of the odorant. However, if an aroma or flavor is difficult for a pane list to describe, the
panelist may go back and re-evaluate the sample before recording the results. 
5)  Individual results—As soon as a sample is tasted or smelled, record individual results.
Information recorded includes a description of ar omas or flavors perceived, their intensity, and
the order in which they were perceived. 
6)  Rest interval—Sniff odor-free water and rest at least 2 min between samples. Fatigue is a
problem1 that can be dealt with. When samples are expected to cause fatigue, the panel leader
can increase the rest interval and limit the number of samples pre sented. The leader also may try
to arrange samples such that samples known to be fatiguing are placed near the end of the sample
row. Avoid juxtaposition of such samples. Also, use taste- and odor-free blanks between
samples. Five to six samples per sessio n is the maximum. 
7)  Discussion—When all panelists have had an opportunity to examine the sample, hold a
discussion period. Each panelist’s impression of the sample is stated and the panel leader records
it to be seen by everyone. By examining the order of appearance, in tensity, and description, the
panel leader attempts to group responses together, soliciting comments from the panel members
as to whether or not they agree. Sometimes panelists detect an aroma that they cannot describe;
in the discussion they may see what another panelist called it and decide to agree with that
description. With inexperienced panels, several different descriptors may be used for the same
aroma. As the panel gains more experience, these differences tend to be reconciled. It is the
responsibi lity of the panel leader to ensure that the panelists are provided with standards that
duplicate the sample aromas. Descriptions that fewer than 50% of the panelists use are called
‘‘other notes’’ and are listed separately or are not included in the group results. 
8)  Recording panel results—Record the following: sample description; time of sampling;
identity of panel member; flavor, aroma, and feeling factor descriptions; intensity rating; order of
perception; range and average for each descriptor. 
6.  Calculation and Interpretation1 
In early testing intensity was used to describe the strength of an odor in an ordinal scale from
slight to strong.12 If an odor was recognized, then it had an intensity. The rating scale has been
modified to use numbe rs corresponding to the ordinal categories. Points (other than threshold) onStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe scale can be anchored by the use of taste standards. Thus a certain concentration of a taste
standard is defined as a certain point on the rating scale and numerical ratings f or nonthreshold
intensities are anchored. Threshold ratings are not defined by any standards. Their meaning is
different from that of the other ratings and they are difficult to manipulate mathematically. 
Calculate averages if at least 50% of the panelist s agree on a given description. If a panelist
does not give that description, assign an intensity value of zero. For example: 
Description PanelistIntensity
IIIIII IV Average
Musty 2 4022.0
Chlorinous 2 4443.5
7.  Quality Control12 
Use odor-free samples and duplicates occasionally. The odor-free sample serves to detect
guessing. Duplicates check reproducibility. A standard concentration of an odor reference
standard in odor-free water also can be used to chec k odor recognition and reproducibility of the
intensity scale. 
Use counterbalancing of samples so that each panelist receives the samples in a different
order. This prevents error due to order effects such as fatigue, carryover, and expectation. 
8.  Precision and Bias
 Initial studies of precision and bias have been completed.12,13 An odor recognition and
reproducibility study by untrained panelists has rated some of the odors of Table 2170:I , Table
2170:II , and  Table 2170:III  as poor, fair, go od, or excellent.13 
9.  References
         1.    SUFFET, I.H., B.M. BRADY, J.H.M. BAR TELS, G.A. BURLINGAME, J. MALLEVIALLE & T.
YOHE . 1988. Development of the flavor profile analysis method into a standard method
for sensory analysis of water. Water Sci. Technol.  20:1.
         2.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1968. Basic Principles of Sensory
Evaluation. ASTM Spec. Tech. Publ. 433, American Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
         3.    MEILGAARD , M.C. 1988. Sensory evaluation techniques applied to waterworks
sampl es. Water Qual. Bull.  13(2-3):39. WHO Collaborating Centre on Surface and
Groundwater Quality, Burlington, Ont., Canada.
         4.    BARTELS, J.H.M., B.M. BRADY & I.H. SUFFET . 1989. Appendix B in Taste and Odor in
Drinking Water Supplies—Phases I and II. Ameri can Water Works Assoc. Research
Foundation, Denver, Colo.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         5.    KRASNER, S.W., M.J. MCGUIRE & V.B. FERGUSON . 1985. Tastes and odors: the flavor
profile method. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  77:34.
         6.    BARTELS, J.H.M., B.M. BRADY & I.H. SUFFET . 1989. Ap pendix A i n Taste and Odor in
Drinking Water Supplies—Phases I and II. American Water Works Assoc. Research
Foundation, Denver, Colo.
         7.    MALLEVIALLE, J. & I.H. SUFFET , eds. 1981. Identification and Treatment of Tastes and
Odors in Drinking Water. Appe ndix A. American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.
         8.    BARTELS, J.H.M., B.M. BRADY & I.H. SUFFET . 1987. Training panelists for the flavor
profile analysis method. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  79:26.
         9.    SUFFET, I.H., J. HO, D. CHIOU, D. KHIARI & J. MALLEVIALLE.  1995. Taste-and-odor
problems observed during drinking water treatment. In I.H. Suffet, J. Mallevialle & E.
Kawczynski, eds. Advances in Taste and Odor Treatment and Control. American
Water Works Assoc. Research Foundation & Lyonnaise des Eaux , Denver, Colo.
       10.    CAUL, J.F . 1957. The profile method of flavor analysis. In Advances in Food Research,
Vol. 7. Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
       11.    BURLINGAME, G.A., D. KHIARI & I.H. SUFFET.  1991. Odor reference standards: The
universal language . Proc. AWWA Water Quality Technology Conf., Miami, Fla., p. 7.
       12.    MENG, A. & I.H. SUFFET.  1992. Assessing the quality of flavor profile analysis data. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  84:89.
       13.    KRASNER, S.W.  1995. The use of reference materials in sensory analysis. Water Sci.
Technol.  31(11):265.
10.  Bibliography
 AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION.  1993. Flavor Profile Analysis: Screening and
Training of Panelists. AWWA Manual. American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.
2310        ACIDITY* #(28)
2310  A.        Introduction
 Acidity of a water is its quantitative capacity to react with a strong base to a designated pH.
The measured value may vary significantly with the end-point pH used in the determination.
Acidity is a measure of an aggregate property of water and can be interpreted in terms of specific
substances only when the chemcical composition of the sample is known. Strong mineral acids,
weak acids such as carbonic and acetic, and hydrolyzing salts such as iron or aluminum sulfates
may c ontribute to the measured acidity according to the method of determination. 
Acids contribute to corrosiveness and influence chemical reaction rates, chemical speciation,
and biological processes. The measurement also reflects a change in the quality of th e sourceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwater. 
2310  B.        Titration Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Hydrogen ions present in a sample as a result of dissociation or hydrolysis of
solutes react with additions of standard alkali. Acidity thus depends on the end-point pH or
indicator used. The construction of a titration curve by recording s ample pH after successive
small measured additions of titrant permits identification of inflection points and buffering
capacity, if any, and allows the acidity to be de termined with respect to any pH of interest.
 In the titration of a single acidic speci es, as in the standardization of reagents, the most
accurate end point is obtained from the inflecti on point of a titration curve. The inflection point
is the pH at which curvature changes from convex to concave or vice versa. 
Because accurate identificat ion of inflection points may be difficult or impossible in buffered
or complex mixtures, the titration in such cases is carried to an arbitrary end-point pH based on
practical considerations. For routine control titrations or rapid preliminary estimates of  acidity,
the color change of an indicator may be used for the end point. Samples of industrial wastes, acid
mine drainage, or other solutions that contai n appreciable amounts of hydrolyzable metal ions
such as iron, aluminum, or manganese are treated with  hydrogen peroxide to ensure oxidation of
any reduced forms of polyvalent cations, and boiled to hasten hydrolysis. Acidity results may be
highly variable if this procedure is not followed exactly. 
b. End points:  Ideally the end point of the acidity titration should correspond to the
stoichiometric equivalence point for neutralizati on of acids present. The pH at the equivalence
point will depend on the sample, the choice among multiple inflection p oints, and the intended
use of the data.
 Dissolved carbon dioxide (CO2) usually is the major acidic component of unpolluted surface
waters; handle samples from such sources carefully to minimize the loss of dissolved gases. In a
sample containing only car bon dioxide-bicarbonates-carbonates, titration to pH 8.3 at 25°C
corresponds to stoichiometric neutralization of carbonic acid to bicarbonate. Because the color
change of phenolphthalein indicator is close to pH 8.3, this value generally is accepted as a
standard end point for titration of total acidity, including CO2 and most weak acids. Metacresol
purple also has an end point at pH 8.3 and gives a sharper color change. 
For more complex mixtures or buffered soluti ons selection of an inflection point may b e
subjective. Consequently, use fixed end points of pH 3.7 and pH 8.3 for standard acidity
determinations via a potentiometric titration in wastewaters and natural waters where the simple
carbonate equilibria discussed above cannot be assumed. Bromphenol b lue has a sharp color
change at its end point of 3.7. The resulting titrations are identified, traditionally, as ‘‘methyl
orange acidity’’ (pH 3.7) and ‘‘phenolphthalein’’ or total acidity (pH 8.3) regardless of the
actual method of measurement. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc. Interferences:  Dissolved gases contributing to acidity or alkalinity, such as CO2, hydrogen
sulfide, or ammonia, may be lost or gained during sampling, storage, or titration. Minimize such
effects by titrating to the end point promptly after opening s ample container, avoiding vigorous
shaking or mixing, protecting sample from the atmosphere during titration, and letting sample
become no warmer than it was at collection.
 In the potentiometric titration, oily matter, suspended solids, precipitates, or o ther waste
matter may coat the glass electrode and cause a sluggish response. Difficulty from this source is
likely to be revealed in an erratic titration curve. Do not remove interferences from sample
because they may contribute to its acidity. Briefly pa use between titrant additions to let electrode
come to equilibrium or clean the electrodes occasionally. 
In samples containing oxidizable or hydrolyzable ions such as ferrous or ferric iron,
aluminum, and manganese, the reaction rates at room temperature may be slow enough to cause
drifting end points. 
Do not use indicator titrations with colored or turbid samples that may obscure the color
change at the end point. Residual free available chlorine in the sample may bleach the indicator.
Eliminate this sou rce of interference by adding 1 drop of 0.1 M sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3). 
d. Selection of procedure:  Determine sample acidity from the volume of standard alkali
required to titrate a portion to a pH of 8.3 (phenolphthalein acidity) or pH 3.7 (methyl orange
acidity of wastewaters and grossly polluted waters). Titrate at room te mperature using a properly
calibrated pH meter, electrically operated titrator, or color indicators.
 Use the hot peroxide procedure (¶ 4a) to pretreat samples known or suspected to contain
hydrolyzable metal ions or reduced forms of polyvalent cation, suc h as iron pickle liquors, acid
mine drainage, and other industrial wastes. 
Color indicators may be used for routine and control titrations in the absence of interfering
color and turbidity and for preliminary titrations to select sample size and strength of titrant (¶
4b). 
e. Sample size:  The range of acidities found in wastewaters is so large that a single sample
size and normality of base used as titrant cannot be specified. Use a sufficiently large volume of
titrant (20 mL or more from a 50-mL buret) to obtain relativel y good volumetric precision while
keeping sample volume sufficiently small to permit sharp end points. For samples having
acidities less than about 1000 mg as calcium carbonate (CaCO3)/L, select a volume with less
than 50 mg CaCO3 equivalent acidity and ti trate with 0.02 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH). For
acidities greater than about 1000 mg as CaCO3/L, use a portion containing acidity equivalent to
less than 250 mg CaCO3 and titrate with 0.1 N NaOH. If necessary, make a preliminary titration
to determine optimum  sample size and/or normality of titrant.
f. Sampling and storage:  Collect samples in polyethylene or borosilicate glass bottles and
store at a low temperature. Fill bottles completely and cap tightly. Because waste samples may
be subject to microbial action and to loss or gain of CO2 or other g ases when exposed to air,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationanalyze samples without delay, preferably within 1 d. If biological activity is suspected analyze
within 6 h. Avoid sample agitation and prolonged exposure to air.
2.  Apparatus
a. Electrometric titrator:  Use any commercial pH meter or electrically operated titrator that
uses a glass electrode and can be read to 0.05 pH unit. Standardize and calibrate according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Pay special attention to   tempe rature compensation and electrode
care. If automatic temperature compensation is not provided, titrate at 25 ± 5°C.
b. Titration vessel:  The size and form will depend on the electrodes and the sample size.
Keep the free space above the sample as small as practicable, but allow room for titrant and full
immersion of the indicating portions of electrodes. For convention al-sized electrodes, use a
200-mL, tall-form Berzelius beaker without a spout. Fit beaker with a stopper having three holes,
to accommodate the two electrodes and the buret. With a miniature combination glass-reference
electrode use a 125-mL or 250-mL erle nmeyer flask with a two-hole stopper.
c. Magnetic stirrer.
d. Pipets,  volumetric.
e. Flasks,  volumetric, 1000-, 200-, 100-mL.
f. Burets,  borosilicate glass, 50-, 25-, 10-mL.
g. Polyolefin bottle , 1-L.
3.  Reagents
a. Carbon dioxide-free water:  Prepare all stock and standard solutions and dilution water for
the standardization procedure with distilled or deionized water that has been freshly boiled for
15 min and cooled to room temperature. The final pH of the wate r should be ≥ 6.0 and its
conductivity should be <2 µmhos/cm.
b. Potassium hydrogen phthalate solution,  approximately 0.05 N: Crush 15 to 20 g primary
standard KHC8H4O4 to about 100 mesh and dry at 120°C for 2 h. Cool in a desiccator. Weigh
10.0 ± 0.5 g (to the nearest mg), transfer to a 1-L volumetric flask, and di lute to 1000 mL.
c. Standard sodium hydroxide titrant,  0.1N: Prepare solution approximately 0.1 N as
indicated under Preparation of Desk Reagents (see inside front cover). Standardize by titrating
40.00 mL KHC8H4O4 solution (¶ 3b), using a 25-mL buret. Titrate to the infl ection point (¶ 1a),
which should be close to pH 8.7. Calculate normality of NaOH:
 
where: 
                  A =   g KHC8H4O4 weighed into 1-L flask, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                  B =   mL KHC8H4O4 solution taken for titration, and 
                  C =   mL NaOH solution used. 
Use the measured normality in furthe r calculations or adjust to 0.1000 N; 1 mL = 5.00 mg
CaCO3. 
d. Standard sodium hydroxide titrant,  0.02 N: Dilute 200 mL 0.1 N NaOH to 1000 mL and
store in a polyolefin bottle protected from atmospheric CO2 by a soda lime tube or tight cap.
Standardize against KHC8H4O4 as directed in ¶ 3c, using 15.00 mL KHC8H4O4 solution and a
50-mL buret. Calculate normality as above (¶ 3c); 1 mL = 1.00 mg CaCO3.
e. Hydrogen peroxide,  H2O2, 30%.
f. Bromphenol blue indicator solution,  pH 3.7 indicator: Dissolve 100 mg bromphenol blue,
sodium salt, in 100 mL water.
g. Metacresol purple indicator solution,  pH 8.3 indicator: Dissolve 100 mg metacresol
purple in 100 mL water.
h. Phenolphthalein indicator solution, alcoholic,  pH 8.3 indicator.
i. Sodium thiosulfate,  0.1M: Dissolve 25 g Na2S2O3⋅5H2O and dilute to 1000 mL with
distilled water.
4. Procedure
 If sample is free from hydrolyzable metal ions and reduced forms of polyvalent cations,
proceed with analysis according to b, c, or d. If sample is known or suspected to contain such
substances, pretreat according to a. 
a. Hot peroxide treatment:  Pipet a suitable sample (see ¶ 1e) into titration flasks. Measure
pH. If pH is above 4.0 add 5-mL increments of 0.02 N sulfuric acid (H2SO4) (Section 2320B.3 c)
to reduce pH to 4 or less. Remove electrodes. Add 5 drops 30% H2O2 and boil for 2 to 5 min.
Cool to room temperature and titrate with standard alkali to pH 8.3 according to the procedure of
4d.
b. Color change:  Select sample size and normality of titrant according to criteria of ¶ 1e.
Adjust sample to room temperature, if necessary, and with a pipet discharge sample into an
erlenmeyer flask, while keeping pipet tip near flask bottom. If free re sidual chlorine is present
add 0.05 mL (1 drop) 0.1 M Na2S2O3 solution, or destroy with ultraviolet radiation. Add 0.2 mL
(5 drops) indicator solution and titrate over a white surface to a persistent color change
characteristic of the equivalence point. Com mercial indicator solutions or solids designated for
the appropriate pH range (3.7 or 8.3) may be used. Check color at end point by adding the same
concentration of indicator used with sample to a buffer solution at the designated pH.
c. Potentiometric titration curve:
1) Rinse electrodes and titration vessel with distilled water and drain. Select sample size andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationnormality of titrant according to the criteria of ¶ 1e. Adjust sample to room temperature, if
necessary, and with a pipet discharge sample while keeping pipet  tip near the titration vessel
bottom. 
2) Measure sample pH. Add standard alkali in increments of 0.5 mL or less, such that a
change of less than 0.2 pH units occurs per increment. After each addition, mix thoroughly but
gently with a magnetic stirrer. Avoid splashing. Record pH when a consta nt reading is obtained.
Continue adding titrant and measure pH until pH 9 is reached. Construct the titration curve by
plotting observed pH values versus cumulative milliliters titrant added. A smooth curve showing
one or more inflections should be obtaine d. A ragged or erratic curve may indicate that
equilibrium was not reached between successive alkali additions. Determine acidity relative to a
particular pH from the curve. 
d. Potentiometric titration to pH 3.7 or 8.3:  Prepare sample and titration assembly as
specified in ¶ 4c1). Titrate to preselected end-point pH (¶ 1d) without recording intermediate pH
values. As the end point is approached make smaller additions of alka li and be sure that pH
equilibrium is reached before making the next addition.
5.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   mL NaOH titrant used, 
                  B =   normality of NaOH, 
                  C =   mL H2SO4 used (¶ 4a), and 
                  D =   normality of H2SO4. 
Report pH of the end point used, as follows: ‘‘The acidity to pH _______ = _______ mg
CaCO3/L.’’ If a negative value is obtained, report the value as negative. The absolute value of
this negative value should be equivalent to the net alkalinity. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 No general statement can be made about precision because of the great variation in sample
characteristics. The precision of   the titration is likely to be much greater than the uncertainties
involved in sampling and sample handli ng before analysis. 
Forty analysts in 17 laboratories analyzed synthetic water samples containing increments of
bicarbonate equivalent to 20 mg CaCO3/L. Titration according to the procedure of ¶ 4d gave a
standard deviation of 1.8 mg CaCO3/L, with negligi ble bias. Five laboratories analyzed twoStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsamples containing sulfuric, acetic, and formic aci ds and aluminum chloride by the procedures of
¶s 4b and 4d. The mean acidity of one sample (to pH 3.7) was 487 mg CaCO3/L, with a standard
deviation of 11 mg/L. The  bromphenol blue titration of the same sample was 90 mg/L greater,
with a standard deviation of 110 mg/L. The other sample had a potentiometric titration of 547
mg/L, with a standard deviation of 54 mg/L, while the corresponding indicator result was 85
mg/L greater, with a standard deviation of 56 mg/L. The major difference between the samples
was the substitution of ferric ammonium citrate, in the second sample, for part of the aluminum
chloride. 
7.  Bibliography
 WINTER, J.A. & M.R. MIDGETT.  1969. FWPCA Method Study 1. Mineral and Physical Analyses.
Federal Water Pollution Control Admin., Washington, D.C.
 BROWN, E., M.W. SKOUGSTAD & M.J. FISHMAN.  1970. Methods for collection and analysis of
water samples for dissolved minerals and gases. Chapter A1 in Book 5, Techniques of
Water-Resources Investigations of United States  Geological Survey. U.S. Geological Survey,
Washington, D.C.
 SNOEYINK, V.L. & D. JENKINS.  1980. Water Chemistry. John Wiley & S ons, New York, N.Y. 
2320        ALKALINITY* #(29)
2320  A.        Introduction
1.  Discussion
 Alkalinity of a water is its acid-neutralizing capacity. It is the sum of all the titratable bases.
The measured value may vary significantly with the end-point pH used. Alkalinity is a measure
of an aggregate property of water and can be  interpreted in terms of specific substances only
when the chemical composition of the sample is known. 
Alkalinity is significant in many uses and treatments of natural waters and wastewaters.
Because the alkalinity of many surface waters is primarily a f unction of carbonate, bicarbonate,
and hydroxide content, it is taken as an indication of the concentration of these constitutents. The
measured values also may include contributions from borates, phosphates, silicates, or other
bases if these are present.  Alkalinity in excess of alkaline earth metal concentrations is
significant in determining the suitability of a water for irrigation. Alkalinity measurements are
used in the interpretation and control of water and wastewater treatment processes. Raw
domest ic wastewater has an alkalinity less than, or only slightly greater than, that of the water
supply. Properly operating anaerobic digesters typically have supernatant alkalinities in the
range of 2000 to 4000 mg calcium carbonate (CaCO3)/L.1 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Reference
         1.    POHLAND, F.G. & D.E. BLOODGOOD. 1963. Laboratory studies on mesophilic and
thermophilic anaerobic sludge digestion. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  35:11.
2320  B.        Titration Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Hydroxyl ions present in a sample as a result of dissociation or hydrolysis of
solutes react with additions of standard acid. Alkalinity thus depends on the end-point pH used.
For methods of determining inflection points from titration curv es and the rationale for titrating
to fixed pH end points, see Section 2310B.1 a.
 For samples of low alkalinity (less than 20 mg CaCO3/L) use an extrapolation technique
based on the near proportionality of concentration of hydrogen ions to excess of titran t beyond
the equivalence point. The amount of standard acid required to reduce pH exactly 0.30 pH unit is
measured carefully. Because this change in pH corresponds to an exact doubling of the hydrogen
ion concentration, a simple extrapolation can be made t o the equivalence point.1,2 
b. End points:  When alkalinity is due entirely to carbonate or bicarbonate content, the pH at
the equivalence point of the titration is determined by the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2)
at that stage. CO2 concentration depends, in turn, on the tota l carbonate species originally
present and any losses that may have occurred during titration. The pH values in Table 2320:I
are suggested as the equivalence points for the corresponding alkalinity concentrations as
milligrams CaCO3 per liter. ‘‘Phenolphth alein alkalinity’’ is the term traditionally used for the
quantity measured by titration to pH 8.3 irrespective of the colored indicator, if any, used in the
determination. Phenolphthalein or metacresol purple may be used for alkalinity titration to pH
8.3. Bromcresol green or a mixed bromcresol green -methyl red indicator may be used for pH 4.5.
 c. Interferences:  Soaps, oily matter, suspended solids, or precipitates may coat the glass
electrode and cause a sluggish response. Allow additional time between t itrant additions to let
electrode come to equilibrium or clean the electrodes occasionally. Do not filter, dilute,
concentrate, or alter sample. 
d. Selection of procedure:  Determine sample alkalinity from volume of standard acid
required to titrate a portion to a designated pH taken from ¶ 1b. Titrate at room temperature with
a properly calibrated pH meter or electrically operated titrator, or us e color indicators. If using
color indicators, prepare and titrate an indicator blank.
 Report alkalinity less than 20 mg CaCO3/L only if it has been determined by the
low-alkalinity method of ¶ 4d. 
Construct a titration curve for standardization of reage nts. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationColor indicators may be used for routine and control titrations in the absence of interfering
color and turbidity and for preliminary titrations to select sample size and strength of titrant (see
below). 
e. Sample size:  See Section 2310B.1 e for selection of size sample to be titrated and normality
of titrant, substituting 0.02 N or 0.1 N sulfuric (H2SO4) or hydrochloric (HCl) acid for the
standard alkali of that method. For the low-alkalinity method, titra te a 200-mL sample with
0.02N H2SO4 from a 10-mL buret.
f. Sampling and storage:  See Section 2310B.1  f.
2.  Apparatus
 See Section 2310B.2 . 
3.  Reagents
a. Sodium carbonate solution,  approximately 0.05 N: Dry 3 to 5 g primary standard Na2CO3
at 250°C for 4 h and cool in a desiccator. Weigh 2.5 ± 0.2 g (to the nearest mg), transfer to a 1-L
volumetric flask, fill flask to the mark with distilled water, and  dissolve and mix reagent. Do not
keep longer than 1 week.
b. Standard sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acid,  0.1N: Prepare acid solution of approximate
normality as indicated under Preparation of Desk Reagents. Standardize against 40.00 mL 0.05 N
Na2CO3 solution, with about 60 mL water, in a beaker by titrating pot entiometrically to pH of
about 5. Lift out electrodes, rinse into the same beaker, and boil gently for 3 to 5 min under a
watch glass cover. Cool to room temperature, rinse cover glass into beaker, and finish titrating to
the pH inflection point. Calculate  normality:
 
where: 
                  A =   g Na2CO3 weighed into 1-L flask, 
                  B =   mL Na2CO3 solution taken for titration, and 
                  C =   mL acid used. 
Use measured normality in calculations or adjust to 0.1000 N; 1 mL 0.1000 N solution = 5.00 mg
CaCO3. 
c. Standard sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acid, 0.02N: Dilute 200.00 mL 0.1000 N standard
acid to 1000 mL with distilled or deionized water. Standardize by potentiometric titration ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation15.00 mL 0.05 N Na2CO3 according to the procedure of ¶ 3b; 1 mL = 1.00 m g CaCO3.
d. Bromcresol green indicator solution,  pH 4.5 indicator: Dissolve 100 mg bromcresol green,
sodium salt, in 100 mL distilled water.
e. Mixed bromcresol green-methyl red indicator solution:3 Use either the aqueous or the
alcoholic solution:
1) Dissolve 100 mg bromcresol green sodium salt and 20 mg methyl red sodium salt in 100
mL distilled water. 
2) Dissolve 100 mg bromcresol green and 20 mg  methyl red in 100 mL 95% ethyl alcohol or
isopropyl alcohol. 
f. Metacresol purple indicator solution,  pH 8.3 indicator: Dissolve 100 mg metacresol purple
in 100 mL water.
g. Phenolphthalein solution, alcoholic,  pH 8.3 indicator.
h. Sodium thiosulfate,  0.1N: See Section 2310B.3 i.
4.  Procedure
a. Color change:  See Section 2310B.4 b.
b. Potentiometric titration curve:  Follow the procedure for determining acidity ( Section
2310B.4 c), substituting the appropriate normality of standard acid solution for standard NaOH,
and continue titration to pH 4.5 or lower. Do not filter, dilute, conc entrate, or alter the sample.
c. Potentiometric titration to preselected pH:  Determine the appropriate end-point pH
according to ¶ 1b. Prepare sample and titration assembly ( Section 2310B.4 c). Titrate to the
end-point pH without recording intermediate pH values and without undue dela y. As the end
point is approached make smaller additions of acid and be sure that pH equilibrium is reached
before adding more titrant.
d. Potentiometric titration of low alkalinity:  For alkalinities less than 20 mg/L titrate 100 to
200 mL according to the procedure of ¶ 4c, above, using a 10-mL microburet and 0.02 N standard
acid solution. Stop the titration at a pH in the range 4.3 to 4 .7 and record volume and exact pH.
Carefully add additional titrant to reduce the pH exactly 0.30 pH unit and again record volume.
5.  Calculations
a. Potentiometric titration to end-point pH:
 
where: 
                  A =   mL standard acid used and Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                  N =   normality of standard acid 
or 
where: 
                  t =   titer of standard acid, mg CaCO3/mL. 
Report pH of end point used as follows: ‘‘The alkalinity to pH _______ =  _______ mg
CaCO3/L’’ and indicate clearly if this pH corresponds to an inflection point of the titration
curve. 
b. Potentiometric titration of low alkalinity:
 Total alkalinity, mg CaCO3/L 
where: 
                  B =   mL titrant to first recorded pH, 
                  C =   total mL titrant to reach pH 0.3 unit lower, and 
                  N =   normality of acid. 
c. Calculation of alkalinity relationships:  The results obtained from the phenolphthalein and
total alkalinity determinations offer a means for stoichiometric classification of the three
principal forms of alkalinity present in many waters. The classific ation ascribes the entire
alkalinity to bicarbonate, carbonate, and hydroxide, and assumes the absence of other (weak)
inorganic or organic acids, such as silicic, phosphoric, and boric acids. It further presupposes the
incompatibility of hydroxide and bic arbonate alkalinities. Because the calculations are made on a
stoichiometric basis, ion concentrations in the strictest sense are not represented in the results,
which may differ significantly from actual concentrations especially at pH > 10. According to
this scheme:
1) Carbonate (CO32–) alkalinity is present when phenolphthalein alkalinity is not zero but is
less than total alkalinity. 
2) Hydroxide (OH–) alkalinity is present if phenolphthalein alkalinity is more than half the
total alkalinity. 
3) Bicarbonate (HCO3–) alkalinity is present if phenolphthalein alkalinity is less than half theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationtotal alkalinity. These relationships may be calculated by the following scheme, where P is
phenolphthalein alkalinity and T  is total alkalinity (¶ 1b): 
Select the smaller value of P or (T −P). Then, carbonate alkalinity equals twice the smaller
value. When the smaller value is P, the balance ( T −2P) is bicarbonate. When the smaller value
is (T−P), the balance (2 P−T ) is hydroxide. All results are expressed as CaCO3. The
mathematical conversion of the results is shown in Table 2320:II . (A modification of Table
2320:II  that is more accurate when P = 1/2T  has been proposed.4) 
Alkalinity relationships also may be computed nomographically (see Carbon Dioxide,
Section 4500-CO2). Accurately measure pH, calculate OH– concentration as milligrams CaCO3
per liter, and calculate concentrations of CO32– and HCO3– as milligrams CaCO3 per liter from
the OH– concentration, and the phenolphthalein and total alkalinities by the following equations: 
CO32– = 2P − 2[OH–] 
HCO3– = T  − 2P + [OH–] 
Similarly, if difficulty is experienced with the phenolphthalein end point, or if a check on the
phenolphthalein titration is desired, calculate phenolphthalein alkalinity as CaCO3 from the
results of the nomographic determinations of carbonate and hydroxide ion concentrations: 
P = 1/2 [CO32–] + [OH–] 
6.  Precision and Bias
 No general statement can be made about precision because of the great variation in sample
characteristics. The precision of the titration is likely to be much greater than the uncertainties
involved in sampling and sample handling  before the analysis. 
In the range of 10 to 500 mg/L, when the alkalinity is due entirely to carbonates or
bicarbonates, a standard deviation of 1 mg CaCO3/L can be achieved. Forty analysts in 17
laboratories analyzed synthetic samples containing incremen ts of bicarbonate equivalent to 120
mg CaCO3/L. The titration procedure of ¶ 4b was used, with an end point pH of 4.5. The
standard deviation was 5 mg/L and the average bias (lower than the true value) was 9 mg/L.5 
Sodium carbonate solutions equivalent to  80 and 65 mg CaCO3/L were analyzed by 12
laboratories according to the procedure of ¶ 4c.6 The standard deviations were 8 and 5 mg/L,
respectively, with negligible bias.6 Four laboratories analyzed six samples having total
alkalinities of about 1000 mg Ca CO3/L and containing various ratios of carbonate/bicarbonate
by the procedures of both ¶ 4a and  ¶ 4c. The pooled standard deviation was 40 mg/L, with
negligible difference between the procedures. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation7.  References
         1.    LARSON, T.E. & L.M. HENLEY. 1955. Determination of low alkalinity or acidity in water.
Anal. Chem.  27:851.
         2.    THOMAS, J.F.J. & J.J. LYNCH. 1960. Determination of carbonate alkalinity in natural
waters. J. Amer. Water Works Ass oc. 52:259.
         3.    COOPER, S.S.  1941. The mixed indicator bromocresol green-methyl red for carbonates
in water. Ind. Eng. Chem ., Anal. Ed. 13:466.
         4.    JENKINS, S.R. & R.C. MOORE. 1977. A proposed modification to the classical method of
calculating alk alinity in natural waters. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc . 69:56.
         5.    WINTER, J.A. & M.R. MIDGETT. 1969. FWPCA Method Study 1. Mineral and Physical
Analyses. Federal Water Pollution Control Admin., Washington, D.C.
         6.    SMITH, R. 1980. Research Rep. No.  379, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
South Africa.
8.  Bibliography
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1982. Standard Methods for Acidity or
Alkalinity of Water. Publ. D1067-70 (reapprove d 1977), American Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
 SKOUGSTAD M.W., M.J. FISHMAN, L.C. FRIEDMAN, D.E. ERDMAN, & S.S. DUNCAN. 1979. Methods
for determination of inorganic substances in water and fluvial sediments. In Techniques of
Water-Resources Investigation of the United States Geological Survey. U.S. Geological
Survey, Book 5, Chapter A1, Washingto n, D.C.
2330        CALCIUM CARBONATE SATURATION* #(30)
2330 A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) saturation indices commonly are used to evaluate the
scale-forming and scale-dissolving tendencies of water. Assessing these tendencies is useful in
corrosion control programs and in preventing CaCO3 scaling in piping and equipment such as
industrial heat exchangers or domestic water heaters. 
Waters oversaturated with respect to CaCO3 tend to precipitate CaCO3. Waters
undersaturated with respect to CaCO3 tend to dissolve CaCO3. Saturated waters, i.e., wat ers in
equilibrium with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCaCO3, have neither CaCO3-precipitating nor CaCO3-dissolving tendencies. Saturation
represents the dividing line between ‘‘precipitation likely’’ and ‘‘precipitation not likely.’’ 
Several water quality characteristics must be meas ured to calculate the CaCO3 saturation
indices described here. Minimum requirements are total alkalinity (2320), total calcium
(3500-Ca), pH (4500-H+), and temperature (2550). The ionic strength also must be calculated or
estimated from conductivity (2510)  or total dissolved solids (2540C) measurements. Measure pH
at the system’s water temperature using a temperature-compensated pH meter. If pH is measured
at a different temperature, for example in the laboratory, correct the measured pH.1-3 In
measuring pH  and alkalinity, minimize CO2 exchange between sample and atmosphere. Ideally,
seal the sample from the atmosphere during measurements4; at a minimum, avoid vigorous
stirring of unsealed samples. 
There are two general categories of CaCO3 saturation indice s: indices that determine whether
a water has a tendency  to precipitate CaCO3 (i.e., is oversaturated) or to dissolve CaCO3 (i.e., is
undersaturated) and indices that estimate the  quantity  of CaCO3 that can be precipitated from an
oversaturated water and t he amount that can be dissolved by an undersaturated water. Indices in
the second category generally yield more information but are more difficult to determine. 
2.  Limitations
 It is widely assumed that CaCO3 will precipitate from oversaturated waters and that it
cannot be deposited from undersaturated waters. Exceptions may occur. For example, CaCO3
deposition from oversaturated waters is inhibited by the pres ence of phosphates (particularly
polyphosphates), certain naturally occurring organics, and magnesium.5-7 These materials can
act as sequestering agents or as crystal poisons. Conversely, CaCO3 deposits have been found in
pipes conveying undersaturated wat er. This apparent contradiction is caused by high pH (relative
to the bulk water pH) in the immediate vicinity of certain areas (cathodes) of corroding metal
surfaces. A locally oversaturated condition may occur even if the bulk water is undersaturated. A
small, but significant, amount of CaCO3 can be deposited. 
The calculations referred to here, even the most sophisticated computerized calculations, do
not adequately describe these exceptions. For this reason, do not consider saturation indices as
absolut es. Rather, view them as guides to the behavior of CaCO3 in aqueous systems and
supplement them, where possible, with experimentally derived information. 
Similarly, the effects predicted by the indices do not always conform to expectations. The
relationsh ip between the indices and corrosion rates is a case in point. Conceptually, piping is
protected when CaCO3 is precipitated on its surfaces. CaCO3 is believed to inhibit corrosion by
clogging reactive areas and by providing a matrix to retain corrosion pro ducts, thus further
sealing the surfaces. Waters with positive indices traditionally have been assumed to be
protective while waters with negative indices have been assumed to be not protective, orStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcorrosive. The expected relationship is observed sometimes ,8,9 but not always.10,11 Unexpected
results may be due in part to limited capability to predict CaCO3 behavior. Also, water
characteristics not directly involved in the calculation of the indices (e.g., dissolved oxygen,
buffering intensity, chloride, sul fate, and water velocity) may influence corrosion rates
appreciably.9,12-16 Thus, do not estimate corrosion rates on the basis of CaCO3 indices alone. 
3.  References
         1.    MERRILL, D.T. & R.L. SANKS.  1978, 1979. Corrosion control by deposition of CaCO3
films: A practical approach for plant operators. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  70:592;
70:634 & 71:12.
         2.    LOEWENTHAL, R.E. & G. V. R. MARAIS.  1976.  Carbonate Chemistry of Aquatic Systems:
Theory and Applications. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann Arbor, Mich.
         3.    MERRILL, D.T.  1976. Chemical conditioning for water softening and corrosion control.
In R.L. Sanks, ed. Water Treatment Plant Design. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann
Arbor, Mich.
         4.    SCHOCK, M.R., W. MUELLER & R.W. BUELOW.  1980. Laboratory techniques for
measurement of pH for corrosion control studies and water not in equilibrium with the
atmosphere. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  72:304.
         5.    PYTKOWICZ, R.M.  1965. Rates of inorganic carbon nucleation. J. Geol.  73:196.
         6.    FERGUSON, J.F. & P.L. MCCARTY.  1969. Precipitation of Phosphate from Fresh Waters
and Waste Waters. Tech. Rep. No. 120, Stanford Univ., Stanford, Calif.
         7.    MERRILL, D.T. & R.M. JORDEN.  1975. Lime-induced reactions in municipal wastewaters.
J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  47:2783.
         8.    DE MARTINI, F.  1938. Corrosion and the Langelier calcium carbonate saturation index.
J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  30:85 .
         9.    LARSON, T.E.  1975. Corrosion by Domestic Waters. Bull. 59, Illinois State Water
Survey.
       10.    JAMES M. MONTGOMERY, CONSULTING ENGINEERS, INC.  1985.  Water Treatment
Principles and Design. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
       11.    STUMM, W.  1960. Investigations of the corrosive behavior of waters.  J. San. Eng. Div.,
Proc. Amer. Soc. Civil Eng.  86:27.
       12.    PISIGAN, R.A., JR. & J.E. SINGLEY.  1985. Evaluation of water corrosivity using the
Langelier index and relative corrosion rate models.  Materials Perform.  24:26.
       13.    LANE, R.W.  1982. Control of corrosion in distribution and building water systems.  In
Proceedings AWWA Water Quality Technology Conf., Nashville, Tenn., Dec. 5–8,
1982.
       14.    SONTHEIMER, H., W. KOLLE & V.L. SNOEYINK.  1982. The siderite model of the
formation of corrosion-resistant scales.  J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.   73:572.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation       15.    SCHOCK, M.R. & C.H. NEFF.  1982. Chemical aspects of internal corrosion; theory,
prediction, and monitoring. In Proceedings AWWA Water Qua lity Technology Conf.,
Nashville, Tenn., Dec. 5–8, 1982.
       16.    AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION.  1986. Corrosion Control for Plant Operators.
ISBW-O-89867-350-X. Denver, Colo.
2330 B.        Indices Indicating Te ndency of a Water to Precipitate CaCO3 or
Dissolve CaCO3
1.  General Discussion
 Indices that indicate CaCO3 precipitation or dissolution tendencies define whether a water is
oversaturated, saturated, or undersaturated with respect to CaCO3. The most widely used indices
are the Saturation Index (SI): the Relat ive Saturation (RS), also known as the Driving Force
Index (DFI); and the Ryznar Index (RI). The SI is by far the most commonly used and will be
described here. The RS and SI are related (see Equation 6, Section 2330D ). The RI1 has been
used for many years , sometimes with good results. Because it is semi-empirical it may be less
reliable than the SI. 
2.  Saturation Index by Calculation
 SI is determined from Equation 1. 
SI = pH − pHs                (1)
where: 
                pH =   measured pH and 
              pHs =   pH of the water if it were in equilibrium with CaCO3 at the existing calcium ion
[Ca2+] and bicarbonate ion [ HCO3–] concentrations. 
A positive SI connotes a water oversaturated with respect to CaCO3. A negative SI signifies
an undersaturated water. An SI of zero represents a water in equilibrium with CaCO3. 
a.  Analytical solution for pHs: Determine pHs as follows2:
 pHs = pK2 − pKs + p[Ca2+] + p[HCO3–] + 5  pfm                (2)
where: 
                K2 =    second dissociation constant for carbonic acid, at the water temperature, 
                Ks =    solubility product constant fo r CaCO3 at the water temperature, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation          [Ca2+] =    calcium ion concentration, g-moles/L, 
      [HCO3–] =    bicarbonate ion concentration, g-moles/L, and 
                f m =    activity coefficient for monovalent species at the specified temperature. 
In Equation 2, p precedin g a variable designates −log10 of that variable. 
Calculate values of pK2, pKs, and pf m required to solve Equation 2 from the equations in
Table 2330:I . To save computation time, values for pK2 and pKs have been precalculated for
selected temperatures (se e Table 2330:II ). 
Table 2330:II  gives several values for pKs. Different isomorphs of CaCO3 can form in
aqueous systems, including calcite, aragonite, and vaterite. Each has somewhat different
solubility properties. These differences can be accommodated wh en computing  pHs simply by
using the  pKs for the compound most likely to form. The form of CaCO3 most commonly found
in fresh water is calcite. Use the  pKs for calcite unless it is clear that a different form of CaCO3
controls CaCO3 solubility. 
Estimate c alcium ion concentration from total calcium measurements with Equation 3. 
[Ca2+] = Cat − Caip                (3)
where: 
              Cat =   total calcium, g-moles/L, and 
            Caip =   calcium associated with ion pairs such as CaHCO3+, CaSO40, and CaOH+. 
Calcium associ ated with ion pairs is not available to form CaCO3. 
Estimate [HCO3–], the bicarbonate ion concentration, from Equation 4. 
where: 
              Alkt =   total alkalinity, as determined by acid titration to the carbonic acid end point,
g-equivalents/L, 
                Kw =   dissoc iation constant for water, at the water temperature, and 
              Alko =   alkalinity contributed by NH30, H3SiO4–, HPO42–, B(OH)4–, CH3COO–
(acetate), HS–, and ion pairs such as CaHCO3+ and MgOH+. These contributions usually are
small compared to the contribution s of components normally considered (HCO3–, CO32–,OH–,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand H+). 
Calculations can be simplified. For example, in Equation 4, terms containing exponents (e.g.,
10(pH + pfm − pkw))  usually can be neglected for waters that are approximately neutral (pH 6.0 to
8.5) with alkalinity greater than about 50 mg/L as CaCO3. The terms  Caip in Equation 3 and Alko
in Equation 4 are difficult to calculate without computers. Therefore they usually are neglected
for hand calculations. The simplified version of Equation 2 under such conditions is: 
pHs = pK2 − pKs + p[Cat] + p[Alkt] + 5 pf m
1)  Sample calculation—The calculation is best illustrated by  working through an example.
Assume that calcite controls CaCO3  solubility and determine the SI for a water of the following
composition: 
 Concentration 
Constituent mg ÷mg
mole = g-mole s/L  
Calcium 152 40  000 3.80 × 10–3 
Magnesium   39 24  312 1.60 × 10–3 
Sodium   50 22  989 2.18 × 10–3 
Potassium     5 39  102 1.28 × 10–4 
Chloride   53 35  453 1.49 × 10–3 
Alkalinity (as CaCO3)130 50  000 2.60 × 10–3* 
Sulfate 430 96  060 4.48 × 10–3 
Silica (as SiO2)   15 60  084 2.50 × 10–4 
*g-equivalents.
Water temperature = 20°C (293.2°K); pH = 9.00. 
 
Before evaluating pf m in Equation 2, determine the ionic  strength ( I) and another constant
(A). Estimate ionic strength from  the first equation of Table 2330:I , assuming all the alkalinit y is
due to bicarbonate ion. Use the alkalinity concentration (2.60 ×  10–3) and the bicarbonate
charge (−1) to calculate the contribution of alkalinity to ionic strength. Assume silica is mostly
H4SiO4. Because H4SiO4 has zero charge, silica does not co ntribute to ionic strength. 
                  I =   0.5 [4(3.80 × 10–3) + 4(1.60 × 10–3) + 2.18 × 10–3 + Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                        1.28 × 10–4 + 1.49 × 10–3 + 2.60 × 10–3  
                        + 4(4.48 × 10–3)] 
                     =   2.29 × 10–2 g-moles/L 
In the absence of a complete  water analysis, estimate ionic  strength from conductivity or
total dissolved solids measurements  (see alternative equations, Table 2330:I ). 
Estimate  A from the equation in Table 2330:I , after first determining the dielectric constant  E
from the formula  in the same  table. Alternatively, use precalculated values of  A in Table
2330:II . In Table 2330:II , A = 0.506 at 20°C. 
Next estimate pfm from the equation in Table 2330:I  
 
Determine [HCO3–] from Equation 4. Neglect Alko, but because the pH exceeds 8. 5,
calculate the other terms. From Table 2330:II , pK2 = 10.38 and pKw = 14.16. 
 
Therefore p[HCO3–] = 2.60. 
Determine [Ca2+] from Equation 3. Neglect Caip. 
[Ca2+] = Cat = 3.80 × 10–3 g-moles/L 
Therefore p[Ca2+] = 2.42. 
From Table 2330:II , pKs for cal cite is 8.45. 
Determine pHs from Equation 2: 
pHs = 10.38 − 8.45 + 2.42 + 2.60 + 5 (0.063) = 7.27 
And finally, determine SI from Equation 1: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSI = 9.00 − 7.27 = 1.73 
The positive  SI indicates the water is oversaturated with respect  to calcite. 
2)  Effect of neglecting Caip and Alko—If Caip is neglected, pHs  is underestimated and SI is
overestimated by an amount equal to  p(1 − YCaip), where YCaip is the fraction of total calcium in
ion  pairs. For example, if YCaip = 0.30 then the estimate fo r SI is  0.15 units too high. Similarly,
if Alko is neglected, SI is overestimated by an amount equal to p(1−YAlko), where YAlko is the
fraction of total alkalinity contributed by species other than  HCO3–, CO32–, OH–, and H+. The
effects of neglecting Caip  and Alko are additive. 
Caip and Alko may be neglected if the factors YCaip and YAlko  are small and do not interfere
with interpretation of the SI. The  factors are small for waters of low and neutral pH, but they
increase as pH values approach and ex ceed 9. At high pH values,  however, the  SI is typically
much larger than its overestimate, so  neglecting Caip and Alko causes no problem. To return to
the  example above, when calculations were done with a computerized  water chemistry code
(SEQUIL) (see  Table 2330:III ) that considers Caip and Alko, the SI was 1.48, i.e., 0.25 units
lower than the  result obtained by hand calculations. In this instance, neglecting  Caip and Alko
did not interfere with interpreting the result. Both  calculations showed the  water to be strongly
oversaturated. 
The potential for misinterpretation is most acute in nearly-saturated waters of high sulfate
concentration. Recirculating cooling  water is an example. Calcium is sequestered by the robust
CaSO40  ion pair and the SI can be overestimated by as much as 0.3 to 0.5  units, even at neutral
pH. Under these conditions, the  SI may be  thought to be zero (neither scale-forming or
corrosive) when in  fact it is negative. 
Resolve this problem by determining  pHs using computerize d  water chemistry codes that
consider ion pairs and the other forms  of alkalinity. Section 2330D  provides information about
water  chemistry codes. The most accurate calculations are obtained  when a complete mineral
analysis is provided. 
An alternative  but somewhat less rigorous procedure involves  direct measurement of (Ca2+),
the calcium ion activity, with a  calcium specific-ion electrode.9 Use Equation 5 to determine
p[Ca2+]; then use p[Ca2+] in Equation 2. 
p[Ca2+] = p(Ca2+) − 4pfm                (5) 
This approach eliminates the need to determine Caip. However,  no equivalent procedure is
available to bypass the determination  of  Alko. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Graphical solutions for pHs: Caldwell-Lawrence diagrams can be used to determine
pHs.10-12 The diagrams are particularly useful for estimating chemical dosages needed to
achieve desired water conditions. Consult the references for descriptions of how  to use the
diagrams; see Section 2330D  for additional information about the diagrams.
3.  Saturation Index by Experimental Determination
a.  Saturometry:  Saturometers were developed to measure the relative saturation of seawater
with respect to CaCO3. A water of known calcium and pH is equilibrated with CaCO3 in a
sealed flask containing a pH electrode. The water temperature is controlled  with a
constant-temperature bath. During equilibration the pH decreases if CaCO3 precipitates and
increases if CaCO3 dissolves. When the pH stops changing, equilibrium is said to have been
achieved. The initial pH and calcium values and the final pH value  are used to calculate the
relative saturation (RS).13 Equation 6, Section 2330D , may then be used to determine SI.
 A major advantage of this method is that the approach to equilibrium can be tracked by
measuring pH, thus minimizing uncertainty about the achievement of equilibrium. The method is
most sensitive in the range of minimum buffering intensity (pH 7.5 to 8.5). The calculations do
not consider ion pairs or noncarbonate alkalinity, except borate. The technique has been used for
in situ  oceanographi c measurements14 as well as in the laboratory. 
The saturometry calculations discussed above use Ks of the CaCO3 phase assumed to control
solubility. Uncertainties occur if the identity of  the controlling solid is unknown. Resolve these
uncertainties by me asuring Ks of the controlling solid. It is equal to the CaCO3 activity product,
[Ca2+] × [CO32–], at equilibrium. Calculate the latter from the equilibrium pH and initial
calcium, alkalinity, and pH measurements.15 
b.  Alkalinity difference technique:16 SI also can be determined by equilibrating water of
known pH, calcium, and alkalinity with CaCO3 in a sealed, constant-temperature system. The
CaCO3 activity product before equilibration is determined from initial c alcium, pH, and
alkalinity (or total carbonate) values. The CaCO3 solubility product constant ( Ks) equals the
CaCO3 activity product after equilibration, which is determined by using the alkalinity change
that occurred during equilibration. RS is found by dividing the initial activity product by Ks.
Calculate SI by using Equation 6 ( see Section 2330D.1  ). The advantage of this method is that it
makes no assumptions about the identity of the CaCO3 phase. However it is more difficult to
determine when equili brium is achieved with this method than with the saturometry method.
 Whatever the method used, use the temperatures that are the same as the temperature of the
water source. Alternatively, correct test results to the temperature of the water source.16 
4.  References
         1.    RYZNAR, J.W.  1944. A new index for determining the amount of calcium carbonateStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationformed by water.  J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  36:47.
         2.    SNOEYINK, V.L. & D. JENKINS.  1980. Water Chemistry. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
N.Y.
         3.    STUMM, W. & J.J. MORGAN.  1981. Aquatic Chemistry, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, N.Y.
         4.    RUSSELL, L.L.  1976. Chemical Aspects of Groundwater Recharge with Wastewaters.
Ph.D. thesis, Univ. California, Berkeley.
         5.    LANGELIER, W.F.  1936. Th e analytical control of anticorrosion water treatment. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  28:1500.
         6.    ROSSUM, J.R. & D.T. MERRILL.  1983. An evaluation of the calcium carbonate saturation
indexes. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  75:95.
         7.    PLUMMER, L.N. & E. BUSENBERG.  1982. The solubilities of calcite, aragonite, and
vaterite in CO2-H2O solutions between 0 and 90 degrees C, and an evaluation of the
aqueous model for the system CaCO3-CO2-H2O.  Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
46:1011.
         8.    ELECTRIC POWER RESEARCH I NSTITUTE.  1982. Design and Operating Guidelines
Manual for Cooling Water Treatment: Treatment of Recirculating Cooling Water.
Section 4. Process Model Documentation and User’s Manual. EPRI CS-2276, Electric
Power Research Inst., Palo Alto, Calif.
         9.    GARRELS, R.M. & C.L. CHRIST.  1965. Solutions, Minerals, and Equilibria. Harper &
Row, New York, N.Y.
       10.    MERRILL, D.T. & R.L. SANKS.  1978, 1979. Corrosion control by deposition of CaCO3
films: A practical approach for plant operators. J. Amer. Water Wo rks Assoc.  70:592;
70:634 & 71:12.
       11.    LOEWENTHAL, R.E. & G.V.R. MARAIS.  1976. Carbonate Chemistry of Aquatic Systems:
Theory and Applications. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann Arbor, Mich.
       12.    MERRILL, D.T.  1976. Chemical conditioning for water  softening and corrosion control.
In R.L. Sanks, ed., Water Treatment Plant Design. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann
Arbor, Mich.
       13.    BEN-YAAKOV, S. & I.R. KAPLAN.  1969. Determination of carbonate saturation of
seawater with a carbonate saturometer. Limnol. Oceanogr.  14:874.
       14.    BEN-YAAKOV, S. & I.R. KAPLAN.  1971. Deep-sea in situ calcium carbonate saturometry.
J. Geophys. Res.  76:72.
       15.    PLATH, D.C., K.S. JOHNSON & R.M. PYTKOWICZ.  1980. The solubility of
calcite—probably containing magnesiu m—in seawater.  Mar. Chem.  10:9.
       16.    BALZAR, W.  1980. Calcium carbonate saturometry by alkalinity difference. Oceanol.
Acta.  3:237.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2330 C.        Indices Predicting the Quantity of CaCO3 That Can Be Precipitated or
Dissolved
 The Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Potential (CCPP) predicts both tendency to precipitate
or to dissolve CaCO3 and quantity that may be precipitated or dissol ved. The CCPP also is
known by other names, e.g., Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Capacity (CCPC). 
The CCPP is defined as the quantity of CaCO3 that theoretically can be precipitated from
oversaturated waters or dissolved by undersaturated waters during e quilibration.1 The amount
that actually precipitates or dissolves may be less, because equilibrium may not be achieved. The
CCPP is negative for undersaturated waters, zero for saturated waters, and positive for
oversaturated waters. 
1.  Calculating CCPP
 The CCPP does not lend itself to hand calculations. Preferably calculate CCPP with
computerized water chemistry models and Caldwell-Lawrence diagrams (see Section 2330D ). 
The most reliable calculations consider ion pairs and the co ntribution to alkalinity of other
species besides HCO3–, CO32–, OH–, and H+. Models that do not consider these factors
overestimate the amount of CaCO3 that can be precipitated and underestimate the amount of
CaCO3 that can be dissolved. 
2.  Experimental Determination of CCPP
 Estimate CCPP by one of several experimental techniques. 
a.  Saturometry:  See Section 2330B . The CCPP is determined as part of the RS calculation.
b.  Alkalinity difference technique:  See Section 2330B . The CCPP equals the difference
between alkalinity (or calcium) values of the initial and equilibrated water, when they are
expressed as CaCO3.
c.  Marble test:  The marble test1-5 is similar to the alkalinity difference technique. The CCPP
equals the change in alkalinity (or calcium) values during equilibration, when they are expressed
as CaCO3.
 d.  Enslow test:  The Enslow test5 is a continuous  version of the alkalinity difference or
marble tests. Water is fed continuously to a leveling bulb or separatory funnel partly filled with
CaCO3. The effluent from this device is filtered through crushed marble so that the filtrate is
assumed to be in equ ilibrium with CaCO3. The CCPP equals the change in alkalinity (or
calcium) values that occurs during passage through the apparatus. 
e.  Calcium carbonate deposition test:6 The calcium carbonate deposition test (CCDT) is an
electrochemical method that measures the electric current produced when dissolved oxygen isStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationreduced on a rotating electrode. When an oversaturated water is placed in the apparatus, CaCO3
deposits on the electrode. The deposits interfere with oxygen transfer and the current diminishes.
The rate of CaCO3 deposition is directly proportional to the rate at which the current declines.
The CCDT and the CCPP are related, b ut they are not the same. The CCDT is a rate, and the
CCPP is a quantity.
 For realistic assessments of the CCPP (or CCDT) keep test temperature the same as the
temperature of the water source. Alternatively, co rrect test results to the temperature of the water
source. 
3.  References
         1.    MERRILL, D.T. & R.L. SANKS.  1978, 1979. Corrosion control by deposition of CaCO3
films: A practical approach for plant operators. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  70:592;
70:634 & 71:12.
         2.    MERRILL, D.T.  1976. Chemical conditioning  for water softening and corrosion control.
In R.L. Sanks, ed. Water Treatment Plant Design. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann
Arbor, Mich.
         3.    DE MARTINI, F.  1938. Corrosion and the Langelier calcium carbonate saturation index.
J. Amer. Water Works As soc. 30:85.
         4.    HOOVER, C.P.  1938. Practical application of the Langelier method. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  30:1802.
         5.    DYE, J.F. & J.L. TUEPKER.  1971. Chemistry of the Lime-Soda Process. In American
Water Works Association. Water Quality and Tr eatment. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New
York, N.Y.
         6.    MCCLELLAND, N.I. & K.H. MANCY.  1979. CCDT bests Ryzner index as pipe CaCO3 film
predictor. Water Sewage Works  126:77.
2330 D.        Diagrams and Computer Codes for CaCO3 Indices
1.  Description
 Table 2330:III  lists diagrams and computer codes that can be used to determine the SI and
CCPP. It also provides a brief description of their characteristics. 
Many computer codes do not calculate SI directly, but instead calculate the r elative
saturation ( RS). When RS data are presented, calculate the SI from:1 
SI = log10RS                (6)
where: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                RS =   ratio of CaCO3 activity product to CaCO3 solubility product constant. 
The diagrams and a few of the codes define pHs as the pH th e water would exhibit if it were
in equilibrium with CaCO3 at the existing calcium and total alkalinity concentrations.2 This
definition of pHs differs from the definition following Equation 1 because alkalinity is used
instead of bicarbonate. Within the p H range 6 to 9, alkalinity-based pHs and bicarbonate-based
pHs are virtually equal, because total alkalinity is due almost entirely to bicarbonate ion. Above
pH 9 they differ and Equation 6 no longer applies if SI is calculated with alkalinity-based pHs.
However, if SI is determined from bicarbonate-based pH, Equation 6 continues to apply. 
Furthermore, calculating SI with alkalinity-based pHs reverses the sign of the SI above pH
values of approximately pK2, i.e., a positive, not the usual negative, SI conn otes an
undersaturated water.3 With bicarbonate-based pHs or RS, sign reversal does not occur, thereby
eliminating the confusing sign change. For these reasons, bicarbonate-based pHs or RS is
preferred. Table 2330:III  lists the definition of pHs used for e ach code. 
Some models calculate only the amount of CaCO3 that can be precipitated but not the
amount of CaCO3 that can be dissolved. Others calculate both. 
The diagrams and codes can be used to determine many more parameters than the CaCO3
saturation ind ices. A fee may be charged for computer software or graphs. The information in
Table 2330:III  describes parameters each code uses to calculate SI. Contact the sources listed
below the table for current information. 
2.  References
         1.    SNOEYINK, V.L. & D. JENKINS.  1980. Water Chemistry. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
N.Y.
         2.    LANGELIER, W.F.  1936. The analytical control of anticorrosion water treatment. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  28:1500.
         3.    LOEWENTHAL, R .E. & G.V.R. MARAIS.  1976. Carbonate Chemistry of Aquatic Systems:
Theory and Applications. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann Arbor, Mich.
         4.    MERRILL, D.T. & R.L. SANKS.  1978. Corrosion Control by Deposition of CaCO3 Films:
A Handbook of Practical App lication and Instruction. American Water Works Assoc.,
Denver, Colo.
         5.    MERRILL, D.T.  1976. Chemical conditioning for water softening and corrosion control.
In R.L. Sanks, ed., Water Treatment Plant Design. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann
Arbor, Mic h.
         6.    ELECTRIC POWER RESEARCH INSTITUTE.  1982. Design and Operating Guidelines
Manual for Cooling Water Treatment: Treatment of Recirculating Cooling Water.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSection 4. Process Model Documentation and User’s Manual. EPRI CS-2276, Electric
Power Researc h Inst., Palo Alto, Calif.
         7.    BROWN, D.S. & J.D. ALLISON.  1987. MINTEQA1 Equilibrium Metal Speciation Model:
A User’s Manual. EPA-600/3-87-012.
         8.    PARKHURST, D.L., D.C. THORSTENSON & L.N. PLUMMER.  1980. PHREEQE—A
Computer Program for Geochemical Calculations. USGS WRI 80-96 NTIS PB
81-167801.
         9.    CROWE, A.S. & F.J. LONGSTAFF.  1987. Extension of Geochemical Modeling Techniques
to Brines: Coupling of the Pitzer Equations to PHREEQE. In Proceedings of Solving
Groundwater Problems With Models, Nat ional Water Well Assoc., Denver, Colo. Feb.
10–12, 1987.
       10.    FLEMING, G.W. & L.N. PLUMMER.  1983. PHRQINPT—An Interactive Computer
Program for Constructing Input Data Sets to the Geochemical Simulation Program
PHREEQE. USGS WRI 83-4236.
       11.    ELECTR IC POWER RESEARCH INSTITUTE.  SEQUIL—An Inorganic Aqueous Chemical
Equilibrium Code for Personal Computers; Volume 1, User’s Manual/Workbook,
Version 1.0, GS-6234-CCML. Electric Power Research Inst., Palo Alto, Calif.
       12.    KHARAKA, Y.K., W.D. GUNTER, P.  K. AGGARWAL, E.H. PERKINS & J.D. DEBRAAL.  1988.
Solmineq.88—A Computer Program for Geochemical Modeling of Water–Rock
Interactions. USGS WRIR 88-4227, Menlo Park, Calif.
       13.    BALL, J.W., D.K. NORDSTROM & D.W. ZACHMANN.  1987. WATEQ4F—A Personal
Compute r Fortran Translation of the Geochemical Model WATEQ2 With Revised
Data Base. USGS OFR 87-50.
2340        HARDNESS* #(31)
2340  A.        Introduction
1.  Definition
 Originally, water hardness was understood to be a measure of the capacity of water to
precipitate soap. Soap is precipitated chiefly by the calcium and magnesium ions present. Other
polyvalent cations also may precipitate soap, but they o ften are in complex forms, frequently
with organic constituents, and their role in water hardness may be minimal and difficult to
define. In conformity with current practice, total hardness is defined as the sum of the calcium
and magnesium concentrations,  both expressed as calcium carbonate, in milligrams per liter. 
When hardness numerically is greater than the sum of carbonate and bicarbonate alkalinity,
that amount of hardness equivalent to the total alkalinity is called ‘‘carbonate hardness’’; theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationamou nt of hardness in excess of this is called ‘‘noncarbonate hardness.’’ When the hardness
numerically is equal to or less than the sum of carbonate and bicarbonate alkalinity, all hardness
is carbonate hardness and noncarbonate hardness is absent. The hardne ss may range from zero to
hundreds of milligrams per liter, depending on the source and treatment to which the water has
been subjected. 
2.  Selection of Method
 Two methods are presented. Method B, hardness by calculation, is applicable to all waters
and yields the higher accuracy. If a mineral analysis is performed, hardness by calculation can be
reported. Method C, the EDTA titration m ethod, measures the calcium and magnesium ions and
may be applied with appropriate modification to  any kind of water. The procedure described
affords a means of rapid analysis. 
3.  Reporting Results
 When reporting hardness, state the method used, for example, ‘‘hardness (calc.)’’ or
‘‘hardness (EDTA).’’ 
2340  B.        Hardness by Calculation
1.  Discussion
 The preferred method for determining hardness is to compute it from the results of separate
determinations of calcium and magnesium. 
2.  Calculation
 Hardness, mg equivalent CaCO3/L = 2.497 [Ca, mg/L] + 4.118 [Mg, mg/L]
2340  C.        EDTA Titrimetric Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and its sodium salts (abbreviated EDTA) form
a chelated soluble complex when added to a solution of certain metal cations. If a small amount
of a dye such as Eriochrome Black T or Calmagite is added to an aqu eous solution containing
calcium and magnesium ions at a pH of 10.0 ± 0.1, the solution becomes wine red. If EDTA is
added as a titrant, the calcium and magnesium will be complexed, and when all of the
magnesium and calcium has been complexed the solution turns from wine red to blue, marking
the end point of the titration. Magnesium ion must be present to yield a satisfactory end point. To
insure this, a small amount of complexometrically neutral magnesium salt of EDTA is added to
the buffer; this automatic ally introduces sufficient magnesium and obviates the need for a blank
correction.
 The sharpness of the end point increases with increasing pH. However, the pH cannot beStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationincreased indefinitely because of the danger of precipitating calcium carbonate, CaCO3, or
magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH)2, and because the dye changes color at high pH values. The
specified pH of 10.0 ± 0.1 is a satisfactory compromise. A limit of 5 min is set for the duration of
the titration to minimize the tendency toward CaCO3 precipitat ion. 
b. Interference:  Some metal ions interfere by causing fading or indistinct end points or by
stoichiometric consumption of EDTA. Reduce this interference by adding certain inhibitors
before titration. MgCDTA [see 2 b3)], selectively complexes heavy metals,  releases magnesium
into the sample, and may be used as a substitute for toxic or malodorous inhibitors. It is useful
only when the magnesium substituted for heavy metals does not contribute significantly to the
total hardness. With heavy metal or polyphos phate concentrations below those indicated in Table
2340:I , use Inhibitor I or II. When higher concentrations of heavy metals are present, determine
calcium and magnesium by a non-EDTA method (see Section 3500-Ca  and Section 3500-Mg )
and obtain hardness by  calculation. The figures in Table 2340:I  are intended as a rough guide
only and are based on using a 25-mL sample diluted to 50 mL.
 Suspended or colloidal organic matter also may interfere with the end point. Eliminate this
interference by evaporating th e sample to dryness on a steam bath and heating in a muffle
furnace at 550°C until the organic matter is completely oxidized. Dissolve the residue in 20 mL
1N hydrochloric acid (HCl), neutralize to pH 7 with 1 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and make up
to 50 mL  with distilled water; cool to room temperature and continue according to the general
procedure. 
c. Titration precautions:  Conduct titrations at or near normal room temperature. The color
change becomes impractically slow as the sample approaches freezing temperature. Indicator
decomposition becomes a problem in hot water.
 The specified pH may prod uce an environment conducive to CaCO3 precipitation. Although
the titrant slowly redissolves such precipitates, a drifting end point often yields low results.
Completion of the titration within 5 min minimizes the tendency for CaCO3 to precipitate. The
following three methods also reduce precipitation loss: 
1) Dilute sample with distilled water to reduce CaCO3 concentration. This simple expedient
has been incorporated in the procedure. If precipitation occurs at this dilution of 1 + 1 use
modification 2) or 3). Using too small a sample contributes a systema tic error due to the
buret-reading error. 
2) If the approximate hardness is known or is determined by a preliminary titration, add 90%
or more of titrant to sample before  adjusting pH with buffer. 
3) Acidify sample and stir for 2 min to expel CO2 before  pH adjustment. Determine
alkalinity to indicate amount of acid to be added. 
2.  Reagents
a. Buffer solution:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1) Dissolve 16.9 g ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) in 143 mL conc ammonium hydroxide
(NH4OH). Add 1.25 g magnesium salt of EDTA (available commercially) and dilute to 250 mL
with distilled water. 
2) If the magnesium salt of EDTA is unavailable, dissolve 1.179 g disodium salt of
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid dihydrate (analytical reagent grade) and 780 mg magnesium
sulfate (MgSO4⋅7H2O) or 644 mg magnesium chloride (MgCl2⋅6H2O) in 50 mL distilled  water.
Add this solution to 16.9 g NH4Cl and 143 mL conc NH4OH with mixing and dilute to 250 mL
with distilled water. To attain the highest accuracy, adjust to exact equivalence through
appropriate addition of a small amount of EDTA or MgSO4 or MgCl2. 
Store Solution 1) or 2) in a plastic or borosilicate glass container for no longer than 1 month.
Stopper tightly to prevent loss of ammonia (NH3) or pickup of carbon dioxide (CO2). Dispense
buffer solution by means of a bulb-operated pipet. Discard buffer wh en 1 or 2 mL added to the
sample fails to produce a pH of 10.0 ± 0.1 at the titration end point. 
3) Satisfactory alternate ‘‘odorless buffers’’ also are available commercially. They contain
the magnesium salt of EDTA and have the advantage of being relatively odorless and more
stable than the NH4Cl-NH4OH buffer. They usually do not provide as good a n end point as
NH4Cl-NH4OH because of slower reactions and they may be unsuitable when this method is
automated. Prepare one of these buffers by mixing 55 mL conc HCl with 400 mL distilled water
and then, slowly and with stirring, adding 300 mL 2-aminoetha nol (free of aluminum and
heavier metals). Add 5.0 g magnesium salt of EDTA and dilute to 1 L with distilled water. 
b. Complexing agents:  For most waters no complexing agent is needed. Occasionally water
containing interfering ions requires adding an appropriate complexing agent to give a clear,
sharp change in color at the end point. The following are satisfactory:
1) Inhibitor I:  Adjust acid samples to pH 6 or higher with buffer or 0.1 N NaOH. Add 250 mg
sodium cyanide (NaCN) in powder form. Add sufficient buffer to adjust to pH 10.0 ± 0.1.
(CAUTION : NaCN is extremely poisonous. Take extra precautions in its use.  Flush solutions
containing this inhibitor down the drain with large quantities of water after insuring that no acid
is present to liberate volatile poisonous hydrogen cyanide.) 
2) Inhibitor II:  Dissolve 5.0 g sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S⋅9H2O) or 3.7 g  Na2S⋅5H2O
in 100 mL distilled water. Exclude air with a tightly fitting rubber stopper. This inhibitor
deteriorates through air oxidation. It produces a sulfide precipitate that obscures the end point
when appreciable concentrations of heavy metals are pr esent. Use 1 mL in ¶ 3b below. 
3) MgCDTA:  Magnesium salt of 1, 2-cyclohexanediaminetetraacetic acid. Add 250 mg per
100 mL sample and dissolve completely before adding buffer solution. Use this complexing
agent to avoid using toxic or odorous inhibitors when interfering substances are  present in
concentrations that affect the end point but will not contribute significantly to the hardness value. 
Commercial preparations incorporating a buffer and a complexing agent are available. SuchStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmixtures must maintain pH 10.0 ± 0.1 during titrati on and give a clear, sharp end point when the
sample is titrated. 
c. Indicators:  Many types of indicator solutions have been advocated and may be used if the
analyst demonstrates that they yield accurate values. The prime difficulty with indicator
solutions is deterioration with aging, giving indistinct end points. For  example, alkaline solutions
of Eriochrome Black T are sensitive to oxidants and aqueous or alcoholic solutions are unstable.
In general, use the least amount of indicator providing a sharp end point. It is the analyst’s
responsibility to determine individ ually the optimal indicator concentration.
1) Eriochrome Black T:  Sodium salt of
1-(1-hydroxy-2-naphthylazo)-5-nitro-2-naphthol-4-s ulfonic acid; No. 203 in the Color Index.
Dissolve 0.5 g dye in 100 g 2,2 ′,2′′-nitrilotriethanol (also called triethanolamine) or
2-methoxymethanol (also called ethyl ene glycol monomethyl ether). Add 2 drops per 50 mL
solution to be titrated. Adjust volume if necessary. 
2) Calmagite:  1-(1-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-phenylazo)-2-naphthol-4-sulfonic acid. This is
stable in aqueous solution and produces the same color change as Eriochrome Black T, with a
sharper end point. Dissolve 0.10 g Calmagite in 100 mL distilled water. Use 1  mL per 50 mL
solution to be titrated. Adjust volume if necessary. 
3) Indicators 1 and 2 can be used in dry powder form if care is taken to avoid excess
indicator. Prepared dry mixtures of these indicators and an inert salt are available commercially. 
If the end point color change of these indicators is not clear and s harp, it usually means that
an appropriate complexing agent is required. If NaCN inhibitor does not sharpen the end point,
the indicator probably is at fault. 
d. Standard EDTA titrant,  0.01 M: Weigh 3.723 g analytical reagent-grade disodium
ethylenediaminetetraacetate dihydrate, also called (ethylenedinitrilo)tetraacetic acid disodium
salt (EDTA), dissolve in distilled water, and dilute to 1000 mL. Standardize against standard
calcium solution (¶ 2e) as described in ¶ 3b below.
 Because the titrant extracts hardness-producing cations from soft-glass containers, store in
polyethylene (preferable) or borosilicate glass bottles. Compensate for gradual deterioration  by
periodic restandardization and by using a suitable correction factor. 
e. Standard calcium solution:  Weigh 1.000 g anhydrous CaCO3 powder (primary standard or
special reagent low in heavy metals, alkalis, and magnesium) into a 500-mL erlenmeyer flask.
Place a funnel in the flask neck and add, a little at a time, 1 + 1 HCl u ntil all CaCO3 has
dissolved. Add 200 mL distilled water and boil for a few minutes to expel CO2. Cool, add a few
drops of methyl red indicator, and adjust to the intermediate orange color by adding 3 N NH4OH
or 1 + 1 HCl, as required. Transfer quantitative ly and dilute to 1000 mL with distilled water; 1
mL = 1.00 mg CaCO3.
f. Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 0.1 N.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Procedure
a. Pretreatment of polluted water and wastewater samples:  Use nitric acid-sulfuric acid or
nitric acid-perchloric acid digestion ( Section 3030 ).
b. Titration of sample:  Select a sample volume that requires less than 15 mL EDTA titrant
and complete titration within 5 min, measured from time of buffer addition.
 Dilute 25.0 mL sample to about 50 mL with distilled water in a porcelain casserole or o ther
suitable vessel. Add 1 to 2 mL buffer solution. Usually 1 mL will be sufficient to give a pH of
10.0 to 10.1. The absence of a sharp end-point color change in the titration usually means that an
inhibitor must be added at this point (¶ 2b et seq.) or that the indicator has deteriorated. 
Add 1 to 2 drops indicator solution or an  appropriate amount of dry-powder indicator
formulation [¶ 2c3)]. Add standard EDTA titrant slowly, with continuous stirring, until the last
reddish tinge disappears. Add the la st few drops at 3- to 5-s intervals. At the end point the
solution normally is blue. Daylight or a daylight fluorescent lamp is recommended highly
because ordinary incandescent lights tend to produce a reddish tinge in the blue at the end point. 
If suffic ient sample is available and interference is absent, improve accuracy by increasing
sample size, as described in ¶ 3c below. 
c. Low-hardness sample:  For ion-exchanger effluent or other softened water and for natural
wat ers of low hardness (less than 5 mg/L), take a larger sample, 100 to 1000 mL, for titration
and add proportionately larger amounts of buffer, inhibitor, and in dicator. Add standard EDTA
titrant slowly from a microburet and run a blank, using redistilled, distilled, or deionized water of
the same volume as the sample, to which identical amounts of buffer, inhibitor, and indicator
have been added. Subtract volume of EDTA used for blank from volume of EDTA used for
sample.
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   mL titration for sample and 
                  B =   mg CaCO3 equivalent to 1.00 mL EDTA titrant. 
5.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 610 mg/L total hardness as CaCO3 contributed by 108 mg
Ca/L and 82 mg Mg/L, and the following supplementary substances: 3.1 mg K/L, 19.9 mg Na/L,
241 mg Cl–/L, 0.25 mg NO2–-N/L, 1.1 mg NO3–-N/L, 259 m g SO42–/L, and 42.5 mg total
alkalinity/L (contributed by NaHCO3) in distilled water was analyzed in 56 laboratories by theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationEDTA titrimetric method with a relative standard deviation of 2.9% and a relative error of 0.8%. 
6.  Bibliography
 CONNORS, J.J. 1950. Advances in chemical and colorimetric methods. J. Amer. Water Works
Assoc.  42:33.
 DIEHL, H., C.A. GOETZ & C.C. HACH. 1950. The versenate titration for total hardness. J. Amer.
Water Works Assoc.  42:40.
 BETZ, J.D. &  C.A. NOLL. 1950. Total hardness determination by direct colorimetric titration. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  42:49.
 GOETZ, C.A., T.C. LOOMIS & H. DIEHL. 1950. Total hardness in water: The stability of standard
disodium dihydrogen ethylenediaminetetraaceta te solutions. Anal. Chem.  22:798.
 DISKANT, E.M. 1952. Stable indicator solutions for complexometric determination of total
hardness in water. Anal. Chem.  24:1856.
 BARNARD, A.J., JR., W.C. BROAD & H. FLASCHKA. 1956 & 1957. The EDTA titration. Chemist
Anal yst 45:86 & 46:46.
 GOETZ, C.A. & R.C. SMITH. 1959. Evaluation of various methods and reagents for total hardness
and calcium hardness in water. Iowa State J. Sci.  34:81 (Aug. 15).
 SCHWARZENBACH, G. & H. FLASCHKA . 1969. Complexometric Titrations, 2nd ed. Barnes &
Noble, Inc., New York, N.Y.
2350        OXIDANT DEMAND/REQUIREMENT* #(32)
2350  A.        Introduction
1.  Significance and Chemistry
 Oxidants are added to water supplies and wastewater primarily for disinfection. Other
beneficial uses include slime removal, oxida tion of undesirable inorganic species (e.g., ferrous
ion, reduced manganese, sulfide, and am monia) and oxidation of organic constituents (e.g., taste-
and odor-producing compounds). Oxidant demand refers to the difference between the added
oxidant dose and the residual oxidant concentration measured after a prescribed contact time at a
given pH a nd temperature. Oxidant requirement refers to the oxidant dose required to achieve a
given oxidant residual at a prescribed contact time, pH, and temperature. 
The fate of oxidants in water and wastewater is complex. For example, chlorine reacts with
sampl e constituents by three general pathways: oxidation, addition, and substitution. First,
chlorine can oxidize reduced species, such as Fe2+, Mn2+, and sulfide. In these reactions,
chlorine is reduced to inorganic chloride (Cl–). Second, chlorine can add to olefins and other
double-bond-containing organic compounds to pr oduce chlorinated organic compounds. Third,
chlorine can substitute onto chemical substrates. The addition and substitution reactions produceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationorganochlorine species (e.g., chlorination of phen ol to chlorophenols) or active chlorine species
(e.g., chlorination of ammonia to produce monochloramine). Chlorine reacts with naturally
occurring organic compounds by a combination of these mechanisms to generate such products
as trihalomethanes. See Section 4500-Cl  (chlorine), 4500-ClO2 (chlorine dioxide), and 4500-O3
(ozone) for additional information. 
Oxidant demand and oxidant requirement are significantly affected by the chemical and
physical characteristics of the sample and the manner in which the  oxidant consumption is
measured. In particular, oxidant reactivity is influenced by temperature, pH, contact time, and
oxidant dose. Oxidant demand and oxidant requirement are defined operationally by the
analytical method used to determine the residual o xidant concentration. Report sample
temperature, pH, contact time, oxidant dose,  and analytical method with oxidant demand or
oxidant requirement.  Sample temperature strongly affects reaction kinetics and thus the demand
exerted in a given contact time. Sa mple pH affects the form of the oxidant and the nature and
extent of the demand. For example, ozone is unstable at high pH values and ozone demand is
especially sensitive to sample pH. Oxidant demand increases with time and therefore the demand
must be def ined for a given contact time. Oxidant demand also is dependent on oxidant dose.
Increasing oxidant dose usually will increase demand, but it is incorrect to assume that doubling
the oxidant dose will double the oxidant demand. For these reasons, it is dif ficult to extrapolate
oxidant demand data from one set of conditions to another. Always study oxidant consumption
under the range of conditions expected in the field.  
Oxidant consumption is used to evaluate oxidant demand and oxidant requirement. Report
consumption values according to the objective of the study. For example, report chlorine demand
as follows: ‘‘The sample dosed at 5.0 mg/L consumed 3.9 mg/L after 24 h at 20°C and pH 7.1, as
measured by amperometric titration.’’ By contrast, report ozone requirement  as follows: ‘‘The
sample required a dose of 2.1 mg/L to achieve an ozone residual of 0.5 mg/L after 20 min at
15°C and pH 6.5, as measured by the indigo method.’’ 
2.  Selection of Method
 Select a method to measure oxidant residuals used in the demand calculation that is specific
and has adequate sensitivity. Some oxidant residual measurement techniques are subject to
interferences from oxidation-produced oxidants . Interferences affect oxidant demand
measurements because the concentrations of the interferents may change as the oxidant residual
changes. Thus, calculate free chlorine demand in municipal wastewater as the difference
between free chlorine dose and free  chlorine residual measured after a desired contact time at a
given temperature, pH, and chlorine dose for a specified analytical method. Chlorination of
non-nitrified municipal wastewater probably produces  chloramines. If the analytical method for
free ch lorine is subject to interferences from chloramines, then the free chlorine residual
measurement will be too large (see Section 4500-Cl.A.3) , and  the resulting free chlorine demand
value will be incorrectly low. It is sometimes difficult to predict the ma nner in which
oxidant-produced oxidants will affect the demand measurement. The best approach is to use the
analytical method most specific to the oxidant of interest but always indicate the method with theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationresult. 
The addition of reagents may cause loss of oxidant residual or other changes in oxidant
demand. The loss of total chlorine upon addition of acid and KI is discussed in Section
4500-Cl.A.3 a. 
2350  B.        Chlorine Demand/Requirement
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  The sample is divided into subsamples and each is dosed with the standardized
oxidant (chlorine) solution to yield a series of  increasing doses. After the appropriate contact
time, oxidant residual, pH, and temperature are measured and the  demand/requirement
determined by difference between initial and final concentrations.
b.  Selection of method:  Chlorine consumption tests may be made to examine the demand or
requirement for total chlorine, free chlorine, combined chlorine, monochloramine, or
dichloramine. Specify the chlorine species consumed in the chlorine demand/requi rement test.
The analytical method should exhibit minimal interferences for the species examined. For
demand/ requirement studies with free chlorine, use only amperometric titration ( Section
4500-Cl.D ) or DPD methods ( Section 4500-Cl.F  and Section 4500-Cl. G).
c.  Interference:  Refer to Section 4500-Cl.D.1 b (amperometric titration), Section
4500-Cl.F.1 d (DPD ferrous titrimetric method), or Section 4500-Cl.G.1 b (DPD colorimetric
method). Pay special attention to interferences caused by oxidation products such a s MnO2,
NH2Cl, and NHCl2. If the ammonia or organic nitrogen content of the water is significant,
combined chlorine may form. See Section Section 4500-Cl  for details. Under these conditions,
expect interferences in the measurement of free chlorine by combi ned chlorine.
d.  Minimum detectable concentration:  Because it is calculated by difference, the minimum
detectable chlorine demand/requirement is 
  times the minimum chlorine residual detectable
by the analytical method. For minimum detectable chlorine residual, see Section 4500-Cl.F.1 e
(DPD ferrous titrimetric method) or Section 4500-Cl.G.1 c (DPD colorimetric method).
Minimum detectable demand also is influenced by amount of oxidant consumed relative to
oxidant dose (see ¶ 6 below).
e.  Sampling:  Most reliable results are obtained on fresh samples that contain low amounts of
suspended solids. If samples will be analyzed w ithin 24 h of collection, refrigerate unacidified at
4°C immediately after collection. To preserve for up to 28 d , freeze unacidified samples at
−20°C. Warm chilled samples to desired test condition before analysis.
2.  Apparatus
 See Section 4500-Cl.D  (amperometric titration) or Section 4500-Cl.G  (DPD colorimetric
method). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Reagents
a.  Chlorine-demand-free water:  See Section 4500-Cl.C.3 m. Alternatively, prepare dilutions,
blanks, and dosing solutions from high-quality distilled water (preferably carbon-filtered
redistilled water).
b.  Acetic acid,  conc (glacial).
c.  Potassium iodide,  KI, crystals.
d.  Standard sodium thiosulfate titrant,  0.025 N: See Section 4500-Cl.B.2 d.
e.  Starch indicator solution:  See Section 4500-Cl.B.2 e.
f.  Reagents for determining residual chlorine:  See Section 4500-Cl.D.3  (amperometric
titration), Section 4500-Cl.F.2  (DPD ferrous titrimetric method), or Section 4500-Cl.G.3  (DPD
colorimetric method).
g.  Standard chlorine solution:  Prepare by bubbling chlorine gas through distilled water or by
diluting commercially available 5–7% (50 000–70 000 mg/L) sodium hypochlorite. Store in the
dark or in a brown, glass-stoppered bottle. Standardize each day of  use. A suitable strength of
chlorine solution usually will be between 100 and 1000 mg/L, preferably about 100 times
estimated chlorine demand. Use a solution of sufficient concentration so that adding the chlorine
solution will not increase the volume of the treated portions by more than 5%.
 Standardization—Place 2 mL acetic acid and 10 to 15 mL chlorine-demand-free water in a
flask. Add about 1 g KI. Measure into the flask a suitable volume of chlorine solution. In
choosing a convenient volume, note that  1 mL 0.025 N Na2S2O3 titrant is equivalent to about 0.9
mg chlorine as Cl2. Select volumes that will require no more than 20 mL titrant. 
Titrate with standardized 0.025 N Na2S2O3 titrant until the yellow iodine color almost
disappears. Add 1 to 2 mL starch  indicator solution and continue titrating until the blue color
disappears. 
Determine the blank by adding identical quantities of acid, KI, and starch indicator to a
volume of chlorine-demand-free water corresponding to the sample used for titration. Perf orm
whichever blank titration applies, according to Section 4500-Cl.B.3 d. Calculate the chlorine
stock concentration as described in Section 4500-Cl.B.4 . 
4.  Procedure
 Measure sample temperature and pH. Keep sample and sample portions at desired
temperature and protect from light throughout th e procedure. If pH adjustment is desired,
prepare a blank in distilled water containing the same amount of buffer  as in the sample. Carry
the blank throughout the procedure. 
Measure 5* #(33)  equal sample portions of 200 mL† #(34)  each into glass-stop pered bottles or
flasks of ample capacity to permit mixing. Add increasing amounts of standard chlorine solution
( ¶ 3g ) to suc cessive portions in the series. Try to bracket the estimated demand/requirement and
satisfy criteria of ¶ 5a. Increase dosage between portions in increments of 0.1 mg/L forStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetermining low demands/requirements and up to 1.0 mg/L or more for higher demands.  Mix
while adding. Dose sample portions according to a staggered schedule that will permit
determining the residual after predetermined contact times. 
Conduct test over desired contact period. Record  contact time. At end of contact period,
measure sample temperature, sample pH, and residual chlorine. Record residual measurement
method used. 
5.  Calculation
a.  Chlorine demand:  Select sample portion with a residual at the end of the contact period
that satisfies the following criteria:
 
1)  Rs < Ds − 1.4 Rmin, 
2)  Rs > Rmin, and 
3)  Dose is most similar to the dosage range expected in the field 
where: 
                  Rs=   residual after contact time, mg/L, 
                Ds=   dose, mg/L, and 
              Rmin=   minimum residual measurable by the method, mg/L. 
The first two criteria insure that the chlorine residual and demand are greater than their
respective minimum detection limits. If no sample portion satisfies all criteria, repeat the test and
adjust doses accordingly. Calculate chlorine demand as follows: 
Chlorine demand, mg/L = ( DS − RS) − (DB − RB) 
where Rs and Ds are defined as above, and: 
                RB=   residual of blank after contact time, mg/L, and 
                DB =   blank dose, mg/L. 
When reporting chlorine demand, include dose, contact time, sample temperature, sample pH,
and analytical method. 
b.  Chlorine requirement:  Report the chlorine dose that produced the target residual after the
desired contact time. When reporting chlorine requirement, include the target residual, contact
time, sample temperature, sample pH, and analytical method. Rep ort chlorine demand of blank if
it is greater than 10% of the difference between the requirement and the target residual.
6.  Precision and BiasStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation For data on precision and bias of concentration measurements, see analytical method used.
Because demand is calculated by difference, the uncertainty associated with the demand value
will be greater than the uncertainty of the ind ividual residual measurements. If the standard
deviations of the dose measurement and residual measurements are the same, then the standard
deviation and minimum detection limit of the oxidant demand will be 
  (approximately 1.4)
times the standard deviati on and minimum detection limit of the measurement technique,
respectively. 
The chlorine dose and amount consumed affect the precision and bias of demand calculation
in two ways. First, the amount consumed must be sufficiently large, relative to the dose, to
minimize errors associated with a value calculated from the difference of two numbers of
approximately equal value. Second, the amount consumed must be small enough, relative to the
dose, to prevent the residual concentration from being too small. 
7.  Bibliography
 
See Section 4500-Cl.D.7  or Section 4500-Cl.F.6 , according to analytical method used. 
2350  C.        Chlorine Dioxide Demand/Requirement
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  See Section 2350B.1 . Chlorine dioxide consumption studies are made by
dosing samples from a ClO2 stock solution.
b.  Selection of method:  Use the amperometric method II ( Section 4500-ClO2.E) because of
its high degree of accuracy and minimal interferences.
c.  Interference:  See Section 4500-ClO2.E.1b.
d.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum detectable chlorine dioxide
demand/requirement is 
  times the minimum chlorine dioxide residual detectable by the
analytical method (see Section 2350B.1 d and  Section 2350B.6) .
2.  Apparatus
 See Section 4500-ClO2.E.2. 
3.  Reagents
 See Section 4500-ClO2.B.2 to prepare and standardize ClO2. 
See Section 4500-ClO2.E.3 for reagents required to determine ClO2 residual. 
4.  Procedure
 Follow procedure of Section 2350B.4 , using ClO2 solution, rather than chlorine solution, forStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdosing sample portions. 
Follow procedure of Section 4500-ClO2.E.4 to measure ClO2 residual. 
5.  Calculation
a.  Chlorine dioxide demand:  See Section 2350B.5 a.
b.  Chlorine dioxide requirement:  See Section 2350B.5 b.
6.  Precision and Bias
 See Section 2350B.6 . 
7.  Bibliography
 
See Section 4500-ClO2.E.6 and  Section 4500-ClO2.E.7. 
2350  D.        Ozone Demand/Requirement—Batch Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  See Section 2350B.1 . Samples can be ozonated in batch and semi-batch modes.
In batch ozone consumption studies, an ozone stock solution is used to add ozone to the samples.
In semi-batch ozone consumption studies, a stream of ozone gas is added continuously to the
sample.
 Ozone decomposes at high pH. Thus, even pH-buffered distilled water has a non-zero ozone
demand/requirement. Analyze blanks with all oz one consumption tests. Do not subtract the
ozone demand of the blank from the ozone de mand of the sample, but report it separately. 
b.  Selection of method:  Ozone produces oxidants that interfere with iodometric methods.
The indigo method ( Section 4500-O3.B) is recommended for measuring ozone residuals in ozone
consumption studies. The indigo method measures only the demand for ozone ; it does not
measure the demand for ozone-produced oxidants such as the hydroxyl radical.
c.  Interference:  See Section 4500-O3.B.1b.
d.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum detectable ozone demand/requirement
is 
  times the minimum ozone residual detectable by the analytical method (see Section
2350B.1 d and  Section 2350B.6) .
 For minimum detectable ozone residuals, see Section 4500-O3.B.1c. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Ozone generator:  Use a laboratory-scale ozonator, capable of providing up to about 5%
ozone in the gas phase at a gas flow of up to about 1 L/min.
b.  Apparatus for measuring residual ozone:  See Section 4500-O3.B.2.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Reagents
a.  Ozone-demand-free water:  Ozonate reagent water (see Section 1080 ) for at least 1 h and
purge with nitrogen gas for at least 1 h. CAUTION:  Conduct all laboratory ozonations under a
vented hood.
b.  Standard ozone solution:  Put about 800 mL of ozone-demand-free water in a 1-L flask.
Bubble ozone (approximately 1 to 5% O3 in the gas phase) through the water for about 30 min
while stirring. At room temperature the ozone solution will contain about  10 to 20 mg O3/L. If
the flask is cooled in an ice bath throughout the procedure, the ozone concentration will be about
30 to 40 mg O3/L. Standardize the ozone solution by the indigo method. Use a small sample
volume (typically 1 mL) as directed in Sectio n 4500-O3.B.4a3).
4.  Procedure
 Follow procedure of Section 2350B.4 , using standard ozone solution, rather than chlorine
solution, for dosing sample portions. Carry a reagent blank through the procedure. 
Follow procedure of Section 4500-O3.B.4 to measure O3 residual. 
5.  Calculation
a.  Ozone demand:  See Section 2350B.5 a for selection of the proper sample portion.
Calculate ozone demand in sample as follows:
 Ozone demand, mg/L = DS − RS
where: 
                Rs =   oxidant residual of sample after contact time, mg/L, and 
                Ds =   sample oxidant d ose, mg/L. 
Calculate ozone demand in the blank separately. 
Ozone demand of blank, mg/L = DB − RB
where: 
                RB =   oxidant residual of blank after contact time, mg/L, and 
                DB =   blank oxidant dose, mg/L. 
Report the ozone demand and the ozone demand of t he blank, ozone dose, contact time,
sample temperature, sample pH, and analytical method. 
b.  Ozone requirement:  See Section 2350B.5 b.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation6.  Precision and Bias
 See Section 2350B.6 . 
7.  Bibliography
 
See Section 4500-O3.B.7 and  Section 4500-O3.B.8. 
2350  E.        Ozone Demand/Requirement—Semi-Batch Method
1.  General Discussion
 See Section 2350D.1 . 
The semi-batch method involves determination of ozone demand with the continuous
addition of gaseous ozone to a batch reactor. The results obtained in this method depend on the
mass-transfer characteristics o f the reactor. In addition, some compounds that consume ozone
may volatilize during the test. 
2.  Apparatus
 All apparatus listed in Section 2350D.2  is required, plus: 
a.  Gas washing bottles,  borosilicate glass, minimum volume 250 mL.
b.  Tubing:  Use only stainless steel or TFE tubing.
c.  Glassware:  Buret, 50 mL; beaker, 400 mL; graduated cylinder, 250 mL.
d.  Wash bottle , 500 mL.
e.  Magnetic stirrer  (optional).
3.  Reagents
a.  Ozone-demand-free water:  See Section 2350D.3 a.
b.  Sulfuric acid , H2SO4, 2N: Cautiously add 56 mL conc H2SO4 to 800 mL
ozone-demand-free water in a 1-L volumetric fl ask. Mix thoroughly, cool, add up to mark with
ozone-demand-free water.
c.  Potassium iodide,  KI: Dissolve 20 g KI in about 800 mL of ozone-demand-free water in a
1-L volumetric flask. Make up to mark with ozone-demand-free water.
 d.  Standard sodium thiosulfate titrant , Na2S2O3, 0.1N: See Section 4500-Cl.B.2 c. 
e.  Standard sodium thiosulfate titrant,  Na2S2O3, 0.005 N: Dilute the proper volume
(approximately 50 mL) of standardized 0.1 N Na2S2O3 to 1 L.
f.  Starch indicator solution:  See Section 4500-Cl.B.2 e.
4.  ProcedureStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Determine the output of the ozone generator by passing the ozone gas through two serial KI
traps (Traps A and B) for about 10 min. For best results, keep gas flow below approximately 1
L/min. Each trap is a gas washing bottle containing a known volume (at least 200 mL) of 2% KI.
Quantitatively transfer contents of each trap into a beaker, add 10 mL of 2 N H2SO4, and titrate
with standardized 0.005 N Na2S2O3 until the yellow iodine color almost disappears. Add 1 to 2
mL starch indicator soluti on and continue titrating to the disappearance of blue color. 
Put a known volume (at least 200 mL) of sample in a separate gas washing bottle (label gas
washing bottles to avoid contaminating the reaction vessel with iodide). Direct ozone gas
through this  reaction vessel. For ozone demand studies, direct gas stream leaving reaction vessel
through a KI trap (Trap C) prepared as above. Ozonate sample for a given contact time. For
ozone demand studies, turn ozonator off at end of contact time and pour content s of Trap C into
a beaker. Add 10 mL 2 N H2SO4 and titrate with 0.005 N Na2S2O3 as described above. For ozone
requirement studies, remove a portion from the reaction vessel at the end of contact time and
measure residual ozone concentration by the indigo met hod. 
5.  Calculation
a.  Ozone dose:
 
where: 
                  A =   mL titrant for Trap A, 
                  B =   mL titrant for Trap B, 
                  N =   normality of Na2S2O3, and 
                  T =   ozonation time, min. 
b.  Ozone demand:
 
where: 
C = mL titrant for Trap C. 
Report sample ozone demand and blank ozone demand, ozone dose, ozonation time, sample
temperature, sample pH, sample volume, and analytical method. Because the ozone transfer rate
is highly depende nt on experimental conditions, also report vessel volume, vessel type, gas flow
rate, and sample volume. 
c.  Ozone requirement:  The ozone requirement in the semi-batch test is the ozone dose,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmg/min, required to obtain the target ozone residual after the desired ozonation time. See Section
2350E.5 a to calculate dose. When reporting ozone requirement, also i nclude target oxidant
residual as well as other experimental characteristics listed in ¶ 5b above.
6.  Precision and Bias
 
See Section 2350B.6 . 
7.  Bibliography
 
See Section 4500-O3.B.7 and  Section 4500-O3.B.8. 
2510        CONDUCTIVITY* #(35)
2510  A.        Introduction
 Conductivity, k, is a measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to carry an electric
current. This ability depends on the presence of ions; on their total concentration, mobility, and
valence; and on the temperature of m easurement. Solutions of most inorganic compounds are
relatively good conductors. Conversely, molecules of organic compounds that do not dissociate
in aqueous solution conduct a current very poorly, if at all. 
1.  Definitions and Units of Expression
 Conductance, G, is defined as the reciprocal of resistance, R: 
where the unit of R is ohm and G is ohm−1 (sometimes written mho).  Conductance of a solution
is measured between two spatially fixed and chemicall y inert electrodes. To avoid polarization at
the electrode surfaces the conductance measurement is made with an alternating current signal.1
The conductance of a solution, G, is directly proportional to the electrode surface area, A, cm2,
and inversely pro portional to the distance between the electrodes, L, cm. The constant of
proportionality, k, such that: 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationis called ‘‘conductivity’’ (preferred to ‘‘specific conductance’’). It is a characteristic property of
the solution between the electrodes. The units  of k are 1/ohm-cm or mho per centimeter.
Conductivity is customarily reported in micromhos per centimeter ( µmho/cm). 
In the International System of Units (SI) the reciprocal of the ohm is the siemens (S) and
conductivity is reported as millisiemens per m eter (mS/m); 1 mS/m = 10 µmhos/cm and 1 µS/
cm = 1 µmho/cm. To report results in SI units of mS/m divide µmhos/cm by 10. 
To compare conductivities, values of k are reported relative to electrodes with A = 1 cm2 and
L = 1 cm. Absolute conductances, Gs, of standard potassium chloride solutions between
electrodes of precise geometry have been measured; the corresponding standard conductivities,
ks, are shown in Table 2510:I . 
The equivalent conductivity, Λ, of a solution is the conductivity per unit of concen tration. As
the concentration is decreased toward zero, Λ approaches a constant, designated as Λ°. With k in
units of micromhos per centimeter it is necessary to convert concentration to units of equivalents
per cubic centimeter; therefore: 
Λ = 0.001 k/concentration 
where the units of Λ, k, and concentration are mho-cm2/equivalent, µmho/cm, and equivalent/L,
respectively. Equivalent conductivity, Λ, values for several concentrations of KCl are listed in
Table 2510:I . In practice, solutions of KCl more dilu te than 0.001 M will not maintain stable
conductivities because of absorption of atmospheric CO2. Protect these dilute solutions from the
atmosphere. 
2.  Measurement
a. Instrumental measurements:  In the laboratory, conductance, Gs, (or resistance) of a
standard KCl solution is measured and from the corresponding conductivity, ks, (Table 2510:I ) a
cell constant, C, cm−1, is calculated:
 
Most conductivity meters do n ot display the actual solution conductance, G, or resistance, R;
rather, they generally have a dial that permits the user to adjust the internal cell constant to
match the conductivity, ks, of a standard. Once the cell constant has been determined, or set,  the
conductivity of an unknown solution, 
ku = CGu 
will be displayed by the meter. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDistilled water produced in a laboratory generally has a conductivity in the range 0.5 to 3
µmhos/cm. The conductivity increases shortly after exposure to both air and th e water container. 
The conductivity of potable waters in the United States ranges generally from 50 to 1500
µmhos/cm. The conductivity of domestic wastewaters may be near that of the local water supply,
although some industrial wastes have conductivities above 10 000 µmhos/cm. Conductivity
instruments are used in pipelines, channels, flowing streams, and lakes and can be incorporated
in multiple-parameter monitoring stations using recorders. 
Most problems in obtaining good data with conductivity monitorin g equipment are related to
electrode fouling and to inadequate sample circulation. Conductivities greater than 10 000 to 50
000 µmho/cm or less than about 10 µmho/cm may be difficult to measure with usual
measurement electronics and cell capacitance. Consu lt the instrument manufacturer’s manual or
published references.1,5,6 
Laboratory conductivity measurements are used to:     
•  Establish degree of mineralization to assess the effect of the total concentration of ions on
chemical equilibria, physiologica l effect on plants or animals, corrosion rates, etc.     
•  Assess degree of mineralization of distilled and deionized water.     
•  Evaluate variations in dissolved mineral concentration of raw water or wastewater. Minor
seasonal variations found in res ervoir waters contrast sharply with the daily fluctuations in
some polluted river waters. Wastewater contai ning significant trade wastes also may show a
considerable daily variation.     
•  Estimate sample size to be used for common chemical determination s and to check results of a
chemical analysis.     
•  Determine amount of ionic reagent needed in certain precipitation and neutralization reactions,
the end point being denoted by a change in slope of the curve resulting from plotting
conductivity agains t buret readings.     
•  Estimate total dissolved solids (mg/L) in a sample by multiplying conductivity (in micromhos
per centimeter) by an empirical factor. This factor may vary from 0.55 to 0.9, depending on the
soluble components of the water and on th e temperature of measurement. Relatively high
factors may be required for saline or boiler waters, whereas lower factors may apply where
considerable hydroxide or free acid is present. Even though sample evaporation results in the
change of bicarbonate to carbonate the empirical factor is derived for a comparatively constant
water supply by dividing dissolved solids by conductivity.     
•  Approximate the milliequivalents per liter of either cations or anions in some waters by
multiplying conductivity in u nits of micromhos per centimeter by 0.01. 
b. Calculation of conductivity:  For naturally occurring waters  that contain mostly Ca2+,
Mg2+, Na+, K+, HCO3−, SO42−, and  Cl− and with TDS less than about 2500 mg/L, the
following  procedure can be used to calculate conductivity from measured  ionic co ncentrations.7
The abbreviated water analysis in Table 2510:II  illustrates the calculation procedure. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationAt infinite dilution the contribution to conductivity by different  kinds of ions is additive. In
general, the relative contribution of  each cation and anion is calculated by multiplying
equivalent conductances, λ°+ and λ°−, mho-cm2/equivalent, by concentration in  equivalents per
liter and correcting units. Table 2510:III  contains  a short list of equivalent conductances for ions
commonly found  in natur al waters.8 Trace concentrations of ions generally make  negligible
contribution to the overall conductivity. A temperature  coefficient of 0.02/deg is applicable to
all ions, except H+  (0.0139/deg) and OH− (0.018/deg). 
At finite concentrations, as oppos ed to infinite dilution, conductivity per equivalent decreases
with increasing concentration  (see Table 2510:I ).  For solutions composed of one anion type and
one cation type, e.g., KCl as in Table 2510:I , the decrease in  conductivity per equivalent wit h
concentration can be calculated,  ±0.1%, using an ionic-strength-based theory of Onsager.9
When  mixed salts are present, as is nearly always the case with natural  and wastewaters, the
theory is quite complicated.10 The following  semiempirical procedu re can be used to calculate
conductivity for  naturally occurring waters: 
First, calculate infinite dilution conductivity ( Table 2510:II ,  Column 4): 
k° = ∑|zi|(λ°+i)(mMi) + ∑|zi|(λ°−i)(mMi) 
where: 
                |zi| =   absolute value of the charge of the i-th ion,  
            mMi =   millimolar concentration of the i-th ion, and 
    λ°+i, λ°−i =   equivalent conductance of the i-th ion. 
 
If mM is used to express concentration, the product, ( λ°+)  (m Mi) or (λ°−)(mMi), corrects the
units from liters to cm3. In this  case k° is 5 78.2 µmho/cm ( Table 2510:II , Column 4). 
Next, calculate ionic strength, IS in molar units: 
IS = ∑zi2(mMi)/2000 
The ionic strength is 15.33/2000 = 0.00767 M (Table 2510:II ,  Column 5). 
Calculate the monovalent ion activity coefficient, y, using the  Dav ies equation for IS ≤ 0.5
M and for temperatures from 20 to  30°C.9,11 
y = 10−0.5[IS1/2/(1 + IS1/2) − 0.3IS] 
In the present example IS = 0.00767 M and y = 0.91. 
Finally, obtain the calculated value of conductivity, kcalc, from: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationkcalc = k°y2 
In the exa mple being considered, kcalc = 578.2 × 0.912 =  478.8 µmho/cm versus the reported
value as measured by the  USGS of 477 µmho/cm. 
For 39 analyses of naturally occurring waters,7,12 conductivities  calculated in this manner
agreed with the measured values t o  within 2%. 
3.  References
         1.    WILLARD, H.H., L.L. MERRITT & J.A. DEAN.  1974. Instrumental Methods of Analysis, 5th
ed. D. Van Nostrand Company, New York, N.Y.
         2.    WU, Y.C., W.F. KOCH, W.J. HAMER & R.L. KAY.  1987. Review of electrolytic conductance
standards . J. Solution Chem.  16:No.12.
         3.    JASPER, W.S.  1988. Secondary Standard Potassium Chloride Conductivity Solutions at
25°C. Corporate Metrology Laboratory, YSI Inc., Yellow Springs, Ohio.
         4.    ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE METROLOGIE LEGALE.  1981. S tandard Solutions
Reproducing the Conductivity of Electrolytes, International Recommendation No. 56,
1st ed., June 1980. Bur. International de Metrologie Legale, Paris, France.
         5.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1982. Standard test methods  for
electrical conductivity and resistivity of water. ASTM Designation D1125-82.
         6.    SCHOEMAKER, D.S., C.W. GARLAND & J.W. NIBLER.  1989. Experiments in Physical
Chemistry, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, N.Y.
         7.    HAMILTON, C.E.  1978. Manua l on Water. ASTM Spec. Tech. Publ. 442A, 4th ed.
American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
         8.    DEAN, J.A.  1985. Lange’s Handbook of Chemistry, 13th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
New York, N.Y.
         9.    ROBINSON, R.A. & R.H. STOKES.  1959. Electrol yte Solutions, 2nd ed. Academic Press,
New York, N.Y.
       10.    HARNED, H.S. & B.B. OWEN.  1958. The Physical Chemistry of Electrolytic Solutions,
3rd ed. Reinhold Publishing Corp., New York, N.Y.
       11.    DAVIES, C.W.  1962. Ion Association. Elsevier Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
       12.    TCHOBANOGLOUS, G. & E.D. SCHROEDER.  1985. Water Quality, Vol. 1.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Mass.
2510 B.        Laboratory Method
1.  General Discussion
 See Section 2510A . Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Apparatus
a. Self-contained conductivity instruments:  Use an instrument capable of measuring
conductivity with an error not exceeding 1% or 1 µmho/cm, whichever is greater.
b. Thermometer, capable of being read to the nearest 0.1°C and covering the range 23 to
27°C. Many conductivity meters are equipped to read an automatic temperature sensor.
c. Conductivity cell:
1) Platinum-electrode type—Conductivity cells c ontaining platinized electrodes are available
in either pipet or immersion form. Cell choice depends on expected range of conductivity.
Experimentally check instrument by comparing instrumental results with true conductivities of
the KCl solutions listed in Table 2510:I . Clean new cells, not already coated and ready for use,
with chromic-sulfuric acid cleaning mixture [see Section 2580B.3 a2)] and platinize the
electrodes before use. Subsequently, clean and re platinize them whenever the readings become
erratic, when a sharp end point cannot be obtaine d, or when inspection shows that any platinum
black has flaked off. To platinize, prepare a solution of 1 g chloroplatinic acid, H2PtCl6⋅6H2O,
and 12 mg lead aceta te in 100 mL distilled water. A more concentrated solution reduces the time
required to platinize electrodes and may be used when time is a factor, e.g., when the cell
constant is 1.0/cm or more. Immerse electrodes in this solution and connect both to the negative
terminal of a 1.5-V dry cell battery.  Connect positive side of battery to a piece of platinum wire
and dip wire into the solution. Use a current such that only a small quantity of gas is evolved.
Continue electrolysis until both cell electrodes a re coated with platinum black. Save platinizing
solution for subsequent use. Rinse electrodes thoroughly and when not in use keep immersed in
distilled water. 
2) Nonplatinum-electrode type—Use conductiv ity cells containing electrodes constructed
from durable common metals (stainless steel among others) for continuous monitoring and field
studies. Calibrate such cells by comparing sample conductivity with resul ts obtained with a
laboratory instrument. Use properly designed and mated cell and instrument to minimize errors
in cell constant. Very long meter leads can affect performance of a conductivity meter. Under
such circumstances, consult the manufacturer’s ma nual for appropriate correction factors if
necessary. 
3.  Reagents
a. Conductivity water:  Any of several methods can be used to prepare reagent-grade water.
The methods discussed in Section 1080  are recommended.  The conductivity should be small
compared to the value being measured.
b. Standard potassium chloride solution,  KCl, 0.0100 M: Dissolve 745.6 mg anhydrous KCl
in conductivity water and dilute to 1000 mL in a class A volumetric flask at 25°C and store in a
CO2-free atmosphere. This is the standard reference solution, which at  25°C has a conductivity
of 1412 µmhos/cm. It is satisfactory for most samples when the cell has a constant between 1Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand 2 cm−1. For other cell constants, use stronger or weaker KCl solutions listed in Table 2510:I .
Care must be taken when using KCl solut ions less than 0.001 M, which can be unstable because
of the influence of carbon dioxide on pure water. For low conductivity standards, Standard
Reference Material 3190, with a certified conductivity of 25.0 µS/cm ± 0.3 µS/cm, may be
obtained from NIST. Sto re in a glass-stoppered borosilicate glass bottle.
4.  Procedure
a. Determination of cell constant:  Rinse conductivity cell with at least three portions of
0.01M KCl solution. Adjust temperature of a fourth portion to 25.0 ± 0.1°C. If a conductivity
meter displays resistance, R, ohms, measure resistance of this portio n and note temperature.
Compute cell constant, C:
 C, cm–1 = (0.001412)( RKCl)[1 + 0.0191( t − 25)] 
where: 
            RKCl =   measured resistance, ohms, and 
                  t =   observed temperature, °C. 
Conductivity meters often indicate conductivity directly. Commercial probe s commonly
contain a temperature sensor. With such instruments, rinse probe three times with 0.0100 M KCl,
as above. Adjust temperature compensation dial to 0.0191 C−1. With probe in standard KCl
solution, adjust meter to read 1412 µmho/cm. This procedure a utomatically adjusts cell constant
internal to the meter. 
b. Conductivity measurement:  Thoroughly rinse cell with one or more portions of sample.
Adjust temperature of a final portion to about 25°C. Measure sample resistance or conductivity
and note temperature to ±0.1°C.
5.  Calculation
 The temperature coefficient of most waters is only approximately the same as that of
standard KCl solution; the more the temperature of measurement deviates from 25.0°C, the
greater the uncertainty in applying the temperature correction.  Report temperature-compensated
conductivities as ‘‘ µmho/cm  25.0°C.’’ 
a. When sample resistance is measured, conductivity at 25°C is:
 
where: 
                  k =   conductivity, µmhos/cm, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                  C =   cell constant, cm−1, 
                Rm =   measured resistance of sample, ohms, and 
                  t =   temperature of measurement. 
b. When sample conductivity is meas ured without internal temperature compensation
conductivity at 25°C is: 
where: 
                km =   measured conductivity in units of µmho/cm at t°C, and other units are defined as
above. 
For instruments with automatic temperature compensation and readout directly  in µmho/cm
or similar units, the readout automatically is corrected to 25.0°C. Report displayed conductivity
in designated units. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 The precision of commercial conductivity meters is commonly between 0.1 and 1.0%.
Reproducibility of 1 to 2% is expected after an in strument has been calibrated with such data as
is shown in Table 2510:I . 
2520        SALINITY* #(36)
2520 A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Salinity is an important unitless property of industrial and natural waters. It was originally
conceived as a measure of the mass  of dissolved salts in a given mass of solution. The
experimental  determination of the salt content by drying and weighing presents  some
difficulties due to the loss of some components. The only  reliable way to determine the true or
absolute salinity of a natural  water is to make a complete chemical analysis. However, this
method is time-consuming an d cannot yield the precision necessary for accurate work. Thus, to
determine salinity, one normally  uses indirect methods involving the measurement of a physical
property such as conductivity, density, sound speed, or refractive  index. From an empirical
relationship of salinity and the physical  property detemined for a standard solution it is possibleStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationto calculate salinity. The resultant salinity is no more accurate than the  empirical relationship.
The precision of the measurement of a  physical proper ty will determine the precision in salinity.
Following are the precisions of various physical measurements and the  resultant salinity
presently attainable with commercial instruments: 
PropertyPrecision of
MeasurementPrecision of
Salinity  
Conductivit y ±0.0002 ±0.0002 
Density ±3 × 10–6 g/cm3 ±0.004 
Sound speed ±0.02 m/s ±0.01 
Although conductivity has the greatest precision, it responds  only to ionic solutes.  Density,
although less precise, responds to  all dissolved solutes. 
2.  Selection of Method
 In the past, the salinity of seawater was determined by hydrometric and argentometric
methods, both of which were included in previous editions of Standard Methods . In recent years
the conductivity (2520B) and density (2520C) met hods have been used because of their high
sensitivity and precision. These two methods are recommended for precise field and laboratory
work. 
3.  Quality Assurance
 Calibrate salinometer or densimeter against st andards of KCl or standard seawater. Expected
precision is better than ±0.01 salinity units with careful analysis and use of bracketing standards. 
2520 B.        Electrical Conductivity Method
1.  Determination
 See Conductivity, Section 2510 . Because of its high sensitivity  and ease of measurement,
the conductivity method is most commonly used to determine salinity.1  For seawater
measurements use  the Practical Salinity Scale 1978.2-5 This scale was developed  relative to a
KCl solution. A seawater with a conductivity, C, at  15°C equal to that of a KCl solution
containing a mass of 32.4356  g in a mass of 1 kg of solution is defined as having a practical
salinity of 35. This value was dete rmined as an average of three  independent laboratory studies.
The salinity dependence of the  conductivity ratio, Rt, as a function of temperature ( t °C,
International Practical Temperature Scale 1968) of a given sample to  a standard S= 35 seawater
is used to determine the salinity Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationS = a0 + a1Rt1/2 + a2Rt +a3Rt3/2 + a4Rt2 + a5Rt5/2 +  S 
where  S is given by 
 
and: 
a0 =0.0080 b0 =0.0005 
a1 =−0.1692 b1 =−0.0056 
a2 =25.3851 b2 =−0.0066 
a3 =14.0941 b3 =−0.0375 
a4 =−7.0261 b4 =0.0636 
a5 =2.7081 b5 =−0.0144 
 valid from S = 2 to 42, where: 
 
To measure the conductivity, use a conductivity bridge calibrated with standard
seawater* #(37)  with a known conductivity relative  to KCl, following manufacturer’s
instructions and the procedures  noted in Section 2510 . If the measurements are to be made in
estuarine waters, make secondary calibrations of weight-diluted  seawater of known conductivity
to ensure that the bridge is measuring true conductivities. 
The Practical Salinity Scale recently has been extended to low s alinities6 to give an equation
that is valid from 0 to 40 salinity.  The equation is: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
 
where: 
            SPSS =   value determined from the Practical Salinity Scale given earlier, 
                a0 =   0.008, 
                b0 =   0.0005, 
                  X =   400Rt, 
                  Y =   100Rt, and 
              f(t) =   (t−15)/[1 + 0.0162 ( t−15)] 
The practical salinity breaks with the old salinity-chlorinity relationship, S =  l.806 55 Cl.
Although the scale can be used for  estuarine waters7-10 and brines11-13, there are
limitations.12,14-22 
2.  References
         1.    LEWIS, E.L.  1978. Salinity: its definition and calculation. J. Geophys. Res. 83:466.
         2.    LEWIS, E.L.  1980. The practical salinity scale 1978 and its antecedents. IEEEJ. Oceanic
Eng. OE-5:3.
         3.    BRADSHAW, A.L. & K.E. SCHLEIC HER.  1980. Electrical conductivity of seawater. IEEE
J. Oceanic Eng .OE-5:50.
         4.    CULKIN, F. & N.D. SMITH.  1980. Determination of the concentration of potassium
chloride solution having the same electrical conductivity, at 15°C and infinite
frequency, a s standard seawater of salinity 35.000 0/00 (Chlorinity 19.37394 0/00.IEEE
J. Oceanic Eng . OE-5:22.
         5.    DAUPHINEE, T.M., J. ANCSIN, H.P. KLEIN & M.J. PHILLIPS.  1980. The effect of
concentration and temperature on the conductivity ratio of potassium chl oride solutions
to standard seawater of salinity 35 0/00 (Cl.19.3740) at 15°C and 24°. IEEE J. Oceanic
Eng.OE-5:17.
         6.    HILL, K.D., T.M. DAUPHINEE & D.J. WOODS.  1986. The Extension of the Practical
Salinity Scale 1978 to low salinities. IEEE J. Oceanic  Eng. OE-11:109.
         7.    MILLERO, F.J.  1975. The physical chemistry of estuarines. In T.M. Church, ed. Marine
Chemistry in the Coastal Environment. American Chemical Soc. Symposium, Ser. 18.
         8.    MILLERO, F.J.  1978. The physical chemistry of Baltic Sea waters. Thalassia
Jugoslavica  14:1.
         9.    MILLERO, F.J.  1984. The conductivity-salinity-chlorinity relationship for estuarineStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwaters. Limnol. Oceanogr . 29:1318.
       10.    MILLERO, F.J. & K. KREMLING.  1976. The densities of Baltic Sea waters. Deep-Sea Res .
23:1129.
       11.    FERNANDEZ, F., F. VAZQUEZ & F.J. MILLERO.  1982. The density and composition of
hypersaline waters of a Mexican lagoon. Limnol. Oceanogr.  27:315.
       12.    MILLERO, F.J. & P.V.CHETIRKIN.  1980. The density of Caspian Sea waters. Deep-Sea
Res.  27:265.
       13.    MILLERO, F.J., A. MUCCI, J. ZULLIG & P. CHETIRKIN.  1982. The density of Red Sea
brines. Mar. Chem . 11:477.
       14.    BREWER, P.G. & A. BRADSHAW.  1975. The effect of non-ideal composition of seawater
on salinity and density. J. Mar. Res . 33:155.
       15.    CONNORS, D.N. & D.R. KESTER.  1974. Effect of major ion variations in the marine
environment on the specific gravity-conductivity-chlorinity-salinity relationship. Mar.
Chem . 2:301.
       16.    POISSON, A.  1980. The concentration of the KCl s olution whose conductivity is that of
standard seawater (35 0/00) at 15°C. IEEE J. Oceanic Eng .OE-5:24.
       17.    POISSON, A.  1980. Conductivity/salinity/temperature relationship of diluted and
concentrated standard seawater. IEEE J.Oceanic Eng . OE-5:17.
       18.    MILLERO, F.J., A.GONZALEZ & G.K. WARD.  1976. The density of seawater solutions at
one atmosphere as a function of temperature and salinity. J. Mar. Res . 34:61.
       19.    MILLERO, F.J., A. GONZALEZ, P.G. BREWER & A.BRADSHAW.  1976. The density of North
Atlantic and North Pacific deep waters. Earth Planet Sci. Lett . 32:468.
       20.    MILLERO, F.J., D. LAWSON & A.GONZALEZ.   1976. The density of artificial river and
estuary waters. J. Geophys. Res . 81:1177.
       21.    MILLERO, F.J., P. CHETIRKIN & F. CULKIN.   1977. The relative conductivity and density
of standard seawaters. Deep-Sea Res . 24:315.
       22.    MILLERO, F.J., D. FORSHT, D. MEANS, J. GRIESKES & K. KENYON.  1977. The density of
North Pacific ocean waters. J.Geophys. Res . 83:2359.
2520 C.        Density Method
1.  Determination
 With a precise vibrating flow densimeter, it is possible to make rapid measurements of the
density of natural waters. The measurements are made bypassing the sample through a vibrating
tube encased in a constant-temperature jacket. The  solution density ( ρ) is proportional to the
square of the period of the vibration ( τ). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationρ = A +Bτ2
where A and B are terms determined by calibration, B being determined by calibration with a
densimeter with standard seawater. The difference between the de nsity of the sample and that of
pure water is given by: 
ρ − ρ0 = B(τ2 − τ02)
where τ and τ0 are, respectively, the periods of the sample and water. The system is calibrated
with two solutions of known density. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations for cal ibration.
These two solutions can be nitrogen gas and water or standard seawater and water. The salinity
of the sample can be determined from the 1 atm international equation of state for seawater. This
equation relates ( ρ −ρ0) to the practical salinity ( S) as a function of temperature.1 
ρ (kg/m3) = ρ0+ AS +BS3/2 + CS2
where: 
                  A =   8.244 93 × 10–1 − 4.0899 × 10–3t
                        + 7.6438 × 10–5t2 − 8.2467 ×10–7t3 + 5.3875 ×10–9t4, 
                  B =   −5.724 66 × 10–3 + 1.0227 × 10–4t − 1.6546 × 10–6t2, 
                  C =   4.8314 × 10–4, 
and the density of water is given by: 
                ρ0 =   999.842 594 + 6.793 952 × 10–2t − 9.095 290× 10–3 t2 
                        + 1.001 685 × 10–4t3 − 1.120 083 ×10–6t4 + 6.536 332 
                        × 10–9t5 
Perform simple iteratio n by adjusting S until it gives the measured ρ − ρ0 at a given temperature.
If the measurements are made at 25°C, the salinity can be determined from the following
equation: 
S = 1.3343 ( ρ − ρ0) + 2.155 306 ×10–4 (ρ − ρ0)2 −1.171 16 × 10–5 (ρ −ρ0)3
which h as a τ = 0.0012 in S. Approximate salinities also can be determined from densities or
specific gravities obtained with a hydrometer at a given temperature (Section 210B, 16th
edition). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Reference
         1.    MILLERO, F.J. & A. POISSON . 1981. International one-atmosphere equation of state of
seawater. Deep Sea Res . 28:625.
2520 D.        Algorithm of Practical Salinity
   Because all practical salinity measurements are carried out in  reference to the conductivity
of standard seawater (corrected to S  = 35), it is the quantity Rt that will be available for salinity
calcula tions. Rt normally is obtained directly by laboratory salinometers, but in situ
measurements usually produce the quantity  R, the ratio of the in situ  conductivity to the standard
conductivity  at S = 35, t = 15°C, p = 0 (where p is the pressure above one  standard atmosphere
and the temperature is on the 1968 International Temperature Scale). R is factored into three
parts, i.e., 
R =RprtRt 
where:  
      Rp = ratio of in situ  conductivity to conductivity of the same sample 
              at the same tem perature, but at p = 0 and rt = ratio of 
              conductivity of reference seawater, having a practical salinity 
              of 35, at temperature t, to its conductivity at t = 15°C. From 
              Rp and rt calculate Rt using the in situ  results, i.e.,
 
  
Rp and rt can be expressed as functions of the numerical values  of the in situ  parameters, R, t,
and p, when t is expressed in °C  and p in bars (105 Pa), as follows: 
 
where: 
          e1 =  2.070 × 10–4, d1 =  3.426 × 10–2, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation          e2 =−6.370 × 10–8, d2 =  4.464 × 10–4, 
          e3 =  3.989 × 10–12, d3 =  4.215 × 10–1, 
and d4 =−3.107 × 10–3, 
and 
rt =c0 + c1t +c2t2 + c3t3 +c4t4 
where: 
      c0 = 0.676 609 7, 
      c1 = 2.005 64 × 10–2, 
      c2 = 1.104 259 ×10–4, 
      c3 = −6.9698 × 10–7,and 
      c4 = 1.0031 × 10–9.  
2530        FLOATABLES #(38) *
2530 A.        Introduction
 One important criterion for evaluating the possi ble effect of waste disposal into surface
waters is the amount of floatable material in the waste. Two general types of floating matter are
found:  particulate matter that inclu des ‘‘grease balls,’’ and liquid components capable of
spreading as a thin, highly visible film over large areas. Floatable material in wastewaters is
important because it accumulates on the surface, is often highly visible, is subject to
wind-induced tran sport, may contain pathogenic bacteria and/or viruses associated with
individual particles, and can significantly concentrate metals and chlorinated hydrocarbons such
as pesticides and PCBs. Colloidally dispersed oil and grease behave like other dispersed organic
matter and are included in the material measured by the COD, BOD, and TOC tests. The
floatable oil test indicates the readily separabl e fraction. The results are useful in designing oil
and grease separators, in ascertaining the efficiency of opera ting separators, and in monitoring
raw and treated wastewater streams. Many cities and districts have specified floatable oil and
grease limits for wastewater discharged to sewers. 
2530 B.        Particulate Floatables (GENERAL)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Discussion
a.  Principle:  This method depends on the gravity separation of particles having densities
less than that of the surrounding water. Particle s that collect on the surface and can be filtered
out and dried at 103 to 105°C are defined by this test as floata ble particles.
b.  Application:  This method is applicable to raw wastewater, treated primary and secondary
effluent, and industrial wastewater. Because of the limited sensitivity, it is not applicable to
tertiary effluents or receiving waters, whether freshwater or sea water.
c.  Precautions:  Even slight differences in sampling and handling during and after collection
can give large differences in th e measured amount of floatable material. Additionally, uniformity
of the TFE #(39) * coating of the separation funnel is critical to o btaining reliable results. For a
reproducible analysis treat all samples uniformly, preferably by mixing them in a standard
manner, before flotation and use consistently prepared separation funnels as much as possible.
Because the procedure relies on the d ifference in specific gravity between the liquid and the
floating particles, temperature variations may affect the results. Conduct the test at a constant
temperature the same as that of the receiving water body, and report temperature with results.
d.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum reproducible detectable concentration
is approximately 1 mg/L. Although the minimum levels that can be measured are below 1 mg/ L,
the results are not meaningful within the current established accuracy of  the test.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Floatables sampler with mixer:  Use a metal container of at least 5 L capacity equipped
with a propeller mixer on a separate stand ( Figure 2530:1 ), and with a 20-mm-ID bottom outlet
cocked at an angle of 45° to the container wall in the direction of f luid movement. The 45° angle
assures that even large particles will flow from the container into the flotation funnels where the
sample is withdrawn. Fit exterior of bottom outle t with a short piece of tubing and a pinch clamp
to allow unrestricted flow th rough the outlet. Coat inside of container with TFE as uniformly as
possible, using a TFE spray to prevent oil and grease from sticking to the surface.
b.  Flotation funnel:  Use an Imhoff cone provided with a TFE stopcock at the bottom and
extended at the top to a total volume of 3.5 L ( Figure 2530:2 ). Coat inside of flotation funnel
with TFE as uniformly as possible to prevent floatable grease particle s sticking to the sides.
Mount flotation funnels as shown in Figure 2530:3  with a light behind the bottom of the funnels
to aid in reading levels.
c.  Filter holder:  Coat inside of top of a standard 500-mL membrane filter holder with TFE,
again taking all possible precautions to obtain a uniform TFE coating.
d.  Filters,  glass fiber, fine porosity. #(40) †
e.  Vacuum flask,  500 mL.
f.  TFE coating:  Follow instructions that accompany commercially available coating kits.
Alternatively, have necessary glassware coated commercially. Uniform coatings are key to theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationreliability of the test results, but in practice are difficult to obtain .
3.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of glass fiber filters:  See Section 2540D.3 a.
b.  Sample collection and treatment:  Collect sample in the floatables sampler at a point of
complete mixing, transport to the laboratory, and place 3.0 L in the flotation funnel within 2 h
after sample collection to minimize changes in the floatable mate rial. While the flotation funnel
is being filled, mix sampler contents with a small propeller mixer. Adjust mixing speed to
provide uniform distribution of floating partic les throughout the liquid but avoid extensive air
entrapment through formation of a l arge vortex.
c.  Correction for density and for concentration effects:  When a receiving water has a density
and ion concentration different from that of  the waste, adjust sample density and ion
concentration to that of the receiving water. For example, if the receivi ng water is ocean water,
place 1.5 L sample in flotation funnel and add 1.5 L filtered seawater from the receiving area
together with mixture of 39.8 g NaCl, 8.0 g MgCl2⋅6H2O, and 2.3 g CaCl2⋅2H2O. The final
mixture contains the amount of floatables in a 1 .5-L sample in a medium of approximately the
same density and ion concentration as seawater.
d. Flotation:  Mix flotation funnel contents at 40 rpm for 15 min using a paddle mixer ( Figure
2530:3 ). Let settle for 5 min, mix at 100 rpm for 1 min, and let settle for 30 min. Discharge 2.8 L
through bottom stopcock at a rate of 500 mL/min. Do not dist urb the sample surface in the
flotation funnel during discharge. With distilled water from a wash bottle, wash down any
floatable material sticking to sides of stirring paddle and funnel. Let remaining 200 mL settle for
15 min and discharge settled solids and liquid down to the 40-mL mark on the Imhoff cone. Let
settle again for 10 min and discharge until only 10 mL liquid and the floating particles remain in
funnel. Add 500 mL distilled water and stir by hand to separate entrapped settleable particles
from  the floatable particles. Let settle for 15 min, then discharge to the 40-mL mark. Let settle
for 10 min, then discharge dropwise to the 10-mL mark. Filter remaining 10 mL and floating
particles through a preweighed glass fiber filter. Wash sides of flotat ion funnel with distilled
water to transfer all floatable material to filter.
e.  Weighing:  Dry and weigh glass fiber filter at 103 to 105° C for exactly 2 h (see Section
2540D.3 c).
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   weight of filter + floatables, mg, 
                  B =   weight of filter, mg, and Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                  C =   sample volume, L. (Do not include volume used for density or concentration
correction, if used.) 
5.  Precision and Bias
 Precision varies with the concentration of suspended matter in the sample. There is no
completely satisfactory procedure for determining the bias of the method for wastewater samples
but approximate recovery can be determined by r unning a second test for floatables on all water
discharged throughout the procedure, with the exception of the last 10 mL. Precision and bias are
summarized in Table 2530:I . Experience with the method at one municipal treatment plant
indicates that the pr actical lower limit of detection is approximately 1 mg/L. 
6.  Bibliography
 HEUKELEKIAN, H. & J. BALMAT.  1956. Chemical composition of the particulate fractions of
domestic sewage. Sewage Ind. Wastes  31:413.
 ENGINEERING-SCIENCE, INC. 1965. Determination and Removal of Floatable Material from
Waste Water. Rep. for U.S. Public Health Serv. contracts WPD 12-01 (R1)-63 and WPD
12-02-64, Engineering-Science, Inc., Arcadia & Oakland, Calif.
 HUNTER, J.V. & H. HEUKELEKIAN.  1965. Composition of domestic sewage fractions. J. Water
Pollut. Control Fed . 37:1142.
 NUSBAUM I. & L. BURTMAN.  1965. Determination of floatable matter in waste discharges. J.
Water Pollut. Control Fed.  37:577.
 SCHERFIG, J. & H. F. LUDWIG.  1967. Determination of floatables and hexane extractables in
sewage. In Advances in Water Pollution Research, Vol. 3, p. 217, Water Pollution Control
Federation, Washington, D.C.
 SELLECK, R.E., L. W. BRACEWELL & R. CARTER.  1974. The Significance and Control of
Wastewater Floatables in Coastal Waters. Rep. for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
contract R-800373 , SERL Rep. No. 74-1, Sanitary Engineering Research Lab., Univ.
California, Berkeley.
 BRACEWELL, L.W.  1976. Contribution of Wastewater Discharges to Surface Films and Other
Floatables on the Ocean Surface. Thesis, Univ. California, Berkeley.
 BRACEWELL, L .W., R.E. SELLECK & R. CARTER.  1980. Contribution of wastewater discharges to
ocean surface particulates. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  52:2230. 
2530 C.        Trichlorotrifluoroethane- Soluble Floatable Oil and Grease (GENERAL)
1.  Discussion
 The floatable oil and grease test does not measure a precise class of substances; rather, the
results are determined by the conditions of the test. The fraction measured includes oil and
grease, both floating and adhering to the sides of the test vessel. The adhering and the floating
portions are of similar practical significance because it is assumed that most of the adheringStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationportion would otherwise float under receiving water conditions. The results have been found to
represent well the amount of oil removed in separators having overflow rates equivalent to test
conditions. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Floatable oil tube (Figure 2530:4 ): Before use, carefully clean tube by brushing with a
mild scouring power. Water must form a smooth film on inside of cleaned glass. Do not use
lubricant on stopcock.
b.  Conical flask,  300 mL.
3.  Reagents
 
a.  1,1,2-trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane #(41) *: See Section 5520B.3 b. 
b.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 6 N.
c.  Filter paper .#(42) †
4.  Procedure
a.  Sampling:  Collect samples at a place where there is a strong turbulence in the water and
where floating material is not trapped at the su rface. Fill floatable oil tube to mark by dipping
into water. Do not use samples taken to the laboratory in a bot tle, because oil and grease cannot
be redispersed to their original condition.
b.  Flotation:  Support tube in a vertical position. Start flotation period at sampling site
immediately after filling tube. The standard flotation time is 30 min. If a different time is used,
state this variation in reporting results. At end of flotation  period, discharge the first 900 mL of
water carefully through bottom stopcock, stopping before any surface oil or other floating
material escapes. Rotate tube slightly back and forth about its vertical axis to dislodge sludge
from sides, and let settle fo r 5 min. Completely discharge sludge that has settled to the bottom or
that comes down from the sides with the liquid. Scum on top of the liquid may mix with the
water as it moves down the tube. If mixing occurs, stop drawing off water before any floatable s
have been lost. Let settle for 5 min before withdrawing remainder of water. After removing
water, return tube to laboratory to complete test.
c.  Extraction:  Acidify to pH 2 or lower with a few drops of 6 N HCl, add 50 to 100 mL
trichlorotrifluoroethane, and shake vigorously. Let settle and draw off solvent into a clean dry
beaker. Filter solvent through a dry filter paper into a tared 300-mL c onical flask, taking care not
to get any water on filter paper. Add a second 50-mL portion of trichlorotrifluoroethane and
repeat extraction, settling, and filtration into the same 300-mL flask. A third extraction may be
needed if the amount of floatables in sample exceeds 4 mg/L. Wash filter paper carefully with
fresh solvent discharged from a wash bottle with a fine tip. Evaporate solvent from flask as
described in Section 5520B.4 . For each solvent batch, determine weight of residue left after
evaporation  from the same volume as used in the analysis.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation5.  Calculations
 Report results as ‘‘soluble floatable oil and grease, 30 min (or other specified) settling time,
mg/L.’’ 
Trichlorotrifluoroethane-soluble floatable oil and grease, 30 min settling time, mg/L 
where: 
                  A =   total gain in weight of tar ed flask, mg, and 
                  B =   calculated residue from solvent blank of the same volume as that used in the test,
mg. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 There is no standard against which bias of this test can be determined. Variability of
replicates is influenced by sample heterogeneity. If large grease particles are present, the element
of chance in sampling may be a major facto r. One municipal wastewater discharge and two
meat-packing plant discharges, both containing noticeable particles of grease, were analyzed in
triplicate. Averages for the three wastewaters were 48, 57, and 25 mg/L; standard deviations
averaged 11%. An oil refinery made duplicate determinations of its separator effluent on 15
consecutive days, obtaining results ranging from 5.1 to 11.2 mg/L. The average difference
between pairs of samples was 0.37 mg/L. 
7.  Bibliography
 POMEROY, R.D.  1953. Floatability of oil and grease in wastewaters. Sewage Ind. Wastes
25:1304.
2540        SOLIDS #(43) *
2540  A.        Introduction
 Solids refer to matter suspended or dissolved in water or wastewater. Solids may affect water or
effluent quality adversely in a number of ways. Waters with high dissolved solids generally are
of inferior palatability and ma y induce an unfavorable physiological reaction in the transient
consumer. For these reasons, a limit of 500 mg dissolved solids/L is desirable for drinking
waters. Highly mineralized waters also are unsuitable for many industrial applications. Waters
high in suspended solids may be esthetically unsatisfactory for such purposes as bathing. Solids
analyses are important in the control of biologi cal and physical wastewater treatment processes
and for assessing compliance with regulatory agency wastewater efflu ent limitations.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Definitions
 ‘‘Total solids’’ is the term applied to the material residue left in the vessel after evaporation
of a sample and its subsequent drying in an oven at a defined temperature. Total solids includes
‘‘total suspended solids,’’ the portion of  total solids retained by a filter, and ‘‘total dissolved
solids,’’ the portion that passes through the filter. 
The type of filter holder, the pore size, porosity, area, and thickness of the filter and the
physical nature, particle size, and amount of mat erial deposited on the filter are the principal
factors affecting separation of suspended from dissolved solids. ‘‘Dissolved solids’’ is the
portion of solids that passes through a filter of 2.0 µm (or smaller) nominal pore size under
specified conditions.  ‘‘Suspended solids’’ is the portion retained on the filter. 
‘‘Fixed solids’’ is the term applied to the residue of total, suspended, or dissolved solids after
heating to dryness for a specified time at a specified temperature. The weight loss on ignition  is
called ‘‘volatile solids.’’ Determinations of fixed and volatile solids do not distinguish precisely
between inorganic and organic matter because the loss on ignition is not confined to organic
matter. It includes losses due to decomposition or volatil ization of some mineral salts. Better
characterization of organic matter can be made by such tests as total organic carbon ( Section
5310 ), BOD ( Section 5210 ), and COD ( Section 5220 ). 
‘‘Settleable solids’’ is the term applied to the material settling out o f suspension within a
defined period. It may include floating material, depending on the technique ( Section 2540F.3 b). 
2.  Sources of Error and Variability
 Sampling, subsampling, and pipeting two-phase or three-phase samples may introduce
serious errors. Make and keep such samples homogeneous during transfer. Use special handling
to insure sample integrity when subsampl ing. Mix small samples with a magnetic stirrer. If
suspended solids are present, pipet with wide-bore pipets. If part of a sample adheres to the
sample container, consider this in evaluating and reporting results. Some samples dry with the
formation of a c rust that prevents water evaporation;  special handling is required to deal with
this. Avoid using a magnetic stirrer with samples containing magnetic particles. 
The temperature at which the residue is dried has an important bearing on results, because
weight losses due to volatilization of organic matter, mechanically occluded water, water of
crystallization, and gases from heat-induced chemical decomposition, as well as weight gains
due to oxidation, depend on temperature and time of heating. Each sample  requires close
attention to desiccation after drying. Minimize opening desiccator because moist air enters.
Some samples may be stronger desiccants than those used in the desiccator and may take on
water. 
Residues dried at 103 to 105°C may retain not onl y water of crystallization but also some
mechanically occluded water. Loss of CO2 will result in conversion of bicarbonate to carbonate.
Loss of organic matter by volatilization usually will be very slight. Because removal of occluded
water is marginal at this temperature, attainment of constant weight may be very slow. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationResidues dried at 180 ± 2°C will lose almost all mechanically occluded water. Some water of
crystallization may remain, especially if sulfates are present. Organic matter may be lost by
volatilization, but not completely destroyed. Loss of CO2 results from conversion of
bicarbonates to carbonates and carbonates may be decomposed partially to oxides or basic salts.
Some chloride and nitrate salts may be lost. In general, evaporating and dryin g water samples at
180°C yields values for dissolved solids closer to those obtained through summation of
individually determined mineral species than the dissolved solids values secured through drying
at the lower temperature. 
To rinse filters and filter ed solids and to clean labware use Type III water. Special samples
may require a higher quality water; see Section 1080 . 
Results for residues high in oil or grease may be questionable because of the difficulty of
drying to constant weight in a reasonable time. 
To aid in quality assurance, analyze samples in duplicate. Dry samples to constant weight if
possible. This entails multiple drying-cooling-weighing cycles for each determination. 
Analyses performed for some special purposes may demand deviation fr om the stated
procedures to include an unusual constituent with the measured solids. Whenever such variations
of technique are introduced, record and present them with the results. 
3.  Sample Handling and Preservation 
Use resistant-glass or plastic bottles, provided that the material in suspension does not adhere
to container walls. Begin analysis as soon as possible because of the impracticality of preserving
the sample. Refriger ate sample at 4°C up to the time of analysis to minimize microbiological
decomposition of solids. Preferably do not hold samples more than 24 h. In no case hold sample
more than 7 d. Bring samples to room temperature before analysis. 
4.  Selection of Method
 Methods B through F are suitable for the determination of solids in potable, surface, and
saline waters, as well as domestic and industrial wastewaters in the range up to 20 000 mg/L. 
Method G is suitable for the determination o f solids in sediments, as well as solid and
semisolid materials produced during water and wastewater treatment. 
5.  Bibliography
 THERIAULT, E.J. & H.H. WAGENHALS.  1923. Studies of representative sewage plants. Pub. Health
Bull.  No. 132.
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1979. Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
and Wastes. Publ. 600/4-79-020, rev. Mar. 19 83. Environmental Monitoring and Support
Lab., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio.
2540  B.        Total Solids Dried at 103–105°CStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  A well-mixed sample is evaporated in a weighed dish and dried to constant
weight in an oven at 103 to 105°C. The increase in weight over that of the empty dish represents
the total solids. The results may not represent the weight of actual  dissolved and suspended
solids in wastewater samples (see above).
b.  Interferences:  Highly mineralized water with a significant concentration of calcium,
magnesium, chloride, and/or sulfate may be hygroscopic and require prolonged drying, proper
desiccation, and rapid weighing. Exclude large, floating particles or sub merged agglomerates of
nonhomogeneous materials from the sample if it is determined that their inclusion is not desired
in the final result. Disperse visible floating o il and grease with a blender before withdrawing a
sample portion for analysis. Because e xcessive residue in the dish may form a water-trapping
crust, limit sample to no more than 200 mg residue (see Section 2540A.2) .
2.  Apparatus
a.  Evaporating dishes:  Dishes of 100-mL capacity made of one of the following materials: 
1)  Porcelain, 90-mm diam. 
2)  Platinum—Generally satisfactory for all purposes. 
3)  High-silica glass. #(44) * 
b.  Muffle furnace  for operation at 550°C.
c.  Steam bath.
d.  Desiccator,  provided with a desiccant containing a color indicator of moisture
concentration or an instrumental indicator.
e.  Drying oven,  for operation at 103 to 105°C.
f.  Analytical balance,  capable of weighing to 0.1 mg.
g.  Magnetic stirrer  with TFE stirring bar.
h.  Wide-bore pipets .#(45) †
i.  Graduated cylinder.
 j. Low-form beaker. #(46) ‡ 
3.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of evaporating dish:  If volatile solids are to be measured ignite clean
evaporating dish at 550°C for 1 h in a muffle furnace. If only total solids are to be measured,
heat clean dish to 103 to 105°C for 1 h. Store and cool dish in desicc ator until needed. Weigh
immediately before use.
b.  Sample analysis:  Choose a sample volume that will yield a residue between 2.5 and 200
mg. Pipet a measured volume of well-mixed sample, during mixing, to a preweighed dish. For
homogeneous samples, pipet from the approximate midpoint of the container  but not in the
vortex. Choose a point both middepth and midway between wall and vortex. Evaporate toStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdryness on a steam bath or in a drying oven. Stir sample with a magnetic stirrer during transfer.
If necessary, add successive sample portions to the same  dish after evaporation. When
evaporating in a drying oven, lower temperature to approximately 2°C below boiling to prevent
splattering. Dry evaporated sample for at least 1 h in an oven at 103 to 105°C, cool dish in
desiccator to balance temperature, and weigh. Repeat cycle of drying, cooling, desiccating, and
weighing until a constant weight is obtained, or un til weight change is less than 4% of previous
weight or 0.5 mg, whichever is less. When weighing dried sample, be alert to change in weight
due to a ir exposure and/or sample degradation. Analyze at least 10% of all samples in duplicate.
Duplicate determinations should agree within 5% of their average weight.
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   weight of dried residue + dish, mg, and 
                  B =   weight of dish, mg. 
5.  Precision
 Single-laboratory duplicate analyses of 41 samp les of water and wastewater were made with
a standard deviation of differences of 6.0 mg/L. 
6.  Bibliography
 SYMONS, G.E. & B. MOREY . 1941. The effect of drying time on the determination of solids in
sewage and sewage sludges. Sewage Works J.  13:936.
2540  C.        Total Dissolved Solids Dried at 180°C
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  A well-mixed sample is filtered through a standard glass fiber filter, and the
filtrate is evaporated to dryness in a weighed di sh and dried to constant weight at 180°C. The
increase in dish weight represents the total dissolved solids. Th is procedure may be used for
drying at other temperatures.
 The results may not agree with the theoretical value for solids calculated from chemical
analysis of sample (see above). Approximate methods for correlating chemical analysis with
dissolved solids  are available.1 The filtrate from the total suspended solids determination
(Section 2540D ) may be used for determination of total dissolved solids. 
b.  Interferences:  See Section 2540A.2  and  Section 2540B.1 . Highly mineralized watersStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwith a considerable calcium, magnesium, chloride, and/or sulfate content may be hygroscopic
and require prolonged drying, proper de siccation, and rapid weighing. Sampl es high in
bicarbonate require careful and possibly pr olonged drying at 180°C to insure complete
conversion of bicarbonate to carbonate. Because excessive residue in the dish may form a
water-trapping crust, limit sample to no more than 200 mg residue.
2.  Apparatus
 Apparatus listed in Section 2540B.2 a - h is required, and in addition: 
a.  Glass-fiber filter disks #(47) * without organic binder.
b.  Filtration apparatus:  One of the following, suitable for the filter disk selected:
1)  Membrane filter funnel.  
2)  Gooch crucible,  25-mL to 40-mL capacity, with Gooch crucible adapter. 
3)  Filtration apparatus  with reservoir and coarse (40- to 60- µm) fritted disk as filter
support. #(48) † 
c.  Suction flask,  of sufficient capacity for sample size selected.
d.  Drying oven,  for operation at 180 ± 2°C.
3.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of glass-fiber filter disk:  If pre-prepared glass fiber filter disks are used,
eliminate this step. Insert disk with wrinkled side up into filtration apparatus. Apply vacuum and
wash disk with three successive 20-mL volumes of reagent-gra de water. Continue suction to
remove all traces of water. Discard washings.
b.  Preparation of evaporating dish:  If volatile solids are to be measured, ignite cleaned
evaporating dish at 550°C for 1 h in a muffle furnace. If only total dissolved solids are to be
measured, heat clean dish to 180 ± 2°C for 1 h in an oven. Store in  desiccator until needed.
Weigh immediately before use.
c.  Selection of filter and sample sizes:  Choose sample volume to yield between 2.5 and 200
mg dried residue. If more than 10 min are required to complete filtration, increase filter size or
decrease sample volume.
d.  Sample analysis:  Stir sample with a magnetic stirrer and pipet a measured volume onto a
glass-fiber filter with applied vacuum. Wash with three successive 10-mL volumes of
reagent-grade water, allowing complete drainage between washings, and continue  suction for
about 3 min after filtration is complete. Transf er total filtrate (with washings) to a weighed
evaporating dish and evaporate to dryness on a steam bath or in a drying oven. If necessary, add
successive portions to the same dish after evaporat ion. Dry evaporated sample for at least 1 h in
an oven at 180 ± 2°C, cool in a desiccator to balance temperature, and weigh. Repeat drying
cycle of drying, cooling, desiccating, and weighing until a constant weight is obtained or until
weight change is les s than 4% of previous weight or 0.5 mg, whichever is less. Analyze at least
10% of all samples in duplicate. Duplicate dete rminations should agree within 5% of theirStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationaverage weight. If volatile solids are to be determined, follow procedure in Section 2540E .
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   weight of dried residue + dish, mg, and 
                  B =   weight of dish, mg. 
5.  Precision
 Single-laboratory analyses of 77 samples of a known of 293 mg/L were made with a
standard deviation of differences of 21.20 mg/L. 
6.  Reference
         1.    SOKOLOFF, V.P . 1933. Water of crystallization in total solids of water analysis. Ind.
Eng. Chem.,  Anal. Ed. 5:336.
7.  Bibliography
 HOWARD, C.S.  1933. Determination of total dissolved solids in water analysis. Ind. Eng. Chem.,
Anal. Ed. 5:4.
 U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY . 1974. Methods for Collection and Analysis of Water Samples for
Dissolved Minerals and Gases. Techniqu es of Water-Resources Investigations, Book 5,
Chap. A1. U.S. Geological Surv., Washington, D.C.
2540  D.        Total Suspended Solids Dried at 103–105°C
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  A well-mixed sample is filtered through a weighed standard glass-fiber filter
and the residue retained on the filter is dried to a constant weight at 103 to 105°C. The increase
in weight of the filter represents the total suspended solids.  If the suspended material clogs the
filter and prolongs filtration, it may be necessary to  increase the diameter of the filter or decrease
the sample volume. To obtain an estimate of total suspended solids, calculate the difference
between total dissolved  solids and total solids.
b.  Interferences:  See Section 2540A.2  and  Section 2540B.1 . Exclude large floating particles
or submerged agglomerates of nonhomogeneous materials from the sample if it is determined
that their inclusion is not representative. Because excessive residue on the filter may form aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwater-entrapping crust, limit the sample size to that yielding no more than 200 mg residue. For
samples high in dissolved solids thoroughly wash the filter to ensure removal of dissolved
material. Prolonged filtration times resulti ng from filter clogging may produce high results
owing to increased colloidal materials captured on the clogged filter.
2.  Apparatus
 Apparatus listed in Section 2540B.2  and Section 2540C.2  is required, except for evaporating
dishes, steam bath, and 180°C drying oven. In addition: 
Aluminum weighing dishes.  
3.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of glass-fiber filter disk:  If pre-prepared glass fiber filter disks are used,
eliminate this step. Insert disk with wrinkled side up in filtration apparatus. Apply vacuum and
wash disk with three successive 20-mL portions of reagent-grad e water. Continue suction to
remove all traces of water, turn vacuum off, and discard washings. Remove filter from filtration
apparatus and transfer to an inert aluminum weighing dish. If a Gooch crucible is used, remove
crucible and filter combination. Dr y in an oven at 103 to 105°C for 1 h. If volatile solids are to
be measured, ignite at 550°C for 15 min in a muffle furnace. Cool in desiccator to balance
temperature and weigh. Repeat cycle of dryi ng or igniting, cooling, desiccating, and weighing
until a  constant weight is obtained or until weight change is less than 4% of the previous
weighing or 0.5 mg, whichever is less. Store in desiccator until needed.
b.  Selection of filter and sample sizes:  Choose sample volume to yield between 2.5 and 200
mg dried residue. If volume filtered fails to meet minimum yield, increase sample volume up to 1
L. If complete filtration takes more than 10 min, increase filter  diameter or decrease sample
volume.
c.  Sample analysis:  Assemble filtering apparatus and filter and begin suction. Wet filter with
a small volume of reagent-grade water to seat it. Stir sample with a magnetic stirrer at a speed to
shear larger particles, if practical, to obtain a more uni form (preferably homogeneous) particle
size. Centrifugal force may separate particle s by size and density, resulting in poor precision
when point of sample withdrawal is varied. While stirring, pipet a measured volume onto the
seated glass-fiber filter. Fo r homogeneous samples, pipet from the approximate midpoint of
container but not in vortex. Choose a point bot h middepth and midway between wall and vortex.
Wash filter with three successive 10-mL volumes of reagent-grade water, allowing complete
drainage b etween washings, and continue suction for about 3 min after filtration is complete.
Samples with high dissolved solids may require additional washings. Carefully remove filter
from filtration apparatus and transfer to  an aluminum weighing dish as a support . Alternatively,
remove the crucible and filter combination from the crucible adapter if a Gooch crucible is used.
Dry for at least 1 h at 103 to 105°C in an oven, cool in a desiccator to balance temperature, and
weigh. Repeat the cycle of drying, cooling,  desiccating, and weighing until a constant weight is
obtained or until the weight change is less than 4% of the previous weight or 0.5 mg, whichever
is less. Analyze at least 10% of all samples in duplicate. Duplicate determinations should agreeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwithin 5%  of their average weight. If volatile solids are to be determined, treat the residue
according to 2540E.
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   weight of filter + dried residue, mg, and 
                  B =   weight of filter, mg. 
5.  Precision
 The standard deviation was 5.2 mg/L (coefficient of variation 33%) at 15 mg/L, 24 mg/L
(10%) at 242 mg/L, and 13 mg/L (0.76%) at 1707 mg/L in studies by two analysts of four sets of
10 determinations each. 
Single-laboratory duplicate anal yses of 50 samples of water and wastewater were made with
a standard deviation of differences of 2.8 mg/L. 
6.  Bibliography
 DEGEN, J. & F.E. NUSSBERGER . 1956. Notes on the determination of suspended solids. Sewage
Ind. Wastes  28:237.
 CHANIN, G., E.H. CHOW, R.B. ALEXANDER & J. POWERS . 1958. Use of glass fiber filter medium in
the suspended solids determinati on. Sewage Ind. Wastes  30:1062.
 NUSBAUM, I . 1958. New method for determination of suspended solids. Sewage Ind. Wastes
30:1066.
 SMITH, A.L. & A.E. GREENBERG . 1963. Evaluation of methods for determining suspended solids
in wastewater. J. Water Pollut. Con trol Fed.  35:940.
 WYCKOFF, B.M . 1964. Rapid solids determination using glass fiber filters. Water Sewage Works
111:277.
 NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE PAPER INDUS TRY FOR AIR AND STREAM IMPROVEMENT.  1975. A
Preliminary Review of Analytical Methods for the Deter mination of Suspended Solids in
Paper Industry Effluents for Compliance with EPA-NPDES Permit Terms. Spec. Rep. No.
75-01. National Council of the Paper Industry for Air & Stream Improvement, New York,
N.Y.
 NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE PAPER INDUSTRY FOR AIR A ND STREAM IMPROVEMENT . 1977. A
Study of the Effect of Alternate Procedures on Effluent Suspended Solids Measurement.
Stream Improvement Tech. Bull. No. 291, National Council of the Paper Industry for Air &
Stream Improvement, New York, N.Y.
 TREES, C.C . 1978. Analytical analysis of the effect of dissolved solids on suspended solidsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetermination. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  50:2370.
2540  E.        Fixed and Volatile Solids Ignited at 550°C
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  The residue from Method B, C, or D is  ignited to constant weight at 550°C.
The remaining solids represent the fixed total, dissolved, or suspended solids while the weight
lost on ignition is the volatile solids. The determination is useful  in control of wastewater
treatment plant operation because it offers a rough approximation of the amount of organic
matter present in the solid fraction of wastewater, activated sludge, and industrial wastes.
b.  Interferences:  Negative errors in the volatile solids may be produced by loss of volatile
matter during drying. Determination of low concentrations of volatile solids in the presence of
high fixed solids concentrations may be subject to considerable error. In such cases, measure for
suspect volatile components by another test, for example, total organic carbon ( Section 5310 ).
Highly alkaline residues may react with silica in sample or silica-containing crucibles.
2.  Apparatus
 See Section 2540B.2 , Section 2540C.2 , and  Section 2540D.2 . 
3.  Procedure
 Ignite residue produced by Method 2540B, C, or D to constant weight in a muffle furnace at
a temperature of 550°C. Ignite a blank glass fiber filter along with samples. Have furnace up to
temperature before inserting sample. Usually, 15 to  20 min ignition are required for 200 mg
residue. However, more than one sample and/or heavier residues may overtax the furnace and
necessitate longer ignition times. Let dish or filter disk cool partially in air until most of the heat
has been dissipated.  Transfer to a desiccator for final cooling in a dry atmosphere. Do not
overload desiccator. Weigh dish or disk as soon as it has cooled to balance temperature. Repeat
cycle of igniting, cooling, desiccating, and we ighing until a constant weight is obtaine d or until
weight change is less than 4% or 0.5 mg, whichever is less. Analyze at least 10% of all samples
in duplicate. Duplicate determinations should agree within 5% of their average weight. Weight
loss of the blank filter is an indication of unsuitabil ity of a particular brand or type of filter for
this analysis. 
4.  CalculationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
where: 
                  A =   weight of residue + dish before ignition, mg, 
                  B =   weight of residue + dish or filter after ignition, mg, and 
                  C =   weight of dish or filter, mg. 
5.  Precision
 The standard deviation was 11 mg/L at 170 mg/L volatile total solids in studies by three
laboratories on four samples and 10 replicates. Bias data on actual samples cannot be obtained. 
2540  F.        Settleable Solids
1.  General Discussion
 Settleable solids in surface and saline waters as well as domestic and industrial wastes may
be determined and reported on either a volume (mL/L) or a weight (mg/L) basis. 
2.  Apparatus
 The volumetric test requires only an Imhoff cone. The gravimetric test requires all the
apparatus listed in Section 2540D.2  and  a glass vessel with a minimum diameter of 9 cm. 
3.  Procedure
a.  Volumetric:  Fill an Imhoff cone to the 1-L mark with a well-mixed sample. Settle for 45
min, gently agitate sample near the sides of the cone with a rod or by spinning, settle 15 min
longer, and record volume of settleable solids in the cone as milli liters per liter. If the settled
matter contains pockets of liquid between large settled particles, estimate volume of these and
subtract from volume of settled solids. The practical lower limit of measurement depends on
sample composition and generally is  in the range of 0.1 to 1.0 mL/L. Where a separation of
settleable and floating materials occurs, do not estimate the floating material as settleable matter.
Replicates usually are not required.
 Where biological or chemical floc is present, the gravimetri c method (3 b) is preferred. 
b.  Gravimetric:
1)  Determine total suspended solids as in Section 2540D . 
2)  Pour a well-mixed sample into a glass vessel of not less than 9 cm diam using not lessStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthan 1 L and sufficient sample to give a depth of 20 cm. Alternatively use a glass vessel of
greater diameter and a larger volume of sample. Let stand quiescent fo r 1 h and, without
disturbing the settled or floating material, si phon 250 mL from center of container at a point
halfway between the surface of the settled mate rial and the liquid surface. Determine total
suspended solids (milligrams per liter) of this su pernatant liquor ( Section 2540D ). These are the
nonsettleable solids. 
4.  Calculation
 mg settleable solids/L = mg total suspended solids/L − mg nonsettleable solids/L 
5.  Precision and Bias
 Precision and bias data are not now available. 
6.  Bibliography
 FISCHER, A.J. & G.E. SYMONS . 1944. The determination of settleable sewage solids by weight.
Water Sewage Works  91:37.
2540  G.        Total, Fixed, and Volat ile Solids in Solid and Semisolid Samples
1.  General Discussion
a.  Applicability:  This method is applicable to the determination of total solids and its fixed
and volatile fractions in such solid and semisolid samples as river and lake sediments, sludges
separated from water and wastewater treatment processes, and s ludge cakes from vacuum
filtration, centrifugation, or other sludge dewatering processes.
b. Interferences:  The determination of both total and volatile solids in these materials is
subject to negative error due to loss of ammonium carbonate and volatile organic matter during
drying. Although this is true also for wastewater, the effect tends  to be more pronounced with
sediments, and especially with sludges and sludge cakes. The mass of organic matter recovered
from sludge and sediment requires a longer ign ition time than that specified for wastewaters,
effluents, or polluted waters. Carefully  observe specified ignition time and temperature to control
losses of volatile inorganic salts if these are a problem. Make all weighings quickly because wet
samples tend to lose weight by evaporation. Af ter drying or ignition, residues often are very
hygroscopic and rapidly absorb moisture from the air. Highly alkaline residues may react with
silica in the samples or silica-containing crucibles.
2.  Apparatus
 All the apparatus listed in Section 2540B.2  is required except that a magnetic stirrer and
pipets are not used and a balance capable of weighing to 10 mg may be used. 
3.  ProcedureStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa.  Total solids:
1)  Preparation of evaporating dish—If volatile solids are to be measured, ignite a clean
evaporating dish at 550°C for 1 h in a muffle furnace. If only total solids are to be measured,
heat dish at 103 to 105°C for 1 h in an oven. Cool in desiccator, we igh, and store in desiccator
until ready for use. 
2)  Sample analysis 
a) Fluid samples—If the sample contains enough moisture to flow more or less readily, stir to
homogenize, place 25 to 50 g in a prepared evapor ating dish, and weigh. Evaporate to dryness on
a water bath, dry at 103 to 105°C for 1 h, cool to balance tempe rature in an individual desiccator
containing fresh desiccant, and weigh. Repeat  heating, cooling, desiccating, and weighing
procedure until the weight change is less than 4% or 50 mg, whichever is less. Analyze at least
10% of all samples in duplicate. Du plicate determinations should agree within 5% of their
average weight. 
b) Solid samples—If the sample consists of discrete pieces of solid material (dewatered
sludge, for example), take cores from each piece with a No. 7 cork borer or pulverize the entire
sample coarsely on a clean surface by hand, using rubber gloves. Plac e 25 to 50 g in a prepared
evaporating dish and weigh. Place in an oven at 103 to 105°C overnight. Cool to balance
temperature in a desiccator and weigh. Repeat drying (1 h), cooling, weighing, and desiccating
steps until weight change is less than 4% or 5 0 mg, whichever is less. Analyze at least 10% of all
samples in duplicate. Duplicate determinations s hould agree within 5% of their average weight. 
b.  Fixed and volatile solids:  Transfer the dried residue from 2)a) above to a cool muffle
furnace, heat fu rnace to 550°C, and ignite for 1 h. (If the residue contains large amounts of
organic matter, first ignite it over a gas burner and under an exhaust hood in the presence of
adequate air to lessen losses due to reducing conditions and to avoid odors in the laboratory.)
Cool in desiccator to balance temperature and weigh. Repeat igniting (30 min), cooling,
desiccating and weighing steps until the weight change is less than 4% or 50 mg, whichever is
less. Analyze at least 10% of all samples in duplicate. Dupli cate determinations should agree
within 5% of their average weight. 
4.  CalculationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
where: 
                  A =   weight of dried residue + dish, mg, 
                  B =   weight of dish, 
                  C =   weight of wet sample + dish, mg, and 
                  D =   weight of residue + dish after ignition, mg. 
5.  Precision and Bias
 Precision and bias data are not now available. 
6.  Bibliography
 GOODMAN, B.L . 1964. Processing thickened sludge with chemical conditioners. Pages 78 et seq.
in Sludge Concentration, Filtration and Incineration. Univ. Michigan Continued Education
Ser. No. 113, Ann Arbor.
 GRATTEAU, J.C. & R.I. DICK . 1968. Activated sludge suspended solids determinations. Water
Sewage Works  115:468.
2550        TEMPERATURE #(49) *
2550  A.        Introduction
 Temperature readings are used in the calculation of various forms of alkalinity, in studies of
saturation and stability with respect to calcium carbonate, in the calculation of salinity, and in
general laboratory operations.  In limnological studies, water temperatures as a function of depth
often are required. Elevated temperatures resulti ng from discharges of heated water may have
significant ecological impact. Identification of source of water supply, such as deep wells, of ten
is possible by temperature measurements alone. Industrial plants often require data on water
temperature for process use or heat-transmission calculations. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2550  B.        Laboratory and Field Methods
1.  Laboratory and Other Non-D epth Temperature Measurements
 Normally, temperature measurements may be made with any good mercury-filled Celsius
thermometer. As a minimum, the thermometer should have a scale marked for every 0.1°C, with
markings etched o n the capillary glass. The thermometer should have a minimal thermal capacity
to permit rapid equilibration. Periodically check the thermometer against a precision
thermometer certified by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, formerly
National Bureau of Standards) #(50) * that is used with its certificate and correction chart. For
field operations use a thermometer h aving a metal case to prevent breakage. 
Thermometers are calibrated for total immersion or partial immersion. One calibrated fo r
total immersion must be completely immersed to the depth of the etched circle around the stem
just below the scale level. 
2.  Depth Temper ature Measurements
 Depth temperature required for limnological studies may be measured with a reversing
thermometer, thermophone, or thermistor. The thermistor is most convenient and accurate;
however, higher cost may preclude its use. C alibrate any temperature measurement devices with
a NIST-certified thermometer before field use. Make readings with the thermometer or device
immersed in water long enough to permit complete equilibration. Report results to the nearest
0.1 or 1.0°C, depend ing on need. 
The thermometer commonly used for depth measurements is of the reversing type. It often is
mounted on the sample collection apparatus so that a water sample may be obtained
simultaneously. Correct readings of reversing thermometers for change s due to differences
between temperature at reversal and temperature at time of reading. Calculate as follows: 
where: 
              ∆T  =   correction to be added algebraically to uncorrected reading, 
                T 1 =   uncorrected reading at reversal, 
                  t =   temperature at w hich thermometer is read, 
                V0 =   volume of small bulb end of capillary up to 0°C graduation, 
                  K =   constant depending on relative thermal expansion of mercury and glass (usualStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationvalue of K = 6100), and 
                  L =   calibration correction of thermometer depending  on T1. 
If series observations are made it is convenient to prepare graphs for a thermometer to obtain
∆T  from any values of T 1 and t. 
3.  Bibliography
 WARREN, H.F. & G.C. WHIPPLE.  1895. The thermophone—A new instrument for determining
temperatures. Mass. Inst. Technol. Quart.  8: 125.
 SVERDRUP, H.V., M.W. JOHNSON & R.H. FLEMING.  1942. The Oceans. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs,  N.J.
 American Society for Testing and Materi als. 1949. Standard Specifications for ASTM
Thermometers. No. E1-58, ASTM, Philadelphia, Pa.
 REE, W.R.  1953. Thermistors for depth thermometry. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  45:259. 
2560        PARTICLE COUNTING AND SIZE DISTRIBUTION (PROPOSED) #(51) *
2560  A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Particles are ubiquitous in natural waters and in water and wastewater treatment streams.
Particle counting and size distribution analysis can help to determine the makeup of natural
waters, treatment plant influent, process wate r, and finished water. Similarly, it can aid in
designing treatment processes, making decisions about changes in operations, and/or
determining process efficiency. Methods for meas uring particle size distribution included herein
depend on electronic measur ement devices because manual methods are likely to be too slow for
routine analysis. However, when particle size analysis is to include size distribution of large
(>500-µm) aggregates, use direct microscopic coun ting and sizing. Principles of various types  of
instruments capable of producing both size and number concentration information on particulate
dispersions are included. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, the term ‘‘size distribution’’ means
an absolute size distribution, i.e., one that includes the  number concentration or count. 
In most particle-counting instruments, particles pass though a sensing zone where they are
measured individually; the only exception included is the static type of light-scattering
instrument. Instruments create an electron ic pulse (voltage, current, or resistance) that is
proportional to a characteristic size of the particle. The instrument responses (pulse height,
width, or area) are classified by magnitude and c ounted in each class to yield the particle size
distribution.  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Selection of Method
 Three instrument types are included: electrical sensing zone instruments, light-blockage
instruments, and light-scattering instruments. 
Select instrument consistent with expected use of the particle size analysis. Instruments va ry
in the particle characteristic being sensed, lower and upper size limits of detection, degree of
resolution of the size distribution, particle number concentration range that can be measured
accurately, amount of shear to which a sample is subjected bef ore measurement, amount of
sample preparation, operator skill required, and the ease with which data can be obtained and
manipulated into the desired forms. See Section 2560B.1 , Section 2560C.1 , and  Section
2560D.1 , and  manufacturers’ literature for info rmation on characteristics of each type of
instrumentation. 
Some instruments can be set up for either continuous-flow or batch sampling. Others can be
used only for batch analysis. For instruments usable in both modes, check that no systematic
differences  in particle size distributions occur between continuous-flow measurements and batch
samples taken at or near the intake point for continuous-flow samples. 
3.  Sample Collection and Handling
a. Batch samples:  Use extreme care in obtaining, handling, and preparing batch samples to
avoid changing total particle count and size distribution.
 Choose representative times and locations for sampling. Ensure that particles are not
subjected to great er physical forces during collection than in their natural setting. Collect
samples from a body of water with submerged vessels to minimize turbulence and bubble
entrainment. If sampling from particular depths, use standard samplers designed for that purpo se.
For flowing systems, make sure that the velocity into the opening of the sampling device is the
same as that of the flowing stream (isokinetic sa mpling) and that the opening diameter is at least
50 times as large as the particles to be measured. For sa mpling from a tap, let water flow slowly
and continuously down the side of the collection vessel. 
Minimize particle contamination from the air, dilution water (or, for electrical sensing zone
instruments, electrolyte solution) (see ¶ 4 below), and any ves sel or glassware that comes in
contact with the sample. Minimize exposure to air by keeping sample in a closed container and
by minimizing time between sampling and analysis. 
Preferably use glass bottles and other vessels with bottle cap liners of TFE. 
Clean all glassware scrupulously by automatic  dishwashing, vigorous hand brushing, and/or
ultrasonication. Rinse glassware immediately before use with particle-free water. Between
samples, rinse any part of the instrument that comes in contact with samples with either clean
water or the upcoming sample. Alternatively, run multiple replicates and discard the first results. 
To avoid breakup of aggregates of particles or flocs, sample and make dilutions very slowly
using wide-bore pipets, needles, or other sam pling devices; cut off pipet tips to avoid high
velocities at the entrance. If sample dilution is required, add sample to dilution water, not viceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationversa, by submerging the pipet tip in the dilution water and releasing sample slowly. Use
minimum intensity a nd duration of mixing adequate to dilute the suspension into the dilution
water.  Avoid mechanical stirrers inside the sample or ultrasonication. Simultaneously gently
rotate and partially invert entire sample in a closed bottle. Use cylindrical dilution b ottles to
avoid sharp corners. Leave less than approximately 25% air space during mixing. To avoid
sedimentation, make measurements immediately after mixing. Do not mix during measurement
unless absolutely necessary to prevent sedimentation. 
Most surface and ground waters contain relatively stable particles that aggregate slowly.
Particle size distribution in biologically active waters or waters that have been treated with
coagulants is more likely to change over short time periods. To minimize flocculatio n, minimize
time between sampling and measurement. In highly flocculent systems, maximum holding time
should be only a few minutes; for more stable samples, a few hours may be acceptable. Dilution
slows flocculation kinetics and, in some cases, makes flocc ulation less likely. Make dilutions
only immediately before measurement. 
Samples measured at different temperature or pressure than when collected and those with
biological activity may develop entrained air bubbles that interfere with measurement accurac y.
If any gas bubbles are visible, let sample stand for a short time to degas naturally or use a mild
vacuum to speed degassing. Use ultrasound to ai d degassing, but only if floc breakup is not a
problem. 
Minimize time between sampling and analysis; if a t all possible, make measurements
immediately after sampling. If storage is unavoida ble, refrigerate at 4°C but restore samples to
room temperature, preferably in water bath, before measurement. 
b. Continuous-flow:  Using a particle counter as a continuous-flow monitor may be desirable.
Many more samples can be processed by automated particle counting than by batch sample
analysis. All the instruments mentioned in Methods B through D can be used  in this mode,
although instruments and samples not requiring dilution are easier to set up. For some
instruments, this type of operation requires custom hardware; for others there is commercially
available hardware.
 Problems of batch samples are equally relevant to continuous analysis. Other critical
considerations include selection of sampling point, velocity at entrance and throughout sample
line, maintenance of stable sample flow rate, position of instrument’s sensor in the sample line,
and absence of flow-modifying devices upstream of the sensor. 
Choose a sampling point that is representative and away from wall surfaces. Place entrance
to sample line facing the flow, with the velocity at the opening nearly the same as the
surrounding flow. 
Sample pre servation within the instrument is difficult because both deposition (or temporary
holdup) of particles and floc breakup must be  avoided. Deposition occurs by gravity settling of
particles onto horizontal surfaces. Floc breakup occurs because of excessive shear forces.
Minimize length of transmission lines, especially in horizontal components, and preferably have
no horizontal lines. Avoid drastic changes in flow direction or velocity. Do not useStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationflow-modifying devices such as pumps, fittings with irregula r surfaces, sharp angle changes,
flow controllers, etc., between the sampling point and the sensor. Locate pumps after the sensor.
Preferably, provide curved sample lines (e.g., flex ible tubing or bent glass tubing) rather than
right-angle fittings. 
For most instruments, flow rate is specified. Because calibration (see ¶ 5) can change with
flow rate within the range, flow control within very narrow limits is essential. Calibrate and use
the sensor at the same flow rate. For continuous particle size distri bution measurements, flow
control, not simply flow monitoring, is necessary. Do not make measurements at a flow rate
different from that used for calibration. Provide a flow control system downstream of the sensor,
maintain a constant rate, and do not intr oduce turbulence or pulsations before or through the
sensor. 
4.  Dilution Water
 Particle-free water is virtually impossible to obtain, but it is possible to produce water
containing very few particles within the size range to be measured. Produce ‘‘particle-free’’ or
‘‘clean’’ water from distilled, deionized wate r or water taken from the same source as the
samples. If all samples are from the same source or have similar chemical characteristics,
preferably filter sample water to produce ‘‘par ticle-free’’ water with no change in chemical
environment.  Distilled, de ionized water produced by ion exchange and cartridge filtration may
produce acceptable ‘‘particle free’’ dilution water, but preferably use continuous closed-loop
membrane filtration. 
Dilution water preparation systems are available from particle-counter manufacturers.
Alternatively, assemble a system similar to that shown in Figure 2560:1  (or any system that
produces a water of sufficient quality). In the system shown, a pump draws the water from a
bottle and puts it through the in-line filter. Use membr ane filters with nominal pore sizes no
more than 10% of the smallest particle size expected; alternatively use cartridge filters. Pass
water through the filter several times. The system lets water be passed directly from the
product-water bottle to the sou rce-water bottle by opening of the clamps and three-way stopcock.
Use glass tubing in the bottles, but use flexible tubing to allow draining product-water bottle into
source-water bottle. Attach a glass wool or membrane filter to air inlets. Dilute samples  by
drawing water directly from the three-way stopcock into the bottle to be used in sample analysis. 
A simpler system with one-pass filtration directly into the sample bottle may be adequate for
many samples, depending on the particle size range to be me asured. Such a system would omit
the product-water bottle, the connections between the two bottles and associated stopcock and
clamps of Figure 2560:1 . Dilution water is produced on demand and the effluent is put directly,
without additional handling, into  the sample container. 
Guard against biological growth within filtration systems by frequent disassembly and
adequate washing or replacement of components. For many samples, do not use chemical
disinfectants because they might change the particle count an d size distribution by their
oxidizing potential. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation5.  Calibration
 As a particle is detected in the sensing zone of any instrument, an electrical response is
generated and sorted into a channel of the instrument based on its magnitude. 
Calibrate by determining the channel number into which particles of  known size are sorted
by the instrument. Use spherical particles manufactured for this purpose. Calibration particles are
available in suspension or as dry particles. Over time, suspensions are likely to undergo some
aggregation; use ultrasound to break u p flocs before calibration. Calibration particles are nearly
monodisperse but do exhibit a small inherent (true) variance. 
The precision (see Section 1030A.1 ) and resolution of the instrument influence its ability to
sort particles into different channels . Resolution is a measure of the ability of an instrument to
distinguish between particles of similar but di fferent sizes. An instrument with high precision
and good resolution will measure monodisperse particles in a very narrow size range; some
instrumen ts have sufficient precision and resolution so that calibration particles with extremely
narrow size distributions (very small variance) are sorted into a few adjacent channels. In such
cases, the true variance of the particle size and the measured varianc e will be nearly equal. An
instrument with low precision but high resolu tion will yield a wide distribution on the same
particles (i.e., measured variance > true variance). An instrument with high precision but low
resolution (e.g., few channels) may yield  a narrow measured distribution (e.g., all the particles in
the same channel) even though the true distribution is broader (i.e., measured variance < true
variance). 
Use at least three sizes of calibration particles in reasonably similar number concentrat ions to
calibrate a sensor. To analyze different-size particles in a mixture, ensure that the different sizes
do not interfere with one another. Calibrate under conditions identical with those of sample
measurements, e.g., settingson the instrument, flow r ate, type of sample cell, dilution water or
electrolyte solution, and mixing during measurement. Do not exceed the maximum concentration
for the sensor during calibration. 
The calibration curve depends on the characteristic of the particle measured by the
instrument (diameter, area, or volume) and whether the pulses are sorted into channels on an
arithmetic or logarithmic basis. For example, if an electrical sensing zone instrument (which
responds to particle volume) is used in a logarithmic mode, the cali bration curve will be the
logarithm of particle volume vs. channel number. 
Generally, increments between channels are equal on an arithmetic or logarithmic basis. In
most light-blockage and light-scattering instruments, the lower and upper limits for each  channel
can be set by the user. Because most samples have broad particle size distributions, spanning at
least one order of magnitude, and often two or thr ee, preferably use larger increments for larger
sizes. This is consistent with equal logarithmic spa cing, although other less systematic intervals
that preserve the characteristic of larger increments for larger sizes are permissible. Such
intervals also are consistent with the resolution capabilities of most available instruments, which
respond to a cha racteristic particle area or volume (proportional to square or cube of diameter,
respectively), and therefore require greater resolution for larger particles than for smaller ones onStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa diameter basis. 
At a given set of settings for a given sensor, each ch annel represents a certain average size
and size increment. After measuring the channel number associated with several sizes of
calibration particles, use a calibration equation to assign average sizes or, in some cases, the
lower limit of size, to all oth er channels. Knowledge of the average size and both the arithmetic
and logarithmic increment of each channel is necessary for reporting. In contrast to calibration
particles, environmental particles are rarely spherical. Generally report measurements in te rms of
‘‘equivalent spherical diameter,’’ i.e., size of any particle taken as that of a sphere that would
give the same response in the instrument. Because most sample particles are nonspherical and
different instruments respond to different characteristic s of particles, different measured particle
size distributions result from different instruments. 
Some light-scattering instruments calculate particle size from first principles and do not
require calibration per se. For those instruments, periodically ad just the system optics. Make
frequent checks that the instrument response is consistent by following the calibration
procedures for other instruments. 
6.  Data Reporting
a. Particle concentrations:  Number, surface, or volume concentration over a specified size
range is particularly valuable as a summary factor for particle counting and size distribution. Its
variation with some changes in an independent variable in a nat ural or engineered system may be
of interest.
 When reporting the number concentration (number per milliliter) of particles, report also the
size range measured (both lower and upper size limits). The lower limit is particularly important,
because most sam ples have large number concentrations near the lower limit of detection of
currently available instruments. Never state or imply a lower size limit of zero. 
In some studies a surface area concentration ( µm2/mL) or volume concentration ( µm3/mL)
may be more  relevant; convert number concentration to these forms by multiplying by the area
or volume, respectively, of a sphere with the mean diameter for each size class. (This is an
approximation based on the assumption that particles are spherical.) In such case s, also report
lower and upper limits of size class. 
b. Tabulated size distributions:  If the distribution itself (i.e., the variation of particle number,
surface area, or volume concentration with particle size) is to be shown in tabular format, give
for each instrument channel (or grouping of channels) th e number concentration and the
associated size range (lower and upper limits).
c. Graphical size distributions:  For graphical reporting, preferably use the count information
(on a number, surface area, or volume basis) as the ordinate and particle size as the abscissa.
 For the count information, use absolute, rather than relative,  scales because they indicate
both concentration and size distribution. Also, prefer ably use differential, rather than cumulative,
distributions because they show directly what size range contained the most particles. For ease of
plotting, associate the nu mber (or surface area or volume) concentration with a mean size forStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationeach channel, rather than with the size range (the lower and upper limit). To account for that
change without losing information, normalize the data by dividing the concentration of partic les
in a given size class by the size interval for that class (on either an arithmetic or a logarithmic
basis). Normalization prevents creation of artificial (or apparent) peaks or valleys in a
distribution and ensures that the same distribution measured b y different instruments with
different size increments will be the same graphically. If data are not normalized, plot size
distribution data (absolute and differential) as a discrete histogram (i.e., as a bar chart with the
upper limit of one channel being  identical to the lower limit of the next). 
Preferably show particle sizes with a logarithmic scale. Most samples have broad
distributions and most analyzers use larger incr ements of diameter with increasing size; these
characteristics are consistent with  a logarithmic scale, which also intrinsically avoids showing a
zero size.  Produce the logarithmic scale by showing the log of diameter on an arithmetic scale or
the arithmetic values of diameter on a logarithmic scale. 
d. Example calculations:  A calculation layout (with example data) useful for preparing either
tabular or graphical presentation is shown in Table 2560:I . This format may be abbreviated or
modified to suit the data presentation being developed.
 Columns A  through G represent calibration information. Which of these values are set (or
determined from calibration by the user) and which are calculated from this primary information
depends on the type of instrument. In constructing such a table, preferably plac e primary
information first. In most light-blockage and light-scattering instruments, the lower and upper
size limits for each channel are known; calculate mean diameter as the arithmetic or logarithmic
(geometric) mean of these limits, depending on whethe r instrument channels represent arithmetic
or logarithmic increments. In electrical sensing zone instruments, the mean size (or log size) is
determined directly from the calibration equation and increment width (arithmetic, ∆dpi, or
logarithmic, ∆log dpi) is pre-set; calculate lower and upper limits as mean size ± one half the
arithmetic or logarithmic increment. 
Columns H through O represent counting information for a sample. The corrected counts
(Column H) are the direct counts from the particle size ana lyzer minus the background count for
each channel. Adjust background count for dilution and differences in sample measured and
dilution water measured for background count. Adjust this figure for sample dilution and volume
analyzed to obtain the number con centration of particles (Column I). For example, for corrected
count n, a 1:10 dilution, and 0.5 mL analyzed, number concentration is calculated as ( n × 10)/0.5
= 20n/mL. Volume concentration (Column J) may be approximated as the number of particles
multip lied by the volume of a spherical particle with the mean diameter for the channel ( πd3p/6).
Values in the remaining columns are calculated as shown in the table. The normalized,
differential, absolute distribution functions obtained in Columns K (particle size distribution
function) through O give the values needed for graphic presentations as follows: 
K: particle numbers (arithmetic scale) vs. diameter (arithmetic scale) Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationL: particle volume (arithmetic scale) vs. diameter (arithmetic scale) 
M: particle number (arithmetic scale) vs. diameter (logarithmic scale) 
N: particle volume (arithmetic scale) vs. diameter (logarithmic scale) 
O: log of particle number (arithmetic scale) vs. diameter (logarithmic scale). 
(Alternatively, plot values from Column K d irectly on a logarithmic scale.) 
If distribution K, L, M, or N is plotted, the area under the resulting graph between any two
values of diameter represents the total number or volume concentration between those size
limits. The logarithmic graph (O) shows  the entire distribution better than other distributions, but
can hide differences between similar distributions . It often is linear over specified size ranges. 
7.  Quality Control
 See Section 1020  and Section 1030 . Observe precautions for sampling and handling
discussed in ¶ 3 above. Particle counting and size analysis requires experienced analysts capable
of judgment in recognizing unusual behavior of an inst rument. Ability to recognize partial
blockage of an aperture or sensor or electronic noise is essential. 
Electronic noise can be detected directly in some instruments by making a particle count
when no flow is being put through a sensor. Ensure that the n oise is not environmental, i.e., due
to other nearby instruments, poor grounding, or in consistent electrical supply. Noise also can be
created by excessive cable length between the sensor and instrument or worn cables and
connectors. Perform noise checks p eriodically. 
Analyze sample blanks, handled identically to real samples, daily. Discard data from all
channels that yield counts in the blanks greater than 5% of the counts for real samples. This
procedure accounts for both particle contamination and elec tronic noise. Develop a maximum
acceptable total count for blanks for each sensor (or for each set of standard settings for one
sensor); if blanks give more than this maximum, discontinue particle counting until the
contamination or noise is eliminated. Se t maximum so that the 5% rule is met for all channels of
interest (i.e., down to some minimum size limit acceptable in the laboratory for the sensor in use
and the samples being measured). Recognize that the lower size limit of measurement for every
sensor  and every instrument is more likely to be dictated by electronic noise and particle
contamination than by electronic settings. 
Test cleaning and rinsing for sample bottles by partially filling the container with clean
water, swirling the water to contact  all sides, and performing a particle count. When the
container has been shown to contribute negligible counts, check cleanliness of the cap similarly.
Develop and document the standard washing and rinsing procedure, verify its validity as
indicated, and f ollow the procedure without exception. 
Also develop standard procedure for mixing samples and dilution water. Test mixing by
varying the mixing intensity and/or duration to determine the minimum that gives adequate
reproducibility (a sign of uniform conce ntration) and to determine if greater mixing increases the
total particle counts (a sign of floc breakup). Follow an established mixing procedure withoutStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationexception. 
To determine precision, make replicate measurements on at least 5% of the samples. Report
standard deviation (or range) of the total particle number concentration for each sensor or the
total of all sensors, if more than one is used. See Section 1030 . 
Particle counting and size distribution analyzers are calibrated for size, not concentration.
Standards for calibrating (or checking) the ability of an instrument to measure particle
concentration accurately are under development. Currently, only precision, not bias, can be
measured well for particle concentration. Obtain an indication of bias by  preparing standards of
particles of known density at a known suspended solids concentration; multiply total measured
particle volume concentration by the known density to estimate the suspended solids
concentration from the particle measurements. Compare this estimate with the known suspended
solids concentration as an indicator of the combined instrument and laboratory bias. 
Periodically calibrate with particles traceable to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). 
8.  Bibliography
 KAVANAUGH, M.C., C.H. TATE, A.R. TRUSSELL, R.R. TRUSSELL & G. TREWEEK .  1980. Use of
particle size distribution measurements for selection and control of solid/liquid separation
processes. In M.C. Kavanaugh & J. Leckie, eds. Particulate s in Water. Advan. Chem. Ser.
No. 189, American Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
 LAWLER, D.F., C.R. O’MELIA & J.E. TOBIASON . 1980. Integral water treatment plant design: from
particle size to plant performance. In M.C. Kavanaugh & J. Leckie, eds. Particula tes in
Water. Advan. in Chem. Ser. No. 189, American Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1980. Standard method for determining the
quality of calibration particles for automatic particle counters. F322-80, Annual Bo ok of
ASTM Standards. American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
 STUMM, W. & J.J. MORGAN . 1981. Aquatic Chemistry, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
N.Y. 
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1985. Standard practice for particle size
analysis of particulated substances in the range of 0.2 to 75 micrometers by optical
microscopy. E20-85, Annual Book of ASTM Standa rds. American Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1987. Defining size cal ibration, resolution,
and counting accuracy of a liquid-borne partic le counter using near-monodisperse spherical
particulate material. F658-87, Annual Book of AS TM Standards. American Soc. Testing &
Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
 HARGESHEIMER, E.E., C.M. LE WIS & C.M. YENTSCH . 1992. Evaluation of Particle Counting as a
Measure of Treatment Plant Performance. AWWA Research Foundation, Denver, Colo.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2560  B.        Electrical Sensing Zone Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  In electrical sensing zone instruments, particles are suspended in an electrolyte
solution and pass through a small orifice. A constant current or potential is applied between
electrodes on either side of the orifice; the change in resistan ce caused by the particle taking up
volume in the orifice causes a change in potential or current (whichever is not being held
constant electronically). The pulse is proportional to the particle volume.
 The voltage or current pulses are amplified and sort ed into size classes or channels based on
their maximum height. Some instruments have fixed channels; others permit selection of number
of size classes, size width of each channel, and/or lowest size to be measured. 
b. Interferences:  Interferences are caused by contamination with particles, the presence of
gas bubbles, and electronic noise. See Section 2560A.3 a and  b for sampling precautions, and
Section 2560A.4  for particle-free water preparation. Minimize electro nic noise as directed in
Section 2560A.7 . Increasing electrolyte strength is another method for minimizing electronic
noise.
c. Detectable sizes and concentrations:  The lower size limit of measurement depends on both
electronic noise and aperture size. Manufacturers claim that the lower size limit (diameter) is
approximately 2% of the aperture size, but not lower than approxim ately 0.4 µm, but values as
low as approximately 0.7 µm have been reported. For the upper size limit, manufacturers state
the maximum size is 40 to 60% of the aperture size, but a realistic upper limit for measuring
flocs is 20% of the aperture size.
 The minimum concentration limit depends on the ability to distinguish particles from
background counts. For each channel, background count should be less than 5% of total count.
In size ranges in which the count is very low (zero or nearly so), counts may be statistically
unreliable. Determine if a larger sample volume provides more satisfactory (less scattered) data.
Grouping data from several adjacent channels, thereby increasing the size increment, also can
give a more accurate size distribution. 
The maxim um concentration limit depends on the rate at which the instrument can process
different pulses and the need to avoid more than one particle in the sensing zone at the same time
(coincidence). Follow manufacturers’ instructions for upper limits on particle  counts for each
aperture size. Some instruments include a capability for correcting for overly concentrated
samples, but do not use this feature because each particle is not measured individually and errors
in absolute size distribution may result. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Particle counter and size-distribution analyzer.
b. Glassware:  For glassware preparation, see Section 2560A.3 a and Section 2560A.7 .Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Reagents
a. Particle-free electrolyte solution:  Prepare an electrolyte solution of NaCl, CaCl2, NaNO3,
Ca(NO3)2, or some other simple inorganic salt at a concentration of 1 to 10% by weight. Pass
solution through a continuous-flow membrane microfiltration system (see Section 2560A.4) .
Alternatively, use a commercially prepared electrolyte solution (filtration also may be required).
b. Calibration particles:  See Section 2560A.5 .
4.  Procedure
a. Preparation:  Let instrument warm up according to manufacturer’s instructions. Select
proper size aperture for particle sizes of interest; use more than one aperture if size distribution is
wider than the range that can be measured with one aperture. R inse aperture with acid solution,
distilled water, and finally clean electrolyte solution. Install aperture. Choose settings on the
instrument for each type of choice, including linear or logarithmic mode (spacing of sizes for
each channel; logarithmic is preferable for environmental samples), desired size width of each
channel, total number of channels and which channels are to be included, and method of starting
and stopping counting. Counting can be started and stopped manually, by switches built into th e
manometer representing set sample volumes, by a set maximum count in any one channel, or
stopped by time after a manual start. For reporting absolute measurements, choose a method that
measures volume sampled.
b. Calibration:  See Section 2560A.5 . Calibrate each aperture with at least three particle
sizes, determining the channel number at which the maximum count for each size is located.
Handle calibration samples identically to those used for measurement. Bec ause calibration can
change, check it at each use of the instrument. Plot results as the volume of calibration particles
vs. channel number (linear mode) or as the logarithm (base 10 or e) of the volume of calibration
particles vs. channel number (logarith mic mode). The results should plot as a straight line. Use
an equation for that line to assign an average size to each channel. Convert results from particle
volume to particle diameter for reporting.
c. Blank sample:  Measure at least one blank sample of the electrolyte solution. Carry a
sample bottle with only electrolyte solution through procedures identical to those used for
samples.  Subtract counts from the blank solution (i.e., background counts ), channel by channel,
from the counts of the samples. See Section 2560A.7 .
d. Measurement of samples:  Prepare diluted sample, ensuring that the volume of sample is no
greater than the volume of the electrolyte solution (dilution water); if a more concentrated
suspension is necessary, prepare dilution water with a higher electro lyte concentration. Mix
gently (see Section 2560A.3 a). Insert sample container into the instrument. Start vacuum to
control the mercury column and start particle counting. During counting, continuously watch the
monitor provided on the instrument to check for blockage of the aperture by oversized particles.
Check that the time for the specified volume (if the count is controlled by the stop and start
switches on the manometer) is consistent with that found for particle-free electrolyte solution.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationWhen coun t is complete, check that the concentration did not exceed the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Repeat with a greater dilution if necessary. When a series of samples with
various concentrations is to be measured and sample order is not critical, measure sam ples in
order of expected increasing particle concentration, rinsing with next sample.
5.  Calculation
 See Section 2560A.6 . 
2560  C.        Light-Blockage Methods
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  In light-blockage instruments, a focused beam of light shines from one side of
the measurement zone toward a photovoltaic cell on the other side. The illuminated volume of
liquid constitutes the sensing zone. Particles pass through the sens ing zone at a known velocity.
The blockage of light by the particle creates a change in the voltage at the photovoltaic cell. In
different instruments, different characteristics of the resulting signal are used to determine size:
light obscuration instru ments use pulse height (related to the cross-sectional area of the particle)
while time-of-transition instruments use the pulse width (proportional to a characteristic length
of the particle). In all cases, measurements usually are reported in terms of equ ivalent spherical
diameter.
 For light-obscuration instruments, consult manufacturer’s literature to determine the
relationship between height of the voltage pulse and particle size (and increment of particle size). 
Time-of-transition devices typically ut ilize a laser beam as the light source. The beam may
scan a stationary sample at a fixed velocity as it sweeps out an optical sensing zone.
Alternatively, a suspension can be passed through a fixed optical sensing zone. In the latter case,
the measured par ticle size is sensitive to flow rate through the sensor. 
Devices using light blockage principles vary in the number of channels (size classes) into
which particles are sorted. In some cases, these are pre-set by the manufacturer; in others, they
can be se t by the analyst. Different (interchangeable) sensors are available to measure different
size ranges and different particle concentrations. 
b. Interferences:  Interferences are caused by contamination with particles, the presence of
gas bubbles, and electronic noise. See Section 2560A.3 a and  b for sampling precautions and
Section 2560A.4  for particle-free dilution water preparation. Dilution  water is necessary only for
samples with particle number concentrations exceeding the capacity of the sensor to distinguish
different particles. If dilution water is to be used, analyze it without sample and subtract particle
counts in each channel from s ample counts.
 For devices in which sample flows through the sensor, some electronic noise can be detected
by counting with clean water in the sensor and no flow (that is, with no true particle counts). If
noise is present, it is likely to occur as a very large number of counts in the smallest size range
(lowest channel). Eliminate this noise by re-setting the size range of the smallest channelStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation(increasing the lowest size range to be measured) high enough to avoid significant counts in the
lowest channel. F or further measures to minimize electronic noise, see Section 2560A.7 . 
c. Detectable sizes and concentrations:  The lower size limit of measurement depends on both
electronic noise and sensor capability. Devices us ing the principle of light obscuration typically
are limited to particles larger than approximately 1 µm. Device s using the time-of-transition
principle can detect particles as small as 0.1 µm. The upper particle size limit usually is
determined by the size of the orifice through which particles pass. Manufacturers state particle
size limits (lower and upper) for ea ch sensor. See Section 2560B.1 c.
2.  Apparatus
a. Particle counter and size distribution analyzer.  
b. Glassware:  See Section 2560A.3 a and Section 2560A.7 .
3.  Reagents
a. Particle-free dilution water:  See Section 2560A.4 .
b. Calibration particles:  See Section 2560A.5 .
4.  Procedure
a. Preparation:  Let instrument warm up according to manufacturer’s instructions. Select
sensor to measure size and concentration ranges expected; use more than one sensor if size
distribution is wider than the range that can be measured with one sensor. Rinse sensor with a
volume of particle-free dilution water equivalent to at least three times that used in measuring
samples.
 Choose settings on the instrument for each type of choice available: including total number
of channels and which channels are to  be included, absolute or relative counts, cumulative or
differential counts, etc. Also choose method of starting and stopping counting based on total
count, maximum count in one channel, duration of  counting, or analysis of a specified volume of
sample. U sually, the known-volume method is preferable because it lends itself to determination
of absolute size distribution. 
b. Calibration:  See Section 2560A.5 . Initial calibration of each sensor on an instrument
requires several particle sizes to determine the relationship between particle size and channel
number. Either this relationship may be controlled by varying the ran ge of millivolt responses
that are sorted into each channel or it is pre-set by the manufacturer.
 After initial calibration, use at least two sizes of calibration particles for each sensor each
time the instrument is used. For instruments in which the sam ple flows through a stationary
sensing zone, measure flow rate of sample and adjust it to that used during initial calibration. 
c. Blank sample:  See Section 2560B.4 c but substitute particle-free dilution water for
electrolyte solution.
d. Measurement of samples:  Dilute sample, if necessary to keep within manufacturer’s
guidelines. Mix gently (see Section 2560A.3 a). For flow-type instruments with pressure-basedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsamplers, insert sample container into the instrument; for vacuum-based samp lers, insert sampler
tubing into the sample container. Start counting only after sufficient sample has passed through
the tubing connecting the sample and sensor to ensure that the sensor is receiving the sample.
For instruments that scan a stationary samp le, gently transfer sample into the measurement
device and insert.
 For all instruments, when the count is complete, check that the concentration did not exceed
the manufacturer’s recommendations. Repeat with a greater dilution if necessary. 
Between sampl es, rinse with dilution water or the upcoming sample. When a series of
samples with various concentrations is to be measured and sample order is not critical, measure
samples in order of expected increasing particle concentration; preferably, rinse with th e next
sample. 
5.  Calculation
 See Section 2560A.6 . 
2560  D.        Light-Scattering Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  Light-scattering instruments may be either flow or static devices. In flow
instruments, the direct path of the light beam through the flow cell is blocked by a particle as it
flows through the measurement zone with the fluid, and light scat tered over a fixed range of
angles is collected and measured. Particle size is determined from the angle and intensity of
scattering based on the principles of Fraunhofer  diffraction and/or Mie scattering. In static
instruments, the particles remain quiesc ent and a laser light beam scans part of the suspension.
Scattered light is collected by a photovoltaic cell and the resulting response from all particles
scanned is mathematically deconvoluted to generate the size distribution.
 Available particle counte rs vary in the angle or range of angles at which scattered light is
measured and in the number of channels (size classes) into which particles are sorted. For
flow-type instruments, different (interchangeable ) sensors are available to measure different siz e
ranges and different particle concentrations. The particle sizes determined by these instruments
are equivalent spherical diameters, i.e., they ar e determined from the amount of light that would
have been scattered at the angle(s) built in to the instrum ent by a calibration sphere of that
diameter. 
b. Interferences:  For both types of instruments, interferences are caused by contamination of
the sample with particles, the presence of gas bubbles, and electronic noise. For static-type
instruments, additional sources of interference can be surface con tamination (particles, markings,
or scratches) on the sample container and sample color. See Section 2560A.3 a and  b for
sampling precautions and 2560A.4 for particle-free dilution water preparation. Dilution water is
necessary only for samples with partic le number concentrations exceeding the capacity of the
sensor to distinguish different particles. If dilution water is to be used, analyze it without sampleStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand subtract particle counts in each channel from sample counts. To correct for color
interference,  consult the instrument manual.
 In flow-type instruments, some electronic noise can be detected by counting with clean
water in the sensor and no flow (that is, with no true particle counts). If noise is present, it is
likely to occur as a very large numb er of counts in the smallest size range (lowest channel).
Eliminate this noise by resetting the size range of the smallest channel (increasing the lowest size
range to be measured) high enough to avoid significant counts in the lowest channel. For further
measures to minimize electronic noise, see Section 2560A.7 . 
For static-type instruments, use a glass container that is optically clear and has no lettering or
markings, at least in the light path. Minimize th e effect of specific glassware by using the sam e
sample container for all samples that will be compared and ensuring that the orientation of the
sample container in the light beam is the same for every sample. 
c. Detectable sizes and concentrations:  The lower size limit of measurement depends on both
electronic noise and sensor capability. For flow-type instruments, the upper particle size limit
usually is determined by the size of the orifice through which pa rticles pass. Manufacturers state
particle size limits (lower and upper) for each sensor. See Section 2560B.1 c.
 Application of the Mie theory to the scatte ring data can extend the range of light-scattering
instruments to as low as 0.1 µm. Alternatively, s ome instruments extend the lower limit of
detectable diameters to 0.1 µm by augmenting Fraunhofer diffraction data with scattering
intensity measurements at a fixed angle (often 90°) using two or three different wavelengths of
incident light. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Particle counter and size distribution analyzer.
b. Glassware:  See Section 2560A.3 a and Section 2560A.7 .
3.  Reagents
a. Particle-free dilution water:  See Section 2560A.4 .
b. Calibration particles:  See Section 2560A.5 .
4.  Procedure
a. Preparation:  Let instrument warm up according to manufacturer’s instructions. For
flow-type instruments, select sensor to measure size and concentration ranges expected; use
more than one sensor if size distribution is wider than the range that can be  measured with one
sensor. Preferably use a sensor designed for the concentration range of the undiluted sample
rather than diluting samples into the concentration range of the sensor. For both types of
instruments, place in or pass through the sensor at l east three times a volume of particle-free
dilution water equivalent to that used in measuring samples, before the first sample.
 Choose settings on the instrument for each type of choice available, including flow rate,
total number of channels and which c hannels are to be included, absolute or relative counts, etc.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationAlso choose method of starting and stopping c ounting: total count, maximum count in one
channel, duration of counting, or analysis of  a specified volume of sample. For flow-type
instruments, the  known-volume method is preferable because it lends itself to determination of
absolute size distribution. For static-type analyzers, the analyst does not control sample size
directly, but can control duration of measurement. Take care not to exceed maximu m particle
number concentration limits suggested by manufacturer. 
Some flow-type instruments permit choice between vacuum or pressure systems for
transporting the sample through the sensor. If floc preservation is essential, preferably use a
vacuum system  but ensure that bubbles do not form before the sensor; otherwise, use a pressure
system with a pulseless gear pump. 
b. Calibration:  See Section 2560A.5 . For flow-type instruments, initial calibration of each
sensor on an instrument requires several particle sizes to determine the relationship between
particle size and channel number. Either this relationship may be co ntrolled by varying the range
of millivolt responses that are sorted into each channel, or it is pre-set by the manufacturer.
Static-type instruments are pre-set by the manufacturer because sizing is done by a software
conversion of the light sensed. After  initial calibration, use at least two sizes of calibration
particles for each sensor each time the instrument is used. Although the calculation of particle
sizes is based on first principles and not on this calibration, calibrate to ensure that the
instru ment is functioning properly. For flow-type in struments, measure flow rate through the
sensor and adjust to that used during initial calibration.
c. Blank sample:  See Section 2560B.4 c, but substitute particle-free dilution water for
electrolyte solution.
d. Measurement of samples:  If dilution is necessary, dilute sample to keep within
manufacturer’s guidelines for the maximum counting rate. Mix gently (see Section 2560A.3 a).
 For flow-type instruments, initiate the flow from the sample through the sensor . Check that
flow rate is the same as that used for sensor calibration. Start counting only after sufficient
sample has passed through the tubing connecting the sample and sensor to ensure that the sensor
is receiving the sample. When counting is complete,  check that the concentration did not exceed
the manufacturer’s recommendations. Repeat with a greater dilution if necessary. For subsequent
samples, rinse with dilution water or the next sample. When a series of samples with varying
concentrations is to b e measured and sample order is not critical, measure samples in order of
expected increasing particle concentration; in this case, preferably rinse with next sample. 
For static-type instruments, insert sample beaker or bottle and start particle counting. When
counting is complete, check that the concentration did not exceed the manufacturer’s
recommendations by diluting and measuring again. If the second count is related to the first
according to the ratio of the dilution factors of the two measurements, c onsider the first
measurement acceptable. Repeat with a greater dilution if necessary. For subsequent samples,
see directions in preceding paragraph. 
5.  CalculationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation See Section 2560A.6 . 
2570        ASBESTOS #(52) *
2570  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 The term ‘‘asbestos’’ describes a group of naturally occurring, inorganic, highly fibrous
silicate minerals that are easily separated into long, thin, flexible fibers when crushed or
processed.  Included in the definition  are the asbestiform (see ¶ 2 below) varieties of serpentine
(chrysotile), riebeckite (crocidolite), grunerite (grunerite asbestos), anthophyllite (anthophyllite
asbestos), tremolite (tremolite asbestos), and actinolite (actinolite asbestos). 
Asbestos has  been used widely as a thermal insulator and in filtration. The tiny, almost
indestructible fibers penetrate lung tissue and linings of other body cavities, causing asbestosis
and cancer in the lungs and mesothelioma in other cavity linings. 
2.  Definitions
 Asbestiform —having a special type of fibrous habit (form) in which the fibers are separable
into thinner fibers and ultimately into fibrils. This habit accounts for greater flexibility and
higher tensile strength than other habits of the  same mineral. More information on asbestiform
mineralogy is available.1,2 
Aspect ratio —ratio of the length of a fibrous particle to its average width. 
Bundle —structure composed of three or more fibers in parallel arrangement with the fibers
closer than one fiber diameter to each other. 
Cluster —structure with fibers in a random arrangement such that all fibers are intermixed
and no single fiber is isolated from the group; groupings of fibers must have more than two
points touching. 
Fiber (AHERA) —structu re having a minimum length greater than or equal to 0.5 µm, an
aspect ratio of 5:1 or greater, and substantially parallel sides.3 
Fibril —single fiber that cannot be separated into smaller components without losing its
fibrous properties or appearance. 
Fibrous —composed of parallel, radiating, or interlaced aggregates of fibers, from which the
fibers are sometimes separable. The crystalline aggregate of a mineral may be referred to as
fibrous even if it is not composed of separable fibers, but has that dist inct appearance.
‘‘Fibrous’’ is used in a general mineralogical way to describe aggregates of grains that
crystallize in a needle-like habit and appear to be composed of fibers; it has a much more general
meaning than ‘‘asbestos.’’  While all asbestos mine rals are fibrous, not all minerals having
fibrous habits are asbestos. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMatrix —fiber or fibers with one end free and the other end embedded in, or hidden by, a
particle. The exposed fiber must meet the fiber definition. 
Structures —all the types of asbesto s particles, including fibers, bundles, clusters, and
matrices. 
3.  References
         1.    STEEL, E. & A. WYLIE . 1981. Mineralogical characteristics of asbestos. In P.H. Riordon,
ed. Geology of Asbestos Deposits. Soc.  Mining Engineers—American Inst.
Mechanical Engineers, New York, N.Y.
         2.    ZUSSMAN , J. 1979. The miner alogy of asbestos. In Asbestos: Properties, Applications
and Hazards. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1987. Asbestos-containing materials in
schools: Final rule and notice. Federal Register , 40 CFR Part 763, Appendix A to
Sub-part E, Oct. 30, 1987.
2570  B.        Transmission Electron Microscopy Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is used to determine the concentration of asbestos structures, expressed as the
number of such structures per liter of water. Asbestos identification by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) is based on morphology, se lected area electron diffraction (SAED), and
energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA). Inform ation about structure size also is generated.
Only asbestos structures containing fibers greater than or equal to 0.5 µm in length are counted.
The concentrations  of both fibrous asbestos structures greater than 10 µm in length and total
asbestos structures per liter of water are determined. The fibrous asbestos structures greater than
10 µm in length are of specific interest for meeting the Federal Maximum Contami nant Level
Goal (MCLG) for drinking water, but in many cases the total asbestos concentration provides
important additional information. 
a. Principle:  Sample portions are filtered through a membrane filter. A section of the filter is
prepared and transferred to a TEM grid using the direct transfer method. The asbestiform
structures are identified, sized, and counted by transmission electr on microscopy (TEM), using
selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and en ergy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS or EDXA) at
a magnification of 15 000 to 20 000×.
b. Interferences:  Certain minerals have properties (i.e., chemical or crystalline structure) that
are very similar to those of asbestos minerals and may interfere with the analysis by causing
false positives. Maintain references for the following materia ls in the laboratory for comparison
with asbestos minerals, so that they are not misidentified as asbestos minerals: antigorite,
attapulgite (palygorskite), halloysite, hornblende, pyroxenes, sepiolite, and vermiculite scrolls.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation High concentrations of iron  or other minerals in the water may coat asbestos fibers and
prevent their full identification. 
2.  Sampling
a. Containers:  Use new, pre-cleaned, capped bottles of glass or low-density (conventional)
polyethylene, capable of holding at least 1 L.  Do not use polypropylene bottles. Rinse bottles
twice by filling approximately one-third full with fiber-free water and shaking vigorously for 30
s.  Discard rinse water, fill bottles with fiber-free water, treat in ultrasonic bath (60 to 100 W) for
15 min, and rinse several times with fiber-free water.
 Make blank determinations on the bottles before collecting a sampl e. Use one bottle in each
batch or a minimum of one bottle in each 24 to test for background level when using
polyethylene bottles. When sampling waters probabl y containing very low levels of asbestos, or
for additional confidence in the bottle blanks, run  additional blank determinations. 
b. Collection:  Follow general principles for water sampling (see Section 1060 ). Some
specific considerations apply to asbestos  fibers, which range in length from 0.1 µm to 20 µm or
more. In large bodies of water, because of the range of sizes there may b e a vertical distribution
of particle sizes that may vary with depth. If a representative sample from a water supply tank or
impoundment is required, take a carefully designated set of samples representing vertical as well
as horizontal distribution and co mposite for analysis. When sampling from a distribution system,
choose a commonly used faucet, remove all hoses or fittings, and let water run to waste for 1 to 3
min. (Often, the appropriate time to obtain a main’s sample can be determined by waiting for a
change in water temperature.) Because sediment may build up in valving works, do not adjust
faucets or valves until all samples have been collected. Similarly, do not consider samples at
hydrants and at dead ends of the distribution systems to be represe ntative of the water in the
system. As an additional precaution against contamination, rinse each bottle several times with
the source water being sampled. For depth sampling, omit rinsing. Obtain a sample of
approximately 800 mL from each sampling site, leaving some air space in each bottle.  Using a
waterproof marker, label each container with date, time, place, and sampler’s initials.
c. Shipment:  Ship water samples in a sealed container, but separate from any bulk or air
samples intended for asbestos analysis. Preferably, ship in a cooler to retard bacterial or algal
growth. Do not freeze the sample. In the laboratory, prepare sample  within 48 h of collection.
3.  Apparatus
a. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtered negative-flow hood.
b. Filter funnel assemblies , either 25 mm or 47 mm, of either of the following types:
1) Disposable plastic units , or 
2) Glass filtering unit . With this type of unit, observe the following precautions: Never let
unit dry after filtering. Immediately place it in detergent solution, scrub with a test-tube brush,
and rinse several times in particle-free water. Periodically  treat unit in detergent solution in an
ultrasonic bath. Clean unit after each sample is filtered. Run a blank on particle-free waterStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfiltered through the glass filtering unit at frequent intervals to ensure absence of residual asbestos
contamination. 
c. Side-arm filter flask , 1000 mL.
d. Either:
1) Mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane filters , 25- or 47-mm diam, ≤ 0.45-µm and 5-µm
pore size, or 
2) Polycarbonate (PC) filters , 25- or 47-mm diam, ≤ 0.4-µm pore size. 
e. Ultrasonic bath , tabletop model, 60 to 100 W.
f. Graduated pipet , disposable glass, 1, 5, and 10 mL.
g. Cabinet-type dessicator  or low-temperature drying oven .
h. Cork borer , 7 mm.
i. Glass slides .
j. Petri dishes , glass, approximately 90-mm diam.
k. Mesh screen , stainless steel or aluminum, 30 to 40 mesh.
l. Ashless filter paper filters , 90-mm diam.
m. Exhaust or fume hood.
n. Scalpel blades.
o. Low-temperature plasma asher.
p. High-vacuum carbon evaporator  with rotating stage, capable of less than 0.013 Pa
pressure.  Do not use units that evaporate carbon filaments in a vacuum generated only by oil
rotary pump. Use carbon rods sharpened with a carbon rod sharpener to necks about 4 mm long
and 1 mm in diam. Install rods in the evaporator so that the points are approximately 100 to 120
mm from surface of microscope slide held in the rotating device.
q. Lens tissue.
r. Copper TEM finder grids , 200 mesh. Use pre-calibrated grids, or determine grid opening
area by either of the following methods:
1) Measure at least 20 grid openings in each of 20 random 200-mesh grids (total of 400 grid
openings for every 1000 grids used) by placing the 20 grids on a glass slide and examining them
under an optical microscope. Use a calibrated reticule to measure average length and width of 20
openings from each of the individual grids. From the accumulated data, calculate the average
grid opening area. 
2) Measure grid area at the TEM (¶ s below) at a calibrated screen magnification of between
15 000 and 20 000×. Measure one grid opening for each grid examined. Measure grid openings
in both the x and y directions and calculate area. 
s. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) , 80 to 120 kV, equipped with energy dispersive
X-ray system (EDXA), capable of performing electron diffraction with a fluorescent screenStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationinscribed with calibrated gradations. The TEM must have a scanning transmis sion electron
microscopy (STEM) attachment or be capable of producing a spot size of less than 250 nm diam
at crossover. Calibrate routinely for magnification, camera constant, and EDXA settings
according to procedures of 5 d.
4.  Reagents and Materials
a. Acetone.
b. Dimethylformamide (DMF) . CAUTION : Toxic; use only in a fume hood.
c. Glacial acetic acid . CAUTION : Use in a fume hood.
d. Chloroform.
e. 1-Methyl-2-pyrrolidinone.
f. Particle-free water:  Use glass-distilled water or treat by reverse osmosis; filter through a
filter with pore diam 0.45 µm or smaller.
g. Non-asbestos standards  for minerals listed in ¶ 1b above.
h. Asbestos standards  for minerals listed in Section 2570A.1 .
5.  Procedure
a. Sample filtration:  Samples with high levels of organic contaminants may require
pretreatment. A process using ultraviolet li ght and ozone bubbling is described elsewhere.1
Drinking water samples prepared within 48 h of collection do not require pretre atment.
 Under a HEPA hood, carefully wet-wipe exterior of sample bottle to remove any possible
contamination before taking bottle into a clean preparation area separated from preparation areas
for bulk or air-sample handling. 
Prepare specimen in a clean HEPA filtered negative-pressure hood. Measure cleanliness of
preparation area hoods by cumulative process blank concentrations (see ¶ b below). 
If using a disposable plastic filter funnel unit,  remove funnel assembly and discard top filter
supplied with t he apparatus, but be sure to retain the coarse polypropylene support pad in place.
Assemble unit with the adapter and a properly sized neoprene stopper, and attach funnel to the
1000-mL side-arm vacuum flask. Moisten support pad with a few milliliters dist illed water, place
a 5.0-µm-pore-size MCE backing filter on support pad, and place an MCE or PC filter
(≤0.45-µm-pore-size) on top of backing filter. After both filters are completely wet, apply
vacuum, ensuring that filters are centered and pulled flat wi thout air bubbles. If there are any
irregularities on the filter surface, discard filters  and repeat process. Replace funnel assembly.
Return flask to atmospheric pressure. Alternatively, use glass filtering unit, following the same
procedure to set up fi lters. 
With flask at atmospheric pressure, add 20 mL particle-free water to funnel. Cover funnel
with its plastic cover if the disposable filtering unit is used. 
Briefly, by hand, shake capped bottle with sample suspension, then place it in tabletop
ultrasonic bath and sonicate for 3.0 min. The water level in the bath should be approximately theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsame as that of the sample. After treatment, re turn sample bottle to work surface of HEPA hood.
Carry out all preparation steps, until filters are ready for dryi ng, in this hood. 
Shake suspension vigorously by hand for 2 to 3 s. Estimate amount of liquid to be withdrawn
to produce an adequate filter preparation. Experien ce has shown that a light staining of the filter
surface will usually yield a suitable prepara tion. If the sample is relatively clean, use a
volumetric cylinder to measure sample. If sample has a high particulate or asbestos content,
withdraw a small volume (but at least 1 mL) with disposable glass pipet, inserting pipet halfway
into sample. 
NOTE: If, after examination in the TEM, the smallest volume measured (1.0 mL) yields an
overloaded sample, make additional serial dilutions of the suspension. Shake suspension
vigorously by hand for 2 to 3 s before taking serial dilution portion. Do not re-trea t in ultrasonic
bath either original solution or any dilutions. Mix 10 mL sample with 90 mL particle-free water
in a clean sample bottle to obtain a 1:10 serial dilution. 
Uncover filter funnel and dispense mixture in to the water in the funnel. Recover fun nel and
agitate but do not swirl the liquid. (One acceptable means of agitation is to inject 5 to 10 mL
particle-free water from a squeeze bottle into the funnel.) Apply vacuum and filter. Discard
pipet, if used. 
Disassemble filtering unit and carefully r emove filter with clean forceps. Place filter, particle
side up, in a precleaned, labeled, disposable plastic petri dish or similar container. 
To obtain an optimally loaded filter, make several filtrations with different sample portions.
Use new disposab le plastic funnel units or carefully cleaned glass units for each filtration. When
additional filters are prepared, shake suspension without additional ultrasonic treatment before
removing the sample portion. Each new filtration should represent at least a  five-fold loading
difference. 
Dry MCE filters for at least 12 h (over desiccant) in airtight, cabinet-type desiccator.
Alternatively, to shorten drying time for filters prepared using the acetone collapsing method,
plug damp filter and attach to a glass  slide as described in ¶ c1)a)  below. Place the slide with
filter plug(s) (up to eight plugs can be attached to one slide) on a bed of desiccant, cover, and
place in desiccator for 1 to 2 h. 
Place PC filters in a dessicator for at least 30 min before prep aration; lengthy drying is not
required. 
b. Sample blank preparation:  Prepare sample blanks that include both a process blank (50
mL particle-free water) for each set of samples analyzed and one unused filter from each new
box of sample filters (MCE or PC). Blanks are considered contaminated if , after analysis, they
are shown to contain more than 53 asbestos structures/mm2. This corresponds to 3 or 4 asbestos
structures found in 10 grid openings. Identify sour ce of contamination before making any further
analysis. Reject samples that were proces sed with the contaminated blanks and prepare new
samples after source of contamination is found. Take special care with polycarbonate filters,
because some have been shown to contain asbestos contamination.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc. Specimen preparation:
1) Mixed cellulose ester (MCE) filters 
a) Filter fusing—Use either the acetone or the DMF-acetic acid method. 
(1) Acetone fusing method—Remove a section from any quadrant of the sample and blank
filters with a 7-mm cork borer. Place filter section (particle side up) on a clean microscope sli de.
Affix filter section to slide with a gummed page reinforcement or other suitable means. Label
slide with a glass scribing tool or permanent marker. 
Prepare a fusing dish as follows: Make a pad from five to six ashless paper filters and place
in botto m of a glass petri dish. Place metal screen bridge on top of pad and saturate filter pads
with acetone. Place slide on top of bridge and cover the petri dish. Wait approximately 5 min for
sample filter to fuse and clear completely. 
(2) DMF-acetic acid fus ing method—Place drop of clearing solution (35%
dimethylformamide [DMF], 15% glacial acetic acid, and 50% particle-free water by volume) on
a clean microscope slide. CAUTION : DMF is a toxic solvent; use only in a fume hood . Use an
amount of clearing soluti on that just saturates the filter. Using a clean scalpel blade, cut a
wedge-shaped section of filter. A one-eighth filter section is sufficient. Carefully lay filter
segment, sample surface upward, on top of solution. Bring filter and solution together at an angle
of about 20 deg to help exclude air bubbles. Remove excess clearing solution with filter paper.
Place slide in oven, on a slide-warmer, or on hot plate, in a fume hood, at 65 to 70°C for 5 to 10
min. The filter section should fuse and clear comple tely. 
b) Plasma etching—Place microscope slide, with attached collapsed filter pieces, in a
low-temperature plasma asher. Because plasma ashers vary greatly in their performance, both
from unit to unit and between different positions in the asher barrel, it is  difficult to specify
operating conditions. Insufficient etching will result in a failure to expose embedded fibers; too
much etching may result in the loss of particles from the filter surface. Calculate time for ashing
on the basis of final sample observ ations in transmission electron microscope. Additional
information on calibration is available.2,3 
c) Carbon coating—Using high-vacuum carbon evaporator (¶ 3 p), proceed as follows: Place
glass slide holding filters on the rotation device and evacuate evaporator chamber to a pressure
of less than 0.013 Pa. Perform evaporation in very short bursts, sep arated by 3 to 4 s to let
electrodes cool. An experienced analyst can judge the thickness of the carbon film. Make initial
tests on unused filters. If the carbon film is too thin, large particles will be lost from the TEM
specimen, and there will be few co mplete and undamaged grid openings. A coating that is too
thick will lead to a TEM image lacking in contrast and a compromised ability to obtain electron
diffraction patterns. The carbon film should be as thin as possible and still remain intact on most
of the grid openings of the TEM specimen. 
d) Specimen washing—Prepare a Jaffe washer according to any published design.1,4 One
such washer consists of a simple stainless steel  bridge contained in a glass petri dish. Place on
the stainless steel bridge several pieces of lens tissue large enough t o hang completely over theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationbridge and into the solvent. In a fume hood, fill petri dish with either acetone or DMF to one
quarter of the level in the dish. 
Place TEM grids, shiny side up, on a piece of lens tissue or filter paper so that individual
grids can be easily picked up with forceps. Prepare from each sample three grids. Using a curved
scalpel blade, excise three square (3-mm × 3-mm) pieces of carbon-coated MCE filter from
random areas on the filter. Place each square filter piece, carbon-side up, on top of a TEM
specimen grid (¶ 3r). 
Place all three assemblies (filter/grid) for each sample on the same piece of saturated lens
tissue in Jaffe washer. Place lid on the Jaffe wash er and let system stand, preferably overnight. 
Alternatively, place grid s on a low-level (petri dish is filled only enough to wet paper on
screen bridge) DMF Jaffe washer for 60 min. Then add enough solution of equal parts
DMF/acetone to fill washer up to screen level. Remove grids after 30 min if they have cleared,
i.e., all filter material has been removed from the carbon film, as determined by inspecting in the
TEM. Let grids dry before placing in TEM. 
2) Polycarbonate (PC) filters—Cover surface of a clean microscope slide with two strips of
double-sided cellophane tape. Cut a strip of filter paper slightly narrower than width of slide.
Position filter paper strip on center of length of slide. Using a  clean, curved scalpel blade, cut a
strip of the PC filter approximately 25 × 6 mm. Use a rocking motion of the scalpel blade to
avoid tearing filter. Place PC strip, particle side up, on slide perpendicular to long axis of slide,
making sure that the ends  of the PC strip contact the double-sided cellophane tape. Each slide
can hold several PC strips. Label filter paper next to each PC strip with sample number. 
Carbon-coat filter strips as directed in ¶ 1)c) above. (Etching is not required.) Take special
care to avoid overheating filter sections during carbon coating. 
Prepare a Jaffe washer as described in ¶ 1)d) above, but fill washer with chloroform or
1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone to the level of the screen. Using a clean curved scalpel blade, excise
three 3 -mm-square filter pieces from each PC strip. Place filter squares, carbon side up, on shiny
side of a TEM grid (¶ 3r). Pick up grid and filter section together and place them on lens tissue
in the Jaffe washer. Place lid on Jaffe washer and leave grids for  at least 4 h. Best results are
obtained with longer wicking times, up to 12 h. Carefully remove grids from the Jaffe washer
and let dry in the grid box before placing them in a clean, marked grid box. 
d. Instrument calibration:  Calibrate instrumentation regularly, and keep a calibration record
for each TEM in the laboratory, in accordance with the laboratory’s quality assurance program.
Record all calibrations in a log book along with dates of calibr ation and attached backup
documentation.
 Check TEM for both alignment and systems operation. Refer to manufacturer’s operational
manual for detailed instructions. 
Calibrate camera length of TEM in electr on diffraction (ED) operating mode before
observing  ED patterns of unknown samples. Measure camera length by using a carbon-coated
grid on which a thin film of gold has been sputtered or evaporated. A thin film of gold may be
evaporated directly on to a specimen grid containing asbestos fibers. This yields  zone-axis EDStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationpatterns from the asbestos fibers superimposed on a ring pattern from the polycrystalline gold
film. Optimize thickness of gold film so that only one or two sharp rings are obtained. Thicker
gold films may mask weaker diffraction spots from t he fibrous particles. Because unknown
d-spacings of most interest in asbestos analysis are those lying closest to the transmitted beam,
multiple gold rings from thicker films are unnecessary. Alternatively, use a gold standard
specimen to obtain an average  camera constant calculated for that particular instrument, which
can then be used for ED patterns of unknowns taken during the corresponding period. 
Calibrate magnification at the fluorescent screen  at magnification used for structure counting.
Use a gr ating replica (e.g., one containing at least 2160 lines/mm). Define a field of view on the
fluorescent screen; the field must be measurable or previously inscribed with a scale or
concentric circles (use metric scales). Place grating replica at the same di stance from the
objective lens as the specimen. For instruments that incorporate a eucentric tilting specimen
stage, place all specimens and the grating replica at the eucentric position. Follow the
instructions provided with the grating replica to calcula te magnification. Frequency of
calibration depends on service history of the microscope. Check calibration after any
maintenance that involves adjustment of the power supply to the lens, the high-voltage system,
or the mechanical disassembly of the electro n optical column (apart from filament exchange). 
Check smallest spot size of the TEM. At th e crossover point, photograph spot size at a
magnification of 25 000× (screen magnification 20 000×). An exposure time of 1 s usually is
adequate. Measured spot siz e must be less than or equal to 250 nm. 
Verify resolution and calibration of the EDXA as follows: Collect a standard EDXA Cu peak
from the Cu grid and compare X-ray energy with channel number for Cu peak to make sure
readings are within ± 10 eV. Collect a  standard EDXA of crocidolite asbestos; elemental
analysis of the crocidolite must resolve the Na peak. Collect a standard EDXA spectrum of
chrysotile asbestos; elemental analysis of chrysotile must resolve both Si and Mg on a single
chrysotile fiber. 
e. Sample analysis:  Carefully load TEM grid with grid bars oriented parallel/perpendicular to
length of specimen holder. Use a hand lens or eye loupe if necessary. This procedure will line up
the grid with the x and y translation directions of the micros cope. Insert specimen holder into
microscope.
 Scan entire grid at low magnification (250× to 1000×) to determine its acceptability for
high-magnification analysis. Grids are acceptable if the following conditions are met: 
•  The fraction of grid opening s covered by the replica section is at least 50%. 
•  Relative to that section of the grid covered by the carbon replica, the fraction of intact grid
openings is greater than 50%. 
•  The fractional area of undissolved filter is less than 10%. 
•  The frac tion of grid squares with overlapping or folded replica film is less than 50%. 
•  At least 20 grid squares have no overlapping or folded replica, are less than 5% covered withStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationholes, and have less than 5% opaque area due to incomplete filter dissolution. 
If the grid meets these criteria, chose grid squares for analysis from various areas of the grid
so that the entire grid is represented. To be suitable for analysis, an individual grid square must
meet the following criteria: 
•  It must have less than 5% holes over its area. 
•  It must be less than 25% covered with particulate matter. 
•  It must be uniformly loaded. 
Observe and record orientation of grid at 80 to 150× on a grid map record sheet along with
the location of the grid squares examined. I f indexed grids are used, a grid map is not needed,
but record identifying coordinates of the grid square. 
At a screen magnification of 15 000 to 25 000×, evaluate the grids for the most concentrated
sample loading. Reject sample if it is estimated to con tain more than about 25 asbestos structures
per grid opening. Proceed to the next most concentrated sample until a set of grids is obtained
that have less than 25 asbestos structures per grid opening. 
Analyze a minimum of four grid squares for each sample . 
Analyze approximately one-half of the predetermined sample area on one sample grid
preparation and the remainder on a second sample grid preparation. 
Use structure definitions given in Section 2570A.2  to enumerate asbestos structures. Record
all data o n count sheet. Record asbestos structures in two size categories: ≥0.5 µm to ≥ 10.0 µm
and >10.0 µm. For fibers and bundles, record size category of greatest length of the structure.
For matrices and clusters, record size category of the visible portion o f the longest fiber or
bundle involved with the structure, not the gr eatest overall dimension of the structure. No
minimum or maximum width restrictions are a pplied to the fiber definition, as long as the
minimum length and aspect ratio criteria are met. R ecord ‘‘NSD’’ (no structures detected) when
no structures are found in the grid opening. 
Record a typical electron diffraction pattern for each type of asbestos observed for each
group of samples (or a minimum of every five samples) analyzed. Record micro graph number on
count sheet. For chrysotile, record one X-ray spectrum for each tenth structure analyzed. For
each type of amphibole, record one X-ray spectrum for each fifth structure analyzed. (More
information on identification is available.1,4) Attach the printouts to the back of the count sheet.
If the X-ray spectrum is stored, record file and disk number on count sheet. 
Analytical sensitivity can be improved by increasing amount of liquid filtered, increasing
number of grid openings analyzed, or decr easing size of filter used. Occasionally, because of
high particle loadings or high asbestos concentration, the desired analytical sensitivity cannot be
achieved in practice. 
Unless a specific analytical sensitivity is desired, stop analysis on the 10th g rid opening orStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe grid opening that contains the 100th asbestos structure, whichever comes first. If the analysis
is stopped at the grid opening that contains the 100th asbestos structure, count entire grid square
containing the 100th structure. 
After an alysis, remove grids from TEM, replace them in grid storage holder, and store for a
minimum of one year from the date of the analysis for legal purposes. Sample filters also may be
stored in the plastic petri dishes, if necessary. Prolonged storage of the remaining water sample
is not recommended, because microbial growth may cause loss of asbestos structures to the sides
of the storage container. 
Report the following information for each water sample analyzed: asbestos concentration in
structures per lite r, for total structures and fibrous asbestos structures greater than 10 µm in
length; types of asbestos present; number of asbest os structures counted; effective filtration area;
average size of TEM grid openings counted; number of grid openings examined; size category
for each structure counted. Include a copy of the TEM count sheet, either hand-written or
computer-generated. 
6.  Calculations
 Calculate amount of asbestos in a sample as follows: 
where: 
             N = number of asbestos structures counted,    
            Af = effective filter area of final sampling filter, mm2,           
             D = dilution factor (if ap plicable),        
             G = number of grid openings counted,            
            AG = area of grid openings, mm2, and              
            Vs = volume of sample, L. 
The same formula may be used to calculate asbestos fibers greater than 10 µm in length per liter
based on the  total number of fibers and bundles greater than 10 µm in length whether free or
associated with matrices and clusters. Express final results as million structures per liter (MSL)
and million fibers per liter (MFL). 
7.  Quality Control/Quality Assurance
 Use the laboratory’s quality-control checks to verify that system is performing according to
accuracy and consistency specifications. Because of the difficulties in preparing known
quantitative asbestos samples, rou tine quality-control testing focuses on reanalysis of samplesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation(duplicate recounts). Reanalyze 1 out of ever y 10 samples, not including laboratory blanks. 
In addition, set up quality assurance programs according to the criteria developed by Federal
agencie s.2,3 These documents cover sample custody, sample preparation, blank checks for
contamination, calibration, sample analysis, analyst qualifications, and technical facilities. 
8.  Precision and Bias
 Precision measurements for intralaboratory comparisons have been found to have a relative
standard deviation (RSD) of 13 to 22% for standard and environmental water samples, with an
RSD of 8.4 to 29% for interlaboratory comparison s.1 An earlier study found an interlaboratory
reproducibility of 25 to 50% in standard samples.5 
Accuracy measurements from inter- and intralaboratory studies have demonstrated an RSD
of 17% for standard chrysotile suspensions, and an RSD of 16% for stand ard crocidolite
suspensions.1 
9.  References
         1.    CHATFIELD, E.J. & M.J. DILLON . 1983. Analytical Method for the Determination of
Asbestos in Water. EPA 600/4-83-043, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Athens, Ga.
         2.    NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY & NATIONA L VOLUNTARY
ACCREDITATION PROGRAM . 1989. Program Handbook for Airborne Asbestos
Analysis. NISTIR 89-4137, U.S. Dep. Commerce, Gaithersburg, Md.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1987. Asbestos-containing materials in
schools: Final rule and not ice. Federal Register , 40 CFR Part 763, Appendix A to
Sub-part E, Oct. 30, 1987.
         4.    YAMATE, G., S.C. AGARWALL & R.D. GIBBONS . 1984. Methodology for the
Measurement of Airborne Asbestos by Electron Microscopy. USEPA draft report,
Contract No. 68-02-326 6, Research Triangle Park, N.C.
         5.    CHOPRA , K.S. 1977. Inter-laboratory measurements of amphibole and chrysotile fiber
concentrations in water. In National Bureau of Standards Spec. Publ. 506, Proc. of the
Workshop on Asbestos: Definitions and Measurem ent Methods. Gaithersburg, Md.
2580        OXIDATION-REDUCTION POTENTIAL (ORP) #(53) *
2580  A.        Introduction
1.  Significance
 Oxidation and reduction (redox) reactions mediate the behavior of many chemicalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconstituents in drinking, process, and wastewaters as well as most aquatic compartments of the
environment.1-5 The reactivities and mobilities of important elements in biological systems (e.g.,
Fe, S, N, and C), as well as those of a number of other metallic elements, depend strongly on
redox conditions. Reactions involving both electr ons and protons are pH- and Eh-dependent;
therefore, chemical reactions in aqueous media often can be characterized by pH and Eh together
with the activity of dissolved chemical species. Like pH, Eh represents an intensity factor. It
does not characterize the capacity (i.e., poise) of the system for oxidation or reduction. 
The p otential difference measured in a solution between an inert indicator electrode and the
standard hydrogen electrode should not be equa ted to Eh, a thermodynamic property, of the
solution. The assumption of a reversible chemical equilibrium, fast electrode kinetics, and the
lack of interfering reactions at the electrode surface are essential for such an interpretation.
These conditions rarely, if ever, are met in natural water. 
Thus, although measurement of Eh in water is relatively straightforward, many fa ctors limit
the interpretation of these values. These factors include irreversible reactions, electrode
poisoning, the presence of multiple redox couples, very small exchange currents, and inert redox
couples. Eh values measured in the field correlate poor ly with Eh values calculated from the
redox couples present. Nevertheless, measurement of redox potential, when properly performed
and interpreted, is useful in developing a more complete understanding of water chemistry. 
2.  Sampling and Storage
 Do not store samples; analyze on collection. Minimize both atmospheric contact and delay
in analysis. 
3.  References
         1.    BAAS-BECKING, L.G.M., I.R. KAPLAN & D. MOORE.  1960. Limits of the natural
environment in terms of pH and oxidation-reduction potentials. J. Geol.  68:243.
         2.    LANGMUIR, D.  1971. Eh-pH determination. In R.E. Carver, ed. Procedure s in
Sedimentary Petrology. Wiley-Interscience, New York, N.Y.
         3.    GARRELS, R.M. & C.L. CHRIST.  1965. Solutions, Minerals and Equilibria. Harper and
Row, New York, N.Y.
         4.    BRECK, W.G.  1972. Redox potentials by equilibration. J. Mar. Res.  30:121.
         5.    BRICKER, O.P.  1982. Redox potential: Its measurement and importance in water
systems. In R.A. Minear & L.H. Keith, eds. Water Analysis, Vol. 1, Inorganic Species.
Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
4.  Bibliography
 GARRELS, R.M . 1960. Mineral Equilibria at Low Temperature and Pressure. Harper & Brothers,
New York, N.Y.
 POURBAIX, M.J.N . 1966. Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibriums in Aqueous Solutions (transl.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationJ.A. Franklin, Centre Belge d’Etude de  la Corrosion). Pergamon Press, Ltd., Oxford,
England.
 STUMM, W . 1967. Redox potential as an environmental parameter; conceptual significance and
operational limitation. In Advances in Water Pollution Research. Proc. Int. Conf. Water
Pollut. Res., 3rd, 1: 283.
 ADAMS, R.N . 1969. Electrochemistry at Solid Electrodes. Marcel Dekker, New York, N.Y.
 BATES, R.G.  1973. Determination of pH, Theory and Practice, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, N.Y.
 LINDBERG, R.D. & D.D. RUNNELLS.  1984. Groundwater redox reac tions: an analysis of
equilibrium state applied to Eh measurements and geochemical modeling. Science  225:925.
2580  B.        Oxidation-Reduction Potential Measurement in Clean Water
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Electrometric measurements are made by potentiometric determination of
electron activity (or intensity) with an inert indicator electrode and a suitable reference electrode.
Ideally, the indicator electrode will serve as either an electron  donor or acceptor with respect to
electroactive oxidized or reduced chemical species in solution. At redox equilibrium, the
potential difference between the ideal indicator electrode and the reference electrode equals the
redox potential of the system. Ho wever, inert indicator electrodes that behave ideally in all
aqueous systems, particularly in natural waters, do not exist. Electrodes made of platinum are
most commonly used for Eh measurements. They have limitations,1 as do alternative materials
such as gold and graphite.
 The standard hydrogen reference electrode is fragile and impractical for routine laboratory
and field use. Therefore, silver: silver-chloride or calomel reference electrodes are used
commonly. The redox potential measurement is correcte d for the difference between the
potential of the reference electrode and that of the standard hydrogen electrode. See Section
4500-H  pH Value. 
It is not possible to calibrate Eh electrodes over a range of redox potentials (as is done with
pH electrodes).  Instead, standard solutions that exhibit both chemical stability and known redox
potentials for specific indicator electrodes are used to check electrode response at the
temperature of measurement. 
The potential of the platinum (Pt) Eh electrode versus t he Ag/AgCl reference electrode with
KCl electrolyte in ZoBell’s solution (3 × 10−3M potassium ferrocyanide and 3 × 10−3M
potassium ferricyanide in 0.1 M KCl)2 has been measured as a function of temperature.3 Good
agreement was obtained between Eh values mea sured with this electrode pair in ZoBell’s
solution and those calculated from the stability constants at 8 to 85°C. The potential of the
ZoBell’s solution with this electrode configuration Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationas a function of temperature can be calculated:4 
Eh, V = 0.428 − 0.0022 ( T − 25)
where T  = solution temperature, °C. Alternatively, select the value from Table 2580:I . 
To determine the Eh of a sample relative to the standard hydrogen electrode, measure Eh of
both sample and standard solution at the same temperature (w ithin ±0.1°C). Then calculate Eh
value of the sample: 
Ehsystem = Eobserved + EhZoBell/reference − EhZoBell observed
where: 
                Eobserved =   sample potential relative to reference electrode. 
    EhZoBell/reference =   theoretical Eh of refer ence electrode  and ZoBell’s solution, relative to the
standard hydrogen electrode (see Table 2580:I ), and 
     EhZoBellobserved =   observed potential of ZoBell’s solution,  relative to the reference
electrode. 
The measurements described above can be applied analogously to other indicator
electrode/reference electrode pairs and standard solutions. 
b.  Interferences:  Specific interferences may be due to operation of either indicator or
reference electrode, redox capacity or poise of the sample, sample preservation and handling,
and temperature equilibration. 
1)  Sorption and poisoning effects on electrode s—Contamination of the electrode surface,
salt bridge, or internal electrolyte in the case of reference electrodes, can lead to excessive drift,
poor electrode response, and artifact potentials. Organic matt er, sulfide, and bromide may cause
these problems, particularly in long-term electrode use.1,5-7 If excessive drift occurs or erratic
performance of paired electrodes is observed in redox standard solutions after appropriate
cleaning, refilling, or regener ation procedures, discard the faulty electrode and use a new one. 
2) pH variations—Redox potential is sensitive to pH if hydrogen ion or hydroxide ion is
involved in the redox half-cells. Cell potentials tend to increase as proton concentration increases
(i.e., pH decreases) and Eh values drop as hydroxide concentratio ns increase (i.e., pH increase). 
3)  Sample handling and preservation—The sample poise will govern the resistance of the
sample to change in redox potential;  this phenomenon is analogous to the resistance to pH
change afforded by buffer capacity. Except in concentrated process streams,  sludges, leachates,
and highly reducing or treated waters, the concen trations of oxidized or reduced species may be
fairly low (i.e., <10−4M). Under these conditions, handle reduced samples very carefully to avoid
exposure to atmospheric oxygen. A closed cell sampling configuration may be used.4,8 Samples
cannot be stored or preserved; analyze at sampling. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation4)  Temperature equilibration—Obtain Eh standa rd solution reading for the electrode pair at
a temperature as close as possible to that of the sample. Temperature determines the Eh reference
potential for a particular solution and electrode pair. It also may affect the reversibility of the
redox reaction, the magnitude of the exchange current, and the stability of the apparent redox
potential reading, particularly in poorly poised solutions. Hold temperature constant for all
measurements and report it with  Eh results. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  pH or millivolt meter:  Use a pH meter or other type of high-impedance potentiometer
capable of reading either pH or millivolts (mV). For most applications, a meter scale readable to
±1400 mV is sufficient.
b.  Reference electrode  consisting of a half-cell providing a constant electrode potential. See
Section 4500-H+.B.2b.
c.  Oxidation-reduction indicator electrode:  The platinum electrode is used most commonly.
A noble metal or graphite electrode may be useful for specific applications.
1)  Noble metal electrode—Noble metal (i.e., gold or platinum) foil, wire, or billet types of
electrode are inert and resistant to chemical reaction. Clean and polish electrode surface to insure
reliable performance. Platinum electrodes may be cleaned by  strong acid soaking,9,10 hydrogen
peroxide and detergent washing,11 and anodic activation.10 Abrasive polishing with crocus
cloth, jeweler’s rouge, or 400 to 600 grit wet/dry carborundum paper may be best.5 
2)  Graphite electrode—A wax-impregnated graphite (WIG) electrode may be used,
especially in aqueous suspensions or soils.12,13 The WIG electrode is more resistant to electrode
poisoning than electrodes made of platinum wire. 
d.  Beakers:  Preferably use polyethylene, TFE, or glass beakers.
e.  Stirrer:  Use a magnetic TFE-coated stirring-bar-type mixer.
f.  Flow cell:  Use for continuous flow measurements and for poorly buffered solutions.
3.  Reagents
a.  Standard redox solutions:  Standardize the electrode system against redox solutions that
provide stable known Eh values over a range of temperatures. Although standard solutions are
available, they do not cover the anticipated range of Eh values. Comm ercially prepared solutions
may be used, particularly in field testing. The composition and Eh values of standard solutions
are shown in Table 2580:II . With reasonable care, these solutions are stable for several months.
 b.  Eh electrode cleaners:  Use eit her: 
1)  Aqua regia—Mix 1 volume conc nitric acid with 3 volumes conc hydrochloric acid.
Prepare fresh and dilute by at least 50% with water. Neutralize prior to discarding. 
2)  Chromic acid—Dissolve 5 g potassium dichromate, K2Cr2O7, in 500 mL conc sulfuric
acid. Conduct cleaning procedure in a fume hood. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation4.  Procedure
a.  Instrument calibration:  Follow manufacturer’s instructions for using pH/millivolt meter
and in preparing electrodes for use. Use a shorting lead to verify the zero point on the meter’s
millivolt scale. Equilibrate the standard solution to the tempera ture of the sample. Immerse
electrodes in the gently stirred, standard solution in a beaker (or flow cell). Turn on meter,
placing the function switch in the millivolt mode.
 After several minutes for electrode equilibration, record reading to nearest mill ivolt. If the
reading is more than ±10 mV from the theoretical redox standard value at that temperature,
replace reference electrode fluid and repeat the meas urement. If that procedure fails to bring the
reading to within ±10 mV of the theoretical value, p olish the sensing element of the indicator
electrode with carborundum paper, crocus cloth, or jeweler’s rouge. Rinse electrode thoroughly
and recheck reading with a fresh portion of the st andard solution. If the reading is within ±10
mV of the theoretical value, record it and the temperature. If the reading is not within ±10 mV,
repeat the cleaning procedure or try another electrode. Then rinse the electrode with distilled
water and proceed with the sample measurement. Recalibrate daily and more frequently if turbid,
organic-rich, or high-dissolved-solids solutions are being measured. 
b.  Electrode cleaning procedure: Useful treatments for noble metal electrodes in restoring
performance after long periods of use include immersion in warm (70°C) aqua regia for 1 to 2
min or 5 min in 6 N HNO3 after bringing to a boil. Alternatively treat  with chromic acid solution
followed by 6 N HCl and rinse with water.
 c.  Sample analysis:  Check system for performance with the standard solution, rinse
electrodes thoroughly with sample water, then immerse them in the gently stirred sample. Let
equilibra te, record Eh value to the nearest millivolt, and temperature to ±0.1°C. Repeat with a
second sample portion to confirm successive readings within ±10 mV. Equilibration times vary
and may take many minutes in poorly poised solutions. Successive readings th at vary less than
±10 mV over 10 min are adequate for most purposes. Make continuous flow or pumped sample
measurements, particularly of poorly poised solutions, in a closed flow cell after external
calibration of the electrode system. 
See Table 2580:III  for recommended combinations of electrodes, standards, and sample
handling. 
5.  Trouble Shooting
a.  Meter:  Use a shorting lead to establish meter reading at zero millivolts whenever possible.
If the meter cannot be zeroed, follow the manufacturer’s instructions for service.
b.  Electrodes:  If the potentiometer is in good working order, the fault may be in the
electrodes. Frequently, renewal of the filling solution for the salt bridge for the reference
electrode is sufficient to restore electrode performance. Another useful check is to oppose the
emf of a questionable reference electrode with that of the same type known to be in good order.
Using an adapter, plug the good reference electrode into the indicator electrode jack of theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationpotentiometer. Then plug the questionable el ectrode into the reference electrode jack. With the
meter in the millivolt position, immerse electrodes in an electrolyte (e.g., KCl) solution and then
into a redox standard solution. The two millivolt readings should be 0 ± 5 mV for both solutions.
If dif ferent electrodes are used (e.g., silver:silver chloride versus calomel or vice versa), the
reading should be 44 ± 5 mV for a good reference electrode.
 Unless an indicator electrode has been poi soned, physically damaged, or shorted out, it
usually is poss ible to restore function by proper cleaning. 
6.  Calculation
 Ehsystem = Eobserved + Ereference standard − Ereference observed
Report temperature at which readings were made. 
7.  Precision and Bias
 Standard solution measurements made at stable temperatures with a properly functioning
electrode system should be accurate to within ±10 mV. Calibration precision as reflected by the
agreement of dual platinum electrodes versus an  Ag:AgCl reference electrode for over a 2-year
period has been estimated at ±15 mV (i.e., one standard deviation) in ZoBell’s solution (N = 78)
at approximately 12°C. Precision on groundwater samples (N = 234) over the same period has
been estimated at ±22  mV (i.e., ± one standard deviation) in a closed flow cell.15 
8.  References
         1.    WHITFIELD, M.  1974. Thermodynamic limitations on the use of the platinum electrode
in Eh measurements. Limnol. Oceanogr.  19:857.
         2.    ZOBELL, C.E.  1946. Studies on redox potential of marine sediments. Amer. Assoc.
Petroleum Geol . 30:447.
         3.    NORDSTROM, D.K.  1977. Thermochemical equilibria of ZoBell’s solution. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta  41:1835.
         4.    WOOD, W.W.  1976. Guidelines for collection and field analysis of ground water samples
for selected unstable constituents. Chap ter D2 in Techniques of Water-Resources
Investigations of the United States Geological Survey, Book 1. U.S. Geological
Survey, Washington, D.C.
         5.    BRICKER, O.P.  1982. Redox potential: Its measurement and importance in water
systems. In R.A. Minear & L .H. Keith, eds. Water Analysis, Vol. 1, Inorganic Species.
Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
         6.    GERISCHER, H.  1950. Messungen der Austauschstromdichte beim
Gleichgewichtspotential an einer Platinelektrode in Fe2+/Fe3+ - Losungen. Z.
Elektrochem . 54:366.
         7.    BOULEGUE, J. & G. MICHARD.  1979. Sulfur speciations and redox processes in reducing
environments. In E.A. Jenne, ed., ACS Symposium Ser., Vol. 93. American ChemicalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSoc., Washington, D.C.
         8.    GARSKE, E.E. & M.R. SCHOCK.  1986. An inexpensive flo w-through cell and
measurement system for monitoring selected chemical parameters in ground water.
Ground Water Monit. Rev.  6:79.
         9.    STARKEY, R.L. & K.M. WIGHT.  1945. Anaerobic Corrosion in Soil. Tech. Rep. American
Gas Assoc., New York, N.Y.
       10.    IVES, D.J.G. & G.J. JANZ.  1961. Reference Electrodes. Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
       11.    BOHN, H.L . 1971. Redox potentials. Soil Sci.  112:39.
       12.    SHAIKH, A.U., R.M. HAWK, R.A. SIMS & H.D. SCOTT.  1985. Graphite electrode for the
measurement of re dox potential and oxygen diffusion rate in soil. Nucl. Chem. Waste
Manage.  5:237.
       13.    SHAIKH, A.U., R.M. HAWK, R.A. SIMS & H.D. SCOTT.  1985. Redox potential and oxygen
diffusion rate as parameters for monitoring biodegradation of some organic wastes i n
soil. Nucl. Chem. Waste Manage . 5:337.
       14.    LIGHT, T.S.  1972. Standard solution for redox potential measurements. Anal. Chem.
44:1038.
       15.    BARCELONA, M.J., H.A. WEHRMANN, M.R.  SCHOCK , M.E. SIEVERS & J.R. KARNY.  1989.
Sampling Frequency for Grou nd-Water Quality Monitoring. EPA 600S4/89/032.
Illinois State Water Survey-Univ. Illinois,  rep. to USEPA-EMSL, Las Vegas, Nev.
2710        TESTS ON SLUDGES #(54) *
2710  A.        Introduction
 
This section presents a series of tests uniquely applicable to sludges or slurries. The test data
are useful in designing facilities for solids separation and concentration and for assessing
operational behavior, especially  of the activated sludge process. 
2710  B.        Oxygen-Consumption Rate
1.  General Discussion
 This test is used to determine the oxygen consumption rate of a sample of a biological
suspension such as activated sludge. It is useful in laboratory and pilot-plant studies as well as in
the operation of full-scale treatment pla nts. When used as a routine plant operation test, it often
will indicate changes in operating conditions at an early stage. However, because test conditions
are not necessarily identical to conditions at the sampling site, the observed measurement mayStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationnot be identical with actual oxygen consumption rate. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Oxygen-consumption rate device:  Either:
1)  Probe with an oxygen-sensitive electrode (polarographic or galvanic), or 
2)  Manometric or respirometric device with appropriate readout and sample capacity of at
least 300 mL. The device should have an oxygen supply capacity greater than the oxygen
consumption rate of the biological suspension, or at least 150 mg/L ⋅h. 
b. Stopwatch  or other suitable timing device.
c. Thermometer  to read to ± 0.5°C.
3.  Procedure
a. Calibration of oxygen-consumption rate device:  Either:
1)  Calibrate the oxygen probe and meter according to the method given in Section
4500-O.G , or 
2)  Calibrate the manometric or respirometric device according to manufacturer’s
instructions. 
b. Volatile suspended solids determination:  See Section 2540 .
c. Preparation of sample:  Adjust temperature of a suitable sample portion to that of the basin
from which it was collected or to required evaluation temperature, and maintain constant during
analysis. Record temperature. Increase DO concentration of samp le by shaking it in a partially
filled bottle or by bubbling air or oxygen through it.
d. Measurement of oxygen consumption rate:
1)  Fill sample container to overflowing with an appropriate volume of a representative
sample of the biological suspension to be tested. 
2)  If an oxygen-sensing probe is used, immedi ately insert it into a BOD bottle containing a
magnetic stirring bar and the biological suspension. Displace enough suspension with probe to
fill flared top of bottle and isolate its contents from the atmosphere. Activate probe stirring
mechanism and magnetic stirrer. (N OTE: Adequate mixing is essential. For suspensions wit h
high concentrations of suspended solids, i.e., >5000 mg/L, more vigorous mixing than that
provided by the probe stirring mechanism and magnetic stirrer may be required.) If a manometric
or respirometric device is used, follow manufacturer’s instructions for startup. 
3)  After meter reading has stabilized, record initial DO and manometric or respirometric
reading, and start timing device. Record appropriate DO, manometric, or respirometric data at
time intervals of less than 1 min, depending on rate of consumption. R ecord data over a 15-min
period or until DO becomes limiting, whichever occurs first. The oxygen probe may not be
accurate below 1 mg DO/L. If a manometric or respirometric device is used, refer to
manufacturer’s instructions for lower limiting DO value. L ow DO (≤2 mg/L at the start of the
test) may limit oxygen uptake by the biological suspension and will be indicated by a decreasingStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationrate of oxygen consumption as the test progresses.  Reject such data as being unrepresentative of
suspension oxygen consumpti on rate and repeat test beginning with higher initial DO levels. 
The results of this determination are quite sensitive to temperature variations and poor
precision is obtained unless replicate determinations are made at the same temperature. When
oxygen c onsumption is used as a plant control test, run periodic (at least monthly) replicate
determinations to establish the precision of the technique. This determination also is sensitive to
the time lag between sample collection and test initiation. 
4.  Calculations
 If an oxygen probe is used, plot observed readings (DO, milligrams per liter) versus time
(minutes) on arithmetic graph paper and determine the slope of the line of best fit. The slope is
the oxygen consumption rate in milligrams per li ter per minute. 
If a manometric or respirometric device is used, refer to manufacturer’s instructions for
calculating the oxygen consumption rate. 
Calculate specific oxygen consumption rate in milligrams per gram per hour as follows: 
Specific oxygen con sumption rate, (mg/g)/h 
5.  Precision and Bias
 Bias is not applicable. The precision for this test has not been determined. 
6.  Bibliography
 UMBREIT, W.W., R.H. BURRIS & J.F. STAUFFER . 1964. Manometric Techniques. Burgess
Publishing Co., Minneapolis, Minn.
2710  C.        Settled Sludge Volume
1.  General Discussion
 The settled sludge volume of a biological suspension is useful in routine monitoring of
biological processes. For activated sludge plant control, a 30-min settled sludge volume or the
ratio of the 15-min to the 30-min settled slud ge volume has been used to determine the
returned-sludge flow rate and when to waste sludge. The 30-min settled sludge volume also is
used to determine sludge volume index1 (Section 2710D ). 
This method is inappropriate for dilute sludges because of the sm all volume of settled
material. In such cases, use the volumetric test for settleable solids using an Imhoff coneStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation(2540F). Results from 2540F are not comparable w ith those obtained with the procedure herein. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Settling column:  Use 1-L graduated cylinder equipped with a stirring mechanism
consisting of one or more thin rods extending the length of the column and positioned within two
rod diameters of the cylinder wall. Provide a stirrer able to rotate the st irring rods at no greater
than 4 rpm (peripheral tip speed of approximately 1.3 cm/s). See Figure 2710:1 .
b. Stopwatch.
c. Thermometer.
3.  Procedure
 Place 1.0 L sample in settling column and distribute solids by covering the top and inverting
cylinder three times. Insert stirring rods, activate stirring mechanism, start the stop watch, and let
suspension settle. Continue stirring throu ghout test. Maintain suspension temperature during test
at that in the basin from which the sample was taken. 
Determine volume occupied by suspension at measured time intervals, e.g., 5, 10, 15, 20, 30,
45, and 60 min. 
Report settled sludge volume of the  suspension in milliliters for an indicated time interval. 
Variations in suspension temperature, sampling and agitation methods, dimensions of settling
column, and time between sampling and start of the determination significantly affect results. 
4.  Precision and Bias
 Bias is not applicable. The precision for this test has not been determined. 
5.  Reference
         1.    DICK, R.I. & P.A. VESILIND.  1969. The SVI—What is It? J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.
41:1285.
2710  D.        Sludge Volume Index
1.  General Discussion
 The sludge volume index (SVI) is the volume in milliliters occupied by 1 g of a suspension
after 30 min settling. SVI typically is used to monitor settling characteristics of activated sludge
and other biological suspensions.1 Although SVI is not supported theoretically,2 experience has
shown it to be useful in routine process control. 
2.  Procedure
 Determine the suspended solids concentration of a well-mixed sample of the suspension
(See Section 2540D ). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDetermine the 30 min settled sludge volume (See Section 2710C ). 
3.  Calculations
 
4.  Precision and Bias
 Precision is determined by the precision achieved in the suspended solids measurement, the
settling characteristics of the suspension, and variab les associated with the measurement of the
settled sludge volume. Bias is not applica ble. 
5.  References
         1.    DICK, R.I. & P.A. VESILIND . 1969. The SVI—What is it? J. Water Pollut. Control Fed .
41:1285.
         2.    FINCH, J. & H. IVES . 1950. Settleability indexes for activated sludge. Sewage Ind.
Wastes  22:833.
6.  Bibliography
 DONALDSON , W. 1932. Some notes on the operation of sewage treatment works. Sewage Works
J. 4:48.
 MOHLMAN , F.W. 1934. The sludge index. Sewage Works J.  6:119.
 RUDOLFS , W. & I.O. L ACY. 1934. Settling and compacting of activated sludge. Sewage Works
J. 6:647.
2710  E.        Zone Settling Rate
1.  General Discussion
 At high concentrations of suspended solids, suspensions settle in the zone-settling regime.
This type of settling takes place under quiescent conditions and is characterized by a distinct
interface between the supernatant liquor a nd the sludge zone. The height of this distinct sludge
interface is measured with time. Zone settling data for suspensions that undergo zone settling,
e.g., activated sludge and metal hydroxide suspensions, can be used in the design, operation, and
evaluat ion of settling basins.1-3 
2.  Apparatus
a. Settling vessel:  Use a transparent cylinder at least 1 m high and 10 cm in diameter. To
reduce the discrepancy between laboratory and full-scale thickener results, use larger diametersStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand taller cylinders.1,3 Attach a calibrated millimeter tape to ou tside of cylinder. Equip cylinder
with a stirring mechanism, e.g., one or more thin rods positioned within two rod diameters of the
internal wall of settling vessel. Stir suspension near vessel wall over the entire depth of
suspension at a peripheral speed  no greater than 1 cm/s. Greater speeds may interfere with the
thickening process and yield inaccurate results.4 Provide the settling vessel with a port in the
bottom plate for filling and draining. See Figure 2710:2 .
b. Stopwatch.
c. Thermometer .
3.  Procedure
 Maintain suspension in a reservoir in a uniformly mixed condition. Adjust temperature of
suspension to that of the basin from which it wa s collected or to required evaluation temperature.
Record temperature. Remove a well-mixed sample from  reservoir and measure suspended solids
concentration ( Section 2540D ). 
Activate stirring mechanism. Fill settling vessel to a fixed height by pumping suspension
from reservoir or by gravity flow. Fill at a rate sufficient to maintain a uniform suspended s olids
concentration throughout settling vessel at end of filling. The suspension should agglomerate,
i.e., form a coarse structure with visible fluid channels, within a few minutes. If suspension does
not agglomerate, test is invalid and should be repeated . 
Record height of solids-liquid interface at interv als of about 1 min. Collect data for sufficient
time to assure that suspension is exhibiting a constant zone-settling velocity and that any initial
reflocculation period, characterized by an accelerating  interfacial settling velocity, has been
passed. 
Zone settling rate is a function of suspended solids concentration, suspension characteristics,
vessel dimensions, and laboratory artifacts. With the filling method described above and a
sufficiently large cylinder, these artifacts should be minimized. However, even with careful
testing suspensions often may behave erratically. Unpredictable behavior increases for sludges
with high solids concentrations and poor settling characteristics, and in small cylinde rs. 
4.  Calculations
 Plot interface height in centimeters vs. time in minutes.1,3 Draw straight line through data
points, ignoring initial shoulder or refloccula tion period and compression shoulder. Calculate
interfacial settling rate as slope of line in ce ntimeters per minute. 
5.  Precision and Bias
 Bias is not applicable. The precision for this test has not been determined. 
6.  References
         1.    DICK, R.I.  1972. Sludge treatment. In W.J. Weber, ed., Physicochemical Processes for
Water Quality Control. Wiley-Interscience, New York, N.Y.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         2.    DICK, R.I. & K.W. YOUNG.  1972. Analysis of thickening performance of final settl ing
tanks. Proc. 27th Ind. Waste  Conf. , Purdue Univ., Eng. Ext. Ser. No. 141, 33.
         3.    VESILIND, P.A.  1975. Treatment and Disposal of Wastewater Sludges. Ann Arbor
Science Publishing Co., Ann Arbor, Mich.
         4.    VESILIND, P.A.  1968. Discussion of Evalu ation of activated sludge thickening theories.
J. San. Eng. Div., Proc. Amer.  Soc. Civil Eng.  94: SA1, 185.
7.  Bibliography
 DICK, R.I. & R.B. EWING.  1967. Evaluation of activated sludge thickening theories. J. San. Eng.
Div., Proc. Amer. Soc.  Civil Eng.  93:SA4, 9.
 DICK, R.I.  1969. Fundamental aspects of sedimentation I & II. Water Wastes Eng.  3:47, 45, &
6:2.
 DICK, R.I.  1970. Role of activated sludge final settling tanks. J. San. Eng. Div., Proc. Amer. Soc.
Civil Eng.  96:SA2, 423. 
2710  F.        Specific Gravity
1.  General Discussion
 The specific gravity of a sludge is the ratio of the masses of equal volumes of a sludge and
distilled water. It is determined by comparing the mass of a known volume of a homogeneous
sludge sample at a specific temperature to the  mass of the same volume of distilled water at 4°C. 
2.  Apparatus
 Container: A marked flask or bottle to hold a known sludge volume during weighing. 
3.  Procedure
 Follow either a or b. 
a. Record sample temperature, T. Weigh empty container and record weight, W. Fill empty
container to mark with sample, weigh, and record weight, S. Fill empty container to mark with
water, weigh, and record weight, R. Measure all masses to the nearest 10  mg.
b. If sample does not flow readily, add as much of it to container as possible without exerting
pressure, record volume, weigh, and record mass, P. Fill container to mark with distilled water,
taking care that air bubbles are not trapped in the sludge or  container. Weigh and record mass, Q.
Measure all masses to nearest 10 mg.
4.  Calculation
 Use a or b, matching choice of procedure above. 
a. Calculate specific gravity, SG, from the formulaStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
The values of the temperature correction factor F are given in Table 2710:I . 
b. Calculate specific gravity, SG, from the formula
 
For values of F, see Table 2710:I . 
2710 G.        Capillary Suction Time
1.  General Discussion
 The capillary suction time (CST) test determines rate of water release from sludge. It
provides a quantitative measure, reported in seconds, of how readily a sludge releases its water.
The results can be used to assist in sludge d ewatering processes; to evaluate sludge conditioning
aids and dosages; or, when used with a jar test and the settleable solids procedure, to evaluate
coagulation effects on the rate of water release from sludges. 
The test consists of placing a sludge samp le in a small cylinder on a sheet of chromatography
paper. The paper extracts liquid from the sludge by capillary action. The time required for the
liquid to travel a specified distance is recorded automatically by monitoring the conductivity
change occurr ing at two contact points appropriately spaced and in contact with the
chromatography paper. The elapsed time is indicative of the water drainage rate. The CST test
has been used as a relative indicator to characterize the performance of most sludge dewate ring
processes. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Test materials and apparatus  may be fabricated (see Figure 2710:3 ) or are commercially
available. #(55) * The unit includes a paper support block, stainless steel reservoir with 18-mm ID
and 25-mm height, and a digital timer.
b. CST paper .#(56) †
c. Thermometer  to read ± 0.5C.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationd. Pipet , 10-mL, plastic with tip trimmed to allow free passage of sludge flocs.
3.  Procedure
 Turn on and reset CST meter. Dry CST test block and reservoir. Place a new CST paper on
lower test block with rough side up and grain parallel to the 9-cm side. Add upper test block,
insert sludge reservoir into test block, and seat it usi ng light pressure and a quarter turn to
prevent surface leaks.  Measure and record temperature of sludge. Pipet 6.4 mL sludge into test
cell reservoir; if pipetting is difficult because of sludge consistency, pour a representative sludge
sample into the te st cell until it is full. The CST device will begin time measurement as liquid
being drawn into the paper reaches the inner pair of electrical contacts. Timing ends when the
outer contact is reached. Record CST shown on digital display. Empty remaining slu dge from
reservoir and remove and discard used CST paper.  Rinse and dry test block and reservoir. Repeat
for a minimum of five determinations per sample to account for measurement variation and to
allow identification of any faulty readings due to leaks or  spills. 
Variations in sludge temperature and sample volume can affect CST results. Ensure that all
analyses are run under similar conditions. Sludge suspended solids concentration has a
significant effect on test results. In evaluating sludge conditioner s or monitoring operation of a
dewatering process, avoid this effect by ensuring homogeneity among sludge samples.
Comparison of CST data from different sludge samp les from the same source (especially if taken
on different days) cannot be made with confid ence unless suspended solids concentrations are
comparable. Make a rough correction for different  solids contents by dividing the sludge’s CST
value by its corresponding solids concentration. 
Characteristics of CST paper may vary between lots. If comparis on of CST values for
distilled water indicates such variations, subtract times for distilled water blanks from sample
times to improve comparisons. 
Record CST model used, paper type, sludge type, sludge temperature, and capillary suction
time. Measure sol ids concentration and CST of distilled water using the same paper to provide
useful information. 
4.  Precision and Bias
 Ten tests conducted on an anaerobically digested pulp mill sludge resulted in a mean CST of
363.2 s with a standard deviation of 36.2 s. Twenty tests using an anaerobically digested
municipal wastewater sludge gave a mean of 85.2 s with a standard deviation of 14.12 s.
Triplicate analyses of 30 sample sets of conditioned and unconditioned alum sludge resulted in
an average standard deviation of 1.0 s with means between 5 and 80 s. Method bias cannot be
determined. 
5.  Bibliography
 BASKERVILLE, R.C. & R.S. GALE.  1968. A simple automatic instrument for determining the
filtrability of sewage sludges. J. Inst. Water Pollut. Control  67:233.
 KAVANAGH, B.A.  1980. The dewatering of activated sludge: measurements of spec ific resistanceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationto filtration and capillary suction time. Water Pollut. Control  79:388.
 VESILIND, P.A.  1988. Capillary suction time as a fundamental measure of sludge dewaterability.
J. Water Pollut. Control Fed.  60:215.
 TILLER, F.M., Y.L. SHEN & A. ADIN . 1990. Capillary suction theory for rectangular cells. Res. J.
Water Pollut. Control Fed.  62:130. 
2710 H.        Time-to-Filter
1.  General Discussion
 The time to filter (TTF) correlates with capilla ry suction time (CST) and is similar to the
specific resistance to filtration if sludge solids content and filtrate viscosity do not vary among
compared samples. The test requires ap proximately 200 mL sludge and can be used to assist in
the daily operation of sludge dewatering processes or to evaluate sludge-conditioning polymers
and dosages. 
Testing with a smaller volume is possible in applications to evaluate water drainage rate
subsequent to jar tests and settleable solids determination (see Section 2540F ). In this case, drain
collected sludge from one or more Imhoff cones after decanting as much supernatant as possible;
use a small-volume TTF apparatus. 
The test consists of placi ng a sludge sample in a Buchner funnel with a paper support filter,
applying vacuum, and measuring the time required for 100 mL filtrate (or, for reduced sample
volumes, 50% of original sample) to collect. While similar to the specific resistance to filtra tion
test, the time-to-filter test is superior because of its ease of use and simplicity. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Time-to-filter large-volume or small-volume  (Figure 2710:4 ) assembly .
b. Filter paper #(57) *
c. Stopwatch.
3.  Procedure
 Place paper filter in funnel and make a firm seal by pre-wetting with a small volume of
water with vacuum on. If using large-volume apparatus, take a 200-mL sample of sludge. With
vacuum pump providing a constant vacuum of 51 kPa, pour sam ple into funnel. Start stopwatch
or timer and determine time required for 100 mL of sample to collect in graduated cylinder. This
is the time to filter. Make a minimum of three replicate determinations. 
For the small-volume test, use 7 to 10 mL sludge. Re cord time required for 50% of sample to
collect in graduated cylinder. Compare this time to filter only to other results using the same
sample volume. 
Sludge suspended solids concentration has a significant effect on test results. In evaluating
sludge-con ditioning products, compare results for which initial suspended solids concentrationsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationare comparable. Make a rough correction for different solids contents by dividing the
time-to-filter value by its corresponding solids concentration. However, variations in solids
concentration occur in full-scale applications, and the time-to-filter results may be interpreted as
indicating the overall rate of water release from  sludges, including the effect of differing solids
concentrations. 
4.  Precision and Bias
 Variations in vacuum pressure, support filter type, sludge temperature, and sample volume
can affect test results. Triplicate analyses of 18 sample sets of conditioned and unconditioned
alum sludge resulted in an average method pr ecision of 19 s (approximately 4% of the average
value) for the large-volume TTF test. Triplicate analyses of 9 sample sets of conditioned and
unconditioned alum sludge resulted in a method precision of 9 s (approximately 6% of the
average value) for the s mall-volume TTF test. Method bias, which refers to the agreement
between the value determined by the test method and the real value, cannot be determined. 
5.  Bibliography
 KNOCKE, W.R. & D.L. WAKELAND.  1983. Fundamental characteristics of water treatment plant
sludges. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc. 113: 516.
 DENTEL, S.K., T.A. BOBER, P.V. SHETTY & J.R. RESTA.  1986. Procedures Manual for Selection of
Coagul ant, Filtration, and Sludge Conditioning Aids in Water Treatment. Publ. 90515,
American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo. 
2720        ANAEROBIC SLUDGE DIGESTER GAS ANALYSIS* #(58)
2720 A.        Introduction
 Gas produced during the anaerobic decomposition of wastes contains methane (CH4) and
carbon dioxide (CO2) as the major components with minor quantities of hydrogen (H2),
hydrogen sulfide (H2S), nitrogen (N2), and oxygen (O2). It is saturated with water vapor.
Common practice is to analyze the gases produced to estimate their fuel value and to check on
the treatment process. The relative proportions of CO2, CH4, and N2 are normally of most
concern and the easiest to determine b ecause of the relatively high percentages of these gases. 
1.  Selection of Method
 Two procedures are described for gas analysis, the volumetric method (B), and the gas
chromatographic method (C). The volumetric analysis is suitable for the determination of CO2,
H2, CH2, and O2. Nitrogen is estimated indirectly  by difference. Although the method is
time-consuming, the equipment is relatively simple. Because no calibration is needed before use,
the procedure is particularly appropriate when analyses are conducted infrequently. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationThe principal advantage of gas chro matography is speed. Commercial equipment is designed
specifically for isothermal or temperature-programmed gas analysis and permits the routine
separation and measurement of CO2, N2, O2, and CH4 in less than 15 to 20 min. The
requirements for a recorder, pressure-regulated bottles of carrier gas, and certified standard gas
mixtures for calibration raise costs to the point where infrequent analyses by this method may be
uneconomical. The advantages of this system are freedom from the cumulative errors found  in
sequential volumetric measurements, adaptability to other gas component analyses, adaptability
to intermittent on-line sampling and analysis, and the use of samples of 1 mL or less.1 
2.  Sample Collection
 When the source of gas is some distance from the apparatus used for analysis, collect
samples in sealed containers and bring to the instrument. Displacement collectors are the most
suitable containers. Glass sampling bulbs (or tube s) with three-way glass or TFE stopcocks at
each end, as indicated in Figure 2720:1 , are particularly useful. These also are available with
centrally located ports provided with septa for syringe transfer of samples. Replace septa
periodically to prevent c ontamination by atmospheric gases. Connect one end of collector to gas
source and vent three-way stopcock to the atmosphere. Clear line of air by passing 10 to 15
volumes of gas through vent and open stopcock to admit sample. If large quantities of gas are
available, sweep air away by passing 10 to 15 volumes of gas through tube. If the gas supply is
limited, fill the gas sampling bulb (tube) with an acidic salt solution.2 Then completely displace
the acidic salt solution in the gas sampling bulb (tube) wit h the sample gas. Because the acidic
salt solution absorbs gases to some extent, fill the gas sampling bulb completely with the gas and
seal off from any contact with displacement fl uid during temporary storage. When transferring
gas to the gas-analyzing a pparatus, do not transfer any fluid. 
3.  References
         1.    GRUNE, W.N. & C.F. CHUEH . 1962–63. Sludge gas analysis using gas chromatograph.
Water Sewage Works  109:468; 110:43, 77, 102, 127, 171, 220, and 254.
         2.    CHIN, K.K. & K.K. WONG.  1983. Thermophilic anaerobic digestion of palm oil  mill
effluent. Water Res.  17:993.
2720  B.        Volumetric Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  This method may be used for the analysis either of digester gas or of methane in
water (see Section 6211 , Methane). A measured volume of gas is passed first through a solution
of potassium hydroxide (KOH) to remove CO2, next through a solut ion of alkaline pyrogallol to
remove O2, and then over heated cupric oxide, which removes H2 by oxidation to water. AfterStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationeach of the above steps, the volume of gas remaining is measured; the decrease that results is a
measure of the relative percentage of  volume of each component in the mixture. Finally, CH4 is
determined by conversion to CO2 and H2O in a slow-combustion pipet or a catalytic oxidation
assembly. The volume of CO2 formed during combustion is measured to determine the fraction
of methane orig inally present. Nitrogen is estimated by assuming that it represents the only gas
remaining and equals the difference between 100% and the sum of the measured percentages of
the other components.
 When only CO2 is measured, report only CO2. No valid assump tions may be made about the
remaining gases present without making a complete analysis. 
Follow the equipment manufacturers’ recommendations with respect to oxidation
procedures. 
CAUTION : Do not attempt any slow-combustion procedure on digester gas becaus e of the
high probability of exceeding the explosive 5% by volume concentration of CH4. 
2.  Apparatus
 Orsat-type gas-analysis apparatus,  consisting of at least: (1) a water-jacketed gas buret with
leveling bulb; (2) a CO2-absorption pipet; (3) an O2-absorption pipet; (4) a cupric
oxide-hydrogen oxidation assembly; (5) a shielded catalytic CH4-oxidation assembly or
slow-combustion pipet assembly; and (6) a leveling bulb. With the slow-combustion pipet use a
controlled source of current to heat the platinum filament electrically. Preferably use mercury as
the displacement fluid; alternatively  use aqueous Na2SO4-H2SO4 solution for sample collection.
Use any commercially available gas analyzer having these units. 
3.  Reagents
a. Potassium hydroxide solution:  Dissolve 500 g KOH in distilled water and dilute to 1 L.
b. Alkaline pyrogallol reagent:  Dissolve 30 g pyrogallol (also called pyrogallic acid) in
distilled water and make up to 100 mL. Add 500 mL KOH solution.
c. Oxygen gas:  Use approximately 100 mL for each gas sample analyzed.
d. Displacement liquid (acidic salt solution):  Dissolve 200 g Na2SO4 in 800 mL distilled
water; add 30 mL conc H2SO4. Add a few drops of methyl orange indicator. When color fades,
replace solution.
4.  Procedure
a. Sample introduction:  Transfer 5 to 10 mL gas sample into gas buret through a
capillary-tube connection to the collector. Expel this sample to the atmosphere to purge the
system. Transfer up to 100 mL gas sample to buret. Bring sample in buret to atmos pheric or
reference pressure by adjusting leveling bulb. Measure volume accurately and record as V1.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb. Carbon dioxide absorption:  Remove CO2 from sample by passing it through the
CO2-absorption pipet charged with the KOH solution. Pass gas back and forth until sample
volume remains constant. Before opening stopcocks between buret and any absorption pip et,
make sure that the gas in the buret is under a slight positive pressure to prevent reagent in the
pipet from contaminating stopcock or manifold. After absorption of CO2, transfer sample to
buret and measure volume. Record as V2.
c. Oxygen absorption:  Remove O2 by passing sample through O2-absorption pipet charged
with alkaline pyrogallol reagent until sample volume remains constant. Measure volume and
record as V3 . For digester gas samples, continue as directed in ¶ 4d. For CH4 in water, store gas
in CO2 pipet and proceed ¶ 4e below.
d. Hydrogen oxidation:  Remove H2 by passing sample through CuO assembly maintained at
a temperature in the range 290 to 300°C. When a constant volume has been obtained, transfer
sample back to buret, cool, and measure volume. Record as V4.
 Waste to the atmosphere all but 20 to 25 mL of remaining gas. Measure volume and record
as V5. Store temporarily in CO2-absorption pipet. 
e. Methane oxidation:  Purge inlet connections to buret with O2 by drawing 5 to 10 mL into
buret and expelling to the atmosphere. Oxidize CH4 either by the catalytic oxidation process for
digester gas and gas phase of water samples or by the slow-combusti on process for gas phase of
water samples.
1) Catalytic oxidation process—For catalytic oxidation of digester gas and gas phase of
water samples, transfer 65 to 70 mL O2 to buret and record this volume as V6 . Pass O2 into
CO2-absorption pipet so that it will mix with sample stored there. Return this mixture to buret
and measure volume. Record as V7. This volume should closely approximate V5 plus V6 . Pass
O2-sample mixture through catalytic oxidation assembly, which should be heated in accordance
with the manufacturer’s directions. Keep rate of g as passage less than 30 mL/min. After first
pass, transfer mixture back and forth through the assembly between buret and reservoir at a rate
not faster than 60 mL/min until a constant volume is obtained. Record as V8. 
2) Slow-combustion process—For slow combustion of the gas phase of water samples,
transfer 35 to 40 mL O2 to buret and record volume as V6 . Transfer O2 to slow-combustion
pipet and then transfer sample from CO2-absorption pipet to buret. Heat platinum c oil in
combustion pipet to yellow heat while controlling temperature by adjusting current. Reduce
pressure of O2 in pipet to somewhat less than atmospheric pressure by means of the leveling bulb
attached to the pipet. Pass sample into slow-combustion pipet  at rate of approximately 10
mL/min. After the first pass, transfer sample and O2 mixture back and forth between pipet and
buret several times at a faster rate, allowing mercury in pipet to rise to a point just below heatedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcoil. Collect sample in combusti on pipet, turn off coil, and cool pipet and sample to room
temperature with a jet of compressed air. Transfer sample to buret and measure volume. Record
as V8. 
f. Measurement of carbon dioxide produced:  Determine amount of CO2 formed in the
reaction by pa ssing sample through CO2-absorption pipet until volume remains constant. Record
volume as V9 . Check accuracy of determination by absorbing residual O2 from sample. After
this absorption, record final volume as V10. 
5.  Calculation
a. CH4 and H2 usually are the only combustible gases present in sludge digester gas. When
this is the case, determine percentage by volume of each gas as follows:
 
b. Alternatively, calculate CH4 by either of the two following equations:
 
Results from the calculations for CH4 by the three equations should be in reasonable agreement.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationIf not, repeat analysis after checking apparatus for sources of error, such as l eaking stopcocks or
connections. Other combustible gases, such as ethane, butane, or pentane, will cause a lack of
agreement among the calculations;  however, the possibility that digester gas contains a
significant amount of any of these is remote. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 A gas buret measures gas volume with a precision of 0.05 mL and a probable accuracy of
0.1 mL. With the large fractions of CO2 and CH4 normally present in digester gas, the overall
error for their determination can be made less th an 1%. The error in the determination of O2 and
H2, however, can be considerable because of the small concentrations normally present. For a
concentration as low as 1%, an error as large as 20% can be expected. When N2 is present in a
similar low-volume pe rcentage, the error in its determination would be even greater, because
errors in each of the other determinations would be reflected in the calculation for N2. 
7.  Bibliography
 YANT, W.F. & L.B. BERGER . 1936. Sampling of Mine Gases and the Use of the Bureau of Mines
Portable Orsat Apparatus in Their Analysis. Miner’s Circ. No. 34, U.S. Bur. Mines,
Washington, D.C.
 MULLEN, P.W.  1955. Modern Gas Analysis. Inter science Publishers, New York, N.Y.
2720  C.        Gas Chromatographic Method
1.  General Discussion
 See Section 6010C  for discussions of gas chromatography. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Gas chromatograph:  Use any instrument system equipped with a thermal conductivity
detector (TCD), carrier-gas flow controllers, in jector and column temperature setting dials, TCD
current controller, attenuator, carrier-gas pressure gauge, injection po rt, signal output, and power
switch. Some columns require temperature programming while others are isothermal. Preferably
use a unit with a gas sampling loop and valve that allow automatic injection of a constant sample
volume.
b. Sample introduction apparatus:  An instrument equipped with gas-sampling valves is
designed to permit automatic injection of a specific sample volume into the chromatograph. If
such an instrument is not available, introduce samples with a 2-mL syringe fitted with a
27-gauge hypodermic needle. Reduce escape of gas by greasing plunger lightly with mineral oil
or preferably by using a special gas-tight syringe. One-step separation of oxygen, nitrogen,
methane, and carbon dioxide may be accomplished in conc entric columns (column within a
column) under isothermal conditions at room temperature instead of performing two columnStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationanalyses. These concentric columns permit the simultaneous use of two different packings for
the analysis of gas samples.
c. Chromatographic column: #(59) * Select column on the basis of manufacturer’s
recommendations. #(60) † Report column and packing specifi cations and conditions of analyses
with results.
 A two-column system usually is required. A molecular sieve column separates H2, O2, N2,
CO, and CH4 isothermally, but because CO2 is adsorbed by the molecular sieve, a second
column is needed to complete the analysis. A commonly used two-column system utilizes a
Chromosorb 102 column and a Molecular Sieve 5A or 13X column to separat e H2, O2, N2, CH4,
and CO2 isothermally.1,2 
A single-column procedure can be used; however, it requires temperature programming.
Columns packed with special porous spherical or  granular packing materials effect separation
with sharp, well-resolved peaks.3 With temperature programming, columns packed with
Chromosorb 102,2 Carbosphere,4 and Carbosieve3 separate the gases listed.† #(61)  Commercial
equipment specifically designed for such operations is available.2,4-6 
d. Integrator/recorder:  Use a 10–mV full-span strip chart recorder with the gas
chromatograph. When minor components such as H2 and H2S are to be detected, a 1-mV
full-span recorder is preferable. 
Integrators that can easily detect very minute quantities of gases are available. Computerized
data-proc essing systems, to record and manipulate the chromatographic signal, chromatographic
base line, etc., also are available. 
3.  Reagents
a. Carrier gases:  Preferably use helium for separating digester gases. It is impossible to
detect less than 1% hydrogen when helium is used as the carrier gas.1 Obtain linear TCD
responses for molar concentrations of hydrogen between 0 and 60% by using a n 8.5%
hydrogen–91.5% helium carrier gas mixture.7 To detect trace quantities of hydrogen use argon
or nitrogen as carrier gas.1
b. Calibration gases:  Use samples of CH4, CO2, and N2 of known purity, or gas mixtures of
certified composition, for calibration. Also use samples of O2, H2, and H2S of known purity if
these gases are to be measured. Preferably use custom-made gas mixtur es to closely approximate
digester gas composition.
c. Displacement liquids:  See Section 2720B.3 d.
4.  Procedure
a. Preparation of gas chromatograph:  Open main valve of carrier-gas cylinder and adjust
carrier-gas flow rate to recommended values. To obtain accurate flow measurements, connect a
soap-film flow meter to the TCD vent. Turn power on. Turn on oven heaters , if used, andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetector current and adjust to desired values.
 Set injection port and column temperatures as specified for the column being used. Set TCD
current. Turn on recorder or data processor. Check that the injector/detector temperature has
risen to  the appropriate level and confirm that column temperature is stabilized. Set range and
attenuation at appropriate positions. 
The instrument is ready for use when the recorder yields a stable base line. Silica gel and
molecular sieve columns gradually los e activity because of adsorbed moisture or materials
permanently adsorbed at room temperature. If insufficient separations occur, reactivate by
heating or repacking. 
b. Calibration:  For accurate results, prepare a calibration curve for each gas to be measured
because different gas components do not give equiva lent detector responses on either a weight or
a molar basis. Calibrate with synthetic mixtures or with pure g ases.
1) Synthetic mixtures—Use purchased gas mixtures of certified composition or prepare in
the laboratory. Inject a standard volume of each mixture into the gas chromatograph and note
response for each gas. Compute detector response, either as area under a peak or as height of
peak, after correcting for attenuation. Read peak heights accurately and correlate with
concentration of component in sample. Reproduce operating parameters exactly from one
analysis to the next. If sufficient reproducibility cannot be  obtained by this procedure, use peak
areas for calibration. Preferably use peak areas when peaks are not symmetrical. Prepare
calibration curve by plotting either peak area or peak height against volume or mole percent for
each component. 
Modern integrat ors and data-processing systems are able to generate calibration tables for
certified gas mixtures. 
2) Pure gases—Introduce pure gases into chromatograph individually with a syringe. Inject
sample volumes of 0.25, 0.5, 1.0 mL, etc., and plot detector response, corrected for attenuation,
against gas volume. 
When the analysis system yields a linear dete ctor response with increasing gas component
concentration from zero to the range of interest, run standard mixtures along with samples. If the
same sample size is used, calculate gas concentration by direct proportions. 
c. Sample analysis:  If samples are to be injected with a syringe, equip sample collection
container with a port closed by a rubber or silicone septum. To take a sample for analysis, expel
air from barrel of syringe by depressing plunger and force needle through the septum. Withdraw
plunger to take gas volume desired, pull needle from collection container, and inject sample
rapidly into chromatograph.
 When samples are to be injected through a gas-sampling valve, connect sample collection
container to inle t tube. Let gas flow from collection tube through the valve to purge dead air
space and fill sample tube. About 15 mL normally are sufficient to clear the lines and to provide
a sample of 1 to 2 mL. Transfer sample from loop into carrier gas stream by foll owing
manufacturer’s instructions. Bring samples to atmospheric pressure before injection. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationWhen calibration curves have been prepared with a synthetic gas mixture of certified
composition, use the same sample volume as that used during calibration. When c alibration
curves are prepared by the procedure using varyi ng volumes of pure gases, inject any convenient
gas sample volume up to about 2 mL. 
Inject sample and standard gases in sequence to permit calculation of unknown gas
concentration in volume (or mo le) percent by direct comparison of sample and standard gas peak
heights or areas. For more accurate analysis, make duplicate or triplicate injections of sample
and standard gases. 
5.  Calculation
a. When calibration curves have been prepared with synthetic mixtures and the volume of the
sample analyzed is the same as that used in calibration, read volume percent of each component
directly from calibration curve after detector response for that co mponent is computed.
b. When calibration curves are prepared with varying volumes of pure gases, calculate the
percentage of each gas in the mixture as follows:
 
where: 
                  A =   partial volume of component (read from calibration curve) and 
                  B =   volume sample injected. 
c. Where standard mixtures are run with samples and instrument response is linear from zero
to the concentration range ofinterest:
 
where: 
                  C =   recorder value of sample and 
                  D =   recorder value of standard. 
d. Digester gases usually are saturated with water vapor that is not a digestion product.
Therefore, apply corrections to calculate the dry volume percent of each digester gas component
as follows:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
where: 
                Pv =   saturated water vapor pressure at room  temperature and pressure, decimal %. 
The saturation water vapor pressure can be found in common handbooks. The correction factor
 is usually small and is often neglected by analysts. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Precision and bias depend on the instrument, the column, operating conditions, gas
concentrations, and techniques of operation. The upper control limits for replicate analyses of a
high-methane-content standard gas mixture (65.01%  methane, 29.95% carbon dioxide, 0.99%
oxygen, and 4.05% nitrogen) by a single operator were as follows: 65.21% for methane, 30.36%
for carbon dioxide, 1.03% for oxygen, and 4.15% for nitrogen. The lower control limits for this
same standard gas mixture we re: 64.67% for methane, 29.88% for carbon dioxide, 0.85% for
oxygen, and 3.85% for nitrogen. The observed relative standard deviations (RSD) were: 0.14%
for methane, 0.26% for carbon dioxide, 3.2% for oxygen, and 1.25% for nitrogen. 
In a similar analysis of another standard gas mixture (55% methane, 35% carbon dioxide,
10% diatomic gases—2% hydrogen, 6% nitrogen, 2% oxygen), typical upper control limits for
precision of duplicate determinations were: 55.21% for methane, 35.39% for carbon dioxide, and
10.26 % for the diatomic gases. The lower control limits for this standard gas mixture were:
54.78% for methane, 34.62% for carbon dioxide, and 9.73% for the diatomic gases. The
observed RSDs for this analysis were: 0.13% for methane, 0.36% for carbon dioxide, a nd 0.88%
for the diatomic gases. 
A low-methane-content standard gas mixture (35.70% methane, 47.70% carbon dioxide,
3.07% oxygen, 8.16% nitrogen, and 5.37% hydrogen) was analyzed as above yielding upper
control limits as follows: 34.4% for methane, 49.46%  for carbon dioxide, 3.07% for oxygen, and
8.2% for nitrogen. The lower control limits were: 34.18% for methane, 49.11% for carbon
dioxide, 2.83% for oxygen, and 7.98% for nitrogen. The observed RSDs were: 0.11% for
methane, 0.16% for carbon dioxide, 1.37%  for oxygen, and 0.46% for nitrogen. 
With digester gas the sum of the percent CH4, CO2, and N2 should approximate 100%. If it
does not, suspect errors in collection, handling, storage, and injection of gas, or in instrumental
operation or calibration. 
7.  ReferencesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         1.    SUPELCO, INC.  1983. Isothermal and Temperature Programmed Analyses of Permanent
Gases and Light Hydrocarbons. GC Bull. 760F. Bellefonte, Pa.
         2.    MINDRUP, R.  1978. The analysis of gases and light hydrocarbons by gas
chromatograp hy. J. Chromatogr. Sci.  16:380.
         3.    SUPELCO, INC . 1983. Analyzing Mixtures of Permanent Gases and Light (C1 - C3)
Hydrocarbons on a Single GC Column. GC Bull. 712F. Bellefonte, Pa.
         4.    ALLTECH ASSOCIATES, INC . 1989. Chromatography. Catalog No. 200.  Deerfield, Ill.
         5.    SUPELCO, INC . 1983. Column Selection for Gas and Light Hydrocarbon Analysis. GC
Bull. 786C. Bellefonte, Pa.
         6.    SUPELCO, INC . 1989. Supelco Chromatography Products. Catalog 27. Bellefonte, Pa.
         7.    PURCELL, J.E. & L.S. ETTRE . 1965. Analysis of hydrogen with thermal conductivity
detectors. J. Gas Chromatogr.  3(2):69.
8.  Bibliography
 LEIBRAND, R.J.  1967. Atlas of gas analyses by gas chromatography. J. Gas Chromatogr.  5:518.
 JEFFREY, P.G. & P.J. KIPPING.  1972. Gas Analysis by Gas Chromatography, 2nd ed. Pergamon
Press Inc., Elmsford, N.Y.
 BURGETT, C., L. GREEN & E.  BONELLI.  1977. Chromatographic Methods in Gas Analysis.
Hewlett-Packard Inc., Avondale, Pa.
 THOMPSON, B.  1977. Fundamentals of Gas Analysis by Gas Chromatography. Varian
Associates, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif. 
2810        DISSOLVED GAS SUPERSATURATION #(62) *
2810  A.        Introduction
 Water can become supersaturated with atmospheric gases by various means, heating and air
entrainment in spilled or pumped water being the most common. The primary sign of gas
supersaturation is the formation of bubbles on su bmerged surfaces or within the vascular systems
and tissues of aquatic organisms. 
Gas supersaturation can limit aquatic life and interfere with water treatment processes.
Levels of supersaturation lethal to aquatic organisms have been found in springs, ri vers, wells,
lakes, estuaries, and seawater. Gas supersaturation can be produced in pumped or processed
water intended for drinking, fish hatchery suppl y, and laboratory bioassays. Seasonal and other
temporal variations in supersaturation may occur in surf ace waters as a result of solar heating
and photosynthesis. Because the rate of equilibration may be slow, supersaturation may persist in
flowing water for days and excessive dissolved gas levels thus may persist far from the source ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsupersaturation. 
Gas bubbles form only when the total dissolved gas pressure is greater than the sum of
compensating pressures. Compensating pressures include water, barometric and, for organisms,
tissue or blood pressure. The total dissolved gas pressure is equal to the sum  of the partial
pressures of all the dissolved gases, including water vapor. Typically, only nitrogen, oxygen,
argon, carbon dioxide, and water vapor pressures need to be considered in most natural waters.
Gas bubble disease, of fish or other aquatic organ isms, is a result of excessive uncompensated
gas pressure. A single supersaturated gas such as oxygen or nitrogen may not necessarily result
in gas bubble disease because bubble formation depends largely on total dissolved gas pressure.
The degree of gas s aturation should be described in terms of pressures rather than concentration
or volume units. 
2810  B.        Direct-Sensing Membrane-Diffusion Method
1.  General Discussion
a. Principle:  This method requires an instrument with a variable length of ‘‘gas permeable’’
tubing, connected to a pressure-measuring device.  Dimethyl silicone rubber tubing often is used
because it is highly permeable to dissolved gases, including wate r vapor. At steady state, the
gauge pressure inside the tubing is equal to the difference in gas pressure ( ∆P) between the total
dissolved gas pressure and the ambient barometric pressure. When the water is in equilibrium
with the atmosphere, ∆P equals zer o. 
If ∆P is greater than zero, the water is supersaturated. Conversely, if ∆P is negative the water
is undersaturated.
b. Working range:  The working range of this method depends on the pressure-sensing device
used, but typically will range from −150 to +600 mm Hg. Dissolved solids in wastewater will not
interfere with this method. The practical depth range for these inst ruments is 1 to 10 m.
2.  Apparatus
 Several types of membrane-diffusion instruments are available commercially. #(63) *
Alternatively, construct a unit f rom commercially available parts. Several units have been
described, including a direct-reading instrument using pressure transd ucers and a digital
readout,1 an on-line unit that can activate an alarm system,2 and an early model of the Weiss
saturometer.3 Each of these units has specific advantages and limitations; the instrument of
choice will depend on the specific application. A ll these instruments are portable so that data
collection is completed in the field. 
Test the instrument for leaks according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Even a very
small leak, difficult to detect and locate, will result in useless data. Calibra te the
pressure-measuring device with a mercury manometer or certified pressure gauge. If a
manometer is used, include fresh mercury that flows freely in the tubing. An alternative methodStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfor directly testing membrane-diffusion instruments in a small, clos ed chamber where induced
∆P levels can be compared against observed ∆P levels is available.2 
Van Slyke-Neill4 or gas chromatography methods1 are inappropriate for calibration but they
may be used to verify results. These methods measure individual gas con centrations and require
further conversion to ∆P or partial pressure and suffer from sampling and sample handling
problems.5-7 
3.  Procedure
 At the start of each day, test the instrument for leaks and recalibrate. At a monitoring site,
completely submerge the sensing element in the water, preferably below the hydrostatic
compensation depth. This is the depth where the hydrostat ic and total gas pressures are equal and
as a result, bubbles will not form on the tubing. Bubble formation on the silicone rubber tubing
seriously reduces accuracy. Compute hydrostatic compensation depth5 as follows: 
where: 
                  Z =   hydrostatic compensat ion depth, m, and 
                ∆P =   pressure difference between total dissolved gas pressure and the ambient
barometric pressure, mm Hg. 
The factor 73.42 is the hydrostatic pressure of fresh water at 20°C expressed in terms of mm
Hg/m water depth. Because the vari ation of hydrostatic pressure with temperature and salinity is
small, this equation can be used for all natural waters. 
Dislodge formed bubbles on the tubing by gently striking the instrument or moving the
instrument rapidly in the water. Movement of wate r across the silicone rubber tubing also
facilitates establishing the equilibrium between gas pressure in the water and in the tubing. 
Operate the instrument ‘‘bubble free’’ until a stable ∆P is observed. This may take from 5 to
30 min, depending on the ∆P, water temperature, water flow, and geometry of the system.  The
time response of the membrane-diffusion method is shown in Figure 2810:1  for ‘‘bubble-free’’
and ‘‘bubble’’ conditions. 
If the instrument is used in heavily contaminated water containing o il or other organic
compounds, clean the silicone tubing with a mild detergent according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Silicone rubber tubing has been used in uncontaminated natural water for at least
eight years without being adversely affected by a ttached algal growth.2 The tubing can be
damaged by abrasive grit, diatoms, biting aquatic organisms, certain organic compounds, and
strong acids.2 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationObtain the barometric pressure with each measurement by using a laboratory mercury
barometer, a calibrated portable barometer, or pressure transducer. Barometric pressures reported
by weather agencies (or airports) are corrected to sea level and are unusable. 
4.  Calculation
a. Total gas pressure:   Preferably report total gas pressure as ∆P.2,6,8 Express pressure as
millimeters of mercury.
 Total gas pressure also has been reported as a percentage of local barometric pressure: 
where: 
                Pb =   true local barometric pressure , mm Hg. 
The reporting of total gas pressure as a percentage is not encouraged.8 
b. Component gas pressures:  When information on component gas supersaturation is needed,
express data as partial pressures, differential pressures, or percent saturation.5,8 This requires
additional measurements of dissolved oxygen, temperature, and sali nity#(64) † at the monitoring
site. In a mixture of gases in a given volume, the partial pressure of a gas is the pressure that this
gas would exert if it were the only gas present.
1)  Oxygen partial pressure—Calculate partial pressure of oxygen as follows: 
 
where: 
              PO2 =   partial pressure of dissolved oxygen, mm Hg, 
              βO2 =   Bunsen coefficient for oxygen ( Table 2810:I ), L/(L⋅atm), and 
              DO =   measured concentration of oxygen, mg/L. 
Bunsen coefficients for marine waters are available.5 The factor  0.5318 equals 760/(1000
K), where K is the ratio of molecular  weight to molecular volume for oxygen gas.5 
2) Nitrogen partial pressure—Estimate the partial pressure of  nitrogen by subtracting the
partial pressures of oxygen and water  vapor from the total gas pressure. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationPN2 = Pb + ∆P − PO2 − PH2O 
where: 
            PH2O =   vapor pressure of water in mm Hg from Table  2810:II . 
This term includes a small contribution from argon and any  other gases present, including
carbon dioxide and methane. The  partial pressure of carbon dioxide is negligible in natural
waters  of pH > 7.0. 
3) Nitrogen:oxygen partial pressure ra tio—The ratio of the partial pressure of nitrogen to the
partial pressure of oxygen (N2:O2)  characterizes the relative contribution of the two gases to the
total  dissolved gas pressure. In water in equilibrium with air, this ratio  is 3.77. 
c. Differential pressures:  The differential pressure of a gas is  the difference between the
partial pressures of that gas in water  and air. The oxygen differential pressure may be calculated
as 
∆PO2 = PO2 − 0.209 46( Pb − PH2O) 
and the nitrogen differ ential pressure as 
∆PN2 = ∆P − ∆PO2 
d. Percent of saturation:  In older literature, supersaturation values have been reported as
percent saturation. This method of reporting component gases is discouraged but can be
calculated as  follows: 
 
The followi ng relationships are useful conversions: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
 
Use care with these relationships with older data because both  TGP(%) and N2(%) have
been differently defined.5 
5.  Quality Control
 The precision of the membrane-diffusion method depends primarily on the pressure-sensing
instrument. For an experienced operator it is approximately ±1 to 2 mm Hg with an accuracy of
±3 to 5 mm Hg.3,6 Air leaks, bubble formation, bio film development, incomplete equilibration,
or condensation produce negative errors while direct water leaks can result in positive errors in
submersible units. 
For accurate work, measure water temperature to the nearest ±0.1°C. 
6.  Reporting of Results
 In reporting results, include the following data: 
Sensor depth, m, 
Barometric pressure, mm Hg, 
Water temperature, °C, 
Dissolved oxygen, mm Hg or mg/L, 
Salinity, g/kg, and 
∆P, mm Hg. 
If component gas information is needed add: 
Partial pressure of oxygen, mm Hg, 
Partial pressure of nitrogen, mm Hg, and 
Nitrogen:oxygen partial pressure ratio 
or 
∆PO2, mm Hg, and Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation∆PN2, mm Hg. 
7.  Interpretation of Results
 The biological effects of dissolved gas supe rsaturation depend on the species, age, depth in
water column, length of exposure, temperature, and nitrogen:oxygen partial pressure ratio.12
Safe limits generally are segregated into wild/natural circumstances, where behavior and
hydrostatic pressure can modify the exposure by horizontal and vertical movements away from
dangers, and captive environments such as aquaria, hatcheries, or laboratories, where conditions
not only preclu de escape but also include other significant stresses. Of these two realms, captive
circumstances are more likely to cause illness or mortality from gas bubble disease and will do
so sooner and at the lower ∆P levels. 
In wild/natural circumstances, the li mit of safe levels of gas supersaturation depends on the
depth available to the species and/ or species behavior, but this limit usually occurs at a ∆P
between 50 and 150 mm Hg. Under captive conditions, the ∆P should be as close to zero as
possible. For s ensitive species and life stages, sublethal and lethal effects have been observed at
∆P of 10 to 50 mm Hg.13 
8.  References
         1.    D’AOUST, B.G., R. WHITE & H. SIEBOLD.  1975. Direct measurement of total dissolved
gas partial pressure. Undersea Biomed. Res.  2:141.
         2.    BOUCK, G.R.  1982. Gasometer: an inexpensive device for continuous monitoring of
dissolved gases and supersaturation. Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc.  111:505.
         3.    FICKEISEN, D.H., M.J. SCHNEIDER & J.C. MONTGOMERY.  1975. A comparative evaluation
of the Weiss saturometer. Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc.  104:816.
         4.    BEININGEN, K.T.  1973. A Manual for Meas uring Dissolved Oxygen and Nitrogen Gas
Concentrations in Water with the Van Slyke-Neill Apparatus. Fish Commission of
Oregon, Portland.
         5.    COLT, J.  1984. Computation of dissolved gas concentrations in water as functions of
temperature, salinity, and pressure. Spec. Publ. 14, American Fisheries Soc., Bethesda,
Md.
         6.    D’AOUST, B.G. & M.J.R. CLARK.  1980. Analysis of supersaturated air in natural waters
and reservoirs. Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc.  109:708.
         7.    PIRIE, W.R. & W.A. HUBBERT.  1977. Assumpt ions in statistical analysis. Trans. Amer.
Fish. Soc.  106:646.
         8.    COLT, J.  1983. The computation and reporting of dissolved gas levels. Water Res.
17:841.
         9.    BENSON, B.B. & D. KRAUSE.  1980. The concentration and isotopic fractionation in
freshwat er in equilibrium with the atmosphere. 1. Oxygen. Limnol. Oceanogr.  25:662.
       10.    BENSON, B.B. & D. KRAUSE.  1984. The concentration and isotopic fractionation ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationoxygen dissolved in freshwater and seawater in equilibrium with the atmosphere.
Limnol. Oce anogr.  29:620.
       11.    GREEN, E.J. & D.E. CARRITT.  1967. New tables for oxygen saturation of seawater. J.
Mar. Res.  25:140.
       12.    WEITKAMP, D.E. & M. KATZ.  1980. A review of dissolved gas supersaturation literature.
Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc.  109:659.
       13.    COLT, J.  1986. The impact of gas supersaturation on the design and operation of aquatic
culture systems. Aquacult. Eng.  5:49.
Figures
Figure 2120:1 .  Filtration system for color determinations.  
Figure 2120:2 .  Chromaticity diagrams.  
Figure 2150:1 .  Odor-free-water generator.  
Figure 2530:1 .  Floatables sampler with mixer.  
Figure 2530:2 .  Floatables flotation funnel and filter holder.  
Figure 2530:3 .  Flotation funnels and mixing unit.  
Figure 2530:4 .  Floatable oil tube, 1-L capacity.  
Figure 2560:1 .  Schematic of filtration apparatus for preparation of particle-free dilution
water or electrolyte solution.  
Figure 2710:1 .  Schematic diagram of settling vessel for settled sludge volume test.  
Figure 2710:2 .  Schematic diagram of settling vessel for zone settling rate test.  
Figure 2710:3 .  Capillary suction time apparatus.  
Figure 2710:4 .  TTF equipment.  Large-volume equipment requires a 9-cm- diam Buchner
funnel and a 250-mL graduated cylinder.  Small-volume equipment requires a 2.5-cm-diam
funnel and  a 10-mL cylinder. 
Figure 2720:1 . Gas collection apparatus.  
Figure 2810:1 .  Time response for the membrane-diffusion method.  
Tables
TABLE  2120:I.   S ELECTED  ORDINATES  FOR SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC  COLOR
DETERMINATIONS *
    X     Y     Z
Ordinate
     No.Wavelength
nmStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation    X     Y     Z
Ordinate
     No.Wavelength
nm
      1 424.4 465.9 414.1
      2* 435.5* 489.5* 422.2*
      3 443.9 500.4 426.3
      4 452.1 508.7 429.4
      5* 461.2* 515.2* 432.0*
      6 474.0 520.6 434.3
      7 531.2 525.4 436.5
      8* 544.3* 529.8* 438.6*
      9 552.4 533.9 440.6
    10 558.7 537.7 442.5
    11* 564.1* 541.4* 444.4*
    12 568.9 544.9 446.3
    13 573.2 548.4 448.2
    14* 577.4* 551.8* 450.1*
    15 581.3 555.1 452.1
    16 585.0 558.5 454.0
    17* 588.7* 561.9* 455.9*
    18 592.4 565.3 457.9
    19 596.0 568.9 459.9
    20* 599.6* 572.5* 462.0*
    21 603.3 576.4 464.1
    22 607.0 580.4 466.3
    23* 610.9* 584.8* 468.7*
    24 615.0 589.6 471.4
    25 619.4 594.8 474.3
    26* 624.2* 600.8* 477.7*
    27 629.8 607.7 481.8
    28 636.6 616.1 487.2
    29* 645.9* 627.3* 495.2*
    30 663.0 647.4 511.2
Factors When 30 Ordinates UsedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation    X     Y     Z
Ordinate
     No.Wavelength
nm
                 0.032 69        0.033 33        0.039
38
Factors When 10 Ordinates Used
                 0.098 06        0.100 00        0.118
14
* Insert in each column the transmittance value (%) corresponding to the wavelengthshow n. Where limited accuracy is sufficient,
use only the ordinates marked with anasterisk.
TABLE  2120:II.   C OLOR  HUES FOR DOMINANT  WAVELENGTH  RANGES
Wavelength Range
            nm Hue 
      400–465 Violet
      465–482 Blue
      482–497 Blue-green
      497–530 Green
      530–575 Greenish yellow
      575–580 Yellow
      580–587 Yellowish
orange
      587–598 Orange
      598–620 Orange-red
      620–700 Red
      400–530c* Blue-purple
    530c–700* Red-purple
* See Figure 2120:2  for significance of ‘‘c’’.
TABLE  2150:I.   T HRESHOLD  ODOR NUMBERS  CORRESPONDING TO  VARIOUS  DILUTIONSStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation* See Figure 2120:2  for significance of ‘‘c’’.
TABLE  2150:I.   T HRESHOLD  ODOR NUMBERS  CORRESPONDING TO  VARIOUS  DILUTIONS
Sample
Volume
Diluted
to 200 mL
mLThreshold
Odor No.Sample
Volume
Diluted
to 200 mL
mLThreshold
Odor No.
200
140
100
  70
  50
  35
  25
  17    1   
    1.4
  2   
  3   
  4   
  6   
  8   
12   12.0
  8.3
  5.7
  4.0
  2.8
  2.0
  1.4
  1.0  17
  24
  35
  50
  70
100
140
200
TABLE 2150:II.   D ILUTIONS FOR  VARIOUS  ODOR INTENSITIES
Sample Volume in
Which Odor Is
First Noted
mLVolumes to Be Diluted
to 200 mL
mL
200   200, 140, 100, 70, 50
  50   50, 35, 25, 17, 12
  12   12, 8.3, 5.7, 4.0, 2.8
    2.8 Intermediate dilution
TABLE  2160:I.  F LAVOR  THRESHOLD  NUMBERS  CORRESPONDING  TO VARIOUS  DILUTIONS
Sample
Volume
mLDiluent
Volume
mLFlavor
Threshold No.
FTN
200     0     1
100 100     2
  70 130     3Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSample
Volume
mLDiluent
Volume
mLFlavor
Threshold No.
FTN
  50 150     4
  35 165     6
  25 175     8
  17 183   12
  12 188   17
    8 192   25
    6 194   33
    4 196   50
    3 197   67
    2 198 100
    1 199 200
TABLE  2160:II.  D ILUTIONS FOR  DETERMINING THE  FTN
Sample Volume
in Which Taste
Is First Noted
mLVolumes to be Diluted to
200 mL
mL
200 200, 100, 70, 50, 35, 25,
17
  50 50, 35, 25, 17, 12, 8, 6
  12 12, 8, 6, 4, 3, 2, 1
    4 Intermediate dilution
TABLE  2170:I.   Q UANTITATIVE  ODOR REFERENCES *
Compound Odor CharacteristicsStock Solution
Concentration
mg/LAmount Placed I n
200 mL Pure Wat e
25°C for Presenta t
Geosmin Earthy, red beets 0.2† 300 µL for 300 n g
2-Methylisoborneol Earthy, peat-like, Brazil nut, soil 0.2† 200 µL for 200 n g
Free chlorine Chlorinous 1.0 0.1 mL for 0.5 m gStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCompound Odor CharacteristicsStock Solution
Concentration
mg/LAmount Placed I n
200 mL Pure Wat e
25°C for Presenta t
pH = 7
Dichloramine Swimming pool chlorine pH = 7
Monochloramine Chlorinous pH = 7
trans ,2-cis,6-Nonadienal Cucumber, green vegetation 1000 1 µL for 5 µg/L
Styrene Model airplane glue 1000 100 µL for 5 00 µg
Toluene Glue, sweet solventy 1000 100 µL for 500 µg
cis-3-Hexenyl-1-acetate Grassy 1000 100 µL for 500 µg
cis-3-Hexene-1-ol Grassy, green apple 1000 100 µL for 500 µg
Cumene Paste shoe polish, solventy 1000 20 µL for 100 µg/L
m-Xylene Sweet s olventy 1000 40 µL for 200 µg/L
Methylisobutyl ketone Paint solventy 1000 200 µL for 1.0 m g
1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene Shoe polish, coal tar 1000 50 µL for 250 µg/L
Indene Glue, moth balls 1000 1 µL for 5 µg/L
Indan Varnish, coal tar 1000 5 µL for 25 µg/L
Naphthalene Sweet solventy 1000 1 µL for 5 µg/L
Benzofuran Shoe polish, moth balls 1000 2 µL for 10 µg/L
2-Methyl-benzofuran Moth balls, sweet solventy 1000 50 µL for 250 µg/L
NOTE: These compounds have actually been identified as c auses of odors in raw and finished drinking water.
* Adapted from A MERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION.  1993. Flavor Profile Analysis: Sc reening and Training of Panelists. AWWA
Manual, American Water Work s Assoc.,Denver, Colo.
† Compounds available only in solid fo rm and must be dissolved in methanol.
TABLE  2170:II.   R EPRESENTATIVE  ODOR REFERENCE  STANDARDS *
Compound Odor CharacteristicsStock Solution
Concentration
mg/LAmou
mL P u
2,3,6-Trichloroanisole Leather, earthy 1000     4 µL
2,3-Diethylpyrazine Mildew, damp basement 1000     2 µL
2-Isopropyl-3-methoxypyrazine Potato bin, musty 1000     40 µ
Nonanal Hay, sweet 1000     40 µ
Dimethyl sulfide Decaying vegetation, canned corn 1000     1 µLStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCompound Odor CharacteristicsStock Solution
Concentration
mg/LAmou
mL P u
Dimethyl disulfide Septic 1000     2 µL
Dimethyltrisulfide Garlicky, oniony, septic 0.2     50 µ
Butyric acid Putrid, sickening 1000    200 
trans ,2-Nonenal Cucumber with skin 1000     40 µ
Diphenyl ether Geranium   1000†     20 µ
D-Limonene Citrusy 1000    400 
Hexanal Lettuce heart, pumpkin, green
pistachio1000     40 µ
Benzaldehyde Sweet almond 1000    200 
Ethyl-2-methyl-butyrate Fruity, pineapple 1000    100 0
2-Heptanone Banana-like,  sweet solventy 1000    100 
Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene Sweet, minty, Vapo Rub 1000    800 
2-Isobutyl-3-methoxypyrazine Green/bell pepper, musty 1000     40 µ
trans ,2-trans ,4-Decadienal Rancid oily 1000    100 0
Butanol Alcohol, solventy 1000    200 
Eucalyptol (cincole) Topical ointment for chest colds 1000     40 µ
Pyridine Sweet, alcohol, organic 1000    400 
NOTE: Possible causes of odors or chemic al substitutes for causes of odors.
 * Adapted from A MERICAN  WATER WORKS  ASSOCIATION . 1993. F LAVOR  PROFILE  ANALYSIS : SCREENING AND  TRAINING OF  PANELISTS . AWWA
Manual, American Water Works Assoc., Denver, Colo.
 * Com pounds available only in solid form and must be dissolved in methanol.
TABLE  2170:III.   S UBSTITUTE  ODOR REFERENCE  STANDARDS *
CompoundOdor
Characteristic Preparation
Cloves Spicy like cloves Use supermarket brand of 
    dried clove buds (spice). Add
3 
    clove buds to 200 mL pure 
   water and swirl 1–2 min. Allow 
    to stand overnight at room 
    temperature, then discar d the 
    buds.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCompoundOdor
Characteristic Preparation
Dried grass Hay Place dried cut grass in 
    erlenmeyer flask until half full.
Grass Decaying vegetation Weigh 2 g of fresh grass and 
    mix into 200 mL pure water
and 
   let stand at room temperature. 
    In 1–3 d, the odor will app ear.
Grass Septic Allow the solution above for 
    decaying vegetation to stand 
    for an additional 1–2 weeks.
Rubber hose Rubber hose Boil a short section of rubber 
    hose in 200 mL pure water for 
    5 min. Allow to cool and 
    remove the hose.
Soap Soapy Place 5 g of chipped 
    nonscented bar soap in 200 
    mL pure water.
Pencil shavings Woody Instruct panel member to 
    sharpen a wood pencil and 
    sniff the freshly exposed
wood.
NOTE: Standards made from materials rat her than chemicals.* Adapted from A MERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION.  1993. Flavor
Profile Analysis: Screening and Traini ng of Panelists. AWWA Manual. Americ an Water WorksAssoc., Denver, Colo.
TABLE  2170:IV.   B ASIC  TASTE  STANDARDS
Chemical for
Basic Tastes         Food or Beverage
  Corresponding to IntensityConcentration
%Intensity
Scale
(1 to 12)*
Sweet: sugar Canned fruit or vegetables
Carbonated soda
Syrup, jelly  5.00     
10.00     
15.00     4 W
8 M
12 S
Sour: citric aci d Fresh fruit jelly
Some carbonated sodas
Lemon juice  0.05     
  0.10     
  0.20     4 W
8 M
12 SStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationChemical for
Basic Tastes         Food or Beverage
  Corresponding to IntensityConcentration
%Intensity
Scale
(1 to 12)*
Salt: sodium 
    chlorideLevel in bread
Dehydrated soup mix
Soy sauce  0.40     
  0.70     
  1.00     4 W
8 M
12 S
Bitter: caffeine Strong coffee   0.05     
  0.10     
  0.20     4 W
8 M
12 S
or quinine hydrochloride
dihydrate  0.001
  0.002
  0.0044 W
8 M
12 S
* W = weak; M = moderate; S = strong.
TABLE 2320:I.  E ND-POINT p H V ALUES
End Point pH
Test
ConditionTotal
AlkalinityPhenolphthalein
Alkalinity
Alkalinity,
    mg CaCO3/L:
          30 4.9 8.3
        150 4.6 8.3
        500 4.3 8.3
Silicates, phosphates known 
    or suspected4.5 8.3
Routine or automated 
    analyses4.5 8.3
Industrial waste or complex 
    system4.5 8.3
TABLE  2320:II.  A LKALINITY  RELATIONSHIPS *Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  2320:II.  A LKALINITY  RELATIONSHIPS *
Result of
TitrationHydroxide
Alkalinity
as CaCO3Carbonate
Alkalinity
as CaCO3Bicarbonate
Concen-
tration
as CaCO3
P = 0 0 0 T
P < tfrac12T 0 2P T − 2P
P = tfrac12T 0 2P 0
P > tfrac12T 2P − T 2(T − P) 0
P = T T 0 0
*Key: P−phenolphthalein alkalinity; T −total alkalinity.
Table 2330:I.  Estimating Equilibrium Constants and Activity Coefficients Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
TABLE  2330:II.   P RECALCULATED  VALUES FOR  pK AND A AT SELECTED  TEMPERATURES
pKs
Temperature
°CpK2 Calcite Aragonite VateritepKw AStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationpKs
Temperature
°CpK2 Calcite Aragonite VateritepKw A
  5
10
15
20
25*
30
35
40
45
50
60
70
80
9010.55
10.49
10.43
10.38
10.33
10.29
10.25
10.22
10.20
10.17
10.14
10.13
10.13
10.148.39
8.41
8.43
8.45
8.48
8.51
8.54
8.58
8.62
8.66
8.76
8.87
8.99
9.128.24
8.26
8.28
8.31
8.34
8.37
8.41
8.45
8.49
8.54
8.64
8.75
8.88
9.027.77
7.80
7.84
7.87
7.91
7.96
8.00
8.05
8.10
8.16
8.28
8.40
8.55
8.7014.73
14.53
14.34
14.16
13.99
13.83
13.68
13.53
13.39
13.26
13.02
—
—
—0.494
0.498
0.502
0.506
0.511
0.515
0.520
0.526
0.531
0.537
0.549
0.562
0.576
0.591
NOTE: All values determined from the equations of Table 2330:I .
A is used to calculate pfm (see Table 2330:I ).
* pfm estimated from TDS values at 25°C care as follows:
                         TDS          pfm
                          100        0.024
                          200        0.033
                          400        0.044
                          800        0.060
                        1000        0.066
TABLE 2330:III.   G RAPHS AND  COMPUTER  SOFTWARE  THAT CAN BE USED TO  CALCULATE
CaCO3 SATURATION  INDICES*
CaCO3 Indices
Item†Basis for
Calculation
of SI CCPPApproximate
Temperature
Range
°CApproximate
Limit of
Ionic
StrengthIon Pairs
Considered? C
  1.  Caldwell
      Lawrence
      diagrams4pHsaP, D 2–25 0.030 NoStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCaCO3 Indices
Item†Basis for
Calculation
of SI CCPPApproximate
Temperature
Range
°CApproximate
Limit of
Ionic
StrengthIon Pairs
Considered? C
  2.  ACAPP RS P, D −10–110 6+ Yes
  3.  DRIVER RS P 7–65 2.5 Yes
  4.  INDEX C pHsa pHsbP, D 0–50 0.5 No
  5.  LEQUIL RS No 5–90 0.5 Yes
  6.  MINTEQA1 RS P, D 0–100 0.5 YesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCaCO3 Indices
Item†Basis for
Calculation
of SI CCPPApproximate
Temperature
Range
°CApproximate
Limit of
Ionic
StrengthIon Pairs
Considered? C
  7.  PHREEQE
          StandardRS P, D 0–100 0.5 Yes
          For high-
          salinity
          watersRS P, D 0–80 7–8 Yes
  8.  SEQUIL RS P, D 7–65 2.5 Yes
  9.  SOLMINEQ.88 RS P, D 0–350  6 Yes
10.  WTRCHEM pHsaP, D 0–100 0.5 NoStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCaCO3 Indices
Item†Basis for
Calculation
of SI CCPPApproximate
Temperature
Range
°CApproximate
Limit of
Ionic
StrengthIon Pairs
Considered? C
11.  WATEQ4F RS No 0–100 0.5 Yes
*SI          = saturation index                                                                           D        = calculates amount of CaCO3 theoretically dissolved
CCPP     = CaCO3 precipitation potential                                                     RS      = relative saturation
pHsa      = alkalinity-based pH                                                                     PC      = personal computer
pHsb      = bicarbonate-based pH                                                                 RAM   = random access memory
P            = calcula tes amount of CaCO3 theoretically precipitated
†1.  Loewenthal and Marais3 provide 10.2- by 11.4-cm diagrams, with documentation; Merrill5 provides 10.2- by 16.5-cm diagrams,
with documentation.
  2.  Radian Corp., 8501 MoPac Blvd., P.O. Box 201088, Austin , TX 78720-1088 Attn: J.G. Noblett (software and documentation).
  3.  Power Computing Co., 1930 Hi Line Dr., Dallas, TX, 74207 (software and documentation6).
  4.  Brown and Caldwell, P.O. Box 8045, Walnut Creek, CA 94596-1220 Attn: D.T. Merrill (software  and documentation).
  5.  Illinois State Water Survey, Aquatic Chemistry Secti on, 2204 Griffith Dr., Champaign, IL 61820-7495 Attn: T.R. Holm (soft ware
and documentation).
  6.  Center for Exposure Assessment Mode ling, Environmental Research Laboratory, O ffice of Research and Development. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency,Athens , GA 30613 (software and documentation7).
  7.  U.S. Geological Survey, National Center, MS 437, Rest on, VA 22902, Chief of WATSTORE Program (provides software for
mainframe vers ion of standard code);U.S. Geological Survey, Water Resour ces Division, MS 420, 345 Middlefield Rd., Menlo Park,
CA 94025 Attn: K. Nordstrom (provides software for personalcomput er version of standard code); National Water Research Institut e,
Canada Centre  for Inland Waters, 867 Lakeshore Rd., Burlington, Ont., Canada L7R 4A6Attn: A.S. Crowe (provides software and
documentation 8,9 for personal computer versions of both standard and hi gh-salinity codes); U.S. Geological Survey, Booksand
Open File Report Sec tion, Box 25425, Federal Center, Denv er, CO 80225 (provides documentation8,10 for mainframe and personal
computer versions ofstandard code).
  8.  Power Computing Company, 1930 Hi Line Dr., Dallas, TX 74207 (software and documentation11).
  9.  U.S. Geolog ical Survey, Water Resources Division, MS 427, 345 Mi ddlefield Rd., Menlo Park, CA 94025 Attn: Y.K. Kharaka
(software and documentation12).
10.  D.T. Merrill, Brown and Caldwell, P.O. Box 8045,  Walnut Creek, CA 94596-1220 (c ode listing and documentation).
11.  U.S. Geological Survey, Water Resources Division, MS 420, 345 Middlefield Rd., Menlo Park, CA 94025 Attn: K. Nordstrom
(software), Books and Open FileReport Section, Box 25425, Federal Center, Denver, CO 80225 (documentation13).
‡Codes differ in the s pecies included in Alk0.
TABLE  2340:I.   M AXIMUM  CONCENTRATIONS OF  INTERFERENCES  PERMISSIBLE WITH
VARIOUS  INHIBITORS *
Max. Interference
Concentration
mg/LStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  2340:I.   M AXIMUM  CONCENTRATIONS OF  INTERFERENCES  PERMISSIBLE WITH
VARIOUS  INHIBITORS *
Max. Interference
Concentration
mg/L
Interfering
SubstanceInhibitor
IInhibitor
II
Aluminum 20 20   
Barium † †
Cadmium † 20   
Cobalt over 20   0.3
Copper over 30 20   
Iron over 30   5   
Lead † 20   
Manganese (Mn2+) †   1   
Nickel over 20   0.3
Strontium † †
Zinc † 200     
Polyphosphate 10   
* Based on 25-mL sample diluted to 50 mL.
† Titrates as hardness.
TABLE  2510:I.   E QUIVALENT CONDUCTIVITY , Λ, AND CONDUCTIVITY, k, OF POTASSIUM
CHLORIDE AT 25.0°C.*2–4
KCl
Concentration
M or equivalent/LEquivalent
Conductivity, Λ
mho-cm2/equivalentConductivity, ks
µmho/cm
0         149.9
0.0001 148.9          14.9
0.0005 147.7          73.9
0.001  146.9        146.9
0.005 143.6        717.5
0.01    141.2     1 412   
0.02    138.2     2 765   Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationKCl
Concentration
M or equivalent/LEquivalent
Conductivity, Λ
mho-cm2/equivalentConductivity, ks
µmho/cm
0.05    133.3     6 667   
0.1      128.9   12 890   
0.2      124.0   24 800   
0.5      117.3   58 670   
1         111.9 111 900   
* Based on the absolute ohm, the 1968 temperature standard, and the dm3 volumestandard.2 Values are accurate to ±0.1% or 0.1
µmho/cm, whichever is greater.
TABLE  2510:II.   S AMPLE ANALYSIS ILLUSTRATING CALCULATION OF CONDUCTIVITY, kcalc,
FOR NATURAL WATERS.7
Ions mg/L mM |z| λ°±mM z2mM
Ca   55   1.38 164.2   5.52
Mg   12   0.49   52.0   1.96
Na   28   1.22   61.1   1.22
K 3.2 0.08     5.9   0.08
HCO3170   2.79 124.2   2.79
SO4  77   0.80 128.0   3.20
Cl   20   0.56   42.8   0.56
578.2 15.33
TABLE  2510:III.   E QUIVALENT CONDUCTANCES, λ°+ AND λ°−, (MHO -CM2/EQUIVALENT ) FOR
IONS IN WATER AT 25.0 C.8
Cation λ°+ Anion λ°−
H+ 350   OH− 198.6
1/2Ca2+ 59.5 HCO3- 44.5
1/2Mg2+ 53.1 1/2CO32− 72   
Na+ 50.1 1/2SO42− 80.0Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCation λ°+ Anion λ°−
K+ 73.5 Cl− 76.4
NH4+ 73.5 Ac− 40.9
1/2Fe2+ 54   F− 54.4
1/3Fe3+ 68   NO3− 71.4
H2PO4− 33   
1/2HPO42− 57   
TABLE  2530:I.  C OEFFICIENT OF  VARIATION AND  RECOVERY FOR  PARTICULATE  FLOATABLES
TEST
Type of
WastewaterAverage
Floatables
Concentration
mg/LNo. of
SamplesCoefficient
of Variation
%Recovery
 %
Raw* 49      5   5.7 96
Raw   1.0 5 20    92
Primary effluent   2.7 5 15    91
* Additional floatable material added from ski mmings of a primarysedimentation basin.
TABLE  2560:I.   E XAMPLE  CALCULATIONS FOR  PARTICLE  SIZE DISTRIBUTION  ANALYSIS
Channel
No.
(A)Lower
Limit
dp
µm
(B)Upper
Limit
dp
µm
(C)Mean
Diam.
dpi
µm
(D)∆dpi
µm
(E)log dpi
dp in
µm
(F)∆ log dpi
(G)Corrected
Count
(H)Number
Conc.
∆Ni
No./mL
(I)
  6   2.95   3.39   3.16 0.44 0.50 0.06 5125 102 500
  7   3.39   3.89   3.63 0.50 0.56 0.06 4568   91 360
  8   3.89   4.47   4.17 0.58 0.62 0.06 3888   77 760
  9   4.47   5.13   4.79 0.66 0.68 0.06 3088   61 760
10   5.13   5.89   5.50 0.76 0.74 0.06 2289   45 780
11   5.89   6.76   6.31 0.87 0.80 0.06 1584   31 680
12   6.76   7.76   7.24 1.00 0.86 0.06 1023   20 460Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationChannel
No.
(A)Lower
Limit
dp
µm
(B)Upper
Limit
dp
µm
(C)Mean
Diam.
dpi
µm
(D)∆dpi
µm
(E)log dpi
dp in
µm
(F)∆ log dpi
(G)Corrected
Count
(H)Number
Conc.
∆Ni
No./mL
(I)
13   7.76   8.91   8.32 1.15 0.92 0.06   631   12 620
14   8.91 10.23   9.55 1.32 0.98 0.06   363     7 260
15 10.23 11.75 10.96 1.52 1.04 0.06   199     3 980
TABLE  2580:I.  P OTENTIAL OF ZOBELL’S SOLUTION AS FUNCTION OF TEMPERATURE
 T
°C    E
    V T
°C    E
    V
  1 0.481 16 0.448
  2 0.479 17 0.446
  3 0.476 18 0.443
  4 0.474 19 0.441
  5 0.472 20 0.439
  6 0.470 21 0.437
  7 0.468 22 0.435
  8 0.465 23 0.432
  9 0.463 24 0.430
10 0.461 25 0.428
11 0.459 26 0.426
12 0.457 27 0.424
13 0.454 28 0.421
14 0.452 29 0.419
15 0.450 30 0.417
TABLE  2580:II.  P REPARATION OF REDOX STANDARD SOLUTIONS
Standard Solution Potentials of Pt Electrode vs . Selected Reference Electrodes
at 25°C in Standard SolutionWeight o f
Aqu
Calomel Silver:Silver Chloride
Ag/AgClStandard
HydrogenStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  2580:II.  P REPARATION OF REDOX STANDARD SOLUTIONS
Standard Solution Potentials of Pt Electrode vs . Selected Reference Electrodes
at 25°C in Standard SolutionWeight o f
Aqu
Calomel Silver:Silver Chloride
Ag/AgClStandard
Hydrogen
Hg/Hg2Cl2
saturated KClKCl
1.00MKCl
4.00MKCl
saturated
Light’s solution14 +430 +439 +475 +476 +675 39.21 g fer r
    Fe(NH4)
48.22 g f e
    Fe(NH4
56.2 mL s
    1.84
ZoBell’s solution *2 +183 +192 +228 +229 +428 1.4080 g p o
    K4Fe(C
1.0975 g 
    K3Fe(C
7.4555 g 
* Store in dark plastic bottle in a refrigerator.
TABLE  2580:III.   R ECOMMENDED COMBINATIONS FOR  SELECTED SAMPLE TYPES
Sample TypeIndicator
Electrode(s)Reference
ElectrodeType of Sample
Cell
Process stream 
    (low Br–) (S2–)Pt or Au Calomel or silver: silver 
    chlorideClosed continuous flow 
    (dual indicator electrode)
    (high Br–) Pt or Au Calomel or silver : silver 
    chloride with salt bridge 
    (double junction 
    reference electrode)
Natural waters
    Surface waters Pt or Au Calomel or silver: silver 
    chlorideClosed continuous flow 
    (dual indicator electrode) 
    or beaker
    Groundwate r Pt or Au Calomel or silver: silver 
    chlorideClosed continuous flow 
    (dual indicator electrode)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSample TypeIndicator
Electrode(s)Reference
ElectrodeType of Sample
Cell
Soils, sludges WIG, Pt wire Calomel or silver: silver 
    chlorideBeaker or soil core
TABLE  2710:I.   T EMPERATURE  CORRECTION  FACTOR
Temperature
°CTemperature Correction
Factor
15 0.9991
20 0.9982
25 0.9975
30 0.9957
35 0.9941
40 0.9922
45 0.9903
TABLE  2810:I.   B UNSEN  COEFFICIENT FOR  OXYGEN IN  FRESH  WATER
Bunsen Coefficient at Given Temperature (to nearest 0.1°C)
L real gas at STP/(L ⋅ atmosphere )
Temperature
°C 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
  0 0.04914 0.04901 0.04887 0.04873 0.04860 0.04847 0.04833 0.0482 0
  1 0.04780 0.04767 0.04754 0.04741 0.04728 0.04716 0.04703 0.0468 0
  2 0.04653 0.04640 0.04628 0.04615 0.04603 0.04591 0.04579 0.0456 7
  3 0.04531 0.04519 0.04507 0.04495 0.04484 0.04472 0.04460 0.0444 9
  4 0.04414 0.04403 0.0439 20.04381 0.04369 0.04358 0.04347 0.0433 6
  5 0.04303 0.04292 0.04282 0.04271 0.04260 0.04250 0.04239 0.0422 9
  6 0.04197 0.04187 0.04177 0.04166 0.04156 0.04146 0.04136 0.0412 6
  7 0.04096 0.04086 0.04076 0.04066 0.04056 0.04047 0.04037 0.0402 7
  8 0.03999 0.03989 0.03980 0.03971 0.03961 0.03952 0.03943 0.0393 3
  9 0.03906 0.03897 0.03888 0.03879 0.03870 0.03861 0.03852 0.0384 3
10 0.03817 0.03809 0.03800 0.03791 0.03783 0.03774 0.03766 0.0375 7
11 0.03732 0.03724 0.03716 0.03707 0.03699 0.03691 0.03683 0.0367 5
12 0.03651 0.03643 0.03635 0.03627 0.03619 0.03611 0.03604 0.0359 6Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationBunsen Coefficient at Given Temperature (to nearest 0.1°C)
L real gas at STP/(L ⋅ atmosphere )
Temperature
°C 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
13 0.03573 0.03565 0.03558 0.03550 0.0354 30.03535 0.03528 0.0352 0
14 0.03498 0.03491 0.03448 0.03476 0.03469 0.03462 0.03455 0.0344 8
15 0.03426 0.03419 0.03412 0.03406 0.03399 0.03392 0.03385 0.0337 8
16 0.03358 0.03351 0.03344 0.03338 0.03331 0.033 240.03318 0.0331 1
17 0.03292 0.03285 0.03279 0.03272 0.03266 0.03260 0.03253 0.0324 7
18 0.03228 0.03222 0.03216 0.03210 0.03204 0.03198 0.03192 0.0318 6
19 0.03168 0.03162 0.03156 0.03150 0.03144 0.03138 0.03132 0.0312 6
20 0.03109 0.03103 0.03098 0.03092 0.03086 0.03081 0.03075 0.0307 0
21 0.03053 0.03048 0.03042 0.03037 0.03031 0.03026 0.03020 0.0301 5
22 0.02999 0.02994 0.02989 0.02983 0.02978 0.02973 0.02968 0.02963
23 0.02947 0.02942 0.02937 0.02932 0.02927 0.02922 0.02917 0.0291 2
24 0.02897 0.02893 0.02888 0.02883 0.02878 0.02873 0.02868 0.0286 4
25 0.02850 0.02845 0.02840 0.02835 0.02831 0.02826 0.02822 0.0281 7
26 0.02803 0.02799 0.02794 0.02790 0.02785 0.02781 0.02777 0.0277 2
27 0.02759 0.02755 0.02750 0.02746 0.02742 0.02737 0.02733 0.0272 9
28 0.02716 0.02712 0.02708 0.02704 0.02700 0.02695 0.02691 0.0268 7
29 0.02675 0.02671 0.02667 0.02663 0.02659 0.02655 0.02651 0.0264 7
30 0.02635 0.02632 0.02628 0.02624 0.02620 0.02616 0.02612 0.0260 9
31 0.02597 0.02594 0.02590 0.02586 0.02582 0.02579 0.02575 0.0257 1
32 0.02561 0.02557 0.02553 0.02550 0.02546 0.02543 0.02539 0.0253 6
33 0.02525 0.02522 0.02518 0.02515 0.02511 0.02508 0.02504 0.0250 1
34 0.02491 0.02488 0.02484 0.02481 0.02478 0.02474 0.02471 0.0246 8
35 0.02458 0.02455 0.02452 0.02448 0.02445 0.02442 0.02439 0.0243 6
36 0.02426 0.02423 0.02420 0.02417 0.02414 0.02411 0.02408 0.0240 5
37 0.02396 0.02393 0.02390 0.02387 0.02384 0.02381 0.02378 0.0237 5
38 0.02366 0.02363 0.02360 0.02358 0.02355 0.02352 0.02349 0.0234 6
39 0.02338 0.02335 0.02332 0.02329 0.02327 0.02324 0.02321 0.0231 8
40 0.02310 0.02308 0.02305 0.02302 0.02300 0.02297 0.02294 0.0229 2
Based on Benson and Krause.9,10 β = 9.9902 × 10−4exp(9.7265 − 5.26895 × 103/T + 1.00417 × 106/T2), where T = 273.15 + °C.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  2810:II.   V APOR  PRESSURE OF  FRESH  WATER
Vapor Pressure at Given Temperature (to nearest 0.1°C) mm Hg
Temperature
°C 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
  0   4.58   4.61   4.64   4.68   4.71   4.75   4.78   4.82   4.85   4.89
  1   4.92   4.96   4.99   5.03   5.07   5.10   5.14   5.18   5.21   5.25
  2   5.29   5.33   5.36   5.40   5.44   5.48   5.52   5.56   5.60   5.64
  3   5.68   5.72   5.76   5.80   5.84   5.88   5.92   5.97   6.01   6.05
  4   6.09   6.14   6.18   6.22   6.27   6.31   6.36   6.40   6.44   6.49
  5   6.54   6.58   6.63   6.67   6.72   6.77   6.81   6.86   6.91   6.96
  6   7.01   7.05   7.10   7.15   7.20   7.25   7.30   7.35   7.40   7.45
  7   7.51   7.56   7.61   7.66   7.71   7.77   7.82   7.87   7.93   7.98
  8   8.04   8.09   8.15   8.20   8.26   8.31   8.37   8.43   8.48   8.54
  9   8.60   8.66   8.72   8.87   8.84   8.89   8.95   9.02   9.08   9.14
10   9.20   9.26   9.32   9.39   9.45   9.51   9.58   9.64   9.70   9.77
11   9.83   9.90   9.97 10.03 10.10 10.17 10.23 10.30 10.37 10.44
12 10.51 10.58 10.65 10.72 10.76 10.86 10.93 11.00 11.07 11.15
13 11.22 11.29 11.37 11.44 11.52 11.59 11.67 11.74 11.82 11.90
14 11.98 12.05 12.13 12.21 12.29 12.37 12.45 12.53 12.61 12.69
15 12.78 12.86 12.94 13.05 13.11 13.19 13.28 13.36 13.45 13.54
16 13.62 13.71 13.80 13.89 13.97 14.06 14.15 14.24 14.33 14.43
17 14.52 14.61 14.70 14.80 14.89 14.98 15.08 15.17 15.27 15.37
18 15.46 15.56 15.66 15.76 15.86 15.96 16.06 16.16 16.26 16.36
19 16.46 16.57 16.67 16.77 16.88 16.98 17.09 17.20 17.30 17.41
20 17.52 17.63 17.74 17.85 17.96 18.0718.18 18.29 18.41 18.52
21 18.64 18.75 18.87 18.98 19.10 19.22 19.33 19.45 19.57 19.69
22 19.81 19.93 20.05 20.48 20.60 20.42 20.55 20.67 20.80 20.93
23 21.05 21.18 21.31 21.44 21.57 21.70 21.83 21.96 22.09 22.23
24 22.36 22.50 22.63 22.77 22.90 23.04 23.18 23.32 23.46 23.60
25 23.74 23.88 24.03 24.17 24.31 24.46 24.60 24.75 24.90 25.04
26 25.19 25.34 25.49 25.64 25.80 25.95 26.10 26.26 26.41 26.57
27 26.72 26.88 27.04 27.20 27.36 27.52 27.68 27.84 28.00 28.17
28 28.33 28.50 28.66 28.83 29.00 29.17 29.34 29.51 29.68 29.85Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationVapor Pressure at Given Temperature (to nearest 0.1°C) mm Hg
Temperature
°C 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
29 30.03 30.80 30.37 30.55 30.73 30.91 31.08 31.26 31.44 31.62
30 31.81 31.99 32.17 32.36 32.54 32.73 32.92 33.11 33.30 33.49
31 33.68 33.87 34.06 34.26 34.45 34.65 34.85 35.05 35.24 35.44
32 35.65 35.85 36.05 36.25 36.46 36.67 36.87 37.0837.29 37.50
33 37.71 37.92 38.14 38.35 38.57 38.78 39.00 39.22 39.44 39.66
34 39.88 40.10 40.33 40.55 40.78 41.01 41.23 41.46 41.69 41.92
35 42.16 42.39 42.63 42.86 43.10 43.34 43.58 43.82 44.06 44.30
36 44.55 44.79 45.04 45.28 45.53 45.78 46.03 46.29 46.54 46.79
37 47.05 47.31 47.56 47.82 48.08 48.35 48.61 48.87 49.14 49.41
38 49.67 49.94 50.21 50.49 50.76 51.03 51.31 51.59 51.87 52.14
39 52.43 52.71 52.99 53.28 53.56 53.85 54.14 54.43 54.72 55.01
40 55.31 55.60 55.90 56.20 56.50 56.80 57.10 57.41 57.71 58.02
Based on an equation presented by Green and Carritt.11 This equation is cumbersome to use. The following equation9 is adequate
for most applications:
P H 2O = 760{exp(11.8571 − 3,840.70/ T  − 216,961/ T 2)}, where T  = 273.15 + °C.5
Part 3000        METALS
3010        INTRODUCTION
3010  A.        General Discussion
1.  Significance
 The effects of metals in water and wastewat er range from beneficial through troublesome to
dangerously toxic. Some metals are essential to plant and animal growth while others may
adversely affect water consumers, wastewater treatment s ystems, and receiving waters. The
benefits versus toxicity of some metals depend on their concentrations in waters. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Types of Methods
 Preliminary treatment is often required to present the metals to the analytical methodology
in an appropriate form. Alternative methods for pretreatment of samples are presented in Section
3030 . 
Metals may be determined satisfactor ily by a variety of methods, with the choice often
depending on the precision and sensitivity required. Part 3000  describes colorimetric methods as
well as instrumental methods, i.e., atomic absorption spectrometry, including flame,
electrothermal (furnace ), hydride, and cold vapor techniques; flame photometry; inductively
coupled plasma emission spectrometry; inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, and
anodic stripping voltammetry. Flame atomic absorption methods generally are applicable at
moderate (0.1- to 10-mg/L) concentrations in clean and complex-matrix samples. Electrothermal
methods generally can increase sensitivity if matrix problems do not interfere. Inductively
coupled plasma emission techniques are applicable over a broad linear range and  are especially
sensitive for refractory elements. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry offers
significantly increased sensitivity for some elements (as low as 0.01 µg/L) in a variety of
environmental matrices. Flame photometry gives good results a t higher concentrations for
several Group I and II elements. Anodic stripping offers high sensitivity for several elements in
relatively clean matrices. Colorimetric methods are applicable to specific metal determinations
where interferences are known not to compromise method accuracy; these methods may provide
speciation information for some metals. Table 3010:I  lists the methods available in Part 3000  for
each metal. 
3.  Definition of Terms
a.  Dissolved metals:  Those metals in an unacidified sample that pass through a 0.45- µm
membrane filter.
b.  Suspended metals:  Those metals in an unacidified sample that are retained by a 0.45- µm
membrane filter.
c.  Total metals:  The concentration of metals determined in an unfiltered sample after
vigorous digestion, or the sum of the concentrations of metals in the dissolved and suspended
fractions. Note that total metals are defined operationally by the digest ion procedure.
d.  Acid-extractable metals:  The concentration of metals in solution after treatment of an
unfiltered sample with hot dilute mineral acid. To determine either dissolved or suspended
metals, filter sample immediately after collection. Do not preserve with  acid until after filtration.
3010  B.        Sampling and Sample Preservation
 Before collecting a sample, decide what fraction is to be analyzed (dissolved, suspended,
total, or acid-extractable). This decision will determine in part whether the sample is acidified
with or without filtration and the type of digestion required. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSerious errors may be introduced during sampling and storage because of contamination
from sampling device, failure to remove residues of previous samples from sample container,
and loss of metals by adsorpti on on and/or precipitation in sample container caused by failure to
acidify the sample properly. 
1.  Sample Containers
 The best sample containers are made of quartz or TFE. Because these containers are
expensive, the preferred sample container is made of polypropylene or linear polyethylene with a
polyethylene cap. Borosilicate glass containers als o may be used, but avoid soft glass containers
for samples containing metals in the microgram-per-liter range. Store samples for determination
of silver in light-absorbing containers. Use only c ontainers and filters that have been acid rinsed. 
2.  Preservation
 Preserve samples immediately after sampling by acidifying with concentrated nitric acid
(HNO3) to pH <2. Filter samples for dissolved metals before preserving (see Section 3030 ).
Usually 1.5 mL conc HNO3/L sample (or 3 mL 1 + 1 HNO3/L sample) is sufficient for
short-term preservation. For samples with high buffer capacity, increase amount of acid (5 mL
may be re quired for some alkaline or highly buffered samples). Use commercially available
high-purity acid #(65) * or prepare high-purity acid by sub-boiling distillation of acid. 
After acidifying sample, preferably store it in a refrigerator at approximately 4°C to prevent
change in volume due to evaporation. Under these conditions, samples with metal concentrations
of several milligrams per li ter are stable for up to 6 months (except mercury, for which the limit
is 5 weeks). For microgram-per-liter metal levels, analyze samples as soon as possible after
sample collection. 
Alternatively, preserve samples for mercury analysis by adding 2 mL/L 20 % (w/v) K2Cr2O7
solution (prepared in 1 + 1 HNO3). Store in a refrigerator not contaminated with mercury.
(CAUTION :  Mercury concentrations may increase in samples stored in plastic bottles in
mercury-contaminated laboratories.) 
3.  Bibliography
 STRUEMPLER, A.W. 1973. Adsorption characteristics of silver, lead, calcium, zinc and nickel on
borosilicate glass, polyethylene and polypropylene container surfaces. Anal. Chem.  45:2251.
 FELDMAN, C.  1974. Preservation of dilute mercury  solutions. Anal. Chem.  46:99.
 KING, W.G., J.M. RODRIGUEZ & C.M. WAI. 1974. Losses of trace concentrations of cadmium from
aqueous solution during storage in glass containers. Anal. Chem.  46:771.
 BATLEY, G.E. & D. GARDNER.  1977. Sampling and storage of n atural waters for trace metal
analysis. Water Res.  11:745.
 SUBRAMANIAN, K.S., C.L. CHAKRABARTI, J.E. SUETIAS & I.S. MAINES.  1978. Preservation of
some trace metals in samples of natural waters. Anal. Chem.  50:444.
 BERMAN, S. & P. YEATS. 1985. Sampling of  seawater for trace metals. Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation16:1.
 WENDLANDT, E.  1986. Sample containers and analytical accessories made of modern plastics for
trace analysis. Gewaess. Wass. Abwass.  86:79.
3010  C.        General Precautions
1.  Sources of Contamination
 Avoid introducing contaminating metals from containers, distilled water, or membrane
filters. Some plastic caps or cap liners may introduce metal contamination; for example, zinc has
been found in black bakelite-type screw c aps as well as in many rubber and plastic products, and
cadmium has been found in plastic pipet tips. Lead is a ubiquitous contaminant in urban air and
dust. 
2.  Contaminant Removal
 Thoroughly clean sample containers with a metal-free nonionic detergent solution, rinse
with tap water, soak in acid, and then rinse with metal-free water. For quartz, TFE, or glass
materials, use 1 + 1 HNO3, 1 + 1 HCl, or aqua r egia (3 parts conc HCl + 1 part conc HNO3) for
soaking. For plastic material, use 1 + 1 HNO3 or 1 + 1 HCl. Reliable soaking cond itions are 24 h
at 70°C. Chromic acid or chromium-free substitutes #(66) * may be used to remove organic
deposits from containers, but  rinse containers thoroughly with water to remove traces of
chromium. Do not use chromic acid for plastic containers or if chromium is to be determined.
Always use metal-free water in analysis and reagent preparation (see Section 3111B.3 c). In these
method s, the word ‘‘water’’ means metal-free water. 
3.  Airborne Contaminants
 For analysis of microgram-per-liter concentrations of metals, airborne contaminants in the
form of volatile compounds, dust, soot, and aerosols present in laboratory air may become
significant. To avoid contamination use ‘‘clea n laboratory’’ facilities such as commercially
available laminar-flow clean-air benches or custom-designed work stations and analyze blanks
that reflect the complete procedure. 
4.  Bibliography
 MITCHELL, J.W.  1973. Ultrapurity in trace analysis. Anal. Chem.  45:492A.
 GARDNER, M., D. HUNT & G. TOPPING. 1986. Analytical quality control (AQC) for monitoring
trace metals in the coastal and marine environment. Water Sci. Technol.  18:35.
3020        QUALITY ASSURANCE/QUALITY CONTROLStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3020  A.        Introduction
 General information and recommendations for quality assurance (QA) and quality control
(QC) are provided in Section 1020  Quality Assurance, 1030 Data Quality, and 1040 Method
Development and Evaluation. This section discusse s QA/QC requirements that are common to
the analytical methods presented in Part 3000 . The requirements are recommended minimum
QA/QC activities; refer to individual methods  and regulatory program requirements for
method-specific QA/QC requirements. Always  consider the overall purpose of analyses. QA/QC
measures and substantiation for operational-control determinations may differ significantly from
those for determinations of trace metals at water quality criteria levels. Levels of trace metals in
environme ntal samples may be orders of magnitude lower than in potential sources of
contamination. 
Use replicates of measurable concentration to establish precision and known-additions
recovery to determine bias. Use blanks, calibrations, control charts, known add itions, standards,
and other ancillary measurement tools as appropriate. Provide adequate documentation and
record keeping to satisfy client requirements and performance criteria established by the
laboratory. 
3020  B.        Quality Control Practices
1.  Initial Quality Control
a.  Initial demonstration of capability:  Verify analyst capability before analyzing any
samples and repeat periodically to demonstrate proficiency with the analytical method. Verify
that the method being used provides sufficient sensitivity for the purpo se of the measurement.
Test analyst capability by analyzing at least four reagent water portions containing known
additions of the analyte of interest. Confirm proficiency by generating analytical results that
demonstrate precision and bias within acceptab le limits representative of the analytical method.
b.  Method detection limit (MDL):  Before samples are analyzed, determine the MDL for each
analyte by the procedures of Section 1030 , or other applicable procedure.1 Determine MDL at
least annually for each method and major matrix category. Verify MDL for  a new analyst or
whenever instrument hardware or method opera ting conditions are modified. Analyze samples
for MDL determinations over a 3- to 5-d period to generate a realistic value. Preferably use
pooled data from several analysts rather than data from  a single analyst.
c.  Dynamic range (DR):  Before using a new method, determine the dynamic range, i.e., the
concentration range over which a method has an increasing response (linear or second-order), for
each analyte by analyzing several standard solutions that bracket t he range of interest. Each
standard measurement should be within 10% of the true value for acceptance into the DR
determination. Take measurements at both the low and high end of the calibration range toStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetermine method suitability. Analytical instrumenta tion with curve-fitting features may allow
utilization of nonlinear instrument response.
2.  Calibration
a.  Initial calibration:  Calibrate initially with a minimum of a blank and three calibration
standards of the analyte(s) of interest. Select  calibration standards that bracket the expected
concentration of the sample and that are within the method’s dyna mic range. The number of
calibration points depends on the width of the dynamic range and the shape of the calibration
curve. One calibration standard should be below the reporting limit for the method. As a general
rule, differences between calibration st andard concentrations should not be greater than one
order of magnitude (i.e., 1, 10, 100, 1000). Apply linear or polynomial curve-fitting statistics, as
appropriate, for analysis of the concentration-instrument response relationship. The appropriate
linea r or nonlinear correlation coefficient for standard concentration to instrument response
should be ≥ 0.995. Use initial calibration for quantitation of analyte concentration in samples.
Use calibration verification, ¶ b below, only for checks on the initia l calibration and not for
sample quantitation. Repeat initial calibration daily and whenever calibration verification
acceptance criteria are not satisfied.
b.  Calibration verification:  Calibration verification is the periodic confirmation that
instrument response has not changed significantly from the initial calibration. Verify calibration
by analyzing a midpoint calibration standard (check standard) and calibration blank at the
beginning and end of a sample run, periodically during a run (normally after each set of ten
samples). A check standard determination outside 90 to 110% of the expected concentration
indicates a potential problem. If a check standa rd determination is outside 80 to 120% of the
expected concentration, immediately cease sample analyses and initiate corrective action. Repeat
initial calibration and sample determinations since the last acceptable calibration verification.
Use calculated control limits ( Section 1020B ) to provide better indications of system
performance and to provide tighter control limits.
c.  Quality control sample:  Analyze an externally generated quality control sample of known
concentration at least quarterly and whenever new calibration stock solutions are prepared.
Obtain this sample from a source external to the laboratory or prepare  it from a source different
from those used to prepare working standards. Use to validate the laboratory’s working standards
both qualitatively and quantitatively.
3.  Batch Quality Control
a.  Method blank (MB):  A method blank (also known as reagent blank) is a portion of reagent
water treated exactly as a sample, including exposure to all equipment, glassware, procedures,
and reagents. The MB is used to assess whether analytes or interfer ence are present within the
analytical process or system. No analyte of interest should be present in the MB at a warning
level based on the end user’s requirements. Undertake immediate corrective action for MB
measurements above the MDL. Include a minimum  of one MB with each set of 20 or fewer
samples.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Laboratory-fortified blank (LFB):  The laboratory-fortified blank (also known as blank
spike) is a method blank that has been fortified with a known concentration of analyte. It is used
to evaluate ongoing laboratory performance and analyte recovery i n a clean matrix. Prepare
fortified concentrations approximating the midpoint of the calibration curve or lower with stock
solutions prepared from a source different fr om those used to develop working standards.
Calculate percent recovery, plot control cha rts, and determine control limits ( Section 1020B ) for
these measurements. Ensure that the LFB meets performance criteria for the method. Establish
corrective actions to be taken in the event that LFB does not satisfy acceptance criteria. Include a
minimum of one LFB with each set of 20 or fewer samples.
c.  Duplicates:  Use duplicate samples of measurable concentration to measure precision of
the analytical process. Randomly select routine samples to be analyzed twice. Process duplicate
sample independently through entire sample preparation and analytica l process. Include a
minimum of one duplicate for each matrix type with each set of 20 or fewer samples.
d.  Laboratory-fortified matrix (LFM)/laboratory-fortified matrix duplicate:  Use LFM (also
known as matrix spike) and LFM duplicate to evaluate the bias and precision, respectively, of
the method as influenced by a specific matrix. Prepare by adding a kn own concentration of
analytes to a randomly selected routing sample. Prepare addition concentrations to
approximately double the concentration present in the original sample. If necessary, dilute
sample to bring the measurement within the established calib ration curve. Limit addition volume
to 5% or less of sample volume. Calculate percent recovery and relative percent difference, plot
control charts, and determine control limits ( Section 1020B ). Ensure that performance criteria for
the method are satisfied . Process fortified samples independently through entire sample
preparation and analytical process. Include a minimum of one LFM/LFM duplicate with each set
of 20 or fewer samples.
e.  Method of known additions:  To analyze a new or unfamiliar matrix, use the method of
known additions ( Section 1020B ) to demonstrate freedom from interference before reporting
concentration data for the analyte. Verify absence of interferences by analy zing such samples
undiluted and in a 1:10 dilution; results should be within 10% of each other. Limit
known-addition volume to 10% or less of the sample volume.
4.  Reference
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Definition and procedure for the
determination of the method detection limit, revision 1.11. 40 CFR Part 136, Appendix
B. Federal Register  5:23703.
3030        PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OF SAMPLES* #(67)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3030  A.        Introduction
 Samples containing particulates or organic ma terial generally require pretreatment before
spectroscopic analysis. ‘‘Total metals’’ includes all metals, inorganically and organically bound,
both dissolved and particulate. Col orless, transparent samples (primarily drinking water) having
a turbidity of <1 NTU, no odor, and single phase may be analyzed directly by atomic absorption
spectroscopy (flame or electrothermal vaporizati on) or inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy
(atomic emission or mass spectrometry) for total metals without digestion. For further
verification or if changes in existing matrices  are encountered, compare digested and undigested
samples to ensure comparable results. On collection, acidify such samples to  pH <2 with conc
nitric acid (1.5 mL HNO3/L is usually adequate for drinking water) and analyze directly. Digest
all other samples before determining total metals. To analyze for dissolved metals, filter sample,
acidify filtrate, and store until analyses c an be performed. To determine suspended metals, filter
sample, digest filter and the material on it, and analyze. To determine acid-extractable metals,
extract metals as indicated in Section 3030E  through K and analyze extract. 
This section describes gene ral pretreatment for samples in which metals are to be determined
according to Section 3110  through 3500-Zn with several exceptions. The special digestion
techniques for mercury are given in Section 3112B.4 b and  c, and those for arsenic and selenium
in Section 3114  and Section 3500-Se.  
Take care not to introduce metals into samples during preliminary treatment. During
pretreatment avoid contact with rubber, metal-based paints, cigarette smoke, paper tissues, and
all metal products including those made of stainless steel, galvanized metal, and brass.
Conventional fume hoods can contribute significantly to sample contamination, particularly
during acid digestion in open containers. Keep vessels covered with watch glasses and turn
spouts away from incoming ai r to reduce airborne contamination. Plastic pipet tips often are
contaminated with copper, iron, zinc, and cadmium; before use soak in 2 N HCl or HNO3 for
several days and rinse with deionized water. Avoid using colored plastics, which can contain
metals. U se certified metal-free plastic containers and pipet tips when possible. Avoid using
glass if analyzing for aluminum or silica. 
Use metal-free water (see Section 3111B.3 c) for all operations. Check reagent-grade acids
used for preservation, extraction, an d digestion for purity. If excessive metal concentrations are
found, purify the acids by distillation or use ultra-pure acids. Inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS) may require use of ultra-pure acids and reagents to avoid measurable
contam ination. Process blanks through all digestion and filtration steps and evaluate blank
results relative to corresponding sample results. Either apply corrections to sample results or take
other corrective actions as necessary or appropriate. 
3030  B.        Filtration for Dissolved and Suspended MetalsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Filtration Procedures
 If dissolved or suspended metals (see Section 3010A ) are to be determined, filter sample at
time of collection using a preconditioned plastic filtering device with either vacuum or pressure,
containing a filter support of plast ic or fluorocarbon, through a prewashed ungridded 0.4- to
0.45-µm-pore-diam membrane filter (polycarbonate or cellulose esters). Before use filter a blank
consisting of metal-free (deionized) water to insure freedom from contamination. Precondition
filter and filter device by rinsing with 50 mL deionized water. If the filter blank contains
significant metals concentrations, soak membrane filters in approximately 0.5 N HCl or 1 N
HNO3 (recommended for electrothermal and ICP-MS analyses) and rinse with deionize d water
before use. 
Before filtering, centrifuge highly turbid samples in acid-washed fluorocarbon or
high-density plastic tubes to reduce loading on filters. Stirred, pressure filter units foul less
readily than vacuum filters; filter at a pressure of 70  to 130 kPa. After filtration acidify filtrate to
pH 2 with conc HNO3 and store until analyses can be performed. If a precipitate forms on
acidification, digest acidified filtrate before analysis as directed (see Section 3030E ). Retain
filter and digest it  for direct determination of suspended metals. 
If it is not possible to field-filter the sample without contaminating it, obtain sample in an
‘‘unpreserved’’ bottle as above and promptly cool to 4°C. Do not acid-preserve the sample.
Then, without delay, f ilter sample under cleaner conditions in the laboratory. 
Test pH of a portion of aqueous sample upon receipt in the laboratory to ensure that the
sample has been properly filtered and acid-preserved.1 
NOTE:  Different filters display different sorption an d filtration characteristics2; for trace
analysis, test filter and filtration sytem to verify complete recovery of metals. 
If suspended metals (see Section 3010A ) are to be determined, filter sample as above for
dissolved metals, but do not centrifuge bef ore filtration. Retain filter and digest it for direct
determination of suspended metals. Record sample volume filtered and include a filter in
determination of the blank. 
CAUTION : Do not use perchloric acid to digest membrane filters . (See Section 3030H  for
more information on handling HClO4). 
2.  References
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Sample Preparation Procedure for
Spectrochemical Determination of Total Recoverable Elements, Method 200.2.
Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
         2.    HOROWITZ, A.J. , K.R. LUM, J.R. GARBARINO, G.E.M. HALL, C. LEMIEUX & C.R. DEMAS.
1996. Problems with using filtration to define dissolved trace element concentrations in
natural water samples. Environ. Sci. Technol.  30, 954.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3030  C.        Treatment for Acid-Extractable Metals
 Extractable metals (see Section 3010A ) are lightly adsorbed on particulate material. Because
some sample digestion may be unavoidable use rigidly controlled conditions to obtain
meaningful and reprod ucible results. Maintain constant sample volume, acid volume, and contact
time. Express results as extractable metals and specify extraction conditions. 
At collection, acidify entire sample with 5 mL conc HNO3/L sample. To prepare sample, mix
well, transf er 100 mL to a beaker or flask, and add 5 mL 1 + 1 high-purity HCl. Heat 15 min on a
steam bath. Filter through a membrane filter (preconditioned as in Section 3030B ) and carefully
transfer filtrate to a tared volumetric flask. Adjust volume to 100 mL with  metal-free water, mix,
and analyze. If volume is greater than 100 mL, determine volume to nearest 0.1 mL by weight,
analyze, and correct final concentration measurement by multiplying by the dilution factor (final
volume ÷ 100). 
3030  D.        Digestion for Metals
 To reduce interference by organic matter and to convert metals associated with particulates
to a form (usually the free metal) that can be determined by atomic absorption spectrometry or
inductively-coupled plasma sp ectroscopy, use one of the digestion techniques presented below.
Use the least rigorous digestion method required to provide acceptable and consistent recovery
compatible with the analytical method and the metal being analyzed.1-3 
1.  Selection of Acid
 Nitric acid will digest most samples adequately ( Section 3030E ). Nitrate is an acceptable
matrix for both flame and electrothermal atomic absorption and the preferred matrix for
ICP-MS.4 Some samples may require addition of perchlo ric, hydrochloric, hydrofluoric, or
sulfuric acid for complete digestion. These acids may interfere in the analysis of some metals
and all provide a poorer matrix for both electrothermal and ICP-MS analysis. Confirm metal
recovery for each digestion and an alytical procedure used. Use Table 3030:I  as a guide in
determining which acids (in addition to HNO3) to use for complete digestion. As a general rule,
HNO3 alone is adequate for clean samples or easily oxidized materials; HNO3-H2SO4 or
HNO3-HCl digestion is adequate for readily oxidizable organic matter; HNO3-HClO4 or
HNO3-HClO4-HF digestion is necessary for difficult-to-oxidize organic matter or minerals
containing silicates. Although dry ashing is not generally recommended because of the loss of
many vol atile elements, it may be helpful if large amounts of organic matter are present. 
2.  Digestion Procedures
Dilute samples with Ag concentrations greater than 1 mg/L to contain less than 1 mg Ag/L
for flame atomic absorption methods and 25 µg/L or less for electrothermal analysis.2,5,6 ToStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationaddress problems with silver halide solubility i n HNO3, digest using method 3030F.3 b.
Report digestion technique used.
Acid digestion techniques ( Section 3030E  through I) generally yield comparable precision
and bias for most sample types that are totally digested by the technique. Because acids used in
digestion will add metals to the samples and blanks, minimize the volume of acids used.
Because the acid digestion techniques ( Section 3030E  and F) normally are not total
digestions, the microwave digestion procedure ( Section 3030K ) may be used as an alte rnative.
The microwave method is a closed-vessel procedure and thus is expected to provide improved
precision when compared with hot-plate techni ques. Microwave digestion is recommended for
samples being analyzed by ICP-MS. The microwave digestion method i s recommended for the
analysis of Ag, Al, As, Ba, Be, Ca, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, Pb, Sb, Se, Tl,
V, and Zn. Microwave digestion may be acceptable for additional analytes provided its
performance for those elements is validated.
Suggeste d sample volumes are indicated below for flame atomic absorption spectrometry.
Lesser volumes, to a minimum of 5 mL, are appropriate for graphite furnace, ICP, and ICP-MS.
Do not subsample volumes less than 5 mL, especially when particulates are present. I nstead
dilute samples with elevated analyte concentr ations after digestion. If the recommended volume
exceeds digestion vessel capacity, add sample as evaporation proceeds. For samples containing
particulates, wide-bore pipets maybe useful for volume measu rement and transfer.
When samples are concentrated during digestion (e.g., >100mL sample used) determine
metal recovery for each matrix digested, to verify method validity. Using larger samples will
require additional acid, which also would increase the co ncentration of impurities.
Estimated Metal
Concentration
mg/LSample Volume*
mL
<0.1 1000
0.1–10   100
10–100+     10
*For flame atomic abs orption spectrometry.
Report results as follows:
where:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation    A = concentration of metal in digested solution, mg/L,
    B = final volume of digested solution, mL, and
    C = sample size, mL.
Prepare solid samples or liquid sludges with high solids contents on a weight basis. Mix
sample and transfer a suitable amount (typically 1 g of a sludge with 15% total solids) directly
into a preweighed digestion vessel. Reweigh and calculate weight of sample. Proceed with one
of the digestion techniques presented below. However, as these digestion methods are
predominantly for dissolved and extractable metals in aqueous samples, other approaches may be
more appropriate for solid samples. For complete mineralization of solid samples, consult
methods available elsewhere.1,4,6,7 Report results on wet- or dry-weight basis as follows:
where:
    A = concentration of metal in digested solution, mg/L,
    B = final volume of digested solution, mL, and
    D = total solids, % (see Section 2540G ).
Always prepare acid blanks for each type of digestion performed. Although it is always best
to eliminate all relevant sources of contamination, a reagent blank prepared with the same acids
and subjected to the same digestion procedure as the sample can correc t for impurities present in
acids and reagent water. However, blank correction is not recommended for any other sources of
contamination such as impurities adsorbed on glassware.
3.  References
         1.    BOUMANS, P.W.J.M. , ed. 1987. Inductively Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy,
Part II: Applications and Fundamentals. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1992. Test Methods for Evaluatin g Solid
Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods, SW-846, 3rd ed. Update 1, Methods 3005A,
3010A, 3020A & 3050A. Off. Solid Waste & Emergency Response, Washington, D.C.
         3.    HOENIG, M. & A.M. DE KERSABIEC.  1996. Sample preparation steps for analysis by
atomic s pectroscopy methods: Present status. Spectrochim. Acta.  B51:1297.
         4.    JARVIS, K.E., A.L. GRAY & R.S. HOUK,  eds. 1992. Sample preparation for ICP-MS.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationChapter 7 in Handbook of Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry. Blackie,
Glasgow & London, U.K.
         5.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Sample Preparation Procedure for
Spectrochemical Determination of Total Recoverable Elements, Method 200.2.
Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
         6.    KINGSTON, H.M. & S. HASWELL , eds. 1997. Microwave Enhanced Chemistry:
Fundamentals, Sample Preparation and A pplications. American Chemical Soc.,
Washington, D.C.
         7.    BOCK, R.  1979. A Handbook of Decomposition Methods in Analytical Chemistry.
Blackie, Glasgow, U.K. 
3030  E.        Nitric Acid Digestion
 Because of the wide variation in concentration levels detected by various instrumental
techniques and the need to deal adequately with sources of contamination at trace levels, this
method presents one approach for high-level analytes (>0.1 mg/L) and another for trace levels
(≤0.1 mg/L). 
1.  Digestion for Flame Atomic Absorption and High-Level Concentrations
a. Apparatus:
1)  Hot plate.  
2)  Conical (erlenmeyer) flasks,  125-mL, or Griffin beakers,  150-mL, acid-washed and rinsed
with water. 
3)  Volumetric flasks,  100-mL. 
4)  Watch glasses,  ribbed and unribbed. 
b.  Reagent:
 Nitric acid, HNO3, conc, analytical or trace-metals grade. 
c.  Procedure:  Transfer a measured volume (100 mL recommended) of well-mixed,
acid-preserved sample appropriate for the expected metals concentrations to a flask or beaker
(see Section 3030D  for sample volume). In a hood, add 5 mL conc HNO3. If a beaker is used,
cover with a ribbed watch glass to minimize contamination. Boiling chips, glass beads, or
Hengar granules may be added to aid boiling and minimize spatter when high concentration
levels (>10 mg/L) are being determined. Bring to a slow boil and eva porate on a hot plate to the
lowest volume possible (about 10 to 20 mL) before precipitation occurs. Continue heating and
adding conc HNO3 as necessary until digestion is complete as shown by a light-colored, clear
solution. Do not let sample dry during di gestion.
 Wash down flask or beaker walls and watch glass cover (if used) with metal-free water andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthen filter if necessary (see Section 3030B ). Transfer filtrate to a 100-mL volumetric flask with
two 5-mL portions of water, adding these rinsings to the v olumetric flask. Cool, dilute to mark,
and mix thoroughly. Take portions of this solution for required metal determinations. 
2.  Digestion for Trace-Level ( ≤0.1 mg/L) Concentrations for ICP and ICP-MS1
a.  Apparatus:
1)  Block heater,  dry, with temperature control. 
2)  Polypropylene tubes *#(68) , graduated, round-bottom tubes with caps, 17 × 100 mm,
acid-washed and rinsed with metal-free water.  Preferably use tubes that simultaneously match
the analysis instrument autosampler and the block digester. A fit with the centr ifuge is secondary
but also desirable. 
3)  Pipetters,  assorted sizes or adjustable. 
4)  Pipet tips . 
5)  Centrifuge. 
b.  Reagent:
 Nitric acid, HNO3, conc, double distilled.† #(69)  
c.  Procedure:  Soak new polypropylene tubes and caps overnight or for several days in 2 N
HNO3. Triple rinse with metal-free water, and preferably dry in poly rackets or baskets in a
low-temperature oven overnight. Store cleaned tubes in plastic bags befo re use. Pipet tips also
may need to be cleaned; evaluate before use.
 Pipet 10 mL well-mixed, acid-preserved sample into a precleaned, labeled tube with a
macropipet. With a minimum volume change (<0.5 mL), add appropriate amount of analyte for
matrix fort ified samples. With a pipet, add 0.5 mL conc HNO3 (or 1.0 mL 1 + 1 HNO3) to all
samples, blanks, standards, and quality control samples. 
Place tubes in block heater in a hood and adjust temperature to 105°C. Drape caps over each
tube to allow escape of ac id vapors while preventing contamination. NOTE:  Do not screw on caps
at this time. Digest samples for a minimum of 2 h. Do not let samples boil. Add more conc nitric
acid as necessary until digestion is complete by observation of a clear solution. 
Remove tubes from heat and cool. Dilute back to original 10 mL volume with metal-free
water. Adjust over-volume samples to next convenient gradation for calculations and note
volume. (Apply concentration correction from Section 3030D .) If tubes contain particulat es,
centrifuge and decant clear portion into another precleaned tube. Tighten screw caps and store at
4°C until ready for analysis. 
3.  Reference
         1.    JARVIS, K.E., A.L. GRAY & R.S. HOUK,  eds. 1992. Sample preparation for ICP-MS.
Chapter 7 in Handbook of Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry. Blackie &
Son, Ltd., Glasgow & London, U.K.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3030  F.        Nitric Acid-Hydrochloric Acid Digestion
1.  Apparatus
 See Section 3030E.1 a. The following also may be needed: 
Steam bath.  
2.  Reagents
a.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc, analytical grade or better (see Section 3030E ).
b.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 1 + 1.
c.  Nitric acid , HNO3, 1 + 1.
3.  Procedure
a.  Total HNO3/HCl: Transfer a measured volume of well-mixed, acid-preserved sample
appropriate for the expected metals concentrations to a flask or beaker (see Section 3030D  for
sample volume). In a hood add 3 mL conc HNO3 and cover with a ribbed watch glass. Place
flask or beaker on a hot plate and cautiously evaporate to less than 5 mL, making certain that
sample does not boil and that no area of the bottom of the container is allowed to go dry. Cool.
Rinse down walls of beaker and watch glass with a m inimum of metal-free water and add 5 mL
conc HNO3. Cover container with a nonribbed watch glass and return to hot plate. Increase
temperature of hot plate so that a gentle refl ux action occurs. Continue heating, adding additional
acid as necessary, until d igestion is complete (generally indicated when the digestate is light in
color or does not change in appearance with continued refluxing). Cool. Add 10 mL 1 + 1 HCl
and 15 mL water per 100 mL anticipated final volume. Heat for an additional 15 min to disso lve
any precipitate or residue. Cool, wash down beaker walls and watch glass with water, filter to
remove insoluble material that could clog the nebulizer (see Section 3030B ), and transfer filtrate
to a 100-mL volumetric flask with rinsings. Alternatively centrifuge or let settle overnight.
Adjust to volume and mix thoroughly.
b.  Recoverable HNO3/HCl: For this less rigorous digestion procedure, transfer a measured
volume of well-mixed, acid-preserved sample to a flask or beaker. Add 2 mL 1 + 1 HNO3 and 10
mL 1 + 1 HCl and cover with a ribbed watch glass. Heat on a steam bath or hot plate until
volume has been reduced to near 25 mL, making certain sample does not boil. Cool and filter to
remove insoluble material or alternatively centrifuge or let settle overnight. Quantitatively
transfer sample to volumetric flask, adjust volu me to 100 mL, and mix.
 For trace-level digestion, use precautionary measures similar to those detailed in Section
3030E . Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3030  G.        Nitric Acid-Sulfuric Acid Digestion
1.  Apparatus
 See Section 3030E.1 a. 
2.  Reagents
a.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc. (See Section 3030E  for acid grades.)
b.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc.
3.  Procedure
 Transfer a measured volume of well-mixed, acid-preserved sample appropriate for the
expected metals concentrations to a flask or beaker (see Section 3030D  for sample volume). Add
5 mL conc HNO3 and cover with a ribbed watch glass. Bring to  slow boil on hot plate and
evaporate to 15 to 20 mL. Add 5 mL conc HNO3 and 10 mL conc H2SO4, cooling flask or
beaker between additions. Evaporate on a hot plate until dense white fumes of SO3 just appear.
If solution does not clear, add 10 mL conc HNO3 and repeat evaporation to fumes of SO3. Heat
to remove all HNO3 before continuing treatment. All HNO3 will be removed when the solution
is clear and no brownish fumes are evident. Do not let sample dry during digestion. 
Cool and dilute to about 50 mL with water. Heat to almost boiling to dissolve slowly soluble
salts. Filter if necessary, then complete procedure as directed in Section 3030E.1 c beginning
with, ‘‘Transfer filtrate . . .’’ 
3030  H.        Nitric Acid-Perchloric Acid Digestion
1.  Apparatus
 See Section 3030E.1 a. The following also are needed: 
a.  Safety shield.
b.  Safety goggles.
c.  Watch glasses.
2.  Reagents
a.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
b.  Perchloric acid,  HClO4.
c.  Ammonium acetate solution:  Dissolve 500 g NH4C2H3O2 in 600 mL water.
3.  ProcedureStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation CAUTION : Heated mixtures of HClO4 and organic matter may explode violently. Avoid this
hazard by taking the following precautions: (a) do not add HClO4 to a hot solution containing
organic matter; (b) always pretreat samples containing org anic matter with HNO3 before adding
HClO4; (c) avoid repeated fuming with HClO4 in ordinary hoods (For routine operations, use a
water pump attached to a glass fume eradicator. Stainless steel fume hoods with adequate water
washdown facilities are availabl e commercially and are acceptable for use with HClO4); and (d)
never let samples being digested with HClO4 evaporate to dryness. 
Transfer a measured volume of well-mixed, acid-preserved sample appropriate for the
expected metals concentrations to a flask or beaker (see Section 3030D  for sample volume). In a
hood add 5 mL conc HNO3 and cover with a ribbed watch glass. Evaporate sample to 15 to 20
mL on a hot plate. Add 10 mL each of conc HNO3 and HClO4, cooling flask or beaker between
additions. Evaporate g ently on a hot plate until dense white fumes of HClO4 just appear. If
solution is not clear, keep solution just boiling until it clears. If necessary, add 10 mL conc
HNO3 to complete digestion. Cool, dilute to about 50 mL with water, and boil to expel any
chlorine or oxides of nitrogen. Filter, then complete procedure as directed in 3030E.1 c beginning
with, ‘‘Transfer filtrate . . .’’ 
If lead is to be determined in the presen ce of high amounts of sulfate (e.g., determination of
Pb in power plant fly ash sa mples), dissolve PbSO4 precipitate as follows: Add 50 mL
ammonium acetate solution to flask or beaker in which digestion was carried out and heat to
incipient boiling. Rotate container occasionally to wet all interior surfaces and dissolve any
deposited re sidue. Reconnect filter and slowly draw so lution through it. Transfer filtrate to a
100-mL volumetric flask, cool, dilute to mark, mix thoroughly, and set aside for determination of
lead. 
3030  I.        Nitric Acid-Perchlo ric Acid-Hydrofluoric Acid Digestion
1.  Apparatus
a.  Hot plate.
b.  TFE beakers,  250-mL, acid-washed and rinsed with water.
c.  Volumetric flasks,  100-mL, polypropylene or other suitable plastic.
2.  Reagents
a.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc and 1 + 1.
b.  Perchloric acid,  HClO4.
c.  Hydrofluoric acid,  HF, 48 to 51%.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3.  Procedure
 CAUTION : See precautions for using HClO4 in 3030H; handle HF with extreme care and
provide adequate ventilation, especially for the heated solution. Avoid all contact with exposed
skin. Provide medical attention for HF burns. 
Transfer a m easured volume of well-mixed, acid-preserved sample appropriate for the
expected metals concentrations into a 250-mL TFE beaker (see Section 3030D  for sample
volume). Evaporate on a hot plate to 15 to 20 mL. Add 12 mL conc HNO3 and evaporate to near
drynes s. Repeat HNO3 addition and evaporation. Let solution cool, add 20 mL HClO4 and 1 mL
HF, and boil until solution is clear and white fumes of HClO4 have appeared. Cool, add about 50
mL water, filter, and proceed as directed in Section 3030E.1 c beginning wit h, ‘‘Transfer filtrate .
. .’’ 
3030  J.        Dry Ashing
 The procedure appears in the Eighteenth Edition of Standard Methods . It has been deleted
from subsequent editions. 
3030  K.        Microwave-Assisted Digestion
1.  Apparatus
a.  Microwave unit  with programmable power (minimum 545 W) to within ± 10 W of
required power, having a corrosion-resistant, well-ventilated cavity and having all electronics
protected against corrosion for safe operation. Use a unit having a rotating tu rntable with a
minimum speed of 3 rpm to insure homogeneous distribution of microwave radiation. Use only
laboratory-grade microwave equipment and closed digestion containers with pressure relief that
are specifically designed for hot acid.1
b.  Vessels:  Construction requires an inner liner of perfluoroalkoxy (PFA) TeflonTM,*#(70)
other TFE, or composite fluorinated pol ymers,† #(71)  capable of withstanding pressures of at
least 760 ± 70 kPa (110 ± 10 psi), and capable of controlled pressure relief at  the manufacturer’s
maximum pressure rating.
 Acid wash all digestion vessels and rinse with water (¶ 2a). For new vessels or wh en
changing between high- and low-concentration samples, clean by leaching with hot‡ #(72)
hydrochloric acid (1:1) for a minimum of 2  h and then with hot nitric acid (1:1) for a minimum
of 2 h; rinse with water and dry in a clean environment. Use this procedure whenever the
previous use of digestion vessels is unknown or cross-contamination from vessels is suspected. 
c.  Temperature feedback control system , using shielded thermocouple, fiber-optic probe, or
infrared detector.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationd.  Bottles,  polyethylene, 125-mL, with caps.
e.  Thermometer,  accurate to ± 0.1°C.
f.  Balance,  large-capacity (1500 g), accurate to 0.1 g.
g.  Filtration or centrifuge equipment  (optional).
h.  Plastic container  with cover, 1-L, preferably made of PFA TeflonTM§.#(73)
2.  Reagents
a.  Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
b.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc, sub-boiling distilled. Non-sub-boiling acids can be used if they
are shown not to contribute blanks.
3.  Calibration of Microwave Unit
 NOTE:  For microwave units equipped with temperature feedback electronic controls,
calibration of the microwave unit is not required provided performance specifications can be
duplicated. 
For cavity-type microwave equip ment, evaluate absolute power (watts) by measuring the
temperature rise in 1 kg water exposed to microwave radiation for a fixed time. With this
measurement, the relationship between available power (W) and the partial power setting (%) of
the unit can be estimated, and any absolute power in watts may be transferred from one unit to
another. The calibration format required depends on type of electronic system used by
manufacturer to provide partial microwave power. Few units have an accurate and precise lin ear
relationship between percent power settings and absorbed power. Where linear circuits have
been used, determine calibration curve by a three-point calibration method; otherwise, use the
multiple-point calibration method. 
a.  Three-point calibration method:  Measure power at 100% and 50% power using the
procedure described in ¶ 3c and  calculate power setting corresponding to required power in
watts as specified in the procedure from the two-point line. Measure absorbed po wer at the
calculated partial power setting. If the measured absorbed power does not correspond to the
calculated power within ± 10 W, use the multiple-point calibration method, ¶ 3b. Use this point
periodically to verify integrity of calibration.
b.  Multiple-point calibration method:  For each microwave unit, measure the following
power settings: 100, 99, 98, 97, 95, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50, and 40% using the procedure described in
¶ 3c. These data are clustered about the customary working power range s. Nonlinearity
commonly is encountered at the upper end of the calibration curve. If the unit’s electronics are
known to have nonlinear deviations in any region of proportional power control, make a set of
measurements that bracket the power to be used. T he final calibration point should be at the
partial power setting that will be used in the test. Check this setting periodically to evaluate the
integrity of the calibration. If a significant change (± 10 W) is detected, re-evaluate entire
calibration.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc. Equilibrate a large volume of water to room temperature (23 ± 2°C). Weigh 1 kg water
(1000 g ± 1 g) or measure (1000 mL ± 1 mL) into a plastic, not glass, container, and measure the
temperature to ± 0.1°C. Condition microwave unit by heating a glass b eaker with 500 to 1000
mL tap water at full power for 5 min with the exhaust fan on. Loosely cover plastic container to
reduce heat loss and place in normal sample path (at outer edge of rotating turntable); circulate
continuously through the microwave fie ld for 120 s at desired power setting with exhaust fan on
as it will be during normal operation. Remove plastic container and stir water vigorously. Use a
magnetic stirring bar inserted immediately after microwave irradiation; record maximum
temperature wi thin the first 30 s to ± 0.1°C. Use a new sample for each additional measurement.
If the water is reused, return both water and beaker to 23 ± 2°C. Make three measurements at
each power setting. When any part of the high-voltage circuit, power source, or c ontrol
components in the unit have been serviced or replaced, recheck calibration power. If power
output has changed by more than ± 10 W, re-evaluate entire calibration.
 Compute absorbed power by the following relationship: 
where: 
                  P =   apparent power  absorbed by sample, W, 
                  K =   conversion factor for thermochemical calories sec − 1 to watts (4.184), 
                Cp =   heat capacity, thermal capacity, or specific heat (cal g−1 °C−1) of water, 
                  m =   mass of water sample, g, 
              ∆T  =   final temperature minus initi al temperature, °C, and 
                  t =   time, s. 
For the experimental conditions of 120 s and 1 kg water ( Cp at 25°C  =  0.9997), the
calibration equation simplifies to: 
P = (∆T ) (34.85)
Stable line voltage within the manufacturer’s specification is necessary f or accurate and
reproducible calibration and operation. During measurement and operation it must not vary by
more than ± 2 V. A constant power supply may be necessary if line voltage is unstable. 
4.  Procedure
 CAUTION:  This method is designed for microwave digestion of waters only. It is not intended
for the digestion of solids, for which high concentrations of organic compounds may result in
high pressures and possibly unsafe conditions.  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCAUTI ON: As a safety measure, never mix different manufacturers’ vessels in the same
procedure. Vessels constructed differently will retain heat at different rates; control of heating
conditions assumes that all vessels have the same heat-transfer characteristi cs. Inspect
casements for cracks and chemical corrosion. Failure to maintain the vessels’ integrity may
result in catastrophic failure.  
Both prescription controls and performance controls are provided for this procedure.
Performance controls are the most general and most accurate. When equipment capability
permits, use the performance criterion. 
a.  Performance criterion:  The following procedure is based on heating acidified samples in
two stages where the first stage is to reach 160 ± 4° in 10 min and the second stage is to permit a
slow rise to 165 to 170°C during the second 10 min. This perfo rmance criterion is based on
temperature feedback control system capability that is implemented in various ways by different
manufacturers. Because the temperature of the acid controls the reaction, this is the essential
condition that will reproduce resul ts in this preparation method. Verification of temperature
conditions inside the vessel at these specific times is sufficient to verify the critical procedural
requirements.
b.  Prescription criterion:  For all PFA vessels without liners, a verified program that meets
the performance-based temperatur e-time profile is 545 W for 10 min followed by 344 W for 10
min using five single-wall PFA TeflonTMi#(74)  digestion vessels.2 Any ve rified program for a
given microwave unit depends on unit power and operational power settings, heating times,
number, type, and placement of digestion vessels within the unit, and sample and acid volumes.
The change in power, time, and temperature profile  is not directly proportional to the change in
the number of sample vessels. Any deviations from the verified program conditions will require
verification of the time-temperature profile to c onform to the given two-stage profile. This may
be done by labora tory personnel if suitable test equipment is available, or by the manufacturer of
the microwave equipment. 
c.  General conditions:  Weigh entire digestion vessel assembly to 0.1 g before use and record
(A). Accurately transfer 45 mL of well-shaken sample into the digestion vessel. Pipet 5 mL conc
HNO3 into each vessel. Attach all safety equipment required for appropriate and safe vessel
operation following manufacturer’s specifications. Tighten cap to manufacturer’s specifications.
Weigh each capped vessel to the nearest 0.1 g ( B).
 Place appropriate number of vessels evenly distributed in the carousel. Treat s ample blanks,
known additions, and duplicates in the same manner as samples. For prescription control only,
when fewer samples than the appropriate number are digested, fill remaining vessels with 45 mL
water and 5 mL conc HNO3 to obtain full complement of  vessels for the particular program
being used. 
Place carousel in unit and seat it carefully on turntable. Program microwave unit to heat
samples to 160 ± 4°C in 10 min and then, for the second stage, to permit a slow rise to 165 to
170°C for 10 min. Star t microwave generator, making sure that turntable is turning and thatStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationexhaust fan is on. 
At completion of the microwave program, let vessels cool for at least 5 min in the unit before
removal. Cool samples further outside the unit by removing the carousel  and letting them cool on
a bench or in a water bath. When cooled to room temperature, weigh each vessel (to 0.1 g) and
record weight ( C). 
If the net weight of sample plus acid decreased by more than 10%, discard sample. 
Complete sample preparation by ca refully uncapping and venting each vessel in a fume
hood. Follow individual manufacturer’s specifications  for relieving pressure in individual vessel
types. Transfer to acid-cleaned noncontaminating pl astic bottles. If the digested sample contains
particul ates, filter, centrifuge, or settle overnight and decant. 
5.  Calculations
a.  Dilution correction:  Multiply results by 50/45 or 1.11 to account for the dilution caused
by the addition of 5 mL acid to 45 mL sample.
b.  Discarding of sample:  To determine if the net weight of sample plus acid decreased by
more than 10% during the digestion process, use the following calculation
 
6.  Quality Control
 NOTE: When nitric acid digestion is used, recoveries of silver and antimony in some
matrices may be unacceptably low. Verify recoveries using appropriate known additions. 
Preferably include a quality-control sample in each loaded ca rousel. Prepare samples in
batches including preparation blanks, sample duplicates, and pre-digestion known additions.
Determine size of batch and frequency of quality-control samples by method of analysis and
laboratory practice. The power of the microwav e unit and batch size may prevent including one
or more of the quality-control samples in each carousel. Do not group quality-control samples
together but distribute them throughout the various carousels to give the best monitoring of
digestion. 
7.  References
         1.    KINGSTON, H.M. & S. HASWELL,  eds. 1997. Microwave Enhanced Chemistry:
Fundamentals, Sample Preparation and A pplications. American Chemical Soc.,
Washington, D.C.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1990. Microwave assiste d acid digestion
of aqueous samples and extracts. SW-846 Method 3015, Test Methods for Evaluating
Solid Waste. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3110        METALS BY ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROMETRY
 Because requirements for determining metals by atomic absorption spectrometry vary with
metal and/or concentration to be determined, the method is presented as follows: 
Section 3111 , Metals by Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrometry, encompasses: 
•  Determination of antimony, bismuth, cadmium, calcium, cesium, chromium, cobalt, copper,
gold, iridium, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, nickel, palladium, platinum,
potassium, rhodium, ruthenium, silver, sodium, strontium, thallium, tin, and zinc by direct
aspiration into an air-acetylene flame ( Section 3111B ), 
•  Determination of low concentrations of cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead,
manganese, nickel, silver, and zinc by chelation with ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
(APDC), extraction into methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK), and aspiration into an air-acetylene
flame ( Section 3111C ), 
•  Determination of aluminum, barium, beryllium, calcium, molybdenum, osmium, rhenium,
silicon, th orium, titanium, and vanadium by direct aspiration into a nitrous oxide-acetylene
flame ( Section 3111D ), and 
•  Determination of low concentrations of aluminum and beryllium by chelation with
8-hydroxyquinoline, extraction into MIBK, and aspiration into a  nitrous oxide-acetylene flame
(Section 3111E ). 
Section 3112  covers determination of mercury by the cold vapor technique. 
Section 3113  concerns determination of micro quantities of aluminum, antimony, arsenic,
barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, cobal t, copper, iron, lead, manganese, molybdenum,
nickel, selenium, silver, and tin by electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry. 
Section 3114  covers determination of arsenic and selenium by conversion to their hydrides
and aspiration into an argon-hydrog en or nitrogen-hydrogen flame. 
3111        METALS BY FLAME  ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROMETRY* #(75)
3111 A.        Introduction
1.  Principle
 In flame atomic absorption spectrometry, a sample is aspirated into a flame and atomized. A
light beam is directed through the flame, into a monochromator, and onto a detector thatStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmeasures the amount of light absorbed by the atomized elem ent in the flame. For some metals,
atomic absorption exhibits superior sensitivity over flame emission. Because each metal has its
own characteristic absorption wavelength, a source lamp composed of that element is used; this
makes the method relatively fr ee from spectral or radiation interferences. The amount of energy
at the characteristic wavelength absorbed in the flame is proportional to the concentration of the
element in the sample over a limited concentration range. Most atomic absorption instrument s
also are equipped for operation in an emission mode, which may provide better linearity for
some elements. 
2.  Selection of Method
 See Section 3110 . 
3.  Interferences
a.  Chemical interference:  Many metals can be determined by direct aspiration of sample
into an air-acetylene flame. The most troublesome type of interference is termed ‘‘chemical’’
and results from the lack of absorption by atoms bound in molecular comb ination in the flame.
This can occur when the flame is not hot enough to dissociate the molecules or when the
dissociated atom is oxidized immediately to a compound that will not dissociate further at the
flame temperature. Such interferences may be reduce d or eliminated by adding specific elements
or compounds to the sample solution. For example, the interference of phosphate in the
magnesium determination can be overcome by adding lanthanum. Similarly, introduction of
calcium eliminates silica interferenc e in the determination of manganese. However, silicon and
metals such as aluminum, barium, beryllium, and vanadium require the higher-temperature,
nitrous oxide-acetylene flame to dissociate their molecules. The nitrous oxide-acetylene flame
also can be us eful in minimizing certain types of chemical interferences encountered in the
air-acetylene flame. For example, the interference caused by high concentrations of phosphate in
the determination of calcium in the air-acetylene flame is reduced in the nitrous  oxide-acetylene
flame.
 MIBK extractions with APDC (see Section 3111C ) are particularly useful where a salt
matrix interferes, for example, in seawater. This procedure also concentrates the sample so that
the detection limits are extended. 
Brines and sea water can be analyzed by direct aspiration but sample dilution is
recommended. Aspiration of solutions containing hi gh concentrations of dissolved solids often
results in solids buildup on the burner head. This requires frequent shutdown of the flame and
cleaning of the burner head. Preferably use background correction when analyzing waters that
contain in excess of 1% solids, especially when the primary resonance line of the element of
interest is below 240 nm. Make more frequent recovery checks when analy zing brines and
seawaters to insure accurate results in these concentrated and complex matrices. 
Barium and other metals ionize in the flame, thereby reducing the ground state (potentially
absorbing) population. The addition of an excess of a cation (sodi um, potassium, or lithium)
having a similar or lower ionization potential will overcome this problem. The wavelength ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmaximum absorption for arsenic is 193.7 nm and for selenium 196.0 nm—wavelengths at which
the air-acetylene flame absorbs intensely. The  sensitivity for arsenic and selenium can be
improved by conversion to their gaseous hydrides and analyzing them in either a
nitrogen-hydrogen or an argon-hydrogen flame with a quartz tube (see Section 3114 ). 
b.  Background correction:  Molecular absorption and light scattering caused by solid
particles in the flame can cause erroneously high absorption values resulting in positive errors.
When such phenomena occur, use background correction to obtain accurate  values. Use any one
of three types of background correction: conti nuum-source, Zeeman, or Smith-Hieftje correction.
1)  Continuum-source background correction—A continuum-source background corrector
utilizes either a hydrogen-filled hollow cathode lamp with a metal cathode or a deuterium arc
lamp. When both the line source hollow-cathode lamp and the continuum source are placed in
the same optical path and are time-shared, the broadband background from the elemental signal
is subtracted electronically, and the resultant signal will be background-compensated. 
Both the hydrogen-filled hollow-cathode lamp and deuterium a rc lamp have lower intensities
than either the line source hollow-cathode lamp or electrodeless discharge lamps. To obtain a
valid correction, match the intensities of the continuum source with the line source
hollow-cathode or electrodeless discharge lamp . The matching may result in lowering the
intensity of the line source or increasing the slit width; these measures have the disadvantage of
raising the detection limit and possibly causing nonlinearity of the calibration curve. Background
correction using  a continuum source corrector is susceptible to interference from other absorbing
lines in the spectral bandwidth. Miscorrection occurs from significant atomic absorption of the
continuum source radiation by elements other than that being determined. When a line source
hollow-cathode lamp is used without background correction, the presence of an absorbing line
from another element in the spectral bandwidth will not cause an interference unless it overlaps
the line of interest. 
Continuum-source background c orrection will not remove direct absorption spectral overlap,
where an element other than that being determined is capable of absorbing the line radiation of
the element under study. 
2)  Zeeman background correction—This correction is based on the principle that a magnetic
field splits the spectral line into two linearly polarized light beams parallel and perpendicular to
the magnetic field. One is called the pi ( π) component and the  other the sigma ( σ) component.
These two light beams have exactly the same wavelength and differ only in the plane of
polarization. The π line will be absorbed by both the atoms of the element of interest and by the
background caused by broadband absorpti on and light scattering of the sample matrix. The σ line
will be absorbed only by the background. 
Zeeman background correction provides accurate background correction at much higher
absorption levels than is possible with continuum source background corre ction systems. It also
virtually eliminates the possibility of error from structured background. Because no additional
light sources are required, the alignment and intensity limitations encountered using continuum
sources are eliminated. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationDisadvantages of  the Zeeman method include reduced sensitivity for some elements, reduced
linear range, and a ‘‘rollover’’ effect whereby the absorbance of some elements begins to
decrease at high concentrations, resulting in a two-sided calibration curve. 
3)  Smith-Hieftje background correction—This correction is based on the principle that
absorbance measured for a specific element is reduced as the current to the hollow cathode lamp
is increased while absorption of nonspecific absorbing substances remai ns identical at all current
levels. When this method is applied, the absorbance at a high-current mode is subtracted from
the absorbance at a low-current mode. Under these conditions, any absorbance due to
nonspecific background is subtracted out and corre cted for. 
Smith-Hieftje background correction provides a number of advantages over
continuum-source correction. Accurate correction at higher absorbance levels is possible and
error from structured background is virtually eliminated. In some cases, spectr al interferences
also can be eliminated. The usefulness of Smith -Hieftje background correction with electrodeless
discharge lamps has not yet been established. 
4.  Sensitivity, Detection Li mits, and Optimum Concentration Ranges
 The sensitivity of flame atomic absorption spectrometry is defined as the metal
concentration that produces an absorption of 1% (an absorbance of approximately 0.0044). The
instrument d etection limit is defined here as the concentration that produces absorption
equivalent to twice the magnitude of the background fluctuation. Sensitivity and detection limits
vary with the instrument, the element determined, the complexity of the matrix, a nd the
technique selected. The optimum concentration range usually starts from the concentration of
several times the detection limit and extends to the concentration at which the calibration curve
starts to flatten. To achieve best results, use concentrat ions of samples and standards within the
optimum concentration range of the spectrometer. See Table 3111:I  for indication of
concentration ranges measurable with conventional atomization. In many instances the
concentration range shown in Table 3111:I  may be extended downward either by scale
expansion or by integrating the absorption signal over a long time. The range may be extended
upward by dilution, using a less sensitive wavelength, rotating the burner head, or utilizing a
microprocessor to linearize t he calibration curve at high concentrations. 
5.  Preparation of Standards
 Prepare standard solutions of known metal concentrations in water with a matrix similar to
the sample. Use standards that bracket expected sample concentration and are within the
method’s working range. Very dilute standards  should be prepared daily from stock solutions in
concentrations greater than 500 mg/L. Stock sta ndard solutions can be obtained from several
commercial sources. They also can be prepared from National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) reference  materials or by procedures outlined in the following sections. 
For samples containing high and variable concentrations of matrix materials, make the major
ions in the sample and the dilute standard similar. If the sample matrix is complex and
components cannot be matched accurately with standards, use the method of standard additions,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSection 3113B.4 d2), to correct for matrix effects. If digestion is used, carry standards through
the same digestion procedure used for samples. 
6.  Apparatus
a.  Atomic absorption spectrometer,  consisting of a light source emitting the line spectrum of
an element (hollow-cathode lamp or electrodeless discharge lamp), a device for vaporizing the
sample (usually a flame), a means of isolating an absorption line  (monochromator or filter and
adjustable slit), and a photoelectric detector with its associated electronic amplifying and
measuring equipment.
b.  Burner:  The most common type of burner is a premix, which introduces the spray into a
condensing chamber for removal of large droplets. The burner may be fitted with a conventional
head containing a single slot; a three-slot Boling head, which may be  preferred for direct
aspiration with an air-acetylene flame; or a special head for use with nitrous oxide and acetylene.
c.  Readout : Most instruments are equipped with either a digital or null meter readout
mechanism. Most modern instruments are equipped with microprocessors or stand-alone control
computers capable of integrating absorption signals over time and linearizi ng the calibration
curve at high concentrations.
d.  Lamps:  Use either a hollow-cathode lamp or an electrodeless discharge lamp (EDL). Use
one lamp for each element being measured. Multi-element hollow-cathode lamps generally
provide lower sensitivity than single-element lamps. EDLs take a longer time to warm up and
stabilize.
e.  Pressure-reducing valves:  Maintain supplies of fuel and oxidant at pressures somewhat
higher than the controlled operating pressure of the instrument by using suitable reducing valves.
Use a separate reducing valve for each gas.
f.  Vent:  Place a vent about 15 to 30 cm above the burner to remove fumes and vapors from
the flame. This precaution protects laborator y personnel from toxic vapors, protects the
instrument from corrosive vapors, and prevents flame stability from being a ffected by room
drafts. A damper or variable-speed blower is desirable for modulating air flow and preventing
flame disturbance. Select blower size to pr ovide the air flow recommended by the instrument
manufacturer. In laboratory locations with heavy parti culate air pollution, use clean laboratory
facilities ( Section 3010C ).
7.  Quality Assurance/Quality Control
 Some data typical of the precision and bias  obtainable with the methods discussed are
presented in Table 3111:II  and  Table 3111:III . 
Analyze a blank between sample or standard readings to verify baseline stability . Rezero
when necessary. 
To one sample out of every ten (or one sample from each group of samples if less than ten
are being analyzed) add a known amount of the metal of interest and reanalyze to confirm
recovery. The amount of metal added should be appro ximately equal to the amount found. IfStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationlittle metal is present add an amount close to the middle of the linear range of the test. Recovery
of added metal should be between 85 and 115%. 
Analyze an additional standard solution after every ten samples or wit h each batch of
samples, whichever is less, to confirm that the test is in control. Recommended concentrations of
standards to be run, limits of acceptability, and reported single-operator precision data are listed
in Table 3111:III . 
See Section 3020  for additional recommended quality control procedures. 
8.  References
         1.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1986. Annual Book of ASTM
Standards, Volume 11.01, Water and Environmental Technology. American Soc.
Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
         2.    U.S. DEPARTMENT HEALTH, EDUCATION AND W ELFARE.  1970. Water Metals No. 6,
Study No. 37. U.S. Public Health Serv. Publ. No. 2029, Cincinnati, Ohio.
         3.    U.S. DEPARTMENT HEALTH, EDUCATION AND WELFARE.  1968. Water Metals No. 4,
Study No. 30. U.S. Public Health Serv. Publ. No. 999-UTH-8, Cincinna ti, Ohio.
         4.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1983. Methods for Chemical Analysis of
Water and Wastes. Cincinnati, Ohio.
9.  Bibliography
 KAHN, H.L.  1968. Principles and Practice of Atomic Absorption. Advan. Chem. Ser. No. 73, Div.
Water, Air & Waste Chemistry, American Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
 RAMIRIZ-MUNOZ, J.  1968. Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy and Analysis by  Atomic Absorption
Flame Photometry. American Elsevi er Publishing Co., New York, N.Y.
 SLAVIN, W.  1968. Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
 PAUS, P.E.  1971. The application of atomic absorption spectroscopy to the analysis of  natural
waters. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  10:69.
 EDIGER, R.D.  1973. A review of water analysis by atomic absorption. Atomic Absorption
Newsletter  12:151.
 PAUS, P.E.  1973. Determination of some heavy metals in seawater by atomic absorption
spectroscop y. Fresenius Zeitschr. Anal. Chem.  264:118.
 BURRELL, D.C.  1975. Atomic Spectrometric Analysis of Heavy-Metal Pollutants in Water. Ann
Arbor Science Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich. 
3111 B.        Direct Air-Acetylene Flame Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is applicable to the determination of antimony, bismuth, cadmium, calcium,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcesium, chromium, cobalt, copper, gold, iridium, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese,
nickel, palladium, platinum, potassium, rhodium, ru thenium, silver, sodium, strontium, thallium,
tin, and zinc. 
2.  Apparatus
 Atomic absorption spectrometer and associated equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 . Use
burner head recommended by the manufacturer. 
3.  Reagents
a.  Air,  cleaned and dried through a suitable filter to remove oil, water, and other foreign
substances. The source may be a compressor or commercially bottled gas.
b.  Acetylene,  standard commercial grade. Acetone, which always is present in acetylene
cylinders, can be prevented from entering and damaging the burner head by replacing a cylinder
when its pressure has fallen to 689 kPa (100 psi) acetylene.
 CAUTION : Acetylene gas represents an explosive hazard in the laboratory. Follow
instrument manufacturer’s directions in plumbi ng and using this gas. Do not allow gas contact
with copper, brass with >65% copper, silver, or liquid mercury; do not use copper or brass
tubing, regulators, or fittings. 
c.  Metal-free water:  Use metal-free water for preparing all reagents and calibration
standards and as dilution water. Prepare metal-free water by deionizing tap water and/or by using
one of the following processes, depending on the metal concentration i n the sample: single
distillation, redistillation, or sub-boiling. Always check deionized or distilled water to determine
whether the element of interest is present in trace amounts. ( NOTE:  If the source water contains
Hg or other volatile metals, single- or redistilled water may not be suitable for trace analysis
because these metals distill over with the distilled water. In such cases, use sub-boiling to
prepare metal-free water).
d.  Calcium solution:  Dissolve 630 mg calcium carbonate, CaCO3, in 50 mL of 1 + 5 HCl. If
necessary, boil gently to obtain complete solution. Cool and dilute to 1000 mL with water.
e.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 1%, 10%, 20% (all v/v), 1 + 5, 1 + 1, and conc.
f.  Lanthanum solution:  Dissolve 58.65 g lanthanum oxide, La2O3, in 250 mL conc HCl. Add
acid slowly until the material is dissolved and dilute to 1000 mL with water.
g.  Hydrogen peroxide,  30%.
h.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, 2% (v/v), 1 + 1, and conc.
i.  Aqua regia:  Add 3 volumes conc HCl to 1 volume conc HNO3.
j.  Standard metal solutions:  Prepare a series of standard metal solutions in the optimum
concentration range by appropriate dilution of the following stock metal solutions with water
containing 1.5 mL conc HNO3/L. Stock standard solutions are available from a number of
commercial suppliers. Alternatively, prepare as described below. Thoroughly dry reagents beforeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationuse. In general, use reagents of the highest purity. For hydrates, use fresh reagents.
1)  Antimony:  Dissolve 0.2669 g K(SbO)C4H4O6 in water, add 10 mL 1 + 1 HCl and dilute
to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Sb. 
2)  Bismuth:  Dissolve 0.100 g bismuth metal in a minimum volume of 1 + 1 HNO3. Dilute to
1000 mL with 2% (v/v) HNO3;  1.00 mL = 100 µg Bi. 
3)  Cadmium:  Dissolve 0.100 g cadmium metal in 4 mL conc HNO3. Add 8.0 mL conc
HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Cd. 
4)  Calcium:  Suspend 0.2497 g CaCO3 (dried at 180° for 1 h before weighing) in water and
dissolve cautiously with a minimum amount of 1 + 1 HNO3. Add 10.0 mL conc HNO3 and
dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Ca. 
5)  Cesium:  Dissolve 0.1267 g cesium chloride, CsCl, in 1000 mL water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg
Cs. 
6)  Chromium:  Dissolve 0.1923 g CrO3 in water. When solution is complete, acidify with 10
mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Cr. 
7)  Cobalt:  Dissolve 0.1000 g cobalt metal in a minimum amount of 1 + 1 HNO3. Add 10.0
mL 1 + 1 HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Co. 
8)  Copper:  Dissolve 0.100 g copper metal in 2 mL conc HNO3, add 10.0 mL conc HNO3
and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Cu. 
9)  Gold:  Dissolve 0.100 g gold metal in a minimum volume of aqua regia. Evaporate to
dryness, dissolve residue in 5 mL conc HCl, cool, and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL =
100 µg Au. 
10)  Iridium:  Dissolve 0.1147 g ammonium chloroiridate, (NH4)2IrCl6, in a minimum
volume of 1% (v/v) HCl and dilute to 100 mL with 1% (v/v) HCl; 1.00 mL = 500 µg Ir. 
11)  Iron:  Dissolve 0.100 g iron wire in a mixture of 10 mL 1 + 1 HCl and 3 mL conc HNO3.
Add 5 mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Fe. 
12)  Lead:  Dissolve 0.1598 g lead nitrate, Pb(NO3)2, in a minimum amount of 1 + 1 HNO3,
add 10 mL conc HNO3, and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Pb. 
13)  Lithium:  Dissolve 0.5323 g lithium carbonate, Li2CO3, in a minimum volume of 1 + 1
HNO3. Add 10.0 mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Li. 
14)  Magnesium:  Dissolve 0.1658 g MgO in a minimum amount of 1 + 1 HNO3. Add 10.0
mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Mg. 
15)  Manganese:  Dissolve 0.1000 g manganese metal in 10 mL conc HCl mixed with 1 mLStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconc HNO3. Dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Mn. 
16)  Nickel:  Dissolve 0.1000 g nickel metal in 10 mL hot conc HNO3, cool, and dilute to
1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Ni. 
17)  Palladium:  Dissolve 0.100 g palladium wire in a minimum volume of aqua regia and
evaporate just to dryness. Add 5 mL conc HCl and 25 mL water and warm until dissolution is
complete. Dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Pd. 
18)  Platinum:  Dissolve 0.100 g platinum metal in a minimum volume of aqua regia and
evaporate just to dryness. Add 5 mL conc HCl and 0.1 g NaCl and again evaporate just to
dryness. Dissolve residue in 20 mL of 1 + 1 HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with water;  1.00 mL =
100 µg Pt. 
19)  Potassium:  Dissolve 0.1907 g potassium chloride, KCl, (dried at 110°C) in water and
make up to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 100 µg K. 
20)  Rhodium:  Dissolve 0.386 g ammonium hexachlororhodate, (NH4)3RhCl6⋅1.5H2O, in a
minimum volume of 10% (v/v) HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with 10% (v/v) HCl; 1.00 mL = 100
µg Rh. 
21)  Ruthenium:  Dissolve 0.205 g ruthenium chloride, RuCl3, in a minimum volume of 20%
(v/v) HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with 20% (v/v) HCl; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Ru. 
22)  Silver:  Dissolve 0.1575 g silver nitrate, AgNO3, in 100 mL water, add 10 mL conc
HNO3, and make up to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Ag. 
23)  Sodium:  Dissolve 0.2542 g sodium chloride, NaCl, dried at 140°C, in water, add 10 mL
conc HNO3 and make up to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Na. 
24)  Strontium:  Suspend 0.1685 g SrCO3 in water and dissolve cautiously with a minimum
amount of 1 + 1 HNO3. Add 10.0 mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water: 1 mL = 100
µg Sr. 
25)  Thallium:  Dissolve 0.1303 g thallium nitrate, TlNO3, in water. Add 10 mL conc HNO3
and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Tl. 
27)  Zinc:  Dissolve 0.100 g zinc metal in 20 mL 1 + 1 HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with water;
1.00 mL = 100 µg Zn. 
4.  Procedure
a.  Sample preparation:  Required sample preparation depends on the metal form being
measured.
 If dissolved metals are to be determined, see Section 3030B  for sample preparation. If total
or acid-extractable metals are to be determined, see Section 3030C  through K. For all samples,
make certain that the concentrations of acid and matrix modifiers are the same in both samples
and standards. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationWhen determining Ca or Mg, dilute and mix 100 mL sample or standard with 10 mL
lanthanum solution (¶ 3 f) before asp irating. When determining Fe or Mn, mix 100 mL with 25
mL of Ca solution (¶ 3d) before aspirating. When determining Cr, mix 1 mL 30% H2O2 with
each 100 mL before aspirating. Alternatively use proportionally smaller volumes. 
b.  Instrument operation:  Because of differences between makes and models of atomic
absorption spectrometers, it is not possible to formulate instructions applicable to every
instrument. See manufacturer’s operating manual. In general, proceed according to the
following: Install a hollow-cathode lamp for the desired metal in the instrument and roughly set
the wavelength dial according to Table 3111:I . Set slit width according to manufacturer’s
suggested setting for the element being measured. Turn on inst rument, apply to the
hollow-cathode lamp the current suggested by the manufacturer, and let instrument warm up
until energy source stabilizes, generally about 10 to 20 min. Readjust current as necessary after
warmup. Optimize wavelength by adjusting wavele ngth dial until optimum energy gain is
obtained. Align lamp in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
 Install suitable burner head and adjust burner head position. Turn on air and adjust flow rate
to that specified by manufacturer to give maximum se nsitivity for the metal being measured.
Turn on acetylene, adjust flow rate to value specified, and ignite flame. Let flame stabilize for a
few minutes. Aspirate a blank consisting of dei onized water containing the same concentration
of acid in standards a nd samples. Zero the instrument. Aspirate a standard solution and adjust
aspiration rate of the nebulizer to obtain maximum sensitivity. Adjust burner both vertically and
horizontally to obtain maximum response. Aspirate blank again and rezero the instrume nt.
Aspirate a standard near the middle of the linear range. Record absorbance of this standard when
freshly prepared and with a new hollow-cathode lamp. Refer to these data on subsequent
determinations of the same element to check consistency of instrumen t setup and aging of
hollow-cathode lamp and standard. 
The instrument now is ready to operate. When analyses are finished, extinguish flame by
turning off first acetylene and then air. 
c.  Standardization:  Select at least three concentrations of each standard metal solution
(prepared as in ¶ 3 j above) to bracket the expected metal concentration of a sample. Aspirate
blank and zero the instrument. Then aspirate each standard in turn in to flame and record
absorbance.
 Prepare a calibration curve by plotting on linear graph paper absorbance of standards versus
their concentrations. For instruments equipped with direct concentration readout, this step is
unnecessary. With some instruments it may be necessary to convert percent absorption to
absorbance by using a table generally provided by the manufacturer. Plot calibration curves for
Ca and Mg based on original concentration of standards before dilution with lanthanum solution.
Plot calibr ation curves for Fe and Mn based on original concentration of standards before
dilution with Ca solution. Plot calibration curve for Cr based on original concentration of
standard before addition of H2O2. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationd.  Analysis of samples:  Rinse nebulizer by aspirating water containing 1.5 mL conc
HNO3/L. Aspirate blank and zero instrument. Aspirate sample and determine its absorbance.
5.  Calculations
 Calculate concentration of each metal ion, in micrograms per liter for trace elements, and in
milligrams per liter for more common metals, by referring to the appropriate calibration curve
prepared according to ¶ 4c. Alternatively, read  concentration directly from the instrument
readout if the instrument is so equipped. If the sample has been diluted, multiply by the
appropriate dilution factor. 
6.  Bibliography
 WILLIS, J.B.  1962. Determination of lead and other heavy metals in urine by atomic absorption
spectrophotometry. Anal. Chem.  34:614.
 
Also see Section 3111A.8  and  Section 3111A.9 .
3111 C.        Extraction/Air-Acetylene Flame Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is suitable for the determination of low concentrations of cadmium, chromium,
cobalt, copper, iron, lead, manganese, nickel, silver, and zinc. The method consists of chelation
with ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) and extraction into methyl isobutyl ketone
(MIBK), followed by aspiration into an air-acetylene flame. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Atomic absorption spectrometer and associated equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 .
b.  Burner head,  conventional. Consult manufacturer’s operating manual for suggested
burner head.
3.  Reagents
a.  Air:  See Section 3111B.3 a.
b.  Acetylene:  See Section 3111B.3 b.
c.  Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
d.  Methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK),  reagent grade. For trace analysis, purify MIBK by
redistillation or by sub-boiling distillation.
e.  Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) solution:  Dissolve 4 g APDC in 100 mL
water. If necessary, purify APDC with an e qual volume of MIBK. Shake 30 s in a separatory
funnel, let separate, and withdraw lower portion. Discard MIBK layer.
f.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc, ultrapure.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationg.  Standard metal solutions:  See Section 3111B.3  j.
h.  Potassium permanganate solution,  KMnO4, 5% (w/v) aqueous.
i.  Sodium sulfate,  Na2SO4, anhydrous.
j.  Water-saturated MIBK:  Mix one part purified MIBK with one part water in a separatory
funnel. Shake 30 s and let separate. Discard aqueous layer. Save MIBK layer.
k.  Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution,  10% (w/v). This solution can be purchased
commercially.
4.  Procedure
a.  Instrument operation:  See Section 3111B.4 b. After final adjusting of burner position,
aspirate water-saturated MIBK into flame and gradually reduce fuel flow until flame is similar to
that before aspiration of solvent.
b.  Standardization:  Select at least three concentrations of standard metal solutions (prepared
as in Section 3111B.3  j) to bracket expected sample metal concentration and to be, after
extraction, in the optimum concentration range of the instrument. Adju st 100mL of each standard
and 100 mL of a metal-free water blank to pH 3 by adding 1 N HNO3 or 1N NaOH. For
individual el-ement extraction, use the following pH ranges to obtain optimum extraction
efficiency:
ElementpH Range for Optimum
Extraction
Ag 2–5 (complex unstable)
Cd    1–6   
Co    2–10
Cr    3–9   
Cu 0.1–8   
Fe    2–5   
Mn 2–4 (complex unstable)
Ni    2–4   
Pb 0.1–6   
Zn    2–6   
NOTE: For Ag and Pb extraction the optimum pH value is 2.3 ± 0.2. The Mn complex
deteriorates rapidly at room temperature, resu lting in decreased instrument response. Chilling the
extract to 0°C may preserve the complex for a few hours. If this is not poss ible and Mn cannot be
analyzed immediately after extraction, use another analytical procedure.
Transfer each standard solution and blank to  individual 200-mL volumetric flasks, add 1 mLStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationAPDC solution, and shake to mix. Add 10 mL MIBK and shake vigorously f or 30 s. (The
maximum volume ratio of sample to MIBK is 40.) Let contents of each flask separate into
aqueous and organic layers, then carefully add water (adjusted to the same pH at which the
extraction was carried out) down the side of each flask to brin g the organic layer into the neck
and accessible to the aspirating tube.
Aspirate organic extracts directly into the flame (zeroing instrument on a water-saturated
MIBK blank) and record absorbance.
Prepare a calibration curve by plotting on linear graph p aper absorbances of extracted
standards against their concentrations before extraction.
c.  Analysis of samples:  Prepare samples in the same manner as the standards. Rinse atomizer
by aspirating water-saturated MIBK. Aspirate organi c extracts treated as above directly into the
flame and record absorbances.
 With the above extraction procedu re only hexavalent chromium is measured. To determine
total chromium, oxidize trivalent chromium to hexavalent chromium by bringing sample to a
boil and adding sufficient KMnO4 solution dropwise to give a persistent pink color while the
solution is boiled for 10 min. Destroy excess KMnO4 by adding 1 to 2 drops hydroxylamine
hydrochloride solution to the boiling solution, allowing 2 min for the reaction to proceed. If pink
color persists, add 1 to 2 more drops hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution and wait 2 min. Heat
an additional 5 min. Cool, extract with MIBK, and aspirate. 
During extraction, if an emulsion forms at the water-MIBK interface, add anhydrous Na2SO4
to obtain a homogeneous organic phase. In that case, also add Na2SO4 to all standards and
blank s. 
To avoid problems associated with instability of extracted metal complexes, determine
metals immediately after extraction. 
5.  Calculations
 Calculate the concentration of each metal ion in micrograms per liter by referring to the
appropriate calibration curve. 
6.  Bibliography
 ALLAN, J.E.  1961. The use of organic solvents in atomic absorption spectrophotometry.
Spectrochim. Acta  17:467.
 SACHDEV, S.L. & P.W. WEST . 1970. Concentration of trace metals by solvent extraction and their
determination by atomic abso rption spectrophotometry. Environ. Sci. Technol.  4:749.
3111 D.        Direct Nitrous Oxide-Acetylene Flame Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is applicable to the determination of aluminum, barium, beryllium, calcium,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmolybdenum, osmium, rhenium, silicon, thorium, titanium, and vanadium. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Atomic absorption spectrometer and associated equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 .
b.  Nitrous oxide burner head:  Use special burner head as suggested in manufacturer’s
manual. At roughly 20-min intervals of operation it may be necessary to dislodge the carbon
crust that forms along the slit surface with a carbon rod or appropriate alt ernative.
c.  T-junction valve  or other switching valve for rapidly changing from nitrous oxide to air,
so that flame can be turned on or off with air as oxidant to prevent flashbacks.
3.  Reagents
a.  Air:  See Section 3111B.3 a.
b.  Acetylene:  See Section 3111B.3 b.
c.  Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
d.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 1 N, 1+1, and conc.
e.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
f.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, 1% (v/v).
g.  Hydrofluoric acid,  HF, 1 N.
h.  Nitrous oxide,  commercially available cylinders. Fit nitrous oxide cylinder with a special
nonfreezable regulator or wrap a heating coil ar ound an ordinary regulator to prevent flashback
at the burner caused by reduction in nitrous oxide flow through  a frozen regulator. (Most modern
atomic absorption instruments have automatic gas control systems that will shut down a nitrous
oxide-acetylene flame safely in the event of a reduction in nitrous oxide flow rate.)
 CAUTION : Use nitrous oxide with strict a dherence to manufacturer’s directions. Improper
sequencing of gas flows at startup and shutdow n of instrument can produce explosions from
flashback.  
i.  Potassium chloride solution:  Dissolve 250 g KCl in water and dilute to 1000 mL.
j.  Aluminum nitrate solution:  Dissolve 139 g Al(NO3)3⋅9H2O in 150 mL water. Acidify
slightly with conc HNO3 to preclude possible hydrolysis and precipitation. Warm to dissolve
completely. Cool and dilute to 200 mL.
k.  Standard metal solutions:  Prepare a series of standard metal solutions in the optimum
concentration ranges by appropriate dilution of stock metal solutions with water containing 1.5
mL conc HNO3/L. Stock standard solutions are available from a number  of commercial
suppliers. Alternatively, prepare as described below.
1)  Aluminum:  Dissolve 0.100 g aluminum metal in an acid mixture of 4 mL 1 + 1 HCl and 1
mL conc HNO3 in a beaker. Warm gently to effect solution. Transfer to a 1-L flask, add 10 mL 1
+ 1 HCl, and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Al. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2)  Barium:  Dissolve 0.1516 g BaCl2 (dried at 250° for 2 h), in about 10 mL water with 1 mL
1+ 1 HCl. Add 10.0 mL 1 + 1 HCl and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Ba. 
3)  Beryllium : Do not dry.  Dissolve 1.966 g BeSO4⋅4H2O in water, add 10.0 mL conc HNO3,
and dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Be. 
4)  Calcium:  See Section 3111B.3  j4). 
5)  Molybdenum:  Dissolve 0.2043 g (NH4)2 MoO4 in water and dilute to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL
= 100 µg Mo. 
6)  Osmium:  Obtain standard 0.1 M osmium tetroxide solution* #(76)  and store in glass bottle;
1.00 mL = 19.02 mg Os. Make dilutions daily as needed using 1% (v/v) H2SO4. CAUTION:  OsO4
is extremely toxic and highly volatile.  
7)  Rhenium:  Dissolve 0.1554 g potassium perrhenate, KReO4, in 200 mL water. Dilute to
1000 mL with 1% (v/v) H2SO4; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Re. 
8)  Silica:  Do not dry.  Dissolve 0.4730 g Na2SiO3⋅9H2O in water. Add 10.0 mL conc HNO3
and dilute to 1000 mL with water. 1.00 mL = 100 µg SiO2. Store in polyethylene. 
9)  Thorium:  Dissolve 0.238 g thorium nitrate, Th(NO3)4⋅4H2O in 1000 mL water; 1.00 mL
= 100 µg Th. 
10)  Titanium:  Dissolve 0.3960 g pure (99.8 or 99.9%) titanium chloride, TiCl4,†#(77)  in a
mixture of equal volumes of 1 N HCl and 1 N HF. Make up to 1000 mL with this acid mixture;
1.00 mL = 100 µg Ti. 
11)  Vanadium:  Dissolve 0.2297 g ammonium metavanadate, NH4VO3, in a minimum
amount of conc HNO3. Heat to dissolve. Add 10 mL conc HNO3, and dilute to 1000 mL with
water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg V. 
4.  Procedure
a.  Sample preparation:  See Section 3111B.4 a.
 When determining Al, Ba, or Ti, mix 2 mL KCl solution into 100 mL sample or standard
before aspiration. When determining Mo and V, mix 2 mL Al(NO3)3⋅9H2O into 100 mL sample
or standard before aspiration. 
b.  Instrument operation:  See Section 3111B.4 b. After adjusting wavelength, install a nitrous
oxide burner head. Turn on acetylene (without ign iting flame) and adjust flow rate to value
specified by manufacturer for a nitrous oxide-acetylene flame. Turn off acetylene. With both air
and nitrous oxide supplies turned on, set T-junction valve to nitrous oxide and adjust flow rate
according to manufacturer’s specifications. Turn switching valve to the air position and verify
that flow rate is the same. Turn a cetylene on and ignite to a bright yellow flame. With a rapid
motion, turn switching valve to nitrous oxide. The flame should have a red cone above theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationburner. If it does not, adjust fuel flow to obt ain red cone. After nitrous oxide flame has been
ignited,  let burner come to thermal equilibrium before beginning analysis.
 Aspirate a blank consisting of dei onized water containing 1.5 mL conc HNO3/L and check
aspiration rate. Adjust if necessary to a rate between 3 and 5 mL/ min. Zero the instrument.
Aspirate  a standard of the desired metal with a concentration near the midpoint of the optimum
concentration range and adjust burner (both horizontally and vertically) in the light path to
obtain maximum response. Aspirate blank again and re-zero the instrument. T he instrument now
is ready to run standards and samples. 
To extinguish flame, turn switching valve from nitrous oxide to air and turn off acetylene.
This procedure eliminates the danger of flashback that may occur on direct ignition or shutdown
of nitrous  oxide and acetylene. (See also discussion in Section 3111B.4 b.) 
c.  Standardization:  Select at least three concentrations of standard metal solutions (prepared
as in ¶ 3k) to bracket the expected metal concentration of a sample. Aspirate each in turn into the
flame and record absorbances.
 Most modern instruments are  equipped with microprocessors and digital readout which
permit calibration in direct concentration terms. If instrument is not so equipped, prepare a
calibration curve by plotting on linear graph paper absorbance of standards versus concentration.
Plot ca libration curves for Al, Ba, and Ti based on original concentration of standard before
adding KCl solution. Plot calibration curves for Mo and V based on original concentration of
standard before adding Al(NO3)3 solution. 
d.  Analysis of samples:  Rinse atomizer by aspirating water containing 1.5 mL conc HNO3/L
and zero instrument. Aspirate a sample and determine its absorbance.
5.  Calculations
 Calculate concentration of each metal ion in micrograms per liter by referring to the
appropriate calibration curve prepared according to ¶ 4c. 
Alternatively, read the concentration directly from the instrument readout if the instrumen t is
so equipped. If sample has been diluted, multiply by the appropriate dilution factor. 
6.  Bibliography
 WILLIS, J.B.  1965. Nitrous oxide-acetylene flame in atomic absorption spectroscopy. Nature
207:715.
 
Also see Section 3111A.8  and  Section 3111A.9 .
3111 E.        Extraction/Nitrous Oxide-Acetylene Flame Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Application:  This method is suitable for the determination of aluminum at concentrationsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationless than 900 µg/L and beryllium at concentrations less than 30 µg/L. The method consists of
chelation with 8-hydroxyquinoline, extraction with methyl isobutyl k etone (MIBK), and
aspiration into a nitrous oxide-acetylene flame.
b.  Interferences:  Concentrations of Fe greater than 10 mg/L interfere by suppressing Al
absorption. Iron interference can be masked by addition of hydroxylamine
hydrochloride/1,10-phenanthroline. Mn concentrations up to 80 mg/L do not interfere if turbi dity
in the extract is allowed to settle. Mg forms an insoluble chelate with 8-hydroxyquinoline at pH
8.0 and tends to remove Al complex as a coprecipitate. However, the Mg complex forms slowly
over 4 to 6 min; its interference can be avoided if the soluti on is extracted immediately after
adding buffer.
2.  Apparatus
 Atomic absorption spectrometer and associated equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 . 
3.  Reagents
a.  Air:  See Section 3111B.3 a.
b.  Acetylene:  See Section 3111B.3 b.
c.  Ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH, conc.
d.  Buffer:  Dissolve 300 g ammonium acetate, NH4C2H3O2, in water, add 105 mL conc
NH4OH, and dilute to 1 L.
e.  Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
f.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc.
g.  8-Hydroxyquinoline solution:  Dissolve 20 g 8-hydroxyquinoline in about 200 mL water,
add 60 mL glacial acetic acid, and dilute to 1 L with water.
h.  Methyl isobutyl ketone:  See Section 3111C.3 d.
i.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
j.  Nitrous oxide:  See Section 3111D.3 h.
k.  Standard metal solutions:  Prepare a series of standard metal solutions containing 5 to
1000 µg/L by appropriate dilution of the stock metal solutions prepared according to Section
3111D.3 k.
l.  Iron masking solution:  Dissolve 1.3 g hydroxylamine hydrochloride and 6.58 g
1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate in about 500 mL water and dilute to 1 L with water.
4.  Procedure
a.  Instrument operation:  See Section 3111B.4 b, Section 3111C.4 a, and  Section 3111D.4 b.
After final adjusting of burner position, aspirate MIBK into flame and gradually reduce fuel flow
until flame is similar to that before aspiration of solvent. Adjust  wavelength setting according to
Table 3111:I .Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Standardization:  Select at least three concentrations of standard metal solutions (prepared
as in ¶ 3k) to bracket the expected metal concentration of a sample and transfer 100 mL of each
(and 100 mL water blank) to four different 200-mL volumetric f lasks. Add 2 mL
8-hydroxyquinoline solution, 2 mL masking solution (i f required), and 10 mL buffer to one flask,
immediately add 10 mL MIBK, and shake vigorousl y. The duration of shaking affects the forms
of aluminum complexed. A fast, 10-s shaking time fa vors monomeric Al, whereas 5 to 10 min of
shaking also will complex polymeric species. Adjustment of the 8-hydroxyquinoline to sample
ratio can improve recoveries of extremely high or low concentrations of aluminum. Treat each
blank, standard, and sample i n similar fashion. Continue as in Section 3111C.4 b.
c.  Analysis of samples:  Rinse atomizer by aspirating water-saturated MIBK. Aspirate
extracts of samples treated as above, and record absorbances.
5.  Calculations
 Calculate concentration of each metal in micrograms per liter by referring to the appropriate
calibration curve prepared according to ¶ 4b. 
3112        METALS BY COLD-VAPOR ATOMIC ABSORPTION
SPECTROMETRY* #(78)
3112  A.        Introduction
 For general introductory material on atomic absorption spectrometric methods, see Section
3111A . 
3112  B.        Cold-Vapor Atomic Absorption Spectrometric Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is applicable to the determination of mercury. 
2.  Apparatus
 When possible, dedicate glassware for use in Hg analysis. Avoid using glassware previously
exposed to high levels of Hg, such as those used in COD, TKN, or Cl– analysis. 
a. Atomic absorption spectrometer and associated equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 .
Instruments and accessories specifically designed for measurement of mercury by the cold vapor
technique are available commercially and may be substituted.
b. Absorption cell,  a glass or plastic tube approximately 2.5 cm in diameter. An 11.4-cm-long
tube has been found satisfactory but a 15-cm -long tube is preferred. Grind tube ends
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis and cement quartz windows in place. Attach gas inlet andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationoutlet ports (6.4 mm diam) 1.3 cm from each end.
c. Cell support:  Strap cell to the flat nitrous-oxide burner head or other suitable support and
align in light beam to give maximum transmittance.
d. Air pumps:  Use any peristaltic pump with electronic speed control capable of delivering 2
L air/min. Any other regulated compressed air system or air cylinder also is satisfactory.
e. Flowmeter,  capable of measuring an air flow of 2 L/min.
f. Aeration tubing,  a straight glass frit having a coarse porosity for use in reaction flask.
g. Reaction flask,  250-mL erlenmeyer flask or a BOD bottle, fitted with a rubber stopper to
hold aeration tube.
h. Drying tube,  150-mm × 18-mm-diam, containing 20 g Mg (ClO4)2. A 60-W light bulb
with a suitable shade may be substituted to prevent condensation of moisture inside the
absorption cell. Position bulb to maintain cell temperature at 10°C above ambient.
i. Connecting tubing,  glass tubing to pass mercury vapor from reaction flask to absorption
cell and to interconnect all other components. Clear vinyl plastic* #(79)  tubing may be
substituted for glass.
3.  Reagents† #(80)
a. Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
b. Stock mercury solution:  Dissolve 0.1354 g mercuric chloride, HgCl2, in about 70 mL
water, add 1 mL conc HNO3, and dilute to 100 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Hg.
c. Standard mercury solutions:  Prepare a series of standard mercury solutions containing 0 to
5 µg/L by appropriate dilution of stock mercury solution with water containing 10 mL conc
HNO3/L. Prepare standards daily.
d. Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
e. Potassium permanganate solution:  Dissolve 50 g KMnO4 in water and dilute to 1 L.
f. Potassium persulfate solution:  Dissolve 50 g K2S2O8 in water and dilute to 1 L.
g. Sodium chloride-hydroxylamine sulfate solution:  Dissolve 120 g NaCl and 120 g
(NH2OH)2⋅H2SO4 in water and dilute to 1 L. A 10% hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution may
be substituted for the hydroxylamine sulfate.
h. Stannous ion (Sn2+) solution:  Use either stannous chloride, ¶ 1), or stannous sulfate, ¶ 2),
to prepare this solution containing about 7.0 g Sn2+/100 mL.
1) Dissolve 10 g SnCl2 in water containing 20 mL conc HCl and dilute to 100 mL. 
2) Dissolve 11 g SnSO4 in water containing 7 mL conc H2SO4 and dilute to 100 mL. 
Both solutions decompose with aging. If a suspension forms, stir reagent continuously during
use. Reagent volume is sufficient to process about 20 samples; adjust volumes p repared toStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationaccommodate number of samples processed. 
i. Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc.
4.  Procedure
a. Instrument operation:  See Section 3111B.4 b. Set wavelength to 253.7 nm. Install
absorption cell and align in light path to give maximum transmission. Connect associated
equipment to absorption cell with glass or vinyl plastic tubing as indicated in Figure 3112:1 .
Turn on air and adjust flow rate to 2 L/min. Allow air to flow continuously. Alternatively, follow
manufacturer’s directions for operation. NOTE : Fluorescent lighting may increase baseline noise.
b. Standardization:  Transfer 100 mL of each of the 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 µg/L Hg standard
solutions and a blank of 100 mL water to 250-mL erlenmeyer reaction flasks. Add 5 mL conc
H2SO4 and 2.5 mL conc HNO3 to each flask. Add 15 mL KMnO4 solution to each fla sk and let
stand at least 15 min. Add 8 mL K2S2O8 solution to each flask and heat for 2 h in a water bath at
95°C. Cool to room temperature.
 Treating each flask individually, add enough NaCl-hydroxylamine solution to reduce excess
KMnO4, then add 5 mL SnC l2 or SnSO4 solution and immediately attach flask to aeration
apparatus. As Hg is volatilized and carried into the absorption cell, absorbance will increase to a
maximum within a few seconds. As soon as recorder returns approximately to the base line,
remo ve stopper holding the frit from reaction flask, and replace with a flask containing water.
Flush system for a few seconds and run the next standard in the same manner. Construct a
standard curve by plotting peak height versus micrograms Hg. 
c. Analysis of samples:  Transfer 100 mL sample or portion diluted to 100 mL containing not
more than 5.0 µg Hg/L to a reaction flask. Treat as in ¶ 4b. Seawaters, brines, and effluents high
in chlorides require as much as an additional 25 mL KMnO4 soluti on. During oxidation step,
chlorides are converted to free chlorine, which absorbs at 253 nm. Remove all free chlorine
before the Hg is reduced and swept into the cell by using an excess (25 mL) of hydroxylamine
reagent.
 Remove free chlorine by sparging s ample gently with air or nitrogen after adding
hydroxylamine reducing solution. Use a separate tube and frit to avoid carryover of residual
stannous chloride, which could cause reduction and loss of mercury. 
5.  Calculation
 Determine peak height of sample from recorder chart and read mercury value from standard
curve prepared according to ¶ 4b. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Data on interlaboratory precision and bias for this method are given in Table 3112:I . 
7.  ReferenceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         1.    KOPP, J.F., M.C. LONGBOTTOM & L.B. LOBRING.  1972. ‘‘Cold vapor’’ method for
determining mercury. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  64:20.
8.  Bibliography
 HATCH, W.R. & W.L. OTT.  1968. Determination of submicrogram quantities of mercury by atomic
absorption spectrophotometry. Anal. Chem. 40:2085.
 UTHE, J.F., F.A.J. ARMSTRONG  & M.P. STAINTON.  1970. Mercury determination in fish samples
by wet digestion and flameless atomic absorption spectrophotometry. J. Fish. Res. Board
Can. 27:805.
 FELDMAN, C.  1974. Preservation of dilute mercury solutions. Anal. Chem. 46:99.
 BOTHNER, M.H. & D.E. ROBERTSON.  1975. Mercury contamination of sea water sam ples stored in
polyethylene containers. Anal. Chem. 47: 592.
 HAWLEY, J.E.  & J.D. INGLE, JR.  1975. Improvements in cold vapor atomic absorption
determination of mercury. Anal. Chem.  47:719.
 LO, J.M.  & C.M. WAL.  1975. Mercury loss from water during storage : Mechanisms and
prevention. Anal. Chem.  47:1869.
 EL-AWADY, A.A., R.B. MILLER  & M.J. CARTER.  1976. Automated method for the determination of
total and inorganic mercury in water and wastewater samples. Anal. Chem. 48:110.
 ODA, C.E.  & J.D. INGLE, JR.  1981 . Speciation of mercury by cold vapor atomic absorption
spectrometry with selective reduction. Anal. Chem. 53:2305.
 SUDDENDORF, R.F.  1981. Interference by selenium or tellurium in the determination of mercury
by cold vapor generation atomic absorption spe ctrometry. Anal. Chem. 53:2234.
 HEIDEN, R.W. & D.A. AIKENS.  1983. Humic acid as a preservative for trace mercury (II) solutions
stored in polyolefin containers. Anal. Chem. 55:2327.
 CHOU, H.N. & C.A. NALEWAY.  1984. Determination of mercury by cold vapor atomic absorption
spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 56:1737.
3113        METALS BY EL ECTROTHERMAL ATOMIC ABSORPTION
SPECTROMETRY* #(81)
3113  A.        Introduction
1.  Applications
 Electrothermal atomic absorption permits determination of most metallic elements with
sensitivities and detection limits from 20 to 1000 times better than those of conventional flame
techniques without extraction or sample concentration . This increase in sensitivity results from
an increase in atom density within the furnace as compared to flame atomic absorption. ManyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationelements can be determined at concentrations as low as 1.0 µg/L. An additional advantage of
electrothermal atomic absorp tion is that only a very small volume of sample is required. 
The electrothermal technique is used only at concentration levels below the optimum range
of direct flame atomic absorption because it is subject to more interferences than the flame
procedure a nd requires increased analysis time. The method of standard additions may be
required to insure validity of data. Because of the high sensitivity of this technique, it is
extremely susceptible to contamination; extra care in sample handling and analysis ma y be
required. 
2.  Principle
 Electrothermal atomic absorption spectroscopy is based on the same principle as direct
flame atomization but an electrically heated atomizer or graphite furnace replaces the standard
burner head. A discrete sample volume is dispensed into the graphite sample tube (or cup).
Typically, determinations are made by heating the sample in three or more stages. First, a low
current heats the tube to dry the sample. The second, or charring, stage destroys organic matter
and volatilizes other matrix components at an intermediate temperature. Finally, a high current
heats the tube to incandescence and, in an inert atmosphere, atomizes the element being
determined. Additional stages frequently are added to aid in drying and charring, and to clean
and co ol the tube between samples. The resultant ground-state atomic vapor absorbs
monochromatic radiation from the source. A phot oelectric detector measures the intensity of
transmitted radiation. The inverse of the transmittance is related logarithmically to t he
absorbance, which is directly proportional to the number density of vaporized ground-state
atoms (the Beer-Lambert law) over a limited concentration range. 
3.  Interferences
 Electrothermal atomization determinations may be subject to significant interferences from
molecular absorption as well as chemical and matrix effects. Molecular absorption may occur
when components of the sample matrix volatilize duri ng atomization, resulting in broadband
absorption. Several background correction techniques are available commercially to compensate
for this interference. A continuum source such as a deuterium arc can correct for background up
to absorbance levels of abo ut 0.8. Continuum lamp intensity diminishes at long wavelengths and
use of continuum background correction is limited to analytical wavelengths below 350 nm.
Zeeman effect background correctors can handle background absorbance up to 1.5 to 2.0. The
Smith- Hieftje correction technique can accommodate background absorbance levels as large as
2.5 to 3.0 (see Section 3111A.3) . Both Zeeman and Smith-Hieftje background corrections are
susceptible to rollover (development of a negative absorbance-concentration rel ationship) at high
absorbances. The rollover absorbance for each element should be available in the manufacturer’s
literature. Curvature due to rollover should become apparent during calibration; dilution
produces a more linear calibration plot. Use backgr ound correction when analyzing samples
containing high concentrations of acid or dissolved solids and in determining elements for which
an absorption line below 350 nm is used. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMatrix modification can be useful in minimizing interference and increasing an alytical
sensitivity.  Determine need for a modifier by evaluating recovery of a sample with a known
addition.  Recovery near 100% indicates that sa mple matrix does not affect analysis. Chemical
modifiers generally modify relative volatilities of matrix an d metal. Some modifiers enhance
matrix removal, isolating the metal, while other modifiers inhibit metal volatilization, allowing
use of higher ashing/charring temperatures and increasing efficiency of matrix removal.
Chemical modifiers are added at high c oncentration (percent level) and can lead to sample
contamination from impurities in the modifier solution. Heavy use of chemical modifiers may
reduce the useful life (normally 50 to 100 firings) of the graphite tube. Some specific chemical
modifiers and a pproximate concentrations are listed in Table 3113:I . 
Addition of a chemical modifier directly to the sample before analysis is restricted to
inexpensive additives (e.g. phosphoric acid). Use of palladium salts for matrix modification
normally requires me thods of co-addition, in which sample and modifier are added consecutively
to the furnace either manually or, preferably, with an automatic sampler. Palladium salts (nitrate
is preferred, chloride is acceptable) are listed in Table 3113:I  as a modifier for  many metals. The
palladium solution (50 to 2000 mg/L) generally includes citric or ascorbic acid, which aids
reduction of palladium in the furnace. Citric acid levels of 1 to 2% are typical. Use of hydrogen
(5%) in the coolant gas (available commercially as a mixture) also reduces palladium,
eliminating need for organic reducing acids. C AUTION : Do not mix hydrogen and other gases in
the laboratory; hydrogen gas is very flammable—handle with caution . Use low levels of
palladium (50 to 250 mg/L) for normal s amples and higher levels for complex samples. Addition
of excess palladium modifier may widen atomization peaks; in such cases peak area
measurements may provide higher quality results. The recommended mode of modifier use is
through co-addition to the fur nace of about 10 µL of the palladium (or other) modifier solution.
Palladium may not be the best modifier in all cases and cannot be recommended unconditionally.
Test samples requiring a modifier first with pa lladium; test other modifiers only if palladiu m is
unsuccessful or to minimize modifier cost. See Section 3113B.3  for preparation of modifier
solution. 
Temperature ramping, i.e., gradual heating, can be used to decrease background interferences
and permits analysis of samples with complex matrices. R amping permits a controlled,
continuous increase of furnace temperature in any of the various steps of the temperature
sequence. Ramp drying is used for samples containing mixtures of solvents or for samples with a
high salt content (to avoid spattering). If spattering is suspected, develop drying ramp by visual
inspection of the drying stage, using a mirror. Samples that contain a complex mixture of matrix
components sometimes require ramp charring to effect controlled, complete thermal
decomposition. Ramp  atomization may minimize background absorption by permitting
volatilization of the element being determined before the matrix. This is especially applicable in
the determination of such volatile elements as cadmium and lead. Use of time-resolved
absorbanc e profiles (available on most modern instruments) greatly aids method development.
Changes in atomization, notably the element peak appearance time and magnitude of backgroundStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand metal absorbances, can be monitored directly. 
Improve analysis by using a graphite platform, inserted into the graphite tube, as the
atomization site. The platform is not heated as directly by the current flowing through the
graphite tube; thus the metal atomizes later and under more uniform conditions. 
Use standard additions t o compensate for matrix interferences. When making standard
additions, determine whether the added metal and that in the sample behave similarly under the
specified conditions. [See Section 3113B.4 d2)]. In the extreme, test every sample for recovery
(85 to  115% recovery desired) to determine if standard addition is needed. Test every sample
type for recovery. Recovery of only 40 to 85% generally indicates that standard addition is
required. Often, as long as the samples are from sources of consistent proper ties, a representative
recovery can be used to characterize the analysis and determine the necessity of standard
addition. Test samples of unknown origin or of complex composition (digestates, for example)
individually for metal recovery. Ideally, chemical  modifiers and graphite platforms render the
sample fit to be analyzed using a standard analytical calibration curve. Always verify this
assumption; however, a properly developed method with judicious use of chemical modifiers
should eliminate the necessit y for standard addition in all but the most extreme samples. 
Chemical interaction of the graphite tube with various elements to form refractory carbides
occurs at high charring and atomization temperat ures. Elements that form carbides are barium,
molybden um, nickel, titanium, vanadium, and silicon. Carbide formation is characterized by
broad, tailing atomization peaks and reduced sensitivity. Using pyrolytically coated tubes for
these metals minimizes the problem. 
4.  Sensitivity, Detection Li mits, and Optimum Concentration Range
 Estimated detection limits and optimum concentration ranges are listed in Table 3113:II .
These values may vary with the chemical form of the element being determined, sample
composition,  or instrumental conditions. 
For a given sample, increased sensitivity may be achieved by using a larger sample volume
or by reducing flow rate of the purge gas or by using gas interrupt during atomization. Note,
however, that these techniques also will i ncrease the effects of any interferences present.
Sensitivity can be decreased by diluting the sample, reducing sample volume, increasing
purge-gas flow, or using a less sensitive wavelength. Use of argon, rather than nitrogen, as the
purge gas generally i mproves sensitivity and reproducibility. Hydrogen mixed with the inert gas
may suppress chemical interference and increase sensitivity by acting as a reducing agent,
thereby aiding in producing more ground-state atom s. Pyrolytically coated graphite tubes c an
increase sensitivity for the more refractory elements and are recommended. The optical
pyrometer/maximum power accessory available on some instruments also offers increased
sensitivity with lower atomization temperatures for many elements. 
Using the St abilized Temperature Platform Furnace (STPF) technique, which is a
combination of individual techniques, also offers significant interference reduction with
improved sensitivity. Sensitivity changes with sample tube age. Discard graphite tubes whenStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsignifi cant variations in sensitivity or poor reproducibility are observed. The use of high acid
concentrations, brine samples, and matrix modifiers often drastically reduces tube life.
Preferably use the graphite platform in such situations. 
5.  References
         1.    PERKIN-ELMER CORP.  1991. Summary of Standard Conditions for Graphite Furnace.
Perkin-Elmer Corp., Norwalk, Conn.
         2.    ROTHERY, E.,  ed. 1988. Analytical Methods for Graphite Tube Atomizers. Varian
Techtron Pty, Ltd., Mulgrave, V ictoria, Australia.
6.  Bibliography
 FERNANDEZ, F.J. & D.C. MANNING.  1971. Atomic absorption analyses of metal pollutants in
water using a heated graphite atomizer. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  10:65.
 SEGAR, D.A. & J.G. GONZALEZ.  1972. Evaluation of atomic absorption with  a heated graphite
atomizer for the direct determination of trace transition metals in sea water. Anal. Chim. Acta
58:7.
 BARNARD, W.M. & M.J. FISHMAN.  1973. Evaluation of the use of heated graphite atomizer for the
routine determination of trace metals in  water. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  12:118.
 KAHN, H.L.  1973. The detection of metallic elements in wastes and waters with the graphite
furnace. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem.  3:121.
 WALSH, P.R., J.L. FASCHING & R.A. DUCE.  1976. Matrix effects and their co ntrol during the
flameless atomic absorption determination of arsenic. Anal. Chem.  48:1014.
 HENN, E.L.  1977. Use of Molybdenum in Eliminating Matrix Interferences in Flameless Atomic
Absorption. Spec. Tech. Publ. 618, American Soc. Testing & Materials, Ph iladelphia, Pa.
 MARTIN, T.D. & J.F. KOPP.  1978. Methods for Metals in Drinking Water. U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Environmental Monitoring and Support Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
 HYDES, D.J.  1980. Reduction of matrix effects with a soluble organic acid in the carbon furnace
atomic absorption spectrometric determination of cobalt, copper, and manganese in seawater.
Anal. Chem.  52:289.
 SOTERA, J.J. & H.L. KAHN.  1982. Background correction in AAS. Amer. Lab.  14:100.
 SMITH, S.B. & G.M. HIEFTJE.  1983. A new background-correction method for atomic absorption
spectrometry. Appl. Spectrosc.  37:419.
 GROSSER, Z.  1985. Techniques in Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry.
Perkin-Elmer Corp., Ridgefield, Conn.
 SLAVIN, W. & G.R. CARNICK.  1985. A survey of applications of the stabilized temperature
platform furnace and Zeeman correction. Atomic Spectrosc.  6:157.
 BRUEGGEMEYER, T. & F. FRICKE.  1986. Comparison of furnace & atomization behavior of
aluminum from standard & thorium-treated L’vov plat forms. Anal. Chem.  58:1143.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3113  B.        Electrothermal Atomic Absorption Spectrometric Method
1.  General Discussion
 This method is suitable for determination of micro quantities of aluminum, antimony,
arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, manganese,
molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver, and tin. It is also a pplicable to analysis of bismuth,
gallium, germanium, gold, indium, mercury, tellurium, thallium, and vanadium, but precision
and accuracy data are not yet available. 
2.  Apparatus
a. Atomic absorption spectrometer:  See Section 3111A.6 a. The instrument must have
background correction capability.
b. Source lamps:  See Section 3111A.6 d.
c. Graphite furnace:  Use an electrically heated device with electronic control circuitry
designed to carry a graphite tube or cup th rough a heating program that provides sufficient
thermal energy to atomize the elements of interest. Furnace heat controll ers with only three
heating steps are adequate only for fresh waters with low dissolved solids content. For salt
waters, brines, and other complex matrices, use a furnace controller with up to seven
individually programmed heating steps. Fit the furnace in to the sample compartment of the
spectrometer in place of the conventional burner assembly. Use argon as a purge gas to minimize
oxidation of the furnace tube and to prevent the formation of metallic oxides. Use graphite tubes
with platforms to minimize in terferences and to improve sensitivity.
d. Readout:  See Section 3111A.6 c.
e. Sample dispensers:  Use microliter pipets (5 to 100 µL) or an automatic sampling device
designed for the specific instrument.
f. Vent:  See Section 3111A.6  f.
g. Cooling water supply:  Cool with tap water flowing at 1 to 4 L/min or use a recirculating
cooling device.
h. Membrane filter apparatus:  Use an all-glass filtering device and 0.45- µm or
smaller-pore-diameter membrane filters. For trace analysis of aluminum, use polypropylene or
TFE devices.
3.  Reagents
a. Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c.
b. Hydrochloric acid , HCl, 1 + 1 and conc.
c. Nitric acid , HNO3, 1 + 1 and conc.
d. Matrix modifier stock solutions:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1) Magnesium nitrate , 10 000 mg Mg/L: Dissolve 10.5 g Mg(NO3)2⋅6H2O in water. Dilute
to 100 mL. 
2) Nickel nitrate , 10 000 mg Ni/L: Dissolve 4.96 g Ni(NO3)2⋅6H2O in water. Dilute to 100
mL. 
3) Phosphoric acid , 10% (v/v): Add 10 mL conc H3PO4 to water. Dilute to 100 mL. 
4) Palladium nitrate , 4000 mg Pd/L: Dissolve 8.89 g Pd(NO3)2⋅H2O in water. Dilute to 1 L. 
5) Citric acid , 4%: Dissolve 40 g citric acid in water. Dilute to 1 L. 
NOTE : All of the modifier solutions recommended in Table 3113:I  can be prepared with
volumetric combination of the above solutions and water. For preparation of other matrix
modifier s, see references or follow manufacturers’ instructions. 
e. Stock metal solutions:  Refer to Section 3111B  and Section 3114 .
f. Chelating resin:  100 to 200 mesh #(82) * purified by heating at 60°C in 10 N NaOH for 24 h.
Cool resin and rinse 10 times each with alternating portions of 1 N HCl, metal-free water, 1 N
NaOH, and metal-free water.
g. Metal-free seawater (or brine):  Fill a 1.4-cm-ID × 20-cm-long borosilicate glass column
to within 2 cm of the top with purified ch elating resin. Elute resin with successive 50-mL
portions of 1 N HCl, metal-free water, 1 N NaOH, and metal-free water at t he rate of 5 mL/min
just before use. Pass salt water or brine through the column at a rate of 5 mL/min to extract trace
metals present. Discard the first 10 bed volumes (300 mL) of eluate.
4.  Procedures
a. Sample pretreatment:  Before analysis, pretreat all samples as indicated below. Rinse all
glassware with 1 + 1 HNO3 and water. Carry out digestion procedures in a clean, dust-free
laboratory area to avoid sample contamination. For digestion of trace al uminum, use
polypropylene or TFE utensils to avoid leachable aluminum from glassware.
1) Dissolved metals—See Section 3030B . For samples requiring arsenic and/or selenium
analysis add 3 mL 30% hydrogen peroxide/100 mL sample and an appropriate volume of nickel
nitrate solution (see Table 3113:I ) before analysis. For all other metals no fu rther pretreatment is
required except for adding an optional matrix modifier. 
2) Total recoverable metals (Al, Sb, Ba, Be, Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Fe, Pb, Mn, Mo, Ni, Ag, and
Sn)—N OTE: Sb and Sn are not recovered unless HCl is used in the digestion. See Section
3030D .  Quantitatively transfer digested sample to a 100-mL volumetric flask, add an
appropriate amount of matrix modifier (see Table 3113:I ), and dilute to volume with water. 
3) Total recoverable metals (As, Se)—Transfer 100 mL of shaken sample, 1 mL conc HNO3,
and 2 mL 30% H2O2 to a clean, acid-washed 250-mL beaker. Heat on a hot plate without
allowing solution to boil until volume has been reduced to about 50 mL. Remove fro m hot plate
and let cool to room temperature. Add an appropriate concentration of nickel (see Table 3113:I ),Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand dilute to volume in a 100-mL volumetric flask with water. Substitution of palladium is
uneconomical. Nickel may be deleted if palladium is co-a dded during analysis. Simultaneously
prepare a digested blank by substituting water for sample and proceed with digestion as
described above. 
b. Instrument operation:  Mount and align furnace device according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Turn on instrument and data collec tion system. Select appropriate light source and
adjust to recommended electrical setting. Select proper wavelength and se t all conditions
according to manufacturer’s instructions, including background correction. Background
correction is important when elements are determined at short wavelengths or when sample has a
high level of dissolved solids. Background correction norm ally is not necessary at wavelengths
longer than 350 nm. If background correction above 350 nm is needed deuterium arc background
correction is not useful and other types must be used.
 Select proper inert- or sheath-gas flow. In some cases, it is desirabl e to interrupt the
inert-gas flow during atomization. Such interruption results in increased sensitivity by increasing
residence time of the atomic vapor in the optical path. Gas interruption also increases
background absorption and intensifies interferenc e effects, but modern background correction
methods usually eliminate these problems. Consider advantages and disadvantages of this option
for each matrix when optimizing analytical conditions. 
To optimize graphite furnace conditions, carefully adjust fur nace temperature settings to
maximize sensitivity and precision and to minimize interferences. Follow manufacturer’s
instructions. 
Use drying temperatures slightly above the solvent boiling point and provide enough time
and temperature for complete evapor ation without boiling or spattering. 
Select atomization temperature by determini ng the lowest temperature providing maximum
sensitivity without significantly eroding precision. Optimize by a series of successive
determinations at various atomization tempe ratures using a standard solution giving an
absorbance of 0.2 to 0.5. 
The charring temperature must be high enough to maximize volatilization of interfering
matrix components yet too low to volatilize the element of interest. With the drying and
atomizati on temperatures set to their optimum values, analyze a standard solution at a series of
charring temperatures in increasing increments of 50 to 100°C. When the optimum charring
temperature is exceeded, there will be a significant drop in sensitivity. Plot charring temperature
versus sample absorbance: the optimum charring temperature is the highest temperature without
reduced sensitivity. Verify optimization with major changes in sample matrix. 
c. Instrument calibration:  Prepare standard solutions for instrument calibration by diluting
metal stock solutions. Prepare standard solutions fresh daily.
 Prepare a blank and at least three calibration standards in the appropriate concentration
range ( see Table 3113:II ) for correlating element concentration and instrument response. Match
the matrix of the standard solutions to those of the samples as closely as possible. In most cases,
this simply requires matching the acid background of the samples. Fo r seawaters or brines,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationhowever, use the metal-free matrix (¶ 3g) as the standard solution diluent. In addition, add the
same concentration of matrix modifier (if required for sample analysis) to the standard solutions. 
Inject a suitable portion of each st andard solution, in order of increasing concentration.
Analyze each standard solution in triplicate to verify method precision. 
Construct an analytical curve by plotting the av erage peak absorbances or peak areas of the
standard solution versus concentrat ion on linear graph paper. Alternatively, use electronic
instrument calibration if the instrument has this capability. 
d. Sample analysis:  Analyze all samples except those demonstrated to be free of matrix
interferences (based on recoveries of 85% to 115% for known additions) using the method of
standard additions. Analyze all samples at least in duplicate or until repro ducible results are
obtained. A variation of ≤ 10% is considered acceptable reproducibility. Average replicate
values.
1) Direct determination—Inject a measured portion of pretreated sample into the graphite
furnace. Use the same volume as was used to prepare the calibration curve. Usually add modifier
immediately after the sample, preferably using an automatic sampler o r a micropipet.  Some
methods require modifier to be injected before the sample. Use the same volume and
concentration of modifier for all standards and samples. Dry, char, and atomize according to the
preset program. Repeat until reproducible results are obtained. 
Compare the average absorbance value or peak area to the calibration curve to determine
concentration of the element of interest. Alternatively, read results directly if the instrument is
equipped with this capability. If absorbance (or concentr ation) or peak area of the sample is
greater than absorbance (concentration) or peak area of the most concentrated standard solution,
dilute sample and reanalyze. If very large dilutions are required, another technique (e.g., flame
AA or ICP) may be more s uitable for this sample. Large dilution factors magnify small errors on
final calculation. Keep acid background and concentra tion of matrix modifier (if present in the
solutions) constant. Dilute the sample in a blank solution of acid and matrix modifiers.  
Proceed to ¶ 5a below. 
2) Method of standard additions—Refer to ¶ 4c above. The method of standard additions is
valid only when it falls in the linear portion of the calibration curve. Once instrument sensitivity
has been optimized for the element of interest and the linear ra nge for the element has been
established, proceed with sample analyses. 
Inject a measured volume of sample into furnace device. Dry, char or ash, and atomize
samples according to preset program. Repeat until reproducible results are obtained. Record
instrument response in absorbance or concentration as appropriate. Add a known concentration
of the element of interest to a separate portion of sample so as not to change significantly the
sample volume. Repeat the determination. 
Add a known concentration (pr eferably twice that used in the first addition) to a separate
sample portion. Mix well and repeat the determination. 
Using linear graph paper, plot average absorbance or instrument response for the sample andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe additions on the vertical axis against the  concentrations of the added element on the
horizontal axis, using zero as the concentration for the sample. Draw a straight line connecting
the three points and extrapolate to zero absorbance. The intercept at the horizontal axis is the
negative of the el ement concentration in the sample. The concentration axis to the left of the
origin should be a mirror image of the axis to the right. 
5.  Calculations
a. Direct determination:
 µg metal/L = C × F
where: 
        C = metal concentration as read directly from the instrument or from the calibration curve,
µg/L, and          
        F = dilution factor.            
b. Method of additions:
 µg metal/L = C × F 
where: 
                  C =   metal concentration as read from the method of additions plot, µg/L, and 
                  F =  dilution factor. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Data typical of the precision and bias obtainable are presented in Table 3113:III , Table
3113:IV , and  Table 3113:V . 
7.  Quality Control
 See Section 3020  for specific quality control procedures to be followed during analysis.
Although previous indications were that very low optimum concentration ranges were attainable
for most metals (see Table 3113:II ), data in Table 3113:III  using variations of these protocols
show that this may not be so. Exercise extreme care when applying this method to the lower
concentration ranges. Verify analyst precision at  the beginning of each analytical run by making
triplicate analyses. Verify autosampler precision by checking volumes (by weight) delivered by
the autosampler at routinely used injection volume settings. 
8.  Reference
         1.    COPELAND, T.R. & J.P. MANEY.  1986. EPA Method Study 31: Trace Metals by Atomic
Absorption (Furnace Techniques). EPA-600/S4 -85-070, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Environmental Monitoring and Support Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation9.  Bibliography
 RENSHAW, G.D.  1973. The determination of barium by flameless atomic absorption
spectrophotometry using a modified graphite tube atomizer. Atomic Absorption Newsletter
12:158.
 YANAGISAWA, M., T. TAKEUCHI & M. SUZUKI.  1973. Flameless ato mic absorption spectrometry
of antimony. Anal. Chim. Acta  64:381.
 RATTONETTI, A.  1974. Determination of soluble cadmium, lead, silver and indium in rainwater
and stream water with the use of flameless atomic absorption. Anal. Chem.  46:739.
 HENN, E.L.  1975. Determination of selenium in water and industrial effluents by flameless
atomic absorption. Anal. Chem.  47:428.
 MARTIN, T.D. & J.F. KOPP.  1975. Determining selenium in water, wastewater, sediment and
sludge by flameless atomic absorption spectrometry. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  14:109.
 MARUTA, T., K. MINEGISHI & G. SUDOH.  1976. The flameless atomic absorption spectrometric
determination of aluminum with a carbon atomization system. Anal. Chim. Acta  81:313.
 CRANSTON, R.E. & J.W. MURRAY.  1978. The det ermination of chromium species in natural
waters. Anal. Chim. Acta  99:275.
 HOFFMEISTER, W.  1978. Determination of iron in ultrapure water by atomic absorption
spectroscopy. Z. Anal. Chem.  50:289.
 LAGAS, P.  1978. Determination of beryllium, barium, vanadi um and some other elements in
water by atomic absorption spectrometry with electrothermal atomization. Anal. Chim. Acta
98:261.
 CARRONDO, M.J.T., J.N. LESTER & R. PERRY.  1979. Electrothermal atomic absorption
determination of total aluminum in waters and waste waters. Anal. Chim. Acta  111:291.
 NAKAHARA, T. & C.L. CHAKRABARTI.  1979. Direct determination of traces of molybdenum in
synthetic sea water by atomic absorption spectrometry with electrothermal atomization and
selective volatilization of the salt m atrix. Anal. Chim. Acta  104:99.
 TIMINAGA, M. & Y. UMEZAKI.  1979. Determination of submicrogram amounts of tin by atomic
absorption spectrometry with electrothermal atomization. Anal. Chim. Acta  110:55.
3114        ARSENIC AND SELENIU M BY HYDRIDE GENERATION/ATOMIC
ABSORPTION SPECTROMETRY* #(83)
3114 A.        Introduction
 For general introductory material on atomic absorption spectrometric methods, see Section
3111A . 
Two methods are presented in this section: A manual method and a continuous-flow methodStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationespecially recommended for selenium. Co ntinuous-flow automated systems are preferable to
manual hydride generators because the effect of sudden hydrogen generation on light-path
transparency is removed and any blank response from contamination of the HCl reagent by the
elements being determined  is incorporated into the background base line. 
3114  B.        Manual Hydride Generation/Atomic Absorption Spectrometric
Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  This method is applicable to the determination of arsenic and selenium by
conversion to their hydrides by sodium borohydride reagent and transport into an atomic
absorption atomizer.
 Arsenous acid and selenous acid, the As(III) and Se(IV)  oxidation states of arsenic and
selenium, respectively, are instantaneously converted by sodium borohydride reagent in acid
solution to their volatile hydrides. The hydrides are purged continuously by argon or nitrogen
into a quartz cell heated electrical ly or by the flame of an atomic absorption spectrometer and
converted to the gas-phase atoms. The sodium borohydride reducing agent, by rapid generation
of the elemental hydrides in an appropriate reaction cell, minimizes dilution of the hydrides by
the ca rrier gas and provides rapid, sensitive determinations of arsenic and selenium. 
CAUTION: Arsenic and selenium and their hydrides are toxic. Handle with care.  
At room temperature and solution pH values of 1 or less, arsenic acid, the As(V) oxidation
state of arsenic, is reduced relatively slowly by sodium borohydride to As(III), which is then
instantaneously converted to arsine. The arsine atomic absorption peaks commonly are decreased
by one-fourth to one-third for As(V) when compared to As(III). Determin ation of total arsenic
requires that all inorganic arsenic compounds be in the As(III) state. Organic and inorganic
forms of arsenic are first oxidized to As(V) by acid digestion. The As(V) then is quantitatively
reduced to As(III) with sodium or potassium  iodide before reaction with sodium borohydride. 
Selenic acid, the Se(VI) oxidation state of selenium, is not measurably reduced by sodium
borohydride. To determine total selenium by atomic absorption and sodium borohydride, first
reduce Se(VI) formed dur ing the acid digestion procedure to Se(IV), being careful to prevent
reoxidation by chlorine. Efficiency of reduction depends on temperature, reduction time, and
HCl concentration. For 4 N HCl, heat 1 h at 100°C. For 6 N HCl, boiling for 10 min is
sufficient .1-3 Alternatively, autoclave samples in sealed containers at 121°C for 1 h. NOTE:
Autoclaving in sealed containers may result in incomplete reduction, apparently due to the
buildup of chlorine gas.  To obtain equal instrument responses for reduced Se(VI) and Se (IV)
solutions of equal concentrations, manipulate HCl concentration and heating time. For further
details, see Section 3500-Se.  
b.  Equipment selection:  
Certain atomic absorption atomizers and hydride reaction cells are available commerciallyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfor use with the sodium borohydride reagent. A functional manual system that can be constructed
in the laboratory is presented in Figure 3 114:1 . Irrespective of the hydride reaction cell-atomizer
system selected, it must meet the following quality-control considerations: ( a) it must provide a
precise and reproducible standard curve between 0 and 20 µg As or Se/L and an instrumental
detection  limit between 0.1 and 0.5 µg As or Se/L; ( b) when carried through the entire
procedure, oxidation state couples [As (III) - As (V) or Se (IV) - Se (VI)] must cause equal
instrument response; and ( c) sample digestion must yield 80% or greater recovery of a dded
cacodylic acid (dimethyl arsinic acid) and 90% or greater recovery of added As(III), As(V),
Se(VI), or Se(IV).
 Quartz atomization cells provide for the most sensitive arsenic and selenium hydride
determinations. The quartz cell can be heated electric ally or by an air-acetylene flame in an
atomic absorption unit. 
c.  Digestion techniques:  Waters and wastewaters may contain varying amounts of organic
arsenic compounds and inorganic compounds of As(III), As(V), Se(IV), and Se(VI). To measure
total arsenic and selenium in these samples requires sample digestion to s olubilize particulate
forms and oxidize reduced forms of arsenic and selenium and to convert any organic compounds
to inorganic ones. Organic selenium compounds rarely have been demonstrated in water. It is left
to the experienced analyst’s judgment whethe r sample digestion is required.
 Various alternative digestion procedures are provided in ¶s 4c and 4d below. Consider
sulfuric-nitric-perchloric acid digestion (¶ 4c) or sulfuric-nitric acid digestion ( Section 3030F ) as
providing a measure of total recove rable arsenic rather than total arsenic because they do not
completely convert certain organic arsenic compounds to As(V). The sulfuric-nitric-perchloric
acid digestion effectively destroys organics and most particulates in untreated wastewaters or
solid s amples, but does not convert all organic arsenicals to As(V). The potassium persulfate
digestion (¶ 4d) is effective for converting organic arsenic and selenium compounds to As(V)
and Se(VI) in potable and surface waters and in most wastewaters.4 
The HCl- autoclave reduction of Se(VI) described above and in ¶ 4 f is an effective digestion
procedure for total inorganic selenium; however, it has not been found effective for converting
benzene substituted selenium compounds to inorganic selenium. In all cases,  verify the
effectiveness of digestion methods by carrying samples with known additions of organic As or
Se(IV) through the entire procedure. 
d.  Interferences:  Interferences are minimized because the As and Se hydrides are removed
from the solution containing most potential interfering substances. Slight response variations
occur when acid matrices are varied. Control these variations by trea ting standards and samples
in the same manner. Low concentrations of noble metals (approximately 100 µg/L of Ag, Au, Pt,
Pd, etc.), concentrations of copper, lead, and nick el at or greater than 1 mg/L, and concentrations
between 0.1 and 1 mg/L of hydride-f orming elements (Bi, Sb, Sn, and Te) may suppress the
response of As and Se hydrides. Interference by transition metals depends strongly on HCl
concentration. Interferences are less pronounced at 4 to 6 N HCl than at lower concentrations.5
The presence of A s or Se in each other’s matrices can cause similar suppression. ReducedStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationnitrogen oxides resulting from HNO3 digestion and nitrite also can suppress instrumental
response for both elements. Large concentrations of iodide interfere with the Se determination by
reducing Se to its elemental form. Do not use any glassware for determining Se that has been
used for iodide reduction of As(V).
 To prevent chlorine gas produced in the reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) from reoxidizing the
Se(IV), generate the hydride wit hin a few hours of the reduction steps or purge the chlorine from
the samples by sparging.6 
Interferences depend on system design and defy quantitative description because of their
synergistic effects. Certain waters and wastewaters can contain interferen ces in sufficient
concentration to suppress absorption responses of As and Se. For representative samples in a
given laboratory and for initial analyses of unknown wastewaters, add appropriate inorganic
forms of As or Se to digested sample portions and mea sure recovery. If average recoveries are
less than 90%, consider using alternative analytical procedures. 
e.  Detection limit and optimum concentration range:  For both arsenic and selenium,
analyzed by aspiration into a nitrogen-hydrogen flame after reduction, the method detection limit
is 2 µg/L or lower and the optimum concentration range 2 to 20 µg/L.
2.  Apparatus
a. Atomic absorption spectrometer  equipped with air-acetylene flame and quartz cell with
mounting bracket or an electrically heated quartz cell, As and Se electrodeless discharge lamps
with power supply, background correction at measurement wavelengths, and appropriate
strip-chart recorder. A good-quality 10-mV recorder with high sensitivity and a fast response
time is needed.
b. Atomizer:  Use one of the following:
1) Cylindrical quartz cell,  10 to 20 cm long, bracket-mountable above air-acetylene burner. 
2) Cylindrical quartz cell , 10 to 20 cm long, electrically heated by external nichrome wire to
800 to 900°C.7 
3) Cylindrical quartz cell  with internal fuel rich hydrogen-oxygen (air) flame.8 
The sensitivity of quartz cells deteriorates over several months of use. Sensitivity sometimes
may be restored by treatment with 40% HF. CAUTION: HF is extremely corrosive.  Avoid all
contact with exposed skin. Handle with care.  
c. Reaction cell for producing As or Se hydrides:  See Figure 3114:1  for an example of a
manual, laboratory-made system. A commercially available system is acceptable if it utilizes
liquid sodium borohydride reagents; accepts samples digested in accordanc e with ¶s 4c, d, and e;
accepts 4 to 6 N HCl; and is efficiently and precisely stirred by the purging gas and/or a magnetic
stirrer.
d. Eye dropper or syringe  capable of delivering 0.5 to 3.0 mL sodium borohydride reagent.
Exact and reproducible addition is required so that production of hydrogen gas does not varyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsignificantly between determinations.
e.  Vent:  See Section 3111A.6  f.
3.  Reagents
a. Sodium borohydride reagent:  Dissolve 8 g NaBH4 in 200 mL 0.1 N NaOH. Prepare fresh
daily.
b. Sodium iodide prereductant solution:  Dissolve 50 g NaI in 500 mL water. Prepare fresh
daily. Alternatively use an equivalent KI solution.
c. Sulfuric acid,  18N.
d. Sulfuric acid,  2.5N: Cautiously add 35 mL conc H2SO4 to about 400 mL water, let cool,
and adjust volume to 500 mL.
e. Potassium persulfate , 5% solution: Dissolve 25 g K2S2O8 in water and dilute to 500 mL.
Store in glass and refrigerate. Prepare weekly.
f. Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
g. Perchloric acid,  HClO4, conc.
h. Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc.
i. Argon (or nitrogen),  commercial grade.
j. Arsenic(III) solutions:
1) Stock As(III) solution:  Dissolve 1.320 g arsenic trioxide, As2O3, in water containing 4 g
NaOH. Dilute to 1 L; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg As(III). 
2) Intermediate As(III) solution:  Dilute 10 mL stock As solution to 1000 mL with water
containing 5 mL conc HCl; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg As(III). 
3) Standard As(III) solution:  Dilute 10 mL intermediate As(III) solution to 1000 mL with
water containing the same concentration of acid used for sample preservation (2 to 5 mL conc
HNO3); 1.00 mL = 0.100 µg As(III). Prepare diluted solutions daily. 
k. Arsenic(V) solutions:
1) Stock As(V) solution:  Dissolve 1.534 g arsenic pentoxide, As2O5, in distilled water
containing 4 g NaOH. Dilute to 1 L; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg As(V). 
2) Intermediate As(V) solution:  Prepare as for As(III) above; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg As(V). 
3) Standard As(V) solution:  Prepare as for As(III) above; 1.00 mL = 0.100 µg As(V). 
l. Organic arsenic solutions:
1) Stock organic arsenic solution:  Dissolve 1.842 g dimethylarsinic acid (cacodylic acid),
(CH3)2AsOOH, in water containing 4 g NaOH. Dilute to 1 L; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg As. [N OTE:
Check purity of cacodylic acid reagent against an intermediate arsenic stand ard (50 to 100 mg
As/L) using flame atomic absorption.] Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2) Intermediate organic arsenic solution:  Prepare as for As(III) above; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg
As. 
3) Standard organic arsenic solution:  Prepare as for As(III) above; 1.00 mL = 0.100 µg As. 
m. Selenium(IV) solutions:
1) Stock Se(IV) solution:  Dissolve 2.190 g sodium selenite, Na2SeO3, in water containing 10
mL HCl and dilute to 1 L; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Se(IV). 
2) Intermediate Se(IV) solution:  Dilute 10 mL stock Se(IV) to 1000 mL with water
containing 10 mL conc HCl; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg Se(IV). 
3) Standard Se(IV) solution:  Dilute 10 mL intermediate Se(IV) solution to 1000 mL with
water containing the same concentration of acid used for sample preservation (2 to 5 mL conc
HNO3). Prepare solution daily when checking the equivalency of instrument response for Se(IV)
and Se(VI); 1.00 mL = 0.100 µg Se(IV). 
n. Selenium(VI) solutions:
1) Stock Se(VI) solution : Dissolve 2.393 g sodium selenate, Na2SeO4, in water containing 10
mL conc HNO3. Dilute to 1 L;  1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Se(VI). 
2) Intermediate Se(VI) solution:  Prepare as for Se(IV) above; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg Se (VI). 
3) Standard Se(VI) solution:  Prepare as for Se(IV) above; 1.00 mL = 0.100 µg Se(VI). 
4.  Procedure
a. Apparatus setup:  Either see Figure 3114:1  or follow manufacturer’s instructions. Connect
inlet of reaction cell with auxiliary purging gas controlled by flow meter. If a drying cell
between the reaction cell and atomizer is necessary, use only anhydro us CaCl2 but not CaSO4
because it may retain SeH2. Before using the hydride generation/analysis system, optimize
operating parameters. Align quartz atomizers for maximum absorbance. Aspirate a blank until
memory effects are removed. Establish purging gas f low, concentration and rate of addition of
sodium borohydride reagent, solution volume, and stirring rate for optimum instrument response
for the chemical species to be analyzed. Optimize quartz cell temperature. If sodium borohydride
reagent is added too quickly, rapid evolution of hydrogen will unbalance the system. If the
volume of solution being purged is too large, the absorption signal will be decreased.
Recommended wavelengths are 193.7 and 196.0 nm for As and Se, respectively.
b. Instrument calibration standards:  Transfer 0.00, 1.00, 2.00, 5.00, 10.00, 15.00, and 20.00
mL standard solutions of As(III) or Se(IV) to 100-mL volumetric flasks and bring to volume
with water containing the same acid concentration used for sample pre servation (commonly 2 to
5 mL conc HNO3/L). This yields blank and standard solutions of 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 µg As
or Se/L. Prepare fresh daily. In all cases, standards must be carried through the same digestion
protocol as the samples to monitor dig estion effectiveness.
c. Preparation of samples and standards for total  recoverable arsenic and selenium:  UseStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdigestion procedure described in 3030F for samples and standards. Alternatively, add 50 mL
sample, As(III), or Se(IV) standard to 200-mL Berzelius beaker or 100-mL mi cro-kjeldahl flask.
Add 7 mL 18 N H2SO4 and 5 mL conc HNO3. Add a small boiling chip or glass beads if
necessary. Evaporate to SO3 fumes. Maintain oxidizing conditions at all times by adding small
amounts of HNO3 to prevent solution from darkening. Maintain  an excess of HNO3 until all
organic matter is destroyed. Complete digestion usually is indicated by a light-colored solution.
Cool slightly, add 25 mL water and 1 mL conc HClO4 and again evaporate to SO3 fumes to
expel oxides of nitrogen. CAUTION: See Section 3030H  for cautions on use of HClO4. Monitor
effectiveness of either digestion procedure us ed by adding 5 mL of standard organic arsenic
solution or 5 mL of a standard selenium solution to a 50-mL sample and measuring recovery,
carrying standards and t he sample with known addition through entire procedure. To report total
recoverable arsenic as total arsenic, average recoveries of cacodylic acid must exceed 80%. After
final evaporation of SO3 fumes, dilute to 50 mL for arsenic measurements or to 30 mL f or
selenium measurements. For analysis of both elements in a single sample, increase sample
volume to 100 mL and double the volumes of acids us ed in the digestion. Adjust final digestate
volume to 100 mL. Use 50 mL for As and 30 mL for Se determinations, m aking appropriate
volume corrections in calculating results.
d. Preparation of samples and standards for total arsenic  and selenium:  Add 50 mL
undigested sample or standard to a 200-mL Ber zelius beaker or 100-mL micro-kjeldahl flask.
Add 1 mL 2.5 N H2SO4 and 5 mL 5% K2S2O8. Boil gently on a pre-heated hot plate for
approximately 30 to 40 min or until a final volume of 10 mL is reached. Do not let sample go to
dryness. Alternatively heat in an autoclave at 121°C for 1 h in capped containers. After manual
digestion, dilute to 50 mL for subsequent arsenic measurements and to 30 mL for selenium
measurements. Monitor effectiveness of digestion by measuring recovery of As or Se as above.
If poor recovery of arsenic added as cacodylic acid is obtained, reanalyze using double the
amount of K2S2O8. For analysis of both elemen ts in a single sample, increase sample volume to
100 mL and double the volumes of acids used in the digestion. Adjust final digestate volume to
100 mL. Use 50 mL for As and 30 mL for Se determinations, making appropriate volume
corrections in calculating r esults.
e. Determination of arsenic with sodium borohydride:  To 50 mL digested standard or sample
in a 200-mL Berzelius beaker (see Figure 3114:1 ) add 5 mL conc HCl and mix. Add 5 mL NaI
prereductant solution, mix, and wait at least 30 min. (N OTE: The NaI reagen t has not been found
necessary for certain hydride reaction cell designs if a 20 to 30% loss in instrument sensitivity is
not important and variables of solution acid conditions, temperatures, and volumes for
production of As(V) and arsine can be controlle d strictly. Such control requires an automated
delivery system; see Section 3114C .)
 Attach one Berzelius beaker at a time to the rubber stopper containing the gas dispersion
tube for the purging gas, the sodium borohydride reagent inlet, and the outlet to  the quartz cell.
Turn on strip-chart recorder and wait until the base line is established by the purging gas and allStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationair is expelled from the reaction cell. Add 0.5 mL sodium borohydride reagent. After the
instrument absorbance has reached a maximum and r eturned to the base line, remove beaker,
rinse dispersion tube with water, and proceed to the next sample or standard. Periodically
compare standard As(III) and As(V) curves for response consistency. Check for presence of
chemical interferences that suppre ss instrument response for arsine by treating a digested sample
with 10 µg/L As(III) or As(V) as appropriate. Average recoveries should be not less than 90%. 
f. Determination of selenium with sodium borohydride:  To 30 mL digested standard or
sample in a 200-mL Berzelius beaker or 100-mL micro-kjeldahl flask, add 15 mL conc HCl and
mix. Heat for a predetermined period at 90 to 100°C. Alternatively autoclave at  121°C in capped
containers for 60 min, or heat for a predetermined time in open test tubes using a 90 to 100°C hot
water bath or an aluminum block digester. Check effectiveness of the selected heating time by
demonstrating equal instrument responses for c alibration curves prepared either from standard
Se(IV) or from Se(VI) solutions. Effective heat  exposure for converting Se(VI) to Se(IV), with
no loss of Se(IV), ranges between 5 and 60 min when open beakers or test tubes are used.
Establish a heating time  for effective conversion and apply this time to all samples and
standards. Do not digest standard Se(IV) and Se(VI) solutions used for this check of
equivalency. After prereduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV), attach Berzelius beakers, one at a time, to
the purge  apparatus. For each, turn on the strip-chart recorder and wait until the base line is
established. Add 0.50 mL sodium borohydride reagent. After the instrument absorbance has
reached a maximum and returned to the base line, remove beaker, rinse dispersion  tube with
water, and proceed to the next sample or standard. Check for presence of chemical interferences
that suppress selenium hydride instrument response by treating a digested sample with 10 µg Se
(IV)/L. Average recoveries should be not less than 90% .
5.  Calculation
 Construct a standard curve by plotting peak heights or areas of standards versus
concentration of standards. Measure peak heights or areas of samples and read concentrations
from curve. If sample was diluted (or concentrated) before samp le digestion, apply an
appropriate factor. On instruments so equipped, read concentrations directly after standard
calibration. 
6.  Precision and Bias
Single-laboratory, single-operator data were co llected forAs(III) and organic arsenic by both
manual and automated methods, and for the manual determination of selenium. Recovery values
(%) from seven replicates are given below:
Method As(III) Org As Se(IV) Se(VI)
Manual with digestion   91.8 87.3 — —
Manual without digestion 109.4 19.4 100.6 110.8
Automated with digestion   99.8 98.4 — —Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMethod As(III) Org As Se(IV) Se(VI)
Automated without digestion   92.5 10.4 — —
7.  References
         1.    VIJAN, P.N. & D. LEUNG. 1980. Reduction of chemical interference and speciation
studies in the hydride generation-atomic absorption method for selenium. Anal. Chim.
Acta 120:141.
         2.    VOTH-BEACH, L.M. & D.E. SHRADER. 1985. Reduc tion of interferences in the
determination of arsenic and selenium by hydride generation. Spectroscopy  1:60.
         3.    JULSHAMN, K., O. RINGDAL, K.-E. SLINNING & O.R. BRAEKKAN. 1982. Optimization of
the determination of selenium in marine samples by atomic a bsorption spectrometry:
Comparison of a flameless graphite furnace atomic absorption system with a hydride
generation atomic absorption system. Spectrochim. Acta.  37B:473.
         4.    NYGAARD, D.D. & J.H. LOWRY. 1982. Sample digestion procedures for simultaneo us
determination of arsenic, antimony, and selenium by inductively coupled argon plasma
emission spectrometry with hydride generation. Anal. Chem.  54:803.
         5.    WELZ, B. & M. MELCHER. 1984. Mechanisms of transition metal interferences in hydride
generati on atomic-absorption spectrometry. Part 1. Influence of cobalt, copper, iron
and nickel on selenium determination. Analyst  109:569.
         6.    KRIVAN, V., K. PETRICK, B. WELZ & M. MELCHER. 1985. Radiotracer error-diagnostic
investigation of selenium determina tion by hydride-generation atomic absorption
spectrometry involving treatment with hydr ogen peroxide and hydrochloric acid. Anal.
Chem.  57:1703.
         7.    CHU, R.C., G.P. BARRON & P.A.W. BAUMGARNER. 1972. Arsenic determination at
submicrogram levels by arsin e evolution and flameless atomic absorption
spectrophotometric technique. Anal. Chem.  44: 1476.
         8.    SIEMER, D.D., P. KOTEEL & V. JARIWALA. 1976. Optimization of arsine generation in
atomic absorption arsenic determinations. Anal. Chem.  48:836. 
8.  Bibliography
 FERNANDEZ, F.J. & D.C. MANNING. 1971. The determination of arsenic at submicrogram levels
by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  10:86.
 JARREL-ASH CORPORATION. 1971. High Sensitivity Arsenic Determination by Atomic
Absorption. Jarrel-Ash Atomic Absorption Applications Laboratory Bull. No. As-3.
 MANNING, D.C. 1971. A high sensitivity arsenic-selenium sampling system for atomic absorption
spectroscopy. Atomic Absorption Newsletter  10:123.
 BRAMAN, R.S. & C.C . FOREBACK. 1973. Methylated forms of arsenic in the environment. ScienceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation182:1247.
 CALDWELL, J.S., R.J. LISHKA & E.F. MCFARREN . 1973. Evaluation of a low-cost arsenic and
selenium determination of microgram-per-liter levels. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc., 65:731.
 AGGETT, J. & A.C. ASPELL. 1976. The determination of arsenic (III) and total arsenic by
atomic-absorption spectroscopy. Analyst  101:341.
 FIORINO, J.A., J.W. JONES & S.G. CAPAR. 1976. Sequential determination of arsenic, selenium,
antimony, and te llurium in foods via rapid hydride evolution and atomic absorption
spectrometry. Anal. Chem.  48: 120.
 CUTTER, G.A. 1978. Species determination of selenium in natural waters. Anal. Chem. Acta
98:59.
 GODDEN, R.G. & D.R. THOMERSON. 1980. Generation of coval ent hydrides in atomic absorption
spectroscopy. Analyst  105:1137.
 BROWN, R.M., JR., R.C. FRY, J.L. MOYERS, S.J. NORTHWAY, M.B. DENTON & G.S. WILSON. 1981.
Interference by volatile nitrogen oxides and transition-metal catalysis in the preconcentration
of arsenic and selenium as hydrides. Anal. Chem.  53:1560.
 SINEMUS, H.W., M. MELCHER & B. WELZ. 1981. Influence of valence state on the determination of
antimony, bismuth, selenium, and tellurium in lake water using the hydride AA technique.
Atomic Spectrosc.  2:81.
 DEDINA, J. 1982. Interference of volatile hydride forming elements in selenium determination by
atomic absorption spectrometry with hydride generation. Anal. Chem.  54:2097.
3114 C.        Continuous Hydride Generation/Atomic Absorption Spectrometric
Method
1.  General Discussion
 The continuous hydride generator offers the advantages of simplicity in operation, excellent
reproducibility, low detection limits, and high sample volume throughput for selenium analysis
following preparations as described in Section 3500-Se.B  or Section 3114B.4 c and  d. 
a.  Principle:  See Section 3114B .
b.  Interferences:  Free chlorine in hydrochloric acid is a common but difficult-to-diagnose
interference. (The amount of chlorine varies w ith manufacturer and with each lot from the same
manufacturer). Chlorine oxidizes the hydride and can contaminate th e hydride generator to
prevent recoveries under any conditions. When interference is encountered, or preferably before
using each new bottle of HCl, eliminate chlorine from a 2.3-L bottle of conc HCl by bubbling
with helium (commercial grade, 100 mL/min) f or 3 h.
 Excess oxidant (peroxide, persulfate, or permanganate) from the total selenium digestion can
oxidize the hydride. Follow procedures in 3500-Se.B.2, 3, or 4 to ensure removal of all oxidizing
agents before hydride generation. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationNitrite is a common t race constituent in natural and waste waters, and at levels as low as 10
µg/L nitrite can reduce the recovery of hydrogen selenide from Se(IV) by over 50%. Moreover,
during the reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) by dige stion with HCl (3500-Se.B.5), some nitrate  is
converted to nitrite, which subsequently interferes. When this interference is suspected, add
sulfanilamide after sample acidification (or HCl digestion). The diazotization reaction between
nitrite and sulfanilamide completely removes the interferent e ffect (i.e., the standard addition
slope is normal). 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Continuous hydride generator:  The basic unit is composed of two parts: a precision
peristaltic pump, which is used to meter and mix reagents and sample solutions, and the
gas-liquid separator. At the gas-liquid separator a constant flow of argon stri ps out the hydrogen
and metal hydride gases formed in the reaction and carries them to the heated quartz absorption
cell ( Section 3114B.1 b and  Section 3114B.2 b), which is supported by a metal bracket mounted
on top of the regular air acetylene burner head . The spent liquid flows out of the separator via a
constant level side drain to a waste bucket. Schematics and operating parameters are shown in
Figure 3114:2 .
 Check flow rates frequently to ensure a steady flow; an uneven flow in any tubing will cause
an erratic signal. Remove tubings from pump rollers when not in use. Typical flow rates are:
sample, 7 mL/min; acid, 1 mL/min; borohydride reagent, 1 mL/min. Argon flow usually is
pre-fixed, typically at 90 mL/min. 
b. Atomic absorption spectrometric equipment:  See Section 3111A.6 .
3.  Reagents
a.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 5 + 1: Handle conc HCl under a fume hood. If necessary, remove
free Cl2 by stripping conc HCl with helium as described above.
b.  Borohydride reagent:  Dissolve 0.6 g NaBH4 and 0.5 g NaOH in 100 mL water.
CAUTION : Sodium borohydride is toxic, flammable, and corrosive.
c.  Selenium reference standard solution,  1000 mg/L: Use commercially available standard;
verify that selenium is Se(IV).
d.  Intermediate standard solution, 1 mg/L: Dilute 1 mL reference standard solution to 1 L in
a volumetric flask with distilled water.
e.  Working standard solutions, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 µg/L: Dilute 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0
mL intermediate standard solution to 100 mL in a volumetric flask.
f.  Sulfanilamide solution:  Prepare a 2.5% (w/v) solution daily;  add several drops conc HCl
per 50 mL solution to facilitate dissolution.
4.  Procedure
a.  Sample preparation:  See Section 3500-Se  or Section 3114B.4 c and  d for preparationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsteps for various Se fractions or total Se.
b.  Preconditioning hydride generator:  For newly installed tubing, turn on pump for at least
10 to 15 min before instrument calibration. Sample the highest standard for a few minutes to let
volatile hydride react with the reactive sites in the transfer l ines and on the quartz absorption cell
surfaces.
c.  Instrument calibration:  Depending on total void volume in sample tubing, sampling time
of 15 to 20 s generally is sufficient to obtain a steady signal. Between samples, submerge uptake
tube in rinse water. Calibrate instrument daily after a 45-min la mp warmup time. Use either the
hollow cathode or the electrodeless discharge lamp.
d.  Antifoaming agents:  Certain samples, particularly wastewater samples containing a high
concentration of proteinaceous substances, can cause excessive foaming that could carry the
liquid directly into the heated quartz absorption cell and cause splatt ering of salty deposits onto
the windows of the spectrometer. Add a drop of antifoaming agent* #(84)  to eliminate this
problem.
e.  Nitrite removal:  After samples have been acidified, or after acid digestion, add 0.1 mL
sulfanilamide solution per 10 mL sample and let react for 2 min.
f.  Analysis:  Follow manufacturer’s instructions for operation of analytical equipment.
5.  Calculation
 Construct a calibration curve based on absorbance vs. standard concentration. Apply dilution
factors on diluted samples. 
6.  Precision and Bias
Working standards were analyzed together with batches of
water samples on a routine production basis. The standards werecompounded using
chemically pure sodium selenite and sodiumselenate. The values of Se(IV) + Se(VI) were
determin ed byconverting Se(VI) to Se(IV) by digestion with HCl. Results aretabulated below.
No.
AnalysesMean Se(IV)
µg/LRel. Dev.
%Se(IV) + Se(VI)
µg/LRel. Del.
%
21   4.3 12   10.3 7
26   8.5 12   19.7 6
22 17.2   7   39.2 8
20 52.8   5 106.0 6
7.  Bibliography
 REAMER, D.C. & C. VEILOON.  1981. Preparation of biological materials for determination of
selenium by hydride generation-AAS. Anal. Chem.  53:1192.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation SINEMUS, H.W., M. MELCHER & B. WELZ.  1981. Influence of valence state on the determinati on of
antimony, bismuth, selenium, and tellurium in lake water using the hydride AA technique.
Atomic Spectrosc.  2:81.
 RODEN, D.R. & D.E. TALLMAN.  1982. Determination of inorganic selenium species in
groundwaters containing organic interferences by ion ch romatography and hydride
generation/atomic absorption spectrometry. Anal. Chem.  54:307.
 CUTTER, G.  1983. Elimination of nitrite interference in the determination of selenium by hydride
generation. Anal. Chim. Acta  149:391.
 NARASAKI, H. & M. IKEDA.  1984. Automated determination of arsenic and selenium by atomic
absorption spectrometry with hydride generation. Anal. Chem.  56:2059.
 WELZ, B. & M. MELCHER.  1985. Decomposition of marine biological tissues for determination of
arsenic, selenium, and mercury usi ng hydride-generation and cold-vapor atomic absorption
spectrometries. Anal. Chem.  57:427.
 EBDON, L. & S.T. SPARKES.  1987. Determination of arsenic and selenium in environmental
samples by hydride generation-direct current plasma-atomic emission spectrome try.
Microchem. J.  36:198.
 EBDON, L. & J.R. WILKINSON.  1987. The determination of arsenic and selenium in coal by
continuous flow hydride-generation atomic ab sorption spectroscopy and atomic fluorescence
spectrometry. Anal. Chim. Acta.  194:177.
 VOTH-BEAC H, L.M. & D.E. SHRADER.  1985. Reduction of interferences in the determination of
arsenic and selenium by hydride generation. Spectroscopy  1:60. 
3120        METALS BY PLASMA EMISSION SPECTROSCOPY* #(85)
3120 A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 Emission spectroscopy using inductively coupl ed plasma (ICP) was developed in the
mid-1960’s1,2 as a rapid, sensitive, and convenient method for the determination of metals in
water and wastewater samples.3-6 Dissolved metals are determined in filtered and acidified
samples. Total metals are determined after appropriate digestion. Care must be taken to ensure
that potential interferences are dealt with, esp ecially when dissolved solids exceed 1500 mg/L. 
2.  References
         1.    GREENFIELD, S., I.L. JONES & C.T. BERRY.  1964. High-pressure plasma-spectroscopic
emission sources. Analyst  89: 713.
         2.    WENDT, R.H. & V.A. FASSEL.  1965. Induction-coupled plasma spectrometric excitation
source. Anal. Chem.  37:920.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Method 200.7. Inductively coupled
plasma-atomic emission spectrometric method for trace element analysis of water and
wastes. Methods for the Determination of Metals in Environmental
Samples–Suppleme nt I. EPA 600/R-94-111, May 1994.
         4.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1987. Annual Book of ASTM
Standards, Vol. 11.01. American Soc. Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
         5.    FISHMAN, M.J. & W.L. BRADFORD,  eds. 1982. A Supplement to Me thods for the
Determination of Inorganic Substances in Water and Fluvial Sediments. Rep. No.
82-272, U.S. Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
         6.    GARBARINO, J.R. & H.E. TAYLOR.  1985. Trace Analysis. Recent Developments and
Applications of Inductively C oupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy to Trace
Elemental Analysis of Water. Volume 4. Academic Press, New York, N.Y.
3120 B.        Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  An ICP source consists of a flowing stream of argon gas ionized by an applied
radio frequency field typically oscillating at 27.1 MHz. This field is inductively coupled to the
ionized gas by a water-cooled coil surrounding a quartz ‘‘torch ’’ that supports and confines the
plasma. A sample aerosol is generated in an appropriate nebulizer and spray chamber and is
carried into the plasma through an injector tube located within the torch. The sample aerosol is
injected directly into the ICP, su bjecting the constituent atoms to temperatures of about 6000 to
8000°K.1 Because this results in almost complete dissociation of molecules, significant reduction
in chemical interferences is achieved. The high temperature of the plasma excites atomic
emiss ion efficiently. Ionization of a high percenta ge of atoms produces ionic emission spectra.
The ICP provides an optically ‘‘thin’’ source that is not subject to self-absorption except at very
high concentrations. Thus linear dynamic ranges of four to six or ders of magnitude are observed
for many elements.2
 The efficient excitation provided by the ICP results in low detection limits for many
elements. This, coupled with the extended dynamic range, permits effective multielement
determination of metals.3 The light emitted from the ICP is focused onto the entrance slit of
either a monochromator or a polychromator that  effects dispersion. A precisely aligned exit slit
is used to isolate a portion of the emission spectrum for intensity measurement using a
photomu ltiplier tube. The monochromator uses a single exit slit/photomultiplier and may use a
computer-controlled scanning mechanism to examine emission wavelengths sequentially. The
polychromator uses multiple fixed exit slits and corresponding photomultiplier t ubes; it
simultaneously monitors all configured wavelengths using a computer-controlled readout
system. The sequential approach provides greater wavelength selection while the simultaneousStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationapproach can provide greater sample throughput. 
b.  Applicable metals and analytical limits:  Table 3120:I  lists elements for which this method
applies, recommended analytical wavelengths, and typical estimated instrument detection limits
using conventional pneumatic nebulization. Actual working detect ion limits are
sample-dependent. Typical upper limits for linear calibration also are included in Table 3120:I .
c.  Interferences:  Interferences may be categorized as follows:
1)  Spectral interferences—Light emission from spectral sources other than the element of
interest may contribute to apparent net signal intensity. Sources of spectral interference include
direct spectral line overlaps, broadened wings of intense spectra l lines, ion-atom recombination
continuum emission, molecular band emission, and stray (scattered) light from the emission of
elements at high concentrations.4 Avoid line overlaps by selecting alternate analytical
wavelengths. Avoid or minimize other spect ral interference by judicious choice of background
correction positions. A wavelength scan of the element line region is useful for detecting
potential spectral interferences and for selecting positions for background correction. Make
corrections for resid ual spectral interference using empirically determined correction factors in
conjunction with the computer software supplied by the spectrometer manufacturer or with the
calculation detailed below. The empirical correction method cannot be used with scanni ng
spectrometer systems if the analytical and interfering lines cannot be precisely and reproducibly
located. In addition, if using a polychromator, verify absence of spectral interference from an
element that could occur in a sample but for which there is  no channel in the detector array. Do
this by analyzing single-element solutions of 100 mg/L concentration and noting for each
element channel the apparent concentration from the interfering substance that is greater than the
element’s instrument detection  limit. 
2)  Nonspectral interferences 
a)  Physical interferences are effects associated with sample nebulization and transport
processes. Changes in the physical properties of samples, such as viscosity and surface tension,
can cause significant error. This usu ally occurs when samples containing more than 10% (by
volume) acid or more than 1500 mg dissolved solids/L are analyzed using calibration standards
containing ≤ 5% acid. Whenever a new or unusual sample matrix is encountered, use the test
described in ¶ 4g.  If physical interference is present, compensate for it by sample dilution, by
using matrix-matched calibration standards, or by applying the method of standard addition (see
¶ 5d below). 
High dissolved solids content also can contribute to instrumental  drift by causing salt buildup
at the tip of the nebulizer gas orifice. Using prehumidified argon for sample nebulization lessens
this problem. Better control of the argon flow rate to the nebulizer using a mass flow controller
improves instrument performa nce. 
b)  Chemical interferences are caused by molecular compound formation, ionization effects,
and thermochemical effects associated with sample vaporization and atomization in the plasma.
Normally these effects are not pronounced and can be minimized by car eful selection ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationoperating conditions (incident power, plasma observation position, etc.). Chemical interferences
are highly dependent on sample matrix and element of interest. As with physical interferences,
compensate for them by using matrix matched st andards or by standard addition (¶ 5d). To
determine the presence of chemical interference, follow instructions in ¶ 4g. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  ICP source:  The ICP source consists of a radio frequency (RF) generator capable of
generating at least 1.1 KW of power, torch, tesla coil, load coil, impedance matching network,
nebulizer, spray chamber, and drain. High-quality flow regulators are re quired for both the
nebulizer argon and the plasma support gas flow. A peristaltic pump is recommended to regulate
sample flow to the nebulizer. The type of nebulizer and spray chamber used may depend on the
samples to be analyzed as well as on the equipme nt manufacturer. In general, pneumatic
nebulizers of the concentric or cross-flow design are used. Viscous samples and samples
containing particulates or high dissolved solids content (>5000 mg/L) may require nebulizers of
the Babington type.5
b.  Spectrometer:  The spectrometer may be of the simultaneous (polychromator) or
sequential (monochromator) type with air-path, inert gas purged, or vacuum optics. A spectral
bandpass of 0.05 nm or less is required. The instrument should permit examinati on of the
spectral background surrounding the emission lines used for metals determination. It is necessary
to be able to measure and correct for spectral background at one or more positions on either side
of the analytical lines.
3.  Reagents and Standards
 Use reagents that are of ultra-high-purity grade or equivalent. Redistilled acids are
acceptable. Except as noted, dry all salts at 105°C for 1 h and store in a desiccator before
weighing. Use deionized water prepared by passi ng water through at least two stages of
deionization with mixed bed cation/anion exchange resins.6 Use deionized water for preparing
all calibration standards, reagents, and for dilution. 
a.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc and 1+1.
b.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
c.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, 1+1: Add 500 mL conc HNO3 to 400 mL water and dilute to 1 L.
d.  Standard stock solutions:  See Section 3111B , Section 3111D , and  Section 3114B .
CAUTION:  Many metal salts are extremely toxic and may be fatal if swallowed. Wash hands
thoroughly after handling.
1)  Aluminum:  See Section 3111D.3 k1). 
2)  Antimony:  See Section 3111B.3  j1). 
3)  Arsenic:  See Section 3114B.3 k1). 
4)  Barium:  See Section 3111D.3 k2). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation5)  Beryllium:  See Section 3111D.3 k3).
6)  Boron: Do not dry  but keep bottle tightly stoppered and store in a desiccator. Dissolve
0.5716 g anhydrous H3BO3 in water and dilute to 1000 mL; 1 mL = 100 µg B. 
7)  Cadmium:  See Section 3111B.3  j3). 
8)  Calcium:  See Section 3111B.3  j4). 
9)  Chromium:  See Section 3111B.3  j6). 
10)  Cobalt:  See Section 3111B.3  j7). 
11)  Copper : See Section 3111B.3  j8). 
12)  Iron:  See Section 3111B.3  j11). 
13)  Lead:  See Section 3111B.3  j12). 
14)  Lithium:  See Section 3111B.3  j13). 
15)  Magnesium:  See Section 3111B.3  j14). 
16)  Manganese:  See Section 3111B.3  j15). 
17)  Molybdenum:  See Section 3111D.3 k4). 
18)  Nickel:  See Section 3111B.3  j16). 
19)  Potassium:  See Section 3111B.3  j19). 
20)  Selenium:  See Section 3114B.3 n1). 
21)  Silica:  See Section  3111D.3 k7). 
22)  Silver:  See Section 3111B.3  j22). 
23)  Sodium:  See Section 3111B.3  j23). 
24)  Strontium:  See Section 3111B.3  j24). 
25)  Thallium:  See Section 3111B.3  j25). 
26)  Vanadium:  See Section 3111D.3 k10). 
27)  Zinc:  See Section 3111B.3  j27). 
e.  Calibration standards:  Prepare mixed calibration standards containing the concentrations
shown in Table 3120:I  by combining appropriate volumes of the stock solutions in 100-mL
volumetric flasks. Add 2 mL 1+1 HNO3 and 10 mL 1+1 HCl and dilute to 100 mL with water.
Before preparing mixed standards, analyze each stock solution separately to determine possible
spectral interference or the presence of impurities. When preparing mixed standards take care
that the elements are compatible and stable. Store m ixed standard solutions in an FEP
fluorocarbon or unused polyethylene bottle. Verify calibration standards initially using the
quality control standard; monitor weekly for stability. The following are recommended
combinations using the suggested analytical  lines in Table 3120:I . Alternative combinations are
acceptable.
1)  Mixed standard solution I:  Manganese, beryllium, cadmium, lead, selenium, and zinc. 
2)  Mixed standard solution II:  Barium, copper, iron, vanadium, and cobalt. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3)  Mixed standard solution III:  Molybdenum, silica, arsenic, strontium, and lithium. 
4)  Mixed standard solution IV:  Calcium, sodium, potassium, aluminum, chromium, and
nickel. 
5)  Mixed standard solution V:  Antimony, boron, magnesium, silver, and thallium. If
addition of silver results in an initial precipitation, add 15 mL water and warm flask until
solution clears. Cool and dilute to 100 mL with water. For this acid combinat ion limit the silver
concentration to 2 mg/L. Silver under these conditions is stable in a tap water matrix for 30 d.
Higher concentrations of silver require additional HCl. 
f.  Calibration blank:  Dilute 2 mL 1+1 HNO3 and 10 mL 1+1 HCl to 100 mL with water.
Prepare a sufficient quantity to be used to flush the system between standards and samples.
g.  Method blank:  Carry a reagent blank through entire sample preparation procedure.
Prepare method blank to contain the same acid types and concentrations as the sample solutions.
h.  Instrument check standard:  Prepare instrument check standards by combining compatible
elements at a concentration of 2 mg/L.
i.  Instrument quality control sample:  Obtain a certified aqueous reference standard from an
outside source and prepare according to instructions provided by the supplier. Use the same acid
matrix as the calibration standards.
j.  Method quality control sample:  Carry the instrument quality control sample (¶ 3i) through
the entire sample preparation procedure.
k.  Argon:  Use technical or welder’s grade. If gas appears to be a source of problems, use
prepurified grade.
4.  Procedure
a.  Sample preparation:  See Section 3030F .
b.  Operating conditions:  Because of differences among makes and models of satisfactory
instruments, no detailed operating instructions can be provided. Follow manufacturer’s
instructions. Establish instrumental detection limit, precision, optimum backgr ound correction
positions, linear dynamic range, and interferences for each analytical line. Verify that the
instrument configuration and operating conditions satisfy the analytical requirements and that
they can be reproduced on a day-to-day basis. An ato m-to-ion emission intensity ratio [Cu(I)
324.75 nm/ Mn(II) 257.61 nm] can be used to reproduce optimum conditions for multielement
analysis precisely. The Cu/Mn intensity ratio may be incorporated into the calibration procedure,
including specifications fo r sensitivity and for precision.7 Keep daily or weekly records of the
Cu and Mn intensities and/or the intensities of critical element lines. Also record settings for
optical alignment of the polychromator, sample uptake rate, power readings (incident, ref lected),
photomultiplier tube attenuation, mass flow controller settings, and system maintenance.
c.  Instrument calibration:  Set up instrument as directed (¶ b). Warm up for 30 min. For
polychromators, perform an optical alignmen t using the profile lamp or solution. CheckStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationalignment of plasma torch and spectrometer entrance slit, particularly if main tenance of the
sample introduction system was performed. Make Cu/Mn or similar intensity ratio adjustment.
 Calibrate instrument according to manufacturer’s recommended procedure using calibration
standards and blank. Aspirate each standard or blank for a minimum of 15 s after reaching the
plasma before beginning signal integration. Rinse with calibration blank or similar solution for at
least 60 s between each standard to eliminate any carryover from the previous standard. Use
average intensity of multiple  integrations of standards or samples to reduce random error. 
Before analyzing samples, analyze instrument check standard. Concentration values obtained
should not deviate from the actual values by more than ±5% (or the established control limits,
whichev er is lower). 
d.  Analysis of samples:  Begin each sample run with an analysis of the calibration blank, then
analyze the method blank. This permits a check of the sample preparation reagents and
procedures for contamination. Analyze samples, alternating them with anal yses of calibration
blank. Rinse for at least 60 s with dilute acid between samples and blanks. After introducing
each sample or blank let system equilibrate before starting signal integration. Examine each
analysis of the calibration blank to verify that no carry-over memory effect has occurred. If
carry-over is observed, repeat rinsing until proper blank values are obtained. Make appropriate
dilutions and acidifications of the sample to determine concentrations beyond the linear
calibration range.
e.  Instrumental quality control:  Analyze instrument check standard once per 10 samples to
determine if significant instrument drift has occu rred. If agreement is not within ± 5% of the
expected values (or within the established control limits, whichever  is lower), terminate analysis
of samples, correct problem, and recalibrate instrument. If the intensity ratio reference is used,
resetting this ratio may restore calibration without the need for reanalyzing calibration standards.
Analyze instrument check standard to confirm proper recalibration. Reanalyze one or more
samples analyzed just before termination of the analytical run. Results should agree to within ±
5%, otherwise all samples analyzed after the last acceptable instrument check standard analysis
must be reanalyzed.
 Analyze instrument quality control sample within every run. Use this analysis to verify
accuracy and stability of the calibration standards. If  any result is not within ± 5% of the certified
value, prepare a new calibration standard a nd recalibrate the instrument. If this does not correct
the problem, prepare a new stock solution and a new calibration standard and repeat calibration. 
f.  Method quality control:  Analyze the method quality control sample within every run.
Results should agree to within ± 5% of the certified values. Greater discrepancies may reflect
losses or contamination during sample preparation.
g.  Test for matrix interference:  When analyzing a new or unusual sample matrix verify that
neither a positive nor negative nonlinear interference e ffect is operative. If the element is present
at a concentration above 1 mg/L, use serial dilution with ca libration blank. Results from the
analyses of a dilution should be within ± 5% of  the original result. Alternately, or if the
concentration is either below 1 mg/L or not detected, use a post-digestion addition equal to 1Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmg/L. Recovery of the addition shou ld be either between 95% and 105% or within established
control limits of ± 2 standard deviations around the mean. If a matrix effect causes test results to
fall outside the critical limits, complete the analysis after either diluting the sample to elimina te
the matrix effect while maintaining a detectable concentration of at least twice the detection limit
or applying the method of standard additions.
5.  Calculations and Corrections
a.  Blank correction:  Subtract result of an adjacent calibration blank from each sample result
to make a baseline drift correction. (Concentrations printed out should include negative and
positive values to compensate for positive and negative baseline d rift. Make certain that the
calibration blank used for blank correction has not been contaminated by carry-over.) Use the
result of the method blank analysis to correct for reagent contamination. Alternatively,
intersperse method blanks with appropriate sa mples. Reagent blank and baseline drift correction
are accomplished in one subtraction.
b.  Dilution correction:  If the sample was diluted or concentrated in preparation, multiply
results by a dilution factor ( DF) calculated as follows:
 
c.  Correction for spectral interference:  Correct for spectral interference by using computer
software supplied by the instrument manufacturer or by using the manual method based on
interference correction factors. Dete rmine interference correction facto rs by analyzing
single-element stock solutions of appropriate concentrations under conditions matching as
closely as possible those used for sample analysis. Unless analysis conditions can be reproduced
accurately from day to day, or for longer periods, re determine interference correction factors
found to affect the results significantly each time samples are analyzed.7,8 Calculate interference
correction factors ( Kij) from apparent concentrations observed in the analysis of the high-purity
stock solutions:
 
where the apparent concentration of element i is the difference between the observed
concentration in the stock solution and the observed concentration in the blank. Correct sample
concentrations observed for element i (already corrected for baseline d rift), for spectral
interferences from elements j, k, and l; for example:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
Interference correction factors may be negative if background correction is used for element i. A
negative Kij can result where an interfering line is encountered at the background  correction
wavelength rather than at the peak wavelength. Determine concentrations of interfering elements
j, k, and l within their respective linear ranges. Mutual interferences ( i interferes with j and j
interferes with i) require iterative or matrix me thods for calculation. 
d.  Correction for nonspectral interference:  If nonspectral interference correction is
necessary, use the method of standard additions. It is applicable when the chemical and physical
form of the element in the standard addition is the same as in the sam ple, or the ICP converts the
metal in both sample and addition to the same form; the interference effect is independent of
metal concentration over the concentration range of standard additions; and the analytical
calibration curve is linear over the conce ntration range of standard additions.
 Use an addition not less than 50% nor more than 100% of the element concentration in the
sample so that measurement precision will not be degraded and interferences that depend on
element/interferent ratios will not c ause erroneous results. Apply the method to all elements in
the sample set using background correction at carefully chosen off-line positions. Multielement
standard addition can be used if it has been determined that added elements are not interferents. 
e.  Reporting data:  Report analytical data in concentration units of milligrams per liter using
up to three significant figures. Report results below the determined detection limit as not
detected less than the stated detection limit corrected for sample  dilution.
6.  Precision and Bias
 As a guide to the generally expected precision and bias, see the linear regression equations
in Table 3120:II .9 Additional interlaboratory information is available.10 
7.  References
         1.    FAIRES, L.M., B.A. PALMER, R. ENGLEMAN, JR. & T.M. NIEMCZYK.  1984. Temperature
determinations in the inductively coupled plasma using a Fourier transformStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationspectrometer. Spectrochim. Acta 39B:819.
         2.    BARNES, R.M.  1978. Recent ad vances in emission spectroscopy: inductively coupled
plasma discharges for spectrochemical analysis. CRC Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem.  7:203.
         3.    PARSONS, M.L., S. MAJOR & A.R. FORSTER.  1983. Trace element determination by
atomic spectroscopic methods - State  of the art. Appl. Spectrosc.  37:411.
         4.    LARSON, G.F., V.A. FASSEL, R. K. WINGE & R.N. KNISELEY.  1976. Ultratrace analysis by
optical emission spectroscopy: The stray light problem. Appl. Spectrosc.  30:384.
         5.    GARBARINO, J.R. & H.E. TAYLOR.  1979.  A Babington-type nebulizer for use in the
analysis of natural water samples by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry. Appl.
Spectrosc.  34:584.
         6.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1988. Standard specification for
reagent water, D1193-77 ( reapproved 1983). Annual Book of ASTM Standards.
American Soc. for Testing & Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
         7.    BOTTO, R.I.  1984. Quality assurance in operating a multielement ICP emission
spectrometer. Spectrochim. Acta  39B:95.
         8.    BOTTO, R.I.  1982.  Long-term stability of spectral interference calibrations for
inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry. Anal. Chem.  54:1654.
         9.    MAXFIELD, R. & B. MINDAK.  1985. EPA Method Study 27, Method 200. 7 (Trace
Metals by ICP). EPA-600/S4-85/05.  National Technical Information Serv., Springfield,
Va.
       10.    GARBARINO, J.R., B.E. JONES, G. P. STEIN, W.T. BELSER & H.E. TAYLOR.  1985. Statistical
evaluation of an inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometric method for
routine water quali ty testing. Appl. Spectrosc.  39:53. 
3125        METALS BY INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA/MASS
SPECTROMETRY* #(86)
3125  A.        Introduction
1.  General Discussion
 This method is used for the determination of trace metals and metalloids in surface, ground,
and drinking waters by inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometry (ICP/MS). It may also be
suitable for wastewater, soils, sediments, s ludge, and biological samples after suitable digestion
followed by dilution and/or cleanup.1,2 Additional sources of information on quality assurance
and other aspects of ICP/MS analysis of metals are available.3-5 
The method is intended to be performance -based, allowing extension of the elemental analyteStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationlist, implementation of ‘‘clean’’ preparation techniques as they become available, and other
appropriate modifications of the base met hod as technology evolves. Preferably validate
modifications to the ba se method by use of the quality control standards specified in the method. 
Instrument detection limits for many analytes are between 1 and 100 ng/L. The method is
best suited for the determination of metals in ambient or pristine fresh-water matrices. Mor e
complex matrices may require some type of cleanup to reduce matrix effects to a manageable
level. Various cleanup techniques are available to reduce matrix interferences and/or concentrate
analytes of interest.6-10 
This method is ideally used by analyst s experienced in the use of ICP/MS, the interpretation
of spectral and matrix interference, and procedur es for their correction. Preferably demonstrate
analyst proficiency through analysis of a performance evaluation sample before the generation of
data. 
2.  References
         1.    MONTASER, A. & D.W. GOLIGHTLY,  eds. 1992. Inductively Coupled Plasmas in
Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2nd ed. VCH Publishers, Inc., New York, N.Y.
         2.    DATE, A.R. & A.L. GRAY.  1989. Applications of Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometry. Blackie & Son, Ltd., Glasgow, U.K.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Determination of trace elements in
waters and wastes by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry, Method 200.8.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agen cy, Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab.,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
         4.    LONGBOTTOM, J.E., T.D. MARTIN, K.W. EDGELL, S.E. LONG, M.R. PLANTZ & B.E.
WARDEN . 1994. Determination of trace elements in water by inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry: collabora tive study. J. AOAC Internat.  77:1004.
          5.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Method 1638: Determination of
trace elements in ambient waters by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Off. Water, Wa shington, D.C.
         6.    MCLAREN, J.W., A.P. MYKYTIUK, S.N. WILLIE & S. S. BERMAN.  1985. Determination of
trace metals in seawater by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry with
preconcentration on silica-immobilized 8-hydroxyquinoline. Anal. Chem.  57:2907.
         7.    BURBA, P. & P.G. WILLMER.  1987. Multielement preconcentration for atomic
spectroscopy by sorption of dithiocarbamate metal complexes (e.g., HMDC) on
cellulose collectors. Fresenius Z. Anal. Chem.  329: 539.
         8.    WANG, X. & R.M. BARNES.  1989 . Chelating resins for on-line flow injection
preconcentration with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy. J.
Anal. Atom. Spectrom.  4:509.
         9.    SIRIRAKS, A., H.M. KINGSTON & J.M. RIVIELLO.  1990. Chelation ion chromatography as
a method  for trace elemental analysis in complex environmental and biological
samples. Anal. Chem.  62:1185.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation       10.    PUGET SOUND WATER QUALITY AUTHORITY.  1996. Recommended Guidelines for
Measuring Metals in Puget Sound Marine Water, Sediment and Tissue Samples.
Appendix D: Alternate Methods for the Analysis of Marine Water Samples. Puget
Sound Water Quality Authority, Olympia, Wash.
3125  B.        Inductively Coupled Plasma/Mass Spectrometry (ICP/MS) Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Sample material is introduced into an argon-based, high-temperature
radio-frequency plasma, usually by pneumatic ne bulization. Energy transfer from the plasma to
the sample stream causes desolvation, atomization, and ionization of target e lements. Ions
generated by these energy-transfer processes are extracted from the plasma through a differential
vacuum interface, and separated on the basis of their mass-to-charge ratio by a mass
spectrometer. The mass spectrometer usually is of the quadr upole or magnetic sector type. The
ions passing through the mass spectrometer are counted, usually by an electron multiplier
detector, and the resulting information processed by a computer-based data-handling system.
b.  Applicable elements and analytical limits:  This method is suitable for aluminum,
antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, manganese,
molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver, strontium, thallium, uranium, vanadium, a nd zinc. The
method is also acceptable for other elemental analytes as long as the same quality assurance
practices are followed. The basic element suite and recommended analytical masses are given in
Table 3125:I .
 Typical instrument detection limits (IDL )1,2 for method analytes are presented in Table
3125:I . Determine the IDL and method detection level (or limit) (MDL) for all analytes before
method implementation. Section 1030  contains additional information and approaches for the
evaluation of detection  capabilities. 
The MDL is defined in Section 1010C  and  elsewhere.2 Determination of the MDL for each
element is critical for complex matrices such as seawater, brines, and industrial effluents. The
MDL will typically be higher than the IDL, because of ba ckground analyte in metals preparation
and analysis laboratories and matrix-based interferences. Determine both IDL and MDL upon
initial implementation of this method, and then yearly or whenever the instrument configuration
changes or major maintenance oc curs, whichever comes first. 
Determine linear dynamic ranges (LDR) for all method analytes. LDR is defined as the
maximum concentration of analyte above the highest calibration point where analyte response is
within ±10% of the theoretical response. When determining linear dynamic ranges, avoid using
unduly high concentrations of analyte that might damage the detector. Determine LDR on
multielement mixtures, to account for possible interelement effects. Determine LDR on initial
implementation of this metho d, and then yearly. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Interferences:  ICP/MS is subject to several types of interferences.
1)  Isotopes of different elements that form ions of the same nominal mass-to-charge ratio are
not resolved by the quadrupole mass spectrometer, and cause isobaric elemental interferences.
Typically, ICP/MS instrument operating software will have all kno wn isobaric interferences
entered, and will perform necessary calculations automatically. Table 3125:II  shows many of the
commonly used corrections. Monitor the following additional masses:  83Kr, 99Ru, 118Sn, and
125Te. It is necessary to monitor these ma sses to correct for isobaric interference caused by 82Kr
on 82Se, by 98Ru on 98Mo, by 114Sn on 114Cd, and by 123Te on 123Sb. Monitor ArCl at mass 77,
to estimate chloride interferences. Verify that all elemental and molecular correction equations
used in t his method are correct and appropriate for the mass spectrometer used and sample
matrix. 
2)  Abundance sensitivity is an analytical condition in which the tails of an abundant mass
peak contribute to or obscure adjacent masses. Adjust spectrometer resolution to minimize these
interferences. 
3)  Polyatomic (molecular) ion interferences are caused by ions consisting of more than one
atom and having the same nominal  mass-to-charge ratio as the isotope of interest. Most of the
common molecular ion interferences have been identified and are lis ted in Table 3125:III .
Because of the severity of chloride ion interf erence on important analytes, particularly arsenic
and selenium, hydrochloric acid is not recommended for use in preparation of any samples to be
analyzed by ICP/MS. The mathematical corr ections for chloride interferences only correct
chloride to a concentration of 0.4%. Because chloride ion is present in most environmental
samples, it is critical to use chloride correction equations for affected masses. A high-resolution
ICP/MS may be use d to resolve interferences caused by polyatomic ions. Polyatomic
interferences are strongly influenced by instrument design and plasma operating conditions, and
can be reduced in some cases by careful adjustment of nebulizer gas flow and other instrument
operating parameters. 
4)  Physical interferences include differences in viscosity, surface tension, and dissolved
solids between samples and calibration standards. To minimize these effects, dissolved solid
levels in analytical samples should not exceed 0.5%. Dilute water and  wastewater samples
containing dissolved solids at or above 0.5% before analysis. Use internal standards for
correction of physical interferences. Any internal standards used should demonstrate comparable
analytical behavior to the elements being determine d. 
5)  Memory interferences occur when analytes from a previous sample or standard are
measured in the current sample. Use a sufficiently long rinse or flush between samples to
minimize this type of interference. If me mory interferences persist, they may be  indications of
problems in the sample introduction system. Severe memory interferences may require
disassembly and cleaning of the entire sample introduction system, including the plasma torch,
and the sampler and skimmer cones. 
6)  Ionization interferences result when moderate (0.1 to 1%) amounts of a matrix ion changeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationthe analyte signal. This effect, which usually reduces the analyte signal, also is known as
‘‘suppression.’’ Correct for suppression by use of internal standardi zation techniques. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometer:  Instrumentation, available from several
manufacturers, includes a mass spectrometer detector, inductively coupled plasma source, mass
flow controllers for regulation of ICP gas flows, peristaltic pump for  sample introduction, and a
computerized data acquisition and instrument control system. An x-y autosampler also may be
used with appropriate control software.
b.  Laboratory ware:  Use precleaned plastic laboratory ware for standard and sample
preparation. Teflon,* #(87)  either tetrafluoroe thylene hexafluoropropylene-copolymer (FEP),
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), or perfluor oalkoxy PTFE (PFA) is preferred for stan dard
preparation and sample digestion, while high- density polyethylene (HDPE) and other dense,
metal-free plastics may be acceptable for internal standards, known-addition solutions, etc.
Check each new lot of autosampler tubes for suitability, and preclea n autosampler tubes and
pipettor tips (see Section 3010C.2) .
c.  Air displacement pipets,  10 to 100 µL, 100 to 1000 µL, and 1 to 10 mL size.
d.  Analytical balance,  accurate to 0.1 mg.
e.  Sample preparation apparatus,  such as hot plates, microwave digestors, and heated sand
baths. Any sample preparation device has the potential to introduce trace levels of target analytes
to the sample.
f.  Clean hood  (optional), Class 100 (certified to contain less than 100 particles/m3), for
sample preparation and manipulation. Preferably perform all sample manipulations, digestions,
dilutions, etc. in a certified Class 100 environment. Alternatively,  handle samples in glove boxes,
plastic fume hoods, or other environments where random contamination by trace metals can be
minimized.
3.  Reagents
a.  Acids:  Use ultra-high-purity grade (or equivalent) acids to prepare standards and to
process sample. Redistilled acids are acceptable if each batch is demonstrated to be free from
contamination by target analytes. Use extreme care in the handling of acids in the laboratory to
avoid contamination of the acids with trace levels of metals.
1)  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc (specific gravity 1.41). 
2)  Nitric acid,  1 + 1: Add 500 mL conc HNO3 to 500 mL reagent water. 
3)  Nitric acid,  2%: Add 20 mL conc HNO3 to 100 mL reagent water; dilute to 1000 mL. 
4)  Nitric acid,  1%: Add 10 mL conc HNO3 to 100 mL reagent water; dilute to 1000 mL. 
b.  Reagent water:  Use water of the highest possible purity for blank, standard, and sample
preparation (see Section 1080 ). Alternatively, use the procedure described below to produceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwater of acceptable quality. Other water preparation regimes may be us ed, provided that the
water produced is metal-free. Reagent water containing trace amounts of analyte elements will
cause erroneous results.
 Produce reagent water using a softener/reverse osmosis unit with subsequent UV
sterilization. After the general de ionization system use a dual-column strong acid/strong base ion
exchange system to polish laboratory reagent water before production of metal-free water. Use a
multi-stage reagent water system, with two strong acid/strong base ion exchange columns and an
activated carbon filter for organics removal for final polishing of laboratory reagent water. Use
only high-purity water for preparation of samples and standards. 
c.  Stock, standard, and other required solutions: See Section 3120B.3 d for preparation of
standard stock solutions from elemental materials (pure metals, salts). Preferably, purchase
high-purity commercially prepared stock solutions and dilute to requir ed concentrations. Single-
or multi-element stock solutions (1000 mg/L) of the following elements are required: aluminum,
antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cerium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, germanium,
indium, lead, magnesium, manganese, molybd enum, nickel, rhodium, scandium, selenium,
silver, strontium, terbium, thallium, thorium, uranium, vanadium, and zinc. Prepare internal
standard stock separately from target element stock solution. The potential for incompatibility
between target elements and/or internal standards exists, and could cause precipitation or other
solution instability.
1)  Internal standard stock solution:  Lithium, scandium, germanium, indium, and thorium
are suggested as internal standards. The following masses are monitored: 6Li, 45Sc, 72Ge, 115In,
and 232Th. Add to all samples, standards, and quality control (QC) sa mples a level of internal
standard that will give a suitable counts/second (cps) signal (for most internal standards, 200 000
to 500 000 cps; for lithium, 20 000 to 70 000 cps). Minimize error introduced by dilution during
this addition by using an appropr iately high concentration of internal standard mix solution.
Maintain volume ratio for all internal standard additions. 
Prepare internal standard mix as follows: Prepare a nominal 50-mg/L solution of 6Li by
dissolving 0.15 g 6Li2CO3 (isotopically pure, i. e., 95% or greater purity† #(88) ) in a minimal
amount of 1:1 HNO3. Pipet 5.0 mL 1000-mg/L scandium, germanium, indium, and thorium
standards into the lithium solution, dilute resulting solution to 500.0 mL, and mix thoroughly.
The resultant concentration of Sc,  Ge, In, and Th will be 10 mg/L. Older instruments may
require higher levels of internal standard to achieve acceptable levels of precision. 
Other internal standards, such as rhodium, yttrium, terbium, holmium, and bismuth may also
be used in this method.  Ensure that internal standard mix used is stable and that there are no
undesired interactions between elements. 
Screen all samples for internal standard elements before analysis. The analysis of a few
representative samples for internal standards should be sufficient. Analyze samples ‘‘as
received’’ or ‘‘as digested’’ (before addition of internal standard), then add internal standard mix
and reanalyze. Monitor counts at the internal standard masses. If the ‘‘as received’’ or ‘‘asStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdigested’’ samples show a ppreciable detector counts (10% or higher of samples with added
internal standard), dilute sample or use an alternate internal standard. If the internal standard
response of the sample with the addition is not within 70 to 125% of the response for a
calibr ation blank with the internal standard added, either dilute the sample before analysis, or use
an alternate internal standard. During actual analysis, monitor internal standard masses and note
all internal standard recoveries over 125% of internal standard  response in calibration blank.
Interpret results for these samples with caution. 
The internal standard mix may be added to blanks, standards, and samples by pumping the
solution so it is mixed with the sample stream in the sample introduction process. 
2)  Instrument optimization/tuning solution,  containing the following elements: barium,
beryllium, cadmium, cerium, cobalt, copper, germanium, indium, magnesium, rhodium,
scandium, terbium, thallium, and lead. Prepare this solution in 2% HNO3. This mix i ncludes all
common elements used in optimization and tuning of the various ICP/MS operational
parameters. It may be possible to use fewer elements in this solution, depending on the
instrument manufacturer’s recommendations. 
3)  Calibration standards,  0, 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 µg/L.‡ #(89)  Other calibration regimes are
acceptable, provided the full suite  of quality assurance samples and standards is run to validate
these method changes. Fewer standards may be used, and a two-poin t blank/mid-range
calibration technique commonly used in ICP optical methods should also produce acceptable
results. Calibrate all analytes using the selected concentrations. Prepare all calibration standards
and blanks in a matrix of 2% nitric acid. Add i nternal standard mix to all calibration standards to
provide appropriate count rates for interference correction. NOTE:  All standards and blanks used
in this method have the internal standard mix added at the same ratio. 
4)  Method blank,  consisting of reagent water (¶ 3b) taken through entire sample preparation
process. For dissolved samples, take reagent water through same filtration and preservation
processes used for samples. For samples requiring digestion, process reagent water with the
same digestion techniques as samples. Add internal standard mix to method blank. 
5) Calibration verification standard:  Prepare a mid-range standard, from a source different
from the source of the calibration standards, in 2% HNO3, with equivalent addition of internal
standard. 
6)  Calibration verification blank:  Use 2% HNO3. 
7)  Laboratory fortified blank  (optional) : Prepare solution with 2% nitric acid and method
analytes added at about 50 µg/L. This standard, sometimes called a laboratory control sample
(LCS), is used to validate digestion techniques and known-addition lev els. 
8) Reference materials:  Externally prepared reference material, preferably from National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 1643 series or equivalent. 
9)  Known-addition solution for samples:  Add stock standard to sample in such a way that
volume change is less than 5%. In the absence of information on analyte levels in the sample,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationprepare known additions at around 50 µg/L. If analyte concentration lev els are known, add at 50
to 200% of the sample levels. For samples undergoing digestion, make additions before
digestion. For the determination of dissolved me tals, make additions after filtration, preferably
immediately before analysis. 
10)  Low-level st andards:  Use both a 0.3- and a 1.0- µg/L standard when expected analyte
concentration is below 5 µg/L. Prepare both these standards in 2% nitric acid. 
Prepare volumetrically a mixed standard containing the method analytes at desired
concentration(s) (0.30 µg/L, 1.0 µg/L, or both). Prepare weekly in 100-mL quantities. 
d.  Argon: Use a prepurified grade of argon unless it can be demonstrated that other grades
can be used successfully. The use of  prepurified argon is usually necessary because of the
presence of krypton as an impurity in technical argon. 82Kr interferes with the determination of
82Se. Monitor 83Kr at all times.
4.  Procedures
a.  Sample preparation:  See Section 3010  and Section 3020  for general guidance regarding
sampling and quality control. See Section 3030E  for recommended sample digestion technique
for all analytes except silver and antimony. If silver and antimony are t arget analytes, use
method given in 3030F, paying special attention to interferences caused by chloride ion, and
using all applicable elemental corrections. Alternative digestion techniques and additional
guidance on sample preparation are available.3,4
 Ideally use a ‘‘clean’’ environment for any sample handling, manipulation, or preparation.
Preferably perform all sample manipulations in a Class 100 clean hood or room to minimize
potential contamination artifacts in digested or filtered samples. 
b.  Instrument operating conditions:  Follow manufacturer’s standard operating procedures
for initialization, mass calibration, gas flow optimization, and other instrument operating
conditions. Maintain complete and detailed information on the operationa l status of the
instrument whenever it is used.
c.  Analytical run sequence:  A suggested analytical run sequence, including instrument
tuning/optimization, checking of reagent blanks, instrument calibration and calibration
verification, analysis of samples, and analysis of quality control samples and blanks, is given in
Table 3125:IV .
d.  Instrument tuning and optimization:  Follow manufacturer’s instructions for optimizing
instrument performance. The most important optimization criteria include nebulizer gas flows,
detector and lens voltages, radio-frequency forward power, and mass ca libration. Periodically
check mass calibration and instrument resolution. Ideally, optimize the instrument to minimize
oxide formation and doubly-charged species formation. Measure the CeO/Ce ratio to monitor
oxide formation, and measure doubly-charged spe cies by determination of the Ba2+/Ba+ ratio.
Both these ratios should meet the manufacturer’s criteria before instrument calibration. Monitor
background counts at mass 220 after optimization and compare with manufacturer’s criteria. AStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationsummary of performanc e criteria related to optimization and tuning, calibration, and analytical
performance for this method is given in Table 3125:V .
e.  Instrument calibration:  After optimization and tuning, calibrate instrument using an
appropriate range of calibration standards. Use appropriate regression techniques to determine
calibration lines or curves for each analyte. For acceptable calibrati ons, correlation coefficients
for regression curves are ideally 0.995 or greater.
 Immediately after calibration, run initial calibration verification standard, ¶ 3c5); acceptance
criteria are ±10% of known analyte concentration. Next run initial calibrati on verification blank,
¶ 3c6); acceptance criteria are ideally ± the absolute value of the instrument detection limit for
each analyte, but in practice, ± the absolute value of the laboratory reporting limit or the
laboratory method detection limit for eac h analyte is acceptable. Verify low-level calibration by
running 0.3- and/or 1.0- µg/L standards, if analyte concentrations are less than 5 µg/L. 
f.  Sample analysis:  Ensure that all vessels and reagents are free from contamination. During
analytical run (see Table 3125:IV ), include quality control analyses according to schedule of
Table 3125:VI , or follow project-specific QA/QC protocols.
 Intern al standard recoveries must be between 70% and 125% of internal standard response
in the laboratory-fortified blank; otherwise, dilute sample, add internal standard mix, and
reanalyze. 
Make known-addition analyses for each separate matrix in a digestion o r filtration batch. 
5.  Calculations and Corrections
 Configure instrument software to report internal standard corrected results. For water
samples, preferably report results in micrograms per liter. Report appropriate number of
significant figures. 
a.  Correction for dilutions and solids:  Correct all results for dilutions, and raise reporting
limit for all analytes reported from the diluted sample by a corresponding amount. Similarly, if
results for solid samples are to be determined, use Method 25 40B to determine total solids.
Report results for solid samples as micrograms per kilogram, dry weight. Correct all results for
solids content of solid samples. Use the following equation to correct solid or sediment sample
results for dilution during dige stion and moisture content:
 
where: 
           Rcorr =   corrected result, µg/kg, 
        Runcorr =   uncorrected elemental result, µg/L, 
                 V  =   volume of digestate (after digestion), L, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation               W   =   mass of the wet sample, kg, and 
           % TS =   percent tota l solids determined in the solid sample. 
b.  Compensation for interferences:  Use instrument software to correct for interferences
listed previously for this method. See Table 3125:III  for a listing of the most common molecular
ion interferences.
c.  Data reporting:  Establish appropriate reporting limits for method analytes based on
instrument detection limits and the laboratory blank. For regulatory programs, ensure that
reporting limits for method analytes are a factor of three below relevant r egulatory criteria.
 If method blank contamination is typically random, sporadic, or otherwise not in statistical
control, do not correct results for the method blank. Consider the correction of results for
laboratory method blanks only if it can be demons trated that the concentration of analytes in the
method blank is within statistical control over a period of months. Report all method blank data
explicitly in a manner identical to sample reporting procedures. 
d.  Documentation:  Maintain documentation for the following (where applicable): instrument
tuning, mass calibration, calibration verification, an alyses of blanks (method, field, calibration,
and equipment blanks), IDL and MDL studies, analyses of samples  and duplicates with known
additions, laboratory and field duplicate inform ation, serial dilutions, internal standard
recoveries, and any relevant quality control charts.
 Also maintain, and keep available for review, all raw data generated in support of t he
method.5 
6.  Method Performance
 Table 3125:I  presents instrument detection limit (IDL) data generated by this method; this
represents optimal state-of-the-art instrument detection capabilities, not recommended method
detection or reporting limits. Table 3125:VII  through IX contain single-laboratory,
single-operator, single-instrument performance data generated by this method for calibration
verification standards, low-level standards, and known-addition recoveries for fresh-water
matrices. Performance data for th is method for some analytes are not currently available.
However, performance data for similar ICP/MS methods are available in the literature.1,4 
7.  References
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Determination of trace elements in
waters and wastes by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry, Method 200.8.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab.,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
         2.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1984. Definition and procedure for the
determination of the method detection limit, revision 1.11. 40 CFR 136, Appendix B.
         3.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1991. Methods for  the determination of
metals in environmental samples. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Off.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationResearch & Development, Washington D.C.
         4.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Method 1638: Determination of
trace elements in ambient waters by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Off. Water, Washington, D.C.
         5.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1995. Guidance on the Documentation
and Evaluation of Trace Metals Data Collected for Clean Water  Act Compliance
Monitoring. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Off. Water, Washington, D.C.
8.  Bibliography
 GRAY, A.L.  1974. A plasma source for mass analysis . Proc. Soc. Anal. Chem . 11:182.
 HAYHURST, A.N. & N.R. TELFORD.  1977. Mass spectrometric sampling of ions from atmospheric
pressure flames. I. Characteristics and calibration of the sam pling system. Combust. Flame .
67.
 HOUK, R.S., V.A. FASSEL, G.D. FLESCH, H.J. SVEC, A.L. GRAY & C.E. TAYLOR.  1980. Inductively
coupled argon plasma as an ion source for mass spectrometric determination of trace
elements. Anal. Chem . 52:2283.
 DOUGLAS, D.J.  & J.B. FRENCH.  1981. Elemental analysis with a microwave-induced
plasma/quadrupole mass spectrometer system. Anal. Chem . 53:37.
 HOUK, R.S., V.A. FASSEL & H.J. SVEC.  1981. Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry:
Sample introduction, ionization, ion extraction and analytical results. Dyn. Mass Spectrom .
6:234.
 OLIVARES, J.A. & R.S. HOUK.  1985. Ion sampling for inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry. Anal. Chem . 57:2674.
 HOUK, R.S.  1986. Mass spectrometry of inductively coupled plasmas. Anal. C hem. 58:97.
 THOMPSON, J.J. & R.S. HOUK.  1986. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric detection for
multielement flow injection analysis and elemental speciation by reversed-phase liquid
chromatography. Anal. Chem . 58:2541.
 VAUGHAN, M.A. & G. HORLI CK. 1986. Oxide, hydroxide, and doubly charged analyte species in
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometry. Appl. Spectrosc.  40:434.
 GARBARINO, J.R. & H.E. TAYLOR.  1987. Stable isotope dilution analysis of hydrologic samples by
inductively coupled pla sma mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem . 59:1568.
 BEAUCHEMIN, D., J.W. MCLAREN, A.P. MYKYTIUK & S.S. BERMAN.  1987. Determination of trace
metals in a river water reference material by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
Anal. Chem . 59:778.
 THOMPSON, J.J. & R.S. HOUK.  1987. A study of internal standardization in inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry. Appl. Spectrosc.  41:801.
 JARVIS, K.E., A.L. GRAY & R.S. HOUK.  1992. Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry.
Blackie Academic & Professional,  Chapman & Hall, New York, N.Y.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation TAYLOR, D.B., H.M. KINGSTON, D.J. NOGAY, D. KOLLER & R. HUTTON.  1996. On-line solid-phase
chelation for the determination of eight metals in environmental waters by ICP-MS. JAAS
11:187.
 KINGSTON, H.M.S. & S. HASWELL,  eds. 1997. Microwave Enhanced Chemistry: Fundamentals,
Sample Preparation, and Applications. ACS Professional Reference Book Ser., American
Chemical Soc., Washington, D.C.
 U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1998. Inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry , Method 6020. In Solid Waste Methods. SW846, Update 4, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Environmental Monitoring Systems Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
3130        METALS BY ANODIC STRIPPING VOLTAMMETRY* #(90)
3130  A.        Introduction
 Anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) is one of the most sensitive metal analysis techniques;
it is as much as 10 to 100 times more sensitive than electrothermal atomic absorption
spectroscopy for some metals. This corresponds to detection limits in the nanogram-per-liter
range. The technique requires no sample extraction or preconcentration, it is nondestructive, and
it allows simultaneous determination of four to six trace metals, utilizing inexpensive
instrumentation. The dis advantages of ASV are that it is restricted to amalgam-forming metals,
analysis time is longer than for spectroscopic methods, and interferences and high sensitivity can
present severe limitations. The analysis should be performed only by analysts skilled in ASV
methodology because of the interferences and potential for trace background contamination. 
3130  B.        Determination of Lead, Cadmium, and Zinc
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Anodic stripping voltammetry is a two-step electroanalytical technique. In the
preconcentration step, metal ions in the sample solution are reduced at negative potential and
concentrated into a mercury electrode. The concentration of the m etal in the mercury is 100 to
1000 times greater than that of the metal ion in the sample solution. The preconcentration step is
followed by a stripping step applying a positive potential scan. The amalgamated metal is
oxidized rapidly and the accompanying  current is proportional to metal concentration.
b.  Detection limits and working range:  The limit of detection for metal determination using
ASV depends on the metal determined, deposition time, stirring rate, solution pH, sample matrix,
working electrode (hanging mercury drop electrode, HMDE, or thin  mercury film electrode,
TMFE), and mode of the stripping potential scan (square wave or differential pulse). Cadmium,
lead, and zinc are concentrated efficiently duri ng pre-electrolysis because of their high solubilityStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationin mercury and thus have low detecti on limits (<1 µg/L). Long deposition times and high stirring
rates increase the concentration of metal preconcentrated in the mercury phase and reduce
detection limits. The effects of solution pH and matrix are more complicated. In general, add a
high conc entration of inert electrolyte to samples to maintain a high, constant ionic strength.
Acidify sample to a low pH or add a pH buffer. If the pH buffer or other component of the
sample matrix complexes the metal (3130B.1 c), detection limits often are increa sed.
 The choice of working electrode is determined largely by the working range of
concentration required. The HMDE is best suited for analysis from approximately 1 µg/L to 10
mg/L, while the TMFE is superior for detection below 1 µg/L. 
c.  Interferences:  Major interferences include intermetallic compound formation, overlapping
stripping peaks, adsorption of organics, and complexation. Intermetallic compounds can form in
the mercury phase when high concentrations of certain metals are p resent simultaneously. Zinc
forms intermetallic compounds with cobalt and nickel, and both zinc and cadmium form
intermetallic compounds with copper, silver, and gold. As a result, the stripping peak for the
constituent metals may be severely depressed or shifted and additional peaks due to intermetallic
compound stripping may be observed. Minimize or avoid intermetallic compound formation by
use of a hanging mercury drop electrode instead of a thin film mercury electrode when metal
concentrations are above  1 µg/L, application of a preconcentration potential sufficiently negative
to reduce the desired but not the interfering metal, and use of a relatively short preconcentration
period followed by a relatively large pulse modulation (50 mV) during the strippi ng stage. In
general, suspect formation of intermetallic compounds if metals are present in concentrations
above 1 mg/L. If metals are present at concentrations above 10 mg/L, do not use anodic stripping
voltammetry. Concentrations above 10 mg/L usually ca n be quantitated by methods such as
those given in Section 3111  and Section 3120 .
 Separate overlapping stripping peaks by vari ous methods, including appropriate choice of
buffer and electrolyte.1-3 If only one of the metal peaks is of interest, eliminate interfering peaks
by selective complexation with a suitable ligand, such as EDTA. Judicious choice of
preconcentration potential can result in the deposition of the selected metal but not the
interfering metal in the mercury electrode. Selection of buffer/ ligand also may help to distinguish
metals during the preconcentration step. Alternatively, use ‘‘medium exchange,’’ in which
preconcentration is performed with the electrodes in the sample and stripping is performed in a
different electrolyte solution. In  this procedure, metals are deposited from the sample into the
amalgam as usual, but they may be stripped into  a medium that provides different stripping peak
potentials for the overlapping metals. 
Minimize interferences from adsorption of organic compoun ds and complexation by removal
of the organic matter. Digest samples with high-purity acids as described in Section 3030 . Make
standard additions to determine if complexation or adsorption remains a problem. Analyze a
metal-free solution with a matrix simi lar to that of the sample both before and after addition of
known quantities of standard. Repeat procedure for sample. If the slope of the stripping current
versus added metal is significantly different in the sample relative to the metal-free solution,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdigest sample further. The choice of stripping waveform also is important. While both
square-wave and differential-pulse stripping attempt to minimize the contribution of adsorption
currents to the total measured stripping current, square-wave stripping does  this more effectively.
Thus, use square-wave stripping instead of differential-pulse stripping when adsorption occurs. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Electrochemical analyzer:  The basic electrochemical analyzer for ASV applications
contains a three-electrode potentiostat, which very precisely controls potential applied to the
working electrode relative to the reference electrode, and a sensitive c urrent measuring device. It
is capable of delivering potential pulses of various amplitudes and frequencies, and provides
several scan rates and current ranges. More advanced ASV instruments offer automated timing,
gas purge and stirring, and data processi ng routines including curve smoothing, baseline
correction, and background subtraction.
 Two variations of stripping waveforms are commonly used: differential pulse (DPASV) and
square wave (SWASV) waveforms. The differential-pulse waveform consists of a se ries of
pulses superimposed on a linear voltage ramp, while the square-wave waveform consists of a
series of pulses superimposed on a staircase potential waveform. Square-wave stripping is
significantly faster than differen tial-pulse stripping and is typic ally ten times more sensitive.
Most commercially available ASV instruments perform both differential-pulse and square-wave
stripping. 
b.  Electrodes and cell:  Provide working, reference, and auxiliary electrodes. Working
electrodes are either hanging mercury drop or th in mercury film electrodes. Hanging mercury
drop electrodes must be capable of dispensing mercury in very precisely con trolled drop sizes.
Three types of electrodes meet this requirement: static mercury drop electrodes, controlled
growth mercury drop electrodes, or Kemula-type electrodes. In any case, use a drop knocker to
remove an old drop before dispensing a fresh mercu ry drop.
 When the lowest detection limits are required, a thin mercury film electrode is preferred.
This electrode consists of a rotating glassy carbon disk plated with mercury in situ during
preconcentration of the analyte. A high-precision, constant-spe ed rotator controls the rotation
rate of the electrode and provides reproducible mass transport. 
Reference electrodes may be either saturated calomel or silver/ silver chloride electrodes.
Use a platinum wire for the auxiliary electrode. 
Use cells constr ucted of glass, or preferably fused silica or TFE, because they are more
resistant to solution adsorption or leaching. Cover cell with a lid that provides reproducible
placement of the electrodes and gas purging tubes. Provide an additional hole in the cel l lid for
addition of standards. Most commercially available mercury drop electrodes include electrolytic
cells, reference and auxiliary electrodes, and gas purging tubes. 
Use a constant-speed stirring mechanism to provide reproducible mass transport in s amples
and standards. 
Locate the cell in an area where temperature is relatively constant. Alternatively, use aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationconstant-temperature water bath and cell jacket. 
c.  Oxygen-removal apparatus:  Oxygen interferes in electrochemical analyses; remove it
from solution before preconcentration by purging with nitrogen or argon. Provide two gas inlet
tubes through the cell lid: one extends into the solution and the second  purges the space above
the solution. A gas outlet hole in the lid provides for removal of oxygen and excess purging gas.
d.  Recording device:  If the electrochemical analyzer is not equipped with a digital data
acquisition system, use an XY plotter to record stripping voltammograms.
e.  Timer:  If preconcentration and equilibration periods are not controlled by the instrument,
use an accurate timing device.
f.  Polishing wheel:  To obtain the high polish required for a glassy carbon disk electrode, use
a motorized polishing wheel.
3.  Reagents
 CAUTION:  Follow proper practices for disposal of any solutions containing mercury. 
a.  Metal-free water:  Use deionized water to prepare buffers, electrolytes, standards, etc. Use
water with at least 18 megohm-cm resistivity (see Section 1080 ).
b.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc, high-purity.* #(91)
c.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, 6N, 1.6N (10%), and 0.01 N. 
d.  Purging gas (nitrogen or argon),  high-purity. Remove traces of oxygen in nitrogen or
argon gas before purging the solution. Pass gas through sequential scrubbing columns containing
vanadous chloride in the first, deionized water in the second, and bu ffer (or electrolyte) solution
in the third column.
e.  Metal standards:  Prepare stock solutions containing 1 mg metal/mL in polyethylene
bottles. Purchase these solutions commercially or prepare as in Section 3111 . Daily prepare
dilutions of stock standards in a matrix similar to that of the samples to c over the concentration
range desired.
f.  Electrolyte/buffer:  Use one of the following:
1)  Acetate buffer,  pH 4.5: Dissolve 16.4 g anhydrous sodium acetate, NaC2H3O2, in 800 mL
water. Adjust to pH 4.5 with high-purity glacial acetic acid.* #(92)  Dilute to 1 L with water. 
2)  Citrate buffer,  pH 3: Dissolve 42.5 g citric acid (monohydrate) in 700 mL water. Adjust
to pH 3 with high-purity NH4OH.* #(93)  Dilute to 1 L with water. 
3)  Phosphate buffer,  pH 6.8: Dissolve 24 g NaH2PO4 in 500 mL water. Adjust to pH 6.8
with 1 N NaOH. Dilute to 1 L with water. 
g.  Mercury:  Use commercially available triply distilled metallic mercury for hanging
mercury drop electrodes. CAUTION : Mercury vapors are highly toxic. Use only in well-ventilated
area.
h.  Mercuric nitrate solution,  Hg(NO3)2: For thin mercury film electrodes, dissolve 0.325 gStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationHg(NO3)2 in 100 mL 0.01 N HNO3.
i.  Reference electrode filling solution:  Available from electrode manufacturer.
j.  Amalgamated zinc:  Dissolve 2 g Hg(NO3)2 in 25 mL conc HNO3; dilute to 250 mL with
water. In a separate beaker, clean approximately 50 g mossy zinc by gently oxidizing the surface
with 10% HNO3 and rinse with water. Add Hg(NO3)2 solution to cleaned zi nc and stir with a
glass rod. If barely visible bubbles do not appear, add a small amount of 6 N HNO3. Zinc should
rapidly acquire a shiny, metallic appearance. Decant solution and store for amalgamating future
batches of zinc. Rinse amalgamated zinc copiou sly with water and transfer to a gas scrubbing
column.
k.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc.
l.  Vanadous chloride:  Add 2 g ammonium metavanadate, NH4VO3, to 25 mL conc HCl and
heat to boiling. Solution should turn blue-green. Dilute to 250 mL with water. Pour solution into
gas scrubbing column packed with amalgamated zinc and bubble purging gas  through it until the
solution turns a clear violet color. When the violet color is replaced by a blue, green, or brown
color, regenerate vanadous chloride by adding HCl. 
m.  Siliconizing solution:  Preferably use commercially available solutions in sealed ampules
for siliconizing capillaries used for hanging mercury drops. CAUTION : Most commercial
siliconizing reagents contain CCl4, a toxic and cancer-suspect agent. Handl e with gloves and
avoid breathing vapors.
n.  Alumina suspensions,  1, 0.3, and 0.05 µm. Use commercially available alumina
suspensions in water, or make a suspension by adding a small amount of water to the alumina.
o.  Hydrofluoric acid, HF, 5%: Dilute 5 mL conc HF to 100 mL with water.
p.  Methanol.
q. Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 1 N.
4.  Procedure
a.  Sample preparation and storage:  Collect samples in pre-cleaned, acid-soaked
polyethylene or TFE bottles. Add 2 mL conc HNO3/L sample and mix well. Cap tightly and
store in refrigerator or freezer until ready for analysis.
b.  Cell preparation:  Soak clean cell in 6 N HNO3 overnight and rinse well with water before
use.
c.  Electrode preparation:
1)  HMDE—Follow manufacturer’s guidance for capillary cleaning. If not available, use the
following procedure. Remove all mercury from the capillary. Aspirate the following through the
capillary in the order listed: 6 N HNO3, water, 5% HF, water, methanol , and air. Dry capillary at
100°C for 1 h. Siliconize cooled capillary using a siliconizing solution. Between uses, fillStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcapillary with clean mercury and immerse tip in clean mercury. If the capillary fails to suspend a
drop of mercury, repeat cleaning. 
2)  TMFE—Polish glassy carbon disks used for thin mercury film electrodes to a high
metallic sheen with alumina suspensions, progressively decreasing particle size from 1 µm to
0.05 µm. Use a motorized polishing wheel for best results. Completely rinse o ff all traces of
alumina with water. Check disk frequently for etching or pitting; repolish as necessary to
maintain reproducible mercury film deposition. 
d.  Instrumental conditions:  Use the following conditions:
Variable                       Value
Initial potential −1.00 V (Pb, Cd); −1.20 V (Zn)
Final potential 0.00 V
Equilibration potential −1.00 V (Pb, Cd); −1.20 V (Zn)
HMDE drop size medium
TMFE rota tion rate 2000 rpm
DPASV:
    Pulse amplitude 25 mV
    Pulse period 0.5 s
    Pulse width 50 ms
    Sample width 17 ms
    Scan rate 5 mV/s
SWASV:
    SW amplitude 25 mV
    Step potential 4 mV
    Frequency 100 Hz
e.  Deoxygenation:  Pipet 2 mL sample and 3 mL electrolyte/ buffer into cell. If using a
TMFE, add 10 µL Hg(NO3)2 solution. Place electrodes in cell and secure cell lid. Deoxygenate
solution with purified purging gas for 10 min while stirring. When soluti on purge is completed,
purge the space above the solution with purified purging gas. Continue head-space purge
throughout analysis.
f.  Preconcentration:  If using a HMDE, dispense a new mercury drop. Start preconcentration,
stirring and timing simultaneously. Precisely control and keep constant preconcentration times
and stirring rates for solutions and standards. Generally use 120 s  and a rotation rate of 2000 rpm
for the TMFE.
 After the metal is sufficiently concentrated in the amalgam, stop stirring or TMFE rotationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfor an equilibration period of precisely 30 s. 
g.  Anodic stripping:  After equilibration period, begin anodic stripping without stirring and
make potential at the working electrode progressively more positive as a function of time.
Monitor stripping current and plot as a function of applied potential  in stripping voltammograms.
Use peak current to quantify metal concentration and peak potential to identify the metal.
h. Add 5 to 50 µL standard solution and repeat analysis, beginning with deoxygenation of
sample. Adjust volume of added standard solution to obtain 30 to 70% increase of the stripping
peak. If 50 µL addition is not sufficient, use standard solution with a higher concentration of
metal. Shorten deoxygenation step to 1 min after initial gas purge.
5.  Calculations
 Calculate the concentration of metal in the original sample using the following equation: 
where: 
        Co =  concentration of metal in sample, mg/ L,    
        Cs =  concentration of metal in standard solution, mg/L,              
         io =  stripping peak height in original sample,      
         is =  stripping peak height in sample with standard addition,      
        Vo =  volume of sample, mL, and              
        Vs =  volume of standard solution added, mL.      
6.  Quality Control
 Follow quality control guidelines outlined in Section 3020  with respect to use of additions,
duplicates, and blanks for best results. Blanks are critical because of the high sensitivity of the
method. 
7.  Precision and Bias
 Table 3130:I  gives precision data for analyses of samples with various matrices. 
8.  References
         1.    WANG, J.  1985. Stripping Analysis: Principles, Instrumentation, and Applications. VCH
Publishers, Inc., Deerfield Beach, Fla.
         2.    BRAININA, K.H. & E. NEYMAN.  1993. Electroanalytical Stripping Methods. John Wiley
& Sons, New Yor k, N.Y.
         3.    KISSINGER, P.T. & W.R. HEINEMAN.  1996. Laboratory Techniques in ElectroanalyticalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationChemistry, 2nd ed. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, N.Y.
         4.    MARTIN-GOLDBERG, M . 1989. Unpublished data. ResearchTriangle Institute, Metals
Analysis Facilit y. ResearchTriangle Park, N.C.
         5.    BRULAND, K.W., K.H. COALE & L. MART . 1985. Analysis of seawater for dissolved Cd,
Cu, and Pb: An intercomparison of voltammetric and atomic absorption methods. Mar.
Chem. 17:285.
         6.    OSTAPCZUK, P., P. VALENTA & H.W . NURNBERG . 1986. Square wave voltammetry—a
rapid and reliable determination method of Zn, Cd, Pb, Ni, and Co in biological and
environmental samples. J. Electroanal. Chem.  214:51.
         7.    CLARK, B.R., D.W. DEPAOLI, D.R. MCTAGGART & B.D. PATTON.  1988. An o n-line
voltammetric analyzer for trace metals in wastewater. Anal. Chim. Acta  215:13.
         8.    BRETT, C.M.A., A.M. OLIVEIRA-BRETT & L. TUGULEA.  1996. Anodic stripping
voltammetry of trace metals by batch injection analysis. Anal. Chim. Acta  322:151.
9.  Bibliography
 E.G. & G. PRINCETON APPLIED RESEARCH CORP . 1980. Differential pulse anodic stripping
voltammetry of water and wastewater. Application Note W-1. Princeton, N.J.
 PETERSON, W.M. & R.V. WONG . 1981. Fundamentals of stripping voltammetry. Amer. Lab.
13(11):116.
 E.G. & G. PRINCETON APPLIED RESEARCH CORP . 1982. Basics of voltammetry and
polarography. Application Note P-2. Princeton, N.J.
 NURNBERG, H.W.  1984. The voltammetric approach in trace metal chemistry of natural waters
and atmospheric precipitation. Anal. Chim. Acta  164:1.
 SHUMAN, M.S. & MARTIN-GOLDBERG, M.  1984. Electrochemical methods:  Anodic stripping. In
R. Minear & L. Keith, eds. Water Analysis: Inorganic Species. II:345. Academic Press,
Orlando, Fla.
 FLORENCE, T.M . 1986. Electr ochemical approaches to trace element speciation in waters: A
review. Analyst  111:489.
 FLORENCE, T.M.  1992. Trace element speciation by anodic stripping voltammetry. Analyst
117:551.
 TERCIER, M.-L. & J. BUFFLE.  1993. In situ voltammetric measurements in natural waters: Future
prospects and challenges. Electroanalysis  5:187.
3500-Al        ALUMINUM* #(94)
3500-Al  A.        IntroductionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Aluminum (Al) is the second element in Group IIIA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 13, an atomic weight of 26.98, and a valence of 3. The average abundance in the
earth’s crust is 8.1%; in soils it is 0.9  to 6.5%; in streams it is 400 µg/L; in U.S. drinking waters
it is 54 µg/L, and in groundwater it is <0.1 µg/L. Aluminum occurs in the earth’s crust in
combination with silicon and oxygen to form feldspars, micas, and clay minerals. The most
important mine rals are bauxite and corundum, which is used as an abrasive. Aluminum and its
alloys are used for heat exchangers, aircraft pa rts, building materials, containers, etc. Aluminum
potassium sulfate (alum) is used in water-treatment processes to flocculate sus pended particles,
but it may leave a residue of aluminum in the finished water. 
Aluminum’s occurrence in natural waters is controlled by pH and by very finely suspended
mineral particles. The cation Al3+ predominates at pH less than 4. Above neutral pH, t he
predominant dissolved form is Al(OH)4–. Aluminum is nonessential for plants and animals.
Concentrations exceeding 1.5 mg/L constitute a toxicity hazard in the marine environment, and
levels below 200 µg/L present a minimal risk. The United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization’s recommended maximum level for irrigation waters is 5 mg/L. The possibility of a
link between elevated aluminum levels in brain tissues and Alzheimer’s disease has been raised.
The proposed U.S. EPA secondary drinking water st andard MCL is 0.05 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  and  Section 3111E , and
Section 3113B ) and the inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 )
are free from such common interferences as fluoride an d phosphate, and are preferred. The
Eriochrome cyanine R colorimetric method (B) provides a means for estimating aluminum with
simpler instrumentation. 
3500-Al  B.        Eriochrome Cyanine R Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  With Eriochrome cyanine R dye, dilute aluminum solutions buffered to a pH of
6.0 produce a red to pink complex that exhibits maximum absorption at 535 nm. The intensity of
the developed color is influenced by the aluminum concentration, re action time, temperature,
pH, alkalinity, and concentration of other ions in the sample. To compensate for color and
turbidity, the aluminum in one portion of sample is complexed with EDTA to provide a blank.
The interference of iron and manganese, two ele ments commonly found in water when
aluminum is present, is eliminated by adding ascorbic acid. The optimum aluminum range lies
between 20 and 300 µg/L but can be extended upward by sample dilution.
b.  Interference:  Negative errors are caused by both fluoride and polyphosphates. When the
fluoride concentration is constant, the percentage error decreases with increasing amounts ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationaluminum. Because the fluoride concentration often is known or can be  determined readily,
fairly accurate results can be obtained by adding the known amount of fluoride to a set of
standards. A simpler correction can be determined from the family of curves in Figure
3500-Al:1 . A procedure is given for the removal of complex  phosphate interference.
Orthophosphate in concentrations under 10 mg/L does not interfere. The interference caused by
even small amounts of alkalinity is removed by acidifying the sample just beyond the
neutralization point of methyl orange. Sulfate does not interfere up to a concentration of 2000
mg/L.
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum aluminum concentration detectable by
this method in the absence of fluorides and complex phosphates is approximately 6 µg/L.
d.  Sample handling:  Collect samples in clean, acid-rinsed bottles, preferably plastic, and
examine them as soon as possible after collection. If only soluble aluminum is to be determined,
filter a portion of sample through a 0.45- µm membrane filter; dis card first 50 mL of filtrate and
use succeeding filtrate for the determination. Do not use filter paper, absorbent cotton, or glass
wool for filtering any solution that is to be tested for aluminum, because they will remove most
of the soluble aluminum.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 535 nm, with a light path of 1 cm or longer. 
2)  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a green
filter with maximum transmittance between 525 and 535 nm. 
3)  Nessler tubes,  50-mL, tall form, matched. 
b.  Glassware:  Treat all glassware with warm 1 + 1 HCl and rinse with aluminum-free
distilled water to avoid errors due to materials absorbed on the glass. Rinse sufficiently to
remove all acid.
3.  Reagents
 Use reagents low in aluminum, and aluminum-free distilled water. 
a.  Stock aluminum solution:  Use either the metal (1) or the salt (2) for preparing stock
solution; 1.00 mL = 500 µg Al:
1)  Dissolve 500.0 mg aluminum metal in 10 mL conc HCl by heating gently. Dilute to 1000
mL with water, or 
2)  Dissolve 8.791 g aluminum potassium sulfate (also called potassium alum),
AlK(SO4)2⋅12H2O, in water and dilute to 1000 mL. Correct this weight by dividing by the
decimal fraction of assayed AlK(SO4)2⋅12H2O in the reagent used. 
b.  Standard aluminum solution:  Dilute 10.00 mL stock aluminum solution to 1000 mL with
water; 1.00 mL = 5.00 µg Al. Prepare daily.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, 0.02 N and 6 N.
d.  Ascorbic acid solution:  Dissolve 0.1 g ascorbic acid in water and make up to 100 mL in a
volumetric flask. Prepare fresh daily.
e.  Buffer reagent:  Dissolve 136 g sodium acetate, NaC2H3O2⋅3H2O, in water, add 40 mL 1 N
acetic acid, and dilute to 1 L.
f.  Stock dye solution:  Use any of the following products:
1)  Solochrome cyanine R-200* #(95)  or Eriochrome cyanine: †#(96)  Dissolve 100 mg in
water and dilute to 100 mL in a volumetric flask. This solution should have a pH of about 2.9. 
2)  Eriochrome cyanine R: ‡#(97)  Dissolve 300 mg dye in about 50 mL water. Adjust pH
from about 9 to about 2.9 with 1 + 1 acetic acid (approximately 3 mL will be required). Dilute
with water to 100 mL. 
3)  Eriochrome cyanine R:§#(98)  Dissolve 150 mg in about 50 mL water. Adjust pH from
about 9 to about 2.9 with 1 + 1 acetic acid ( approximately 2 mL will be required). Dilute with
water to 100 mL. 
Stock solutions have excellent stability and can be kept for  at least a year. 
g.  Working dye solution:  Dilute 10.0 mL of selected stock dye solution to 100 mL in a
volumetric flask with water. Working solutions are stable for at least 6 months.
h.  Methyl orange indicator solution,  or bromcresol green indicator solution specified in the
total alkalinity determination ( Section 2320B.3 d).
i.  EDTA (sodium salt of ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid dihydrate),  0.01 M: Dissolve 3.7 g
in water, and dilute to 1 L.
j.  Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 1 N and 0.1 N.
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of calibration curve:
1)  Prepare a series of aluminum standards from 0 to 7 µg (0 to 280 µg/L based on a 25-mL
sample) by accurately measuring the calculated volumes of standard aluminum solution into
50-mL volumetric flasks or nessler tubes. Add water to a total volume of a pproximately 25 mL. 
2)  Add 1 mL 0.02 N H2SO4 to each standard and mix. Add 1 mL ascorbic acid solution and
mix. Add 10 mL buffer solution and mix. With a volumetric pipet, add 5.00 mL working dye
reagent and mix. Immediately make up to 50 mL with distilled water. Mix and le t stand for 5 to
10 min. The color begins to fade after 15 min. 
3)  Read transmittance or absorbance on a spectrophotometer, using a wavelength of 535 nm
or a green filter providing maximum transmittance between 525 and 535 nm. Adjust instrument
to zero absorbance with the standard containing no aluminum. 
Plot conce ntration of Al (micrograms Al in 50 mL final volume) against absorbance. 
b.  Sample treatment in absence of fluoride and complex phosphates:  Place 25.0 mL sample,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationor a portion diluted to 25 mL, in a porcelain dish  or flask, add a few drops of methyl orange
indicator, and titrate with 0.02 N H2SO4 to a faint pink color. Record reading and discard sample.
To two similar samples at room temperature add the same amount of 0.02 N H2SO4 used in the
titration and 1 mL in excess.
 To one sample add 1 mL EDTA solution. This will serve as a blank by complexing any
aluminum present and com pensating for color and turbidity. To both samples add 1 mL ascorbic
acid, 10 mL buffer reagent, and 5.00 mL working dye reagent as prescribed in ¶ a2) above. 
Set instrument to zero absorbance or 100% transmittance using the EDTA blank. After 5 to
10 min contact time, read transmittance or absorbance and determine aluminum concentration
from the calibration curve previously prepared. 
c.  Visual comparison:  If photometric equipment is not available, prepare and treat standards
and a sample, as described above, in 50-mL nessler tubes. Make up to mark with water and
compare sample color with the standards after 5 to 10 min contact time.  A sample treated with
EDTA is not needed when nessler tubes are used. If the sample contains turbidity or color, the
use of nessler tubes may result in considerable error.
d.  Removal of phosphate interference:  Add 1.7 mL 6 N H2SO4 to 100 mL sample in a
200-mL erlenmeyer flask. Heat on a hot plate fo r at least 90 min, keeping solution temperature
just below the boiling point. At the end of the heating period solution volume  should be about 25
mL. Add water if necessary to keep it at or above that volume.
 After cooling, neutralize to a pH of 4.3 to 4.5 with NaOH, using 1 N NaOH at the start and
0.1N for the final fine adjustment. Monitor with a pH meter. Make up to 100 mL wit h water,
mix, and use a 25-mL portion for the aluminum test. 
Run a blank in the same manner, using 100 mL distilled water and 1.7 mL 6 N H2SO4.
Subtract blank reading from sample reading or use it to set instrument to zero absorbance before
reading the sam ple. 
e.  Correction for samples containing fluoride:  Measure sample fluoride concentration by the
SPADNS or electrode method. Either:
1)  Add the same amount of fluoride as in the sample to each aluminum standard, or 
2)  Determine fluoride correction from the set of curves in Figure 3500-Al:1 . 
5.  Calculation
 
6.  Precision and BiasStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation A synthetic sample containing 520 µg Al/L and no interference in distilled water was
analyzed by the Eriochrome cyanine R method in 27 laboratories. Relative standard deviation
was 34.4% and relative error 1.7%. 
A second syntheti c sample containing 50 µg Al/L, 500 µg Ba/L, and 5 µg Be/L in distilled
water was analyzed in 35 laboratories. Relative standard deviation was 38.5% and relative error
22.0%. 
A third synthetic sample containing 500 µg Al/L, 50 µg Cd/L, 110 µg Cr/L, 1000 µg Cu/L,
300 µg Fe/L, 70 µg Pb/L, 50 µg Mn/L, 150 µg Ag/L, and 650 µg Zn/L in distilled water was
analyzed in 26 laboratories. Relative standard deviation was 28.8% and relative error 6.2%. 
A fourth synthetic sample containing 540 µg Al/L and 2.5 mg polyph osphate/L in distilled
water was analyzed in 16 laboratories that hydrolyzed the sample in the prescribed manner.
Relative standard deviation was 44.3% and relative error 1.3%. In 12 laboratories that applied no
corrective measures, the relative standard d eviation was 49.2% and the relative error 8.9%. 
A fifth synthetic sample containing 480 µg Al/L and 750 µg F/L in distilled water was
analyzed in 16 laboratories that relied on the curve to correct for the fluoride content. Relative
standard deviation was  25.5% and relative error 2.3%. The 17 laboratories that added fluoride to
the aluminum standards showed a relative standard deviation of 22.5% and a relative error of
7.1%. 
7.  Bibliography
 SHULL, K.E. & G.R. GUTHAN. 1967. Rapid modified Eriochrome cyanine R method for
determination of aluminum in water. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  59:1456.
3500-Sb        ANTIMONY
 Antimony (Sb) is the fourth element in Group VA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 51, an atomic weight of 121.75, and valences of 3 and 5. The average abundance of
Sb in the earth’s crust is 0.2 ppm; in soils it i s 1 ppm; in streams it is 1 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Antimony is sometimes found native, but more commonly in
stibnite (Sb2S3). It is used in alloys of lead and in batteries, bullets, solder, pyrotechnics, and
semiconductors. 
The common aqueous species are SbO2−, HSbO2, and complexes with carbonate and sulfate.
Soluble salts of antimony are toxic. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL is 6
µg/L. 
The electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3113B ) or the
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) are the methods of choice
because of their sensitivity. Alternatively use the flame atomic absorption spectrometric method
(Section 3111B ) or the inductively coupled plasma method ( Section 3120 ) when high sensitivity
is not required. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-As        ARSENIC* #(99)
3500-As  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Arsenic (As) is the third element in Group VA of the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 33, an atomic weight of 74.92, and valences of 3 and 5. The average abundance of As in the
earth’s crust is 1.8 ppm; in soils  it is 5.5 to 13 ppm; in streams it is less than 2 µg/L, and in
groundwater it is generally less than 100 µg/L. It occurs naturally in sulfide minerals such as
pyrite. Arsenic is used in alloys with lead, in storage batteries, and in ammunition. Arsenic
compounds are widely used in pesticides and in wood preservatives. 
Arsenic is nonessential for plants but is an essential trace element in several animal species.
The predominant form between pH 3 and pH 7 is H2AsO4–, between pH 7 and pH 11 it is
HAsO42–, and under reducing conditions it is HAsO2(aq) (or H3AsO3). Aqueous arsenic in the
form of arsenite, arsenate, and organic arsenicals may result from mineral dissolution, industrial
discharges, or the application of pesticides. The chemical form of arsenic d epends on its source
(inorganic arsenic from minerals, industrial discharges, and pesticides; organic arsenic from
industrial discharges, pesticides, and biological action on inorganic arsenic). 
Severe poisoning can arise from the ingestion of as little a s 100 mg arsenic trioxide; chronic
effects may result from the accumulation of arsenic compounds in the body at low intake levels.
Carcinogenic properties also have been imputed to arsenic compounds. The toxicity of arsenic
depends on its chemical form. Ar senite is many times more toxic than arsenate. For the
protection of aquatic life, the average concentration of As3+ in water should not exceed 72 µg/L
and the maximum should not exceed 140 µg/L. The United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization’s recom mended maximum level for irrigation waters is 100 µg/L. The U.S. EPA
primary drinking water standard MCL is 0.05 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 Methods are available to identify and determine total arsenic, arsenite, and arsenate.
Unpolluted fresh water normally does not contai n organic arsenic compounds, but may contain
inorganic arsenic compounds in the form of arsenat e and arsenite. The electrothermal atomic
absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3113B ) is the method of choice in the absence of
overwhelming interferences. The hydride generation-atomic absorption method ( Section 3114B )
is preferred when interferences are present that cannot be overcome by standard electrothermal
techniques (e.g., matrix modifiers, background correction). The silver diethyldithiocarbamate
method (B), in which arsine is generated by reaction with sodium borohydride in acidic solution,
is applicable to the determination of total inorganic arsenic when interferences are absent andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwhen the sample contains no methylarsenic compounds. This method also provides the
advantage of being able to identify and quantify arsenate and arsenite separate ly by generating
arsine at different pHs. The inductively c oupled plasma (ICP) emission spectroscopy method
(Section 3120 ) is useful at higher concentrations (greater than 50 µg/L) while the ICP-mass
spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) is applicable at low er concentrations if chloride does not
interfere. When measuring arsenic species, document that speciation does not change over time.
No universal preservative for speciation measurements has been identified. 
3500-As  B.        Silver Diethyldithiocarbamate Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Arsenite, containing trivalent arsenic, is reduced selectively by aqueous sodium
borohydride solution to arsine, AsH3, in an aqueous medium of pH 6. Arsenate, methylarsonic
acid, and dimethylarsenic acid are not reduced under these conditi ons. The generated arsine is
swept by a stream of oxygen-free nitrogen from the reduction vessel through a scrubber
containing glass wool or cotton impregnated with  lead acetate solution into an absorber tube
containing silver diethyldithiocarbamate and mo rpholine dissolved in chloroform. The intensity
of the red color that develops is measured at 520 nm. To determine total inorganic arsenic in the
absence of methylarsenic compounds, a sample portion is reduced at a pH of about l.
Alternatively, arsenate is  measured in a sample from which arsenite has been removed by
reduction to arsine gas at pH 6 as above. The samp le is then acidified with hydrochloric acid and
another portion of sodium borohydride solution is added. The arsine formed from arsenate is
collected in fresh absorber solution.
b.  Interferences:  Although certain metals—chromium, cobalt, copper, mercury,
molybdenum, nickel, platinum, silver, and seleni um—influence the generation of arsine, their
concentrations in water are seldom high enough to interfere, except in the instance  of acid rock
drainage. H2S interferes, but the interference is removed with lead acetate. Antimony is reduced
to stibine, which forms a colored complex with an absorption maximum at 510 nm and interferes
with the arsenic determination. Methylarsenic compo unds are reduced at pH l to methylarsines,
which form colored complexes with the absorber solution. If methylarsenic compounds are
present, measurements of total arsenic and arsenate are unreliable. The results for arsenite are not
influenced by methylarse nic compounds.
c.  Minimum detectable quantity:  1 µg arsenic.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Arsine generator, scrubber, and absorption tube:  See Figure 3500-As:1 . Use a 200-mL
three-necked flask with a sidearm (19/ 22 or similar size female ground-glass joint) through
which the inert gas delivery tube reaching almost to the bottom of the fl ask is inserted; a 24/40
female ground-glass joint to carry the scrubber; and a second side arm closed with a rubberStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationseptum, or preferably by a screw cap with a hole in its top for insertion of a TFE-faced silicone
septum. Place a small magnetic stirring b ar in the flask. Fit absorber tube (20 mL capacity) to the
scrubber and fill with silver diethyldithiocarbamate solution. Do not use rubber or cork stoppers
because they may absorb arsine. Clean glass equipment with concentrated nitric acid.
b.  Fume hood:  Use apparatus in a well-ventilated hood with flask secured on top of a
magnetic stirrer.
c.  Photometric equipment:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 520 nm. 
2)  Filter photometer,  with green filter having a maximum transmittance in the 500- to
540-nm range. 
3)  Cells,  for spectrophotometer or filter photomet er, 1-cm, clean, dry, and each equipped
with a tightly fitting cover (TFE stopper) to prevent chloroform evaporation. 
3.  Reagents
a.  Reagent water:  See Section 1080A .
b.  Acetate buffer,  pH 5.5: Mix 428 mL 0.2 M sodium acetate, NaC2H3O2, and 72 mL 0.2 M
acetic acid, CH3COOH.
c.  Sodium acetate,  0.2M: Dissolve 16.46 g anhydrous sodium acetate or 27.36 g sodium
acetate trihydrate, NaC2H3O2⋅3H2O, in water. Dilute to 1000 mL with water.
d.  Acetic acid,  0.2M: Dissolve 11.5 mL glacial acetic acid in water. Dilute to 1000 mL.
e.  Sodium borohydride solution,  1%: Dissolve 0.4 g sodium hydroxide, NaOH (4 pellets), in
400 mL water. Add 4.0 g sodium borohydride, NaBH4 (check for absence of arsenic). Shake to
dissolve and to mix. Prepare fresh every few days.
f.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 2 M: Dilute 165 mL conc HCl to 1000 mL with water.
g.  Lead acetate solution:  Dissolve 10.0 g Pb(CH3COO)2⋅3H2O in 100 mL water.
h.  Silver diethyldithiocarbamate solution:  Dissolve 1.0 mL morpholine (C AUTION :
Corrosive—avoid contact with skin ) in 70 mL chloroform, CHCl3. Add 0.30 g silver
diethyldithiocarbamate, AgSCSN(C2H5)2; shake in a stoppered flask until most is dissolved.
Dilute to 100 mL with chloroform. Filter and store in a tightly closed brown bottle in a
refrigerator.
i.  Standard arsenite solution:  Dissolve 0.1734 g NaAsO2 in water and dilute to 1000 mL
with water. CAUTION : Toxic—avoid contact with skin and do not ingest.  Dilute 10.0 mL to 100
mL with water; dilute 10.0 mL of this intermediate solution to 100 mL with  water; 1.00 mL =
1.00 µg As.
j.  Standard arsenate solution:  Dissolve 0.416 g Na2HAsO4⋅7H2O in water and dilute to
1000 mL. Dilute 10.0 mL to 100 mL with water; dilute 10 mL of this intermediate solution toStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation100 mL; 1.00 mL = 1.00 µg As.
4.  Procedure
a.  Arsenite:
1)  Preparation of scrubber and absorber—Dip glass wool into lead acetate solution; remove
excess by squeezing glass wool. Press glass wool between pieces of filter paper, then fluff it.
Alternatively, if cotton is used treat it similarly but dry in a de siccator and fluff thoroughly when
dry. Place a plug of loose glass wool or cotton in scrubber tube. Add 4.00 mL silver
diethyldithiocarbamate solution to absorber tube (5.00 mL may be used to provide enough
volume to rinse spectrophotometer cell). 
2)  Loading of arsine generator—Pipet not more than 70 mL sample containing not more
than 20.0 µg As (arsenite) into the generator flask. Add 10 mL acetate buffer. If necessary, adjust
total volume of liquid to 80 mL. Flush flask with nitrogen at the rat e of 60 mL/min. 
3)  Arsine generation and measurement—While nitrogen is passing through the system, use a
30-mL syringe to inject through the septum 15 mL 1% sodium borohydride solution within 2
min. Stir vigorously with magnetic stirrer. Pass nitrogen through system fo r an additional 15 min
to flush arsine into absorber solution. Pour absorber solution into a clean and dry
spectrophotometric cell and measure absorbance at 520 nm against chloroform. Determine
concentration from a calibration curve obtained with arsenite standards. If arsenate also is to be
determined for this sample by using the same sample portion, save the liquid in the generator
flask. 
4)  Preparation of standard curves—Treat standard arsenite solution containing 0.0, 1.0, 2.0,
5.0, 10.0, and 20.0 µg As described in ¶s 1) through 3) above. Plot absorbance versus
micrograms arsenic in the standard. 
b.  Arsenate:  After removal of arsenite as arsine, treat sample to convert arsenate to arsine:
 If the lead acetate-impregnated glass wool has become ineffective in removing hydrogen
sulfide (if it has become gray to black) replace glass wool [see ¶ a1)]. Pass nitrogen through
system at the rate of 60 mL/min. Cautiously add 10 mL 2.0 N HCl. Generate arsine as directed in
¶ 4a3) and  prepare standard curves with standard solutions of arsenate according to procedure of
¶ 4a4). 
c.  Total inorganic arsenic:  Prepare scrubber and absorber as directed in ¶ 4a1) and  load
arsine generator as directed in ¶ 4a2) using 10 mL 2.0 N HCl instead of acetate buffer. Generate
arsine and measure as directed in ¶ 4a3). Prepare standard curves a ccording to ¶ 4a4). Curves
obtained with standard arsenite solution are almost identical to those obtained with arsenate
standard solutions. Therefore, use either arsenite or arsenate standards.
5.  Calculation
 Calculate arsenite, arsenate, and total inorganic arsenic from readings and calibration curves
obtained in 4 a, b, and c, respectively, as follows: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
6.  Precision and Bias
 Interlaboratory comparisons are not available. The relative standard deviation of results
obtained with arsenite/arsenate mixtures containing approximately 10 µg arsenic was less than
10%. 
7.  Bibliography
 PEOPLES, S.A., J. LAKSO & T. LAIS.  1971. The simultaneous determination of methylarsonic acid
and inorganic arsenic in urine. Proc. West. Pharmacol. Soc.  14:178.
 AGGETT, J. & A.C. ASPELL.  1976. Determination of arsenic (III) and total arsenic by the silver
diethyldithiocarbamate method. Analyst  101:912.
 HOWARD, A.G. & M.H. ARBAB-ZAVAR.  1980. Sequential spectrophotometric determination of
inorganic arsenic (III) and arsenic (V) species. Analyst  105:338.
 PANDE, S.P.  1980. Morpholine as a substitute for pyridine in determination of arsenic in water. J.
Inst. Chem. (India)  52:256.
 IRGOLIC, K.J.  1986. Arsenic in the environment. In A. V. Xavier, ed. Frontiers in Bioinorganic
Chemistry. VCH Publishers, Weinheim, Germany.
 IRGOLIC, K.J.  1987 . Analytical procedures for the determination of organic compounds of metals
and metalloids in environmental samples. Sci. Total Environ.  64:61.
3500-Ba        BARIUM
 Barium (Ba) is the fifth element in Group IIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 56, an atomic weight of 137.33, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Ba in the
earth’s crust is 390 ppm; in soils it is 63 to 8 10 ppm; in streams it is 10 mg/L; in U.S. drinking
waters it is 49 µg/L; and in groundwaters it is 0.05 to 1 mg/L. It is found chiefly in barite
(BaSO4) or in witherite (BaCO3). Barium’s main use is in mud slurries used in drilling oil and
exploration well s, but it is also used in pigments, rat poisons, pyrotechnics, and in medicine. 
The solubility of barium in natural waters is controlled by the solubility of BaSO4, and
somewhat by its adsorption on hydroxides. High concentrations of barium occur in some brines.
Concentrations exceeding 1 mg/L constitute a toxicity hazard in the marine environment. The
U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL is 1 mg/L. 
Perform analyses by the atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  or Section
3111E ), the electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ), or the inductivelyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcoupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  or Section 3125 ). 
3500-Be        BERYLLIUM
 Beryllium (Be) is the first element in Group IIA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 4, an atomic weight of 9.01, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Be in the
earth’s crust is 2 ppm; in soils it is 0.8 to  1.3 ppm; in streams it is 0.2 µg/L, in U.S. drinking
waters and in groundwaters it is typically <0.1 µg/L. Beryllium occurs in nature in deposits of
beryls in granitic rocks. Beryllium is used in high-strength alloys of copper and nickel, windows
in X-ray  tubes, and as a moderator in nuclear reactors. 
Beryllium solubility is controlled in natural waters by the solubility of beryllium hydroxides.
The solubility at pH 6.0 is approximately 0.1 µg/L. It is nonessential for plants and animals.
Acute toxicity o ccurs at 130 µg/L, and chronic toxicity at 5 µg/L in freshwater species. The
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation
waters is 100 µg/L. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL for beryllium is 4 µg/L. 
The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  and  Section 3111E , and
Section 3113B ) and the inductively coupled plasma (ICP) methods ( Section 3120  and  Section
3125 ) are the methods of choice. If atomic absorption or ICP instrumentatio n is not available, the
aluminon colorimetric method detailed in the 19th Edition of Standard Methods  may be used.
This method has poorer precision and bias than the methods of choice. 
3500-Bi        BISMUTH
 Bismuth (Bi) is the fifth element in Group VA in the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 83, an atomic weight of 208.98, and valences of 3 and 5. The average abundance of Bi in the
earth’s crust in 0.08 ppm; in streams it i s <0.02 mg/L, and in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L.
Bismuth occurs in association with lead and silver ores, and occasionally as the native element.
210Bi, 212Bi, and 214Bi are naturally occuring radioisotopes produced in the decay of uranium
and thorium. T he metal is used in alloys of lead, tin, and cadmium, and in some pharmaceuticals. 
In natural water, Bi3+ ion will occur, and complex ions with nitrate and chloride also might
be expected. The iodide and telluride compounds are toxic by ingestion or inhal ation. 
Perform analyses by the atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) or by the
electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successful ly in most cases (with lower
detection limits), even though bismuth is not specifically listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-B        BORON
 See Section 4500-B.  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-Cd        CADMIUM
 Cadmium (Cd) is the second element in Group IIB of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 48, an atomic weight of 112.41, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Cd in
the earth’s crust is 0.16 ppm; in soils it is 0.1  to 0.5 ppm; in streams it is 1 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is from 1 to 10 µg/L. Cadmium occurs in sulfide minerals that also contain zinc,
lead, or copper. The metal is used in electroplating, batteries, paint pigments, and in alloys with
various other metals. Cadmium is usually associated with zinc at a ratio of about 1 part cadmium
to 500 parts zinc in most rocks and soils. 
The solubility of cadmium is controlled in natural waters by carbonate equilibria. Guidelines
for maximum cadmium concentrations in natural water are linked to the hardness or alkalinity of
the water (i.e., the softer the water, the lower the permitted level of cadmium). It is nonessential
for plants and animals. Cadmium is extremely toxic and accumulates in the kidneys and liver,
with prolonged intake at low levels sometimes leading to dysfunction of the kidneys. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for cadmium in
irrigation waters is 10 µg/L. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL  is 10 µg/L. 
The electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3113B ) is preferred.
The flame atomic absorption methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ) and inductively
coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) provide acc eptable precision and
bias, with higher detection limits. Anodic stripping voltammetry ( Section 3130B ) can achieve
superior detection limits, but is susceptible to interferences from copper, silver, gold, and organic
compounds. When atomic absorption spect rometric or inductively coupled plasma apparatus is
unavailable and the desired precision is not as great, the dithizone method detailed in the 19th
Edition of Standard Methods  is suitable. 
3500-Ca        CALCIUM* #(100)
3500-Ca  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Calcium (Ca) is the third element in Group IIA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 20, an atomic weight of 40.08, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Ca in
the earth’s crust is 4.9%; in soils it is 0.07 to 1.7%; in streams it is about 15 mg/L; and in
groundwaters it is from 1 to >500 mg/L. The most common forms of calcium are calcium
carbonate (calcite) and calcium-magnesium carbonate (dolomite). Calcium compounds are
widely used in pharmaceuticals, photography, lime, de-icing salts, pigments, fertilizers, and
plasters. Calcium carbonate solubility is controlled by pH and dissolved CO2. The CO2 , HCO3–,Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationand CO32– equilibrium is the major buffering mechanism in fresh waters. Hardness is based on
the co ncentration of calcium and magnesium salts, and often is used as a measure of potable
water quality. 
NOTE:  Calcium is necessary in plant and animal nutrition and is an essential component of
bones, shells, and plant structures. The presence of calcium in water supplies results from
passage over deposits of limestone, dolomite, gypsum, and gypsiferous shale. Small
concentrations of calcium carbonate combat corrosion of metal pipes by laying down a
protective coating. Because precipitation of calcite in pipe s and in heat-exchangers can cause
damage, the amount of calcium in domestic and industrial waters is often controlled by water
softening (e.g., ion exchange, reverse osmosis). Calcium carbonate saturation and water hardness
are discussed in Section 2330  and Section 2340 , respectively. 
Calcium contributes to the total hardness of water. Chemical softening treatment, reverse
osmosis, electrodialysis, or ion exchange is used  to reduce calcium and the associated hardness. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption methods ( Section 3111B , Section 3111D , and  Section 3111E ) and
inductively coupled plasma method ( Section 3120 ) are accurate means of determining calcium.
The EDTA titration method gives good results for con trol and routine applications, but for
samples containing high P levels (>50 mg/L) only the atomic absorption or atomic emission
methods are recommended because of interferences  often encountered with EDTA indicators. 
3.  Storage of Samples
 The customary precautions are sufficient if care is taken to redissolve any calcium carbonate
that may precipitate on standing. 
3500-Ca  B.        EDTA Titrimetric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  When EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid or its salts) is added to water
containing both calcium and magnesium, it combines first with the calcium. Calcium can be
determined directly, with EDTA, when the pH is made sufficiently high that  the magnesium is
largely precipitated as the hydroxide and an indicator is used that combines with calcium only.
Several indicators give a color change when all of the calcium has been complexed by the EDTA
at a pH of 12 to 13.
b.  Interference:  Under conditions of this test, the following concentrations of ions cause no
interference with the calcium hardness determination: Cu2+, 2 mg/L; Fe2+, 20 mg/L; Fe3+, 20
mg/L; Mn2+, 10 mg/L; Zn2+, 5 mg/L; Pb2+, 5 mg/L; Al3+, 5 mg/L; and Sn4+, 5 mg/L.
Orthophosphate precipitates calcium at the pH of the test. Strontium and barium give a positive
interference and alkalinity in excess of 300 mg/L may cause an indistinct end point in hardStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwaters.
2.  Reagents
a.  Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 1 N.
b.  Indicators:  Many indicators are available for the calcium titration. Some are described in
the literature (see Bibliography ¶ 6); others are commercial preparations and also may be used.
Murexide (ammonium purpurate) was the first indicator available  for detecting the calcium end
point; directions for its use are presented in this procedure. Individuals who have difficulty
recognizing the murexide end point may find th e indicator Eriochrome Blue Black R (color
index number 202) or Solochrome Dark Blue  an improvement because of the color change from
red to pure blue. Eriochrome Blue Black R is
sodium-1-(2-hydroxy-1-naphthylazo)-2-naphthol-4-s ulfonic acid. Other indicators specifically
designed for use as end-point detectors in EDTA titration of calcium may be used.
1)  Murexide (ammonium purpurate) indicator:  This indicator changes from pink to purple at
the end point. Prepare by dissolving 150 mg dye in 100 g absolute ethylene glycol. Water
solutions of the dye are not stable for longer than 1 d. A ground mixture of dye powder and
sodium chloride (NaCl) provides a stable form of the indicator. Prepare by mixing 200 mg
murexide with 100 g solid NaCl and grinding the mixture to 40 to 50 mesh. Titrate immediately
after adding indicator because it is unstable under alk aline conditions. Facilitate end-point
recognition by preparing a color comparison blank containing 2.0 mL NaOH solution, 0.2 g solid
indicator mixture (or 1 to 2 drops if a solution is used), and sufficient standard EDTA titrant
(0.05 to 0.10 mL) to produ ce an unchanging color. 
2)  Eriochrome Blue Black R indicator:  Prepare a stable form of the indicator by grinding
together in a mortar 200 mg powdered dye and 100 g solid NaCl to 40 to 50 mesh. Store in a
tightly stoppered bottle. Use 0.2 g of ground mixture for the titration i n the same manner as
murexide indicator. During titration the color ch anges from red through purple to bluish purple
to a pure blue with no trace of reddish or purple tint. The pH of some (not all) waters must be
raised to 14 (rather than 12 to 13) by the use of 8 N NaOH to get a good color change. 
c.  Standard EDTA titrant,  0.01 M: Prepare standard EDTA titrant and standardize against
standard calcium solution as described in Section 2340C  to obtain EDTA/CaCO3 equivalence.
Standard EDTA titrant, 0.0100 M, is equivalent to 1000 mg CaCO3/1.00 mL; use titrated
equivalent for B in the calculations in 4.
3.  Procedure
a.  Pretreatment of water and wastewater samples:  Follow the procedure described in
Section 3030E  or I if samples require preliminary digestion.
b.  Sample preparation:  Because of the high pH used in this procedure, titrate immediately
after adding alkali and indicator. Use 50.0 mL sample, or a smaller portion diluted to 50 mL so
that the calcium content is about 5 to 10 mg. Analyze hard waters w ith alkalinity higher than 300Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmg CaCO3/L by taking a smaller portion and diluting to 50 mL. Alternatively, adjust sample pH
into the acid range (pH <6), boil for 1 min to dispel CO2, and cool before beginning titration.
c.  Titration:  Add 2.0 mL NaOH solution or a volume sufficient to produce a pH of 12 to 13.
Stir. Add 0.1 to 0.2 g indicator mixture selected (or 1 to 2 drops if a solution is used). Add
EDTA titrant slowly, with continuous stirring to the proper end poi nt. When using murexide,
check end point by adding 1 to 2 drops of titrant in excess to make certain that no further color
change occurs.
4.  Calculation
 
where: 
                  A =   mL titrant for sample and 
                  B =   mg CaCO3 equivalent to 1.00 mL EDTA titrant at the calcium indicator end
point. 
5.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 108 mg Ca/L, 82 mg Mg/L, 3.1 mg K/L, 19.9 mg Na/L, 241
mg Cl–/L, 1.1 mg NO3–-N/L, 0.25 mg NO2–-N/L, 259 mg SO42–/L, and 42.5 mg total
alkalinity/L (contributed by NaHCO3) in distilled water was analyz ed in 44 laboratories by the
EDTA titrimetric method, with a relative standard deviation of 9.2% and a relative error of 1.9%. 
6.  Bibliography
 DIEHL, H. & J.L. ELLINGBOE . 1956. Indicator for titration of calcium in the presence of
magnesium using disodium dihydrogen ethylenediamine tetraacetate. Anal. Chem.  28:882.
 HILDEBRAND, G.P. & C.N. REILLEY . 1957. New indicator for comp lexometric titration of calcium
in the presence of magnesium. Anal. Chem.  29:258.
 PATTON, J. & W. REEDER . 1956. New indicator for titration of calcium with (ethylenedinitrilo)
tetraacetate. Anal. Chem.  28:1026.
 SCHWARZENBACH, G . 1957. Complexometric Titr ations. Interscience Publishers, New York,
N.Y.
 FURMAN, N.H . 1962. Standard Methods of Chemical An alysis, 6th ed. D. Van Nostrand Co.,
Inc., Princeton, N.J.
 KATZ, H. & R. NAVONE . 1964. Method for simultaneous determination of calcium andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationmagnesium. J. Am er. Water Works Assoc.  56:121.
3500-Cs        CESIUM
 Cesium (Cs) is the sixth element in Group IA of the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 55, an atomic weight of 132.90, and a valence of 1. The average abundance of Cs in the
earth’s crust is 2.6 ppm; in soils it is 1 to 5 p pm; in streams it is 0.02 mg/L; and in groundwaters
it is generally <0.1 mg/L. Cesium is found in lepidolite and in the water of certain mineral
springs. 137Cs, with a 33-year half-life, is widely dispersed on the earth’s surface as a result of
the radioac tive fallout from the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Cesium compounds are
used in photoelectric cells, as a catalyst, and in brewing. Some cesium compounds are fire
hazards. 
Perform analyses by the flame atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ). The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though cesium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Cr        CHROMIUM* #(101)
3500-Cr  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Chromium (Cr) is the first element in Group VIB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 24, an atomic weight of 51.99, and valences of 1 through 6. The average abundance of
Cr in the earth’s crust is 122 ppm; in  soils Cr ranges from 11 to 22 ppm; in streams it averages
about 1 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is generally 100 µg/L. Chromium is found chiefly in
chrome-iron ore (FeO ⋅Cr2O3). Chromium is used in alloys, in electroplating, and in pigments.
Chromate compou nds frequently are added to cooling water for corrosion control. 
In natural waters trivalent chromium exists as Cr3+, Cr(OH)2+, Cr(OH)2+, and Cr(OH)4–; in
the hexavalent form chromium exists as CrO42– and as Cr2O72–. Cr3+ would be expected to form
strong complexes with amines, and would be adsorbed by clay minerals. Chromium may exist in
water supplies in both the hexavalent and the trivalent state although the trivalent form rarely
occurs in potable water. 
Chromium is considered nonessential for plants, but an essential trace element for animals.
Hexavalent compounds have been shown to be carcinogenic by inhalation and are corrosive to
tissue. The chromium guidelines for natural water are linked to the hardness or alkalinity of the
water (i.e., the softer  the water, the lower the permitted level for chromium). The United NationsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationFood and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters is 100
µg/L. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL is 0.1 mg/L for total chromium. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The colorimetric method (B) is useful for the determination of hexavalent chromium in a
natural or treated water in the range from 100 to 1000 µg/L. This range can be extended by
appropriate sample dilution or concentration and/o r use of longer cell paths. The ion
chromatographic method with photometric detection (C) is suitable for determining dissolved
hexavalent chromium in drinking water, groundwat er, and industrial wastewater effluents. The
electrothermal atomic absorption sp ectrometric method ( Section 3113B ) is suitable for
determining low levels of total chromium (< 50 µg/L) in water and wastewater, and the flame
atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ) and the
inductively coupled plasma met hods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) are appropriate for
measuring concentrations up to milligram-per-liter levels. 
3.  Sample Handling
 If only the dissolved metal content is desired, filter sample through a 0.45- µm membrane
filter at time of collection, and after filtrati on acidify filtrate with conc nitric acid (HNO3) to pH
<2. If only dissolved hexavalent chromium  is desired, adjust pH of filtrate to 8 or above with 1 N
sodium hydroxide solution and refrigerate. If the total chromium content is desired, acidify
unfiltered sample at time of collection with conc HNO3 to pH <2. If total hexavalent chromium
is desired, adjust the pH of unfiltered sample to 8 or above with 1 N sodium hydroxide and
refrigerate. 
3500-Cr  B.        Colorimetric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  This procedure measures only hexavalent chromium (Cr 6+). Therefore, to
determine total chromium convert all the chromium to the hexavalent state by oxidation with
potassium permanganate. NOTE:  The oxidation process may not provide total c onversion of all
chromium species to Cr 6+.1-3 For total chromium determination, acid-digest the sample (see
Section 3030 ) and follow with a suitable instrumental analysis technique. The hexavalent
chromium is determined colorimetrically by reaction with d iphenylcarbazide in acid solution. A
red-violet colored complex of unknown composition is produced. The reaction is very sensitive,
the molar absorptivity based on chromium being about 40 000 L g–1 cm–1 at 540 nm. To
determine total chromium, digest the sa mple with a sulfuric-nitric acid mixture and then oxidize
with potassium permanganate before reacting with the diphenylcarbazide.
b.  Interferences:  The reaction with diphenylcarbazide is nearly specific for chromium.
Hexavalent molybdenum and mercury salts will react to form color with the reagent but theStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationintensities are much lower than that for chromium at the specified pH. Conce ntrations as high as
200 mg Mo or Hg/L can be tolerated. Vanadium interferes strongly but concentrations up to 10
times that of chromium will not cause trouble. Potential interference from permanganate is
eliminated by prior reduction with azide. Iron in c oncentrations greater than 1 mg/L may
produce a yellow color but the ferric ion (Fe3+) color is not strong and no difficulty is
encountered normally if the absorbance is measured photometrically at the appropriate
wavelength. Interfering amounts of molybde num, vanadium, iron, and copper can be removed by
extraction of the cupferrates of these metals into chloroform (CHCl3). A procedure for this
extraction is provided but do not use it unless necessary, because residual cupferron and CHCl3
in the aqueous sol ution complicate the later oxidation. Therefore, follow the extraction by
additional treatment with acid fuming to decompose these compounds.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 540 nm, with a light path of 1 cm or longer. 
2)  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a greenish
yellow filter having maximum transmittance near 540 nm. 
b.  Separatory funnels,  125-mL, Squibb form, with glass or TFE stopcock and stopper.
c.  Acid-washed glassware:  New and unscratched glassware will minimize chromium
adsorption on glass surfaces during the oxidation procedure. Do not use glassware previously
treated with chromic acid. Thoroughly clean other used glassware and new glasswar e with nitric
or hydrochloric acid to remove chromium traces.
3.  Reagents
 Use reagent water (see Section 1080 ) for reagent preparation and analytical procedure. 
a.  Stock chromium solution:  Dissolve 141.4 mg K2Cr2O7 in water and dilute to 100 mL;
1.00 mL = 500 µg Cr.
b.  Standard chromium solution:  Dilute 1.00 mL stock chromium solution to 100 mL; 1.00
mL = 5.00 µg Cr.
c.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
d.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc, 18 N, and 6 N.
e.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, 0.2N: Dilute 17 mL 6 N H2SO4 to 500 mL with water.
f.  Phosphoric acid,  H3PO4, conc.
g.  Methyl orange indicator solution.
h.  Hydrogen peroxide,  H2O2, 30%.
i.  Ammonium hydroxide,  NH4OH, conc.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationj.  Potassium permanganate solution:  Dissolve 4 g KMnO4 in 100 mL water.
k.  Sodium azide solution:  Dissolve 0.5 g NaN3 in 100 mL water.
l.  Diphenylcarbazide solution:  Dissolve 250 mg 1,5-diphenylcarbazide
(1,5-diphenylcarbohydrazide) in 50 mL acetone. Store in a brown bottle. Discard when solution
becomes discolored.
m.  Chloroform,  CHCl3: Avoid or redistill material that comes in containers with metal or
metal-lined caps.
n.  Cupferron solution:  Dissolve 5 g cupferron, C6H5N(NO)ONH4, in 95 mL water.
o.  Sodium hydroxide, 1N: Dissolve 40 g NaOH in 1 L water. Store in plastic bottle.
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of calibration curve:  To compensate for possible slight losses of chromium
during digestion or other analytical operations, treat standards by the same procedure as the
sample. Accordingly, pipet measured volumes of standard chromium solu tion (5 µg/mL) ranging
from 2.00 to 20.0 mL, to give standards for 10 to 100 µg Cr, into 250-mL beakers or conical
flasks. Depending on pretreatment used in ¶ b below, proceed with subsequent treatment of
standards as if they were samples, also carrying ou t cupferron treatment of standards if this is
required for samples.
 Develop color as for samples, transfer a suitable portion of each colored solution to a 1-cm
absorption cell, and measure absorbance at 540 nm, using reagent water as reference. Correct
absorbance readings of standards by subtracting absorbance of a reagent blank carried through
the method. 
Construct a calibration curve by plotting corrected absorbance values against micrograms
chromium in 102 mL final volume. 
b.  Treatment of sample:  If sample has been filtered and/or only hexavalent chromium is
desired, start analysis within 24 h of collection and proceed to ¶ 4e. NOTE:  Recent evidence4
suggests that preserved samples can be held for 30 d without substantial  changes to Cr 6+
concentrations. If total dissolved chromium is desired and there are interfering amounts of
molybdenum, vanadium, copper, or iron present, proceed to ¶ 4c. If interferences are not present,
proceed to ¶ 4d.
 If sample is unfiltered and to tal chromium is desired, digest with HNO3 and H2SO4 as in
Section 3030G . If interferences are present, proceed to ¶ 4c, ¶ 4d, and ¶ 4e. If there are no
interferences, proceed to ¶ 4d and  ¶ 4e. 
c.  Removal of molybdenum, vanadium, iron, and copper with cupferron:  Pipet a portion of
sample containing 10 to 100 µg Cr into a 125-mL separatory funnel. Dilute to about 40 mL with
water and chill in an ice bath. Add 5 mL ice-cold cupferron solution, s hake well, and let stand in
ice bath for 1 min. Extract in separatory funnel with three successive 5-mL portions of CHCl3;Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationshake each portion thoroughly with aqueous solution, let layers separate, and withdraw and
discard CHCl3 extract. Transfer extracted  aqueous solution to a 125-mL conical flask. Wash
separatory funnel with a small amount of water and add wash water to flask. Boil for about 5 min
to volatilize CHCl3 and cool. Add 5 mL HNO3 and 3 mL H2SO4. Boil samples to the appearance
of SO3 fumes. Cool  slightly, carefully add 5 mL HNO3, and again boil to fumes to complete
decomposition of organic matter. Cool, wash sides of flask, and boil once more to SO3 fumes,
assuming elimination of all HNO3. Cool and add 25 mL water.
d.  Oxidation of trivalent chromium:  Pipet a portion of digested sample with or without
interferences removed, and containing 10 to 100 µg Cr, into a 125-mL conical flask. Add several
drops of methyl orange indicator, then add conc NH4OH until solution j ust begins to turn yellow.
Add 1 + 1 H2SO4 dropwise until it is acidic, plus 1 mL (20 drops) in excess. Adjust volume to
about 40 mL, add two or more acid-washed glass beads, and heat to boiling. Add 2 drops
KMnO4 solution to give a dark red color. If fadi ng occurs, add KMnO4 dropwise to maintain an
excess of about 2 drops. Boil for 2 min longer. Add 1 mL NaN3 solution and continue boiling
gently. If red color does not fade completely after boiling for approximately 30 s, add another 1
mL NaN3 solution. Con tinue boiling for 1 min after color has faded completely, then cool.
e.  Color development and measurement:  Add 0.25 mL (5 drops) H3PO4. Use 0.2 N H2SO4
and a pH meter to adjust solution to pH 1.0 ± 0.3. NOTE:  Recent work5 identifies the optimum
pH range for color development to be 1.6 to 2.2; the matter of optimum pH rang e is currently
being considered by Standard Methods . Transfer solution to a 100-mL volumetric flask, dilute to
100 mL, and mix. Add 2.0 mL diphenylcarbazide solution, mix, and let stand 5 to 10 min for full
color development. Transfer an appropriate portio n to a 1-cm absorption cell and measure its
absorbance at 540 nm, using reagent water as reference. Correct absorbance reading of sample
by subtracting absorbance of a blank carried through the method (see also note below). From the
corrected absorbance, d etermine micrograms chromium present by reference to the calibration
curve.
 NOTE : If the solution is turbid after dilution to 100 mL in ¶ e above, take an absorbance
reading before adding carbazide reagent and correct absorbance reading of final colored s olution
by subtracting the absorbance measured previously. 
5.  Calculation
 For digested samples: 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwhere: 
                  A =   mL original sample, and 
                  B =   mL portion from 100 mL digested sample. 
For undigested samples: 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Collaborative test data from 16 laboratories were obtained on reagent water, tap water, 10%
NaCl solution, treated water from synthetic or ganic industrial waste, EPA extraction leachate,
process water, lake water, and effluent fro m a steel pickle liquor treatment plant.6 The test data
yielded the following relationships: 
Reagent water: 
St = 0.037 x + 0.006
So = 0.022 x + 0.004
Drinking or wastewater: 
St = 0.067 x + 0.004
So = 0.037 x + 0.002
Leachate: 
St = 0.032 x + 0.007
So = 0.017 x + 0.004
where: 
                  St =   overall precision, 
                 So =   single-operator precision, and 
                   x  =   chromium concentration, mg/L. 
7.  ReferencesStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation         1.    BARTLETT, R. & B. JAMES.  1988. Mobility and bioavailability of chromium in soils. In
J.O. Nriagu & E. Noeboer, eds. Chromium in the Natural and Human Environments, p.
267. Wiley-Interscience, New York, N.Y.
         2.    VITALE, R.J., G. R. MUSSOLINE, J.C. PETURA & B.R. JAMES.  1994. Hexavalent chromium
extraction from soils: Evaluation of an alkaline digestion method. J. Environ. Qual.
23:1249.
         3.    VITALE, R.J., G.R. MUSSOLINE, K.A. RI NEHIMER, J.C. PETURA & B.R. JAMES.  1997.
Extraction  of sparingly soluble chromate from soils: Evaluation of methods and Eh-pH
effects. Environ. Sci. Technol.  31: 390.
         4.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1996. Determination of hexavalent
chromium by ion chromatography. Method 1636. EPA 821-R-96-00 3, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
         5.    VITALE, R.J., G.R. MUSSOLINE & K.A. RINEHIMER.  1997. Environmental monitoring of
chromium in air, soil, and water. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmac.  26:S80.
         6.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND M ATERIALS.  1986. Chromium, total. ASTM
D1687-86, Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 11.01. American Soc. Testing &
Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.
8.  Bibliography
 ROWLAND, G.P., JR . 1939. Photoelectric colorimetry—Optical study of permanganate ion and of
chromium-diphenylcarbazide system. Anal. Chem.  11:442.
 SALTZMAN, B.E . 1952. Microdetermination of chromium with diphenylcarbazide by
permangana te oxidation. Anal. Chem.  24:1016.
 URONE, P.F . 1955. Stability of colorimetric reagent for chromium, 5-diphenylcarbazide, in
various solvents. Anal. Chem.  27:1354.
 ALLEN, T.L . 1958. Microdetermination of chromium with 1,5-diphenylcarbohydrazide. Anal.
Chem. 30:447.
 SANDELL, E.B . 1959. Colorimetric Determination of Traces of Metals, 3rd ed. Interscience
Publishers, New York, N.Y.
3500-Cr  C.        Ion Chromatographic Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  This method is applicable to determination of dissolved hexavalent chromium
in drinking water, groundwater, and industrial wa stewater effluents. An aqueous sample is
filtered and its pH adjusted to 9 to 9.5 with a concentrated buffer. This  pH adjustment reduces
the solubility of trivalent chromium and preserves the hexavalent chromium oxidation state. The
sample is introduced into the instrument’s eluent stream of ammonium sulfate and ammoniumStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationhydroxide. Trivalent chromium in solution is se parated from the hexavalent chromium by the
column. After separation, hexavalent chromium reacts with an azide dye to produce a chromogen
that is measured at 530 nm. Hexavalent chromium is identified on the basis of retention time.
 Although this method wa s developed using specific commercial equipment, use of another
manufacturer’s equipment should be acceptable if appropriate adjustments are made. 
b.  Interferences:  Interferences may come from several sources. Use a good grade of salts for
the buffer because trace amounts of chromium may be included.
 Several soluble species of trivalent chromium in the sample may be oxidized to the
hexavalent for m in an alkaline medium in the presence of such oxidants as hydrogen peroxide,
ozone, and manganese dioxide. The hexavalent form can be reduced to the trivalent in the
presence of reducing species in an acid medium. 
High ionic concentration may cause colu mn overload. Samples high in chloride and/or
sulfate might show this phenomenon, which is characterized by a change in peak geometry. 
Interfering organic compounds are removed by the guard column. 
c.  Minimum detectable concentrations:  The method detection limits obtained in a single
laboratory with a 250- µL loop were as follows:  
Reagent water 0.4 µg/L 
Drinking water 0.3 µg/L 
Groundwater 0.3 µg/L 
Primary wastewater effluent 0.3 µg/L 
Electrop lating waste 0.3 µg/L 
d.  Sample preservation and holding time:  Filter sample through a 0.45- µm filter. Use a
portion of sample to rinse syringe filter unit and filter, then collect the required volume of
filtrate. Adjust pH to 9 to 9.5 by adding buffer solution dropwise whil e checking pH with a pH
meter.
 Ship and store sample at 4°C. Bring to room temperature before analysis. Analyze samples
within 24 h of collection. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Ion chromatograph  equipped with a pump capable of precisely delivering a flow of 1 to 5
mL/min. The metallic parts of the pump must not contact sample, eluent, or reagent. Sample
loops should be available or the instrument should be capable of delive ring from 50 to 250- µL
injections of sample. The visible absorption cell should not contain metallic parts that contact the
eluent-sample flow. The cell must be usable at 530 nm. Use plastic pressurized containers to
deliver eluent and post-column reagent.  Use high-purity helium (99.995%) to pressurize the
eluent and post-column reagent vessel.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Guard column , to be placed before the separator column, containing an adsorbent capable
of adsorbing organic compounds and particulates that would damage or interfere with the
analysis or equipment.* #(102)
c.  Separator column , packed with a high-capacity anion-exchange resin capable of resolving
chromate from other sample constituents.† #(103)
d.  Recorder, integrator, or computer  for receiving signals from the detector as a function of
time.
e.  Labware:  Soak all reusable labware (glass, plastic, etc.) including sample containers,
overnight in laboratory-grade detergent, rinse, and soak for 4 h in a mixture of nitric acid (1
part), hydrochloric acid (2 parts), and reagent water (9 parts). Ri nse with tap water and reagent
water. NOTE : Never use chromic acid cleaning solution.
f.  Syringe , equipped with male luer-type fitting and a capacity of at least 3 mL.
3.  Reagents
a.  Reagent water:  Deionized or distilled water free from interferences at the minimum
detection limit of each constituent, filtered through a 0.2- µm membrane filter and having a
conductance of less than 0.1 µS/cm. Use for preparing all reagents.
b.  Cr(VI) stock solution , 100 mg Cr 6+/L: Prepare from primary standard grade potassium
dichromate. Dissolve 0.1414 g K2Cr2O7 in water and dilute to 500 mL in a volumetric flask. pH
adjustment is not required. Store in plastic. CAUTION : Hexavalent chrom ium is toxic and a
suspected carcinogen; handle with care.
c.  Eluent:  Dissolve 33 g ammonium sulfate (NH4)2SO4, in 500 mL water and add 6.5 mL
conc ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH. Dilute to 1 L with water.
d.  Post-column reagent:  Dissolve 0.5 g 1,5-diphenylcarbazide in 100 mL HPLC-grade
methanol. Add with stirring to 500 mL water containing 28 mL conc H2SO4. Dilute to 1 L with
water. Reagent is stable for 4 or 5 d; prepare only as needed.
e.  Buffer solution:  Dissolve 33 g ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4, in 75 mL water and add
6.5 mL conc ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH. Dilute to 100 mL with water.
4.  Procedure
a.  Instrument setup:  Establish ion chromatograph operating conditions as indicated in Table
3500-Cr:I . Set flow rate of the eluent pump at 1.5 mL/min and adjust pressure of reagent
delivery module so that the system flow rate, measured after the detecto r, is 2.0 mL/min.
Measure system flow rate using a graduated cylinder and stopwatch. Allow approximately 30
min after adjustment before measuring flow. 
Use an injection loop size based on required sensitivity. A 50- µL loop is sufficient, although
a 250-µL loop was used to determine the method detection limit. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Calibration:  Before sample analysis, construct a calibration curve using a minimum of a
blank and three standards that bracket the expected sample concentration range. Prepare
calibration standards from the stock standard (3 b) by appropriate dilution  with water in
volumetric flasks. Adjust to pH 9 to 9.5 with buffer solution (3 e) before final dilution. Injection
volumes of standards should be about 10 times the injection loop volume to insure complete loop
flushing.
c.  Sample analysis:  Bring chilled, pH-adjusted sample to ambient temperature. Fill a clean
syringe with sample, attach a 0.45- µm syringe filter, and inject 10 times the sample loop volume
into the instrument. Dilute any sample that has a concentration g reater than the highest
calibration standard.
5.  Calculation
 Determine area or height of the Cr(VI) peak in the calibration standard chromatograms.
Calculate a calibration line by regressing peak area (or height) against standard concentration in
mg/L. A correlation coefficient less than 0.995 may  indicate a problem with the analysis. 
For samples, measure area (or height) of Cr(VI) peak in sample chromatogram, as
determined by retention time. Calculate Cr(VI) concentration by interpolating from the
calibration line. Correct data for any dilutions made. 
Currently available instrumentation automates the entire measurement process (peak
measurement, calibration, and sample measurements and calculations). Ensure that enough
quality control samples are analyzed to monitor the instrumental processes. 
6.  Quality Control
a.  Initial demonstration of performance:  Before sample analysis, set up instrument and
analyze enough known samples to determine estimates for the method detection limit and linear
calibration range. Use the initial demonstration of performance to chara cterize instrument
performance, i.e., method detection levels (MDLs) and linear calibration range.
b.  Initial and continuing calibration performance:  Initially, after every 10 samples, and after
the final sample, analyze an independent check sample and a calibration blank. The
concentration of the calibration check sample should be near the mid-calib ration range; prepare
from a source independent of the calibration standards. Use acceptance criteria for check
standard recovery and calibration standard con centration based on project goals for precision and
accuracy. Typical values for recovery of the c heck standard range from 90 to 110%. The
acceptance criteria for the calibration blank are typically set at ± the nominal MDL.
c.  Reagent blank analysis:  Analyze one laboratory reagent blank with each batch of samples.
Significant Cr(VI) detected in the reagent blank is a sign of contamination. Identify source and
eliminate contamination.
d.  Laboratory-fortified matrix (also known as matrix spike) analysis:  To a portion of a
sample, add a known quantity of Cr(VI). After anal ysis, calculate percent recovery of the known
addition. If the recovery falls outside the control limits (typically  75 to 125%), the matrix may beStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationinterfering with the results. Perform additional testing to determine whether analysis by the
method of standard additions will overcome the in terference. Analyze fortified matrix samples as
frequently as dictated by project  goals and anticipated similarity of matrices in the sample set.
e.  Laboratory control sample:  Analyze a laboratory control sample (LCS) from an external
source with every sample batch. Process LCS and samples identically, including filtering and pH
adjustment. Base acceptance criteria for LCS recovery on project goa ls for precision and bias.
Typical values for acceptable recovery range from 90 to 110%.
7.  Precision and Bias
 The instrument operating conditions and data from a single- laboratory test of the method
are shown in  Table 3500-Cr:I  and Table 3500-Cr:II , respectively. 
Multilaboratory test data are shown in Table 3500-Cr:III .‡#(104)  Fifteen labora tories
analyzed samples ranging from 1.2 to 960 µg Cr/L. 
For reagent water matrix: 
So = 0.033 x + 0.106 
St = 0.050 x + 0.559 
Mean recovery = 1.04 x + 0.183 
where: 
                So =   single-operator precision, 
                 St =   overall precision, and 
                  x  =   added amount. 
For wastewater matrix: 
So = 0.041 x + 0.039 
St = 0.059 x + 1.05 
Mean recovery = 0.989 x − 0.41 
The eleven water samples consisted of a reagent water blank and five Youden pairs. The nine
wastewater samples consisted of a wa stewater blank and four Youden pairs. 
8.  BibliographyStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY . 1991. Methods for the Determination of Metals in
Environmental Samples. Method 218.6, EPA-600/4-91-010, Environmental Monitoring
Systems Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio.
 DIONEX . 1990. Technical Note No. 26.  Dionex, Sunnyvale, Calif.
 EDGEL, K.W., J.A. LONGBOTTOM & R.A. JOYCE . 1994. Determination of dissolved hexavalent
chromium in drinking water, ground water, and industrial wastewater effluents by ion
chromatography: Collaborative study. J. Assoc. Offic. An al. Chem.  77:994.
3500-Co        COBALT
 Cobalt (Co ) is the second element in Group VIII in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 27, an atomic weight of 58.93, and valences of 1, 2, and 3. The average abundance of
Co in the earth’s crust is 29 ppm; in soils it is 1.0 to 14 ppm; in streams it is 0.2 µg/L; and in
groundwaters it is 1 to 10 µg/L. Cobalt occurs only sparingly in ores, usually as the sulfide or the
arsenide. It is widely used in alloys of vari ous steels, in electroplating, in fertilizers, and in
porcelain and glass. 
The solubility of cobalt is controlled by coprecipitation or adsorption by oxides or
manganese and iron, by carbonate precipitation, and by the formation of complex ions. Cobalt
dust is flammable and is toxic by inhalation. Cobalt is cons idered essential for algae and some
bacteria, nonessential for higher plants, and an essential trace element for animals. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters
is 100 µg/L. 
Perform analyses by  the flame atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and
Section 3111C ), by the electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ), or by the
inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ). 
3500-Cu        COPPER* #(105)
3500-Cu  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Copper (Cu) is the first element in Group IB in the periodic table; it has an atomic number of
29, an atomic weight of 63.54, and valences of 1 and 2. The average abundance of Cu in the
earth’s crust is 68 ppm; in soils i t is 9 to 33 ppm; in streams it is 4 to 12 µg/L; and in
groundwater it is <0.1 mg/L. Copper occurs in its native state, but is also found in many
minerals, the most important of which are those containing sulfide compounds (e.g.,
chalcopyrite), but also th ose with oxides and carbonates. Copper is widely used in electrical
wiring, roofing, various alloys, pigments, cooking utensils, piping, and in the chemical industry.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCopper salts are used in water supply systems to control biological growths in reservoirs  and
distribution pipes and to catalyze the oxidation of manganese. Copper forms a number of
complexes in natural waters with inorganic and organic ligands. Among the common aqueous
species are Cu2+, Cu(OH)2, and CuHCO3+. Corrosion of copper-containing all oys in pipe
fittings may introduce measurable amounts of copper into the water in a pipe system. 
Copper is considered an essential trace element for plants and animals. Some compounds are
toxic by ingestion or inhalation. The United Nations Food and Agric ulture Organization
recommended maximum level for irrigation waters is 200 µg/L. Under the lead-copper rule, the
U.S. EPA drinking water 90th percentile action level is 1.3 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ), the
inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ), and the neocuproine
method (B) are recommended because of their freedom from  interferences. The electrothermal
atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ) also may be used with success with an appropriate
matrix modifier. The bathocuproine method (C) may be used for potable waters. 
3.  Sampling and Storage
 Copper ion tends to be adsorbed on the surface of sample containers. Therefore, analyze
samples as soon as possible after collection. If storage is necessary, use 0.5 mL 1 + 1 HCl/100
mL sample, or acidify to pH <2 with HNO3, to prevent this adsorption. 
3500-Cu  B.        Neocuproine Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Cuprous ion (Cu+) in neutral or slightly acidic solution reacts with
2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline (neocuproine) to form a complex in which 2 moles of
neocuproine are bound by 1 mole of Cu+ ion. The complex can be extracted by a number of
organic solvents, including a chloroform-methanol (CHCl3-CH3OH) mixture, to give a yellow
solution with a molar absorptivity of about 8000 at 457 nm. The reaction is virtually specific for
copper; the color follows Beer’s law up to a concentration of 0. 2 mg Cu/25 mL solvent; full
color development is obtained when the pH of the aqueous solution is between 3 and 9; the color
is stable in CHCl3-CH3OH for several days.
 The sample is treated with hydroxylamine-hydrochloride to reduce cupric ions to cuprous
ions. Sodium citrate is used to complex metallic ions that might precipitate when the pH is
raised. The pH is adjusted to 4 to 6 with NH4OH, a solution of neocuproine in methanol is
added, and the resultant complex is extracted into CHCl3. After dilution o f the CHCl3 to an exact
volume with CH3OH, the absorbance of the solution is measured at 4571 nm. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationb.  Interference:  Large amounts of chromium and tin may interfere. Avoid interference from
chromium by adding sulfurous acid to reduce chromate and complex chromic ion. In the
presence of much tin or excessive amounts of other oxidizing ions, use up to 2 0 mL additional
hydroxylamine-hydrochloride solution.
 Cyanide, sulfide, and organic matter interfere but can be removed by a digestion procedure. 
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum detectable concentration,
corresponding to 0.01 absorbance or 98% transmittance, is 3 µg Cu when a 1-cm cell is used and
0.6 µg Cu when a 5-cm cell is used.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer , for use at 4571 nm, providing a light path of 1 cm or longer. 
2)  Filter photometer , providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a
narrow-band violet filter having maximum transmittance in the range 450 to 460 nm. 
b.  Separatory funnels,  125-mL, Squibb form, with glass or TFE stopcock and stopper.
3.  Reagents
a.  Redistilled water,  copper-free: Because most ordinary distilled water contains detectable
amounts of copper, use redistilled water, prepared by distilling singly distilled water in a
resistant-glass still, or distilled water passed through an ion-exc hange unit, to prepare all
reagents and dilutions.
b.  Stock copper solution:  To 200.0 mg polished electrolytic copper wire or foil in a 250-mL
conical flask, add 10 mL water and 5 mL conc HNO3. After the reaction has slowed, warm
gently to complete dissolution of the copper and boil to expel oxides of n itrogen, using
precautions to avoid loss of copper. Cool, add about 50 mL water, transfer quantitatively to a 1-L
volumetric flask, and dilute to the mark with water; 1 mL = 200 µg Cu.
c.  Standard copper solution:  Dilute 50.00 mL stock copper solution to 500 mL with water;
1.00 mL = 20.0 µg Cu.
d.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc.
e.  Hydroxylamine-hydrochloride solution:  Dissolve 50 g NH2OH⋅HCl in 450 mL water.
f.  Sodium citrate solution:  Dissolve 150 g Na3C6H5O7⋅2H2O in 400 mL water. Add 5 mL
NH2OH⋅HCl solution and 10 mL neocuproine reagent. Extract with 50 mL CHCl3 to remove
copper impurities and discard CHCl3 layer.
g.  Ammonium hydroxide,  NH4OH, 5 N: Dilute 330 mL conc NH4OH (28-29%) to 1000 mL
with water. Store in a polyethylene bottle.
h.  Congo red paper,  or other pH test paper showing a color change in the pH range of 4 to 6.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationi.  Neocuproine reagent:  Dissolve 100 mg 2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline
hemihydrate* #(106)  in 100 mL methanol. This solution is stable under ordinary storage
conditions for a month or more.
j.  Chloroform,  CHCl3: Avoid or redistill material that comes in containers with metal-lined
caps.
k.  Methanol,  CH3OH, reagent grade.
l.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
m.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc.
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of calibration curve:  Pipet 50 mL water into a 125-mL separatory funnel for
use as a reagent blank. Prepare standards by pipetting 1.00 to 10.00 mL (20.0 to 200 µg Cu)
standard copper solution into a series of 125-mL separatory funnels, a nd dilute to 50 mL with
water. Add 1 mL conc H2SO4 and use the extraction procedure given in ¶ 4b below.
 Construct a calibration curve by plotting absorbance versus micrograms of copper. 
To prepare a calibration curve for smaller amounts of copper, dilut e 10.0 mL standard copper
solution to 100 mL. Carry 1.00-to 10.00-mL volumes of this diluted standard through the
previously described procedure, but use 5-cm cells to measure absorbance. 
b.  Treatment of sample:  Transfer 100 mL sample to a 250-mL beaker, add 1 mL conc
H2SO4 and 5 mL conc HNO3. Add a few boiling chips and cautiously evaporate to dense white
SO3 fumes on a hot plate. If solution remains colored, cool, add another 5 mL conc  HNO3, and
again evaporate to dense white fumes. Repeat, if necessary, until solution becomes colorless.
 Cool, add about 80 mL water, and bring to a boil. Cool and filter into a 100-mL volumetric
flask. Make up to 100 mL with water using mostly beaker and  filter washings. 
Pipet 50.0 mL or other suitable portion containing 4 to 200 µg Cu, from the solution obtained
from preliminary treatment, into a 125-mL separatory funnel. Dilute, if necessary, to 50 mL with
water. Add 5 mL NH2OH⋅HCl solution and 10 mL s odium citrate solution, and mix thoroughly.
Adjust pH to approximately 4 by adding 1-mL increments of NH4OH until Congo red paper is
just definitely red (or other suitable pH test paper indicates a value between 4 and 6). 
Add 10 mL neocuproine reagent and  10 mL CHCl3. Stopper and shake vigorously for 30 s or
more to extract the copper-neocuproine complex into the CHCl3. Let mixture separate into two
layers and withdraw lower CHCl3 layer into a 25-mL volumetric flask, taking care not to transfer
any of the aqueous layer. Repeat extraction of the water layer with an additional 10 mL CHCl3
and combine extracts. Dilute combined extracts to 25 mL with CH3OH, stopper, and mix
thoroughly. 
Transfer an appropriate portion of extract to a suitable absorption cell (1  cm for 40 to 200 µgStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationCu; 5 cm for lesser amounts) and measure absorbance at 4571 nm or with a 450- to 460-nm
filter. Use a sample blank prepared by carrying 50 mL water through the complete digestion and
analytical procedure. 
Determine micrograms copper i n final solution by reference to the appropriate calibration
curve. 
5.  Calculation
 
6.  Bibliography
 SMITH, G.F. & W.H. MCCURDY . 1952. 2,9-Dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline:  New specific in
spectrophotometric determination of copper. Anal. Chem.  24:371.
 LUKE, C.L. & M.E. CAMPBELL . 1953. Determination of impurities in germanium and silicon .
Anal. Chem.  25:1586.
 GAHLER, A.R . 1954. Colorimetric determination of copper with neocuproine. Anal. Chem.
26:577.
 FULTON, J.W. & J. HASTINGS . 1956. Photometric determinations of copper in aluminum and
lead-tin solder with neocuproine. Anal. Chem.  28:1 74.
 FRANK, A.J., A.B. GOULSTON & A.A. DEACUTIS . 1957. Spectrophotometric determination of
copper in titanium. Anal. Chem.  29:750.
3500-Cu  C.        Bathocuproine Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Cuprous ion forms a water-soluble ora nge-colored chelate with bathocuproine
disulfonate (2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phena nthrolinedisulfonic acid, disodium salt).
While the color forms over the pH range 3.5 to 11.0, the recommended pH range is between 4
and 5. The sample is buffered at a pH of about 4.3 and reduced with hydroxylamine
hydrochloride. The absorbance is measured at 4841 nm. The method can be applied to copper
concentrations up to at least 5 mg/L with a sensitivity of 20 µg/L.
b.  Interference:  The following substances can be tolerated with an error of less than ±2%:   
 
SubstanceConcentration
mg/L   
Cations Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSubstanceConcentration
mg/L   
   Aluminum   100 
   Beryllium     10 
   Cadmium   100 
   Calcium 1000 
   Chromium (III)     10 
   Cobalt (II)       5 
   Iron (II)   100 
   Iron (III)   100 
   Lithium   500 
   Magnesium   100 
   Manganese (II)   500 
   Nickel (II)   500 
   Sodium 1000 
   Strontium   200 
   Thorium (IV)   100 
   Zinc   200 
Anions 
   Chlorate 1000 
   Chloride 1000 
   Fluoride   500 
   Nitrate   200 
   Nitrite   200 
   Orthophosphate 1000 
   Perchlorate 1000 
   Sulfate 1000 
Compounds 
   Residual chlorine       1 
   Linear alkylate sulfonate (LAS)     40 
Cyanide, thiocyanate, persulfate, and EDTA also can interfere. 
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  20 µg/L with a 5-cm cell.
2.  ApparatusStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following, with a light path of 1 to 5 cm (unless
nessler tubes are used):
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 4841 nm. 
2)  Filter photometer,  equipped with a blue-green filter exhibiting maximum light
transmission near 4841 nm. 
3)  Nessler tubes,  matched, 100-mL, tall form. 
b.  Acid-washed glassware:  Rinse all glassware with conc HCl and then with copper-free
water.
3.  Reagents
a.  Copper-free water:  See Method B, ¶ 3a.
b.  Stock copper solution:  Prepare as directed in Method B, ¶ 3b, but use 20.00 mg copper
wire or foil; 1.00 mL = 20.00 µg Cu.
c.  Standard copper solution:  Dilute 250 mL stock copper solution to 1000 mL with water;
1.00 mL = 5.00 µg Cu. Prepare daily.
d.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 1 + 1.
e.  Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution:  See Method B, ¶ 3e.
f.  Sodium citrate solution:  Dissolve 300 g Na3C6H5O7⋅2H2O in water and make up to 1000
mL.
g.  Disodium bathocuproine disulfonate solution:  Dissolve 1.000 g C12H4N2(CH3)2(C6H4)2
(SO3Na)2 in water and make up to 1000 mL.
4.  Procedure
 Pipet 50.0 mL sample, or a suitable portion diluted to 50.0 mL, into a 250-mL erlenmeyer
flask. In separate 250-mL erlenmeyer flasks, prepare a 50.0-mL water blank and a series of
50.0-mL copper standards containing 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, 20.0, and 25.0 µg Cu. To sample, blank,
and standards add, mixing after each addition, 1.00 mL 1 + 1 HCl, 5.00 mL NH2OH⋅HCl
solution, 5.00 mL sodium citrate solution, and 5.00 mL disodium bathocuproine disulfonate
solution. Transfer to cells and read sample abso rbance against the blank at 4841 nm. Plot
absorbance against micrograms Cu in standards for the calibration curve. Estimate concentration
from the calibration curve. 
5.  Calculation
 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation6.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 1000 µg Cu/L, 500 µg Al/L, 50 µg Cd/L, 110 µg Cr/L, 300
µg Fe/L, 70 µg Pb/L, 50 µg Mn/ L, 150 µg Ag/L, and 650 µg Zn/L was analyzed in 33
laboratories by the bathocuproine method, with a relative stan dard deviation of 4.1% and a
relative error of 0.3%. 
7.  Bibliography
 SMITH, G.F. & D.H. WILKINS . 1953. New colorimetric reagent specific for copper. Anal. Chem.
25:510.
 BORCHARDT, L.G. & J.P. BUTLER . 1957. Determination of trace amounts of copper. Anal. Chem.
29:414.
 ZAK, B . 1958. Simple procedure for the single sample determination of serum copper and iron.
Clinica Chim. Acta  3:328.
 BLAIR, D. & H. DIEHL . 1961. Bathophenanthrolinedisulfonic acid and bathocuproinedisulfonic
acid, water soluble reagents for iron and copper. Talanta  7:163.
3500-Ga        GALLIUM
 Gallium (Ga) is the third element in Group IIIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 31, an atomic weight of 67.72, and valences of 1, 2, and 3. The average abundance of
Ga in the earth’s crust is 19 ppm; in soils it is 1.9 to 29 ppm; in streams it is 0.09 µg/L; and in
groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Gallium occurs in many zinc ores, and nearly always in bauxite.
Gallium compounds are used in semiconducting devices. 
The element exists as Ga3+ in natural water, and its s olubility is controlled by formation of
the hydroxide. It is considered nonessential for plants and animals. 
Perform analyses by the electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section  3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though gallium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Ge        GERMANIUM
 Germanium (Ge) is the third element in Group IVA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 32, an atomic weight bnof 72.59, and valences of 2 and 4. The average abundance of
Ge in the earth’s crust is 1.5 ppm; in streams  it is 0.03 to 0.1 µg/ L; and in groundwaters it is
<0.1 mg/L. Germanium is found in germanite, in certain zinc ores, and in elevated levels in
certain 
hot spring waters. Germanium alloys are used in transistors, gold alloys, phosphors, and
semiconducting  devices. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationGermanium is present in natural waters in the tetravalent state, and its distribution in natural
waters probably is controlled by adsorption on clay mineral surfaces. It is nonessential for plants
and animals. 
Perform analyses by the electrothe rmal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though germanium is not
specifically listed as an anal yte in the method. 
3500-Au        GOLD
 Gold (Au) is the third element in Group IB in the periodic table;  it has an atomic number of
79, an atomic weight of 196.97, and valences of 1 and 3. The average abundance of Au in the
earth’s crust is 0.004 ppm; in streams it is 2 µg/L; and in groundwater it is <0.1 mg/L. Gold
occurs in the native form, and is associated with quartz or pyrite. The main uses of gold are in
jewelry, dentistry, electronics, and the aerospace industry. 
Gold solubility is restricted to acidic waters in the presence of oxidizing agents and chloride,
or in alkaline solutions in the presence of hydrogen sulfide. Its solubility may be influenced by
natural organic acids. Compounds of gold containing thiosulfate and cyanide have some human
toxicity. 
Perform analyses by the atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) or by the
electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in most cases  (with lower
detection limits), even though gold is not specifically listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-In        INDIUM
 Indium (In) is the fourth element in Group IIIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 49, an atomic weight of 114.82, and valences of 1, 2, and 3. The average abundance
of indium in the earth’s crust is 0.19 ppm; in str eams it is <0.01 µg/L; and in groundwaters it is
<0.1 mg/L. Indium often occurs in combination with zinc ores, and sometimes with pyrites and
siderite. Indium is used in alloys for bearings, brazing, solder, and in electrical devices. 
Indium exists as In3+ and as a number of complex ions. Its solubility is controlled by the
formation of the insoluble hydroxide. The metal and its compounds are toxic by inhalation. 
Perform analyses by the electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The
inductiv ely coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though indium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Ir        IRIDIUMStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Iridium (Ir) is the eighth element in Group VIII of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 77, an atomic weight of 192.2, and valences of 1, 3, and 4. The average abundance of
Ir in the earth’s crust is probably <0.001 ppm , and in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Iridium
occurs uncombined with platinum and other metals. It is used in alloys with platinum in
catalysts, thermocouples, electrodes, and wires. 
The aqueous chemistry is controlled by complex compounds, although the solubility in
natural waters is relatively unknown. 
Perform analyses by the flame atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ). The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most case s (with lower detection limits), even though iridium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Fe        IRON* #(107)
3500-Fe  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Iron (Fe) is the first element in Group VIII of the periodic table;  it has an atomic number of
26, an atomic weight of 55.85, and common valences of 2 and 3 (and occasionally valences of 1,
4, and 6). The average abundan ce of Fe in the earth’s crust is 6.22%;  in soils Fe ranges from 0.5
to 4.3%; in streams it averages about 0.7 mg/L; and in groundwater it is 0.1 to 10 mg/L. Iron
occurs in the minerals hematite, magnetite, taconite, and pyrite. It is widely used in steel and in
other alloys. 
The solubility of ferrous ion (Fe2+) is controlled by the carbonate concentration. Because
groundwater is often anoxic, any soluble iron in groundwater is usually in the ferrous state. On
exposure to air or addition of oxidants, ferro us iron is oxidized to the ferric state (Fe3+) and may
hydrolyze to form red, insoluble hydrated ferric oxide. In the absence of complex-forming ions,
ferric iron is not significantly soluble unless the pH is very low. 
Elevated iron levels in water can ca use stains in plumbing, laundry, and cooking utensils, and
can impart objectionable tastes and colors to foods. The United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization recommended level for irrigation waters is 5 mg/L. The U.S. EPA secondary
drinking water st andard MCL is 0.3 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 Sensitivity and detection limits for the atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section
3111B  and  Section 3111C ), the inductively coupled plasma method ( Section 3120 ), and the
phenanthroline colorimetric procedure described he re (B) are similar and generally adequate for
analysis of natural or treated waters. Lower detection limits can be achieved with electrothermalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationatomic absorption spectrometry ( Section 3113B ) when an appropriate matrix modifier is used.
The complexing reage nts used in the colorimetric procedures are specific for ferrous iron but the
atomic absorption procedures are not. However, because of the instability of ferrous iron, which
is changed easily to the ferric form in solutions in contact with air, determinat ion of ferrous iron
requires special precautions and may need to be done in the field at the time of sample
collection. 
The procedure for determining ferrous iron using 1,10-phenanthroline ( Section
3500-Fe.B.4 c) has a somewhat limited applicability; avoid  long storage time or exposure of
samples to light. A rigorous quantitative distinction between ferrous and ferric iron can be
obtained with a special procedure using bathophe nanthroline. Spectrophotometric methods using
bathophenanthroline1-6 and other or ganic complexing reagents such as ferrozine7 or TPTZ8 are
capable of determining iron concentrations as low as 1 µg/L. A chemiluminescence procedure9
is stated to have a detection limit of 5 ng/L. Additional procedures are described elsewhere.10-13 
3.  Sampling and Storage
 Plan in advance the methods of collecting, storing, and pretreating samples. Clean sample
container with acid and rinse with reagent water. Equipment for membrane filtration of samples
in the field may be required to determine i ron in solution (dissolved iron). Dissolved iron,
considered to be that passing through a 0.45- µm membrane filter, may include colloidal iron.
The value of the determination depends greatly on the care taken to obtain a representative
sample. Iron in well or tap water samples may vary in concentration and form with duration and
degree of flushing before and during sampling. When taking a sample portion for determining
iron in suspension, shake the sample bottle often and vigorously to obtain a uniform suspe nsion
of precipitated iron. Use particular care when colloidal iron adheres to the sample bottle. This
problem can be acute with plastic bottles. 
For a precise determination of total iron, use a separate container for sample collection. Treat
with acid at  the time of collection to place the iron in solution and prevent adsorption or
deposition on the walls of the sample container. Take account of the added acid in measuring
portions for analysis. The addition of acid to the sample may eliminate the need fo r adding acid
before digestion ( Section 3500-Fe.B.4 a). 
4.  References
         1.    LEE, G.F. & W. STUMM . 1960. Determination of ferrous iron in the presence of ferric
iron using bathophenanthroline. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  52:1567.
         2.    GHOSH, M.M., J.T. O’CONNOR & R.S. ENGELBRECHT . 1967. Bathophenanthroli ne method
for the determination of ferrous iron. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  59:897.
         3.    BLAIR, D. & H. DIEHL . 1961. Bathophenanthroline-disulfonic acid and
bathocuproine-disulfonic acid, water soluble reagents for iron and copper. Talanta
7:163.
         4.    SHAPIRO, J . 1966. On the measurement of ferrous iron in natural waters. Limnol.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationOceanogr.  11:293.
         5.    MCMAHON, J.W . 1967. The influence of light and acid on the measurement of ferrous
iron in lake water. Limnol. Oceanogr.  12:437.
         6.    MCMAHON, J. W. 1969. An acid-free bathophenanthroline method for measuring
dissolved ferrous iron in lake water. Water Res.  3:743.
         7.    GIBBS, C . 1976. Characterization and application of ferrozine iron reagent as a ferrous
iron indicator. Anal. Chem.  48:1197.
         8.    DOUGAN, W.K. & A.L. WILSON . 1973. Absorbtiometric determination of iron with
TPTZ. Water Treat. Exam.  22:110.
         9.    SEITZ, W.R. & D.M. HERCULES . 1972. Determination of trace amounts of iron (II) using
chemiluminescence analysis. Anal. Chem.  44:2143.
       10.    MOSS, M.L. & M.G. MELLON . 1942. Colorimetric determination of iron with
2,2′-bipyridine and with 2,2 ′,2′′-tripyridine. Ind. Eng. Chem.,  Anal. Ed. 14:862.
       11.    WELCHER, F.J . 1947. Organic Analytical Reagents. D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton,
N.J., Vol. 3, pp. 100–104.
       12.    MORRIS, R.L . 1952. Determination of iron in water in the presence of heavy metals.
Anal. Chem.  24:1376.
       13.    DOIG, M.T., III & D.F. MARTIN . 1971. Effect of humic acids on iron analyses in natural
water. Water Res.  5:689 .
3500-Fe  B.        Phenanthroline Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Iron is brought into solution, reduced to the ferrous state by boiling with acid
and hydroxylamine, and treated with 1,10-phenanthroline at pH 3.2 to 3.3. Three molecules of
phenanthroline chelate each atom of ferrous iron to form an orang e-red complex. The colored
solution obeys Beer’s law; its intensity is independent of pH from 3 to 9. A pH between 2.9 and
3.5 insures rapid color development in the presence of an excess of phenanthroline. Color
standards are stable for at least 6 months.
b.  Interference:  Among the interfering substances are strong oxidizing agents, cyanide,
nitrite, and phosphates (polyphosphates more so than orthophosphate), chromium, zinc in
concentrations exceeding 10 times that of iron, cobalt and copper in excess o f 5 mg/L, and nickel
in excess of 2 mg/L. Bismuth, cadmium, mercury, molybdate, and silver precipitate
phenanthroline. The initial boiling with acid converts polyphosphates to orthophosphate and
removes cyanide and nitrite that otherwise would interfere. A dding excess hydroxylamine
eliminates errors caused by excessive concentrations of strong oxidizing reagents. In the
presence of interfering metal ions, use a larger excess of phenanthroline to replace that
complexed by the interfering metals. Where excess ive concentrations of interfering metal ionsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationare present, the extraction method may be used.
 If noticeable amounts of color or organic matter are present, it may be necessary to
evaporate the sample, gently ash the residue, and redissolve in acid. The ash ing may be carried
out in silica, porcelain, or platinum crucibles that have been boiled for several hours in 6 N HCl.
The presence of excessive amounts of organic matter may necessitate digestion before use of the
extraction procedure. 
c.   Minimum detectable concentration:  Dissolved or total concentrations of iron as low as 10
µg/L can be determined with a spectrophotometer using cells with a 5 cm or longer light path. 
Carry a blank through the entire procedure to allow for correctio n.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 510 nm, providing a light path of 1 cm or longer. 
2)  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a green
filter having maximum transmittance near 510 nm. 
3)  Nessler tubes,  matched, 100-mL, tall form. 
b.  Acid-washed glassware:  Wash all glassware with conc hydrochloric acid (HCl) and rinse
with reagent water before use to remove deposits of iron oxide.
c.  Separatory funnels:  125-mL, Squibb form, with ground-glass or TFE stopcocks and
stoppers.
3.  Reagents
 Use reagents low in iron. Use reagent water (see Section 1080  and  Section 3111B.3 c) in
preparing standards and reagent solutions and in procedure. Store reagents in glass-stoppered
bottles. The HCl and ammonium acetate solutions are stable  indefinitely if tightly stoppered. The
hydroxylamine, phenanthroline, and stock iron solutions are stable for several months. The
standard iron solutions are not stable; prepare daily as needed by diluting the stock solution.
Visual standards in nessler t ubes are stable for several months if sealed and protected from light. 
a.  Hydrochloric acid , HCl, conc, containing less than 0.5 ppm iron.
b.  Hydroxylamine solution:  Dissolve 10 g NH2OH⋅HCl in 100 mL water.
c.  Ammonium acetate buffer solution:  Dissolve 250 g NH4C2H3O2 in 150 mL water. Add
700 mL conc (glacial) acetic acid. Because even a good grade of NH4C2H3O2 contains a
significant amount of iron, prepare new reference standards with each buffer preparat ion.
d.  Sodium acetate solution:  Dissolve 200 g NaC2H3O2⋅3H2O in 800 mL water.
e.  Phenanthroline solution:  Dissolve 100 mg 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate,
C12H8N2⋅H2O, in 100 mL water by stirring and heating to 80°C. Do not boil. Discard the
solution if it darkens. Heating is unnecessary if 2 drops conc HCl are added to the water . (NOTE :Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationOne milliliter of this reagent is sufficient for no more than 100 µg Fe.)
f.  Potassium permanganate,  0.1M: Dissolve 0.316 KMnO4 in reagent water and dilute to
100 mL.
g.  Stock iron solution:  Use metal (1) or salt (2) for preparing the stock solution.
1)  Use electrolytic iron wire, or ‘‘iron wire for standardizing,’’ to prepare the solution. If
necessary, clean wire with fine sandpaper to remove any oxide coating and to produce a bright
surface. Weigh 200.0 mg wire and place in a 1000-mL volumetric f lask. Dissolve in 20 mL 6 N
sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and dilute to mark with water; 1.00 mL = 200 µg Fe. 
2)  If ferrous ammonium sulfate is preferred, slowly add 20 mL conc H2SO4 to 50 mL water
and dissolve 1.404 g Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2⋅6H2O. Add 0.1 M potassium permanganate (KMnO4)
dropwise until a faint pink color persists. Dilute to 1000 mL with water and mix; 1 .00 mL = 200
µg Fe. 
h.  Standard iron solutions:  Prepare daily for use.
1)  Pipet 50.00 mL stock solution into a 1000-mL volumetric flask and dilute to mark with
water; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg Fe. 
2)  Pipet 5.00 mL stock solution into a 1000-mL volumetric flask and dilute to mark with
water; 1.00 mL = 1.00 µg Fe. 
i.  Diisopropyl or isopropyl ether.  CAUTION : Ethers may form explosive peroxides; test
before using.
4.  Procedure
a.  Total iron:  Mix sample thoroughly and measure 50.0 mL into a 125-mL erlenmeyer flask.
If this sample volume contains more than 200 µg iron use a smaller accurately measured portion
and dilute to 50.0 mL. Add 2 mL conc HCl and 1 mL NH2OH⋅HCl solution.  Add a few glass
beads and heat to boiling. To insure dissolution of all the iron, continue boiling until volume is
reduced to 15 to 20 mL. (If the sample is ashed, take up residue in 2 mL conc HCl and 5 mL
water.) Cool to room temperature and transfer to a 50- or 100-mL volumetric flask or nessler
tube. Add 10 mL NH4C2H3O2 buffer solution and 4 mL phenanthroline solution, and dilute to
mark with water. Mix thoroughly and allow a minimum of 10 min for maximum color
development.
b.  Dissolved iron:  Immediately after collection filter sample through a 0.45- µm membrane
filter into a vacuum flask containing 1 mL conc HCl/100 mL sample. Analyze filtrate for total
dissolved iron (¶ 4a) and/or dissolved ferrous iron (¶ 4c). (This proc edure also can be used in the
laboratory if it is understood that normal sample exposure to air during shipment may result in
precipitation of iron.)
 Calculate suspended iron by subtracting dissolved from total iron. 
c.  Ferrous iron:  Determine ferrous iron at sampling site because of the possibility of changeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationin the ferrous-ferric ratio with time in acid solutions. To determine ferrous iron only, acidify a
separate sample with 2 mL conc HCl/100 mL sample at time of collection. Fill bottle directly
from sampling source and stopper. Immediately withdraw a 50-mL portion of acidified sample
and add 20 mL phenanthroline solution and 10 mL NH4C2H3O2 solution with vigorous stirring.
Dilute to 100 mL and measure color intens ity within 5 to 10 min. Do not expose to sunlight.
(Color development is rapid in the presence of excess phenanthroline. The phenanthroline
volume given is suitable for less than 50 µg total iron; if larger amounts are present, use a
correspondingly larger  volume of phenanthroline or a more concentrated reagent.)
 Calculate ferric iron by subtracting ferrous from total iron. 
d.  Color measurement:  Prepare a series of standards by accurately pipetting calculated
volumes of standard iron solutions [use solution described in ¶ 3h2) to measure 1- to 10- µg
portions] into 125-mL erlenmeyer flasks, diluting to 50 mL by adding measu red volumes of
water, and carrying out the steps in ¶ 4a beginning with transfer to a 100-mL volumetric flask or
nessler tube.
 For visual comparison, prepare a set of at least 10 standards, ranging from 1 to 100 µg Fe in
the final 100-mL volume. Compare c olors in 100-mL tall-form nessler tubes. 
For photometric measurement, use Table 3500-Fe:I  as a rough guide for selecting proper
light path at 510 nm. Read standards against water set at zero absorbance and plot a calibration
curve, including a blank (see ¶ 3c and  General Introduction). 
If samples are colored or turbid, carry a second set of samples through all steps of the
procedure without adding phenanthroline. Instead of water, use the prepared blanks to set
photometer to zero absorbance and read each  sample developed with phenanthroline against the
corresponding blank without phenanthroline. Tran slate observed photometer readings into iron
values by means of the calibration curve. This procedure does not compensate for interfering
ions. 
e.  Samples containing organic interferences:  Digest samples containing substantial amounts
of organic substances according to the directions given in Section 3030G  or Section 3030H .
1)  If a digested sample has been prepared according to the directions given in Section 3030G
or Section 3030H , pipet 10.0 mL or other suitable portion containing 20 to 500 µg Fe into a
125-mL separatory funnel. If the volume taken is less than 10 mL, ad d water to make up to 10
mL. To the separatory funnel add 15 mL conc HCl for a 10-mL aqueous volume; or, if the
portion taken was greater than 10.0 mL, add 1.5 mL conc HCl/mL sample. Mix, cool, and
proceed with ¶ 4e3) below. 
2)  To prepare a sample solely for determining iron, measure a suitable volume containing 20
to 500 µg Fe and carry it through the digestion procedure described in either Section 3030G  or
Section 3030H . However, use only 5 mL H2SO4 or HClO4 and omit H2O2. When digestion is
complete, cool, dilute with 10 mL water, heat almost to boiling to dissolve slowly soluble salts,
and, if the sample is still cloudy, filter through a glass-fiber, sintered-glass, or porcelain filter,
washing with 2 to 3 mL water. Quant itatively transfer filtrate or clear solution to a 25-mLStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationvolumetric flask and make up to 25 mL with water. Empty flask into a 125-mL separatory
funnel, rinse flask with 5 mL conc HCl and add to the funnel. Add 25 mL conc HCl measured
with the same flask. M ix and cool to room temperature. 
3)  Extract the iron from the HCl solution in the separatory funnel by shaking for 30 s with
25 mL isopropyl ether ( CAUTION ). Draw off lower acid layer into a second separatory funnel.
Extract acid solution again with 25 mL isopropyl ether, drain acid la yer into a suitable clean
vessel, and add ether layer to the ether in the first funnel. Pour acid layer back into second
separatory funnel and re-extract with 25 mL isopropyl ether. Withdraw and discard acid layer
and add ether layer to first funnel. Persi stence of a yellow color in the HCl solution after three
extractions does not signify incomplete separation of iron because copper, which is not
extracted, gives a similar yellow color.  
Shake combined ether extracts with 25 mL water to return iron to aqu eous phase and transfer
lower aqueous layer to a 100-mL volumetric flask. Repeat extraction with a second 25-mL
portion of water, adding this to the first aqueous extract. Discard ether layer. 
4)  Add 1 mL NH2OH⋅HCl solution, 10 mL phenanthroline solution, and 10 mL NaC2H3O2
solution. Dilute to 100 mL with water, mix thoroughly, and let stand for a minimum of 10 min.
Measure absorbance at 510 nm using a 5-cm absorption cell for amounts of iron  less than 100 µg
or 1-cm cell for quantities from 100 to 500 µg. As reference, use either water or a sample blank
prepared by carrying the specified quantities of acids through the entire analytical procedure. If
water is used as reference, correct sample  absorbance by subtracting absorbance of a sample
blank. 
Determine micrograms of iron in the sample from the absorbance (corrected, if necessary) by
reference to the calibration curve prepared by using a suitable range of iron standards containing
the sam e amounts of phenanthroline, hydroxylamine, and sodium acetate as the sample. 
5.  Calculation
 When the sample has been treated according to ¶ 4a, ¶ 4b, ¶ 4c, or ¶ 4e2): 
When the sample has been treated according to ¶ 4e1): 
Report details of sample collection, storage, and pretreatment if they are pertinent to
interpretation  of results. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation6.  Precision and Bias
 Precision and bias depend on the method of sample collection and storage, the method of
color measurement, the iron concentration, and th e presence of interfering color, turbidity, and
foreign ions. In general, optimum reliability  of visual comparison in nessler tubes is not better
than 5% and often only 10%, whereas, under optimum conditions, photometric measurement
may be reliable to 3% or 3 µg, whichever is greater. The sensitivity limit for visual observation
in nessler tubes i s approximately 1 µg Fe. Sample variability and instability may affect precision
and bias of this determination more than will the errors of analysis. Serious divergences have
been found in reports of different laboratories because of variations in methods  of collecting and
treating samples. 
A synthetic sample containing 300 µg Fe/L, 500 µg Al/L, 50 µg Cd/L, 110 µg Cr/L, 470 µg
Cu/L, 70 µg Pb/L, 120 µg Mn/L, 150 µg Ag/L, and 650 µg Zn/L in distilled water was analyzed
in 44 laboratories by the phenanthroli ne method, with a relative standard deviation of 25.5% and
a relative error of 13.3%. 
7.  Bibliography
 CHRONHEIM, G. & W. WINK . 1942. Determination of divalent iron (by o-nitrosophenol). Ind.
Eng. Chem.,  Anal. Ed. 14:447.
 MEHLIG, R.P. & R.H. HULETT . 1942. Spectrophotometric determination of iron with
o-phenanthroline and with nitro-o-ph enanthroline. Ind. Eng. Chem.,  Anal. Ed. 14:869.
 CALDWELL, D.H. & R.B. ADAMS . 1946. Colorimetric determination of iron in water with
o-phenanthroline. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  38: 727.
 WELCHER, F.J . 1947. Organic Analytical Reagents. D. Van Nostrand C o., Princeton, N.J., Vol. 3,
pp. 85–93.
 KOLTHOFF, I.M., T.S. LEE & D.L. LEUSSING . 1948. Equilibrium and kinetic studies on the
formation and dissociation of ferroin and ferrin. Anal. Chem.  20:985.
 RYAN, J.A. & G.H. BOTHAM . 1949. Iron in aluminum alloys: Colorimetric determination using
1,10-phenanthroline. Anal. Chem.  21:1521.
 REITZ, L.K., A.S. O’BRIEN & T.L. DAVIS . 1950. Evaluation of three iron methods using a factorial
experiment. Anal. Chem.  22:1470.
 SANDELL, E.B . 1959. Chapter 22 in Colorimetric De termination of Traces of Metals, 3rd ed.
Interscience Publishers, New York, N.Y.
 SKOUGSTAD, M.W., M.J. FISHMAN, L.C. FRIEDMAN, D.E. ERDMANN & S.S. DUNCAN . 1979.
Methods for Determination of Inorganic Substances in Water and Fluvial Sediment. Chapter
A1 in Book 5, Techniques of Water Resources Investigations of the United States Geological
Survey. U.S. Geological Surv., Washington, D.C.
3500-Pb        LEAD* #(108)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-Pb  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Lead (Pb) is the fifth element in Group IVA in the periodic table; it has an atomic number of
82, an atomic weight of 207.19, and valences of 2 and 4. The average abundance of Pb in the
earth’s crust is 13 ppm; in soils i t ranges from 2.6 to 25 ppm; in streams it is 3 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is generally <0.1 mg/L. Lead is obtained chiefly from galena (PbS). It is used in
batteries, ammunition, solder, piping, pigments, insecticides, and alloys. Lead also was used in
gasoline for many years as an anti-knock agent in the form of tetraethyl lead. 
The common aqueous species are Pb2+ and hydroxide and carbonate complexes. Lead in a
water supply may come from industrial, mine, and smelter discharges or from the dissolution  of
plumbing and plumbing fixtures. Tap waters that  are inherently noncorrosive or not suitably
treated may contain lead resulting from an attack  on lead service pipes, lead interior plumbing,
brass fixtures and fittings, or solder pipe joints. 
Lead is no nessential for plants and animals. It is toxic by ingestion and is a cumulative
poison. The Food and Drug Administration regulates lead content in food and in house paints.
Under the lead-copper rule, the U.S. EPA drinking water 90th percentile action leve l is 15 µg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) has a relatively high detection
limit in the flame mode and requires an extraction procedure ( Section 3111C ) for the low
concentrations common in potable water. The elect rothermal atomic absorption (AA) method
(Section 3113B ) is more sensitive for low concentrations and does not require extraction. The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) is even more sensitive
than the electrothermal AA meth od. The inductively coupled plasma method ( Section 3120 ) has
a sensitivity similar to that of the flame atomic absorption method. Anodic stripping
voltammetry ( Section 3130B ) can achieve superior detection limits, but is susceptible to
interferences from c opper, silver, gold, and organic compounds. The dithizone method (B) is
sensitive and specific as a colorimetric procedure. 
3500-Pb  B.        Dithizone Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  An acidified sample containing microgram quantities of lead is mixed with
ammoniacal citrate-cyanide reducing solution and extracted with dithizone in chloroform
(CHCl3) to form a cherry-red lead dithizonate. The color of the mixed color s olution is measured
photometrically.1,2 Sample volume taken for analysis may be 2 L when digestion is used.
b.  Interference:  In a weakly ammoniacal cyanide solution (pH 8.5 to 9.5) dithizone formsStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcolored complexes with bismuth, stannous tin, and monovalent thallium. In strongly ammoniacal
citrate-cyanide solution (pH 10 to 11.5) the dithizonates of these ion s are unstable and are
extracted only partially.3 This method uses a high pH, mixed color, single dithizone extraction.
Interference from stannous tin and monovalent thallium is reduced further when these ions are
oxidized during preliminary digestion. A m odification of the method allows detection and
elimination of bismuth interference. Excessive quantities of bismuth, thallium, and tin may be
removed.4
 Dithizone in CHCl3 absorbs at 510 nm; control its interference by using nearly equal
concentrations of excess dithizone in samples, standards, and blank. 
The method is without interference for the determination of 0.0 to 30.0 µg Pb in the presence
of 20 µg Tl+, 100 µg Sn2+, 200 µg In3+, and 1000 µg each of Ba2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Mg2+,
Mn2+, Hg2+, Sr2+, Zn2+, Al3+, Sb3+, As3+, Cr3+, Fe3+, V3+, PO43–, and SO42–. Gram quantities
of alkali metals do not interfere. A modification is provided to avoid interference from excessive
quantities of bismuth or tin. 
c.  Preliminary sample treatment:  At time of collection acidify with conc HNO3 to pH <2 but
avoid excess HNO3. Add 5 mL 0.1 N iodine solution to avoid losses of volatile organo-lead
compounds during handling and digesting of samples. Prepare a blank of le ad-free water and
carry through the  procedure.
d.  Digestion of samples:  Unless digestion is shown to be unnecessary, digest all samples for
dissolved or total lead as described in 3030H or K.
e.  Minimum detectable concentration:  1.0 µg Pb/10 mL dithizone solution.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Spectrophotometer  for use at 510 nm, providing a light path of 1 cm or longer.
b.  pH meter.
c.  Separatory funnels:  250-mL Squibb type. Clean all glassware, including sample bottles,
with 1 + 1 HNO3. Rinse thoroughly with reagent water.
d.  Automatic dispensing burets:  Use for all reagents to minimize indeterminate
contamination errors.
3.  Reagents 
Prepare all reagents in lead-free water.  
a. Stock lead solution:  Dissolve 0.1599 g lead nitrate, Pb(NO3)2 (minimum purity 99.5%), in
approximately 200 mL water. Add 10 mL conc HNO3 and dilute to 1000 mL with water.
Alternatively, dissolve 0.1000 g pure Pb metal in 20 mL 1 + 1 HNO3 and dilute to  1000 mL with
water; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Pb.
b.  Working lead solution:  Dilute 2.0 mL stock solution to 100 mL with water; 1 mL = 2.00Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationµg Pb.
c.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, 1 + 4: Dilute 200 mL conc HNO3 to 1 L with water.
d.  Ammonium hydroxide , NH4OH, 1 + 9: Dilute 10 mL conc NH4OH to 100 mL with water.
e.  Citrate-cyanide reducing solution:  Dissolve 400 g dibasic ammonium citrate,
(NH4)2HC6H5O7, 20 g anhydrous sodium sulfite, Na2SO3, 10 g hydroxylamine hydrochloride,
NH2OH⋅HCl, and 40 g potassium cyanide, KCN ( CAUTION : Poison ) in water and dilute to 1 L.
Mix this solution with 2 L conc NH4OH. Do not pipet by mouth . Prepare solution in a fume
hood.
f.  Stock dithizone solution:  The dithizone concentration in the stock dithizone solutions is
based on having a 100% pure dithizone reagent. Some commercial grades of dithizone are
contaminated with the oxidation product diphenylthiocarbodiazone or with metals. Purify
dithizone as directed below. For dithizone solutions not stronger than 0.001% (w/v), calculate
the exact concentration by dividing the absorbance of the solution in a 1.00-cm cell at 606 nm by
40.6 × 103, the molar absorptivity.
 In a fume h ood, dissolve 100 mg dithizone in 50 mL CHCl3 in a 150-mL beaker and filter
through a 7-cm-diam paper.* #(109)  Receive filtrate in a 5 00-mL separatory funnel or in a
125-mL erlenmeyer flask under slight vacuum; use a filtering device designed to handle the
CHCl3 vapor. Wash beaker with two 5-mL portions CHCl3, and filter. Wash the paper with three
5-mL portions CHCl3, adding final portion dropwise to edge of paper. If filtrate is in flask,
transfer with CHCl3 to a 500-mL separatory funnel. 
Add 100 mL 1 + 99 NH4OH to separatory funnel and shake moderately for 1 min; excessive
agitation produces slowly breaking emulsions. Let layers separate, swirling funnel gently to
submerge CHCl3 droplets held on surface of aqueous layer. Transfer CHCl3 layer to 250-mL
separator y funnel, retaining the orange-red aqueous layer in the 500-mL funnel. Repeat
extraction, receiving CHCl3 layer in another 250-mL separatory funnel and transferring aqueous
layer, using 1 + 99 NH4OH, to the 500-mL funnel holding the first extract. Repeat e xtraction,
transferring the aqueous layer to 500-mL funnel. Discard CHCl3 layer. 
To combined extracts in the 500-mL separatory funnel add 1 + 1 HCl in 2-mL portions,
mixing after each addition, until dithizone precipitates and solution is no longer orange -red.
Extract precipitated dithizone with three 25-mL portions CHCl3. Dilute combined extracts to
1000 mL with CHCl3; 1.00 mL = 100 µg dithizone. 
g.  Dithizone working solution:  Dilute 100 mL stock dithizone solution to 250 mL with
CHCl3; 1 mL = 40 µg dithizone.
h.  Special dithizone solution:  Dissolve 250 mg dithizone in 250 mL CHCl3. This solution
may be prepared without purification because all extracts using it are discarded.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationi.  Sodium sulfite solution:  Dissolve 5 g anhydrous Na2SO3 in 100 mL water.
j.  Iodine solution:  Dissolve 40 g KI in 25 mL water, add 12.7 g resublimed iodine, and dilute
to 1000 mL.
4.  Procedure
a.  With sample digestion:  CAUTION:  Perform the following procedure (excluding use of
spectrophotometer) in a fume hood.  To a digested sample containing not more than 1 mL conc
acid add 20 mL 1 + 4 HNO3 and filter through lead-free filter paper† #(110)  and fil ter funnel
directly into a 250-mL separatory funnel. Rinse digestion beaker with 50 mL water and add to
filter. Add 50 mL ammoniacal citrate-cyanide solution, mix, and cool to room temperature. Add
10 mL dithizone working solution, shake stoppered funnel v igorously for 30 s, and let layers
separate. Insert lead-free cotton in stem of sepa ratory funnel and draw off lower layer. Discard 1
to 2 mL CHCl3 layer, then fill absorption cell. Measure absorbance of extract at 510 nm, using
dithizone working solution,  ¶ 3g, to zero spectrophotometer.
b.  Without sample digestion:  To 100 mL acidified sample (pH 2) in a 250-mL separatory
funnel add 20 mL 1 + 4 HNO3 and 50 mL citrate-cyanide reducing solution; mix. Add 10 mL
dithizone working solution and proceed as in ¶ 4a.
c.  Calibration curve:  Plot concentration of at least five standards and a blank against
absorbance. Determine concentration of lead in extract from curve. All concentrations are µg
Pb/10 mL final extract.
d.  Removal of excess interferences:  The dithizonates of bismuth, tin, and thallium differ
from lead dithizonate in maximum absorbance. Detect their presence by measuring sample
absorbance at 510 nm and at 465 nm. Calculate corrected absorbance of sample  at each
wavelength by subtracting absorbance of blank at  same wavelength. Calculate ratio of corrected
absorbance at 510 nm to corrected absorbance at 465 nm. The ratio of corrected absorbances for
lead dithizonate is 2.08 and for bismuth dithizonate is 1 .07. If the ratio for the sample indicates
interference, i.e., is markedly less than 2.08, proceed as follows with a new 100-mL sample: If
the sample has not been digested, add 5 mL Na2SO3 solution to reduce iodine preservative.
Adjust sample to pH 2.5 usi ng a pH meter and 1 + 4 HNO3 or 1 + 9 NH4OH as required.
Transfer sample to 250-mL separatory funnel, extract with a minimum of three 10-mL portions
special dithizone solution, or until the CHCl3 layer is distinctly green. Extract with 20-mL
portions CHCl3 to remove dithizone (absence of green). Add 20 mL 1 + 4 HNO3, 50 mL
citrate-cyanide reducing solution, and 10 mL dithizone working solution. Extract as in ¶ 4a and
measure absorbance.
5.  CalculationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Single-operator precision in recovering 0.0104 mg  Pb/L from Mississippi River water was
6.8% relative standard deviation and  −1.4% relative error. At the level of 0.026 mg Pb/L,
recovery was made with 4.8% relative standard devia tion and 15% relative error. 
7.  References
         1.    SNYDER, L.J . 1947. Improved dithizone method for determination of lead—mixed color
method at high pH. Anal. Chem.  19:684.
         2.    SANDELL, E.B . 1959. Colorimetric Determination of Traces of Metals, 3rd ed.
Interscience, New York, N .Y.
         3.    WICHMANN, H.J . 1939. Isolation and determination of trace metals— the dithizone
system. Ind. Eng. Chem. , Anal. Ed. 11:66.
         4.    AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1977. Annual Book of ASTM
Standards. Part 26, Method D3112-77, America n Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
3500-Li        LITHIUM* #(111)
3500-Li  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Lithium (Li) is the second element in Group IA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 3, an atomic weight of 6.94, and a valence of 1. The average abundance of Li in the
earth’s crust is 18 ppm; in soils it is 14 to 32 ppm; in streams it is 3 µg/ L, and in groundwaters it
is <0.1 mg/L. The more important minerals containing lithium are lepidolite, spodumene,
petalite, and amblygonite. Lithium compounds are used in pharmaceuticals, soaps, batteries,
welding flux,  ceramics, reducing agents (e.g., lithium aluminum hydride), and cosmetics. 
Many lithium salts are only slightly soluble, and the metal’s concentration in water is
controlled by incorporation in clay minerals of soils. Lithium is considered nonessential f or
plants and animals, but it is essential for some microorganisms. Some lithium salts are toxic by
ingestion. The United Nations Food and Agricu lture Organization recommended maximum level
for lithium in irrigation waters is 2.5 mg/L. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) and the inductively coupled
plasma method ( Section 3120 ) are preferred. The flame emission photometric method (B) also is
available for laboratories not equipped to use p referred methods. The inductively coupled
plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) may be applied successfully in most cases
(with lower detection limits), even though lithium is not specifically listed as an analyte in the
method. 
3500-Li  B.        Flame Emission Photometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Lithium can be determined in trace amounts by flame photometric methods at a
wavelength of 670.8 nm.
b.  Interference:  A molecular band of strontium hydroxide with an absorption maximum at
671.0 nm interferes in the flame photometric determination of lithium. Ionization of lithium can
be significant in both the air-acetylene and nitrous oxide-acetylene flames and can be suppressed
by adding potassium. See Section 3500-NaB.1 a for additional information on minimizing
interferences in flame photometry.
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The minimum lithium concentration detectable is
approximately 0.1 µg/L for reagent water analyzed on an atomic absorption spectrophotometer
in the emission mode with an air-acetylene flame, or 0.03 µg/L with a nitrou s oxide-acetylene
flame.
d.  Sampling and storage:  Preferably collect sample in a polyethylene bottle, although
borosilicate glass containers also may be used. At time of collection adjust sample to pH <2 with
nitric acid (HNO3).
2.  Apparatus
 Flame photometer:  A flame photometer or an atomic absorption spectrometer operating in
the emission mode using a lean air-acetylene flame is recommended. 
3.  Reagents
 Use reagent water (see Section 3111B.3 c) in reagent preparation and analysis. 
a.  Potassium ionization suppressant:  Dissolve 95.35 g KCl dried at 110°C and dilute to
1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 50 mg K.
b.  Stock lithium solution:  Dissolve 152.7 mg anhydrous lithium chloride, LiCl, in water and
dilute to 250 mL; 1.00 mL = 100 µg Li. Dry salt overnight in an oven at 105°C. Cool in a
desiccator and weigh immediately after removal from desiccator. Alternat ively, purchase
prepared stock from a reputable supplier.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Standard lithium solution:  Dilute 10.00 mL stock LiCl solution to 500 mL with water;
1.00 mL = 2.0 µg Li.
4.  Procedure
a.  Pretreatment of polluted water and wastewater samples:  Choose digestion method
appropriate to matrix (see Section 3030 ).
b.  Suppressing ionization:  If necessary, filter sample through medium-porosity paper, add
1.0 mL potassium ionization suppressant to 50 mL volumetric flask, and dilute with sample for
flame photometric determination. Sample solution will be in a 0.1% K matrix.
c.  Treatment of standard solutions:  Prepare dilutions of the Li standard solution to bracket
sample concentration or to establish at least three points on a calibration curve of emission
intensity against Li concentration. Prepare standards by adding ap propriate volumes of standard
lithium solution to 25 mL water + 1.0 mL potassium ionization suppressant reagent in a 50-mL
volumetric flask. Dilute to 50.0 mL and mix. Both samples and standards will be in a 0.1% K
matrix to suppress ionization of lithium.
d.  Flame photometric measurement:  Determine lithium concentration by direct intensity
measurements at a wavelength of 670.8 nm. The bracketing method ( Section 3500-NaB.4 d) can
be used with some photometric instruments, while the construction of a calibr ation curve is
necessary with others. Run sample, water, and lithium standard as nearly simultaneously as
possible. For best results, average several readings on each solution.
 Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for instrument operation. 
5.  Calculation
 µg Li/L = ( µg Li/L in portion analyzed) × D
where: 
6.  Quality Control
 Process a QC standard through entire analytical protocol as a way of determining systematic
bias. The control limits for precision of duplicate determinations at concentrations (in water) of
4.0 µg/L and 10.0 µg/L were 4.09 ± 0.056 µg/L and 9.96 ± 0.094 µg/L, respectively. The
single-operator RSD was 1.38% for a lithium solution containing 10 µg/L. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation7.  Bibliography
 FISHMAN, M.J.  1962. Flame photometric determination of lithium in water. J. Amer. Water
Works Assoc.  54:228.
 PICKETT, E.E. & S.R. KOIRTYOHANN.  1968. The nitrous oxide-acetylene flame in emission
analysis-I. General characteristics. Spectrochem. Acta.  23B:235.
 KOIRTYOHANN, S.R. & E.E. PICKETT.  1968. The nitrous oxide-acetylene flame in emission
analysis-II. Lithium and the alkaline earths. Spectrochem. Acta , 23B:673.
 URE, A.M. & R.L. MITCHELL.  1975. Lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium , and cesium. In J.A.
Dean & T.C. Rains, eds. Flame Emission and Atomic Absorption Spectrometry. Dekker,
New York, N.Y.
 THOMPSON, K.C. & R.J. REYNOLDS.  1978. Atomic Absorption Fluorescence, and Flame
Spectroscopy—A Practical Approach, 2nd ed. John Wiley &  Sons, New York, N.Y.
 WILLARD, H.H., L.L. MERRIT, J.A. DEAN & F.A. SETTLE., JR.  1981. Instrumental Methods of
Analysis, 6th ed. Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, Calif.
3500-Mg        MAGNESIUM* #(112)
3500-Mg  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Magnesium (Mg) is the second element in Group IIA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 12, an atomic weight of 24.30, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Mg in
the earth’s crust is 2.1%; in soils it is 0.03 to 0.84%; in streams it is 4 mg/L, and in groundwaters
it is >5 mg/L. Magnesium occurs commonly in the minerals magnesite and dolomite.
Magnesium is used in alloys, pyrotechnics , flash photography, drying agents, refractories,
fertilizers, pharmace uticals, and foods. 
The common aqueous species is Mg2+. The carbonate equilibrium reactions for magnesium
are more complicated than for calcium, and conditions for direct precipitation of dolomite in
natural waters are not common. Important contributors t o the hardness of a water, magnesium
salts break down when heated, forming scale in boilers. Chemical softening, reverse osmosis, or
ion exchange reduces magnesium and associated hardness to acceptable levels. 
Magnesium is an essential element in chloroph yll and in red blood cells. Some salts of
magnesium are toxic by ingestion or inhalation. C oncentrations greater than 125 mg/L also can
have a cathartic and diuretic effect. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The methods presented are applicable to waters and wastewaters. Direct determinations canStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationbe made with the atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) and inductively
coupled plasma method ( Section 3120 ). The inductive ly coupled plasma mass spectrometric
method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in most cases (with lower detection
limits), even though magnesium is not specifically listed as an analyte in the method. These
methods can be applied to most conc entrations encountered, although sample dilution may be
required. Choice of method is largely a matter of personal preference and analyst experience. A
calculation method (B) also is available. 
3500-Mg  B.        Calculation Method
 Magnesium may be estimated as the difference between hardness and calcium as CaCO3 if
interfering metals are present in noninterfering concentrations in the calcium titration ( Section
3500-Ca.B ) and suitable inhibit ors are used in the hardness titration ( Section 2340C ). 
mg Mg/L = [total hardness (as mg CaCO3/L)  − calcium hardness (as mg CaCO3/L)] × 0.243
3500-Mn        MANGANESE* #(113)
3500-Mn  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Manganese (Mn) is the first element in Group VIIB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 25, an atomic weight of 54.94, and common valences of 2, 4, and 7 (and more rarely,
valences of 1, 3, 5, and 6). The aver age abundance of Mn in the earth’s crust is 1060 ppm; in
soils it is 61 to 1010 ppm; in streams it is 7 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L.
Manganese is associated with iron minerals, and occurs in nodules in ocean, fresh waters, and
soils. The comm on ores are pyrolusite (MnO2) and psilomelane. Manganese is used in steel
alloys, batteries, and food additives. 
The common aqueous species are the reduced Mn2+ and the oxidized Mn4+. The aqueous
chemistry of manganese is similar to that of iron. Since gr oundwater is often anoxic, any soluble
manganese in groundwater is usually in the reduced state (Mn2+). Upon exposure to air or other
oxidants, groundwater containing manganese usually will precipitate black MnO2. Elevated
manganese levels therefore can ca use stains in plumbing/laundry, and cooking utensils. It is
considered an essential trace element for plants and animals. The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for manganese in irrigation waters is 0.2
mg/L. The U.S . EPA secondary drinking water standard MCL is 50 µg/L. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ), the
electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ), and the inductively coupled plasma
methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) permit direc t determination with acceptable
sensitivity and are the methods of choice. Of the various colorimetric methods, the persulfate
method (B) is preferred because the use of mercuric ion can control interference from a limited
chloride ion concentration. 
3.  Sampling and Storage
 Manganese may exist in a soluble form in a neutral water when first collected, but it
oxidizes to a higher oxidation state and precipitates or becomes adsorbed on the container walls.
Determine manganese very soon after sample c ollection. When delay is unavoidable, total
manganese can be determined if the sample is acidified at the time of collection with HNO3 to
pH <2. See Section 3010B . 
3500-Mn  B.        Persulfate Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Persulfate oxidation of soluble manganous compounds to form permanganate is
carried out in the presence of silver nitrate. The resulting color is stable for at least 24 h if excess
persulfate is present and organic matter is absent.
b.  Interference:  As much as 0.1 g chloride (Cl–) in a 50-mL sample can be prevented from
interfering by adding 1 g mercuric sulfate (HgSO4) to form slightly dissociated complexes.
Bromide and iodide still will interfere and only trace amounts may be pre sent. The persulfate
procedure can be used for potable water with trace to small amounts of organic matter if the
period of heating is increased after more persulfate has been added.
 For wastewaters containing organic matter, use preliminary digestion wit h nitric and sulfuric
acids (HNO3 and H2SO4) (see Section 3030G ). If large amounts of Cl– also are present, boiling
with HNO3 helps remove it. Interfering traces of Cl– are eliminated by HgSO4 in the special
reagent. 
Colored solutions from other inorganic  ions are compensated for in the final colorimetric
step. 
Samples that have been exposed to air may give low results due to precipitation of
manganese dioxide (MnO2). Add 1 drop 30% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to the sample, after
adding the special reagent,  to redissolve precipitated manganese. 
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  The molar absorptivity of permanganate ion is about
2300 L g–1 cm–1. This corresponds to a minimum detectable concentration (98% transmittance)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationof 210 µg Mn/L when a 1-cm cell is used or 42 µg Mn/L when a 5-cm cell i s used.
2.  Apparatus
 Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required: 
a.  Spectrophotometer,  for use at 525 nm, providing a light path of 1 cm or longer.
b.  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a green
filter having maximum transmittance near 525 nm.
c.  Nessler tubes,  matched, 100-mL, tall form.
3.  Reagents
a.  Special reagent : Dissolve 75 g HgSO4 in 400 mL conc HNO3 and 200 mL distilled water.
Add 200 mL 85% phosphoric acid (H3PO4), and 35 mg silver nitrate (AgNO3). Dilute the cooled
solution to 1 L.
b.  Ammonium persulfate,  (NH4)2S2O8, solid.
c.  Standard manganese solution:  Prepare a 0.1 N potassium permanganate (KMnO4) solution
by dissolving 3.2 g KMnO4 in distilled water and making up to 1 L. Age for several weeks in
sunlight or heat for several hours near the boiling point, then filter thr ough a fine fritted-glass
filter crucible and standardize against sodium oxalate as follows:
 Weigh several 100- to 200-mg samples of Na2C2O4 to 0.1 mg and transfer to 400-mL
beakers. To each beaker, add 100 mL distilled water and stir to dissolve. Add 10 mL 1 + 1
H2SO4 and heat rapidly to 90 to 95°C. Titrate rapidly with the KMnO4 solution to be
standardized, while stirring, to a slight pink end- point color that persists for at least 1 min. Do
not let temperature fall below 85°C. If necessary, warm beaker contents during titration; 100 mg
Na2C2O4 will consume about 15 mL permanganate solution. Run a blank on distilled water and
H2SO4. 
where: 
                  A =   mL titrant for sample and 
                  B =   mL titrant for blank. 
Average results of several titrations. Calculate v olume of this solution necessary to prepare 1
L of solution so that 1.00 mL = 50.0 µg Mn, as follows: Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation
To this volume add 2 to 3 mL conc H2SO4 and NaHSO3 solution dropwise, with stirring, until
the permanganate color disappears. Boil to remove excess SO2, cool, and dilute to 1000 mL with
distilled water. Dilute this solution further to measure small amounts of manganese. 
d.  Standard manganese solution (alternate):  Dissolve 1.000 g manganese metal (99.8%
min.) in 10 mL redistilled HNO3. Dilute to 1000 mL with 1% (v/v) HCl; 1 mL  =  1.000 mg Mn.
Dilute 10 mL to 200 mL with distilled water; 1 mL  =  0.05 mg Mn. Prepare dil ute solution daily.
e.  Hydrogen peroxide , H2O2, 30%.
f.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
g.  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc.
h.  Sodium nitrite solution:  Dissolve 5.0 g NaNO2 in 95 mL distilled water.
i.  Sodium oxalate,  Na2C2O4, primary standard.
j.  Sodium bisulfite:  Dissolve 10 g NaHSO3 in 100 mL distilled water.
4.  Procedure
a.  Treatment of sample:  If a digested sample has been prepared according to directions for
reducing organic matter and/or excessive chlorides in Section 3030G , pipet a portion containing
0.05 to 2.0 mg Mn into a 250-mL conical flask. Add distilled water , if necessary, to 90 mL and
proceed as in ¶ b.
b.  To a suitable sample portion add 5 mL special reagent and 1 drop H2O2. Concentrate to
90 mL by boiling or dilute to 90 mL. Add 1 g (NH4)2S2O8, bring to a boil, and boil for 1 min.
Do not heat on a water bath. Remove from heat source, let stand 1 min,  then cool under the tap.
(Boiling too long results in decomposition of excess persulfate and subsequent loss of
permanganate color; cooling too slowly has the same effect.) Dilute to 100 mL with distilled
water free from reducing substances and mix. Prepa re standards containing 0, 5.00, . . . 1500 µg
Mn by treating various amounts of standard Mn solution in the same way. 
c.  Nessler tube comparison:  Use standards prepared as in ¶ 4b and  containing 5 to 100 µg
Mn/100 mL final volume. Compare samples and standards visually.
d.  Photometric determination:  Use a series of standards from 0 to 1500 µg Mn/100mL final
volume. Make photometric measurements against a distilled water blank. The following table
shows light path length appropriate for various amounts of manganese in 100 mL final volume: 
  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationshows light path length appropriate for various amounts of manganese in 100 mL final volume: 
  
  Mn Range
      µgLight Path
     cm   
    5–200      15 
  20–400        5 
  50–1000        2 
100–1500        1 
Prepare a calibration curve of manganese concentration vs. absorbance from the standards
and determine Mn in the samples from the curve. If turbidity or interfering color is present, make
corrections as in 4e.
e.  Correction for turbidity or interfering color:  Avoid filtration because of possible retention
of some permanganate on the filter paper. If visual comparison is used, the effect of turbidity
only can be estimated and no correction can be made for inte rfering colored ions. When
photometric measurements are made, use the following ‘‘bleaching’’ method, which also
corrects for interfering color: As soon as the photometer reading has been made, add 0.05 mL
H2O2 solution directly to the sample in the optica l cell. Mix and, as soon as the permanganate
color has faded completely and no bubbles remain, read again. Deduct absorbance of bleached
solution from initial absorbance to obtain absorbance due to Mn.
5.  Calculation
a. When all of the original sample is taken for analysis:
 
b. When a portion of the digested sample (100 mL final volume) is taken for analysis:
 
6.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 120 µg Mn/L, 500 µg Al/L, 50 µg Cd/L, 110 µg Cr/L, 470 µg
Cu/L, 300 µg Fe/L, 70 µg Pb/L, 150 µg Ag/L, and 650 µg Zn/L in distilled water was analyzed
in 33 laboratories by the persulfate method, with a relative standard deviation of 26.3% and aStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationrelative error of 0%. 
A second synthetic sample, similar in all respects except for 50 µg Mn/L and 1000 µg Cu/L,
was analyzed in 17 laboratories by the persulfate method, with a relative standard deviation of
50.3% and a relative error of 7.2%. 
7.  Bibliography
 RICHARDS,  M.D. 1930. Colorimetric determination of manganese in biological material. Analyst
55:554.
 NYDAHL,  F. 1949. Determination of manganese by the persulfate method. Anal. Chem. Acta.
3:144.
 MILLS,  S.M. 1950. Elusive manganese. Water Sewage Works  97:92.
 SANDELL,  E.B. 1959. Colorimetric Determination of Traces of Metals, 3rd ed. Interscience
Publishers, New York, N.Y., Chapter 26.
3500-Hg        MERCURY
 Mercury (Hg) is the third element in Group IIB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 80, an atomic weight of 200.59, and valences of 1 and 2. The average abundance of
Hg in the earth’s crust is 0.09 ppm; in soils it is  30 to 160 ppb; in streams it is 0.07 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is 0.5 to 1 µg/L. Mercury occurs free in nature, but the chief source is cinnibar
(HgS). Mercury is used in amalgams, mirror coatings, vapor lamps, paints, measuring devices
(thermometers, barometers, manometers), pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and fungicides. It is often
used in paper mills as a mold retardant for paper. 
The common aqueous species are Hg2+, Hg(OH)20, Hg0, and stable complexes with organic
ligands. Inorganic mercury can be me thylated in sediments when sulfides are present to form
dimethyl mercury, (CH3)2Hg, which is very toxic and can concentrate in the aquatic food chain.
Mercury poisoning occurred in Japan in the 1950s as the result of consumption of shellfish that
had accum ulated mercury. In times past, mercury was used in the haberdashery industry to block
hats (the cause of the ‘‘mad hatter’’ syndrome). 
Mercury is considered nonessential for plants and animals. The U.S. EPA primary drinking
water standard MCL is 2 µg/L. 
The cold-vapor atomic absorption method ( Section 3112B ) is the method of choice for all
samples. The inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be
applied successfully in some cases, even though mercury is not specifically  listed as an analyte
in the method. The dithizone method detailed in the 19th edition of Standard Methods  can be
used for determining high levels of mercury (>2 µg/L) in potable waters. 
Because mercury can be lost readily from samples, preserve them by t reating with HNO3 to
reduce the pH to <2 (see Section 1060 ). Glass storage containers are preferred to plastic, because
they can extend the holding time to 30 d, rather than only the 14 d allowed in plastic containers. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-Mo        MOLYBDENUM
 Molybdenum (Mo) is the second element in Group VIB in the periodic table; it has an
atomic number of 42, and atomic weight of 95.95, and valences of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. The average
abundance of Mo in the earth’s crust is 1.2 ppm ; in soils it is 2.5 ppm; in streams it is 1 µg/L,
and in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Molybdenum occurs naturally as molybdenite (MoS2) and
wulfenite 
(PbMoO4). It is used in alloys, ink pigments, catalysts, and lubricants. 
The common aqueous species ar e HMoO4–, MoO42–, and organic complexes. It is
considered an essential trace element for plants and animals. The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters is 0.01 mg/L. 
Use one of the flame atomic abs orption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  or Section
3111E ), the electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3113B ), or one of
the inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  or Section 3125 ). 
3500-Ni        NICKEL
 Nickel (Ni) is the third element in Group VIII in the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 28, an atomic weight of 58.69, and a common valence of 2 and less commonly 1, 3, or 4. The
average abundance of Ni in the earth’s crus t is 1.2 ppm; in soils it is 2.5 ppm; in streams it is 1
µg/L, and in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Nickel is obtained chiefly from pyrrhotite and
garnierite. Nickel is used in alloys, magnets, protective coatings, catalysts, and batteries. 
The common aqu eous species is Ni2+. In reducing conditions insoluble sulfides can form,
while in aerobic conditions nickel complexes with hydroxide, carbonates, and organic ligands
can form. It is suspected to be an essential trace element for some plants and animals. T he United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters
is 200 µg/L. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL is 0.1 mg/L. 
The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ), the
inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ), and the electrothermal
atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3113B ) are the methods of choice for all
samples. 
3500-Os        OSMIUM
 Osmium (Os) is the seventh element in Group VIII in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 76, an atomic weight of 190.2, and valences of 3, 4, and 6, and less commonly 1, 2, 5,
7, and 8. The average abundance of Os in the earth’s crust is probably <0.005 ppm, and in
groundwaters it is <0.01 mg/L. Osmium occurs in iridosime and in platinum-bearing river sands.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationOsmium is used as a hardener with iridium and as a catalyst with platinum. 
The aqueous chemistry is controlled by c omplex compounds, although the solubility in
natural waters is relatively unknown. 
Analyze by flame atomic absorption methods ( Section 3111D  and  Section 3111E ). 
3500-Pd        PALLADIUM
 Palladium (Pd) is the sixth element in Group VIII of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 46, an atomic weight of 106.42, and valences of 2 and 4. Palladium occurs with
platinum in nature. It is used in alloys to make electrical relays, catalysts, in the making of
‘‘white gold,’’ and in protective coatings. 
Palladium has no known toxic effects. The United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters is 5 mg/L. 
Preferably an alyze by flame atomic absorption method ( Section 3111B ). The inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in
most cases (with lower detection limits), even though palladium is not specifically listed as an
analyte in the method. 
3500-Pt        PLATINUM
 Platinum (Pt) is the ninth element in Group VIII of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 78, an atomic weight of 195.1, and valences of 2 and 4. The average abundance of Pt
in the earth’s crust is probably <0.01 ppm, an d in groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Platinum is
usually found in its native state, but also may be found as sperrylite (PtAs2). Platinum is used as
a catalyst and in laboratoryware, jewelry, and surgical wire. 
The aqueous chemistry in natural waters is rel atively unknown, although its solubility is
probably controlled by complex compounds. In powder form, platinum can be flammable, and its
soluble salts are toxic by inhalation. 
Preferably analyze by flame atomic absorption method ( Section 3111B ). The induc tively
coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in
most cases (with lower detection limits), even though platinum is not specifically listed as an
analyte in the method. 
3500-K        POTASSIUM* #(114)
3500-K  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and SignificanceStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Potassium (K) is the fourth element in Group IA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 19, an atomic weight of 39.10, and a valence of 1. The average abundance of K in the
earth’s crust is 1.84%; in soils it ha s a range of 0.1 to 2.6%; in streams it is 2.3 mg/L, and in
groundwaters it has a range of 0.5 to 10 mg/L. Potassium is commonly associated with
aluminosilicate minerals such as feldspars. 40K is a naturally occurring radioactive isotope with
a half-life o f 1.3 × 109 years. Potassium compounds are used in glass, fertilizers, baking powder,
soft drinks, explosives, electroplating, and pigmen ts. Potassium is an essential element in both
plant and human nutrition, and occurs in groundwaters as a result of mine ral dissolution, from
decomposing plant material, and from agricultural runoff. 
The common aqueous species is K+. Unlike sodium, it does not remain in solution, but is
assimilated by plants and is incorporated into a number of clay-mineral structures. 
2.  Selection of Method
 Methods for the determination of potassium include flame atomic absorption ( Section
3111B ), inductively coupled plasma ( Section 3120 ), flame photometry (B), and selective ion
electrode (C). The inductively coupled plasma/mass spe ctrometric method ( Section 3125 )
usually may be applied successfully (with lower detection limits), even though potassium is not
specifically listed as an analyte in the method. The preferred methods are rapid, sensitive, and
accurate; selection depends on  instrument availability and analyst choice. 
3.  Storage of Samples
 Do not store samples in soft-glass bottles because of the possibility of contamination from
leaching of the glass. Use acid-washed polyethyl ene or borosilicate glass bottles. Adjust sample
to pH < 2 with nitric acid. This will dis solve potassium salts and reduce adsorption on vessel
walls. 
3500-K  B.        Flame Photometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Trace amounts of potassium can be determined in either a direct-reading or
internal-standard type of flame photometer at a wavelength of 766.5 nm. Because much of the
information pertaining to sodium applies equally to the potassium determ ination, carefully study
the entire discussion dealing with the flame photometric determination of sodium ( Section
3500-Na.B ) before making a potassium determination.
b.  Interference:  Interference in the internal-standard method may occur at
sodium-to-potassium ratios of 5:1 or greater. Ca lcium may interfere if the calcium-to-potassium
ratio is 10:1 or more. Magnesium begins to interfere when the magnesium-to-potassi um ratio
exceeds 100:1.
c.   Minimum detectable concentration:  Potassium levels of approximately 0.1 mg/L can beStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationdetermined.
2.  Apparatus
 See Section 3500-Na.B.2 . 
3.  Reagents
 To minimize potassium pickup, store all solutions in plastic bottles. Shake each container
thoroughly to dissolve accumulated salts from walls before pouring. 
a.  Reagent water: See Section 1080 . Use this water for preparing all reagents and calibration
standards, and as dilution water.
b.  Stock potassium solution:  Dissolve 1.907 g KCl dried at 110°C and dilute to 1000 mL
with water; 1 mL = 1.00 mg K.
c.  Intermediate potassium solution:  Dilute 10.0 mL stock potassium solution with water to
100 mL; 1.00 mL = 0.100 mg K.
 Use this solution to prepare calibration curve in potassium range of 1 to 10 mg/L. 
d.  Standard potassium solution:  Dilute 10.0 mL intermediate potassium solution with water
to 100 mL; 1.00 mL = 0.010 mg K. Use this solution to prepare calibration curve in potassium
range of 0.1 to 1.0 mg/L.
4.  Procedure
 Make determination as described in Section 3500-Na.B.4 , but measure emission intensity at
766.5 nm. 
5.  Calculation
 See Section 3500-Na.B.5 . 
6.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 3.1 mg K+/L, 108 mg Ca2+/L, 82 mg Mg2+/L, 19.9 mg
Na+/L, 241 mg Cl–/L, 0.25 mg NO2–-N/L, 1.1 mg NO3–-N/L, 259 mg SO42–/L, and 42.5 mg
total alkalinity/L (contributed by NaHCO3) was analyzed in 33 labo ratories by the flame
photometric method, with a relative standard deviation of 15.5% and a relative error of 2.3%. 
7.  Bibliography
 MEHLICH, A. & R.J. MONROE.  1952. Report on potassium analyses by means of flame photometer
methods. J. Assoc. Offic. Agr. Chem.  35:588.
 
Also see Section 3500-Na.B.7 . 
3500-K  C.        Potassi um-Selective Electrode MethodStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Potassium ion is measured potentiometrically by using a potassium
ion-selective electrode and a double-junction, sleev e-type reference electrode. The analysis is
performed with either a pH meter having an expanded millivolt scale capable o f being read to the
nearest 0.1 mV or a specific ion meter having a direct concentration scale for potassium.
 Before measurement, an ionic strength adjustor reagent is added to both standards and
samples to maintain a constant ionic strength. The electrod e response is measured in standard
solutions with potassium concentrations spanning the range of interest using a calibration line
derived either by the instrument meter or manually. The electrode response in sample solutions
is measured following the same  procedure and potassium concentration determined from the
calibration line or instrument direct readout. 
b.  Interferences:  Although most sensitive to potassium, the potassium electrode will respond
to other cations at high concentrations; this can result in a positive bias. Table 3500-K:I  lists the
concentration of common cations causing a 10% error at var ious concentrations of potassium
chloride with a background ionic strength of 0.12 N sodium chloride. Of the cations listed,
ammonium ion is most often present in samples at concentrations high enough to result in a
significant bias. It can be converted to gaseous ammonia by adjusting to pH > 10. 
An electrode exposed to interfering cations te nds to drift and respond sluggishly. To restore
normal performance soak electrode for 1 h in distilled water and then for several hours in a
standard potassium solution . 
c.  Detection limits:  Samples containing from 0.1 to 1000 mg K+/L may be analyzed. To
measure higher concentrations dilute the sample.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Expanded-scale or digital pH meter or ion-selective meter.
b.  Potassium ion-selective electrode.
 c. Sleeve-type double-junction reference electr ode: Fill outer sleeve with reference electrode
filling solution (see ¶ 3b). Fill inner sleeve with inner filling solution provided with the
electrode. 
d.  pH electrode.  
e.  Mixer,  magnetic, with a TFE-coated stirring bar.
3.  Reagents
a.  Ionic strength adjustor (ISA):  Dissolve 29.22 g NaCl in reagent water and dilute to 100
mL.
b.  Reference electrode outer sleeve filling solution:  Dilute 2 mL ISA solution to 100 mL
with reagent water.
c.  Stock potassium solution:  See Section 3500-K.B.3 b.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationd.  Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 6 N.
e.  Reagent water:  See Section 1080 .
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of standards:  Prepare a series of standards containing 100.0, 10.0, 1.0, and
0.1 mg K+/L by making serial dilutions of the stock potassium solution as in Section
3500-K.B.3 c and  Section 3500-K.B.3 d.
b.  Instrument calibration:  Fill reference electrode according to the manufacturer’s
instructions using reference electrode filling solution. Transfer 100 mL 0.1 mg K+/L standard
into a 150-mL beaker and add 2 mL ISA. Raise pH to about 11. Stir gently wi th magnetic mixer.
Immerse electrodes, wait approximately 2 min for potential stabilization and record meter
reading. Thoroughly rinse electrodes and blot dry. Repeat for each standard solution in order of
increasing concentration. Prepare calibration curv e on semilogarithmic graph paper by plotting
observed potential in millivolts (linear scale) against concentration (log scale). Alternatively,
calculate calibration line by regression analysis.
c.  Analysis of samples:  Transfer 100 mL sample into a 150-mL beaker and follow procedure
applied to standards in ¶ 4b above. From the measured response, calculate K+ concentration
from calibration curve.
5.  Precision
 Reproducibility of potential measured, over the method’s range, can be expected to be ± 0.4
mV, corresponding to about ± 2.5% in concentration. 
6.  Quality Assurance
 The slope of the calibration line should be −56 mV/10-fold concentration change. If the
slope is outside the range of −56 ±3 mV, the electrode may require maintenance (replace filling
solutions). If the proper electrode response ca nnot be obtained, replace electrode. 
Analyze an independent check standard with a mid-range potassium concentration
throughout analysis of a series, initially, every ten samples, and after final sample. If the value
has changed by more than 5%, recalibrat e electrode. Analyze a reagent blank at the same
frequency. Readings must represent a lower concentration than the lowest concentration standard
(0.1 mg/L). 
7.  Bibliography
 PIODA, L., V. STANKOVA & W. SIMON.  1969. Highly selective potassium ion responsive liquid
membrane electrode. Anal. Lett.  2 (12): 665.
 MIDGLEY, D. & K. TORRANCE.  1978. Potentiometric Water Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, N.Y.
 BAILEY, P.L.  1980. Analysis with Ion-Selective Electrodes. Heyden & Son Ltd., Philadelphia,
Pa.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-Re        RHENIUM
 Rhenium (Re) is the third element in Group VIIB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 75, an atomic weight of 186.21, and valences of 1 through 7, with 7 being the most
stable. The average abundance of Re in the earth’ s crust is 7 ppm, and in groundwaters it is <0.1
mg/L. Rhenium is found in columbite, tantalite, and wolframite, as well as in molybdenum ore
concentrates. It is used in tungsten-molybdenum-based alloys, thermocouples, filaments, and
flash bulbs. Rhenium i n the powderform can be flammable. 
For analysis methods, see flame atomic absorption methods ( Section 3111D  and  Section
3111E ). The inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be
applied successfully in most cases (with l ower detection limits), even though rhenium is not
specifically listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Rh        RHODIUM
 Rhodium (Rh) is the fifth element in Group VIII in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 45, an atomic weight of 102.91, and valences of 1 through 6, the most common being
1 and 3. Rhodium is found in its native state in platinum-bearing sands. It is used in platinum
alloys for thermocouples, electrical contacts, and jewelry. 
The aqueous chemistry in natural waters is relatively unknown. The metal is flammable in
the powder form, and its salts are toxic by inhalation. 
For analysis see flame atomic absorption method ( Section 3111B ). The inductively coupled
plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in most
cases (with lower detection limits), even though rhodium is not specifically lis ted as an analyte
in the method. 
3500-Ru        RUTHENIUM
 Ruthenium (Ru) is the fourth element in Group VIII in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 44, an atomic weight of 101.07, and valences of 1 through 7, the most common being
2, 3, and 4. The average abundance of Ru in the earth’s crust is probably <0.01 ppm, and in
groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. It occurs in its native state in platinum-bearing river sands. It is
used in jewelry with platinum, in electrical contacts, and as a catalyst. 
The aqueous chemistry in natural w aters is relatively unknown. Ruthenium has no known
toxic effects. 
For analysis see flame atomic absorption method ( Section 3111B ). The inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied successfully in most
cases (wit h lower detection limits), even though ruthenium is not specifically listed as an analyte
in the method. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-Se        SELENIUM* #(115)
3500-Se  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Selenium (Se) is the third element in Group VIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 34, an atomic weight of 78.96, and valences of 2, 4, or 6. The average abundance of
Se in the earth’s crust is 0.2 ppm; in soils it is 0.27 to 0.74 ppm; in streams it is 0.2 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. Selenium is used in electronics, ceramics, and shampoos. 
The inorganic fraction of dissolved selenium consists predominantly of selenium as the
selenate ion (SeO42–), designated here as Se(VI), and selenium as the selenite ion (SeO32–),
Se(IV). Other common aqueous species include Se2–, HSe–, and Se0. Selenium is considered a
nonessential trace element for most plants, but is an essential trace nutrient for most a nimals, and
selenium deficiency diseases are well known in veterinary medicine. Above trace levels,
ingested selenium is toxic to animals and may be toxic to humans. While the selenium
concentration of most natural waters is low, the pore water in selenife rous soils in semiarid areas
may contain up to hundreds or thousands of micrograms dissolved selenium per liter. Certain
plants that grow in such areas accumulate large concentrations of selenium and may poison
livestock that graze on them. Water drained f rom such soil may cause severe environmental
pollution and wildlife toxicity. Selenopolysulfide ions (SSe2−) may occur in the presence of
hydrogen sulfide in waterlogged, anoxic soils. Sele nium derived from microbial degradation of
seleniferous organic mat ter includes selenite, selenate, and the volatile organic compounds
dimethylselenide and dimethyldiselenide. Nonvolatile organic selenium compounds may be
released to water by microbial processes. Soluble selenium may be leached from coal ash and fly
ash a t electric power plants that burn seleniferous coal. 
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for
selenium in irrigation waters is 20 µg/L. The U.S. EPA primary drinking water standard MCL is
50 µg/L. 
2. Selection of Method
 The selenium methods using hydride generation atomic absorption ( Section 3114B  and
Section 3114C ), electrothermal atomic absorption ( Section 3113B ), and derivatization
colorimetry (C) are the most sensitive currently available. F or determination of selenium at
higher concentrations, the inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 )
may be used. 
By using suitable preparatory steps to convert other chemical species to Se(IV), it is possible
to distinguish the chemical species in the sample. In drinking water and most surface and groundStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwaters, Se(IV), Se(VI), and particulate selenium frequently are the only significant species.
However, when speciation is important, for example, when a new matrix is being analy zed, the
general analytical scheme shown in Figure 3500-Se:1  may be carried out as follows: Determine
volatile selenium by stripping sample with nitrogen or air and collecting selenium in alkaline
hydrogen peroxide (see Method D). To obtain an estimate of selenium in suspended particles,
determine total selenium, filter sample, and make a second determination of total selenium. In
any case, filter sample. Occasionally, a filtered sample may have the odor of hydrogen sulfide
and a yellow color; such a sample  may contain selenopolysulfides, which may be estimated by
comparing results of total selenium analyses before and after acidification, stripping with
nitrogen, settling for 10 min, and refiltration. Determine selenite, Se(IV), by analyzing filtered
water sample directly by Methods 3114B or C, or by Section 3500-Se.C  or Section 3500-Se.E . In
principle, sample digestion with HCl will conve rt Se(VI) to Se(IV), and the value determined
will equal the sum of the two species. In practice, samples frequently cont ain an unknown
masking agent that produces an unduly low result. Test for this effect by analyzing samples with
known additions of both species. If recovery is good, the HCl digestion followed by analyses
will yield reliable results. If recovery is poor an d organic selenium is to be determined
subsequently, attempt to remove the interference by sample pretreatment with resin (B.1).
Interference also can be eliminated by digestion with an oxidizing agent (B.2, 3, and 4), but these
procedures prevent distingu ishing of Se(VI) and organic selenium and also oxidize many organic
selenium compounds. To measure nonvolatile organic selenium compounds, use Method E. 
The choice of digestion method for oxidizing in terferences and organic selenium depends on
sample matr ix. The methods described in B.2, 3, and 4, in order of increasing complexity and
digestive ability, use ammonium (or potassium) persulfate, hydrogen peroxide, and potassium
permanganate. Ammonium persulfate digestion is adequate for most filtered ground, drinking,
and surface water. Hydrogen peroxide digestion may be required if organic selenium compounds
are present, and potassium permanganate digestion may be needed with unfiltered samples or
those containing refractory organic selenium compounds. Confir m results obtained with one
digestion method by using a more rigorous method when characterizing a new matrix. 
3.  Interferences
 Interferences are found in certain reagents, as well as in samples. Recognition of the
presence of an interferant is critical, especially when unknown sample matrices are being
analyzed. Routinely add Se(IV) and Se(VI) to test for inte rference. If present, characterize the
interference and correct by the method of standard additions. A slope less than one indicates
interference. In cases of mild interference (recoveries reduced by 25% or less), the standard
additions method will largely  correct determined values. 
Because the hydride atomic absorption method is extremely sensitive, samples frequently
need to be diluted to bring them within the linear range of the instrument. Diluting a filtered
water sample frequently will eliminate samp le-related interferences. Include full reagent blanks
in each run to ensure absence of contamination from reagents. Hydride generator atomic
absorption is susceptible to common interference problems related to nitrite in the sample or freeStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationchlorine in the reagent HCl (see Methods Section 3114B  and  Section 3114C ). 
4.  Bibliography
 U.S. NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1976. Selenium: Medical and Biological Effects of
Environmental Pollutants. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.
 CUTTER, G.A. 1978. Species determination of selenium in natural waters. Anal.  Chim. Acta
98:59.
 ROBBERECHT, H. & R. VAN GRIEKEN.  1982. Selenium in environmental waters: Determination,
speciation and concentration levels. Talanta  29:823.
 KUBOTA, J. & E.E. CARY.  1982. Cobalt, molybdenum and selenium. In A.L. Page et al., eds.
Metho ds of soil analysis, Part 2, 2nd ed. Agronomy  9:485.
 RAPTIS, S.  et al. 1983. A survey of selenium in the environment and a critical review of its
determination at trace levels. Fresenius Z. Anal. Chem.  316:105.
 CUTTER, G.  1983. Elimination of nitrite int erference in the determination of selenium by hydride
generation. Anal. Chim. Acta  149:391.
 CAMPBELL, A.  1984. Critical evaluation of analytical methods for the determination of trace
elements in various matrices. Part 1. Determination of selenium in biol ogical materials and
water. Anal. Chem. 56:645.
 LEMLY, A.D.  1985. Ecological basis for regulating aqua tic emissions from the power industry:
The case with selenium. Regul. Toxic. Pharm.  5:465.
 OHLENDORF, H.M., D.J. HOFFMAN, M.K. SAIKI & T.W. ALDRICH.  1986. Embryonic mortality and
abnormalities of aquatic birds: Apparent impact s of selenium from irrigation drainwater. Sci.
Total Environ.  52:49.
3500-Se  B.        Sample Preparation
1.  Removal of Organic and Iron In terference by Resin Pretreatment
 Interferences are common in selenium analysis, particularly when chemical speciation is
attempted. Routine pretreatment of water samples as described here is not necessary. The
methods i n this section should be tried when poor recovery of standard additions indicates a
problem. 
Many waters contain iron and/or dissolved organic matter (humic acid) in quantities
sufficient to interfere. Reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) usually is nonquantitat ive. When Se(VI)
standard additions show poor recovery, treat the sample before analysis. To remove dissolved
organic compounds, pass an acidified sample through a resin. Because dissolved organic
selenium compounds also may be removed by this treatment, a lso determine total selenium in the
untreated water sample (see 2, 3, or 4 below). To remove iron use a strong base ion exchange
resin.* #(116)  Iron is removed as the anionic chloro complex. In this treatment the acidity and ion
exchanger do not alter speciation ; complete speciation of selenium is possible. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa.  Apparatus:
1)  Chromatography column for organics removal, glass, about 0.8 cm ID ×30 cm long, with
fluorocarbon metering valve. 
2)  Chromatography column for ion exchange, disposable polyethylene.† #(117)  
3)  pH meter. 
b.  Reagents:
1)  Organics-removal resin:  Thoroughly rinse 16 to 50 mesh resin‡ #(118)  with deionized
water and remove resin fines by decanting. Rinse three times with pH 12 solution. Store resin in
pH 12 solution and refrigerate to prevent bacterial growth. 
2)  Anion exchange resin:  Add 100 to 200 mesh anion exchange resin* #(119)  to a beaker and
thoroughly rinse with deionized water. Cover resin with 4 N HCl, stir, and let settle. Decant and
repeat acid rinse twice more. Store resin in 4 N HCl. 
3)  Hydrochloric acid, conc: Before use, bubble helium through the acid for 3 h at rate of 100
mL/min. ( CAUTION : Use a fume hood. ) 
4) pH 1.6 solution:  Adjust pH of deionized water to 1.6 with HCl. 
5)  pH 12 solution:  Adjust pH of deionized water to 12 with KOH. 
c.  Procedure:
1)  Organic removal—Place 5 cm washed resin in a 0.8-cm-ID column. Precondition column,
at 1 mL/min, with 30 mL pH 12 solution and 20 mL pH 1.6 solution. Using HCl and a pH meter
adjust sample to pH 1.6 to 1.8. Pass sample through preconditioned column a t rate of 1 mL/min.
Discard first 10 mL and use next 11 to 50 mL collected for Se(IV) determinations by Methods
3114B or C, or 3500-Se.C preceded, if Se(VI) also is to be determined, by preparatory step B.5.
If more than 50 mL sample are needed, use anothe r column or use a column with twice as much
resin. 
2)  Iron removal—Place 4 cm prepared resin in a small chromatographic column (add resin
to column filled with 4 N HCl to avoid air bubbles). Rinse column with 10 mL 4 N HCl at flow
rate < 6 mL/min. Let solution drain to top of resin, but do not let the col umn run dry. Adjust
sample to 4 N HCl and pour into column. Discard first 10 mL and collect the next 11 to 100 mL
for Se(IV) analysis by Methods 3114B or C, or 3500-Se.C preceded, if necessary, by preparatory
step B.2 and if Se(VI) also is to be determined,  by preparatory step B.5 below. 
2.  Removal of Interference by Persulfate Digestion
 The combination of this procedure with step B.5 below and Methods Section 3114B  or
Section 3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C  is, in most cases, the preferred method for determining
total selenium in filtered  water. A small amount of ammonium or potassium persulfate is added
to the mixture of sample and HCl to remove interference from reducing agents and to oxidize
relatively labile organic selenium compounds such as selenoamino acids and methaneseleninic
acid. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationIf the sample contains hydrogen sulfide or a large concentration of organic matter or is
otherwise suspect or to confirm method accuracy, reanalyze sample using digestion procedure 3
or 4 below. 
Prepare 2% potassium or ammonium persulfate solution by d issolving 2.0 g in 100 mL
deionized water (prepare weekly). Add 0.2 mL persulfate solution to the mixed sample and HCl
of ¶ B.5c before heating and proceeding with pretreatment and analysis. 
After completing analysis multiply concentration of selenium det ermined in the acidified
sample by 2.04 to obtain total selenium in original sample. 
3.  Removal of Interference by Alkaline Hydrogen Peroxide Digestion
 Occasionally, digestion with persulfate gives incomplete recovery of total selenium. In this
case, digestion with hydrogen peroxide is used to remove all reducing agents that might inte rfere
and to fully oxidize organic selenium to Se(VI). The resulting solution can be analyzed for total
selenium after pretreatment according to step B.5 below. 
This method is suitable for determining total selenium in unfiltered water samples, where
particulate selenium is present. When working with a new matrix, confirm results obtained by
reanalyzing the sample using digestion procedure 4, below. 
a.  Apparatus:
1)  Beakers , 150-mL. 
2)  Watch glasses . 
3)  Hot plate . 
4)  Pipetter,  1-mL, and tips. 
5)  Graduated cylinder,  25-mL. 
b.  Reagents:
1)  Hydrogen peroxide , H2O2, 30%. Keep refrigerated. 
2)  Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 1 N. 
3)  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, 1.5 N: Dilute 125 mL conc HCl to 1 L with deionized water. 
c.  Procedure:  Add 2 mL 30% H2O2 and 1 mL 1 N NaOH to 25 mL sample in a beaker.
Cover beaker to control spattering and simmer on hot plate until fine bubbles characteristic of
H2O2 decomposition subside and are replaced by ordinary boiling. Add 1 mL 1.5 N HCl to
redissolve any precipitate that may have formed, let cool, and pour into graduated cylinder.
Rinse beaker with deionized water into graduated cylinder and make volume up to 25 mL.
Proceed to B.5 and chosen analytical method.
4.  Removal of Interference by Permanganate Digestion
 This digestion method utilizes potassium permanganate to oxidize selenium and remove
interfering organic compounds. Excess KMnO4 and MnO2 are removed by reaction with
hydroxylamine. HCl digestion is included here, because it is conveniently performed in the sameStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationreaction vial. Selenite may then be determined directly by Methods Section 3114B  or Section
3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C . 
Verify recovery for the given matrix. This method gives good recovery even with heavily
contaminated water samples that contain organic selenium compounds, dissolved organic matter,
and visible suspended material. 
Permanganate may oxidize chloride ion to free chlorine. Part of the chlorine (which
interferes with hydride ana lysis) is removed by reaction with hydroxylamine, but the best way to
eliminate free chlorine is by prolonged heating in  an open vial during the digestion step. Excess
hydroxylamine may reduce recovery by reducing selenium to Se(0). 
a.  Apparatus:
1)  Oven with thermostat , for continuous operation at 110 ± 5°C. 
2)  Digestion vials , 40-mL, with fluorocarbon-lined screw caps. 
3)  Metal support rack  to hold 40 digestion vials. 
b.  Reagents:
1)  Hydrochloric acid , HCl, conc. [See ¶ B.1b3)]. 
2)  Hydrochloric acid, HCl, 10 N: Dilute 1000 mL conc HCl to 1200 mL with deionized
water. 
3)  Sulfuric acid,  H2SO4, conc and 25%. NOTE : Many brands of H2SO4 are contaminated
with selenium. Run reagent blanks when star ting a new bottle. Make 25% v/v solution by adding
250 mL conc H2SO4 to 500 mL deionized water, and diluting to 1 L. 
4)  Potassium permanganate solution , KMnO4, 5% (w/v): Dissolve 50 g KMnO4 in 1000 mL
deionized water. 
5)  Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution:  Dissolve 100 g NH2OH⋅HCl in 1000 mL
deionized water. 
c.  Procedure:  Pipe 5 mL sample into digestion vial, add 5 mL 25% H2SO4 and 1 mL
KMnO4 solution. Screw cap on and place in preheated oven at 110°C for 1 h. Remove tray with
vials from the oven and cool to room temp erature. Open vial, carefully add a few drops
hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution, mix, and wait until sample is decolorized and residual
manganese dioxide is dissolved. Avoid excess hydroxylamine solution, which can cause a low
reading. Add 10 mL conc HCl to the sample and heat vial 60 min at 95°C without cap. Let cool
to room temperature. Transfer sample to a 25- mL volumetric flask or graduated cylinder, rinse
vial into flask, dilute to mark, and mix well. Proceed to analyze by Methods Section 3114B  or
Section 3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C . If M ethod Section 3114B  or Section 3114C  is used,
multiply spectrometer readings by the dilution factor as follows:Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation 
5.  Reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) by Hydrochloric Acid Digestion
 Se(VI) is reduced to Se(IV) by digestion w ith HCl. Determine Se(IV) + Se(VI) by either
hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometer (Method Section 3114B  or Section 3114C ) or
as an or ganic derivative (Method C). 
Test any given sample matrix to ensure recovery of added Se(VI). If recovery is poor, try to
remove interference by the procedure of ¶ B.1, above, or if at least 75% recovery is achieved,
use the method of standard additions. The method described here is of limited utility for direct
analysis of water samples, but is useful as a step in determining total selenium in a sample where
selenium has been oxidized to Se(VI). 
a.  Apparatus:
1)  Dispenser, bottle type, 5-mL, suitable for dispensing concentrated HCl. 
2)  Pipetters,  0.2- and 5-mL. 
3)  Screw-cap culture tubes,  borosilicate glass, 25- × 150-mm. 
4)  Boiling water bath,  suitable for heating culture tubes; a 1-L beaker on a hot plate is
suitable. 
b.  Reagents:
1)  Sodium selenate additions solution:  Dilute 1000 mg/L stock selenate solution with
deionized water to prepare a solution of 1 to 10 mg/L, such that the concentration of the
additions solution will be approximately 50 times greater than anticipated tot al selenium in the
sample to be analyzed. 
2)  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc: See ¶ B.1b3). 
c.  Procedure:  Calibrate acid dispenser using water. Preheat water bath. Pipet 5 mL filtered
sample into a culture tube. Add 5 mL conc HCl. Loosely cap tube (do not tighten) and place in
boiling water bath for 20 min. Let tube cool and tighten cap. Deter mine total Se(IV) by Methods
Section 3114B  or C, or Section 3500-Se.C .
 Add 0.200 mL additions solution with a microliter pipet to sample and proceed as above.
Analyze a deionized water blank and a blank with the addition to ensure absence of
contamination  and to determine the true value of the addition. 
Multiply the concentration of selenium determined in the acidified sample by 2.00 to obtain
total concentration of Se(IV) + Se(VI). Multiply reading obtained for sample with addition by
2.04. 
6.  Bibliography
 JANGHORBANI, M., B. TING, A. NAHAPETLAN & R. YOUNG.  1982. Conversion of urinary seleniumStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationto selenium IV by wet oxidation. Anal. Chem.  54:1188.
 ADELOJU, S.B. & A.M. BOND.  1984. Critical evaluation of some wet digestion methods for the
stripping voltammetric determination of selenium in biological materials. Anal. Chem.
56:2397.
 BRIMMER, S.P., W.R. FAWCETT & K.A. KULHAVY.  1987. Quantitative reduction of selenate ion to
selenite in aqueous samples. Anal. Chem. 59:1470.
3500-Se  C.        Colorimetric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  This method is specific to determining selenite ion in aqueous solution.
Selenite ion reacts with 2,3-diaminonaphthalene  to produce a brightly colored and strongly
fluorescent piazselenol compound, which is extracted in cyclohexane and mea sured
colorimetrically.
 The optimum pH for formation of the piazselenol complex is approximately 1.5 but should
not be above 2.5 because above pH 2, the rate of formation of the colored compound is critically
dependent on pH. When indicators are used to a djust pH, results frequently are erratic; results
can be improved when pH is monitored electrochemically. 
b.  Interference:  No inorganic compounds are known to give a positive interference. Colored
organic compounds extractable by cyclohexane may be encountered, but usually they are absent
or can be removed by oxidizing the sample (see B.2, 3, or 4) or by tr eating it to remove dissolved
organics (see B.1). Negative interference results from compounds that reduce the concentration
of diaminonaphthalene by oxidizing it. Addition of  EDTA eliminates negative interference from
at least 2.5 mg Fe2+.
c.  Minimum detectable quantity:  10 µg Se/L.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  A spectrophotometer, for use at 480 nm, providing a light path
of 1 cm or longer.
b.  Separatory funnel , 250-mL, preferably with a fluorocarbon stopcock.
c.  Thermostatically controlled water bath  (50°C) with cover.
d.  pH meter.
e.  Centrifuge,  with rotor for 50-mL tubes (optional).
f.  Centrifuge bottles,  60-mL, screw-capped, fluorocarbon.
g.  Shaker,  suitable for separatory funnel (optional).
3.  Reagents
 Use reagent water (see Section 1080 ) in preparing reagents. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationa.  Selenium standard reference solution:  Dissolve 2.190 g sodium selenite, Na2SeO3, in
water containing 10 mL HCl and dilute to 1 L. 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Se(IV).
b.  Working standard selenium solutions:  Dilute selenium reference standard solution with
water or suitable background solution to produce a series of working standards spanning the
concentration range of interest.
c.  Hydrochloric acid:  HCl, conc and 0.1 N.
d.  Ammonium hydroxide,  NH4OH, 50% v/v.
e.  Cyclohexane , C6H12.
f.  2,3-Diaminonaphthalene (DAN) solution:  Dissolve 200 mg DAN in 200 mL 0.1 N HCl.
Shake 5 min. Extract three times with 25-mL  portions of cyclohexane, retaining aqueous phase
and discarding organic portions. Filter into opaque container* #(120)  and store in c ool, dark place
for no longer than 8 h. CAUTION : Toxic, handle with extreme care .
g.  Hydroxylamine-EDTA solution  (HA-EDTA): Dissolve 4.5 g Na2EDTA in approximately
450 mL water. Add 12.5 g hydroxylamine hydrochloride (NH2OH⋅HCl) and adjust volume to
500 mL.
4.  Procedure
a.  Formation of piazselenol:  Add 2 mL HA-EDTA solution to 10 mL sample in 60-mL
centrifuge bottle (filtered if Se(IV) is to be de termined; oxidized using Method B.2, 3, or 4, then
reduced using Method B.5 for total Se). Adjust to pH 1.5 ± 0.3 with 0.1 N HCl and 50% NH4OH,
using a pH meter. Add 5 mL DAN solution and heat in a covered water bath at 50°C for 30 min.
b.  Extraction of piazselenol:  Cool and add 2.0 mL cyclohexane. Cap container securely and
shake vigorously for 5 min. Let solution stand for 5 min or until cyclohexane layer becomes well
separated. If separation is slow, centrifuge for 5 min at 2000 rpm . Place bottle in a clamp on a
ringstand at a 45° angle to the vertical. Remove aqueous phase using a disposable pipet attached
to a vacuum line. Transfer organic phase to a small capped container using a clean disposable
pipet, or to the spectrophotometer  cuvette if absorbance is to be read immediately.
c.  Determination of absorbance:  Read absorbance at 480 nm using a zero standard. The
piazselenol color is very stable but evaporation of the cyclohexane concentrates the color unless
the container is capped. CAUTION : Avoid inhaling cyclohexane vapors . Beer’s Law is obeyed up
to 2 mg/L.
5.  Calculation
 Construct calibration curve using at least a three-point standard curve to bracket the
expected sample concentration. Plot absorbance vs. concentration. Correct for digestion blank
and any reagent blank. 
6.  Precision and BiasStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Three standard reference materials (wheat flour, water, and a commercial standard) were
used to evaluate Se recovery.1 The wheat flour sample was digested using HNO3 and HClO4 to
convert total selenium to Se(VI), digested with HCl  to convert Se(VI) to Se(IV) and finally, the
colorimetric method was used. Results were as follows: 
Selenium Concentration
µg Se/L  
Standard Expected Recovered* 
NBS, SRM 1567, wheat flour†
NBS, SRM 1543ib, water
Fisher Certified AAS Standard1097 ± 19 7
    9.7 ± 0.5  
 1002 ± 8     1113 ± 8
   8.7 ± 0
1002 ± 0 
 * Analyses in triplicate. 
† Dry weight basis.
7.  Reference
         1.    HOLTZCLAW, K.M., R.H. NEAL, G. SPOSITO  & S.J. TRAINA . 1987. A sensitive
colorimetric method for the quantitation of selenite in soil solutions and natural waters.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J.  51:75.
8.  Bibliography
 HOSTE, J. & J. GILLIS.  1955. Spectrophotometric determination of traces of selenium with
3,3′-diaminobenzidine. Anal. Chim. Acta . 12:158.
 CHENG, K.  1956. Determination of traces of selenium. Anal. Chem.  28:1738.
 MAGIN, G.B.  et al. 196 0. Suggested modified method for colorimetric determination of selenium
in natural waters. J. Amer. Water Works Assoc.  52:1199.
 ROSSUM, J.R. & P.A. VILLARRUZ.  1962. Suggested methods for determining selenium in water. J.
Amer. Water Works Assoc.  54:746.
 OLSEN, O.E.  1973. Simplified spectrophotometric analysis of plants for selenium. J. Assoc. Offic.
Anal. Chem. 56:1073.
3500-Se  D.        Determination of Volatile Selenium
1.  General Discussion
 Dimethylselenide and dimethyldiselenide are low boiling, extremely malodorous organic
compounds sparingly soluble in water. They are produced by microbial processes in seleniferous
soil and decaying seleniferous organic matter, an d occasionally are present in natural waters.
They are readily air stripped from a water sample and can be collected with high efficiency in anStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationalkaline solution of hydrogen peroxide, which oxidizes them quantitatively to Se(VI). Total
selenium is determin ed by digestion with HCl and analysis by the hydride atomic absorption
(Section 3114B  or Section 3114C ) or colorimetric ( Section 3500-Se.C ) methods. 
Either nitrogen or air may be used to strip the sample. Preferably use nitrogen if air-sensitive
compounds  (e.g., selenopolysulfides) are suspected. 
Because volatile selenium can be lost in the course of sample collection and handling,
preferably air-strip the sample in the field immediately after it is collected. After boiling to
decompose H2O2, return the a lkaline peroxide solution to the laboratory for analysis. 
2.  Apparatus
 All apparatus required for selenate reduction (¶ B.5) and  Methods Section 3114B  or Section
3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C , plus: 
a.  Gas washing bottles,  borosilicate glass, 250-mL, with coarse porous glass gas dispersion
frit. Mark 100-mL level on side of bottle.
b.  Rotameter,  to measure 3 L/min air flow.
c.  Gas flow regulator
d.  Hot plate.
e.  Graduated cylinder,  100-mL.
f.  Beakers,  250-mL.
g.  Rubber tubing , to interconnect gas washing bottles and other gas equipment.
h.  Rubber gloves .
3.  Reagents
 All reagents required for selenate reduction (¶ B.5) and  Methods Section 3114B  or Section
3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C , plus: 
a.  Hydrogen peroxide,  30%. Refrigerate.
b.  Sodium hydroxide solution,  NaOH, 1 N.
c.  Compressed air or nitrogen.
4.  Procedure
 Set up air-flow train in this order: Regulated air supply →rotameter →gas washing bottle
1→gas washing bottle 2. 
Prepare alkaline peroxide solution immedi ately before use by pouring 20 mL 30% H2O2 into
a 100-mL graduated cylinder, adding 50  to 60 mL deionized water and 5 mL 1 N NaOH, and
making up to 100 mL. CAUTION : Alkaline H2O2 is unstable. Do not keep in glass bottle; hold at
about 0 °C in oversized plastic bottle. Solution is corrosive; protect eyes and skin. Pour into gas
washing bottle  2. Pour approximately 100 mL freshly collected sample into gas washing bottle 1.
Do not attempt to measure sample volume accurately before volatile selenium determination, asStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationunnecessary handling may cause volatile selenium to be lost. 
Connect and check all air lines, turn on air and adjust flow to 3 L/min. Strip for 30 min or
more. After 30 min, turn off air, disconnect gas washing bottle 2, and place it on the hot plate.
Adjust heat to produce a gentle simmering of oxygen bubbles from decomposition of H2O2.
Continue heating until the characteristic effervescence of oxygen subsides and is replaced by
ordinary boiling. Remove from hot plate and let cool. Pour solution into beaker. (Volume will be
very near to 100 mL, and correction will usually be unnecess ary.) Analyze for total selenium
using HCl digestion (B.5) and Methods Section 3114B  or Section 3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C .
Once boiled, this solution may be safely stored and transported in plastic bottles. Measure
volume of sample in gas washing bottle 1. 
5.  Calculation
 The concentration of volatile selenium compounds in the original water sample can be
calculated as: 
6.  Precision and Bias
 Approximately 90% of dimethylselenide in samples will be recovered with 30 min air
stripping. The recovery of dimethyldiselenide is not known. Loss of gases to the atmosphere
during sampling and handling that precede analysis may cause a significant negative error. 
3500-Se  E.        Determination of Nonvolatile Organic Selenium Compounds
1.  General Discussion
 In principle, the total amount of dissolved or ganic selenium plus polysulfidic selenium may
be estimated by comparing ‘‘total Se,’’ determined by oxidation and HCl digestion (¶ B.2 or ¶
B.3 and  ¶ B.5, or ¶ B.4), followed by Metho ds Section 3114B  or Section 3114C , or Section
3500-Se.C , with Se(IV) + Se(VI) determined by HCl digestion (¶ B.5) and  Method Section
3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C . In practice, this will give a meaningful estimate only if a known
addition of Se(VI) is fully  recovered. Even if recovery is good, this estimate may be unreliable,
because it is the difference of two (frequently larger) numbers determined by slightly different
methods. Comparing total Se before and after treatment with resin [¶ B.1c1)] gives a sim ilarly
unreliable estimate of nonvolatile organic Se. 
It is preferable to separate and directly determine nonvolatile organic selenium. One method
involves adsorption of dissolved organic matter onto a C-18 reverse phase HPLC resin, elutionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwith an organi c solvent, and determination of selenium in this fraction. While this technique is
relatively simple, it is affected by pH and small organic molecules (e.g., individual selenium
containing amino acids) are not retained by the resins. Adjust sample pH to 1. 5 to 2.0 before
using the column, but because the latter problem cannot be solved easily, the use of organic
adsorbents provides only an estimate of organic selenium concentration. 
Alternatively, isolate specific compounds and determine their selenium con tent. In some
natural waters selenium may be associated with dissolved polypeptides or small proteins, and
even small amounts of free selenoamino acids may be present. Because selenoamino acids are
the most toxic form of the element, a direct determination  is sometimes desirable. 
To determine selenium in dissolved peptides, hydrolyze with acid and isolate the free amino
acids via ligand exchange chromatography. Elute the selenoamino acids from the column and
determine selenium. Selenoamino acids are unstab le during acid hydrolysis and even using
nonoxidizing methyl sulfonic acid and nitroge n-purged glass ampules, selenoamino acid
recoveries are only 50 to 80%. This method is  good only for estimating protein-bound selenium.
A somewhat more reliable estimate of free selenoamino acids and selenium associated with
small oligopeptides is obtained by performing a similar procedure without the hydrolysis step. 
While these methods are too intricate for routine use, semiquantitative, and sensitive only to
certain cl asses of organic compounds, at present they are the only ones available with any
practical experience. 
Imperfect separation of organic selenium com pounds from inorganic forms of selenium may
cause interference. In parallel with the actual determination, a lways perform the procedure using
a solution compounded to resemble the actual matrix and containing a similar amount of
selenium, but in the form of Se(IV) and Se (VI) to determine degree of interference. 
2.  Apparatus
a.  Rotary evaporator,  with temperature-control bath and 30-mL pear-shaped flasks.
b.  Glass ampule sealing apparatus,  or oxygen-gas torch.
c.  Heating block,  100°C, or pressure cooker.
d.  Glass chromatography columns,  15 cm long, 0.7 cm ID.* #(121)
e.  Glass syringe,  50-mL.
f.  Glass ampules,  10- or 20- mL. Clean by heating in a muffle furnace at 400°C for 24 h.
g.  pH meter.
3.  Reagents
a.  Hydrochloric acid , HCl, 1 N.
b.  Methyl sulfonic acid,  conc.
c.  Ammonium hydroxide , NH4OH, 1.5 N: Dilute 100 mL conc NH4OH to 1 L with deionized
water.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationd.  Sodium hydroxide , NaOH pellets and 1 N solution.
e.  pH 1.6 solution:  Adjust pH of deionized water to 1.6 using HCl.
f.  pH 9.0 solution:  Adjust pH of deionized water to 9.0 using NaOH.
g.  Copper sulfate solution,  CuSO4, 1M: Dissolve 25 g CuSO4⋅5H2O in deionized water and
dilute to 100 mL.
h.  Methanol,  purified.
i.  C-18 cartridges †#(122)  Using a glass syringe, pass the following sequence of reagents
through the cartridge to clean the resin (6 mL/min or less): 10 mL deionized water; 20 mL 1 N
HCl; 10 mL deionized water; 20 mL methanol; 10 mL deionized water;  and 20 m L pH 1.6
solution. Refrigerate but do not freeze cleaned cartridges.
j.  Ligand-exchange chromatographic resin , 100/200 mesh: Rinse resin‡ #(123)  with
deionized water to remove fines. Then rinse resin three times in the following sequence: 1 N HCl;
1.5N NH4OH; and deionized water. Store resin wet.
k.  Copper-treated ligand-exchange chromatographic resin, 100/200 mesh: Rinse resin‡ with
deionized water to remove fines. Then rinse three times with 1 N HCl, followed by deionized
water. Using NaOH adjust pH of supernatant above the resin to about 7. Ad d CuSO4 solution to
the resin and stir. After settling, decant supernatant and add more CuSO4 solution. Decant
CuSO4 solution and rinse with deionized water until no copper is noticeable in the supernatant.
Rinse resin three times with 1.5 N NH4OH and three  times with deionized water. Store resin wet.
4.  Procedures
a.  Extractable organic selenium:  Adjust sample (5 to 50 mL) to pH 1.5 to 2.0 using HCl and
place in a clean glass syringe with an attached cleaned C-18 cartridge. Push sample through the
cartridge at a rate of 6 mL/min. After removing the cartridge, dra w 2 mL pH 1.6 solution into
syringe as a rinse, reattach cartridge, and push the rinse through the cartridge. Repeat two
additional times. The cartridge can be refrigerated for storage. To elute organic selenium, push
10 mL methanol through the cartridge a t rate of 2 mL/min and collect eluate in a 30 mL
pear-shaped flask. Remove methanol by rotary evaporation, with the water bath temperature less
than 40°C. Use deionized water to solubilize and transfer the residue into the vessel used for
total selenium di gestions. Determine total dissolved selenium by digestion with persulfate (pG;
B.2) or peroxide (pG; B.3), reduction of Se(VI) (pG; B.5), and analysis by Methods Section
3114B  or Section 3114C , or Section 3500-Se.C .
b.  Hydrolysis of protein-bound selenium:  Place filtered sample in a 10- or 20-mL glass
ampule (depending on desired volume), and add conc methyl sulfonic acid to adjust
concentration to 4 M. Purge acidified sample with nitrogen for 10 min and seal top wi th a torch.
Heat sealed vial at 100°C for 24 h in a heati ng block or pressure cooker. Transfer cooled
hydrolysis solution with deionized water rinses to a 50-mL beaker and place in an ice bath.
Using NaOH pellets and 1 N NaOH, adjust to pH 9.0, taking care not to allow solution to heat toStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationboiling.
c.  Determination of selenoamino acids:  If sample is not hydrolyzed as in ¶ 4b, filter, and
adjust pH to 9.0 using 1 N NaOH.
 Fill an empty chromatographic column with deionized water and add ammonium-form resin
to a depth of 2 cm. Add copper-treated resi n to form a 12-cm length of resin. (The
ammonium-form resin removes any copper that bleeds from the copper-treated resin above it).
Rinse with deionized water until the pH of the effluent is 9.0; maintain flow through the column
by gravity. Pass sample thr ough column, rinse sample beaker with 5 mL pH 9 solution, and place
the rinse on column (after the last of the sample reaches the top of the resin). Rinse beaker twice
more. Discard flow through column. 
Place clean beaker under column and add 20 mL 1.5 N NH4OH to the column. Neutralize
NH4OH eluate with 2.5 mL conc HCl. Determine total dissolved selenium by digestion with
persulfate (¶ B.2) or peroxide (¶ B.3), reduction of Se(VI) (¶ B.5) and  analysis by Methods
Section 3114B  or Section 3114C , or Section 3 500-Se.C . 
5.  Precision and Bias
 These procedures are only semiquantitative. Typical relative standard deviation is 12% for
the C-18 isolation of dissolved organic se lenium, and 15% for protein-bound selenium. 
6.  Bibliography
 CUTTER, G.  1982. Selenium in reducing waters. Science  217:829.
 COOKE, T.D. & K.W. BRULAND.  1987. Aquatic chemistry of selenium: evidence of
biomethylation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 21:1214.
3500-Ag        SILVER
 Silver (Ag) is the second element in Group IB of the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 47, an atomic weight of 107.87, and valences of 1 and 2. The average abundance of Ag in the
earth’s crust is 0.08 ppm; in soils it is < 0.01 to 0.5 ppm; in streams it is 0.3 µg/L; in U.S.
drinking waters it is 0.23 µg/L, and in groundwater it is <0.1 µg/L. Silver occurs in its native
state and in combination with many nonmetallic elements such as argentite (Ag2S) and horn
silver (AgCl). Le ad and copper ores also may yield considerable silver. Silver is widely used in
photography, silverware, jewelry, mirrors, and batteries. Silver iodide has been used in the
seeding of clouds, and silver oxide to a limited extent is used as a disinfectant f or water. 
In acidic water Ag+ would predominate, and in high-chloride water a series of complexes
would be expected. Silver is nonessential for plants and animals. Silver can cause argyria, a
permanent, blue-gray discoloration of the skin and eyes that im parts a ghostly appearance.
Concentrations in the range of 0.4 to 1 mg/ L have caused pathological changes in the kidneys,
liver, and spleen of rats. Toxic effects on fish in fresh water have been observed at
concentrations as low as 0.17 µg/L. For freshwa ter aquatic life, total recoverable silver shouldStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationnot exceed 1.2 mg/L. 
The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ) and the
inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) are preferred. The
electrothe rmal atomization method ( Section 3113B ) is the most sensitive for determining silver
in natural waters. The dithizone method detailed in the 19th edition of Standard Methods  can be
used when an atomic absorption spectrometer is unavailable. A method suitab le for analysis of
silver in industrial or other wastewaters at levels above 1 mg/L is available.1 
If total silver is to be determined, acidify sample with conc nitric acid (HNO3) to pH <2 at
time of collection. If sample contains particulate matter and o nly the ‘‘dissolved’’ metal content
is to be determined, filter through a 0.45- µm membrane filter at time of collection. After
filtration, acidify filtrate with HNO3 to pH <2. Complete analysis as soon after collection as
possible. Some samples may require  special storage and digestion; see Section 3030D . 
Reference
         1.    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  1994. Approved Inorganic Test
Procedures. Federal Register  59(20):4504.
3500-Na        SODIUM* #(124)
3500-Na  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Sodium (Na) is the third element in Group IA of the periodic table; it has an atomic number
of 11, an atomic weight of 22.99, and a valence of 1. The average abundance of Na in the earth’s
crust is 2.5%; in soils it is 0. 02 to 0.62%; in streams it is 6.3 mg/L, and in groundwaters it is
generally >5 mg/L. Sodium occurs with silicates and with salt deposits. Sodium compounds are
used in many applications, including caustic soda, salt, fertilizers, and water treatment
chemica ls. 
Sodium is very soluble, and its monovalent ion Na+ can reach concentrations as high as 15
000 mg/L in equilibrium with sodium bicarbonate. The ratio of sodium to total cations is
important in agriculture and human physiology. Soil permeability can be harmed by a high
sodium ratio. In large concentrations it may affect persons with cardiac difficulties. A limiting
concentration of 2 to 3 mg/L is recommended in feedwaters destined for high-pressure boilers.
When necessary, sodium can be removed by the hy drogen-exchange process or by distillation.
The U.S. EPA advisory limit for sodium in drinking water is 20 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of MethodStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation Method Section 3111B  uses an atomic absorption spectrometer in the flame absorption
mode. Method Section 3120B  uses inductively coupled plasma; this method is not as sensitive as
the other methods, but usually this is not importa nt. Method Section 3500-Na.B  uses either a
flame photometer or an atomic absorption spectrometer in the flame emission mode. The
inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though sodium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. When all of these instruments are available, the choice will
depend on factors including relative quality of the instruments, precision and sensitivity
required, number of samples and analytes per sample, matrix effects, and relative ease of
instrument operation. If an atomic absorption spectrometer is used, operation in the emission
mode is preferred. 
3.  Storage of Sample
 Store alkaline samples or samples containing low sodium concentrations in polyethylene
bottles to eliminate the possibility of sample contamination due to leaching of the glass
container. 
3500-Na  B.        Flame Emission Photometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Trace amounts of sodium can be determined by flame emission photometry at
589 nm. Sample is nebulized into a gas flame under carefully controlled, reproducible excitation
conditions. The sodium resonant spectral line at 589 nm is isolated by interference filters or by
light-dispersing devices such as prisms or gratings. Emission light intensity is measured by a
phototube, photomultiplier, or photodiode. The light intensity at 589 nm is approximately
proportional to the sodium concentration.  Alignment of the wavelength dispersing device and
wavelength readout may not be precise. The appropriate wavelength setting, which may be
slightly more or less than 589 nm, can be determined from the maximum emission intensity
when aspirating a sodium sta ndard solution, and then used for emission measurements. The
calibration curve may be linear but has a tendency to level off or even reverse at higher
concentrations. Work in the linear to near-linear range.
b.  Interferences:  Minimize interference by incorporation of one or more of the following:
1)  Operate at the lowest practical concentration range. 
2)  Add releasing agents, such as strontium or lanthanum at 1000 mg/L, to suppress
ionization and anion interference. Among common anions capable of causing interference are
Cl–, SO42– and HCO3– in relatively large amounts. 
3)  Matrix-match standards and samples by adding identical amounts of interfering
substances present in the sample to calibration standards. 
4)  Apply an experimentally determined correction in those instances where the sampleStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcontains a single important interference. 
5)  Remove interfering ions. 
6)  Remove burner-clogging particulate matter from the sample by filtration through a filter
paper of medium retentiveness. 
7)  Use the standard addition technique as described in the flame photometric method for
strontium ( Section 3500-Sr.B) . The method involves preparing a calibration curve using the
sample matrix as a diluent, and determining the sample concentration eithe r mathematically or
graphically. 
8)  Use the internal standard technique. Potassium and calcium interfere with sodium
determination by the internal-standard method if the potassium-to-sodium ratio is ≥5:1 and the
calcium-to-sodium ratio is ≥10:1. When these ratios are exceeded, determin e calcium and
potassium concentrations and matrix-match sodium calibration standards by addition of
approximately equivalent concentrations of inte rfering ions. Interference from magnesium is not
significant until the magnesium-to-sodium ratio exceeds 100,  a rare occurrence. 
b.  Minimum detectable concentration:  Better flame photometers or atomic absorption
spectrometers operating in the emission mode can be used to determine sodium levels
approximating 5 µg/L.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Flame photometer  (either direct-reading or internal-standard type) or atomic absorption
spectrometer operating in the flame emission mode.
b.  Glassware:  Rinse all glassware with 1 + 15 HNO3 followed by several portions of reagent
water (¶ 3a).
3.  Reagents
 To minimize sodium contamination, store all solutions in plastic bottles. Use small
containers to reduce the amount of dry element that may be picked up from the bottle walls when
the solution is poured. Shake each container vigorously to w ash accumulated salts from walls
before pouring solution. 
a.  Reagent water:  See Section 1080 . Use reagent water to prepare all reagents and
calibration standards, and as dilution water.
b.  Stock sodium solution:  Dissolve 2.542 g NaCl dried at 140°C to constant weight and
dilute to 1000 mL with water; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Na.
c.  Intermediate sodium solution:  Dilute 10.00 mL stock sodium solution with water to 100.0
mL; 1.00 mL = 0.10 mg Na (1.00 mL = 100 µg Na). Use this intermediate solution to prepare
calibration curve in sodium range of 1 to 10 mg/L.
d.  Standard sodium solution:  Dilute 10.00 mL intermediate sodium solution with water to
100 mL; 1.00 mL = 10.0 µg Na. Use this solution to prepare calibration curve in sodium range ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation0.1 to 1.0 mg/L.
4.  Procedure
a.  Pretreatment of polluted water and wastewater samples:  Follow the procedures described
in Section 3030 .
b.  Instrument operation:  Because of differences between makes and models of instruments,
it is impossible to formulate detailed operating instructions. Follow manufacturer’s
recommendation for selecting proper photocell and wavelength, adjusting slit wi dth and
sensitivity, appropriate fuel and oxidant gas pre ssures, and the steps for warm-up, correcting for
interferences and flame background, rinsing of bur ner, igniting flame, and measuring emission
intensity.
c.  Direct-intensity measurement:  Prepare a blank and sodium calibration standards in
stepped amounts in any of the following applicable ranges: 0 to 1.0, 0 to 10, or 0 to 100 mg/L.
Determine emission intensity at 589 nm. Aspirate calibration standards a nd samples enough
times to secure a reliable average reading for each. Construct a calibration curve from the
sodium standards. Determine sodium concentration of sample from the calibration curve. Where
a large number of samples must be run routinely, the calibration curve provides sufficient
accuracy. If greater precision and less bias are desired and time is available, use the bracketing
approach described in ¶ 4d below.
d.  Bracketing approach:  From the calibration curve, select and prepare sodium standards
that immediately bracket the emission intensity of the sample. Determine emission intensities of
the bracketing standards (one sodium standard slightly less and the other slightly greater than the
sample) and the sample as nearly simultaneously as possible. Repeat the determination on
bracketing standards and sample. Calculate the sodium concentration by the equation in ¶ 5b and
average the findings.
5.  Calculation
a.  For direct reference to the calibration curve:
 mg Na/L = (mg Na/L in portion) × D
b.  For the bracketing approach:
 
where: 
                  B =   mg Na/L in upper bracketing standard, 
                  A =   mg Na/L in lower bracketing standard, 
                  b =   emission intensity of upper bracketing standard, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation                  a =   emission intensity of lower bracketing standard, 
                  s =   emission intensity of sample, and 
                  D =   dilution ratio, 
6.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 19.9 mg Na+/L, 108 mg Ca2+/L, 82 mg Mg2+/L, 3.1 mg
K+/L, 241 mg Cl–/L, 0.25 mg NO2–-N/L, 1.1 mg NO3–-N/L, 259 mg SO42–/L, and 42.5 mg total
alkalinity/L (as CaCO3) was analyzed in 35 laboratories by t he flame photometric method, with
a relative standard deviation of 17.3% and a relative error of 4.0%. 
7.  Bibliography
 WEST, P.W., P. FOLSE & D. MONTGOMERY.  1950. Application of flame spectrophotometry to
water analysis. Anal. Chem.  22:667.
 COLLINS, C.G. & H. POLKINHORNE.  1952. An investigation of anionic interference in the
determination of small quan tities of potassium and sodium with a new flame photometer.
Analyst  77:430.
 MELOCHE, V.W.  1956. Flame photometry. Anal. Chem.  28:1844.
 BURRIEL-MARTI, F. & J. RAMIREZ-MUNOZ.  1957. Flame Photometry: A Manual of Methods and
Applications. D. Van Nostrand Co. , Princeton, N.J.
 DEAN, J.A. 1960.  Flame Photometry. McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, N.Y.
 URE, A.M. & R.L. MITCHELL.  1975. Lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, and cesium. In J.A.
Dean & T.C. Rains, eds. Flame Emission and Atomic Absorption Spectr ometry. Dekker,
New York, N.Y.
 THOMPSON, K.C. & REYNOLDS, R.J.  1978. Atomic Absorption, Fluorescence, and Flame
Spectroscopy—A Practical Approach, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
 WILLARD, H.H., L.L. MERRIT, JR., J.A. DEAN & F.A. SETTLE, JR.  1981. Instrumental Methods of
Analysis, 6th ed. Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, Calif.
 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1988. Method D 1428-82: Standard test
methods for sodium and potassium in water and water-formed deposits by flame photometr y.
Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 11.01. American Soc. Testing & Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.
3500-Sr        STRONTIUM* #(125)
3500-Sr  A.        IntroductionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Strontium (Sr) is the fourth element in Gr oup IIA of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 38, an atomic weight of 87.62, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Sr in the
earth’s crust is 384 ppm; in soils Sr ranges from 3.6 to 160 ppm;  in streams it averages 50 µg/L,
and in groundwaters it ranges from 0.01 to 10 mg/L. Strontium is found chiefly in celestite
(SrSO4) and in strontianite (SrCO3). Strontium compounds are used in pigments, pyrotechnics,
ceramic s, and flares. 90Sr is a fission product of nuclear react or fuels, and was widely distributed
on the earth’s surface as a result of fallout from nuclear weapons testing. 
The common aqueous species is Sr2+. The solubility of strontium is controlled by carb onate
and sulfate. Some compounds are toxic by inge stion and inhalation. Although there is no U.S.
EPA drinking water standard MCL for concentra tion of strontium, strontium-90 measurements
are required when the gross beta activity of a water sample is grea ter than 50 pCi/L. The U.S.
EPA primary drinking water standard MCL for 90Sr is 8 pCi/L. 
A method for determination of 90Sr is found in Section 7500-Sr.  
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric method ( Section 3111B ) and inductively coupled
plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) are preferred. The flame emission photometric
method (B) also is available for those laboratories that do not have the equipment needed for one
of the preferred methods. 
3.  Sampling and Storage
 Polyethylene bottles are preferable for sample storage, although borosilicate glass containers
also may be used. At time of collection adjust sample to pH <2 with nitric acid (HNO3). 
3500-Sr  B.        Flame Emission Photometric Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  The flame photometric method can be used for the determination of strontium
in the concentration range prevalent in natural waters. The strontium emission is measured at a
wavelength of 460.7 nm, while the background intensity is measured at a wavelength of 466 nm.
The difference in readings obtained at these two wavelengths measures the light intensity
emitted by strontium. 
b.  Interference:  Emission intensity is a linear function of strontium concentration and
concentration of other constituents. The standard addition technique distributes the same ions
throughout the standards and the sample, thereby equalizing the radiat ion effect of possible
interfering substances. A very low pH (<1) could produce an interference, but sample dilution
should eliminate this interference.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationc.  Minimum detectable concentration:  Strontium levels of about 0.2 mg/L can be detected
by the flame photometric method without prior sample concentration.
2.  Apparatus
 Spectrophotometer,  equipped with photomultiplier tube and flame accessories; or an atomic
absorption spectrophotometer capable of operation in flame emission mode. 
3.  Reagents
a.  Stock strontium solution:  Dissolve 2.415 g strontium nitrate, Sr(NO3)2, dried to constant
weight at 140°C, in 1000 mL 1% (v/v) HNO3; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Sr.
b.  Standard strontium solution:  Dilute 25.00 mL stock strontium solution to 1000 mL with
water; 1.00 mL = 25.0 µg Sr. Use this solution for preparing Sr standards in the 0.2- to 25-mg/L
range.
c.  Nitric acid,  HNO3, conc.
4.  Procedure
a.  Pretreatment of polluted water and wastewater samples:  Select an appropriate procedure
from Section 3030 .
b.  Preparation of strontium standards:  Dilute samples, if necessary, to contain less than 400
mg Ca or Ba/L and less than 40 mg Sr/L. Add 25.0 mL sample (or a lesser but consistent volume
to keep all standards in the linear range of the instrument) to 2 5.0 mL of each of a series of four
or more strontium standards containing from 0 mg/L to a concentration exceeding that of the
sample. For most natural waters 0, 2.0, 5.0, and 10.0 mg Sr/L standards are sufficient. A broader
range curve might be preferable  for brines. Dilute the brine sufficiently to eliminate burner
splatter and clogging.
c.  Concentration of low-level strontium samples:  Concentrate samples containing less than 2
mg Sr/L. Polluted water or wastewater samples can be concentrated during digestion by starting
with a larger volume (see Section 3030D ). For other samples, add 3  to 5 drops conc HNO3 to
250 mL sample and evaporate to about 25 mL. Cool and make up to 50.0 mL with distilled
water. Proceed as in ¶ b. The HNO3 concentration in the sample prepared for atomization can
approach 0.4 mL/50 mL without producing interference .
d.  Flame photometric measurement:  Measure emission intensity of prepared samples
(standards plus sample) at wavelengths of 460.7 and 466 nm. Follow manufacturer’s instructions
for correct instrument operation. Use a fuel-rich nitrous oxide-acetylene fla me, if possible.
5.  Calculation
a.  Using a calculator or computer with linear regression capability, enter the net intensity
(reading at 460.7 nm minus reading at 466 nm) versus concentration added to the sample and
solve the equation for zero emissions. The negative of this number mu ltiplied by any dilutionStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationfactor is the sample concentration.
b.  Plot net intensity (reading at 460.7 nm minus reading at 466 nm) against strontium
concentration added to the sample. Because the plot forms a straight calibration line that
intersects the ordinate, strontium concentration can be calculated from the equation: 
where:
                 A =   sample emission-intensity reading of sample plus 0 mg/L at 460.7 nm, 
                  B =   background radiation reading at 466 nm, and 
                  C =   slope of calibration line. 
Use the ratio D/E only when E mL of sample are concentrated to a final vo lume D mL
(typically 50 mL). 
c.  Graphical method:  Strontium concentration also can be evaluated by the graphical
method illustrated in Figure 3500-Sr:1 . Plot net intensity against strontium concentration added
to sample. If the line intersects the ordinate at Y emissions, the stron tium concentration is where
the abscissa value of the point on the calibration line has an ordinate value of 2 Y emissions due
to the two-fold dilution with standards (if sample and standards are mixed in equal volumes).
The calibration line in the example intersects the ordinate at 12. Thus, Y  =  12 and 2 Y  =  24.
The strontium concentration of the sample is the abscissa value of the point on the calibration
line having an ordinate value of 24. In the example, the strontium concentration is 9.0 mg/L.
d.  Report strontium concentrations below 10 mg/L to the nearest 0.1 mg/L and above 10
mg/L to the nearest whole number.
6.  Quality Control
 See Part 1000  and  Section 3020  for specific quality control procedures to be followed
during sample preparation and analysis. 
7.  Precision and Bias
 Strontium concentrations in the range 12.0 to 16.0 mg/L can be determined with an accuracy
within ±1 to 2 mg/L. 
8.  Bibliography
 CHOW, T.J. & T.G. THOMPSON.  1955. Flame photometric determination of strontium in sea water.
Anal. Chem.  27:18.
 NICHOLS, M.S. & D.R. MCNALL. 1957. Strontium content of Wisconsin municipal waters. J. Amer.
Water Works Assoc.  49:1493.
 HORR, C.A.  1959. A survey of analytical methods for the determination of strontium in naturalStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationwater. U.S. Geol. Surv. Water Supply Pap. No. 1496A.
3500-Te        TELLURIUM
 Tellurium (Te) is the fourth element in Group VIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 52, an atomic weight of 127.60, and valences of 2, 4, and 6. The average abundance
of Te in the earth’s crust is 0.002 ppm; in s oils it is 0.001 to 0.01 ppm; and in groundwaters it is
<0.1 mg/L. Tellurium is found in its native state and as the telluride of gold and other metals. It
is used in alloys, catalysts, batteries, and as a coloring agent in glass and ceramics. 
The common aqueous species is TeO32–. The metal and its compounds are toxic by
inhalation. 
Perform analyses by the electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ). The
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 ) also may be applied
successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though tellurium is not specifically
listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Tl        THALLIUM
 Thallium (Tl) is the fifth element in Group IIIA in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 81, an atomic weight of 204.38, and valences of 1 and 3. The average abundance in
the earth’s crust is 0.07 ppm, and in groundwate rs it is <0.1 mg/L. The metal occurs chiefly in
pyrites. Thallium is used in the production of glasses and rodenticides, in photoelectric
applications, and in electrodes for dissolved oxygen meters. 
The common aqueous species is Tl+. It is nonessential fo r plants and animals. Compounds of
thallium are toxic on contact with moisture, a nd by inhalation. The U.S. EPA primary drinking
water standard MCL is 2 µg/L. 
For analysis, use one of the atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  or
Section 3 113B ), or one of the inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  or Section
3125 ), depending upon sensitivity requirements. 
3500-Th        THORIUM
 Thorium (Th) is the first element in the actinium series of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 90, an atomic weight of 232.04, and a valence of 4. The average abundance in the
earth’s crust is 8.1 ppm; in soils it is 1 3 ppm; in streams it is 0.1 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is
<0.1 mg/L. Thorium is a radioactive element, with 232Th having a half-life of 1.4 × 1010 years. It
is widely distributed in the earth, with the principal mineral being monazite. Thorium is used in
sun lamps, photoelectric cells, incandescent lighting, and gas mantles. 
The aqueous chemistry of thorium is controlled by the Th4+ ion, which forms a set ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcomplex species with hydroxides. Thorium’s radioactive decay isotopes are dangerous when
inhaled or ingested as thorium dust particles. 
Either of the flame atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  or Section
3111E ) may be used for analysis. The inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric method
(Section 3125 ) also may be applied succe ssfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even
though thorium is not specifically listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Sn        TIN
 Tin (Sn) is the fourth element in Group IVA in the periodic table; it has an atomic number of
50, an atomic weight of 118.69, and valences of 2 and 4. The average abundance in the earth’s
crust is 2.1 ppm; in soils it is 10 ppm; in st reams it is 0.1 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is <0.1
mg/L. Tin is found mostly in the mineral cassiterite (SnO2), in association with granitic rocks.
Tin is used in reducing agents, solder, bronze, pewter, and coatings for various metals. 
The common aqueo us species are Sn4+, Sn(OH)4, SnO(OH)2, and SnO(OH)3–. Tin is
adsorbed to suspended solids, sulfides, and hydroxides. Tin can be methylated in sediments.
Tributyl tin undergoes biodegradation quick ly. Organo-tin compounds are toxic. Tin is
considered nones sential for plants and animals. 
Either the flame atomic absorption method ( Section 3111B ) or the electrothermal atomic
absorption method ( Section 3113B ) may be used successfully for analyses, depending upon the
sensitivity desired. The inductively coupled  plasma/mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 )
also may be applied successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though tin is
not specifically listed as an analyte in the method. 
3500-Ti        TITANIUM
 Titanium (Ti) is the first element in Group IVB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 22, an atomic weight of 47.88, and valences of 2, 3, and 4. The average abundance of
Ti in the earth’s crust is 0.6%; in soils it i s 1700 to 6600 ppm; in streams it is 3 µg/L, and in
groundwaters it is <0.1 mg/L. The element is commonly associated with iron minerals. Titanium
is used in alloys for aircraft, marine, and food-handling equipment. Compounds of the metal are
used in pigmen ts and as a reducing agent. 
Titanium species are usually insoluble in natural waters, with the Ti4+ species being the most
common ion when found. Some compounds are toxic by ingestion and the pure metal is
flammable. 
Either of the flame atomic absorption  spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  or Section
3111E ) may be used. The inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric method ( Section 3125 )
also may be applied successfully in most cases (with lower detection limits), even though
titanium is not specifica lly listed as an analyte in the method. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation3500-U        URANIUM
 Uranium (U) is the third element in the actinide series of the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 92, an atomic weight of 238.04, and valences of 3, 4, and 6. The average abundance
of U in the earth’s crust is 2.3 ppm, and in soils it is 1.8 ppm. Concentrations of uranium in
drinking waters usually are expressed in terms of picocuries per liter, but that is now being
replaced by Becquerel per liter (Bq/L). The approximate conversion factor, assuming
equilibrium between 234U and 238U, is 1 µg uranium equals 0.67 pCi. The mean concentration of
uranium in drinking water is 1.8 pCi/L. The chief ore is uraninite, or pitchblende, uranous
uranate [U(UO4)2]. Uranium is known mainly for its use in the nuclear industry, but has also
been used in glass, ceramics, and photography. 
Uranium compounds are radioactive and are thereby toxic by inhalation and ingestion. There
are three natural radioisotopes of uranium. Uranium-238 has a half-life of 4.5 × 109 years,
represents 99% of uranium’s  natural abundance, and is not fissionable, but can be used to form
plutonium-239, which is fissionable. Uranium-235 has a half-life of 7.1 × 108 years, represents
0.75% of uranium’s natural abundance, is readily fissionable, and was the energy source in t he
original atomic bombs. Uranium-234 has a half-life of 2.5 × 105 years and represents only
0.006% of uranium’s natural abundance. 
The common forms in natural water are U4+ and UO22+. In natural waters below pH 5,
UO22+ would dominate; in the pH range of  5 to 10, soluble carbonate complexes predominate.
Although there is no U.S. EPA drinking water standard MCL for uranium, an analysis for
uranium is required if the gross alpha activity of a water sample is greater than 15 pCi/L. 
Perform analyses by the i nductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometry method ( Section
3125 ) or by one of the methods in Section 7500-U  (for regulatory compliance purposes). 
3500-V        VANADIUM* #(126)
3500-V  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Vanadium (V) is the first element in Group VB in the periodic table; it has an atomic
number of 23, an atomic weight of 50.94, and valences of 2, 3, 4, and 5. The average abundance
of V in the earth’s crust is 136 ppm; in  soils it ranges from 15 to 110 ppm; in streams it averages
about 0.9 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is generally <0.1 mg/L. Though relatively rare, vanadium
is found in a variety of minerals; most important among these are vanadinite [Pb5(VO4)3Cl], and
patronite (possibly VS4), occurring chiefly in Peru. Vanadium complexes have been noted inStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationcoal and petroleum deposits. Vanadium is used in steel alloys and as a catalyst in the production
of sulfuric acid and synthetic rubber. 
The dominant form in natural wa ters is V5+. It is associated with organic complexes and is
insoluble in reducing environments. It is considered nonessential for most higher plants and
animals, although it may be an essential trace element for some algae and microorganisms.
Laboratory an d epidemiological evidence suggests that vanadium may play a beneficial role in
the prevention of heart disease. In water supplies in New Mexico, which has a low incidence of
heart disease, vanadium has been found in concentrations of 20 to 150 µg/L. In a state where
incidence of heart disease is high, vanadium was not found in water supplies. However,
vanadium pentoxide dust causes gastrointestinal and respiratory disturbances. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended maximum level for irrigation waters
is 0.1 mg/L. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111D  and  Section 3111E ), the
electrothermal atomic absorption method ( Section 3113B ), the inductively coupled plasma
methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ), and gallic acid  method ( Section 3500-V.B ) are
suitable for potable water samples. The atomic absorption spectrometric and inductively coupled
plasma methods are preferred for polluted samples. The electrothermal atomic absorption
method also may be used successfully with  an appropriate matrix modifier. 
3500-V  B.        Gallic Acid Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle : The concentration of trace amounts of vanadium in water is determined by
measuring the catalytic effect it exerts on the rate of oxidation of gallic acid by persulfate in acid
solution. Under the given conditions of concentrations of react ants, temperature, and reaction
time, the extent of oxidation of gallic acid is proportional to the concentration of vanadium.
Vanadium is determined by measuring the absorbance of the sample at 415 nm and comparing it
with that of standard solutions treat ed identically.
b.  Interference : The substances listed in Table 3500-V:I  will interfere in the determination
of vanadium if the specified concentrations are exceeded. This is not a serious problem for Cr6+,
Co2+, Mo6+, Ni2+, Ag+, and U6+ because the tolerable concentra tion is greater than that
commonly encountered in fresh water. However, in some samples the tolerable concentration of
Cu2+, Fe2+, and Fe3+ may be exceeded. Because of the high sensitivity of the method, interfering
substances in concentrations only slight ly above tolerance limits can be rendered harmless by
dilution. 
Traces of Br– and I– interfere seriously and dilution alone will not always reduce the
concentration below tolerance limits. Mercuric ion may be added to complex these halides andStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationminimize th eir interference; however, mercuric ion its elf interferes if in excess. Adding 350 µg
mercuric nitrate, Hg(NO3)2, per sample permits determination of vanadium in the presence of up
to 100 mg Cl–/L, 250 µg Br–/L, and 250 µg I–/L. Dilute samples containing h igh concentrations
of these ions to concentrations below the values given above and add Hg(NO3)2. 
c.  Minimum detectable concentration : 0.025 µg V in approximately 13 mL final volume or
approximately 2 µg V/L.
2.  Apparatus
a.  Water bath,  capable of being operated at 25 ± 0.5°C.
b.  Colorimetric equipment : One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for measurements at 415 nm, with a light path of 1 to 5 cm. 
2)  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 to 5 cm and equipped with a violet filter
with maximum transmittance near 415 nm. 
3.  Reagents
 Use reagent water (see Section 1080 ) in preparation of reagents, for dilutions, and as blanks. 
a.  Stock vanadium solution : Dissolve 229.6 mg ammonium metavanadate, NH4VO3, in a
volumetric flask containing approximately 800 mL water and 15 mL 1 + 1 nitric acid (HNO3).
Dilute to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 100 µg V.
b.  Intermediate vanadium solution : Dilute 1.00 mL stock vanadium solution with water to
100 mL; 1.00 mL = 1.00 µg V.
c.  Standard vanadium solution : Dilute 1.00 mL intermediate vanadium solution with water
to 100 mL; 1.00 mL = 0.010 µg V.
d.  Mercuric nitrate solution : Dissolve 350 mg Hg(NO3)2⋅H2O in 1000 mL water.
e.  Ammonium persulfate-phosphoric acid reagent : Dissolve 2.5 g (NH4)2S2O8 in 25 mL
water. Bring just to a boil, remove from heat, and add 25 mL conc H3PO4. Let stand
approximately 24 h before use. Discard after 48 h.
f.  Gallic acid solution : Dissolve 2 g H6C7O5 in 100 mL warm water, heat to a temperature
just below boiling, and filter through filter paper.* #(127)  Prepare a fresh solution for each set of
samples.
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of standards and sample : Prepare both blank and sufficient standards by
diluting 0- to 8.0-mL portions (0 to 0.08 µg V) of standard vanadium solution to 10 mL with
water. Pipet sample (10.00 mL maximum) containing less than 0.08 µg V into  a suitable
container and adjust volume to 10.0 mL with water. Filter colored or turbid samples. Add 1.0 mL
Hg(NO3)2 solution to each blank, standard, and sample. Place containers in a water bathStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationregulated to 25 ± 0.5°C and allow 30 to 45 min for samples t o come to the bath temperature.
b.  Color development and measurement : Add 1.0 mL ammonium persulfate-phosphoric acid
reagent (temperature equilibrated), swirl to mix thoroughly, and return to water bath. Add 1.0
mL gallic acid solution (temperature equilibrated), swirl to mix thorough ly, and return to water
bath. Add gallic acid to successive samples at intervals of 30 s or longer to permit accurate
control of reaction time. Exactly 60 min after adding gallic acid, remove sample from water bath
and measure its absorbance at 415 nm, usi ng water as a reference. Subtract absorbance of blank
from absorbance of each standard and sample. Construct a calibration curve by plotting
absorbance values of standards versus micrograms vanadium. Determine amount of vanadium in
a sample by referring to  the corresponding absorbance on the calibration curve. Prepare a
calibration curve with each set of samples.
5.  Calculation
 
6.  Precision and Bias
 In a synthetic sample containing 6 µg V/L, 40 µg As/L, 250 µg Be/L, 240 µg B/L, and 20 µg
Se/L in distilled water, vanadium was measured in 22 laboratories with a relative standard
deviation of 20% and no relative error. 
7.  Bibliography
 FISHMAN, M.J. & M.V. SKOUGSTAD.  1964. Catalytic determination of vanadium in water. Anal.
Chem . 36:1643.
3500-Zn        ZINC* #(128)
3500-Zn  A.        Introduction
1.  Occurrence and Significance
 Zinc (Zn) is the first element in Group IIB in the periodic table;  it has an atomic number of
30, an atomic weight of 65.38, and a valence of 2. The average abundance of Zn in the earth’s
crust is 76 ppm; in soils it is 25 to 68 ppm; in streams it is 20 µg/L, and in groundwaters it is
<0.1 mg/L. The solubility of zinc is controlled in natural waters by adsorption on mineral
surfaces, carbonate equilibrium, and organic complexes. Zinc is used in a number of alloys such
as brass and bronze, and in batteries, fungicides, and pigments. Zinc is an essential growth
element for plants and animals but at elevated levels it is toxic to some species of aquatic life.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationThe United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recommended le vel for zinc in irrigation
waters is 2 mg/L. The U.S. EPA secondary drinking water standard MCL is 5 mg/L.
Concentrations above 5 mg/L can cause a bitter astringent taste and an opalescence in alkaline
waters. Zinc most commonly enters the domestic water s upply from deterioration of galvanized
iron and dezincification of brass. In such cases lead and cadmium also may be present because
they are impurities of the zinc used in galvanizing. Zinc in water also may result from industrial
waste pollution. 
2.  Selection of Method
 The atomic absorption spectrometric methods ( Section 3111B  and  Section 3111C ) and
inductively coupled plasma methods ( Section 3120  and  Section 3125 ) are preferred. The zincon
method (B), suitable for analysis of both potable an d polluted waters, may be used if
instrumentation for the preferred methods is not available.. 
3.  Sampling and Storage
 See Section 3010B.2  for sample handling and storage. 
3500-Zn  B.        Zincon Method
1.  General Discussion
a.  Principle:  Zinc forms a blue complex with 2-carboxy-2 ′-hydroxy-5 ′-sulfoformazyl
benzene (zincon) in a solution buffered to pH 9.0. Other heavy metals likewise form colored
complexes with zincon. Cyanide is added to complex zinc and heavy metals. Cycl ohexanone is
added to free zinc selectively from its cyanide complex so that it can be complexed with zincon
to form a blue color. Sodium ascorbate reduces manganese interference. The developed color is
stable except in the presence of copper (see table be low).
b.  Interferences:  The following ions interfere at concentrations exceeding those listed: 
 
Ion mg/L Ion mg/L   
Cd2+    1 Cr3+  10 
Al3+    5 Ni2+  20 
Mn2+    5 Cu2+  30 
Fe3+    7 Co2+  30 
Fe2+    9 CrO42–  50 
c.  Minimum detectable concentration:  0.02 mg Zn/L.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation2.  Apparatus
a.  Colorimetric equipment:  One of the following is required:
1)  Spectrophotometer,  for measurements at 620 nm, providing a light path of 1 cm or longer. 
2)  Filter photometer,  providing a light path of 1 cm or longer and equipped with a red filter
having maximum transmittance near 620 nm. Deviation from Beer’s Law occurs when the filter
band pass exceeds 20 nm. 
b.  Graduated cylinders,  50-mL, with ground-glass stoppers, Class B or better.
c.  Erlenmeyer flasks,  50-mL.
d.  Filtration apparatus:  0.45-µm filters and filter holders.
3.  Reagents
a.  Metal-free water:  See Section 3111B.3 c. Use water for rinsing apparatus and preparing
solutions and dilutions.
b.  Stock zinc solution:  Dissolve 1000 mg (1.000 g) zinc metal in 10 mL 1 + 1 HNO3. Dilute
and boil to expel oxides of nitrogen. Dilute to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 1.00 mg Zn.
c.  Standard zinc solution:  Dilute 10.00 mL stock zinc solution to 1000 mL; 1.00 mL = 10.00
µg Zn.
d.  Sodium ascorbate,  fine granular powder, USP.
e.  Potassium cyanide solution:  Dissolve 1.00 g KCN in approximately 50 mL water and
dilute to 100 mL. CAUTION:  Potassium cyanide is a deadly poison. Avoid skin contact or
inhalation of vapors. Do not pipet by mouth or bring in contact with acids.
f.  Buffer solution,  pH 9.0: Dissolve 8.4 g NaOH pellets in about 500 mL water. Add 31.0 g
H3BO3 and swirl or stir to dissolve. Dilute to 1000 mL with water and mix thoroughly.
g.  Zincon reagent:  Dissolve 100 mg zincon (2-carboxy-2 ′-hydroxy-5 ′-sulfoformazyl
benzene) in 100 mL methanol. Because zincon disso lves slowly, stir and/or let stand overnight.
h.  Cyclohexanone,  purified.
i.  Hydrochloric acid,  HCl, conc and 1 N. 
j.  Sodium hydroxide,  NaOH, 6 N and 1 N.
4.  Procedure
a.  Preparation of colorimetric standards:  Accurately deliver 0, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0, 5.0, 10.0, and
14.0 mL standard zinc solution to a series of 50-mL graduated mixing cylinders. Dilute each to
20.0 mL to yield solutions containing 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 5. 0, and 7.0 mg Zn/L, respectively.
(Lower-range standards may be prepared to extend the quantitation range. Longer optical path
cells can be used. Verify linearity of response in this lower concentration range.) Add the
following to each solution in sequenc e, mixing thoroughly after each addition: 0.5 g sodium
ascorbate, 5.0 mL buffer solution, 2.0 mL KCN solution, and 3.0 mL zincon solution. Pipet 20.0Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationmL of the solution into a clean 50-mL erlenmeyer flask. Reserve remaining solution to zero the
instrument.  Add 1.0 mL cyclohexanone to the erlenmeyer flask. Swirl for 10 s and note time.
Transfer portions of both solutions to clean sample cells. Use solution without cyclohexanone to
zero colorimeter. Read and record absorbance for solution with cyclohexanone a fter 1 min. The
calibration curve does not pass through zero because of the color enhancement effect of
cyclohexanone on zincon.
b.  Treatment of samples:  To determine readily acid-extractable total zinc, add 1 mL conc
HCl to 50 mL sample and mix thoroughly. Filter and adjust to pH 7. To determine dissolved
zinc, filter sample through a 0.45- µm membrane filter. Adjust to pH 7 with  1N NaOH or 1 N HCl
if necessary after filtering.
c.  Sample analysis:  Cool samples to less than 30°C if necessary. Analyze 20.0 mL of
prepared sample as described in ¶ 4a above, beginning with ‘‘Add the following to each solution
. . .’’ If the zinc concentration exceeds 7 mg Zn/L prepare a sample dilu tion and analyze a
20.0-mL portion.
5.  Calculation
 Read zinc concentration (in milligrams per liter) directly from the calibration curve. 
6.  Precision and Bias
 A synthetic sample containing 650 µg Zn/L, 500 µg Al/L, 50 µg Cd/L, 110 µg Cr/L, 470 µg
Cu/L, 300 µg Fe/L, 70 µg Pb/L, 120 µg Mn/L, and 150 µg Ag/L in doubly demineralized water
was analyzed in a single laboratory. A series of 10 replicates gave a relative standard deviation
of 0.96% and a relative error of 0.15%. A wastewater sample from an industry in Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) No. 3333, primary sm elting and refining of zinc, was analyzed by
10 different persons. Th e mean zinc concentration was 3.36 mg Zn/L and the relative standard
deviation was 1.7%. The relative error compared to results from an atomic absorption analysis of
the same sample was −1.0%. 
7.  Bibliography
  PLATTE, J.A. & V.M. MARCY.  1959. Photometric determination of zinc with zincon. Anal. Chem .
31:1226.
  RUSH, R.M. & J.H. YOE.  1954. Colorimetric determination of zinc and copper with
2-carboxy-2 ′-hydroxy-5 ′-sulfoformazyl-benzene. Anal.  Chem . 26:1345.
 MILLER, D.G.  1979. Colorimetric determination of zinc with zincon and cyclohexanone. J. Water
Pollut. Control Fed . 51:2402.
 PANDE, S.P.  1980. Study on the determination of zinc in drinking water. J. IWWA XII  (3):275.
 
FiguresStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationFigure 3112:1 .  Schematic arrangement of equipment for measurement of mercury by
cold-vapor atomic absorption technique.  
Figure 3114:1 .  Manual reaction cell for producing As and Se hydrides.  
Figure 3114:2 .  Schematic of a continuous hydride generator.  
Figure 3500-Al:1 .  Correction curves for estimation of aluminum in the presence of
fluoride.  Above the mg F–/L present, locate the point corresponding to  the apparent mg
Al/L measured. From this point interpolate between the curves shown, if the point d oes not
fall directly on one of the curves,  to read the true mg Al/L on the ordinate, which
corresponds to 0.00 mg F–/L. For example, an apparent 0.20 mg Al/L in a sample containing
1.00 mg F–/L would actually be 0.30 mg Al/L if no fluoride were present to interfere. 
Figure 3500-As:1 .  Arsine generator and absorber assembly.  
Figure 3500-Se:1 .  General scheme for speciation of selenium in water.  
Figure 3500-Sr:1 .  Graphical method of computing strontium concentration.  
Tables
TABLE  3010:I.   APPLICABLE  METHODS FOR  ELEMENTAL  ANALYSIS
ElementFlame
Atomic
Absorption
(Direct)Flame
Atomic
Absorption
(Extracted)Flame
PhotometryElectrothermal
Atomic
AbsorptionHydride/Cold
Vapor Atomic
AbsorptionInductively
Coupled
Plasma
(ICP)ICP/
Spect r
(ICP
Aluminum 3111D 3111E 3113B 3120A 31
Antimony 3111B 3113B 3120A 31
Arsenic 3113B 3114B 3120A 31
Barium 3111D 3111E 3113B 3120A 31
Beryllium 3111D 3111E 3113B 3120A 31
Bismuth 3111B 3113B 31
Boron 3120A 31
Cadmium 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Calcium 3111B,D 3111E 3120A 31
Cesium 3111B 31
Chromium 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Cobalt 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Copper 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Gallium 3113B 31
Germanium 3113B 31
Gold 3111B 3113B 31
Indium 3113B 31Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementFlame
Atomic
Absorption
(Direct)Flame
Atomic
Absorption
(Extracted)Flame
PhotometryElectrothermal
Atomic
AbsorptionHydride/Cold
Vapor Atomic
AbsorptionInductively
Coupled
Plasma
(ICP)ICP/
Spect r
(ICP
Iridium 3111B 31
Iron 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Lead 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Lithium 3111B 3500-Li.B 3120A 31
Magnesium 3111B 3120A 31
Manganese 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Mercury 3112B 31
Molybdenum 3111D 3111E 3113B 3120A 31
Nickel 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Osmium 3111D 3111E 31
Palladium 3111B 31
Platinum 3111B 31
Potassium 3111B 3500-K.B 3120A 31
Rhenium 3111D 3111E 31
Rhodium 3111B 31
Ruthenium 3111B 31
Selenium 3113B 3114B,C 3120A 31
Silicon 3111D 3111E 3120A 31
Silver 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
Sodium 3111B 3500-Na.B 3120A 31
Strontium 3111B 3500-Sr.B 3120A 31
Tellurium 3113B 31
Thallium 3111B 3113B 3120A 31
Thorium 3111D 3111E 31
Tin 3111B 3113B 31
Titanium 3111D 3111E 31
Uranium 31
Vanadium 3111D 3111E 3113B 3120A 31
Zinc 3111B 3111C 3113B 3120A 31
* Metal is not specifically mentioned in the met hod, but 3125 may be used successfully in most cases.
† Additional alternative methods for aluminum, beryllium, cadmium, mercury, se lenium, silver, and zinc may be found in the 19th
Edition of Standard Method s.
TABLE  3030:I.   A CIDS  USED IN  CONJUNCTION WITH  HNO3 for S AMPLE  PREPARATIONStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  3030:I.   A CIDS  USED IN  CONJUNCTION WITH  HNO3 for S AMPLE  PREPARATION
Acid Recommended for May Be Helpful for Not Recommended for
HCl Ag Sb, Ru, Sn Th, Pb
H2SO4Ti — Ag, Pb, Ba
HClO4— Organic materials —
HF — Siliceous materials —
TABLE  3111:I.   A TOMIC  ABSORPTION  CONCENTRATION  RANGES  WITH  DIRECT  ASPIRATION
ATOMIC  ABSORPTION
ElementWave-
length
nmFlame
Gases*Instrument
Detection
Limit
mg/LSensitivity
mg/LOptimum
Concentration
Range
mg/L
Ag 328.1 A–Ac 0.01 0.06 0.1–4
Al 309.3 N–Ac 0.1 1 5–100
Au 242.8 A–Ac 0.01 0.25 0.5–20
Ba 553.6 N–Ac 0.03 0.4 1–20
Be 234.9 N–Ac 0.005 0.03 0.05–2
Bi 223.1 A–Ac 0.06 0.4 1–50
Ca 422.7 A–Ac 0.003 0.08 0.2–20
Cd 228.8 A–Ac 0.002 0.025 0.05–2
Co 240.7 A–Ac 0.03 0.2 0.5–10
Cr 357.9 A–Ac 0.02 0.1 0.2–10
Cs 852.1 A–Ac 0.02 0.3 0.5–15
Cu 324.7 A–Ac 0.01 0.1 0.2–10
Fe 248.3 A–Ac 0.02 0.12 0.3–10
Ir 264.0 A–Ac 0.6 8 —
K 766.5 A–Ac 0.005 0.04 0.1–2
Li 670.8 A–Ac 0.002 0.04 0.1–2
Mg 285.2 A–Ac 0.0005 0.007 0.02–2
Mn 279.5 A–Ac 0.01 0.05 0.1–10
Mo 313.3 N–Ac 0.1 0.5 1–20
Na 589.0 A–Ac 0.002 0.015 0.03–1
Ni 232.0 A–Ac 0.02 0.15 0.3–10Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementWave-
length
nmFlame
Gases*Instrument
Detection
Limit
mg/LSensitivity
mg/LOptimum
Concentration
Range
mg/L
Os 290.9 N–Ac 0.08 1 —
Pb† 283.3 A–Ac 0.05 0.5 1–20
Pt 265.9 A–Ac 0.1 2 5–75
Rh 343.5 A–Ac 0.5 0.3 —
Ru 349.9 A–Ac 0.07 0.5 —
Sb 217.6 A–Ac 0.07 0.5 1–40
Si 251.6 N–Ac 0.3 2 5–150
Sn 224.6 A–Ac 0.8 4 10–200
Sr 460.7 A–Ac 0.03 0.15 0.3–5f
Ti 365.3 N–Ac 0.3 2 5–100
V 318.4 N–Ac 0.2 1.5 2–100
Zn 213.9 A–Ac 0.005 0.02 0.05–2
* A–Ac = air-acetylene; N–Ac = nitrous oxide-acetylene.
† The more sensitive 217.0 nm wavelength is recommended for instruments with background
correction capabilities.Copyright ASTM. Reprinted with permission.
TABLE  3111:II.  I NTERLABORATORY  PRECISION AND  BIAS DATA FOR  ATOMIC  ABSORPTION
METHODS —D IRECT  ASPIRATION AND  EXTRACTED  METALS
Metal Conc.* SD*Relative SD
%Relative
Error
%No. of
Participants
Direct determination:
    Aluminum1 4.50 0.19 4.2 8.4 5
    Barium2 1.00 0.089 8.9 2.7 11
    Beryllium1 0.46 0.0213 4.6 23.0 11
    Cadmium3 0.05 0.0108 21.6 8.2 26
    Cadmium1 1.60 0.11 6.9 5.1 16
    Calcium1 5.00 0.21 4.2 0.4 8
    Chromium1 3.00 0.301 10.0 3.7 9Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMetal Conc.* SD*Relative SD
%Relative
Error
%No. of
Participants
    Cobalt1 4.00 0.243 6.1 0.5 14
    Copper3 1.00 0.112 11.2 3.4 53
    Copper1 4.00 0.331 8.3 2.8 15
    Iron1 4.40 0.260 5.8 2.3 16
    Iron3 0.30 0.0495 16.5 0.6 43
    Le ad1 6.00 0.28 4.7 0.2 14
    Magnesium3 0.20 0.021 10.5 6.3 42
    Magnesium1 1.10 0.116 10.5 10.0 8
    Manganese1 4.05 0.317 7.8 1.3 16
    Manganese3 0.05 0.0068 13.5 6.0 14
    Nickel1 3.93 0.383 9.8 2.0 14
    Silver3 0.05 0.0088 17.5 10.6 7
    Silve r1 2.00 0.07 3.5 1.0 10
    Sodium1 2.70 0.122 4.5 4.1 12
    Strontium1 1.00 0.05 5.0 0.2 12
    Zinc3 0.50 0.041 8.2 0.4 48
Extracted determination:
    Aluminum2 300     32 10.7 0.7 15
    Beryllium2 5       1.7 34.0 20.0 9
    Cadmium3 50     21.9 43.8 13.3 12
    Cobalt1 300     28.5 9.5 1.0 6
    Copper1 100     71.7 71.7 12.0 8
    Iron1 250     19.0 7.6 3.6 4
    Manganese1 21.5    2.4 11.2 7.4 8
    Molybdenum1 9.5    1.1 11.6 1.3 5
    Nickel1 56.8  15.2 26.8 13.6 14
    Lead3 50     11.8 23.5 19.0 8Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMetal Conc.* SD*Relative SD
%Relative
Error
%No. of
Participants
    Silver1 5.2    1.4 26.9 3.0 7
* For direct determinations, mg/L; for extracted determinations, µg/L.
Superscripts refer to reference numbers.
Source: AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS . 1986. Annual Book of ASTM
Standards. Volume 11.01, Water and Environmental Technology. Amer ican Soc. Testing
Materials, Philadelphia, Pa. Copyright   ASTM. Reprinted with permission.
TABLE  3111:III.  S INGLE -OPERATOR  PRECISION AND  RECOMMENDED  CONTROL  RANGES FOR
ATOMIC  ABSORPTION  METHODS —D IRECT  ASPIRATIONAND  EXTRACTED  METALS
Metal Conc.* SD*Relative SD
%No. of
ParticipantsQC
Std.* Acceptable Range *
Direct determination:
Aluminum1 4.50 0.23 5.1 15 5.00 4.3–5.7
Beryllium1 0.46 0.012 2.6 10 0.50 0.46–0.54
Calcium1 5.00 0.05 1.0 8 5.00 4.8–5.2
Chromium1 7.00 0.69 9.9 9 5.00 3.3–6.7
Cobalt1 4.00 0.21 5.3 14 4.00 3.4–4.6
Copper1 4.00 0.115 2.9 15 4.00 3.7–4.3
Iron1 5.00 0.19 3.8 16 5.00 4.4–5.6
Magnesium1 1.00 0.009 0.9 8 1.00 0.97–1.03
Nickel4 5.00 0.04 0.8 — 5.00 4.9–5.1
Silver1 2.00 0.25 12.5 10 2.00 1.2–2.8
Sodium4 8.2 0.1 1.2 — 5.00 4.8–5.2
Strontium1 1.00 0.04 4.0 12 1.00 0.87–1.13
Potassium4 1.6  0.2 12.5 — 1.6 1.0–2.2
Molybdenum4 7.5 0.07 0.9 — 10.0 9.7–10.3
Tin4 20.0 0.5 2.5 — 20 .018.5–21.5
Titanium4 50.0 0.4 0.8 — 50.0 48.8–51.2
Vanadium 50.0 0.2 0.4 — 50.0 49.4–50.6Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMetal Conc.* SD*Relative SD
%No. of
ParticipantsQC
Std.* Acceptable Range *
Extracted determination:
Aluminum1 300 12 4.0 15 300 264–336
Cobalt1 300 20 6.7 6 300 220–380
Copper1 100 21 21 8 100 22–178
Iron1 250 12 4.8 4 250 180–320
Manganese1 21.5 202 10.2 8 25 17–23
Molybdenum1 9.5 1.0 10.5 5 10 5.5–14.5
Nickel1 56.8 9.2 16.2 14 50 22–78
Silver1 5.2 1.2 23.1 7 5.0 0.5–9.5
* For direct determinations, mg/L; for extracted determinations, µg/L.
Superscripts refer to reference numbers.
Source: AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS.  1986. Annual Book of ASTM
Standards. Volume 11.01, Water and Environmental Technology. Amer ican Soc. Testing
Materials, Philadelphia, Pa. Copyright ASTM. Reprinted with permission.
TABLE  3112:I.   I NTERLABORATORY  PRECISION AND  BIAS OF  COLD-VAPOR  ATOMIC
ABSORPTION  SPECTROMETRIC  METHOD FOR  MERCURY1
    Form      Conc.
µg/LSD
µg/LRelative
SD
%Relative
Error
%No. of
Participants
Inorganic   0.34 0.077 22.6 21.0 23
Inorganic 4.2  0.56  13.3 14.4 21
Organic 4.2  0.36    8.6   8.4 21
TABLE  3113:I.   P OTENTIAL  MATRIX  MODIFIERS FOR  ELECTROTHERMAL  ATOMIC
ABSORPTION  SPECTROMETRY *
Modifier Analyses for Which
Modifier
May Be UsefulStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationModifier Analyses for Which
Modifier
May Be Useful
1500 mg Pd/L + 1000 mg 
    Mg(NO3)2/L1Ag, As, Au, Bi, Cu, Ge, Mn,
Hg, 
    In, Sb, Se, Sn, Te, Tl
500–2000 mg Pd/L + reducing 
    agent2†Ag, As, Bi, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, 
    Hg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb
5000 mg  Mg(NO3)2/L1 Be, Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, V
100–500 mg Pd/L2 As, Ga, Ge, Sn
50 mg Ni/L2 As, Se, Sb
2% PO43− + 1000 mg Mg (NO3)2/L1 Cd, Pb
*Assumes 10 µL modifier/10 µL sample.†Citric acid (1–2%) pr eferred; ascorbic acid or H2 acceptable.
TABLE  3113:II.   D ETECTION  LEVELS AND  CONCENTRATION  RANGES FOR  ELECTROTHERMAL
ATOMIZATION  ATOMIC  ABSORPTION  SPECTROMETRY
ElementWavelength
nmEstimated
Detection
Limit
µg/LOptimum
Concentration
Range
µg/L
Al 309.3 3     20–200
Sb 217.6 3     20–300
As 193.7 1       5–100
Ba 553.6 2     10–200
Be 234.9 0.2    1–30   
Cd 228.8 0.1 0.5–10   
Cr 357.9 2       5–100
Co 240.7 1       5–100
Cu 324.7 1       5–100
Fe 248.3 1       5–100
  Pb* 283.3 1       5–100
Mn 279.5 0.2    1–30   
Mo 313.3 1       3–60   
Ni 232.0 1       5–100Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementWavelength
nmEstimated
Detection
Limit
µg/LOptimum
Concentration
Range
µg/L
Se 196.0 2       5–100
Ag 328.1 0.2    1–25   
Sn 224.6 5     20–300
*The more sensitive 217.0-nm wavelength is recommended for instruments with background correction capabilities.
TABLE  3113:III.   I NTERLABORATORY  SINGLE -ANALYST  PRECISION  DATA FOR
ELECTROTHERMAL  ATOMIZATION  METHODS1
Single-Analyst Precision
% RSD
ElementConcentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
    Al        28       66 108   70   — —   66
     125       27   35   24   — —   34
11 000       11   —   —   22 —   —
58 300       27   —   —   19 —   —
     460         9   —   —   — 30   —
  2 180       28   —   —   —   4   —
       10.5
    20   13   13   13 56   18
     230       10   18   13   21 94   14
    As          9.78   40   25   15   74 23   11
     227       10     6     8   11 15     6
    Ba        56.5    36   21   29   59 23   27
     418       14   12   20   24 24   18
    Be          0.45   18   27   15   30   2   11
       10.9    14     4     9     7 12   12
    Cd          0.4 3   72   49     1 121 35   27
       12       11   17   22   14 11   15
    Cr          9.87   24   33   10   23 15   10
     236       16     7   11   13 16     7Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSingle-Analyst Precision
% RSD
ElementConcentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
    Co        29.7    10   17   10   19 24   12
     420         8   11   13   14   9     5
    Cu        10.1    49   47   17   17 —   30
     234         8   15     6   21 —   11
     300         6   —   —   — 11   —
  1 670       11   —   —   —   6   —
    Fe        26.1  144   52 153   — — 124
     455       48   37   45   — —   31
  1 030       17   —   —   30 —   —
  5 590         6   —   —   32 —   —
     370       14   —   —   — 19   —
  2 610         9   —   —   — 18   —
    Pb        10.4      6   19   17   21 19   33
     243       17     7   17   18 12   16
    Mn          0.44 187 180   —   — — 275
       14.8    32   19   —   — —   18
       91.0    15   —   —   48 —   —
     484.0      4   —   —   12 —   —
     111.0    12   —   —   — 21   —
     666.0      6   —   —   — 20   —
    Ni        26.2     20   26   25   24 18     9
     461.0    15   11     9     8 11     4
    Se        10.0    12   27   16   35 41   13
     235.0      6     6   15     6 13   14
    Ag          8.48   10   —   —   15 27   16
       56.5    14   —   —     7 16   23
         0.45   27 166   48   — —   —
       13.6    15     4   10   — —   —Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  3113:IV.   I NTERLABORATORY  OVERALL  PRECISION  DATA FOR  ELECTROTHERMAL
ATOMIZATION  METHODS1
Overall Precision % RSD
Element Concentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
    Al        28       99 114 124   —   — 131
     125       45   47   49   —   —   40
11 000       19   —   —   43   —   —
58 300       31   —   —   32   —   —
     460       20   —   —   —   47   —
  2 180       30   —   —   —   15   —
       10.5    37   19   22   50 103   39
     230       26   16   16   17 180   21
    As          9.78   43   26   37   72   50   39
     227       18   12   13   20   15   14
    Ba        56.5    68   38   43 116   43   65
     418       35   35   28   38   48   16
    Be          0.45   28   31   15   67   50   35
       10.9    33   15   26   20     9   19
    Cd          0.43   73   60     5   88   43   65
       12       19   25   41   26   20   27
    Cr          9.87   30   53   24   60   41   23
     236       18   14   24   20   14   20
    Co        29.7    13   26   17   18   21   17
     420       21   21   17   18   13   13
    Cu        10.1    58   82   31   32   —   74
     234       12   33   19   21   —   26
     300       13   —   —   —   14   —
  1 670       12   —   —   —   13   —
    Fe        26.1  115   93 306   —   — 204
     455       53   46   53   —   —   44
  1 030       32   —   —   25   —   —Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationOverall Precision % RSD
Element Concentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
  5 590       10   —   —   43   —   —
     370       28   —   —   —   22   —
  2 610       13   —   —   —   22   —
    Pb        10.4    27   42   31   23   28   47
     243       18   19   17   19   19   25
    Mn          0.44 299 272   —   —   — 248
       14.8    52   41   —   —   —   29
       91.0    16   —   —   45   —   —
     484.0      5   —   —   17   —   —
     111.0    15   —   —   —   17   —
     666.0      8   —   —   —   24   —
    Ni        26.2    35   30   49   35   37   43
     461.0    23   22   15   12   21   17
    Se        10.0    17   48   32   30   44   51
     235.0    16   18   18   17   22   34
    Ag          8.48   23   —   —   16   35   34
       56.5    15   —   —   24   32   28
         0.45   57   90 368   —   —   —
       13.6    19   19   59   —   —   —
TABLE  3113:V.   I NTERLABORATORY  RELATIVE  ERROR  DATA FOR  ELECTROTHERMAL
ATOMIZATION  METHODS1
Relative Error
%
Element Concentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
Al        28.0    86 150   54   — — 126
     125.0      4   41   39   — —   30
11 000.0      2   —   —   14 —   —Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationRelative Error
%
Element Concentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
58 300.0    12   —   —     7 —   —
     460.0      2   —   —   — 11   —
  2 180.0    11   —   —   —   9   —
Sb        10.5    30   32   28   24 28   36
     230.0    35   14   19   13 73   39
As          9.78   36     1   22 106 13   16
     227.0      3     7   10   19   6   13
Ba        56.5  132   54   44 116 59   40
     418.0      4     0     0   13   6   60
Be          0.45   40   16   11   16 10   15
       10.9    13     2     9     7   8     8
Cd          0.43   58   45   37   66 16   19
       12.0      4     6     5   22 18     3
Cr          9.87   10     9     4     2   5   15
     236.0    11     0     9   13   5     8
Co        29.7      7     7     1     6   3   13
     420.0    12     8     8   11   5   18
Cu        10.1    16   48     2     5 —   15
     234.0      8     7     0     4 —   19
     300.0      4   —   —   — 21   —
  1 670.0      6   —   —   —   2   —
Fe        26.1    85   60 379   — — 158
     455.0    43   22   31   — —   18
  1 030.0      8   —   —     8 —   —
  5 590.0      2   —   —   12 —   —
     370.0      4   —   —   — 11   —
  2 610.0    35   —   —   —   2   —
Pb        10.4    16   10   17     1 34   14
     243.0      5   15     8   18 15   29
Mn          0.44 332 304   —   — — 556Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationRelative Error
%
Element Concentration
µg/LLab
Pure
WaterDrinking
WaterSurface
WaterEffluent
1Effluent
2Effluent
3
       14.8    10   1   —   — —   36
       91.0    31   —   —   10 —   —
     484.0    42   —   —     4 —   —
     111.0      1   —   —   — 29   —
     666.0      6   —   —   — 23   —
Ni        26.2      9   16   10     7 33   54
     461.0    15   19   18   31 16   18
Se        10.0    12     9     6   36 17   37
     235.0      7     7     0   13 10   17
Ag          8.48   12   —   —     1 51   20
       56.5    16   —   —     8 51   22
         0.45   34 162 534   — —   —
       13.6      3   12     5   — —   —
TABLE  3120:I.  S UGGESTED  WAVELENGTHS , ESTIMATED  DETECTION  LIMITS , ALTERNATE
WAVELENGTHS , CALIBRATION  CONCENTRATIONS , AND UPPER  LIMITS
Element Suggested
Wavelength
nmEstimated
Detection
Limit
µg/LAlternate
Wavelength*
nmCalibration
Concentration
mg/LUpper Limit
Concentration†
mg/L
Aluminum 308.22 40 237.32 10.0 100
Antimony 206.83 30 217.58 10.0 100
Arsenic 193.70 50 189.04‡ 10.0 100
Barium 455.40 2 493.41 1.0    50
Beryllium 313.04 0.3 234.86   1.0   10
Boron 249.77 5 249.68   1.0   50
Cadmium 226.50 4 214.44   2.0   50
Calcium 317.93 10 315.89 10.0 100
Chromium 267.72 7 206.15   5.0   50
Cobalt 228.62 7 230.79   2.0   50Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElement Suggested
Wavelength
nmEstimated
Detection
Limit
µg/LAlternate
Wavelength*
nmCalibration
Concentration
mg/LUpper Limit
Concentration†
mg/L
Copper 324.75 6 219.96   1.0   50
Iron 259.94 7 238.20 10.0 100
Lead 220.35 40 217.00 10.0 100
Lithium 670.78 4§ —   5.0 100
Magnesium 279.08 30 279.55 10.0 100
Manganese 257.61 2 294.92   2.0   50
Molybdenum 202.03 8 203.84 10.0 100
Nickel 231.60 15 221.65   2.0   50
Potassium 766.49 100§ 769.90 10.0 100
Selenium 196.03 75 203.99   5.0 100
Silica (SiO2)212.41 20 251.61 21.4 100
Silver 328.07 7 338.29   2.0   50
Sodium 589.00 30§ 589.59 10.0 100
Strontium 407.77 0.5 421.55   1.0   50
Thallium 190.86‡ 40 377.57 10.0 100
Vanadium 292.40 8 —   1.0   50
Zinc 213.86 2 206.20   5.0 100
* Other wavelengths may be substituted if  they provide the needed sensitivity and are corrected for spectral interference.† Def ines
the top end of the effective calibration range. Do not extr apolate to concentrations beyond highest standard.‡ Available wit h vacuum
or inert gas purged optical path.§ Sensitive to operating conditions.
TABLE  3120:II.  ICP P RECISION AND  BIAS DATA
ElementConcentration
Range
µg/LTotal Digestion*
µg/LRecoverable Digestion*
µg/L
Aluminum
69–4792 X=  0.9273 C+3.6 X=  0.9380 C  +  22.1
S=  0.0559 X+18.6 S=  0.0873 X  +  31.7
SR=  0.0507 X+3.5 SR=  0.0481 X  +  18.8
Antimony
77–1406 X=  0.7940 C−17.0 X=  0.8908 C  +  0.9Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementConcentration
Range
µg/LTotal Digestion*
µg/LRecoverable Digestion*
µg/L
S=  0.1556 X−0.6 S=  0.0982 X  +  8.3
SR=  0.1081 X+3.9 SR=  0.0682 X  +  2.5
Arsenic
69–1887 X=  1.0437 C−12.2 X=  1.0175 C  +  3.9
S=  0.1239 X+2.4 S=  0.1288 X  +  6.1
SR=  0.0874 X+6.4 SR=  0.0643 X  +  10.3
Barium
9–377 X=  0.7683 C+0.47 X=  0.8380 C  +  1.68
S=  0.1819 X+2.78 S=  0.2540 X  +  0.30
SR=  0.1285 X+2.55 SR=  0.0826 X  +  3.54
Beryllium
3–1906 X=  0.9629 C+0.05 X=  1.0177 C  −  0.55
S=  0.0136 X+0.95 S=  0.0359 X  +  0.90
SR=  0.0203 X−0.07 SR=  0.0445 X  −  0.10
Boron
19–5189 X=  0.8807 C+9.0 X=  0.9676 C  +  18.7
S=  0.1150 X+14.1 S=  0.1320 X  +  16.0
SR=  0.0742 X+23.2 SR=  0.0743 X  +  2 1.1
Cadmium
9–1943 X=  0.9874 C−0.18 X=  1.0137 C  −  0.65
S=  0.0557 X+2.02 S=  0.0585 X  +  1.15
SR=  0.0300 X+0.94 SR=  0.0332 X  +  0.90
Calcium
17–47  170 X=  0.9182 C−2.6 X=  0.9658 C  +  0.8
S=  0.1228 X+10.1 S=  0.0917 X  +  6.9
SR=  0.0189 X+3.7 SR=  0.0327 X  +  10.1
Chromium
13–1406 X=  0.9544 C+3.1 X=  1.0049 C  −  1.2
S=  0.0499 X+4.4 S=  0.0698 X  +  2.8
SR=  0.0009 X+7.9 SR=  0.0571 X  +  1.0
Cobalt
17–2340 X=  0.9209 C−4.5 X=  0.9278 C  −  1.5
S=  0.0436 X+3.8 S=  0.0498 X  +  2.6Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementConcentration
Range
µg/LTotal Digestion*
µg/LRecoverable Digestion*
µg/L
SR=  0.0428 X+0.5 SR=  0.0407 X  +  0.4
Copper
8–1887 X=  0.9297 C−0.30 X=  0.9647 C  −  3.64
S=  0.0442 X+2.85 S=  0.0497 X  +  2.28
SR=  0.0128 X+2.53 SR=  0.0406 X  +  0.96
Iron
13–9359 X=  0.8829 C+7.0 X=  0.9830 C  +  5.7
S=  0.0683 X+11.5 S=  0.1024 X  +  13.0
SR=−0.0046 X+10.0 SR=  0.0790 X  +  11.5
Lead
42–4717 X=  0.9699 C−2.2 X=  1.0056 C  +  4.1
S=  0.0558 X+7.0 S=  0.0799 X  +  4.6
SR=  0.0353 X+3.6 SR=  0.0448 X  +3.5  
Magnesium
34–13  868 X=  0.9881 C−1.1 X=  0.9879 C  +  2.2
S=  0.0607 X+11.6 S=  0.0564 X  +  13.2
SR=  0.0298 X+0.6 SR=  0.0268 X  +  8.1
Manganese
4–1887 X=  0.9417 C+0.13 X=  0.9725 C  +  0.07
S=  0.0324 X+0.88 S=  0.0557 X  +  0.76
SR=  0.0153 X+0.91 SR=  0.0400 X  +  0.82
Molybdenum
17–1830 X=  0.9682 C+0.1 X=  0.9707 C  −  2.3
S=  0.0618 X+1.6 S=  0.0811 X  +  3.8
SR=  0.037 1X+2.2 SR=  0.0529 X  +  2.1
Nickel
17–47  170 X=  0.9508 C+0.4 X=  0.9869 C  +  1.5
S=  0.0604 X+4.4 S=  0.0526 X  +  5.5
SR=  0.0425 X+3.6 SR=  0.0393 X  +  2.2
Potassium 347–14  151 X=  0.8669 C−36.4 X=  0.9355 C  −  183.1
S=  0.0934 X+77.8 S=  0.0481 X  +  177.2
SR=−0.0099 X+144.2 SR=  0.0329 X  +  60.9Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElementConcentration
Range
µg/LTotal Digestion*
µg/LRecoverable Digestion*
µg/L
Selenium 
69–1415 X=  0.9363 C−2.5 X=  0.9737 C  −  1.0
S=  0.0855 X+17.8 S=  0.1523 X  +  7.8
SR=  0.0284 X+9.3 SR=  0.0443 X  +  6.6
Silicon 189–9434 X=  0.5742 C−35.6 X=  0.9737 C  −  60.8
S=  0.4160 X+37.8 S=  0.3288 X  +  46.0
SR=  0.1987 X+8.4 SR=  0.2133 X  +  22.6
Silver
8–189 X=  0.4466 C+5.07 X=  0.3987 C  +  8.25
S=  0.5055 X−3.05 S=  0.5478 X  −  3.93
SR=  0.2086 X−1.74 SR=  0.1836 X  −  0.27
Sodium
35–47  170 X=  0.9581 C+39.6 X=  1.0526 C  +  26.7
S=  0.2097 X+33.0 S=  0.1473 X  +  27.4
SR=  0.0280 X+105.8 SR=  0.0884 X  +  50.5
Thallium
79–1434 X=  0.9020 C−7.3 X=  0.9238 C  +  5.5
S=  0.1004 X+18.3 S=  0.2156 X  +  5.7
SR=  0.0364 X+11.5 SR=−0.0106 X  +  48.0
Vanadium
13–4698 X=  0.9615 C−2.0 X=  0.9551 C  +  0.4
S=  0.0618 X+1.7 S=  0.0927 X  +  1.5
SR=  0.0220 X+0.7 SR=  0.0472 X  +  0.5
Zinc
7–7076 X=  0.9356 C−0.30 X=  0.9500 C  +  1.22
S=  0.0914 X+3.75 S=  0.0597 X  +  6.50
SR=−0.0130 X+10.07 SR=  0.0153 X  +  7.78
*X=mean recovery, µg/L,C=true value, µg/L,S=multi-laboratory standard deviation, µg/L,SR=single-an
TABLE  3125:I.   R ECOMMENDED  ANALYTE  MASSES , INSTRUMENTAL  DETECTION  LIMITS
(IDL), and I NTERNAL  STANDARDSStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTABLE  3125:I.   R ECOMMENDED  ANALYTE  MASSES , INSTRUMENTAL  DETECTION  LIMITS
(IDL), and I NTERNAL  STANDARDS
Element Analytical Mass  IDL
µg/LRecommended
Internal Standard
Be     9 0.025 Li
Al   27 0.03 Sc
V   51 0.02 Sc
Cr   52 0.04 Sc
Cr   53 0.03 Sc
Mn   55 0.002 Sc
Co   59 0.002 Sc
Ni   60 0.004 Sc
Ni   62 0.025 Sc
Cu   63 0.003 Sc
Cu   65 0.004 Sc
Zn   66 0.017 Ge
Zn   68 0.020 Ge
As   75 0.025 Ge
Se   77 0.093 Ge
Se   82 0.064 Ge
Ag 107 0.003 In
Ag 109 0.002 In
Cd 111 0.006 In
Cd 114 0.003 In
Sb 121 0.07 In
Sb 123 0.07 In
Tl 203 0.03 Th
Tl 205 0.03 Th
Pb 208 0.005 Th
U 235 0.032 Th
U 238 0.001 Th
Mo   98 0.003† In
Ba 135 0.008† In
Sr   88 0.001‡ InStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation* IDLs were determined on a Perkin Elmer Elan 6000 ICP/MS using seven replicate analys es of a 1% nitric acid solution, at
Manchester Environmental Laboratory, July 1996.† From EPA Method 200.8 for the Analysis of Drinking Waters-Application Note,
Order No.  ENVA-300A, The Perkin Elmer Corporation, 1996.‡ From Perkin Elmer Technical Summary TSMS-12.
TABLE  3125:II.   E LEMENTAL  ABUNDANCE  EQUATIONS AND  COMMON  MOLECULAR  ION
CORRECTION  EQUATIONS
Elemental and Molecular Equations*†
Li 6 = C 6
Be 9 = C 9
Al 27 = C 27
Sc 45 = C 45
V 51 = C 51 − (3.127)[( C 53) − (0.113 × C 52)]
Cr 52 = C 52
Cr 53 = C 53
Mn 55 = C 55
Co 59 = C 59
Ni 60 = C 60
Ni 62 = C 62
Cu 63 = C 63
Cu 65 = C 65
Zn 66 = C 66
Zn 68 = C 68
As 75 = C 75 − (3.127)[( C 77) − (0.815 × C 82)]
Se 77 = C 77
Se 82 = C 82 − (1.008696 × C 83)
Sr 88 = C 88
Mo 98 = C 98 − (0.110588 × C 101)
Rh 103 = C 103
Ag 107 = C 107
Ag 109 = C 109
Cd 111 = C 111 − (1.073)[( C 108) − (0.712 × C 106)]
Cd 114 = C 114 − (0.02686 × C 118)
Sb 121 = C 121
Sb 123 = C 123 − (0.127189 × C 125)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationElemental and Molecular Equations*†
Ba 135 = C 135
Ho 165 = C 165
Tl 203 = C 203
Tl 205 = C 205
Pb 208 = C 208 + (1 × C 206) + (1 × C 207)
Th 232 = C 232
U 238 = C 238
* C = calibration blank corrected counts at indicated mass.† Fr om EPA Method 200.8 for the Analysis of Drinking Waters −
Application Note, Order No. ENVA-300A, The Perkin Elmer Corporation, 1996.
TABLE  3125:III.   C OMMON  MOLECULAR  ION INTERFERENCES IN  ICP/MS1
Molecular Ion MassElement Measurement
Affected by Interference
Background molecular ions:
NH+ 15 —
OH+ 17 —
OH2+ 18 —
C2+ 24 Mg
CN+ 26 Mg
CO+ 28 Si
N2+ 28 Si
N2H+ 29 Si
NO+ 30 —
NOH+ 31 P
O2+ 32 S
O2H+ 33 —
36ArH+ 37 Cl
38ArH+ 39 K
40ArH+ 41 —
CO2+ 44 CaStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMolecular Ion MassElement Measurement
Affected by Interference
CO2+H 45 Sc
ArC+, ArO+ 52 Cr
ArN+ 54 Cr
ArNH+ 55 Mn
ArO+ 56 Fe
ArH+ 57 Fe
40Ar36Ar+ 76 Se
40Ar38Ar 78 Se
40Ar2+ 80 Se
Matrix molecular ions:
    Bromide:
81BrH+ 82 Se
79BrO+ 95 Mo
81BrO+ 97 Mo
81BrOH+ 09 Mo
Ar81Br+ 121 Sb
    Chloride:
35ClO+ 51 V
35ClOH+ 52 Cr
37ClO+ 53 Cr
37ClOH+ 54 Cr
Ar35Cl+ 75 As
Ar37Cl+ 77 Se
    Sulfate:
32SO+ 48 Ti
32SOH+ 49 —
34SO+ 50 V, Cr
34SOH+ 51 V
SO2+, S2+ 64 ZnStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMolecular Ion MassElement Measurement
Affected by Interference
Ar32S+ 72 Ge
Ar34S+ 74 Ge
    Phosphate:
PO+ 47 Ti
POH+ 48 Ti
PO2+ 63 Cu
ArP+ 71 Ga
    Group I  II metals:
pArNa+ 63 Cu
ArK+ 79 Br
ArCa+ 80 Se
    Matrix oxides*
TiO 62–66 Ni, Cu, Zn
ZrO 106–112 Ag, Cd
MoO 108–116 Cd
NbO 109 Ag
* Oxide interferences normally will be very small and will affe ct the method elements only when oxide-producing elements are
present at relatively high concentrations, or when the instrum ent is improperly tuned or maintained. Preferably monitor Ti and Zr
isotopes for soil, sediment, or solid waste samples, because thes e samples potentially contain high levels of these interfering
elements.
TABLE  3125:IV.   S UGGESTED  ANALYTICAL  RUN SEQUENCE
Sample Type Comments
Tuning/optimization standard Check mass calibration and 
    resolution
Tuning/optimization standard Optimize instrument for maximum 
    rhodium counts while keeping
oxides, 
    double charged ions, and
background 
    within instrum ent specifications
Rinse —
Reagent blank Check for contaminationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSample Type Comments
Reagent blank Calibration standard blank
5-µg/L standard —
10-µg/L standard —
20-µg/L standard —
50-µg/L standard —
100-µg/L standard —
Rinse —
Initial calibration verification, 50 µg/L —
Initial calibration blank —
0.30-µg/L standard Low-level calibration verification
1.0-µg/L standard Low-level calibration verification
External reference material NIST 1643c or equivalent
Continuing calibration verification —
Continuing blank calibration —
Project sample method blank —
Project sample laboratory-fortified blank —
Project sample 1–4 —
Project sample 5 —
Project sample 5 with known addition —
Project sample 5 duplicate with known 
    addition—
Continuing calibration verification —
Continuing ca libration blank —
TABLE  3125:V.   S UMMARY OF  PERFORMANCE  CRITERIA
Performance Characteristic Criteria
Mass resolution Manufacturer’s specification
Mass calibration Manufacturer’s specification
Ba2+/Ba+ Manufacturer’s specification
CeO/Ce Manufacturer’s specification
Background counts at mass 220 Manufacturer’s specificat ion
Correlation coefficient ≥0.995Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationPerformance Characteristic Criteria
Calibration blanks < Reporting limit
Calibration verification standards ±10% of true value
Laboratory fortified blank (control
sample)±30% of true value
Precision ±20% relative percent difference for 
    lab duplicates
Known-addition recovery 75–125%
0.3 and 1.0 µg/L standards Dependent on data quality objectives
Reference materials Dependent on data quality objectives
Internal standard response 70–125% of response in calibration 
    blank with known addition
TABLE  3125:VI.   Q UALITY  CONTROL  ANALYSES FOR  ICP/MS M ETHOD
Analysis Frequency Acceptance Criteria
Reference material 
    [¶3 c9)]Greater of: once per 
    sample batch, 
    or 5%Dependent on data 
    quality objectives
Preparatory/method 
    blank [¶ 3 c4)]Greater of: once per 
    sample batch, 
    or 5%± Absolute value of 
    instrument 
    detection limit; 
    ± absolute value 
    of laboratory 
    reporting limit or 
    MDL is acceptable
Laboratory fortified 
    blank [¶ 3 c7)]Greater of: once per 
    sample batch, 
    or 5%± 30% of true value
Duplicate known-
    addition samplesGreater of: once per 
    sample batch, 
    or 5%± 20% relative 
    percent difference
Continuing 
    calibration 
    verification 
    standards [¶ 3 c5)]10% ± 10% of known 
    concentrationStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationAnalysis Frequency Acceptance Criteria
Continuing 
    cali bration 
    verification blank 
    [¶ 3 c6)]10% ± Absolute value of 
    instrument 
    detection limit; 
    ± absolute value 
    of laboratory 
    reporting limit or 
    MDL is acceptable
TABLE  3125:VII.   M ETHOD  PERFORMANCE WITH  CALIBRATION  VERIFICATION  STANDARDS *
Continuing Calibration Verification Standard
(N = 44)Initial Calibration Verifi
(N= 12)
Element MassMean
Recovery
% MeanStandard
DeviationRelative
Standard
Deviation %Mean
Recovery
% MeanStan
Devi
Be     9   98.71 49.35 3.43 6.94 100.06 50.03 1.
Al   27   99.62 49.81 2.99 6.01   98.42 49.21 1.
V   51 100.97 50.48 1.36 2.68   99.91 49.96 1.
Cr   52 101.39 50.70 1.86 3.66   99.94 49.97 1.
Cr   53 100.68 50.34 1.91 3.79   99.13 49.56 1.
Mn   55 101.20 50.60 1.98 3.91   99.48 49.74 1.
Co   59 101.67 50.83 2.44 4.79   99.44 49.72 1.
Ni   60   99.97 49.99 2.14 4.28   97.98 48.99 1.
Ni   62   99.79 49.89 2.09 4.18   97.57 48.79 1.
Cu   63 100.51 50.25 2.19 4.36   97.87 48.93 1.
Cu   65 100.39 50.19 2.26 4.51   98.34 49.17 1.
Zn   66 101.07 50.53 1.93 3.82   98.75 49.38 0.
Zn   68 100.42 50.21 1.89 3.77   97.75 48.87 0.
As   75 100.76 50.38 1.15 2.28   98.83 49.41 0.
Se   77 101.71 50.85 1.43 2.81   99.54 49.77 1.
Se   82 101.97 50.98 1.50 2.95   99.76 49.88 0.
Ag 107 101.50 50.75 1.68 3.30   99.27 49.63 1.
Ag 109 101.65 50.83 1.68 3.31   99.66 49.83 1.
Cd 111 100.92 50.46 1.94 3.84   98.61 49.30 1.
Cd 114 100.90 50.45 2.07 4.10   99.20 49.60 1.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationContinuing Calibration Verification Standard
(N = 44)Initial Calibration Verifi
(N= 12)
Element MassMean
Recovery
% MeanStandard
DeviationRelative
Standard
Deviation %Mean
Recovery
% MeanStan
Devi
Sb 121 100.14 50.07 2.39 4.77   99.38 49.69 1.
Sb 123   99.98 49.99 2.48 4.97   99.09 49.54 1.
Tl 203 101.36 50.68 1.64 3.23 100.05 50.02 1.
Tl 205 102.40 51.20 1.93 3.78 101.23 50.62 1.
Pb 208 101.21 50.61 1.65 3.25   99.33 49.67 0.
U 238 101.54 50.77 1.93 3.80   99.80 49.90 1.
* Single-laboratory, single-operator, singl e-instrument data, determined using a 50- µg/L standard prepared from sources
independent of calibration standard source. Data acquired Januar y-November 1996 during actual sample determinations.
Performance of cont inuing calibration verification standards at different le vels may vary. Perkin-Elmer Elan 6000 ICP/MS used for
determination.
TABLE  3125:VIII.   M ETHOD  PERFORMANCE FOR  RECOVERY OF  KNOWN  ADDITION IN
NATURAL  WATERS *
Total Recoverable Metals† Dissolved Metals‡
Element MassMean
Recovery
%Relative
Standard
Deviation
%Mean
Recovery
%Relative
Standard
Deviation
%
Be     9 89.09   5.77 — —
V   51 87.00   8.82 — —
Cr   52 87.33   8.42   88.38   6.43
Cr   53 86.93   7.90   88.52   5.95
Mn   55 91.81 10.12 — —
Co   59 87.67   8.92 — —
Ni   60 85.07   8.42   89.31   5.70
Ni   62 84.67   8.21   89.00   5.82
Cu   63 84.13   8.46   88.55   8.33
Cu   65 84.37   8.05   88.26   7.80
Zn   66 86.14 23.01   95.59 13.81
Zn   68 81.95 20.31   91.94 13.27
As   75 90.43   4.46   97.30   8.84Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationTotal Recoverable Metals† Dissolved Metals‡
Element MassMean
Recovery
%Relative
Standard
Deviation
%Mean
Recovery
%Relative
Standard
Deviation
%
Se   77 83.09   4.76 105.36 10.80
Se   82 83.42   4.73 105.36 10.75
Ag 107 — —   91.98   5.06
Ag 109 — —   92.25   4.96
Cd 111 91.37   5.47   96.91   6.03
Cd 114 91.47   6.04   97.03   5.42
Sb 121 94.40   5.24 — —
Sb 123 94.56   5.36 — —
Tl 203 97.24   5.42 — —
Tl 205 98.14   6.21 — —
Pb 208 96.09   7.08 100.69   7.28
* Single-laboratory, single-operator , single-instrument data. Samples were Washingt on State surface waters from various locatio ns.
Data acquired January-November 1996 during actual sample determi nations. Performance of known additions at different levels
may vary. Perkin-Elmer Elan 6000 ICP/MS used for determination.
† Known-addition level 20 µg/L. Additions made before preparation according to Section 3030E  (modified by cleanhood digestion in
TFE beakers). N = 20.
‡ Known-addition level for Cd and Pb 1 µg/L; for other analytes 10 µg/L. Additions made after filtration through 1;NO1 HNO3
precleaned 0.45- µm filters. N = 28.
TABLE  3125:IX.   M ETHOD  PERFORMANCE WITH  LOW-LEVEL  CHECK  STANDARDS *
1.0-µg/L Standard 0.3-µg/L Sta n
Element MassMean
Recovery
% MeanStandard
DeviationRelative
Standard
Deviation
%Mean
Recovery
% MeanStan
Devi
Be 9   97 0.97 0.06 6.24   95 0.284 0.
Al 27 121 1.21 0.32 26.49 196 0.588 0.
V 51 104 1.04 0.06 5.83 111 0.332 0.
Cr 52 119 1.19 0.34 28.62 163 0.490 0.
Cr 53 102 1.02 0.36 35.54 113 0.338 0.
Mn 55 103 1.03 0.07 6.55 110 0.329 0.
Co 59 103 1.03 0.07 6.42 102 0.307 0.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation1.0-µg/L Standard 0.3-µg/L Sta n
Element MassMean
Recovery
% MeanStandard
DeviationRelative
Standard
Deviation
%Mean
Recovery
% MeanStan
Devi
Ni 60 101 1.01 0.05 5.24 107 0.321 0.
Ni 62 102 1.02 0.06 5.42 109 0.326 0.
Cu 63 107 1.07 0.09 8.78 118 0.355 0.
Cu 65 107 1.07 0.10 9.05 117 0.352 0.
Zn 66 117 1.17 0.51 43.52 182 0.547 0.
Zn 68 116 1.16 0.50 42.90 179 0.537 0.
As 75   97 0.97 0.05 5.23 101 0.302 0.
Se 77   89 0.89 0.08 8.72   88 0.265 0.
Se 82   92 0.92 0.14 15.50 106 0.317 0.
Ag 107 101 1.01 0.05 4.53   94 0.282 0.
Ag 109 103 1.03 0.07 6.57   92 0.277 0.
Cd 111   98 0.98 0.04 3.80   96 0.288 0.
Cd 114 100 1.00 0.03 3.39   98 0.293 0.
Sb 121   94 0.94 0.05 5.28   93 0.280 0.
Sb 123   94 0.94 0.05 5.36   93 0.278 0.
T1 203 101 1.01 0.04 3.57   98 0.294 0.
Tl 205 104 1.04 0.05 5.15 100 0.300 0.
Pb 208 104 1.04 0.04 3.65 104 0.312 0.
U 238 106 1.06 0.05 4.64 102 0.307 0.
* Single-laboratory, single-operat or, single-instrument data. N = 24 for both standards.
TABLE  3130:I.   P RECISION OF  Cd, Pb, AND Zn A NALYSIS BY  ASV
Metal Concentration
µg/LRSD
%
Sample ElectrodeASV
Mode Cd Pb Zn Cd Pb Zn
Tap water #14 HMDE SW 0.068 0.57 — 4.2 4.8 —
Tap water #24 HMDE SW — 2.50 — — 5.1 —
Seawater #15 TFME DP 0.0121 0.0086 — 10.7 8.1 —Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationMetal Concentration
µg/LRSD
%
Sample ElectrodeASV
Mode Cd Pb Zn Cd Pb Zn
Seawater #25 TFME DP 0.032 0.032 — 6.3 6.3—
Soil extract #16 HMDE SW 189 11.8 — 2.5 5.6 —
Soil extract #16 HMDE DP 186 11.9 — 2.5 4.0 —
Deionized water4HMDE SW 0.13 0.79 — 5.5 2.2 —
Wastewater #17 HMDE DP — 74 26 — 4.3 4.5
Wastewater #27 HMDE DP — 47 86 — 5.2 6.3
Wastewater #37 HMDE DP — 46 65 — 4.6 6.2
Wastewater #48 TFME SW 5.2 60 12 5.2 6.1 7.4
TABLE  3500-Cr:I.   I ON CHROMATOGRAPHIC  CONDITIONS
Variable Value
Guard column Dionex IonPac NG1
Separator column Dionex IonPac AS7
Eluent 250 m M (NH4)2SO4
100 m M NH4OH
Eluent flow rate 1.5 mL/min
Post-column reagent 2 mM diphenylcarbohydrazide
10% v/v CH3OH
1N H2SO4
Post-column reagent flow rate 0.5 mL/m in
Detector Visible  530 nm
Retention time 3.8 min
TABLE  3500-Cr:II.   S INGLE -LABORATORY  PRECISION AND  BIAS
Simple Type Conc.*
µg/LMean
Recovery
% RPD†Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationSimple Type Conc.*
µg/LMean
Recovery
% RPD†
Reagent water   100
1000100
1000.8
0.0
Drinking water   100
1000105
  986.7
1.5
Groundwater   100
1000  98
  960.0
0.8
Primary wastewater
    effluent  100
1000100
1040.7
2.7
Electroplating
    effluen t  100
1000  99
1010.4
0.4
*Sample fortified at this concentration level.
†RPD - relative percent differ ence between fortified duplicates.
TABLE  3500-Cr:III.   M ULTILABORATORY  DETERMINATION OF  BIAS FOR  HEXAVALENT
CHROMIUM *
Water Amount
Added
µg/LAmount
Found
µg/LStSoBias
%
Reagent     6.00     6.68   1.03   0.53 +11.3
    8.00     8.64   1.10   +8.0
  16.0     17.4     2.25   0.77   +8.8
  20.0     21.4     2.31   +7.0
100      101        1.91   3.76   +1.0
140      143        5.52   +2.1
800      819      24.3   12.7     +2.4
960      966      18.5     +7.3
Waste     6.0       5.63   1.17   0.55   −6.2
    8.0       7.31   1.91   −8.6
  16.0     15.1     2.70   1.85   −5.6
  20.0     19.8     1.01   −1.0
100        98.9     4.36   3.31   −1.1
140      138        8.39   −1.4Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationWater Amount
Added
µg/LAmount
Found
µg/LStSoBias
%
800      796      60.6   27.1     −0.5
960      944      72.1     −1.7
*Each Youden pair was used to calc ulate one laboratory data point ( So).
TABLE  3500-F E:I.   S ELECTION  OF LIGHT  PATH LENGTH  FOR VARIOUS  IRON
CONCENTRATIONS
Fe
µg
50-mL
Final
Volume100-mL
Final
VolumeLight
Path
cm
50–200 100–400   1
25–100   50–200   2
10–40     20–80     5
  5–20      10–40   10
TABLE  3500-K:I.   C ONCENTRATION OF  CATIONS  INTERFERING AT  VARIOUS
CONCENTRATIONS OF  POTASSIUM
Concentration Causing 10% Error
mg/L
Cation K conc = 1 mg/L K conc = 10 mg/LK conc = 100
mg/L
Cs+ 1.0 10 100
NH4+ 2.7 27 270
Tl+ 31.4 314 3 140
Ag+ 2 765 27 650 276 500
Tris+ 3 105 31 050 310 500
Li+ 356 3 560 35 600
Na+ 1 179 11 790 117 900Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationConcentration Causing 10% Error
mg/L
Cation K conc = 1 mg/L K conc = 10 mg/LK conc = 100
mg/L
H+ 3.6* 2.6* 1.6*
* pH.
TABLE  3500-V:I.   C ONCENTRATION AT  WHICH  VARIOUS  IONS INTERFERE IN THE
DETERMINATION OF  VANADIUM
IonConcentration
mg/L
Cr6+     1.0
Co2+     1.0
Cu2+     0.05
Fe2+     0.3
Fe3+     0.5
Mo6+     0.1
Ni2+     3.0
Ag+     2.0
U6+     3.0
Br–     0.1
Cl– 100.0
I–     0.001Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationEndnotes
1 (Popup - Footnote)
* Note that these definitions are not the same as false-positive or false-negative instrument
readings, where similar terms commonly are used by laboratory or field personnel to describe a
fault in a single result; false-posit ive and false-negative decision errors are defined in the context
of hypothesis testing, where the terms are defined with respec t to the null hypothesis.
2 (Popup - Footnote)
* As CaCO3.
3 (Popup - Footnote)
* Pyrex or equivalent.
4 (Popup - Footnote)
† DQ O-PRO, available (free) by downloading from  American Chemical Society Division of
Environmental Chemistry home page at http:// a cs.environmental.duq.edu/acsenv/envchem.htm,
and also as part of the tutorial, Reliable Environmental Sampling and Analysis, Ins tant
Reference Sources, Inc., http://instantref.com/inst.ref.htm.
5 (Popup - Footnote)
* Ascarite II, Fisher Scientific Co., or equivalent.
6 (Popup - Footnote)
*APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
7 (Popup - Footnote)
*APPROVED BY STANDARD METHO DS COMMITTEE, 1993.
8 (Popup - Footnote)
* Celite No. 505, Manville Corp., or equivalent.
9 (Popup - Footnote)
* Fisher Electrop hotometer or equivalent.
10 (Popup - Footnote)
† General Electric lamp No. 1719 (at 6 V) or equivalent.
11 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ General Electric photovoltaic cell, Type PV-1, or equivalent.
12 (Popup - Footnote)
§ Corning CS-3-107 (No. 1), CS-4-98 (No. 2),  and CS-5-70 (No. 3), or equivalent.
13 (Popup - Footnote)
* Fisher Electrocolorimeter, Model 181, or equivalent.
14 (Popup - Fo otnote)
† Instrumental Colour Systems, Ltd., 7 Buck lebury Place, Upper Woolhampton, Berkshire RG7
5UD, England.
15 (Popup - Foot note)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1994.
16 (Popup - Footnote)
† Nephelometers that instrument manufacturers claim meet the design specifications of this
method may not give the same reading for a given suspension, even when each instrument ha sStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federationbeen calibrated using the manufacturer’s manual. This differential performance is especially
important when measurements are m ade for regulatory purposes. Consult regulatory authorities
when selecting a nephelometer to be used for making measurements tha t will be reported for
regulatory purposes.
17 (Popup - Footnote)
* Nuclepore Corp., 7035 Commerce Circle, Pleasanton, CA, or eq uivalent.
18 (Popup - Footnote)
† AMCO-AEPA-1 Standard, Advanced Polymer Systems, 3696 Haven Ave., Redwood City,
CA, or equivale nt.
19 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
20 (Popup - Footnote)
* For approximate metric dimensi ons in centimeters multiply dimensions in inches by 2.54.
21 (Popup - Footnote)
† Nuchar WV-G, Westvaco, Covington, VA; Filtraso rb 200, Calgon Carbon Corporation,
Pittsburgh, PA; or equivalent.
22 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ There are numerous methods of arrangin g and presenting samples for odor determinations. The
methods offered here are practical and economical of time and personnel. I f extensive tests are
planned and statistical analysis of data is required, become familiar with the more accurate
methods that have been used extensively by flavor and allied industries.5
23 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 199 3.
24 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
25 (Popup - Footnote)
* Nochromix, Godax Laboratories, Inc., New York, NY, or equivalent.
26 (Popup - Footnote)
† Plastic cup, 7- or 8-ounce, Solo or equivalent, any color except clea r.
27 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ Keebler Sea Toast or equivalent.
28 (Popup - Footnote)
*APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
29 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
30 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMM ITTEE, 1993.
31 (Popup - Footnote)
*APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
32 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD M ETHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation33 (Popup - Footnote)
* The number of sample portions can be increased when working with samples of unkn own
demand and may be decreased when working with samples of familiar origin.
34 (Popup - Footnote)
† Size of sample portions is  not critical, but must be large enough to ensure reproducible results
as well as provide volume sufficient to measure chlorine residual, pH, and temperature.
35 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
36 (Popup - Footnote)
* APP ROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
37 (Popup - Footnote)
* Available from Standard Seawater Services, Institute of Ocean ographic Services,  Warmley,
Godalming, Surrey, England.
38 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
39 (Popup - Footnote)
* Teflon or equivalent.
40 (Popup - Footnote)
† Whatman GF/C or equivalent.
41 (Popup - Footnote)
* Freon o r equivalent.
42 (Popup - Footnote)
† Whatman No. 40 or equivalent.
43 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITT EE, 1997.
44 (Popup - Footnote)
* Vycor, product of Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y., or equivalent.
45 (Popup - Footnote)
† Kimble Nos. 37005 or 37034B, or equivalent.
46 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ Class B or better.
47 (Popup - Footnote)
* Whatman grade 934A H; Gelman type A/E; Millipore type AP40; E-D Scientific Specialties
grade 161; Environmental Express Pro Weigh; or other product s that give demonstrably
equivalent results. Practical filter diameters are 2.2 to 12.5 cm.
48 (Popup - Footnote)
† Gelman No. 4 201 or equivalent.
49 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
50 (Popup - Footnote)
* Some commercial  thermometers may be as much as 3°C in error.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation51 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
52 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
53 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
54 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
55 (Popup - Footnote)
* Venture Innovations, P.O. Box 5363 1, Lafayette, LA 70505; or Tr iton Electronics Ltd., Bigods
Hall, Dunmow, Essex, England, CM63BE; or equivalent.
56 (Popup - Foot note)
† Available from CST apparatus supplier or use Whatman No. 17 chromatography grade paper
cut into 7- × 9-cm sections with grain parallel to long side.
57 (Popup - Footnote)
* Whatman No. 1 or 2 or equivalent.
58 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STAND ARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
59 (Popup - Footnote)
* Gas chromatographic methods are extremely sensitive to the materials used. Use of trade
names in Standard Methods  does not preclude the use of other existing or as-yet-undeveloped
products that give demo nstrably  equivalent results.
60 (Popup - Footnote)
† Commercially available columns and gases they will separate include: Silica  gel and
activated alumina: Silica gel: H2, air (O2 + N2), CO, CH4, C2H6. 
Activated alumina: air (O2 + N2), CH4, C2H6, C3H8. Mo lecular sieves (zeolites): 
Molecular sieve 5A: H2, O2 − Ar, N2, CH4, CO. 
Molecular sieve 13X: O2, N2, CH4, CO. Porous polymers : 
Chromosorb 102: air (H2, O2, N2, CO), CH4, CO2. Porapak Q: air - CO, CO2. 
HayeSep Q: H2, air (O2 + N2), CH4, CO2, C2H6, H2S. Carbon molecular sieves: 
Carbosphere: O2, N2, CO, CH4, CO2, C2H6 (these gases can be eluted isothermally at
various temperatur es or by temperature programming). 
Carbosieve S-II: H2, air (O2 + N2), CO, CH4, CO2, C2H6 (temperature programming
required). 
61 (Popup - Footnote)
† Commercially available columns and gases they will separate include: Silica gel and
activated alumina: Silica gel: H2, air (O2 + N2), CO, CH4, C2H6. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment FederationActivated alumina: air (O2 + N2), CH4, C2H6, C3H8. Molecular sieves (zeolites): 
Molecular sieve 5A: H2, O2 − Ar, N2, CH4, CO. 
Molecular sieve 13X: O2, N2, CH4, CO. Porous polymers: 
Chromosorb 102: air (H2, O2, N2, CO), CH4, CO2. Porapak Q: air - CO, CO2. 
HayeSep Q: H2, air (O2 + N2), CH4, CO2, C2H6, H2S. Carbon molecular sieves: 
Carbosphere: O2, N2, CO, CH4, CO2, C2H6 (these gases can be eluted isothermally at
various temperatures or by temperature program ming). 
Carbosieve S-II: H2, air (O2 + N2), CO, CH4, CO2, C2H6 (temperature programming
required). 
62 (Popup - Footnote)
* APP ROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1996.
63 (Popup - Footnote)
* Common Sensing, Clark Fork, ID; Eco Enterprises, Seattle, WA;  Novatech, Vancouver, B.C.,
Canada; and Sweeney Aquametrics, Stony Creek, CT
64 (Popup - Footnote)
† Methods for these variables  may be found in Section 4500-O , 2550, and Section 2520 ,
respectively.
65 (Popup - Footnote)
* Ultrex, J.T. Baker, or equivalent .
66 (Popup - Footnote)
* Nochromix, Godax Laboratories, or equivalent.
67 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COM MITTEE, 1997.
68 (Popup - Footnote)
* Falcon tubes or equivalent.
69 (Popup - Footnote)
† Ultrex, Optima grade or equivalent.
70 (Popup - Footnote)
* Or equivalent.
71 (Popup - Footnote)
† Such as TFMTM or equivalent.
72 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ At temperature s greater than 80°C, but not boiling.
73 (Popup - Footnote)
§ Or equivalent.
74 (Popup - Footnote)
i Or equivalent.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation75 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993
76 (Popup - Footnote)
* GFS Chemicals, Inc., Columbus, OH, Cat. No. 64,  or equivalent.
77 (Popup - Footnote)
† Alpha Ventron, P.O. Box 299, 152 Andover St., Danvers, MA 01923, or equivalent.
78 (Popu p - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITEE, 1993.
79 (Popup - Footnote)
* Tygon or equivalent.
80 (Popup - Footnote)
† Use specially prepared reagents low in mercury.
81 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
82 (Popu p - Footnote)
* Chelex 100, or equivalent, available fr om Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA.
83 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED B Y STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
84 (Popup - Footnote)
* Dow Corning or equivalent.
85 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STAND ARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
86 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
87 (Popup - Footnote)
* Or eq uivalent.
88 (Popup - Footnote)
† Cambridge Isotope Laboratories or equivalent.
89 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ Performance data for the  method were obtained with these concentrations.
90 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
91 (Popup  - Footnote)
* Ultrex, Suprapur, Aristar, or equivalent.
92 (Popup - Footnote)
* Ultrex, Suprapur, Aristar, or equivalent.
93 (P opup - Footnote)
* Ultrex, Suprapur, Aristar, or equivalent.
94 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 199 3.
95 (Popup - Footnote)Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation* Arnold Hoffman & Co., Providence, RI.
96 (Popup - Footnote)
† K & K Laboratories, K & K Lab. Div., Li fe Sciences Group, Plainview, NY.
97 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ Pfaltz & Bauer, Inc., Stamford, CT.
98 (Popup - Footnote)
§ EM Science , Gibbstown, NJ.
99 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
100 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STAN DARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
101 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
102 (Popup - Footnote)
* IonPac NGl, Dionex, 4700 Lakeside Drive,  Sunnyvale, CA 94086, or equivalent.
103 (Popup - Footnote)
† IonPac AS7, Dionex, or equiv alent.
104 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ The multilaboratory precision and bias data cited in this method were the result  of a
collabora tive study carried out jointly between U.S. EPA Environmental Monitoring Systems
Laboratory (Cincinnati) and Committee D-19 of A STM.
105 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
106 (Popup - Footnote)
* GFS Chemicals, Inc., Columb us, OH, or equivalent.
107 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
108 (Popup - Footnote)
*APPROVED B Y STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
109 (Popup - Footnote)
* Whatman No. 42 or equivalent.
110 (Popup - Footnote)
† Whatman No. 541 or equivalent.
111 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
112 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY S TANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
113 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
114 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
© Copyright 1999 by American Public Health  Association, American Water Works A ssociation, Water Environment Federation115 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1993.
116 (Popup  - Footnote)
* Bio-Rad AG1-X8 or equivalent.
117 (Popup - Footnote)
† Bio-Rad Econo-Columns or equivalent.
118 (Popup - Footnote )
‡ Amberlite XAD-8, Supelco, or equivalent.
119 (Popup - Footnote)
* Bio-Rad AG1-X8 or equivalent.
120 (Popup - Footnote)
* Use  Whatman No. 42 filter paper, or equivalent.
121 (Popup - Footnote)
* Bio-Rad glass Econo-Columns or equivalent.
122 (Popup - Fo otnote)
† Sep-Pak, Waters Associates, or equivalent.
123 (Popup - Footnote)
‡ Chelex 100 (ammonium form) Bio Rad, or equivalent.
124 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
125 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS CO MMITTEE, 1997.
126 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.
127 (Popup - Footnote)
* Whatman No. 42 or equivalent.
128 (Popup - Footnote)
* APPROVED BY STANDARD METHODS COMMITTEE, 1997.