 
Page | 106  
 
University of Florida  
An Integrated Sustainable Transportation System  
 
PIs: David Norton , Keith Duncan    Co-PI: Shirley Meng  
 
 
Description:   The proposed vehicle, operating on biofuel while in transit and charged by the sun while 
parked, is the ultimate sustainable transportation system operating completely on renewable American 
energy resources.  Moreover, the use of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) rather than an IC engine in this 
hybrid vehicle results in a dramatic improvement in  efficiency and reduction in emissions. SOFCs are the 
most efficient technology for converting energy from hydrocarbon fuels to electricity on a “well to 
wheels” basis.  In contrast, the more conventional fuel cells require hydrocarbon fuels to first be 
converted to H 2, with resultant efficiency losses, followed by losses due to H 2 transport and storage.  
Therefore, on a system -basis SOFCs hold the potential for producing the least CO 2/kWh from 
conventional fuels, and if designed to operate on biofuel would  in effect be carbon neutral and operating 
on a renewable resource. If developed this vehicle would be a transformational change in transportation 
technology.  
 
Budget:  $594,000  
Universities : UF 
External Collaborators: Solid -State Energy Technology, Inc., L ynntech, Inc., Planar Energy Devices, 
Inc., CFX Battery, Inc.  
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
The proposed vehicle, operating on biofuel while in transit and charged by the sun while parked, is the 
ultimate sustainable transportation system operating completely on renewable American energy 
resources.  Moreover, the use of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) rather than an IC engine in this hybrid 
vehicle results in a dramatic improvement in efficiency and reduction in emissions. SOFCs are the most 
efficient technology fo r converting energy from hydrocarbon fuels to electricity on a “well to wheels” 
basis.  In contrast, the more conventional fuel cells require hydrocarbon fuels to first be converted to H 2, 
with resultant efficiency losses, followed by losses due to H 2 transport and storage.  Therefore, on a 
system -basis SOFCs hold the potential for producing the least CO 2/kWh from conventional fuels, and if 
designed to operate on biofuel would in effect be carbon neutral and operating on a renewable resource. If 
developed t his vehicle would be a transformational change in transportation technology.  
 
In this project, we made significant gains in the science of energy conversion, from fundamental studies 
of the atomistic underpinning for materials properties to the engineering  of the highest performance solid 
oxide fuel cells in the literature.  Fundamental studies of the two most promising materials for solid 
electrolytes, using computational modeling, enabled us to determine the optimal potentials to use (the 
Gotte potential)  in predicting materials properties for oxides of interest in this field.  Moreover, from a 
molecular dynamics study of bismuth oxide we were able to confirm that dopant polarizability was the 
key feature in determining oxygen vacancy mobility in the fluor ite system.  Undergirded by these results 
we are now positioned to use our computational tools to further optimize the material properties of known 
oxygen ion conductors as well as develop new ones with superior performance.  
 
We have also expanded the appl ication of our previously developed continuum -level electrochemical 
model to describe and predict the performance of SOFCs as a function of electrolyte thickness.  We were   
Page | 107  
 
 
able to show that, for maximum power density, mixed conducting electrolytes had an  optimal thickness 
below which they were rapidly overwhelmed by electronic conduction and above which their ohmic 
losses grew.  We also are the first ones to predict the drop in open circuit potential with decreasing 
thickness for these materials.  
 
Our dev elopment of record conductivity materials also continued with the highest conductivity ceria 
based and bismuth oxide based materials reported.  We further studied their stability and optimal 
temperature window for operation.  In so doing we have establishe d our institution as the clear leaders in 
this area.  
 
We are also leading in the area of anode development as the first to develop SOFCs with anode functional 
layers, which enabled a quantum step in SOFC performance.  By comparison, our work on cathode 
performance is set to take off.  We have already developed one of the highest conductivity cathodes (a 
bismuth ruthenate -bismuth oxide composite) in the literature.  However, our fundamental studies on the 
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) have positioned us to  break further ground towards making a significant 
performance jump using conventional cathode materials.  We have used multiple techniques to investigate 
the factors governing the ORR and the results of those studies point to new electrode architectures t hat 
should both improve performance and increase stability (especially, with respect to chrome poisoning and 
secondary phase formation).  
 
Finally, we have also found time to complete our research efforts in hydrogen production, which is 
critical for the re alization of a future hydrogen economy.  In addition, we moved forward with our work 
on sensors, by indentifying the factors affecting the sensing process and developing high selectivity 
sensors with high signal -to-noise ratios. This has garnered interest from industry, leading to 
collaborations with General Electric (GE) and Energy Management Solutions (aka EPS) and RedOx Fuel 
Cells.  
 
 
This project has been completed .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Page | 108  
 
University of Florida  
Biocatalytic Lignin Modification for Carbon Sequestration  
 
PI: Jon Stewart  
Students:   Bradford Sullivan (postdoctoral fellow), Filip Boratynski (postdoctoral fellow)  
 
 
Description:  After cellulose, lignin is the second most abundant forma of carbon in plants. Lignin’s 
complex structure makes it difficult to use this material in value -added products, and ahte vast majority of 
lignin is currently burned to provide energy for factory o perations. While burning plant derived lignin 
does not add to global greenhouse gas levels, having options to remove lignin from the global carbon 
cycle would lead to diminished atmospheric CO2 levels. This could be accomplished by chemically 
altering lign in’s structure to facilitate long -term terrestrial sequestration or using it in value -added 
products that would not be discarded immediately. We will use Nature’s catalysts (enzymes) to tailor the 
chemical structure of lignin for both deep -well injection ( by using lignin derivatives as drilling “muds”) 
and for materials that can be used in building, packaging, and other manufactured products.)  
 
Budget:  $200,000  
Universities:  UF 
 
Progress Summary  
 
Bradford Sullivan joined this project as a postdoctoral fell ow in February 2010 with extensive experience 
in both organic synthesis and in dioxygenase enzymes.  To the best of our knowledge, no one has applied 
dioxygenases to lignin and/or lignin model compounds.  Enzymes such as toluene dioxygenase offer the 
possi bility of converting this renewable feedstock into valuable building blocks.  In preliminary studies, 
Brad has applied toluene dioxygenase to model compounds derivable from lignin to create small molecule 
mediators required by laccases for lignin breakdown .  Some reaction was obse rved.  We are also setting 
up a collaboration  between our lab and those of Steven Sherman and Charles Turick (Savannah River 
National Laboratory), who have developed a simple method for lignin extraction from a variety of soft 
mate rials such as switchgrass as well as woody tissues.  This will provide us with the material for 
exploring ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents for laccase -catalyzed lignin conversions.  Filip 
Boratynski joined the project in September 2011 with a backg round in biocatalysis.  He will be focusing 
on experiments using the lignin samples provided by our collaborators at Savannah River.  
 
Funds leveraged/new partnerships created : 
 
 
New collaborations  
Steven 
Sherman, 
Charles Turick 
(Savannah 
River National 
Laboratory)  Steve and Chuck have agreed to supply us with lignin 
samples prepared in their lab using a newly -
developed extraction method.  This product stream 
will be employed for enzyme -catalyzed reactions in 
our lab using safe, non -volatile solvents (ion ic liquids 
and deep eutectic solvents)  No external funding 
yet for this work  
 
 
  
Page | 109  
 
 
 
Proposals  
Title  Agency  Reference 
Number  PI, Co-investigators 
and collaborators  Funding 
requested  Project time 
frame (1 
year, 2 years, 
etc.) Date 
submitted  
Adapting 
Kernel 
Metabolism 
to Enhance 
Cereal 
Yield 
Under 
Adverse 
Conditions  USDA  2011 -
67003 -
30215  L. Curtis Hannah 
(P.I.), Tracy 
Hennen -Bierwagen 
(co-P.I.), Karen 
Koch (co -P.I.), Don 
McCarty (co -P.I.), 
Alan Meyers (co -
P.I.), Mark Settles 
(co-P.I.), Jon 
Stewart (co -P.I.), 
William Tracy (co -
P.I.) $5M  5 years  June 2010  
Improving 
Alkene 
Reductases 
for 
Applications 
in 
Asymmetric 
Synthesis  NSF NSF 10 -1 Jon Stewart (P.I.)  497,851  3 years  December 
2010  
 
 
Grants Awarded  
Title  Agency  Reference 
Number  PI, Co-
investigators and 
collaborators  Period of 
Performance  Funding 
awarded  
Adapting Kernel 
Metabolism to Enhance 
Cereal Yield Under 
Adverse Conditions  USDA  2011 -
67003 -
30215  L. Curtis Hannah 
(P.I.), Tracy 
Hennen -Bierwagen 
(co-P.I.), Karen 
Koch (co -P.I.), 
Don McCarty (co -
P.I.), A lan Meyers 
(co-P.I.), Mark 
Settles (co -P.I.), 
Jon Stewart (co -
P.I.), William 
Tracy (co -P.I.) $5M  5 years  
Improving Alkene Reductases 
for Applications in 
Asymmetric Synthesis  NSF CHE -
0615776  Jon Stewart (P.I.)  497,851  3 years  
 
 
 
 
  
Page | 110  
 
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
Lignin makes up approximately 20% of the carbon fixed by plants [1] and must be separated from the 
cellulosic fraction in a number of processes including pulping and bioethanol production [2].  Traditional 
Kraft pulping chemically derivatizes lignin with s ulfonic acid moieties, allowing it to be soluble under 
basic conditions, but also imparting a strong odor that makes it difficult to employ the lignin for any 
purpose other than combustion [3].  Steam treatment is typically employed in cellulosic ethanol p rocesses, 
and this operation yields a lignin stream better suited to value -added uses [4].  It should be noted that 
sugarcane bagasse has a lower density of ortho -substitution, increasing its ability to be derivatized [5].  
  
 
Figure 1:  Typical lignin structure (re -drawn from http://www.dfrc.ars.usda.gov/ligninmodels.html).  
 
 
Laccases are the best -known enzymes that accept lignin as a substrate.  These multi -copper proteins are 
produced by a wide variety of species and play i mportant roles in lignin degradation by white - and 
brown -rot fungi [6].  These enzymes mediate the four -electron reduction of O2 using lignin as the 
ultimate electron source.  Because lignin can be highly crosslinked and interior portions are difficult to 
access by large proteins, laccases are paired with small molecule, diffusible electron carriers (mediators) 
[7].  Depending on reaction conditions, laccase / mediator systems can cross -link lignin internally, 
covalently add small molecules to lignin or deg rade the lignin substrate [7 -9].  We will focus on laccase -
mediated molecular additions since these conversions can alter lignin properties in useful ways.  To 
facilitate re -using laccases, these enzymes have been immobilized on a variety of solid supports  (for a 
summary, see [9]).  
 
Mai and co -workers have shown that polyacrylamide can be grafted onto lignin by simultaneous 
treatment with laccase and a small -molecule peroxide [10, 11].  The reaction is believed to proceed by by 
laccase -mediated radical form ation within lignin.  These radicals couple with radicals found at growing 
ends of polyacrylamide chains (Scheme 1).  The resulting co -polymer had solubility properties suitable 
for use as deep -well drilling fluid.  In addition to polymer grafting, laccase  also cross -links the lignin into  
  
Page | 111  
 
 
higher molecular weight assemblies, increasing its mechanical strength.  These results suggest that other 
living radical polymerizations might also be amenable to lignin attachment.  
  
 
 
 
Non-covalent polymer blends represent an important means of using lignin for value -added products.  
Unfortunately, native lignin interacts poorly with existing materials.  In an effort to solve this problem, 
Thielemans and Wool acylated kraft lignin in an  effort to identify a derivative that dissolved in styrene 
[12].  While successful in this regard, only a limited number of acyl chains were examined in this study.  
This approach also depended on chemically synthesizing activated acyl derivatives (anhydri des, acyl 
chlorides).  By contrast, lipases can utilize carboxylic acids directly and tolerate a wide variety of 
functional groups.  
 
We are investigating the first step in the conversion of aromatic substrates into catechols by using 
cinnamyl alcohol as a model compound for lignin -derived materials.  It appears that bacterial toluene 
dioxygenase does indeed accept cinnamyl alcohol and convert it to the corresponding diol.  The next steps 
will be to combine this enzyme system with a dehydrogenase to yield th e catechol in situ and to probe the 
possibility of oxidizing more complex lignin -derived materials.  This can be combined with the polymer 
grafting approach described above to lower the costs of these materials even further.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
References : 
1. Ruiz -Dueñas, F.J. and Á.T. Martínez, Microbial Degradation of Lignin:  How a Bulky 
Recalcitrant Polymer is Efficiently Recycled in Nature and How We Can Take Advantage of This. 
Microb. Biotechnol., 2009. 2: p. 164 -177. 
2. Lora, J.H. and W.G. Glasser, Recent Industrial Applications of Lignin:  A Sustainable Alternative 
to Nonrenewable Materials. J. Poly. and the Environ., 2002. 10: p. 39 -48. 
3. Stewart, D., Lignin as a Base Material for Materials Applications:  Chemistry, Applications and 
Economics. Ind. Crops and Prod., 2008. 27: p. 202 -207.  
Page | 112  
 
 
4. Li, J., G. Gellerstedt, and K. Toven, Steam Explosion Lignins; Their Extraction, Structure and 
Potential as Feedstock for Biodiesel and Chemicals. Bioresource Technol., 2009. 100: p. 2556 -2561.  
5. Doherty, W., et al., Studies on Polymers and Composites from Lignin and Fiber Derived from 
Sugar Cane. Polymers for Adv. Technol., 2007. 18: p. 673 -678. 
6. Bouws, H., A. Wattenberg, and H. Zorn, Fungal Secretomes - Nature's Toolbox for White 
Biotechnol ogy. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008. 80: p. 381 -388. 
7. Widsten, P. and A. Kandelbauer, Laccase Applications in the Forest Products Industry:  A 
Review. Enz. Microb. Technol., 2008. 42: p. 293 -307. 
8. Burton, S.G., Laccases and Phenol Oxidases in Organ ic Synthesis - a Review. Curr. Org. Chem., 
2003. 7: p. 1317 -1331.  
9. Mikolasch, A. and F. Schauer, Fungal Laccases as Tools for the Synthesis of New Hybrid 
Molecules and Biomaterials. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009. 82: p. 605 -624. 
10. Mai, C., O. Mils tein, and A. Hüttermann, Fungal Laccase Grafts Acrylamide onto Lignin in 
Presence of Peroxides. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1999. 51: p. 527 -531. 
11. Mai, C., O. Milstein, and A. Hüttermann, Chemoenzymatical Grafting of Acrylamide onto 
Lignin. J. Biotech nol., 2000. 79: p. 173 -183. 
12. Thielemans, W. and R.P. Wool, Lignin Esters for Use in Unsaturated Thermosets:  Lignin 
Modification and Solubility Modeling. Biomacromolecules, 2005. 6: p. 1895 -1905.  
 
 
 
 
   
Page | 113  
 
University of Florida  
Combined Cooling, Heat, Power , and Biofuel from Biomass and Solid Waste  
 
PI: William E. Lear Jr.    Co-PI: Jacob N. Chung  
Students : Elango Balu (PhD);  Minki Kim (PhD); Uisung Lee (PhD)  
 
 
Description:  The goal of this project is to provide the underlying research and demonstration of a novel 
technology which would enable the economic utilization of dispersed biomass and solid waste resources 
to produce electric power, cooling, heat, and transportation fuels. This integrated gasification and power 
generation system combines University of Florida advances in high -temperature gasification, hydrogen 
generation and separation, and advanced gas turbine systems. Their integration is expected to result in 
signi ficant improvements in the cost, emissions, feedstock flexibility, and water requirements, all in a 
relatively compact, modular plant system. This in turn will enable much greater utilization of renewable 
energy supplies, helping the development of a susta inable energy supply infrastructure.  
 
 
Budget: $576,000  
Universities: UF 
External Collaborators: Siemens Power Generation, Florida Turbine Technologies, Energy Concepts  
Co., Nu -Power Technologies LLC, PlanetGreenSolutions Inc., LPP Combustion, LLC.  
 
Progress Summary  
 
The current project focus is in three areas: development of a system architecture and thermodynamic 
model, development of models and system -level experiments for the PoWER gas turbine unit, and 
exploration of the underlying science and de monstration of the high temperature steam gasification 
(HiTS) subsystem. These activities are structured in such a way as to allow stepwise research and 
development of the overall plant in outlying years.  
 
The system architecture includes the full integra tion of waste heat and water produced in the gas turbine 
module with the gasification subsystem. This in turn allows efficiency gains, reducing the proportion of 
hydrogen utilized internally, and allows zero net usage of external water resources. A thermod ynamic 
system model has been refined during the current year, and the architecture is suitable for inclusion of 
more complete subsystem models as their development continues. The PoWER and HiTS subsystem 
models have been further developed to include more d etailed physics and, for the PoWER model, 
transient effects.  
 
The PoWER system has been implemented as an experimental system in previous programs, and a 
demonstration -level plant is nearing completion. Early stage integration of the HiTS and PoWER 
subsyst ems includes operation of a Capstone C60 gas turbine engine on syngas from the developmental 
gasifier. Installation of the Capstone unit, including gas handling subsystem and load bank, has been 
accomplished . Some base test using Methane (CH 4) has been performed, and simulated syngas mixture 
test would be performed  during this reporting period.  
 
For HiTS, experiment using 15kW trailer gasification system was performed to enhance syngas quality so 
that we could supply the syngas to the microtur bine ultimately. Conventional 4 -cylinder engine was used 
instead of microturbine to check the validity at present. The engine output data was recorded via load  
  
Page | 114  
 
 
bank, and syngas composition was analyzed via gas chromatograph. The results show that the ov erall 
efficiency from biomass to electricity is mostly near 25%, which is close to the efficiency when the 
gasoline or natural gas used. In addition to that, bench -scale steam gasification system was also being 
tested using hydrogen and oxygen combustion t o supply high temperature in oxygen free condition.  
 
The Membrane reactor to be used alongside with the steam gasifier is designed to operate at 900°C to 
carry out the WGS reaction using MIEC (Mixed Ionic Electronic Conductivity) properties and in situ 
removal of H2 which helps in shifting the equilibrium to the right thus facilitating more H2 production 
and conversion of CO.  
 
On the simulation side, equilibrium model for the gasifier was developed to predict the syngas quality 
with respect to reactor temp erature, pressure, feedstock and steam to biomass ratio. The results were 
compared to other literature values, which are very close to theirs. The model outcome will be compared 
to the experimental result consecutively. Also, kinetic model which considers time effect will be studied 
for accurate prediction in the future.  
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
I. Experimental Facility   
     Trailer scale gasification system consists  of a gasifier, cleaning system and an engine  generator set 
with a load bank.  The down -draft gasifier with the capacity of handling about 10 kg of biomass per batch  
will introduce syngas to the engine after cooling and cleaning stages. Ford DSG -423 four cylinder IC 
engine was operated at 1800 rpm to generate  electrical power  through the generator and the load was 
recorded at the load bank.  
 
 
Figure 1: Schematic of experimental setup  
 
 
 
 
Page | 115  
 
 
II. Engine analysis   
Energy consumption rates of the syngas could be calculated using measured  syngas flow rate  before it 
enters the engine.  They were compared to the actual engine powers which were measured at the engine 
output using the generator and load bank to find engine efficiency. Before comparing the actual condition, 
stoichiometric air and fuel mass flow rates were calculated to check the equivalence ra tio because if it is 
burned at the fuel -rich condition, excess syngas would not completely combusted. As it is found that all 
four syngas were combusted at fuel -lean condition, it is assumed there was enough air to burn all the 
syngas. Considering the effi ciency using gasoline is around 30%, engine efficiencies using syngas  from 
various feedstocks  have quite reasonable values.  
 
 
Figure 2: Engine efficiency (Energy input / Energy output)  
III. Equilibrium Model  
Biomass gasification is a series of chemical reactions to make synthetic gas which is useful form of 
energy.  There are several types of biomass gasification models to predict gasification performance with 
given gasification condition such as temperature, pressure, feedstock, and oxidizing  agent like air or 
steam. We have developed thermodynamic equilibrium model to predict the experiment result. Once we 
have feedstock chemical composition, amount of air and steam, temperature and pressure information, it 
is possible to determine the chemical composition and heating value of the syngas at the equilibrium state. 
These values could be compared to the actual experiment results.  
 
Figure 3:  Equilibrium model prediction for the syngas composition and the lower heating value  0.0%5.0%10.0%15.0%20.0%25.0%30.0%
0.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.00
Pine Horse Manure Red Oak MSW
Engine Efficiency  Energy [kW]  
Syngas consumption [kW] Output Power [KW] Engine Efficiency
22.533.544.55
0510152025
Pine Horse Manure Red Oak MSW
Lower Heating Value [MJ/kg]  Gas composition [%]  
H2 CO CO2 H2O CH4 LHV 
Page | 116  
 
 
IV. Steam gasification  
Bench -scale high temperature gasification system was developed to check the steam gasification 
feasibility with municipal solid waste (MSW) and farm biomass waste.  This system i nvolves a thermal -
chemical process that employs super -critical high -temperature steam to break down the feedstock to pure 
hydrogen -rich gaseous bio -fuels. Since the gasification agent is steam, the entire process is free of air and 
oxygen that traditionally produces air pollution effluents from incineration. The combustion of the 
hydrogen provides not only the steam as a product of the combustion but also provides an extremely high 
temperature, oxygen free environment for gasification. In addition part of the carbon monoxide produced 
may undergo a water shift reaction with the steam and produce additional hydrogen. Part of the hydrogen 
produced by the gasification is recycled back to the torch to maintain the gasification temperatures.  
 
  
Figure 4: Reactor temperature with respect to time  Figure 5: Bench -scale gasification system  
 
V. Enhancing H 2 Yield Using SCZE Membranes  
Syngas mixtures containing mostly H 2 and CO are typically generated at elevated temperatures via the 
conversion of biomass through steam gasification. The water -gas shift (WGS) reaction converts CO into 
CO 2 and provides additional H 2. To enhance H 2 yield further SCZE Membranes  are being deve loped with 
the system in Fig 6.  
H2
CO
CO2
CH4 
 
 
 
H2
CO
CO2
CH4 
 
 
 
F
AR FMFC
MFCSWEEP LINE
EFFLUENT LINEPERMEATE LINEDIRECT TEST LINEEXHAUST HOOD
MEMBRANE REACTOR + 
FURNACEMASS SPECH2O 
BUBBLER
 
Figure 6: Experimental setup for H2 separation membrane  
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70020040060080010001200140016001800Time vs Reactor Temperature
Time (min)Temperature (oC)
  
Combustion Chamber
Module 1 center
Module 2 center
Module 3 center
Module 4 center
 
Page | 117  
 
 
 
VI. Flameless Combustion Experiments and Modeling  
The Power, Water Extraction, and Refrigeration (PoWER) system is the energy conversion  subsystem to 
be eventually integrated with the steam gasification plant described above. One important feature of the 
PoWER system is that the combustion environment features high diluent concentrations, resulting in 
significantly reduced flame temperatur e. This in turn produces a flame characterized by very low soot 
production, highly -uniform temperature field, and low flame luminosity, so that the regime is termed 
flameless combustion. The low flame temperature reduces NOx without complex dry low -NOx 
technology; the low soot formation helps to reduce CO emissions. Overall, the primary regulated 
pollutants – NOx, particulates, unburned hydrocarbons, and CO – are simultaneously reduced to levels 
well below the current state of the art. At the same time, fue l flexibility is enhanced, making this system 
ideal for coupling to a biomass/MSW gasifier with a wide range of syngas compositions. This in turn 
makes the economics more attractive, as a single system is expected to be applicable in multiple 
applications with minimal or no modification.  
 
Current activities have focused on coupling the output fuel stream of the gasif ier to a modified, 
conventional microturbine in order to characterize the suitability of the various syngas variants for gas 
turbine operation.  The gas turbine system is based on a Capstone C60™ microturbine (60 kW) and 
multiple fuel sources, including methane, syngas, and a LPP Combustion, LLC gasified fuel skid, shown 
in Figure 7. The controls allow automatic, rapid switching between two gasifie d fuel paths, gasified liquid 
fuel (LPP) and biomass fuel. For test runs using stored syngas or other low -pressure fuel, we integrated a 
Copeland™ gas booster into the system. A Merlin Simplex portable load bank with 200 kW capacity is 
used to dissipate th e electrical power as well as to control the engine output.  As a parallel activity, 
integrated system modeling, PoWER(turbine), absorption refrigeration, and HiTS (gasifier), is continuing.  
 
 
  
Figure 7: Micro -turbine test system  
 
 
 
Page | 118  
 
 
Integrated system modeling, gasification and PoWER system parts, is being simulated by using 
MATLAB® and C++. The system modeling architecture is shown in Figure 8. Three subsystem 
simulation programs are coupled to form the integrated plant model: turbocharger and microtur bine 
system, vapor absorption refrigeration system (VARS), and HiTS.  
 
 
Figure 8 : Integrated system modeling  concept diagram  
 
In the Gasifier simulation part, from biomass content, biomass flow rate, reactor design temperatures, 
component efficiencies and  PoWER system water extraction are input data. Predicted temperatures, 
pressures and flow  rates, energy flows, and syngas flow, temperature and compositions will be obtained 
as output data. Model chemical kinetics of the reactions in the gasifier ha ve so far been made using an 
equilibrium assumption; the highly non -linear set of equations is solved  by using MAPLE.  
 
The modeling developments are steps along the path towards an integrated overall system simulation 
code. Such a code will allow determination of  optimal flow  path configuration to enable capture of waste 
heat and minimization of energy destruction, as well a parametric optimization for design purposes. The 
model is to be validated via interim experiments described above, so that the full plant des ign can be 
accomplished with confidence.  
 
 
 
  
 
Page | 119  
 
University of Florida  
Database Infrastructure for Integrative Carbon Science R esearch  
 
PI:  Sabine Grunwald       Co-PI: Timothy A. Martin  
Student s: C.W. Ross  (M.S.); X. Xiong  (Ph.D. ) 
Technical staff:  Brandon Hoover  
Post-Docs: Nichola M. Knox  
 
Description:  Rising CO 2 concentrations in the atmosphere and effects on global climate change have 
been well documented, and future impacts are uncertain but potentially devastating. Florida's natural and 
agro-forest ecosystems have much potential to sequester carbon in biomass and soils due to unique 
climatic and landscape conditions. However, research gaps exist to accurately assess carbon pools and 
fluxes at coarse scales, ranging from county to the region and  larger. The overarching objective of this 
project is to address these obstacles by developing a terrestrial carbon information system (called 
“TerraC”) for the carbon science community, focused on ecosystems in Florida.  The information system 
will be adm inistered through the UF Carbon Resources Science Center ( http://carboncenter.ifas.ufl.edu  ), 
a multi -disciplinary Center dedicated to research in support of enhanced agricultural and natural resource 
carbon management.  
 
Budget: $199,440  
Universities:  UF 
External Collaborators:  Natural Resources Conservation Service -U.S. Department of Agriculture  
 
Progress Summary  
 
1) Database  
The conceptual design for the Terra Carbon Information System (Terra C) has been completed and the 
database structure implemented in Structured Query Lan guage (SQL). TerraC consists of a web -
accessible database, meta data editors, and project wizard.  The database hosts carbon and associated 
environmental data from the soils/geologic, atmospheric, vegetation, water, and whole ecosystem 
domains. A major amo unt of time was spent on testing, evaluation, and improvement to upload data into 
the database, which requires the use of a standardized data template. To accommodate a variety of 
different carbon data types (e.g. labile soil carbon, recalcitrant soil carb on, total soil carbon, carbon flux, 
and respiration rate), units of data (e.g. concentrations, contents, stocks, fluxes, CO 2eq., etc.), and spatial 
and temporal resolution of data the design of the database structure is divided into core and optional 
fields. The core fields are standardized to avoid duplication of carbon data entered into the TerraC 
database by different users and projects. Optional fields contain carbon data which are specialized in 
terms of their analytical methods and/or data collection protocol.  
 
2) Web Design & Tutorials  
The web site http://terraC.ifas.ufl.edu  has been developed which provides access to the data engine, query 
tools, and tutorials. The latter ones provide step -by-step instructi ons how to use the system implemented 
in form of Adobe Presenter with voice over.  
 
3) Carbon Datasets  
Several site -specific carbon datasets have been identified and acquired from various sources. These 
carbon data are streamlined and documented in TerraC.  Among them is the large, historic (~1965 to 
1996) Florida Soil Characterization Dataset which contains about 1,300 soil samples and about 8,300+ 
horizons with 144 different soil physical, chemical, morphological, and taxonomic data which are  
  
Page | 120  
 
 
georeferenc ed. In this dataset 7716 samples have soil organic carbon measurements, belonging to 1252 
profiles. Soil carbon has been measured based on Walkley -Black modified acid -dichromate method 
(mineral soils) and Loss on Ignition (organic soils), respectively. Oth er carbon data streamlined into 
TerraC include data from the Santa Fe River Watershed where various carbon pools (hot -water 
extractable (labile) carbon, recalcitrant carbon, total carbon, mineralizable carbon, and other 
biogeochemical properties were colle cted. We will continue to populate TerraC with carbon data 
representing various ecosystem types and ecosystem components over the next project phase.  
 
4) Synthesis Analysis  – Carbon Assessment / Capture  
We continue to work on various prototype synthesis p rojects which utilize TerraC. For example, the 
Florida Soil Characterization Data has been synthesized with spectral data derived from visible/near -
infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy to build a spectral carbon library for the State of Florida 
(Vasqu es et al., 2010). In another synthesis project, the soil carbon data in the Santa Fe River Watershed 
(FL) were fused with a large set of environmental factors to model the spatial distribution of soil carbon 
across the watershed in dependence of climate an d land use change (Vasques et al., 2010). Similar 
synthesis analysis will continue in the next project phase.  
 
References : 
Vasques G.M., S. Grunwald and W.G. Harris. 2010. Building a spectral library to estimate soil organic 
carbon in Florida. J. Environ.  Qual. 39: 923 -934. 
Vasques G.M., S. Grunwald, N.B. Comerford and J.O. Sickman. 2010. Upscaling of dynamic soil organic 
carbon pools in a north -central Florida watershed. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 74: 870 -879. 
 
Funds leveraged/new partnerships created : By utilizing TerraC as a core structure for data 
warehousing and sy nthesis, it helped to leverage a new project funded by the United State Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) – National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) – Agriculture and Food 
Research Ini tiative (AFRI)  Regional Project “Pinemap: Integrating Research, Education and Extension 
for Enhancing Southern Pine Climate Change” (2011 -2016). This is a large -scale $20 million project with 
50+ Co -PIs and Collaborators from 13 institutions (UF is the lea d institution; PI: T.A. Martin; Co -PI: S. 
Grunwald) which supports 25+ students, 10+ Post -Docs, and staff members. The p roject goals are 
to create, synthesize, and disseminate the necessary knowledge to enable southern forest landowners to:  
 harness pine fo rest productivity to mitigate atmospheric carbon dioxide  
 more efficiently utilize nitrogen and other fertilizer inputs  
 adapt their forest management approaches to increase resilience in the face of changing climate.   
The TerraC system provides the data inf rastructure for the Pinemap project. Since Pinemap funds a 
comprehensive monitoring program of ecosystem properties, many measurements related to the carbon 
cycle, will be streamed into TerraC populating the database and allow sharing of carbon and ecosyst em 
data widely (constraint by the data sharing policy implemented in the Pinemap project).  
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
The overall goals of this project are to create a database infrastructure for the carbon science community, 
focused on ecosystems in Florida and the southeastern United States.  The availability of this database 
will enable the analysis and synthesis of carbon data at multiple spatial and temporal scales. A short 
description of the TerraC Information System is provided.   
Page | 121  
 
 
What is Terra C?   
The Terrestrial Carbon (TerraC) Information System  is dedicated to advance terrestrial carbon 
science through sharing of carbon and environmental data. It provides information about carbon cycling 
as it relates to global climate and land use change. TerraC offe rs tools to upload, store, manage, query, 
analyze, and download data characterizing terrestrial carbon dynamics from various sources, including 
soils, plants/biomass, atmosphere, water, and whole ecosystems. The purpose of Terra C is three -fold: (i) 
advanc e terrestrial carbon science through sharing of carbon and environmental data; (ii) facilitate 
environmental synthesis; and (iii) enhance collaboration among researchers, scientists, and extension 
specialists through shared resources. Research projects inv olving carbon and related properties are many 
and spread across multiple disciplines and spatial and temporal scales. TerraC aims to integrate data from 
these widespread sources in a shared information system to facilitate cross -cutting analysis of carbon and 
environmental data, synthesis of carbon research, and enhance communication and collaboration among 
researchers. Data stored in TerraC conform to  quality standards  and can be shared privately among 
selected users or publicly with any user. Detailed information about the data sharing options available in 
TerraC is listed in the  data sharing and usage policy . 
 
Objectives of the Terra C Project  
(1) Build the Terra C Information System : (i) Develop a coherent, searchable, and expandable database 
that integrates terrestrial carbon and associated environmental datasets, and (ii) provide information about 
carbon related to environmental stressors such as climate and land use change.  
(2) Data synthesis : Synthesize multiple large carbon datasets to gain insight into carbon cycling and 
dynam ics across various spatial and temporal scales; upscaling of site ‐specific carbon observations to 
landscape scales.  
(3) Geospatial outreach : Build a ‘GoogleEarth’ application to deliver and share terrestrial carbon data in 
form of a Google carbon application.    
 
Motivation  
Rising CO 2 emissions in the atmosphere and effects on global climate change have been well 
documented, and future impacts are uncertain but potentially devastating. Florida's natural and agro -forest 
ecosystems have much potential to sequester carbon in biomass and soils due to unique climatic and 
landscape conditions. However, research gaps exist to accurately assess carbon pools and fluxes at coarse 
scales, ranging from county to the region and larger scales. The overarc hing objective of this project is to 
address these obstacles by creating a database infrastructure for the carbon science community, focused 
on ecosystems in Florida and the southeastern United States.   The database engine of TerraC is 
administered through  the UF Carbon Resources Science Center, a multi -disciplinary Center dedicated to 
research in support of enhanced agricultural and natural resource carbon management. The TerraC project 
aims to provide the framework to synthesize carbon and environmental d ata to facilitate meta -analysis, 
modeling of carbon dynamics and biogeochemical cycles, and to conduct applied and cutting -edge carbon 
science research.  
 
TerraC in a Nutshell  
TerraC provides a data engine which allows managing, archiving, sharing, editing,  modifying, and 
querying carbon and associated environmental data. These data are derived from various projects and 
sources; thus, provide a wide array of different carbon measurements, in various ecosystems and 
geographic regions, and spatial and temporal  scales. The Terra C data engine facilitates synthesis and 
modeling to gain better insight into carbon cycling from micro, plot, field, watershed, basin, large region, 
and global scales.   
 
  
Page | 122  
 
 
Data Sharing and Usage Policy  
Data users submitting data to or us e data from the TerraC Information System agree to abide by the terms 
and conditions explained in this document. Data users may be held responsible for any misuse that is 
caused or encouraged by failure to abide by this agreement.  
 
Definitions  
Project:  Set of one or more datasets that contain carbon (and related) environmental data.   
Dataset:  Set of data comprised of one or more data fields that contain carbon (and related) data that is 
part of a single project.   
 
Roles of users  
Project owner (leader):  Principal Investigator or person with similar credentials responsible for 
collecting and managing the original, quality controlled data generated by a specific project. The project 
leader needs to initiate a project before a dataset can be submitted to Ter raC and is responsible for the 
quality of all datasets under his/her projects. The project leader controls the levels of data sharing and can 
assign one or more data managers to each of his/her projects.  
 
Data contributor (or manager):  User that has read/w rite access to a dataset in TerraC. The data 
manager has privileges to submit a new dataset to a project and access and modify existing ones in part or 
as a whole. The project leader needs to assign a user manager status before he/she can submit a new 
dataset or modify an existing one in a project.  
 
Data user:  User that can view a dataset in TerraC. The data user can read public datasets and also private 
datasets as long as he/she has been granted access to them by the project leader. The data user cannot 
submit a new dataset or modify existing ones unless he/she receives manager status from the project 
leader to a project.  
 
Data sharing : Data stored in TerraC can be shared at three access levels. The access levels are chosen by 
the project leader to control  access to their projects by different users. Different access levels can be 
assigned to different users, the level being project - and user -specific. Levels 1 and 2 mirror the roles of 
data user and data manager, respectively. Level 3 in the most restricte d access level. Levels of data 
sharing : 
 
Level 1 – Public with read -only access:  Access to the data is open to all TerraC users. Any person that 
has a TerraC user account (i.e. data users) can view the data, but not modify it directly from the TerraC 
datab ase. Only the project leader can modify/edit data.   
Level 2 – Private read/write access:  Access to the data is open to data managers who were assigned 
(approved) by the project leader to have permissions to view and modify/edit data directly from 
TerraC.  Private read/write access  is password -protected.  
Level 3 – Private read -only access:  Access to the data is restricted to the project leader and users 
selected by the project leader. Users can only view the data, but not modify it directly from TerraC.  
 
The project leader controls the sharing of data in TerraC. He/she provides leadership for collaboration 
with new partners on behalf of the project teams. The project leader can switch sharing levels from Level 
3 to 2 and 1, but not vice versa, meaning if the d ata are released to other users or the general public this 
right cannot be reversed.   
 
Data users who are interested in to gain access to a specific protected dataset can contact the project   
Page | 123  
 
 
leader and negotiate agreement of data use of a specific project. The project leader may agree to share 
data with the data user to collaborate on a joint project, work on a co -authored research publication, or use 
them for other purposes.   
 
Data usage:  Data users are expected to use data obtained from TerraC to the highest level of professional 
integrity and ethics. Data users must abide by the following guidelines when distributing or publishing 
data obtained from TerraC:  
Data sharing and usage in TerraC is governed by the  Attribution Non -Commercial 
Share Alike  license provided by Creative Commons  (summary:   
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-sa/3.0 ; legal code:   
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-sa/3.0/legalcode ), which observes the 
following rules:   
Attribution:  The data user must give credit to the project leader (or project) in the manner 
specified by him/her (but not in any way that suggests that the   project leader endorses the 
data user or his/her use of the data);   
Noncommercial:  The data user may not use TerraC data for commercial  purposes; data 
should be used for reserach and non -profit applications;   
Share Alike:  If the data is modified in any manner or used to derive other products, the 
data user may distribute the resulting work only under the same or similar license to this 
one;  
  
Credits and publications derived from TerraC usage:  
 The data user must inform or consult the project leader about his/her intentions to use the data for 
publication well in advance of submission of the publication; the project leader should be given 
the opportunity to read the manuscript and, if appropriate, be offered co -authorship;  
 The data user must give cred it to the project leader (or project), which can be in the form of co -
authorship, citation, or acknowledgement, according to the requirements imposed by the project 
leader; any deviation from this rule must be formally agreed between the data user and proj ect 
leader;  
 The data user must cite or acknowledge TerraC as the data host used to obtain the data;  
 Any modification to the data originally obtained from TerraC by the data user must be fully 
documented.  
  
Carbon Data and Associated Environmental Data  
(1) Core Data Fields:  
 Identification number for each observation (SN)   
 X coordinate (X) {Geographic Coordinate format (latitude/longitude in decimal degrees) with 
World Geographic Datum 1984, WGD 1984}  
 Y coordinate (Y) {Geographic Coordinate format (latitude/l ongitude in decimal degrees) with 
World Geographic Datum 1984, WGD 1984}  
 Sample date (DATE) {MM/DD/YYYY}  
 Height or depth of measurement (Z) {in cm; below the soil surface negative numbers; above the 
soil surface positive numbers}  
 Carbon measurements (variable names, data values, and meta data: analytical methods & units of 
measurement in Standard International Units)  
 Biogeochemical or other environmental data (variable names, data values, and meta data: 
analytical methods & units of measurement in Sta ndard International Units)  
 
 
 
Page | 124  
 
 
(2) Project Elements (meta data):  
 Project title  
 Project description (description of sampling design, sampling protocol, quality assessment, data 
constraints such as below detection limit treatment, missing values, etc.)  
 Projec t owner (typically Principal Investigator of a research project; or Project Leader for agency 
lead project)  
 Project contributor (optional)  
 Project user (optional)  
 Contact information (Project Owner)  
 Funding source  
 Project location (description of geographi c location of project; size of project area)  
 Project period (YYYY to YYYY)  
 Link to project homepage  
 Publications from project  
 Acknowledgements  
  
Data Quality and Standards  
Data format : TerraC focuses on terrestrial carbon and related environmental data. Da ta submitted to 
TerraC must contain carbon data and have the following format:  
 Be oriented in rows and columns, with cases (observations) listed in the rows and properties 
(attributes) listed in the columns;  
 Carbon and other measured properties must be presented as variables in specific columns:  
o Each column must only contain properties measured using the same method; if the same 
property was measured using more than one method (e.g. total carbon vs. carbon 
fractions), each method must be presented as a s eparate column;  
 Spatial coordinates (horizontal and vertical) and time stamps must be presented, whenever 
available, as variables in specific columns;  
 Repeated measures (e.g., the same property collected at different times or replicated) must be 
treated as  separate cases (i.e. listed in separate rows):  
o A column indicating that the cases are repeated measures of the same property must be 
included (e.g. using the same sample identifier for the repetitions);  
o A column indicating the number of the repetition (i. e. 1, 2, 3…) must be included;  
 Quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) data must not be included in the dataset, but instead in 
the metadata of the property it pertains to.  
 
Metadata : Since the objective of TerraC is to share data among multiple users, i t is critical that metadata 
are provided in detail for every project, dataset, and variable in a dataset. Upon creation of a new project, 
the project leader needs to provide information (i.e. metadata) describing project detail, including 
location, samplin g design, contact information, objectives, and others. Upon submission of a new dataset, 
the project leader or data manager needs to provide metadata for dataset and for every variable in the 
dataset.   
 
Data quality : It is the responsibility of the project  leader to ensure that all data listed under a project in 
TerraC have passed QA/QC. The project leader provides information for each project’s data about the 
type of QA/QC and adopted standards. The data managers can assist the project leader to meet QA/QC  
requirements. The TerraC team may quarantine suspicious data and request information from the project 
leader and/or data manager to assure quality of the data before making them available online. TerraC 
cannot be held responsible for mistakes in the data or inadequate data usage. Data that for some reason 
are restricted by funding agencies or imposed proprietary or legal rights (e.g. military projects, pending 
patents, projects funded by private companies, or other) should not be included in TerraC.   
Page | 125  
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Snapshot of the Terrestrial Carbon (TerraC) 
Information System website.   
Fig. 2. Project setup in TerraC.  
 
Fig. 3. Data setup in TerraC.    
 
Fig. 4. User administration tools.  
 
Fig. 5. Data query.    
Fig. 6. TerraC tutorials.  
Publications and Presentations from this Project : 
Hoover B., N.M. Knox, S. Grunwald, T.A. Martin, X. Xiong, P. Chaikaew, J. Kim, B. Cao. 2011. 
Synthesis Tools for Carbon Assessment in Ecosystems. 2011. Florida Energy Systems Consortium 
(FESC) Summit, Gaine sville, FL, Sept. 27 -28, 2011.  
Grunwald  S., T. A. Martin, B. Hoover, G.M. Vasques, B. Zhong, and D.L. DePatieJr. 2010. Terrestrial 
carbon (TerraC) information system. 2010 Florida Energy Systems Consortium (FESC) Summit, 
Orlando, FL, Sep. 27 -29, 2010.  
Hoov er B., G.M. Vasques, B. Zhong, S. Grunwald, T. A. Martin, and D.L. DePatieJr. 2010. The 
terrestrial carbon (TerraC) information system Vers. 1.0. 11th Annual Soil and Water Science Research 
Forum, Gainesville, FL, Sep. 10, 2010.  
Grunwald S., T.A. Martin, G .M. Vasques and B. Hoover. 2009. Database infrastructure for integrative 
carbon science research. Florida Energy Systems Consortium Summit, Tampa, FL, Sept. 29 -30, 2009.  
 
Page | 126  
 
University of Florida  
Development of Biofuel Production Processes from Synthetic and B iomass Wastes  
 
PI: Pratap Pullammanappallil  
Students : Diane Chaulic (PhD), Zhuoli Tian (PhD), Gayathri Ram Mohan (MS), Nicholas Locastro (BS)  
 
 
Description: With the ever -increasing price of petroleum and its finite supply, it is of high priority to 
develop domestic sources of transportation fuel, as well as other chemicals. Ethanol is an attractive 
alternate fuel that is being produced from corn starch.  It is necessary to target other feedstocks for biofuel 
production and develop processes that have  a minimal environmental impact. There is considerable 
ongoing research on developing processes and catalysts for conversion of biomass to biofuels like ethanol 
(called cellulosic ethanol process).  But this project addresses other feedstocks with the foll owing 
objectives: 1) development of biocatalysts for the conversion of waste biodegradable poly lactic acid 
based plastics to ethanol and 2) development of processes that processes for the production of additional 
fuels like biogas, bio -oil and biochar fro m the waste and byproducts of a cellulosic ethanol plant for the 
clean -up and reuse of these waste streams  
 
Budget: $192,000  
Universities: UF 
External Collaborators:  UCF  
 
Progress Summary  
 
Process development for biogasification and clean -up of cellulosic ethanol stillage  
 Demonstrated that struvite (a slow release fertilizer containing ammonia and phosphate) can be 
recovered from the anaerobically digested stillage.  
 A process was developed to recover struvite along with other organic carbonaceous residue 
remaining in the digested stillage.  
 Showed that this process can be applied with or without prior anaerobic digestion of stillage.  
 Estimated that sufficient phosphorous is contained in the r ecovered sludge to grow the biofuel 
crop.  The application of this sludge to grow the bioenergy crop offsets the need for addition of 
phosphate fertilizer.  
 Demonstrated that nanoceria enhances anaerobic digestion of biomass.  
 
Process development for prepa ration of enzymes to saccharify pectin rich biomass feedstocks.  
 
 Developed a process that can be implemented in the biorefinery to prepare biocatalysts for 
saccharification of pectin -rich biomass and a method for saccharifcation of such biomass.  This 
process has applications for pretreating citrus pulp, sugar beet pulp, apple pomace, fruit and 
vegetable wastes etc prior to production of liquid fuels.  
  
Biocatalyst development for conversion of waste PLA based plastics to ethanol  
 
 An E.coli mutant was cons tructed that is incapable of utilizing lactic acid.  
 Into this mutant a Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) gene was inserted. Currently experiments are 
underway to verify the expression of this gene.  
 
  
Page | 127  
 
University of Florida  
Development of Low -Cost CIGS Thin Film Hot Carrier Solar Cells  
 
PI: Gijs Bosman    Co-PI: Tim Anderson  
Student s: Yige Hu, PhD . 
 
 
Description: PV has entered into a period of record growth. Most of the current production is based on 
crystalline Si technology. However, there are fundamental limits to the ultimate Si costs that may inhibit 
it from achieving the desired level of contribution to worldwide energy production. In contrast, thin -film 
PV technology can reach the desired outcome due to fast deposition rates and lower cost. Our study i s 
focused on hot carrier solar cells for cell conversion efficiency improvement in a low cost, high 
throughput CIGS system. The rapid thermali zaton loss of hot photoexcited carriers interacting with the 
lattice can potentially be reduced through phonon eng ineering in the absorber layer; the subsequent 
extraction of the hot carriers may be realized through device engineering of energy selective contacts.  
  
 
Budget: $ 126,112.00  
Universities:  UF 
 
 
Progress Summary  
 
 
Figure 1 : Schematic Presentation o f A Hot Carrier Solar Cell  
 
Hot carrier solar cells allow hot carriers to be collected before energy is lost to the lattice. This is 
accomplished by slowing carrier cooling in the absorber and collecting the carriers using energy selective 
contacts.  This ulti mately leads to both a higher open circuit voltage since the average energy of the 
collected electron is greater than the band gap energy. It also leads to a higher short circuit current, 
leading to an overall greatly improved efficiency. Phonon engineerin g in the absorber helps to increase 
the hot carrier lifetime. Photocurrent measurements as a function of applied bias were carried out on 
fabricated CIGS solar cell structures to characterize the hot carrier effect.  The incident photon energy 
defines the initial hot carrier energy. The bias dependent electric field in the space charge region affects 
high-energy carriers differently than low energy carriers. For a given field strength, low energy, thermally  
 
 
 
Page | 128  
 
 
generated carriers will be directed to their traditional collecting contacts, but the hot carriers with 
randomly directed initial velocities may overcome the field effect and scatter into opposing contacts  
reducing the photocurrent in this way. Hence via a simple device physical model, a relationship between 
initial hot carrier energy, electric field in the space charge absorber region, and photocurrent has been  
established from which the relative density of hot electrons potentially can be determined fro m measured 
current voltage data. The current -voltage characteristics of a 20% efficiency CIGS solar cell under 455nm 
blue light and 633nm red light illumination were measured, respectively. Currently modeling efforts are 
underway to separate hot carrier ef fects from other device phenomena.  
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
The focus of this period is studying the hot carrier effect in the photocurrent -voltage characteristic of 
CIGS based solar cells. A simple model of the relationship of the hot carrier initial energy, electric field in 
the space charge region and the photo -current was developed . Simulation based on the model is presented 
for comparison with experimental data.  
 
As shown  in the figure 2 , high energy photon excited electrons generated within the region o f W-x1 to W 
have a 50% chance of going to the p region 
reducing the overall current; while those generated 
within the region of 0 to x1 will bounce from the 
conduction band Ec and subsequently be  collected 
in the n region contributing to the photon                                     
current which can be written as  
) (21) (21
11 1
x W gqx W gq x gq J
opop op opt

   
where the photon generation rate
opg  is assumed 
constant in the depletion region.  
Figure 2:   Band Diagram ff Hot Carrier Effect            
 
 
The simulated reverse bias JV characteristic of a n -type ZnO and a p -type CIGS cell with 2.7eV incident 
photons based on  this model is shown in figure 3 . In low bias, hot carriers can overcome the barrier 
scattering to both contacts. Only half of them are coll ected on electron contact. Therefore the current 
density considering the hot carrier effect is half of the one without a hot carrier effect. As bias increases, 
more of the  hot carriers bounce back from the E C potential energy barrier and are collected via the n -side 
contact. Therefore the current density increas es rapidly, as shown in figure 3  for reverse bias voltages 
larger than 0.5 V.  
 
 
Page | 129  
 
 
Figure 3:  JV Char acteristic o f Hot Carrier Effect  
 
 
A 19% efficient “champion” CIGS solar cell was illuminated with 455nm blue light and 633nm red light, 
respectively.  In a parallel theoretical study, a n -ZnO/p -CIGS diode is simulated un der the same 
condition. Figure 4  shows the photon current density versus voltage relationship of the experimental and 
simulation resul ts. The photon energy of 455nm blue light is 2.7 eV, which is about 1.4 eV higher than 
the CIGS optical band gap and is able to generate high energy, hot electron -hole pairs. The photon energy 
of 633nm red light is only 1.9eV. The generated electron -hole p airs are closed to the conduction band 
edge and are more likely to relax as cold carriers. As shown, the experiment with blue light illumination 
reveals a rapidly increasing current density at high bias while the experiment with red light illumination 
does not show this effect.  The trend of the experimental data matches with the simulated prediction. 
However, the optical current extraction needs to be better understood with respect to the reverse bias dark 
current since they are comparable parts in the tot al current. A study of the reverse bias dark JV 
characteristic will be carried out based on a space charge limited charge transport model. This will help 
improve the accuracy of the quantitative assessment in the future.  
 
 
 
Figure 4 : Reversed bias JV characteristics under (a) blue light illumination and (b) red light illumination. The current density on 
the y -axis is normalized to the current density value at V = 0.  The blue line on (a) and the red line on (b) are the experimental 
data. They refer to the blue axis and the red axis respectively. The black solid line and black dash line are simulation result s 
assuming photon generated carriers staying hot 100% and 0% respectively. Both refer to the black axis on the left.  
 
Page | 130  
 
University of Florida  
Development of Novel Water Splitting Catalysts for the Production of Renewable 
Hydrogen  
 
PI:  Helena Hagelin -Weaver                                                                                                                                            
Students:  Justin Dodson (Ph.D.)  
 
Description:  This project focuses on the development of iron -based catalysts for the thermochemical 
splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen.  The thermochemical process of splitting water is 
particularly well -suited for the utilization of solar energy to provide th e heat for the reaction and is a way 
to produce a renewable hydrogen fuel.  As hydrogen is difficult to transport and store, producing 
hydrogen on site for power plants using proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells or internal 
combustion engines to gener ate electricity or for the production of chemicals, such as liquid hydrocarbon 
fuels, is a very attractive approach.  The project uses a two -step process in which water is passed over a 
reduced iron oxide to generate hydrogen while the oxygen is taken up b y the oxygen -deficient iron oxide 
(Step 1:  FeOx -
oxygen and regenerate the oxygen -
FeOx -1 + ½O2).  The main objectives of the project are to develop mixed metal oxide catalysts that 1) 
will release oxygen at temperatures lower than 1500°C (Step 2), while still maintaining water -splitting 
activity (Step 1) and 2) are stable up to the temperature necessary fo r the oxygen desorption step.                                                                                                                                      
Budget: $ 100,000                                                                                                                                                    
Universities:  UF 
Progress Summary  
We have initiated the research and designed the reactor system (Figure 1), purchased a high temperature 
furnace and are in the process of purchasing a  mass spectrometer (MS) for product analysis.  
 
Figure 1:  Drawing of reactor system for reaction studies on developed water -splitting catalysts (MFC = mass flow controller, 
T.C. thermocouple, MS = mass spectrometer).    
Page | 131  
 
University of Florida  
Economic Impacts of Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policies  
 
PI: Theodore Kury    
Students : Colin Knapp, Ph.D. (Post -doctoral Fellow)  
 
 
Description:  PURC is engaging in three new research projects that will provide important information 
for policy makers in Florida. The projects are:  
 
Economic and Job Impacts of State Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policies  
This project will provide empirical estimates of state renewable energy and energy efficiency 
policies on economi c development and jobs. Proponents of state and federal policies promoting 
renewable energy and energy efficiency policies often assert that the policies will have positive 
impacts on jobs, specifically the so called green jobs.  
 
Electric Grid Impacts of State Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policies  
This project will provide an estimate of the impacts of renewable energy policies on the electric 
grid. It will fill a gap in the literature for Florida, which as to date focused on the impacts on 
elect ricity generation.  
 
Effects of Energy Commodity Profit Margins on Effectiveness of Energy Efficiency Programs  
This project will test an assumption that is built into many state energy policies and that is held by 
many policy makers at the national level, namely that utilities would improve consumer energy 
efficiency practices if utility prices were decoupled from utility profits.  
 
 
Budget: $150,000.00  
Universities:  UF  
 
Progress Summary  
 
Work has continued on evaluating the effects of Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPSs) on state -level 
employment.  These policies have become a popular policy in state capitals across the country.  As of 
2010, 36 states and the District of Columbia had adopt ed programs which fall under the RPS umbrella.  
The reasons often cited for the adoption of these programs include; increasing the share of electricity 
generation from renewable sources, thus lowering greenhouse gas emissions and reducing the threat of 
global climate change; increasing security by moving towards national energy independence; and creating 
job growth by dedicating expenditures towards industries or technologies not represented within a state’s 
current mix of employment opportunities. These ou tcomes are supported by a vast ex ante literature 
which forecasts results using input -output analysis and economic forecasting models.   
  
The purpose of this project is to approach the employment claim from a purely ex post  perspective and 
measure the eff ect an RPS has on state -level employment.  Initial results suggest a best -case scenario 
where every job created by an RPS is equally offset by job losses elsewhere in the state.  Alternative 
specifications suggest a worsening employment situation with net job loss in those states which adopt an 
RPS.  Additional results suggest that RPSs do not significantly increase the amount of energy generated  
from renewable sources in these states. This appears because the establishment of these guidelines is done 
with little enforcement of realistic and intermediate targets, making the policy an ‘empty promise’. The 
effectiveness of alternate programs, such as mandatory green power purchasing programs, suggests that   
Page | 132  
 
 
the ‘field of dreams’ mentality that surrounds RPSs may be misguided and other options might exist 
which help satisfy some of the same goals.  
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
Initial work on the effect of renewable portfolio standards (RPS) has been completed.  This includes the 
literature review, data collection, and data analysis concerning the effect of RPS implementation on state -
level employment.  An initial version of the results was presented during a seminar given to Ph.D. 
students studying regulation at the University of Florida on April 19, 2011.  Feedback was  received and 
incorporated into the project.  The updated report on this project is in revision and new results will be 
presented during the 2011 FESC Summit.  The paper associated with this project will be targeted for 
publication in a peer -reviewed journ al such as The Journal of Regulatory Economics .  Following 
submission of the peer -reviewed article, attention will be given to the remaining projects outlined in the 
description.  
  