EU STRATEGY FOR A FUTURE  
CHEMICALS POLICY: REACH
While the REACh legislation has still to be fully defined, 
and this process is now not expected to recommence 
until 2nd half 2006, this feature provided by SafePharm 
provides a substantial technical assessment of the 
detailed Registration Evaluation and Authorisation 
process for Chemical Substances, as it currently stands, 
with which companies will need to comply  to satisfy 
REACh legislation.
1. BACKGR oUND
On 13 February 2001 the European Commission adopted the much-
discussed White Paper ‘Strategy for a Future Chemicals Policy’ [1]. 
This proposes a wide-ranging fundamental overhaul of EU chemical 
control legislation, ie the Dangerous Substances Directive (DSD) [2], 
including the notification scheme for new substances [3], the Dangerous 
Preparations Directive (DPD) [4], the Existing Substances Regulation [5] 
and the Marketing and Use Directive [6]. In essence, the legislation for 
new and existing substances would be merged. The current EU chemical 
control measures result in too great a disparity between new and 
existing substances, with the high cost of new substance notification 
stifling innovation. Furthermore, existing substances account for >99% 
by volume of chemicals in commerce, but are poorly assessed and 
controlled in comparison.
The European Commission published the first draft of legislation 
intended to implement the White Paper on 7 May 2003 [7]. This 
is the Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation (REACH) scheme 
for chemicals. There was an 8-week Internet consultation on the 
‘workability’ of this legislation from 16 May to 10 July 2003 and 
about 6,400 contributions were received. A revised version emerged 
in September 2003, jointly from the Enterprise and Environment 
Directorates of the European Commission and after consultation 
within the Commission, the final proposed Regulation was presented 
on 29  October 2003 [8]. These formal legislative proposals have to be 
discussed by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, 
under the Co-decision Procedure. The European Parliament approved 
a compromise text developed by the UK Presidency on 17 November 
2005 and the Competitiveness Council reached political agreement on 
13 December 2005. This paves the way for REACH to enter into force 
in the summer of 2007, with the European Chemicals Agency (ECA) 
being fully operational a year later. Meanwhile, work on the REACH 
Implementation Projects (RIPs) continues, with the EU Joint Research 
Centre (JRC) gearing up to take a greater role in preparing the technical 
guidance documents. The new and existing substances regimes will 
continue until the REACH regime starts to become operational. 
2. REACH: REGISTRATI oN, EVALUATI oN 
AND AUTHo RISATI oN oF CHEMICALS
REACH will place a duty on companies that produce, import and use 
chemicals to assess the risks arising from their use (with new studies 
conducted in justified cases), and to take the necessary measures 
to manage any risks identified. Hence the burden of proof will be 
transferred from the regulators to industry for putting safe chemicals 
on the market. Testing results have to be shared to reduce any animal 
testing, and registration of information on the properties, uses and safe 
use of chemical substances will be an integral part of the new system. 
These registration requirements will vary depending on the volume in 
which a substance is produced, and on the likelihood of exposure to humans or the environment. A phase-in system lasting up to 11 years 
is planned. Higher tonnage substances would require the most data, 
and would have to be registered first; lower tonnage substances would 
require less data and be registered later.
Tighter controls will be introduced for the chemicals of highest concern,  
i.e. carcinogens, mutagens and reproductive toxicants (CMR’s), 
persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic substances (PBT’s) and very 
persistent and very bioaccumulative substances (vPvB’s) will be 
subjected to an authorisation regime and hence will be registered early.  
Other substances of concern, such as endocrine disrupters, will be 
included on a case-by-case basis within the authorisation system. 
Substances subject to authorisation will have to be approved for a 
specific use, with decisions based on a risk assessment and consideration 
of socio-economic factors.
The REACH system will be administered by the new ECA in Helsinki.
3. THE C oMPR oMISE TEXT AND  
PLANNED DEVEL oPMENTS
The first reading on 17 November 2005 of the proposed REACH 
Regulation by the European Parliament took place and considered over 
1,000 tabled amendments. A compromise text was approved, in a deal 
brokered by Guido Sacconi. Pre-registration of all existing ‘phase-in’ 
substances will be in a single phase 18 months after the Regulation 
comes into force, but with a further 6 months allowed for SME’s and 
downstream users. Earlier registration will be required for PBT and vPvB 
existing substances. Full safety data will only be required for registration 
of substances at 1 to 10 tonnes per annum if they are suspected to be 
classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction (CMR) 
or are assessed as classified as dangerous to human health or the 
environment and are for dispersive or diffusive use, particularly if used 
by consumers. Reproduction toxicology data will normally be needed at 
100 tonnes per annum and above instead of at 10 tonnes per annum. 
Waiving of studies on the grounds of low exposure is introduced for 
specific tests at all tonnages. The ‘one substance one registration’ 
(OSOR) requirement was agreed, but with the possibility of opting out 
if the cost would be disproportionate, where there would be a breach 
of confidentiality or a disagreement on the hazardous properties, 
but sharing of animal testing would still be mandatory and also 
sharing of non-animal testing if requested by one potential registrant. 
Authorisation of very high concern substances will now be subject to 
periodic review.
The European Commission considers that work on existing substances 
under the Existing Substances Regulation [5] will be completed. New 
substance notifications made in the run up to REACH will be handled 
as their equivalents under REACH. Similarly work will carry on for 
classification and labelling, but with a shift towards using the REACH 
documentation from 2006, and the 31st Adaptation to Technical 
Progress (ATP) of the Dangerous Substances Directive is planned for 
November 2006. 
The European Commission plan to bring into force a new Regulation 
implementing the Global Harmonised Classification Scheme (GHS) [9] 
at the same time as REACH becomes operational, which would align 
with the stated political intention to implement GHS by 2008. A draft 
Regulation to implement the GHS is in preparation and a three-month 
internet consultation is planned to start in the first quarter of 2006, 
after which the European Commission will publish a formal proposal.
No.45 • APRIL 2006 INo.45 The first part of a two-part feature
EU STRATEGY FOR A FUTURE  
CHEMICALS POLICY: REACH4. REGISTRATI oN
All substances manufactured or imported in the EU at ≥ 1 tonne per 
annum will be registered with the ECA, who will assign a registration 
number and performs a completeness check using an automated 
process, normally withing three weeks.  The registrations are forwarded 
to Member State competent authorities and entered onto a database 
of registered substances.  Under the compromise text, at least 5% of 
registration dossiers are to be checked in more detail by the ECA.
Registration will be needed before new substances are manufactured or 
imported. Manufacture or import of new substances can begin 3 weeks 
after the registration date, unless the ECA informs the registrant that 
the registration is incomplete.
All phase-in substances, ie. those listed in the European Inventory of 
Existing Chemical Substances (EINECS) or manufactured in the EU 15 
years before the Regulation comes into force, have to be registered 
in a prioritised review.  The deadlines for registration of such ‘phase-
in’ substances are based on the date the new Regulation comes into force (Table 1). The compromise text requires earlier registration of 
substances classified as very toxic to aquatic organisms that may cause 
adverse effects in the aquatic environment (ie. labelled with R50/53).   
A new manufacturer or importer of a phase-in substance can part-
icipate in the review and enter the EU market under the compromise 
text. It is important to note that new substances already notified under 
the current DSD scheme are considered as registered under the new 
REACH system, but further information is required under REACH if the 
manufacture or import quantities are triggered. It is anticipated that 
ca 30,000 substances will be registered, with at least 10,000 requiring 
new testing.
5. EVALUATI oN
It is estimated that around 80% of the registered substances will not 
proceed to the next stage of evaluation. However, the registration 
information for the ca 5000 substances exceeding a manufacture or 
import volume of 100 tonnes per annum will have to be evaluated.  The 
registration dossier for substances at 100 tonnes per annum includes 
a proposal for Annex VII testing, and some substances at below this 
tonnage will also have additional proposed testing. For new substances, 
the ECA evaluate the proposal and produce a draft descision within 180 
days.  Evaluation of testing proposals for phase-in substances has to be 
completed as shown in Table 1, with priority being given to substances 
with CMR, PBT, vPvB or sensitising properties.  The registrant is set a 
deadline to submit the additional studies for examination by the ECA.  
At 1,000 tonnes per annum an equivalent procedure is followed for 
Annex VIII testing.
There is also a procedure for evaluating substances. The ECA select 
substances for evaluation base on a risk-based approach, taking 
into account the hazardous properties, including of analogous 
substances, exposure and tonnage, including aggregated tonnage 
from all registrants. Such substances are evaluated by Rapporteur 
Member States, who select substances from the EU rolling action plan.  
The outcome may be EU harmonised classification, restrictions or adding 
to the list for authorisation.
6. AUTHo RISATI oN AND RESTRICTI oNS
Substances of very high concern will have to be authorised before 
being used for specific purposes that have been demonstrated to 
present a negligible risk. It is estimated that ca 1,400 substances will 
No.45 • APRIL 2006 IICriterion  
P
B
TPBT criteria   
Half-life > 60 d in marine water or > 40 d in fresh or 
esturine water or half-life > 180 d in marine sediment or 
> 120 d in fresh or esturine water sediment or half-life in 
soil > 120 d
BCF > 2,000 in fresh or marine aquatic species
Chronic NOEC < 0.01 mg/l for fresh or marine water 
organisms, Category 1 or 2 carcinogen or mutagen or 
Category 1, 2 or 3 toxic for reproduction or chronically 
toxic ( i.e. classified as T or Xn with R48)vPvB criteria
Half-life > 60 d in marine, fresh or esturine water or 
> 180 d in marine, fresh or esturine water sediment 
or half-life in soil > 180 d
BCF > 5,000
Not applicable• Register new substances at ≥ 1 t.p.a. before manufacture or 
import.
•	Pre-registration of all phase-in substances within a 6-month 
period, beginning 12 months after the Regulation comes into 
force.
•	Registration for phase-in substances (from date Regulation in force):  
-	CMR’s (> 1 t.p.a.):  3 years  
-	> 100 t.p.a (R50/53).:  3 years  
-	> 1,000 t.p.a :  3 years  
-	> 100 t.p.a.:  6 years  
-	> 1 t.p.a.:  11 years
• Draft decisions for phase-in substances for further testing:  
-	CMR’s (> 1 t.p.a):  5 years  
-	> 100 t.p.a (R50/53).:  5 years  
-	> 1,000 t.p.a.:  5 years  
-	> 100 t.p.a.:  9 years  
-	> 1 t.p.a. (if any):  15 yearsTable 1.
(a) BCF is bioconcentration factor, NOEC is no-observed effect concentration and CMR is a substance classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic 
or toxic for reproduction
(b) For marine environmental risk assessment, half-life data in freshwater sediment can be overruled by data obtained under marine 
conditions
(c) Substances are classified when they fulfil the criteria for all three inherent properties for P, B and T. However, there is certain flexibility, 
for instance in cases where one criterion is marginally not fulfilled but the others are exceeded considerably.Table 2. Criteria for Identification of PBT and vPvBbe subject to authorisation. There will be a published list of these 
very high concern substances that are candidates for authorisation. 
Very high concern substances are substances classified as category 
1 or 2 carcinogens, mutagens or toxic for reproduction (CMR’s) or 
persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) or very persistent and very 
bioaccumulative (vPvB). The PBT and vPvB criteria given in Annex XII 
of the Regulation are summarised in Table 2. Endocrine disruptors not 
covered by these criteria will be added to the list of very high concern 
substances on an ad hoc basis.
The first step is to identify existing substances, or particular uses of 
substances, requiring authorisation, and to decide on a deadline for 
authorisation and any uses exempted from authorisation. As additional 
very high concern substances are identified, largely from testing for 
registration and evaluation, they will be fed into the authorisation 
system.
Particular uses of very high concern substances will be authorised in 
the second step on the basis of a risk assessment covering all stages 
of the life-cycle for that particular use submitted by industry. The 
risk assessment will focus on exposure assessment for the use, and 
generally no new studies would be required. There is the possibility 
of authorisation based on adequate control of exposure, but not for 
PBT’s, vPvB’s and ‘non-threshold’ CMR’s. However, the ECA can take into 
account socio-economic factors in deciding if the use of the substance 
can nevertheless be authorised in the EU. The compromise text gives 
greater emphasis to the substitution principle, and applications for 
authorisation have to be accompanied by an analysis of possible 
alternatives with their risks and the technical and economic feasibility 
of substitution.
The compromise text introduced an amendment to require authorisations 
to be subject to time-limited review, to allow further consideration of 
alternative substances. Authorisation is also reviewed if information on 
possible substitutes is submitted to the ECA.
Restrictions for persistent organic pollutants (POP’s) required under 
the Stockholm Convention will also be implemented through the 
restrictions provisions of the Regulation.
7. REGISTRATI oN oBLIGATI oNS
Substances manufactured or imported, either neat or in a preparation, 
at > 1 tonne per annum have to be registered, unless exempted. There is 
the option for a non-EU manufacturer to appoint an EU representative 
to register the substance on behalf of the EU importer(s).
Some substances in articles are subject to registration, and the provisions 
have been clarified under the compromise text. Substances in articles 
have to be registered if they are intended to be released from the 
article and are supplied at > 1 tonne per annum. Instead of registration, 
a less onerous procedure of notification applies to substances present in 
articles at above 0.1% unless release of the substance is excluded. Under 
the compromise text articles manufactured in the EU are treated the 
same as imports. However the ECA can require a substance in an article 
to be registered if it poses a risk to human health or the environment.
Substances notified under the DSD are considered as having been 
registered, as are active substances used only for products covered by 
the Plant Protection Products Directive [10] or the Biocidal Products 
Directive [11] or for coformulants of Plant Protection Products.
The Regulation as a whole does not apply to radioactive substances, 
substances under customs supervision, substances in transit and non-
isolated chemical intermediates or waste. Member states can exempt 
substances in the interest of defence. Substances are also exempt from 
registration if regulated by equivalent EU legislation (human and 
veterinary pharmaceuticals, food additives and flavourings, animal 
feed and substances used in animal nutrition). Furthermore, certain 
categories of substance are exempt from registration (Table 3).Non-isolated chemical intermediates do not have to be registered. 
Site isolated intermediates at ≥ 1 tonne per annum are registered 
with information on the identity of the manufacturer and substance, 
classification and available test data. Registration also applies for 
transported isolated intermediates, which are transported between 
or supplied to other sites under contractual control (including for toll 
or contract manufacture) and for which there are strict conditions for 
manufacture and use to ensure only limited exposure. When transported 
at ≥ 1 tonne per annum these are registered with the same information 
as site isolated intermediates, but at > 1,000 tonnes per annum the basic 
Annex V test data are needed.
Although polymers do not have to be registered, if a polymer contains a 
monomer or other starting substance at ≥ 2% (w/w) in chemically bound 
form at ≥ 1 tonne per annum that has not been registered by another 
registrant, this monomer or starting substance has to be registered by 
the polymer manufacturer or importer. 
Substances used only for process-orientated research and development 
(PORD) are exempt from registration for 5 years (extendable for a 
further 5 years on application in exceptional circumstances or 10 
years for substances used exclusively to develop human or veterinary 
medicines). The manufacturer or importer has to inform the ECA of the 
substance identity, labelling and quantity and list the customers. Those 
customers can only use the PORD substance and it cannot be supplied 
to the public.
8. THE REGISTRATI oN DoSSIER 
AND CHEMICAL SAFETY REP oRT
Annexes IV to VIII of the Regulation specify the information needed 
for registration. The general technical, commercial and administrative 
information needed for all registrations for the technical dossier is 
specified in Annex IV (Table 4) overleaf. 
The technical dossier, including robust summaries of the study reports, 
for registration of chemicals under REACH is to be submitted to the ECA 
electronically using the International Chemical Information Database 
(IUCLID) format [12], which is a well-established database format for 
communicating and storing information on chemicals.
No.45 • APRIL 2006 III• The specific substances listed in Annex II of the Regulation
• Substances covered by Annex III:  
- Degradants from environmental factors  
- Chemical degradants from storage  
- Products from use  
- Products from reaction with additives  
- By-products  
- Hydrates, providing the anhydrous form is registered  
- Non-dangerous natural substances  
- Hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and the noble gases  
- Minerals, ores and ore concentrates, natural gas, crude  
 oil and coal
• Monomers bound into polymers, but note that registration  
 is required if the monomer is present at ≥ 2% (w/w) in the  
 polymer and is at ≥ 1 tonne per annum
• Polymers
• Food and food ingredients
• Waste and certain recycled materials
• Substances needed in the interests of defence.Table 3. Categories of Substance Exempt from  
RegistrationA Chemical Safety Report (CSR) is required for substances registered 
at 10 tonnes per annum unless the substance is present only on 
a preparation at below 0.1% or below the concentration limit(s) 
triggering classification as dangerous of the preparation. This is a risk assessment, following the general provisions of Annex I of the proposed 
REACH Regulation. Substances that are used only to formulate cosmetics 
or to manufacture food-packaging materials are dual regulated, they 
still have to be registered under REACH, although they are subject 
to separate EU measures that involve an evaluation of their safety to 
humans. Hence, in order to avoid duplication of work, the CSR only 
has to include an environmental risk assessment. The compromise text 
gives clarification on the CSR for special preparations such as alloys. 
These general risk assessment principles correspond with the current 
EU practice for notified new substances and priority existing substances 
[13]. The ECA will develop software to help registrants prepare the 
CSR. It is essential to have input from downstream users to prepare the 
risk assessment for the CSR, which in practice may prove problematic.  
The CSR also includes an assessment of whether the substance is classed 
as PBT or vPvB according to the Annex XII criteria (Table 2).
The CSR is a key element in communicating important safety inform-  
ation to users, and a summary of the CSR is to be included with the 
safety data sheet (SDS). Guidance on SDS’s is given in Annex Ia of the 
Regulation. Annex XI of the Regulation advises downstream users on 
carrying out a chemical safety assessment and producing a CSR for  
uses not covered in the registrant’s CSR.
No.45 • APRIL 2006 IVD. J. Knight
 
Derek J Knight is the Director of Regulatory Affairs at Safepharm Laboratories Ltd., a leading UK contract research organisation, specialising in 
safety assessments of chemicals, biocides, and agrochemical pesticides.  He heads a team of regulatory affairs professionals who deal with a wide 
range of registration projects covering many product types for regulatory compliance in all the key markets globally.  As such he has gained an 
overall perspective into commercial issues associated with the regulation of the chemical industry.  He is a Fellow of the RSC and a Fellow of TOPRA. 
His doctoral studies at the University of Oxford were in organosulphur chemistry. 
The next issue of Lube-Tech will contain the second part of this feature.Table 5  Annex V Data for Substances at ≥ 1 tonne per annum
Melting/freezing point
Boiling point
Relative density
Vapour pressure
Surface tension
Water solubility
n-Octanol-water partition coefficient
Flash point or flammability
Explosivity
Auto-flammability
Oxidising propertiesGranulometry
Acute oral toxicity
Skin irritation or corrosivity evaluation or in vitro tests
Eye irritation evaluation or in vitro test
Skin sensitisation evaluation or local lymph node assay
Ames test
Acute Daphnia toxicity
Ready biodegradation
Possible additional studies:
Further mutagenicity tests
21-day Daphnia reproduction study• Technical dossier (in a specified electronic format):
 - Annex IV technical data on the registrant, identification  
 of the substance, manufacture and use and guidance on  
 safe use  
- Robust summaries of safety data  
- Proposed classification and labelling  
- Statement whether animal testing was conducted  
- Proposal for any further testing
• Chemical Safety Report , for subtances at > 10 tonne per 
annum. This is a risk assessment including PBT and vPvB 
assessment.Table 4. General Annex IV Information Needed for  
Registration
The information on hazardous properties, as specified in Annexes V to VIII, is linked to the manufacture/import level, on the grounds that there is 
a potential for more exposure as more substance is in the EU (Tables 5 to 8).  
LINK  
www.safepharm.co.uk