 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waste Management by Biological Approach Employing Natural Substrates and
Microbial Agents for the Remediation of Dyes’Wastewater
Dahiya, D., & Singh - Nee Nigam, P. (2020). Waste Management by Biological Approach Employing Natural
Substrates and Microbial Agents for the Remediation of Dyes’Wastewater. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) , 
10(8), Article 2958. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10082958
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Applied Sciences (Switzerland)
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 24/04/2020
DOI:
10.3390/app10082958
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via Ulster University's Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these
rights.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk.
Download date: 29/08/2024applied  
sciences 
Review
Waste Management by Biological Approach
Employing Natural Substrates and Microbial Agents
for the Remediation of Dyes’ Wastewater
Divakar Dahiya and Poonam Singh Nigam *
Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Ulster University, Coleraine BT52 1SA, Northern Ireland, UK;
ddahiya@hotmail.co.uk
*Correspondence: p.singh@ulster.ac.uk
Received: 13 March 2020; Accepted: 20 April 2020; Published: 24 April 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: This article aims to provide information on two aspects: firstly , waste management of residual
biological agro-industrial materials generated from agriculture, and secondly , for the sustainable remediation
of textile wastewater. Annually, huge amounts of solid renewable biomass materials are generated
worldwide from agricultural and farming sectors. The generation of these vast amounts of solid wastes
could be utilised as a valuable and renewable natural resource for various applications. The goal
of promoting sustainable development has increased the interest in recycling wastes economically
and in an eco-friendly way. This article reviews the published research on this topic and discusses
the usage of these solid substrates in the remediation of a major environmental component, textile
dye-contaminated water. The purpose of this article is to discuss an integrated and cross-disciplinary
approach to sustainable solid and liquid waste management and remediation of environmental
components and to report the biological approaches and their e ciency in a chemical-free and
economically viable bioremediation process for large volumes of dye-contaminated water resources.
Keywords: agro wastes; waste management; waste remediation; bioremediation; textile e uent;
dyes; agricultural residues
1. Environmental Pollution Due to Textile Wastewater
The protection of the aquatic environment and life by regulation guidelines of water pollution
has become of increasing importance. Although the release of dyes containing coloured water into
the environment only contributes a small proportion of water pollution, when compared to other
chemical-pollutants, dyes are visible due to their colour even if present in very small quantities. Strict
legislation is forcing textile industries to dispose of their waste-e uent after treatment to a required
standard. Dyes are used mainly in textile manufacturing to dye fabrics in di erent colours. The dyes
are soluble compounds and are commonly classiﬁed under groups of reactive, direct, basic, and acid
dyes. The annual production of these dyes is estimated at over 7 l05tons worldwide, whereas
approximately 10–15% of dye production is wasted in the water bodies during the various processes in
dye manufacturing and dyeing in multiple industries.
Wastewater generated from the textile industry is a mixture of a variety of polluting materials,
including synthetic dyes and other chemicals used in washing and colour-stripping of over or uneven
dyed cotton and during the ﬁnishing of coloured fabric. These dyes are recalcitrant to microbial
degradation because they contain substitutions such as azo, nitro, or sulpho groups.
Several types of synthetic dyes as colour-contributing chemicals are being used in textile companies,
although in smaller quantities. The synthetic dyes not only affect the aesthetic quality of water sources due
to their colour, but also increase biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD),
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958; doi:10.3390 /app10082958 www.mdpi.com /journal /applsciAppl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 2 of 13
inhibiting the rate of photosynthesis and plant growth. Dye-contaminated water, if used for irrigation,
might enter our food chain, which in the long term will result in recalcitrance and bioaccumulation,
and in the development of toxicity, mutagenicity, and carcinogenicity in living systems. The presence of
dyes contributes a small fraction of the total organic-load present in wastewater; however, if disposed of
as untreated wastewater, their colour in water sources makes them visually unacceptable [ 1]. Wastewater
discharge from textile and dyes manufacturing companies to water bodies and water treatment systems
disturbs the ecosystem. It causes health concerns to aquatic life, flora, and fauna; in return, humans are
also affected by consuming seafood sourced from such contaminated water. This whole cycle of health
concern is alarming to environment-regulatory authorities. Removal of colour from effluents has become
of global scientific interest, which is evident from several scientific reports published on this subject [ 2–4].
In the last few decades, many physico-chemical techniques for the decolourisation of textile wastewater
havebeenreported, butonlyafewarepracticallypossibleforusebythetextileindustries. Theirimplementation
is not profitable due to their high cost, less efficiency , and inapplicability of methods to treat a wide range
of synthetic dyes present in large volumes of water. Conventionally , the removal of dyes from wastewater
has been practiced by physical and chemical methods. Some commonly used methods are adsorption,
coagulation, precipitation, filtration, oxidation, and ion-exchange affinity-adsorption [ 5], which have been
used for the remediation of textile effluent. The process of adsorption appears to offer the best prospects
over all the other treatments. These systems are mostly expensive, and although the concentration of dyes is
either reduced or removed from wastewater, after the treatment process, the resultant sludge creates another
problem in terms of their safe and economical disposal.
Microbial degradation of several azo and anthraquinone types of dyes has been previously
reported. Employing microbial systems means, bacteria worked only under anaerobic conditions and
the azo dyes were reduced to their corresponding amines and which were di cult to completely break
down aerobically [ 2–4]. Therefore, it is important to ﬁnd alternative treatments for removing dyes
from large volumes of textile e uents and particularly those methods that are environment-friendly
and economical. Robinson et al. [ 4] have critically reviewed several physical and chemical processes
used by other researchers and concluded that the use of a practical and cheaper alternative for the
decolourisation, such as biological or combination systems, could only be applicable on a large-scale.
In the following sections, we review information published on various options for the treatment
of dye-contaminated water using biological materials and systems.
2. Use of Agricultural Residues as Low-Cost Sorbents in Colour Removal
Nigam et al. [ 6] have investigated in detail a few non-chemical methods for textile-effluent treatment.
Researchers used three renewable natural substrates that are widely available globally as agricultural
residues, either free of cost or at a very low cost. Corn-cob shreds, wood-chips, and wheat-straw were
used in experiments for their ability to adsorb individual dyes and mixture of dyes from solutions
consisting of synthetic dyes commonly used in textile companies. Nine individual Ciba Geigy dyes were
used: Cibacron Red C-2G-reactive dye, Remazol Navy Blue GG-diazo dye, Remazol Red RB-diazo dye,
Cibacron Orange CG-reactive dye, Remazol Golden Yellow RNL-azo dye, Hisperse Navy D2GR-disperse
dye, Remazol Blue B-diazo dye, Remazol Turquoise Blue G 133 -phthalocynine dye, and Remazol Black
B-diazo dye. The textile effluent was simulated as a mixture of all nine dyes. These residual agricultural
substrates were used for removing colour from dye-contaminated water instead of using chemicals in
order to study them as an economical and eco-friendly method of bio-remediation. Researchers have
reported that up to 70–75% colour removal was achieved using corncob shreds and wheat straw from
solutions of 500 mg /L dye [ 6–8]. Increasing the temperature of the process to above room temperature
for the adsorption of dyes had no appreciable effect on the adsorption capacity of both residues. Corncob
was the most efficient in dye colour removal, whereas wood chips had no adsorption of dyes due to
their lignin-containing complex structure.
There are other reports where researchers have used some locally /regionally available, low-cost,
agricultural materials as biosorbents, such as residual apple pomace left after the juice extraction andAppl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 3 of 13
wheat straw, for the removal of colour from a solution of textile dyes [ 9]. Experiments were performed
with a synthetic e uent prepared in a lab, consisting of an equal mixture of ﬁve types of textile dyes at
total dye concentrations of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 150, and 200 mg /L of solution. The factors studied by
these workers included the e ect of dye concentration in solution, particle size of agricultural residues
used as bio-sorbent material, amount of biosorbent added in dye-solution, the rate of adsorbance,
percentage of dye removal, and the application of isotherms of Langmuir and Freundlich. The results
proved apple pomace to be a better material for colour adsorption, adsorbing 81% of dyes from the
synthetic e uent when used in the form of 2 4 mm particles. Even higher colour removal was
achieved, up to 91%, when using dried apple pomace in a ﬁne powdered form containing 600- m
particles. Apple pomace showed adsorption of dyes at a faster rate than the other substrate of wheat
straw; the reason is that wheat-straw has less sorption power in its complex lignin-containing structure,
and apple pomace has negligible lignin.
The use of these cheaply available substrates has been compared with the biosorption capacity of
other commonly available agricultural residues, e.g., corncob and barley-husk [ 10]. The e ectiveness
of adsorption mechanism, as a method of colour removal, has made it an ideal alternative to other
reported methods, which proved to be expensive treatments. Researchers conducted experiments in
simulated e uents made of an equal amount of ﬁve commonly used textile dyes, setting the total dye
concentrations in solution up to 200 mg L 1. Several parameters were studied for the optimisation
of the process, including dye concentration in solution, size of agricultural residue-particles used
as sorbent, dose of biosorbent added in solution, e ective adsorbance of dyes on particles of solid
substrates, and the kinetics of process of dye removal. Authors have reported that 10 grams (dry
weight) of corncob of 600-m particle size used per 1000 mL solution of dyes was more e ective in
adsorption of a high percentage of colour in a shorter time (92% reduction in colour of solution within
48 h of sorption process). The other substrate of barley husk used in the form of particle size 1 4 mm
was most e ective in reference to the weight vs. particle size combination for the adsorption of dyes
up to 92% in 48 h. The results indicated both substrates, barley husk and corncob, could be used as
economical and e ective biosorbents for the removal of dyes from textile e uent [8,10]
2.1. Optimisation of System Using Agricultural Residues
2.1.1. Pretreatment of Lignocellulosic Residues
The agricultural residues are lignocellulosic in nature; their 20–25% lignin content is a barrier in
the eective use of cellulosic content. These residues can be e ectively used for the sorption process
after removing the lignin content from the substrates, making their cellulosic content freely-available
for dye-sorption. The pretreatment of three agricultural residues, including barley husk, corncob,
and wheat straw, were performed mainly for their deligniﬁcation and to increase the surface area for the
eective adsorption of coloured molecules by treated substrates [ 7]. A few commonly used pretreatment
methods, mainly milling of large size material, steaming, alkali treatment, and ammonia-steeping,
were tried and the performance of untreated and pretreated substrates was checked for their colour
adsorption capabilities. The milled (powdered) samples removed a higher percentage of dye at a faster
rate; therefore, milling of substrates to reduce particle size proved to be a better option for pretreatment
of solid agricultural residual materials. Milling is also cost-e ective and eco-friendly treatment process
compared to steaming, alkali, or ammonia-steeping. The authors recommended the milling or grinding
of substrates so no cost was calculated for chemical pretreatment methods. Three milled residues have
been used in studies of adsorption process for colour removal from a solution of ﬁve commonly used
dyes, which were obtained for experiments from a textile company (Remazol Black B, Cibacron Yellow
C-2R, Cibacron Blue C-R, Cibacron Red C-2G, and Remazol Red RB) [7].Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 4 of 13
2.1.2. Optimisation of Adsorption Conditions and Bio-Reactors
A simple approach for the adsorption of textile dyes from the solution was studied by Chandran et al. [ 10].
The artiﬁcial dye-e uent was prepared by mixing two types of Clariant dyes, Solar Jade Green FFB
and Solar orange 7 GLL, and the absorption of colour was studied onto particles of three commonly
available agricultural residues, i.e., wheat straw, sugarcane bagasse, and barley husk. These agricultural
residues particles of 600- m size were used as sorbent-material in solution at 20% concentration (dry
weight, w/v); each substrate was tested in a separate experiment. The dye removal could be clearly
seen within all substrates when the e uent contained dye concentrations in the range of 50 to 200
mg/L. Dye-adsorption on substrates was performed and calculated using two main conditions at which
actual e uent is generated in textile industries. The conditions studied in the adsorption system were
the eect of temperature of the solution in range of 25 to 50C and pH 6.0 to 12.0 [9].
The bioreactors were designed by Robinson et al. [ 11] for batch and continuous dye-adsorption
onto solid residues. The researchers studied the adsorption of ﬁve reactive dyes present in a synthetic
textile dye e uent on particles of barley husks in process-systems designed as a static batch-mode
reactor and a packed-bed reactor (CFPBR) operating with a continuous ﬂow of e uent, with the
purpose of a large-volume of water treatment. Under static batch-mode conditions, the adsorption of
dyes, initial concentrations ( C0), and thermodynamics were studied, whereas, in CFPBR, the e ect
ofC0and retention time ( ) were studied by changing the packed weight and the height of packing
column, which could a ect the kinetics of dye adsorption. The saturation capacities were predicted by
Langmuir isotherm. In such experiments, barley husks removed 8 mg dyes per g dry weight of barley
husk at C0100 mg L 1in the reactor (CFPBR), with a column ﬂow adjusted with a liquid-residence time
of 11 min. In such a set-up of the reactor, the authors achieved 90% adsorption of colour on particles of
barley husk [ 12]. The safety of disposal of the biosorbant material after the biosorption-removal of
dyes was studied, as described in the following sections.
3. Use of Microbial Agents in Remediation System
3.1. White-Rot Fungi in Solid-State Cultivation
The dye-adsorbed agricultural residues that resulted after the above dye-removal experiments
needed safe disposal into the environment. Several experiments were conducted using dye-adsorbed
material, and the researchers found that these dye-adsorbed substrates could be used in solid-state
fermentation (SSF) cultivating two strains of white-rot fungi- Coriolus versicolor and Phanerochaete
chrysosporium [12,13]. Both fungi grew well in the form of thick mycelial growth in SSF without any
inhibition due to presence of dye chemicals and produced a fungal-biomass with a protein content of
19, 23, 50 g and 16, 25, 35 g, respectively, per 100 g dry weight of three substrates used in SSF: wood
chips, corncob shreds, and wheat straw (Figures 1 and 2).
Robinson and Nigam, [ 13] followed a strict screening strategy for the selection of most e ective
microorganism for dye-degradation employing few white-rot fungi in SSF. The process was studied for
the treatment of an actual e uent generated from one Ireland-based American textile industry. After the
screening process, one fungus, Bjerkandera adusta, was investigated in detail for its ability to grow on
solid substrate adsorbed with dye-molecules. Fungal mycelium produced in solid-state fermentation
enriched the nutritional quality of residual barley husks. Project work included the detailed study
of important parameters, including SSF-medium composition, requirements of moisture, enzymes
produced by fungi during SSF, and the protein content in fermented barley husk covered with fungal
mycelium biomass. Experiments were further conducted to optimise the protein-enrichment of SSF
material by supplementing the process with nitrogen at a 20:1 C:N ratio [ 14]. This approach provided
preliminary ﬁndings and suggestions for the treatment of textile e uent, and the bioconversion
of utilised agricultural substrates as dye-adsorbed material into protein-enriched mass after fungal
growth for their safe recycling as a soil conditioner when mixed with soil.Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 5 of 13
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 14 
bioconversion of utilised agricultural substrates as  dye-adsorbed material into protein-enriched mass 
after fungal growth for their safe recycling as a soil conditioner when mixed with soil. 
 
Figure 1. Recycling of agricultural residual material for textile dyes-removal from wastewater, and 
bioremediation using bioagents. (Picture taken by author P. Nigam from lab experiment, not 
published anywhere). 
 
Figure 2. Growth of two white-rot fungi Phanerochaete chrysosporium  and  Coriolus versicolor  in the 
fermentation of dye-adsorbed subs trates. (Picture taken by author P. Nigam from lab experiment, not 
published anywhere).  
A method, which was previously optimised [15]  for the extent of dye desorption from dye-
adsorbed solid particles, was used to measure the degradation of dyes as a result of fungal enzyme activity during the period of SSF. Using this method, fungal strain B. adusta  was reported to 
decolourise the synthetic dye up to 53% in SSF performed at a moisture content of 80–85%. The 
fermented mass due to fungal-growth was enriched wi th protein and analysed as 229 g/kg dry weight 
Figure 1. Recycling of agricultural residual material for textile dyes-removal from wastewater, and
bioremediation using bioagents. (Picture taken by author P . Nigam from lab experiment, not published
anywhere).
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 14 
bioconversion of utilised agricultural substrates as  dye-adsorbed material into protein-enriched mass 
after fungal growth for their safe recycling as a soil conditioner when mixed with soil. 
 
Figure 1. Recycling of agricultural residual material for textile dyes-removal from wastewater, and 
bioremediation using bioagents. (Picture taken by author P. Nigam from lab experiment, not 
published anywhere). 
 
Figure 2. Growth of two white-rot fungi Phanerochaete chrysosporium  and  Coriolus versicolor  in the 
fermentation of dye-adsorbed subs trates. (Picture taken by author P. Nigam from lab experiment, not 
published anywhere).  
A method, which was previously optimised [15]  for the extent of dye desorption from dye-
adsorbed solid particles, was used to measure the degradation of dyes as a result of fungal enzyme activity during the period of SSF. Using this method, fungal strain B. adusta  was reported to 
decolourise the synthetic dye up to 53% in SSF performed at a moisture content of 80–85%. The 
fermented mass due to fungal-growth was enriched wi th protein and analysed as 229 g/kg dry weight 
Figure 2. Growth of two white-rot fungi Phanerochaete chrysosporium and Coriolus versicolor in the
fermentation of dye-adsorbed substrates. (Picture taken by author P . Nigam from lab experiment, not
published anywhere).
A method, which was previously optimised [ 15] for the extent of dye desorption from dye-adsorbed
solid particles, was used to measure the degradation of dyes as a result of fungal enzyme activity
during the period of SSF. Using this method, fungal strain B. adusta was reported to decolourise the
synthetic dye up to 53% in SSF performed at a moisture content of 80–85%. The fermented mass due to
fungal-growth was enriched with protein and analysed as 229 g /kg dry weight of substrate used in
fermentation. After SSF, the fermented mass of dye-adsorbed residues was analysed for actual dyes
degradation by fungi and content of dyes still left adsorbed on fermented substrates. There was no
standard method for the quantitative analyses of dyes contained in solid agricultural substrates after
microbial degradation; therefore, researchers [ 15] studied the extraction of colour from SSF-material,
which could be analysed quantitatively. Two types of preparation of solvents—A consisted of methanol
+chloroform +water in equal ratio; B consisted of 1:1 methanol and water—were tested to washAppl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 6 of 13
out the dyes adsorbed onto substrates’ particles. This method was optimised for the analyses of the
percentage of dyes degraded during fungal growth in SSF.
Apple pomace, barley husk, and corncob were soaked separately in individual solutions of ﬁve
separate dyes, and in a synthetic textile-e uent prepared by mixing equal ratio of all ﬁve dyes, which
were used for the adsorption of dyes on substrates’ particles. Two preparations of solvents named as A
and B were used for the extraction or desorption of colour from these dye-adsorbed substrates. Using
solvent A, the maximum level of 93% desorption of Cibacron Red from corncob was achieved. The most
eective substrate was barley husk, from which 82% the synthetic textile e uent could be desorbed
using solvent A. This method was applied as an approximate calculation of dyes degradation in
SSF [ 15] in solutions of dyes extracted /desorbed from dye-adsorbed material using solvents, before and
after SSF by fungal growth.
3.2. Bacterial Cultures in Submerged Fermentations
The capability of some bacteria to decolourise and metabolise dyes is known, and therefore the
use of remediation technology using these microbes has attracted the interest of many researchers for
the biological-treatment of textile wastewater. A group of researchers [ 3] have studied microbiological
decolourisation of dyes from textile industries and reported on its benefits and limitations. Other group [ 4]
reviewed the mechanisms of degradation of dyes used by diverse groups of microorganisms, including
anaerobic bacteria consortia. The employment of bacteria for their ability to carry out dye decolourisation
has been studied in detail [ 2–4]. The research work has revealed the isolation of a variety of microorganisms
capable of decolourising a wide range of synthetic dyes. Microbial degradation and decolourisation of
dyes is beneficial, being a chemical-free method for the removal of these chemicals from the water sources.
A practical and simple biological process using bacteria for the decolourisation of coloured
wastewater obtained from a textile company has been studied by Nigam et al. [ 16–18]. Few aerobic
and anaerobic microbes were isolated, showing their capability to decolourise dyes present in textile
euent samples, after prolonged enrichment-culturing of samples collected from textile industry.
The decolourisation of some dyes of the effluent and of a solution made in a lab with a mixture of dyes was
only observed under anaerobic conditions, suggesting that the chromophoric bonds in the dye structure
were broken by bacteria. The five anaerobic bacterial isolates (named as PDC 1 to 5) capable of complete
decolourisation of some dyes in individual-dye solutions were further examined in liquid fermentation
under anaerobic conditions. One bacterial isolate was capable of decolourising Remazol-Red (diazo
dye), Cibacron-red (reactive dye), and Remazol-Golden Yellow (azo dye) completely within one day
(24–30 h) of the fermentation process. It also decolourised a reactive dye, Cibacron-Orange, and a diazo
dye, Remazol Navy Blue, within 48 h; Remazol-Blue was decolourised within 54 h.
The researchers have reported that the decolourisation of these dyes was permanent with no
revert or change in the colour of the medium on exposure to oxygen. However, a phthalocyanine dye,
Remazol-Turquoise Blue, was ﬁrst completely decolourised but its original colour partially reversed
after the exposure of the fermented medium to air. The possible applications of these bacterial isolates in
decolourisation and treatment of textile dye e uent have been discussed in a few publications [ 16–18].
A microbial consortium named as PDW, isolated from dye-contaminated soil samples collected from
a textile company , was studied in detail [ 17]. This consortium was found capable of the fast decolourisation
of commercial textile dyes in a process performed under anaerobic conditions. Decolourisation was
affected by the presence of another carbon source in the medium containing textile dyes. This bacterial
consortium was found efficient in dye decolourisation when growing in dye-solutions supplemented
with low-cost and readily available industrial byproducts used as carbon sources, including lactose-whey ,
distillery-waste, and starch. PDW reduced colour from textile plant effluent up to 76% in 3 days [ 17].
Bacterial culture was grown in simulated effluent (mixture of nine dyes, total concentration of dyes 0.5 g /L
or 500 mg /L),and with individual dye components at the same concentration of 0.5 g /L, separately.
Bacteria could grow at 0.5 g /L dye concentration, which is a very dark coloured solution compared to
dye concentration in water bodies after the disposal of actual dye e uent. So if bacteria could removeAppl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 7 of 13
76% of colour at 0.5 g or 500 mg /L dye solutions, these could be applied to much-diluted solution of
dyes (0.1, 0.2 g /L) for a higher percentage of dye removal, fulﬁlling the environmental regulations.
For large volumes of textile water remediation, microbial fermentation performed in batch
conditions for 5–6 days is not a practical and economical option; hence, a continuous treatment system
should be in operation to deal with vast volumes generated in textile industries. For this purpose,
researchers have experimented on immobilising bacterial cultures in a biofilm system for their long-term
application in a continuous-flow decolourisation process [ 18]. Some cheaply available materials, such as
solidified highly porous volcanic lava called Kissiris obtained from Greece, seashells, sponge-scrubbers,
and nylon-webs, were used to grow biofilms of individual bacteria and bacterial-consortium with
capabilities of textile-effluent decolourisation. These biofilm-containing support systems were studied
for their efficiency in the decolourisation in a continuous-flow packed-bed-column bioreactor (CFPBR)
system. Biofilm support systems using volcanic mineral material, nylon-web, and seashells supported
good bacterial growth in the form of actively growing bio-films . These bio-systems were established to
decolourise textile e uent, without the release of a noticeable number of bacterial-cells released from
bioﬁlm attached to the substratum into the outﬂow of treated e uent [ 17,18]. Therefore, a continuous
process for e uent treatment could be performed for a longer period treating a larger volume of
euent compared to a batch treatment process. The e uent generated by textile companies is high in
temperature; therefore, Banat et al. [ 19] studied the isolation of thermophilic bacterial strains capable
of growing and decolourising textile dyes present in e uents at higher temperatures.
3.3. Use of Other Microorganisms (Yeast and Fungi)
The ability of a thermo-tolerant strain of yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus has been investigated
by Meehan et al. [ 20] to decolourise a commonly used textile dye, Remazol-BlackB. The e ect of
important culture conditions, e.g., of pH and temperature, were studied. No appreciable e ect on
decolourisation was seen in a pH range of 3.0–5.5. Maximum colour removal up to 98%, was achieved
when yeast grew at 37C. No colour removal was observed in the experiment of K. marxianus grown
under anaerobic cultivation conditions. Further studies for decolourisation were conducted under
conditions of extreme temperature and lower pH (to inhibit the yeast growth and to study the role of
yeast in decolourisation). When using ten times concentrated yeast inoculum, the results proved that
the decolourisation of medium appeared by adsorption of colour onto the yeast cells; no metabolic
reaction happened in the breaking down of dye molecules [20].
Few fungi also have been studied for their ability to break down five different textile-dyes when mixed
together in an artificial lab-made dye-effluent. The experiments were performed using Coriolopsis gallica
andPhanerochaete chrysosporium in nitrogen-rich medium at C:N ratio set at 11.6:1, and in nitrogen-limited
medium at C:N ratio set at 116:1 [ 14].P . chrysosporium showed 53.6% decolourisation of the effluent in
N-rich medium and a bit lower at 48% in a medium of limited N. However, in another fungal culture
ofC. gallica , the decolourisation capability was higher, up to 86.9% in N-limited and 80.7% in N-rich
medium. The supplementation of nitrogen helped in the stimulation of enzyme activities, and, as a result,
dye decolourisation was improved for P . chrysosporium . However, the increasing nitrogen level stimulated
enzyme production in C. gallica without any improvement in the rate of decolourisation. These results
highlighted the possible use of fungal cultures for the treatment of dye effluent.
During ongoing experiments for a search of effective microorganisms capable of degrading synthetic
dyes in effluents, a filamentous fungi growing under facultative anaerobic condition was isolated from a
vessel containing dyes-effluent stored for a longer period [ 21]. This fungi showed the ability to grow on
dyes as the sole source of carbon when cultivated under two different conditions, aerobic and anaerobic.
This fungal isolate grew in the form of a thick mycelial mat in dye-containing medium, but no decolourisation
of the medium was observed, indicating that the fungus did not produce required enzymes to break the
azo-bond present in dye molecules, though it metabolised other parts in dye structure to support its thick
mycelial growth.Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 8 of 13
The evidence for the use of dyes by fungus for its growth came from the physical examination of
fermented medium in comparison with the control mycelium-free dye-supplemented growth medium.
This was conﬁrmed analytically using capillary electrophoresis and UV–vis spectrophotometry.
The analysis showed that though the dye solution was not decolourised, but results showed changes
in the UV–vis spectra. The results were indicative of degradative-changes, which occurred in the parts
of dye molecules other than on their chromophoric centres. The authors concluded from the study of
the degraded dyes by capillary-electrophoresis that the thick mycelial growth of fungus induced the
structural changes in dyes [21].
4. Enzymes Involved in Dye Degradation
A group of lignin-containing plant-residue-decaying microorganisms has been classified in class
basidiomycetes as white-rot fungi. These fungi have capability to degrade lignin molecules present in the
complex polymers into carbon dioxide and water. The fungal metabolism produces several extracellular
enzymes, which have been studied for their activities in the degradation of lignin and lignin-type
molecules. These enzymes are reported to be heme peroxidases, such as manganese peroxidase (MnP),
versatile peroxidase (VP), lignin peroxidase (LiP), and laccase (Lac) [ 22–24]. Dye-decolourising peroxidase
(DyP) is a member of the novel heme peroxidase family (DyP-type peroxidase superfamily), showing
no homology to fungal heme peroxidases—MnP , VP , and LiP [ 25,26]. Laccase and lignin peroxidase
have been identified to be two main enzymes in solid-state fermentation performed with dye-adsorbed
substrates [ 12]. Four different white-rot cultures, including Bjerkandera adusta, Coriolus versicolor ,Pleurotus
ostreatus, andPhlebia tremellosa were grown in SSF to synthesise enzymes responsible for lignocellulosic
and similar structure-containing materials. Three types of enzymes, laccase, lignin-peroxidase (LiP),
and manganese-peroxidase (MnP), were produced in a mineral salt medium that was nitrogen-deficient.
P . tremellosa andB. adusta produced high enzyme activities and performed better in the decolourisation of
an artificial effluent consisting of five different dyes. Degradation studies were performed at a higher
C:N ratio of 11.6:1 and under an N-limited condition (C:N ratio of 116:1) in a medium with 100 mg /L
dye. Cultivation of B. adusta for 7 days in N-rich medium decolourised dyes to 85%, and P . tremellosa
decolourised dyes up to 79% in 9 days. In contrast, under N-limited conditions, 86% of the effluent was
decolourised by B. adusta in 9 days, and 74% decolourisation was shown in the medium of P.tremellosa
after 11 days. Supplementation of nitrogen showed no effect on percentage dye decolourisation by
B. adusta, though only a slight increase was noticed in P . tremellosa. However, the decolourisation time
was reduced by nitrogen supplementation. These results indicated the potential of P . tremellosa andB.
adusta for textile-effluent treatment [13].
Some strains of microorganisms are reported for their activity in the decolourisation of textile dyes
as they are capable of producing a specific enzyme complex [ 26]. Such capability was explored in a
different scenario in the textile industry by Chatha et al. [ 27]. The problem of faulty dyeing due to uneven
colouring often occurs in the finished fabrics in the textile industry . This uneven extra colouring is usually
removed through a process called chemical-stripping, which helps in removing the loose dyes from cotton
fabrics. A research project was undertaken to study the stripping of colour from cotton-fabrics dyed
with a synthetic dye, C.I. reactive black 5, in an environment-friendly effort using microbial-enzymes
instead of using the method of stripping by synthetic chemicals. The microbial enzymes were prepared by
cultivating a white-rot fungus, Ganoderma lucidum, in solid-state fermentation (SSF), applying optimised
conditions. Crude preparations of SSF-enzyme extract were used in the biological colour-stripping process.
The enzymes produced in culture extract from the fermentation of white-rot fungus G. lucidum ,
were analysed as laccase (EC1.10.3.2) with the activity of 68 U /mL, lignin peroxidase (EC1.11.1.14)
with the activity 530 U /mL, and manganese peroxidase (EC1.11.1.13) with the activity of 395 U /mL.
Important parameters to achieve e ective colour-stripping were studied, such as enzyme activity
(units) present in SSF-extracted ﬁltrate, the conditions of enzyme reaction such as duration of enzyme
contact with the coloured fabric, pH, and temperature. The colour-stripping e ciency using the
enzyme-catalysed process was measured in the treated fabric as K /S values, before and after theAppl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 9 of 13
enzymatic colour removal [ 27]. In this study, culture ﬁltrate extracted from solid-state fermentation
was used without any puriﬁcation process as a crude preparation of enzyme. This source of enzymes
consisted of appreciable units of laccase, lignin peroxidase, and manganese peroxidase activities. Using
crude extract as a cheaper enzyme preparation in an optimised process, up to 71% of colour-stripping
of uneven-dyed fabric could be achieved. There are reports for using crude enzyme extracts for dye
decolourisation [ 28]. In contrast, in other reports, puriﬁed and speciﬁcally characterised preparation of
enzymes were used for dye decolourisation and hydrolysis of straw [ 29,30]. Our approach of using
crude inexpensive enzyme preparation is not only safer to use on fabrics but also environment-friendly
for colour-stripping in the textile industry, in comparison to chemical methods that could be damaging
if used on cotton fabric.
5. Toxicity of Dye E uents
The textile dyes are highly toxic and potentially carcinogenic [ 31], causing damage to the environment
and various diseases in animals and humans [ 32]. Bioremediation refers to the use of microbial systems
to reduce, if not completely eliminate, the concentrations of toxic wastes, which could be hazardous to
the ecosystem. The detoxiﬁcation of coloured chemicals is anticipated to reduce the toxicity of these
compounds. The main objective should be zero emission of colour, as well as the removal of toxic
compounds through the discharge of treated textile e uent into the environment. The reason why
this is so important is the enzymatic breakdown reactions in the microbial decolourization process
produces colourless products that could be even more toxic than the actual colouring chemicals [33].
The toxicity in effluents is mainly due to the formation of dye metabolites. Azo dyes are composed of
aromatic amines, substituted benzene, and naphthalene rings, which have been identified as potentially
carcinogenic molecules. Although most of azo dyes are non-toxic, in the treatment process, the breakdown
compounds produced have been found to be toxic. Many textile effluents may also contain heavy metals
that can be structurally complexed in azo dyes. The breakdown mechanism contributing to the toxicity
of azo dye-compounds could be due to several reasons. Either azo dyes become toxic only after the
cleavage of the azo bond, resulting in their reduction to aromatic amines, or some azo dyes containing
free aromatic amine groups can be metabolically-oxidised without azo reduction, or, following the direct
oxidation of the azo linkage present in azo dye, toxic activation takes place due to the production of
electrophilic diazonium salts. The textile industry effluents are recalcitrant to biodegradation due to
the presence of various types of dyes, and in this way, they cause toxicity to water-sources. Therefore,
the decolourisation and detoxification of textile wastewater are very important to degrade the toxic
chemicals present in textile wastewater before releasing it into waterbodies [31–33].
Toxicity Tests
The wastewater generated from the textile industries after treatment is generally released into
water resources for irrigation of agricultural lands. Therefore, it is obligatory to test the toxicity of
textile effluents before and after treatment on the crop-seeds. For this purpose, the usual methods to
study phytotoxicity are through the monitoring of germination of crop-seeds and, later, the growth of
seedlings into plants. These studies are important to assess the toxic nature of dye molecules released
into irrigation water. Pourbabaee et al. [ 34] studied the germination of three plant seeds irrigated with
untreated and treated textile wastewater. A 100% inhibition in seeds germination was noticed in Lens
orientalis and 50–60% in Triticum boeoticum with the use of untreated effluent at 30 ppm, while 100%
inhibition occurred at 50–150 ppm in T. boeoticum . The least sensitive seeds were from Triticum aestivum ,
which showed 30% and 50% inhibition at 30 and 50–150 ppm, respectively. In the study of bacterial
bioremediation employing Bacillus sp., after the treatment process, the effluent was 100% decolourised
and found less toxic, showing 10% inhibition in T. boeoticum seeds and 0.0% on L. orientalis andT. aestivum
seeds. This toxicity test resulted in the assumption that due to the consumption of biodegradation
products formed by Bacillus sp. or transformation to non-toxic metabolites, the germination of seeds
was not adversely affected.Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 10 of 13
Liao et al. [ 35] have studied the toxic e ects of an azo dye, Reactive Black B (RBB), on the cultivation
of a freshwater algae Chlorella vulgaris, which is a microalgae mainly used as a dietary supplement or
protein-rich food additive. The studies showed that a growth medium containing azo dye RBB was
toxic for the growth of algae toxicity with EC 50calculated as 48 mg L–1. Kabra et al. [ 36] have studied
the toxicity e ect of untreated and treated dye mixture and textile e uent using a bacterial consortium
(Glandularia pulchella +Pseudomonas monteilii ANK) on germination and growth of seeds of two crops,
Phaseolus mungo andSorghum vulgare . The outcome of their experiment showed a higher percentage
of seeds germination in experimental-sets irrigated with distilled water and treated textile e uents
and treated dye mixture, whereas the growth of seedlings was inhibited in sets of untreated e uents
and dye mixture. This study conﬁrmed the toxicity of untreated dyes wastewater, while the treated
samples produced similar results for the germination of seeds as with the use of distilled water.
In comparison to bacterial treatment for dye colour removal, the fungal treatment of textile dyes is an
economical and effective alternative for bioremediation. The main mechanisms involved are biosorption,
bioaccumulation, and biodegradation [ 37]. Therefore, myco-remediation is a natural and low-cost process [ 38].
In this case, endophytic biodegradation occurs because of the activity of fungal enzymes, laccase, lignin
peroxidase, Mn peroxidase, reductase, and tyrosinase [ 39]. Moreover, the breakdown process takes place
in a confined environment as in soil-conditioning and composting, as compared to the discharge of toxic
effluents and treated effluents into water resources after bacterial treatment in liquid systems [4,12,13].
6. Conclusions and Future Perspective
Several researchers have suggested different processes and technologies for the remediation of
textile wastewater [ 40–43]; most of them have employed microbial agents, including bacterial and fungal
species, from a variety of sources [ 44]. Agricultural residual materials have complex structures with high
strength, environmentally friendly nature, low cost, and global availability. A few important agro-waste
products, which are suitable for reducing chemical contaminants in water, have been reviewed for their
applicability for remediation of chemical contaminants in water systems [ 45]. A review of the above
research suggests that cheaply available agricultural residues are available globally as low-cost materials,
which could be used for two purposes: Firstly, their economic and safe recycling to comply with a re-use
strategy for environmental protection, and secondly, for the reduction of colour in textile wastewater.
The renewable sources of agricultural residues such as wheat-straw, corncob and barley-husk are
cheaper materials for the cultivation of microorganisms such as mycelial-fungi for the biosynthesis
of enzymes active in the breakdown of dye-molecules. The crude enzyme preparations of microbial
cultivations in solid-state fermentation were found to be rich in three types of enzyme activities, which
could be used without any expensive purification process, as biodegradable chemicals (instead of toxic
chemicals) for colour-stripping from unevenly dyed fabrics in the textile industry.
Author Contributions: D.D. has reviewed the literature, collected relevant references from published articles
and prepared ﬁrst draft. author P .S.N. has added more information, references, pictures of lab-scale experiments
and submitted ﬁnal version of this review article. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work involved no experimental labwork and therefore, received no external funding
Acknowledgments: There is no research grant used in compiling of this review article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: None, as this is a review of literature, and contains no data, all information presented in
articles has been supported with relevant references.
References
1. Lellis, B.; F ávaro-Polonio, C.Z.; Pamphile, J.A.; Polonio, J.S. E ects of textile dyes on health and the
environment and bioremediation potential of living organisms. Biotechnol. Res. Innov. 2019 ,3, 275–290.
[CrossRef]
2. Banat, I.M.; Nigam, P .; Singh, D.; Marchant, R. Microbial decolorization of textile-dye-containing e uents:
A review. Bioresour. Technol. 1996 ,58, 217–227. [CrossRef]Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 11 of 13
3. McMullan, G.; Meehan, C.; Conneely, A.; Kirby, N.; Robinson, T.; Nigam, P .; Banat, I.; Marchant, R.;
Swyth, W.F. Microbial decolourisation and degradation of textile dyes. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2001 ,56,
81–87. [CrossRef]
4. Robinson, T.; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R.; Nigam, P . Remediation of dyes in textile e uent: A critical
review on current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative. Bioresour. Technol. 2001 ,77, 247–255.
[CrossRef]
5. Hassan, M.M.; Carr, C.M. A critical review on recent advancements of the removal of reactive dyes from dye
house e uent by ion-exchange adsorbents. Chemosphere 2018 ,209, 201–219. [CrossRef]
6. Nigam, P .; Robinson, T.; Singh, D. A critical review on remediation technologies of textile effluents. In Green
Chemistry-Environment Friendly Alternatives ; Sanghi, R., Srivastava, M.M., Eds.; Narosa Publishing: New Delhi ,
India, 2003; pp. 260–277, ISBN 81-7319-523-4.
7. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . E ect of pretreatments of three waste residues, wheat straw, corncobs
and barley husks on dye adsorption. Bioresour. Technol. 2002 ,85, 119–124. [CrossRef]
8. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . Removal of dyes from an artificial textile dye effluent by two agricultural
waste residues, corncob and barley husk. Environ. Int. 2002 ,28, 29–33. [CrossRef]
9. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . Removal of dyes from a synthetic textile dye e uent by biosorption
on apple pomace and wheat straw. Water Res. 2002 ,36, 2824–2830. [CrossRef]
10. Chandran, C.B.; Singh, D.; Nigam, P . Remediation of textile e uent using agricultural residues. Appl. Biochem.
Biotechnol. 2002 ,102, 207–212. [CrossRef]
11. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Naidu, G.S.; Nigam, P . Studies on the removal of dyes from a synthetic textile
euent using barley husk in static-batch mode and in a continuous ﬂow, packed-bed, reactor. Bioresour.
Technol. 2002 ,85, 43–49. [CrossRef]
12. Nigam, P .; Armour, G.; Banat, I.M.; Singh, D.; Marchant, R. Physical removal of textile dyes from e uents
and solid-state fermentation of dye-adsorbed agricultural residues. Bioresour. Technol. 2000 ,72, 219–226.
[CrossRef]
13. Robinson, T.; Nigam, P . Remediation of textile dye-waste water using a white rot fungus Bjerkandera adusta
through solid-state fermentation (SSF). Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2008 ,151, 618–628. [CrossRef]
14. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . Studies on the decolourisation of an artiﬁcial textile-e uent by
white-rot fungi in N-rich and N-limited media. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2001 ,57, 810–813. [CrossRef]
15. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . Studies on desorption of individual textile dyes and a synthetic
dye e uent from dye-adsorbed agricultural residues using solvents. Bioresour. Technol. 2002 ,84, 299–301.
[CrossRef]
16. Nigam, P .; Banat, I.M.; Singh, D.; Marchant, R. Microbial process for the decolorization of textile e uent
containing azo, diazo and reactive dyes. Process. Biochem. 1996 ,31, 435–442. [CrossRef]
17. Nigam, P .; McMullan, G.; Banat, I.M.; Marchant, R. Decolourisation of e uent from the textile industry by a
microbial consortium. Biotechnol. Lett. 1996 ,18, 117–120. [CrossRef]
18. Nigam, P .; Marchant, R. Selection of a substratum for composing bioﬁlm system of a textile-e uent
decolorizing bacteria. Biotechnol. Lett. 1995 ,17, 993–996. [CrossRef]
19. Banat, I.M.; Nigam, P .; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R.; Singh, D. The isolation of thermophilic bacterial cultures
capable of textile dyes decolorization. Environ. Interl. 1997 ,23, 547–551. [CrossRef]
20. Meehan, C.; Banat, I.M.; McMullan, G.; Nigam, P .; Smyth, F.; Marchant, R. Decolorization of Remazol Black-B
using a thermotolerant yeast, Kluyveromyces marxianus IMB3. Environ. Inter. 2000 ,26, 75–79. [CrossRef]
21. Nigam, P .; Banat, I.M.; Oxspring, D.; Marchant, R.; Singh, D.; Smyth, W.F. A new facultative anaerobic filamentous
fungus capable of growth on recalcitrant textile dyes as sole carbon source. Microbios 1995 ,84, 171–185.
22. Robinson, T.; Chandran, B.; Nigam, P . Studies on the production of enzymes by white-rot fungi for the
decolourisation of textile dyes. Enz. Microb. Technol. 2001 ,29, 575–579. [CrossRef]
23. Qin, X.; Luo, H.; Zhang, X.; Yao, B.; Ma, F.; Su, X. Dye-decolorizing peroxidases in Irpex lacteus combining the
catalytic properties of heme peroxidases and laccase play important roles in ligninolytic system. Biotechnol.
Biofuels 2018 ,11, 302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Liers, C.; Pecyna, M.J.; Kellner, H.; Worrich, A.; Zorn, H.; Ste en, K.T.; Hofrichter, M.; Ullrich, R. Substrate
oxidation by dye-decolorizing peroxidases (DyPs) from wood-and litter-degrading agaricomycetes compared
to other fungal and plant heme-peroxidases. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2013 ,97, 5839–5849. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 12 of 13
25. Hofrichter, M.; Ullrich, R.; Pecyna, M.J.; Liers, C.; Lundell, T. New and classic families of secreted fungal
heme peroxidases. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010 ,87, 871–897. [CrossRef]
26. Fernandez-Fueyo, E.; Linde, D.; Almendral, D.; Lopez-Lucendo, M.F.; Ruiz-Duenas, F.J.; Martinez, A.T.
Description of the first fungal dye-decolorizing peroxidase oxidizing manganese (II). Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2015 ,99, 8927–8942. [CrossRef]
27. Chatha, S.A.S.; Mallhi, A.I.; Hussain, A.I.; Asgher, M.; Nigam, P .S. A Biological Approach for Colour-Stripping
of Cotton Fabric Dyed with C.I. Reactive Black 5 Using Fungal Enzymes from Solid State Fermentation.
Curr. Biotechnol. 2014 ,3, 166–173. [CrossRef]
28. Oliveira, S.F.; da Luz, J.M.R.; Kasuya, M.C.M.; Ladeira, L.O.; Junior, A.C. Enzymatic extract containing lignin
peroxidase immobilized on carbon nanotubes: Potential biocatalyst in dye decolourization. Saudi J. Biol. Sci.
2018 ,25, 651–659. [CrossRef]
29. Qin, X.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, X.; Yang, Y. Induction, purification and characterization of a novel manganese
peroxidase from Irpex lacteus CD2 and its application in the decolorization of different types of dye. PLoS ONE
2014 ,9, e113282. [CrossRef]
30. Salvach úa, D.; Prieto, A.; Mart ínez,Á.T.; Mart ínez, M.J. Characterization of a novel dye-decolorizing
peroxidase (DyP)-type enzyme from Irpex lacteus and its application in enzymatic hydrolysis of wheat straw.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2013 ,79, 4316–4324. [CrossRef]
31. Sharma, B.; Dangi, A.K.; Shukla, P . Contemporary enzyme based technologies for bioremediation: A review.
J. Environ. Manag. 2018 ,210, 10–22. [CrossRef]
32. Khan, S.; Malik, A. Toxicity evaluation of textile e uents and role of native soil bacterium in biodegradation
of a textile dye. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2018 ,25, 4446–4458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Garg, S.K.; Tripathi, M. Microbial Strategies for Discoloration and Detoxiﬁcation of Azo Dyes from Textile
Euents. Res. J. Microbiol. 2017 ,12, 1–19. [CrossRef]
34. Pourbabaee, A.A.; Malekzadeh, F.; Sarbolouki, M.N.; Najaﬁ, F. Aerobic decolorization and detoxiﬁcation of a
disperse dye in textile e uent by a new isolate of Bacillus sp.Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2006 ,93, 631–635. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Liao, C.S.; Hung, C.H.; Chao, S.L. Decolorization of azo dye reactive black B by Bacillus cereus strain HJ-1.
Chemosphere 2013 ,90, 2109–2114. [CrossRef]
36. Kabra, A.N.; Khandare, R.V .; Govindwar, S.P . Development of a bioreactor for remediation of textile e uent
and dye mixture: A plant-bacterial synergistic strategy. Water Res. 2013 ,47, 1035–1048. [CrossRef]
37. Kaushik, P .; Malik, A. Mycoremediation of synthetic dyes: An insight into the mechanism, process optimization
and reactor design. In Microbial Degradation of Synthetic Dyes in Wastewaters ; Singh, S.N., Ed.; Springer: Berlin /
Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 1–25.
38. Jain, A.; Y adav , S.; Nigam, V .K.; Sharma, S.R. Fungal-mediated solid waste management: A review . In Mycoremediation
and Environmental Sustainability ; Prasad, R., Ed.; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 153–170.
39. Sim, C.S.F.; Chen, S.H.; Ting, A.S.Y . Endophytes: Emerging tools for the bioremediation of pollutants. In Emerging
and Eco-Friendly Approaches for Waste Management ; Bharagava, R.N., Chowdhary , P ., Eds.; Springer: Singapore,
2019; pp. 189–217.
40. Gulzar, T.; Huma, T.; Jalal, F.; Iqbal, S.; Abrar, S.; Kiran, S.; Nosheen, S.; Hussain, W.; Raﬁque, M.A.
Bioremediation of Synthetic and Industrial E uents by Aspergillus niger Isolated from Contaminated Soil
Following a Sequential Strategy. Molecules 2017 ,22, 2244. [CrossRef]
41. Kiran, S.; Adeel, S.; Nosheen, S.; Hassan, A.; Usman, M.; Raﬁque, M.A. Recent trends in textile e uent
treatments: A review. Adv. Mater. Wastewater Treat. 2017 ,29, 29–49.
42. Meerbergen, K.; Crauwels, S.; Willems, K.A.; Dewil, R.; Van Impe, J.; Appels, L.; Lievens, B. Decolorization
of reactive azo dyes using a sequential chemical and activated sludge treatment. J. Biosci. Bioengng. 2017 ,
124, 668–673. [CrossRef]
43. Ajao, A.T.; Adebayo, G.B.; Yakubu, S.E. Bioremediation of textile industrial e uent using mixed culture of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa andBacillus subtilis immobilized on agar agar in a bioreactor. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
Res. 2017 ,1, 50–56.Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2958 13 of 13
44. Vikrant, K.; Giri, B.S.; Raza, N.; Kim, K.H.; Rai, B.N.; Singh, R.S. Recent advancements in bioremediation of
dye: Current status and challenges. Bioresour. Technol. 2018 ,253, 355–367. [CrossRef]
45. Sivaperumal, P .; Kannan, K.; Thilagaraj, W.R.; Gopalakrishnan, C.; Rajaram, R. Applicability of Agro Waste
for Remediation of Chemical Contaminants in Water. Chapter 19. In Byproducts from Agriculture and Fisheries
Adding Value for Food, Feed, Pharma, and Fuels ; Simpson, B.K., Aryee, A.N.A., Toldr á, F., Eds.; John Wiley and
Sons Ltd.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2019. [CrossRef]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).