REVIEW
p
ublished: 06 January 2017
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02087
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 1 J anuary 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Editedby:
P
eterNeubauer,
TechnicalUniversityofBerlin,
Germany
Reviewedby:
GiuseppeSpano,
UniversityofFoggia,Italy
MaulinP.Shah,
EnviroTechnologyLimited,India
*Correspondence:
C.K.M.Tripathi
ckm.tripathi@hotmail.com
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
Microbiotechnology,Ecotoxicology
andBioremediation,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinMicrobiology
Received: 29August2016
Accepted: 09December2016
Published: 06January2017
Citation:
SinghV,HaqueS,NiwasR,
SrivastavaA,PasupuletiMand
TripathiCKM(2017)Strategiesfor
FermentationMediumOptimization:
AnIn-DepthReview.
Front.Microbiol.7:2087.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.02087Strategies for Fermentation Medium
Optimization: An In-Depth Review
VineetaSingh1,2,ShaﬁulHaque3,4,RamNiwas1,AkanshaSrivastava1,
MukeshPasupuleti1andC.K.M.Tripathi5,6*
1MicrobiologyDivision,CouncilofScientiﬁcandIndustrialResearch-CentralDrugResearchInstitute,Lucknow,India,
2DepartmentofBiotechnology,InstituteofEngineeringandTechnology,Lucknow,India,3DepartmentofBiosciences,Jamia
MilliaIslamia(ACentralUniversity),NewDelhi,India,4ResearchandScientiﬁcStudiesUnit,CollegeofNursingandAllied
HealthSciences,JazanUniversity,Jazan,SaudiArabia,5FermentationTechnologyDivision,CouncilofScientiﬁcand
IndustrialResearch-CentralDrugResearchInstitute,Lucknow,India,6DepartmentofBiotechnology,ShriRamswaroop
MemorialUniversity,Lucknow,India
Optimizationofproductionmediumisrequiredtomaximizethemetaboliteyield.Thiscan
be achieved by using a wide range of techniques from classical “one-factor-at-a-time”
to modern statistical and mathematical techniques, viz. artiﬁcial neural network (ANN),
genetic algorithm (GA) etc. Every technique comes with its own advantages and
disadvantages, and despite drawbacks some techniques are applied to obtain best
results.Useofvariousoptimizationtechniquesincombinationalsoprovidesthedesirable
results. In this article an attempt has been made to review the currently used media
optimization techniques applied during fermentation process of metabolite production.
Comparative analysis of the merits and demerits of various conventional as well as
modern optimization techniques have been done and logical selection basis for the
designing of fermentation medium has been given in the present review. Overall, this
review will provide the rationale for the selection of suitable optimization technique for
media designing employed during the fermentation process of metabolite production.
Keywords: media optimization, OFAT, RSM, ANN, genetic algorithm
INTRODUCTION
Fermentation technology is widely used for the production of various economically important
compoundswhichhaveapplicationsintheenergyproduction,pharmaceutical,chemicalandfood
industry. Although, fermentation processes are used from generations, the need for sustainable
production of products, meet the market requirements in a cost eﬀective manner has put forward
a challenging demand. For any fermentation based product, the most important thing is the
availability of fermented product equal to that of market demand. Various microorganisms have
beenreportedtoproduceanarrayofprimaryandsecondarymetabolites,butinaverylowquantity.
Inordertomeetthemarketdemand,severalhighyieldingtechniqueshavebeendiscoveredinthe
past, and successfully implemented in various processes, like production of primary or secondary
metabolites, biotransformation, oil extraction etc. ( Dubey et al., 2008, 2011; Singh et al., 2009;
R
ajeswarietal.,2014).
Me
dium optimization is still one of the most critically investigated phenomenon that is
carried out before any large scale metabolite production, and possess many challenges too. Before
1970s, media optimization was carried out by using classical methods, which were expensive,
time consuming, involving plenty of experiments with compromised accuracy. Nevertheless, with
the advent of modern mathematical/statistical techniques, media optimization has become more
vibrant,eﬀective,eﬃcient,economicalandrobustingivingtheresults.FordesigningaproductionSingh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
medium, the most suitable fermentation conditions (e.g., pH ,
temperature, agitation speed, etc.) and the appropriate medium
components (e.g., carbon, nitrogen, etc.) must be identiﬁed and
optimized accordingly. Further, by optimizing the above said
parameters, maximum product concentration could be achieved
(GupteandKulkarni,2003;Franco-Laraetal.,2006;Wangetal .,
2011). The schematic representation of a systematic approach of
fermentationmediumdesigninghasbeengivenin Figure1.
An increase in productivity reduces the overall cost of
the product, as well as the production cost; hence, it is one
of the important topics for the research. Usually, enhanced
productivitycanbeachievedeitherbystrainimprovementorb y
optimizingtheprocessparameters.But,strainimprovementand
optimization are “Catch-22” situation. You cannot chose a le ad
strain until you have the best medium and you cannot propose
a ﬁnest medium until you have the lead strain. Usually, the
researchers around the world solve this predicament by stick ing
to one component at a time. However, both strategies cannot
guarantee that one of the preferred strain if another medium
is used. With this drawback and Catch-22 situation, various
new methods have been suggested and investigated, where bot h
the medium design and strain improvement can be carried out
simultaneously.
In this review we have restricted our scope and discussed
aboutthemediaformulationandmediaoptimizationtechniqu es
in terms of their utility, application and feasibility to maxi mize
the metabolite yield produced by the fermentation process.
In order to provide clarity and better understanding for the
readers, initially we have discussed the roles of various (m ajor)
components of the fermentation media, followed by detailed
description of statistical/mathematical optimization tech niques.
Also,theadvantagesanddisadvantagesassociatedwiththe above
methods along with the future directions in the fermentatio n
mediadesignandoptimizationhavebeendiscussedindetail.
NUTRITIONAL CONTROL OF METABOLITE
PRODUCTION
Fermented products that are used in our daily life are
either primary or secondary metabolites produced during the
trophophaseandidiophaseofthemicrobialgrowth,respectively .
High productivity titer is the pre-requisite for the industri al
production of any type of metabolite. The production of speciﬁc
metabolites in high titer could be possible by maintaining
proper control and regulation at diﬀerent levels via transport
and metabolism of extra-cellular nutrients, precursor form ation
and accumulation of intermediates ( Rokem et al., 2007 ).
Fermentation processes, where the precursor(s) of the speciﬁc
products are not added in the medium, carbon and nitrogen
sources present in the medium during their metabolism
may initiate the biosynthesis of precursors that regulate th e
metabolism and inﬂuence the end product synthesis ( Elibol,
2004).Giventhisinview,nutrientstypeandtheirconcentration s
in the medium play an important role in commencing the
production of primary and secondary metabolites as limited
supply of an essential nutrient can restrict the growth ofmicrobial cells or product formation. Generally, carbon and
nitrogen sources present in the medium can inﬂuence the
metaboliteproduction.
Carbon Source
Carbon is the most important medium component, as it is an
energy source for the microorganisms and plays an important
role in the growth as well as in the production of primary and
secondary metabolite. The rate at which the carbon source is
metabolizedcanofteninﬂuencetheformationofbiomassand /or
the production of primary or secondary metabolites. Marwick
et al. (1999) , while studying antibiotics production from marine
bacteria noticed that the gradually assimilating carbon so urces,
like, galactose generally enhances the production of seconda ry
metabolites (antibiotics). A classic example for this is, penic illin
production, where glucose is found to have repression eﬀect.
Later, it was found that lactose is a slowly assimilating carb on
source and helped in the production of secondary metabolites
(i.e., penicillin). Hence, in order to overcome the carbon
catabolite repression phenomenon, the production process was
established using lactose fermentation. Describing the ro le of
eachcarbonindiﬀerentfermentationprocesses,willincreas ethe
length of this manuscript. Hence we compiled a list, wherein
we summarized some interfering and non-interfering carbon
sources(Table1).
Fermentation processes, where raw materials/medium
components cover the signiﬁcant portion of the product cost,
selection of these things become an important task for the
production companies. In addition to the rate of assimilation
of carbon sources, the nature of carbon source also aﬀects the
type and amount of the product. An example of this is ethanol
or single-cell protein production, where the raw materials
contribute ∼60–77%oftheproductioncost;andthesellingprice
of the product is determined largely by the cost of the carbon
source. Methanol could be a very popular inexpensive carbon
source for single-cell protein production, but being toxic to t he
cellsevenatlowconcentrationsandlowﬂashpoints,itcannev er
be used in fermentation as media. Hence, not only the cost even
the dynamics of the carbon source must be considered whether
itplaysaroleasasubstrateinfermentationprocessornot.
Nitrogen Source
Like carbon, the selection of nitrogen source and its
concentration in the media also play a crucial role in metabolit e
production. The microorganism can utilize both inorganic
and/or organic sources of nitrogen. Use of speciﬁc amino acid s
can increase the productivity in some cases and conversely,
unsuitable amino acids may inhibit the synthesis of seconda ry
metabolites ( Marwick et al., 1999 ).Singh et al. (2009) during
the optimization of actinomycin V production by Streptomyces
triostinicus found that biosynthesis of actinomycin V involves
tryptophan pathway and addition of amino acid tryptophan
to the medium enhances the production. On the contrary, the
same amino acid showed inhibitory eﬀect in the production
of candicidin from Streptomyces griseus (Sanchez and Demain,
2002). Nevertheless, it is conﬁrmed that nitrogen molecules
have inhibitory eﬀect on the metabolite production in some
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
FIGURE 1 | Schematic diagram of a systematic approach of fermenta tion medium designing.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
TABLE 1 | Examples of some interfering and non-interfering carbo n sources.
Carbon Source Action Metabolites Producer References
Simple carbon Glycerol Interfering Actinomycin D Streptomycesparvullus Foster and Katz, 1981
Erythromycins Saccharopolysporaerythraea Sánchez et al., 2010
Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Simocyclinones Streptomycesantibioticus Tü 6040 Theobald et al., 2000
Monosaccharide Glucose Interfering Actinomycin Streptomyces sp. Gallo and Katz, 1972
Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Erythromycins Saccharopolysporaerythraea Sánchez et al., 2010
Penicillin Streptomyceschrysogenum Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Streptomycin Streptomycesgriseus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Bacilysin Bacillussubtilis Ozcengiz et al., 1990
Fructose Interfering Penicillin Penicilliumchrysogenum Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Actinomycin Streptomycesantibioticus Rokem et al., 2007
Gentamycin Micromonosporapurpurea Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Galactose Interfering Penicillin Penicilliumchrysogenum Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Actinomycin Streptomycesantibioticus Rokem et al., 2007
Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Disaccharide Maltose Interfering Bacilysin Bacillussubtilis Ozcengiz et al., 1990
Non-interfering Gentamycin Micromonosporapurpurea Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Sucrose Interfering Erythromycins Streptomyceserythreus Rokem et al., 2007
Penicillin Penicilliumchrysogenum Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Lactose Interfering *
Non-interfering Erythromycins Streptomyceserythreus Rokem et al., 2007
Penicillin Penicilliumchrysogenum Rokem et al., 2007
Mannose Interfering Erythromycin Streptomyceserythreus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Streptomycin Streptomycesgriseus Sánchez et al., 2010
Non-interfering Kanamycin Streptomyceskanamyceticus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Complex Starch Interfering *
Non-interfering Kanamycin Streptomyceskanamyceticus Rokem et al., 2007
*Notreported.
cases, whereas, some enhancer eﬀects of nitrogen have also be en
reported( Table2).
Phosphate
Phosphate is another basic component which is required for
the production of phospholipids present in the microbial cell
membranes, and for the production of nucleic acids. The
amount of phosphate which must be added in the fermentation
medium depends upon the composition of the broth and the
need of the organism, as well as according to the nature
of the desired product. For instance, some cultures will not
produce secondary metabolites in the presence of phosphate,
e.g., phosphatase, phytases etc. Sanchez and Demain (2002)
reported that various secondary metabolites’ production suc h
as, actinorhodin, cephalosporin, clavulanic acid, streptomy cin,
tetracycline, vancomycin etc. is highly inﬂuenced by inorg anic
phosphate concentration present in the production medium.
In most cases, lower concentration of phosphate is required
for the initiation of the metabolite (antibiotic) productio n andbeyond a certain concentration it suppresses the secondary
metabolism and ultimately inhibits the production of primary
or secondary metabolite. High phosphate concentration was
reported to inhibit the production of teicoplanin, a glycopeptide
antibiotic( Rokemetal.,2007 ).
From the above description it is clear that changes in
carbon or nitrogen sources of the production medium or
variationfromtheiroptimumrequiredconcentration,mayaﬀe ct
the nature of the end product or its productivity. Therefore,
the production medium with all the required components in
appropriate concentration is required for the production of
desired metabolite at large scale. In order to standardize t he
production medium, the concept of medium optimization has
emerged.
NEED OF MEDIUM OPTIMIZATION
Medium optimization studies are usually carried out in the
chemical, food, and pharmaceutical industries, with respect
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
TABLE 2 | Examples of some interfering and non-interfering nitro gen sources.
Nitrogen Source Action Metabolites Producer References
Inorganic NH+
4Interfering Spiramycin Streptomycesambofaciens Lebrihi et al., 1992
Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Erythromycin Streptomyceserythreus Rokem et al., 2007
Streptomycin Streptomycesgriseus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Tetracycline Streptomyces spp. Rokem et al., 2007; Vastrad and Neelagund, 2011
Non-interfering *
Nitrate Interfering Aﬂatoxin Aspergillusparasiticus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Rifamycin Amycolatoposismediterranei Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Organic Urea Interfering Alternariol Alternaríaalternata
Non-interfering *
Amino acids L-alanine Interfering Actinomycin Streptomycesantibioticus Rokem et al., 2007
Bacilysin Bacillussubtilis Ozcengiz et al., 1990
Non-interfering *
L-arginine Interfering *
Non interfering Cephalosporin Cephalosporiumacremonium Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Gramicidin S Bacillus brevis Poirier and Demain, 1981
d,l-Aspartate Interfering Actinomycin D Streptomycesparvullus Foster and Katz, 1981
Non-interfering Streptothricin Streptomycesrochei Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Leucine Interfering Monascus pigment Monascus spp. Lin and Demain, 1994
Non-interfering Chloramphenicol Streptomycesvenezuelae , Rokem et al., 2007
L-isoleucine Interfering Actinomycin D Streptomycesparvullus Foster and Katz, 1981
Non-interfering Spiramycin Streptomycesambofaciens Lebrihi et al., 1992
DL- phalanine Interfering Actinomycin Streptomycesantibioticus Rokem et al., 2007
Non-interfering Chloramphenicol Streptomycesvenezuelae , Rokem et al., 2007
L-proline Interfering Actinomycin D Streptomycesparvullus Foster and Katz, 1981
Non-interfering Streptomycin Streptomycesgriseus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Tryptophan Interfering Candicidin Streptomycesgriseus Sanchez and Demain, 2002
Non-interfering Actinomycin Streptomycesparvullus Foster and Katz, 1981
*Notreported.
to increase the yield and activity of the desired product.
Currently, there is a very little knowledge available about
the role of factors, their levels in controlling the metabol ite
(e.g., antibiotics, acids) production by diﬀerent strains. I n
order to enhance the productivity of the metabolites (for
e.g., antibiotics etc.), researchers investigated the nut ritional
requirements for the production of secondary metabolites
and found that the nutritional requirements were varying
from strain to strain ( Shih et al., 2002; Singh et al., 2012 ).
The quantity and quality of nutrients available and the
ability to assimilate successfully are the major determina nts
of microbial nature and its metabolic activity. Hence, duri ng
the medium optimization it must be considered that a
minimal growth requirement of the microorganism must be
fulﬁlled for obtaining maximum production of metabolite(s) .
As the fermentation process progresses into lower-value,
higher-volume chemicals, it becomes necessary to maximize
the eﬃciency and minimize the production cost and waste
by-products to compete eﬀectively against the traditional
methods.MEDIA OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES
During the medium designing and optimization, there are
variousstrategiesavailablewhicharefrequentlyusedtoim prove
theeﬃciencyoftheproductionmedium. Figure2isaschematic
representation of various techniques used in the medium
optimization.
Classical Medium Optimization Methods
One-Factor-at-a-Time (OFAT)
Intheclassicalmediumoptimizationtechnique,one-factor -at-a-
time(OFAT)experiments,onlyonefactororvariableisvarie dat
atimewhilekeepingothervariablesconstant.Theconcentrat ions
of the selected medium components were then changed over a
desired range. Because of its ease and convenience, the OFAT
has been the most preferred choice among the researchers for
designingthemediumcompositionandusedintheinitialstage s
in diverse ﬁelds ( Gonzalez et al., 1995 ). This methodology is
still in use even today, during the initial stages of medium
formulation for the production of new metabolite or known
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of various techniques us ed in optimization studies.
compound from new source. Based upon the approach applied,
OFATisfurthersub-groupedinto:
Removalexperiments
In this type of experiment, all the medium components are
removed from the production medium one-by-one, and after
proper incubation period, their eﬀects on the production of
secondary metabolite or the product of interest is observed i n
terms of suitable parameters. Our research group has previous ly
reported that during the production of antifungal compound
fromStreptomyces capoamus , removal of soybean meal or
glycerol or NaCl from the fermentation medium decreased the
yieldby20–40%( Singhetal.,2008 ).
Supplementationexperiments
Supplementation experiments are generally performed to
evaluate the eﬀects of various carbon and nitrogen supplements
on metabolite production. During the study of antifungal
production from Streptomyces violaceusniger, 70–90%
enhancement in the yield was observed by supplementing
xylose, sorbitol and hydroxyl proline in the production mediu m
(Tripathi et al., 2004 ). Similarly, glycerol and peptone was
found as a most suitable carbon and nitrogen sources for the
production of antifungal and antibacterial metabolites fro m
Streptomyces rimosus under submerged fermentation condition
(SinghandRai,2012 ).
Replacementexperiments
For medium formulation, carbon/nitrogen sources showing
enhancement eﬀect on the desired metabolite production in
supplementation experiments are generally tried to be used as a
wholecarbon/nitrogensource.Physicalparameters
In addition to chemical and biological variables, several
researchers used OFAT experiments to standardize the physical
parameters such as pH, temperature, agitation and aeration
requirementsofthefermentationprocess( Niwasetal.,2013 ).
Like any other technique, OFAT method of medium
optimization has its own advantages and disadvantages. The
major advantage of OFAT is its simplicity by which a series
of experiments can be carried out and results can be analyzed
by using simple graphs without the aid of high end statistical
analysis/programs.ThemajordrawbackofOFATisthediﬃculty
in estimating the “interactions” from the experiments as it i s
a hit-and-miss scattershot sequence of the experiments ( Gupte
and Kulkarni, 2003 ).Vaidya et al. (2003) described the time
consumed and cost involved in the analysis of large number
of variables as the major disadvantages of OFAT techniques. In
thismethodology,sometimestheoptimumpointmaybemissed
completely, thus it requires a large number of experiments to
determine the optimum level, which becomes laborious, time
consuming, and uneconomical most of the time ( Gupte and
Kulkarni, 2003 ). Nevertheless, OFAT technique can be a best
screening tool when nothing about the media is known because
ofitseaseandconvenience.
Design of Experiments
The use of statistical method, i.e., design of experiments (D OE)
forthemediaoptimizationinfermentationprocesscanoverco me
the limitations of classical OFAT method and can be a powerful
toolfortheoptimizationofmetaboliteproduction. Fisher(1992)
proposedabasictheoryofexperimentaldesignwhichshowsthat
changing more than one component in the medium at a time
can be more eﬃcient over changing only one-factor-at-a-tim e
(Fisher,1992 ).
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
DOEisaseriesofexperimentswhicharestrategicallyplanned
and executed to obtain a larger amount of information about
the eﬀect of more than one parameter at a time on the
output, i.e., product yield. Most DOE procedures allow the
preliminary screening of 2–10 medium factors in a limited
number of experiments. In this method, several medium factor s
or components are compared simultaneously and the eﬀects are
observed and ranked based on the results. Once the response
variables are determined and ranked, statistical performan ce
parameters are generated from the subsequent analysis. Due
to the requirement of higher number of experiments, OFAT
is laborious, time consuming process, and extremely tedious
for a large number of variables, whereas DOE requires fewer
experiments, lesser time, and lesser material to obtain the s ame
amount of information ( Adinarayana and Ellaiah, 2002; Keskin
Gündogdu et al., 2016 ). The interaction between the factors
can be estimated systematically in DOE ( Haaland, 1989 ). After
gettingthebasicideaaboutthefermentationproductionproc ess
from the literature or from the classical experiments, desig ning
oftheexperimentsaremoreeﬀectivetodeterminetheimpactof
twoormorefactorsonaresponsethanOFAT.
Statistical Medium Optimization
With the advancement of statistical techniques, medium
optimization has found new dimensions, as these techniques
improve the eﬃciency of the process, reduces the time required
in the process and labor cost etc., thus contributing toward t he
overall economics of the process. Being, biological in nature , the
microbial processes contain relatively large amount of natu ral
variations. The networks associated with the microbial rea ctions
are complex, and several factors aﬀect diﬀerent parts of the
networks.Rationalexperimentaldesignandstatisticaleva luation
of the results increase the knowledge about the reliability of
the information obtained during the experiments. By using
experimental design, the amount of experiments required to
obtainaforreliableprocessoptimizationcanbereduced( Elibol,
2004).
Many studies claim substantial improvements over media
obtained using OFAT techniques by using DOE methods. For
example,duringthestudyofrateofmethaneandcarbondioxid e
gasproductionfrom Methanosarcinabarkeri bacteriumgrowing
on methanol, medium optimized through experimental design
was found to give 1.3 times more gas production as compared
totheOFAToptimizedmedium( Silveiraetal.,1991 ).Giventhis,
it is widely acceptedthat inorder to haveanimproved media by
employing the experimental design approach; we require both a
design as well as the optimization technique. The DOE deﬁnes
the medium variants to be tested such as, number of replicates
and the arrangement of the tests in a harmonized pattern
etc. Based upon the obtained experimental data, optimization
technique is used to predict a mathematical model and improve
themediumcomposition.
Experimental Design
Experimental design is a study plan to get deﬁned goals or
objectives. Modern statistical techniques provide us powerfu l
tools for the evaluation of the components or variables eﬀectsbased on the experimental results. Hence, the experiments must
be planned properly with the suﬃcient sample size to obtain
adequate data which is essential to answer the objective as
eﬃciently as possible. Such types of techniques are commonly
called as DOE. In a full factorial design, all the combinatio ns of
the factors, e.g., pH, strain, medium components, temperature
etc.aretested.Incontrast,inapartialfactorialanalysis ,onlyfew
well reported combinations are picked-up and tested. Usually ,
partial factorial analysis is done, when the full factorial de sign is
not possible and some or little knowledge about the interactio ns
ofthemediumcomponentsforaparticularstrainisavailable.
Plakettburmandesign
All the components present in the medium do not contribute
in the metabolite production. Hence, it is utmost important
that the non-contributing factors, should be eliminated fr om
the study as early as possible. In 1946, R.L. Plackett and J.P.
Burman published their work entitled “ The design of optimal
multifactorial experiments ” as a solution to determine the major
eﬀects with higher precision in any process. Plakett Burman
Design (PBD), is a two-level design, which is very useful for
economically detecting the main eﬀects and assuming all the
other interactions are negligible when comparing the some
important major eﬀects, i.e., when there are no interactions, t he
observed eﬀect of a factor can be superior or under estimated
by other factors ( Vaidya et al., 2003 ). An example of PBD has
been given in Table3. PDB is used to screen “ n” number of
experimental variables in just “ n+1” number of experiments
(Reddyetal.,1999;Ghanemetal.,2000 ).Inthisdesign,thereare
two types of variables, i.e., “ real variables ” whose concentration
changes during the experiments, and “ dummy variables ,” whose
concentrationremainsconstantduringtheexperimentsanduse d
to estimate the error. Each variable is represented in two lev els,
i.e., high (H) and low (L). Each horizontal row represents a tr ial
andeachverticalcolumnrepresentstheeitheroftwolevels( high
or low) of each independent and dummy variables in all the
trials. Usually, the classical experiments help in the selec tion of
independent and dummy variables. The eﬀect of each variable is
determinedbythefollowingequation:
Ex1=2/parenleftBig/summationdisplay
Yx1H−/summationdisplay
Yx1L/parenrightBig
/N;
Where, E (X1)=Eﬀect of variable; Y X1-H=yield from the trials
having high concentration of variable; Y X1−L=yield from the
trialshavinglowconcentrationofvariableandN =totalnumber
oftrials.
Experimental error is estimated by calculating the variance
among the dummy variables as follows: V eﬀ=/summationtext(E2
d)/n; where
Veﬀ=varianceoftheconcentrationeﬀect,E d=eﬀectfordummy
variableandn =numberofdummyvariables.Thestandarderror
(SE)oftheconcentrationeﬀectisthesquarerootofthevaria nce
(√Veﬀ). The signiﬁcance level of the eﬀect of each variable
is determined by student’s t-test: tx1=Ex1/SE. The variables
withconﬁdencelevelsgreaterthan90–95%willbeconsidered to
inﬂuencethemetaboliteproductionsigniﬁcantly.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
TABLE 3 | Plackett-Burman design for eleven variables.
Runs Variables and levels
X1X2X3X4X5X6D1D2 D3 D4 D5
1 L H L L L H H H L H H
2 H L L L H H H L H H L
3 L L L H H H L H H L H
4 L L H H H L H H L H L
5 L H H H L H H L H L L
6 H H H L H H L H L L L
7 H H L H H L H L L L H
8 H L H H L H L L L H H
9 L H H L H L L L H H H
10 H H L H L L L H H H L
11 H L H L L L H H H L H
12 L L L L L L L L L L L
H,highconc.ofthecomponents;L,lowconc.ofthecomponents;D,dumm yvariable.
PBD is an authentic method to evaluate the relative
importance of various variables or medium components for
speciﬁc output, for e.g., antibiotic or other cellular metabol ite
production ( Ghanem et al., 2000; Vaidya et al., 2003; Singh and
Tripathi, 2008; Rajeswari et al., 2014 ). Use of PBD decreases
the total number of experiments, tremendously ( Adinarayana
and Ellaiah, 2002 ), as the interaction eﬀects of the variables
not consider and only those variables that actually aﬀect the
production of desired metabolite are screened. For gamma
interferon production using PBD, 20 medium components were
examined in only 24 runs, and 45% higher production was
observed( Castroetal.,1992 ).Likewise,duringtheinitialstudies
of medium optimization for antibacterial metabolite product ion
fromStreptomyces sp, we have used PBD to identify the most
eﬀective components in the media and reported soybean meal,
calcium carbonate, and potassium phosphate can signiﬁcantly
increasetheantibioticproduction( Bangaetal.,2008 ).
EventhoughPBDisagoodmethodtoidentifytheimportant
components, but there are some drawbacks associated with its
eﬃciency. PBD should be used only when the factors have
no interactions, or have only additive eﬀects on the output,
otherwise the results of the factor analyzed will be enhanced
or masked by other factors as it fails to interpret if the eﬀect
of one factor depends on another factor. Nevertheless, in the
DOE,PBDisastartingpointandoneshoulduseittodetermine
the follow-up experimentation list. Given this, PBD is usual ly
called “screening designs” because they help you to screen o ut
non-contributing factors, i.e., for higher yield, from tha t of
contributingfactors.
Taguchidesign
In order to overcome the problems associated with the PBD
method, Dr. Genichi Taguchi developed a method which is
based on “ORTHOGONAL ARRAY.” This method tells us how
diﬀerent parameters aﬀect the yield in a small number of
experiments instead of testing all the possible combinations,
like,thefactorialdesign.Taguchitechniqueoﬀersthree-s tagesofoﬀ-line quality control features, like system strategy, param eter
designing and tolerance design phase ( Pignatiello, 1988 ). The
systemstrategyhelpsinﬁndingtheexperimentallevelsofdes ign
features while parameter designing shows the factor level an d
provides the paramount eﬀects of the process, whereas the
tolerance design phase improves the elemental tolerance that
considerably eﬀect the product formation ( Muhammad et al.,
2014). This design helps in determining the factors aﬀecting the
product signiﬁcantly with a minimum number of experiments,
thus saving time and resources. Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
on the collected data from the Taguchi DOE can be used to
select the new parameter values to optimize the performance
characteristic.Duringtheexecutionoftheexperiment,atﬁ rstthe
total degree of freedom is selected [overall mean always uses 1
degree of freedom (DOF); for each factor DOF =n−1, where
n=number of levels; for any two factor interaction DOF =(na
−1) (nb−1)] followed by the selection of standard orthogonal
array (generally, the number of runs in orthogonal design is
≥to the DOF). At the end of the experiment, the factors are
assigned to appropriate columns. Unlike PBD, it analyses the
main eﬀect and two factor interactions. However, higher order
interactions are assumed as negligible. Noise, i.e., uncontr olled
variables of experiments is taken as focal point for the analys is.
Uncontrolled variables (noises) generally cause the loss of t he
quality. This eﬀect of noise can be removed by employing the
Taguchimethodology( AggarwalandSingh,2005 ).
The Taguchi method becomes very helpful in measuring the
quality by the deviation of a functional characteristic from its
target value. The Taguchi approach is a fully developed method
having advantage of saving experimental time, product cost and
improving the quality as well which is a basic requirement for
the optimization of any fermentation process ( Chanin et al.,
1990). Recently, Muhammad et al. (2014) applied Taguchi’s
statistical approach in the ﬁrst step to optimize the production
of novel thermostable polypeptide antibacterial compound from
Geobacillus pallidus under diﬀerent production conditions such
as incubation period, temperature, pH, aeration rate, nitroge n,
andcarbonconcentrations.
Centralcompositedesign
As PBD considers only main eﬀects and ignores the interaction s
among the factors, therefore, a new design is required. Cent ral
composite design (CCD) was ﬁrst described by Box and
Wilson (1951) . Nowadays it is widely used in response surface
methodology (RSM) for building a second order (quadratic)
model for the response variable without using a complete three-
level factorial experiment. The design consists of three distin ct
sets of experimental runs ( Table5):factorial design in which the
factorsstudied,eachhavingtwolevels( +1and−1);centerpoints ,
whereexperimentalrunshavingthemedianvaluesofeachfact or
used in the factorial design. This point is often replicated in
order to improve the precision of the experiment; star points ,
experimental runs identical to the center points except for one
factor,whichwilltakeonvaluesbothbelowandabovethemedi an
ofthetwofactoriallevels.Thenumbersofstarpointsaredou ble
the number of factors used in the design. On the basis of set
of experiments and the level of factors, CCD are of three types:
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
Circumcentered CCD (CCC), Inscribed CCD (CCI) and Face
centeredCCD(CCF)( Table4).
BoxBehnkendesign
TheBox-BehnkendesignisanalternatetoCCD,itisindepende nt
of quadratic design, which does not contain an embedded
factorialorfractionalfactorialdesign( Ferreiraetal.,2007 ).
In this design, the treatment combinations are at the mid-
points of the edges of the process space and at the center. These
designs are rotatable (or near rotatable) and require 3 leve ls of
each factor. The designs have limited capability for orthogo nal
blockingcomparedtothecentralcompositedesigns.
Someofthefrequentlyusedfermentationmediaoptimization
design techniques in the last 25 years have been summarized i n
Table5.
Optimization Techniques
Responsesurfacemethodology(RSM)
Duringthedevelopmentofpharmaceuticalformulationsvario us
production mediums and process variables related to the
productivity, safety and usefulness should be optimized. Real
relationship between the medium parameters and productivity
is very diﬃcult to understand thus creates hurdles in optimiz ing
the pharmaceutical formulation. Box and Wilson (1951)
developed a method, RSM, which uses factorial designs to
optimize the production processes of the desired metabolites.
RSM is a sturdy, robust and eﬃcient mathematical approach
which includes statistical experimental designs and multipl e
regression analysis, for seeking the best formulation unde r
a set of constrained equations. RSM has often been applied
to optimize the formulation variables and optimization of
TABLE 4 | Structural comparisons of CCD (CCC (CCI), CCF) and BB D for
three factors.
CCC (CCI) CCF Box-Behnken
RepX1X2X3 Rep X1X2X3 Rep X1X2X3
1−1−1−1 1 −1−1−1 1 −1−1 0
1+1−1−1 1 +1−1−1 1 +1−1 0
1−1+1−1 1 −1+1−1 1 −1+1 0
1+1+1−1 1 +1+1−1 1 +1+1 0
1−1−1+1 1 −1−1+1 1 −1 0 −1
1+1−1+1 1 +1−1+1 1 +1 0 −1
1−1+1+1 1 −1+1+1 1 −1 0 +1
1+1+1+1 1 +1+1+1 1 +1 0 +1
1−1.682 0 0 1 −1 0 0 1 0 −1−1
1 1.682 0 0 1 +1 0 0 1 0 +1−1
1 0 −1.682 0 1 0 −1 0 1 0 −1+1
1 0 1.682 0 1 0 +1 0 1 0 +1+1
1 0 0 −1.682 1 0 0 −1 3 0 0 0
1 0 0 1.682 1 0 0 +1
6 0 0 0 6 0 0 0
Total Runs =20 Total Runs =20 Total Runs =15
CCC,Circumcentered;CCI,Inscribed;CCF,Facecentered;BBD,Box- Behnken.fermentation process ( Houck et al., 1995; Franco-Lara et al.,
2006).Vaidya et al. (2003) used RSM for chitinase production
fromAlealigenes xylosoxydans and found 1.4-folds production
enhancement. Shih et al. (2002) reported 3.7-folds increased
production of poly ( γ-glutamic acid) from Bacillus licheniformis
by optimizing nutrient concentration using RSM. RSM was
applied to optimized water-soluble polysaccharide production
fromPleurotus citrinopileatus in submerged culture ( Wang
et al., 2005 ). In the ﬁeld of antibiotics production, the
use of this methodology was reported for chlortetracycline
and tetracycline production with K-carrageenan immobilize d
Streptomyces aureofaciens with 8-folds increase in the antibiotic
yield (Teruel et al., 1997 ); Likewise, Gouveia and his co
researcher during the study of clavulanic acid production by
Streptomycesclavuligerus reportednearly2.6-foldsenhancement
intheyield,whenRSMtechniquewasemployedforthemedium
optimization( Gouveiaetal.,2001 ).
RSM employs several phases of optimization ( Gupte and
Kulkarni,2003 )anditcanbeperformedinthreebasicsteps,i.e.,
experiments designed for the screening of the factors follow ed
by the path of steepest ascent/descent and ﬁnally quadratic
regression model is ﬁtted and optimized using canonical
regression analysis method. One of the important inputs of
RSM is representation of the yield, as a surface plot. It can
provide multiple responses at the same time by considering the
interactions between the variables, which is utmost necess ary
for designing and process optimization ( Zhang and Gao, 2007 ).
Since,thetheoreticalrelationshipsbetweentheindependen tand
dependentvariablesarenotclear,multipleregressionanalysi scan
be applied to predict the dependent variables on the basis of a
second-orderequation.
Y(X)=a0+/summationdisplayN
i=0aiXi+/summationdisplayN
i<jaijXiXj+/summationdisplayN
i=0aiiX2
i
WhereY=predicted response, a0=intercept coeﬃcient, aiXi
=linear terms, aijXiXj=interaction terms and aiiX2=square
terms.
It has been shown that the RSM model is simple, eﬃcient,
less time consuming and capable of predicting the optimization
of various processes of metabolite production. RSM is used to
determinethefactorlevelswhichcansimultaneouslysatisfy aset
ofdesiredspeciﬁcations.Thismethodhelpsustodetermine,h ow
aspeciﬁcresponseisaﬀectedbychangesinthelevelofthefacto rs
over the speciﬁed levels of interest and to achieve a quantita tive
understanding of the system behavior over the region tested .
With the help of RSM we can predict the product properties
throughout the region, even at factor combinations not actu ally
runandtoﬁndconditionsfortheprocessstability.Combinat ions
of PBD and RSM have been used in a number of studies
for medium formulation to give optimum amount of desired
metabolites.SinghandTripathi,employedRSMforolivanicaci d
production and optimized the concentration of soybean meal,
CaCO3andglycerolandfound8-foldshigherproductformation
as compared to the control un-optimized medium ( Singh and
Tripathi, 2008 ). By using minimum number of experiments and
RSMmethodology,2-foldsenhancedheparinaseproductionwas
obtained by Banga & Tripathi, thus showed the importance
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
TABLE 5 | A summary of designs and optimization techniques used fo r the improvement of production media in some of the published stu dies.
Design Technique Fold increase Metabolite Producer Referen ces
PBD * 1.45 Gamma interferon Castro et al., 1992
CCD RSM 8.0 Clortetracyclin, tetracycline Streptomycesaureofaciens Teruel et al., 1997
PBD * * β-amylase, pullulanase Clostridiumthermosulfurogenes Reddy et al., 1999
PBD * * Xylanase Aspergillusterreus Ghanem et al., 2000
PBD, CCD RSM 1.82 Compactin Penicilliumcitrinum Chakravarti and Sahai, 2002
CCD RSM 3.7 Poly ( γ-glutamic acid) Bacillus licheniformis Shih et al., 2002
full FD RSM * Antifungal antibiotic Streptomyceschattanoogensis Gupte and Kulkarni, 2003
PBD, BBD RSM 1.4 Chitinase Alealigenesxylosoxydans Vaidya et al., 2003
* ANN, GA 1.15 Xylitol Candidamogii Baishan et al., 2003
Full FD RSM 1.30 Antifungal antibiotic Thermomonospora sp. Gupte and Kulkarni, 2003
CCD RSM 1.35 Actinorhodin Streptomycescoelicolor Elibol, 2004
CCD RSM * Polyaccharide Pleurotuscitrinopileatus Wang et al., 2005
OFAT 1.82 Polyketide antibiotic Streptomyce spsammoticus Sujatha et al., 2005
CCD OFAT, RSM 1.53, 1.32 Eucalyptene A, xyloketal A Xylariasp. 2508 Xiaobo et al., 2006
PBD, CCD ANN, GA 1.25 Exopolysaccharide Lactobacillusplantarum Desai et al., 2006
PBD, CCD RSM 10 Candicidin derivatives Streptomyces sp. Mao et al., 2007
Frac FD RSM 2.80 Avilamycin Streptomycesviridochromogenes Zhu et al., 2007
PBD, Full FD RSM * Pyruvic acid Torulopsisglabrata Zhang and Gao, 2007
PBD, CCD RSM 8.00 Olivanic acid. Streptomycesolivaceus Singh and Tripathi, 2008
PBD, CCD RSM 3.56 Actinomycin D Streptomycessindenensis Praveen et al., 2008
PBD, CCD RSM 2.37 Heparinase Aspergillusﬂavus Banga and Tripathi, 2009
CCD ANN, GA 4.00 ActinomycinV Streptomycestriostinicus Singh et al., 2009
BBD ANN, GA 8.30 Nisin Lactobacilluslactis Guo et al., 2010
CCD RSM 10.0 Oxytetracycline Streptomycesrimosus Singh et al., 2012
CCD ANN, GA 4.00 Actinomycin D Streptomycessindenensis Khan et al., 2011
CCD RSM 1.37 Antibiotic Xenorhabdus bovienii Wang et al., 2011
PBD, BBD RSM 2.61 Milbemycin Streptomycesbingchenggensis, Baoxin et al., 2011
CCD ANN, NMDS 1.12 Actinomycin D Streptomycessindenensis Tripathi et al., 2012
PBD, BBD RSM 1.78 Antibiotic Streptomyces sp. Rajeswari et al., 2014
CCD RSM 1.44 Jiean-peptide Bacillussubtilis Zhong et al., 2014
BBD, Box-Behnken design; CCD, Central composite design; Frac FD, F ractional factorial design; Full FD, Full factorial design; RSM, Response surface methodology; ANN, Artiﬁcial
neuralnetwork;GA,Geneticalgorithm;NM,Nelder-MeadSimplex;NA ,Neighborhoodanalysis;DT,DecisionTreetechnique; *Notreported.
of the method ( Banga and Tripathi, 2009 ). Production of
an anticancer drug actinomycin D from the submerged
fermentation of Streptomyces sindenensis was found to be
increased by 2.8-folds, when seven factor PBD was employed
in the ﬁrst step, followed by optimizing the concentration
of the resultant eﬃcient components through RSM in the
secondstep( Praveenetal.,2008 ).Theseoptimizationtechniques
can also be employed in the improvement of performance
of other microbial processes, like, biotransformation, fed
batch fermentation, etc. Dubey et al. (2008, 2010) employed
the statistical optimization to enhance the performance of
biotransformation of colchicine into its pharmacologicall y
active derivative 3-demethylated colchicine (3-DMC) thro ugh
various microbial sources including recombinant E. coliunder
immobilized/non-immobilized condition ( Dubey et al., 2008,
2010).TheyusedCCDandRSMtooptimizethethreeextraction
variables (temperature, pH, and process time) and reported
RSM as an eﬃcient tool for the extraction of 3-DMC from the
fermentation medium ( Dubey et al., 2011 ). Similary, a groupof researchers used RSM in fed batch fermentation condition
to improve the production of jiean-peptide (JAA) from Bacillus
subtilisand found 44% enhanced yield of JAA in comparison
to the production under batch fermentation ( Zhong et al.,
2014). Likewise, Ghasemi et al. (2011) used RSM technique for
improving the extraction performance of various components
of essential oils, such as α-pinene (31.8%), 1,8-cineole (24.6%),
limonene (14.8%), linalool (8.3%), and α-terpinolene (4.8%),
present in the leaves of Myrtus communis. By using optimum
conditions achieved through RSM technique, the percentage of
the three components reached more than 85% of the crude
extract.
Even though widely employed with much success, some
limitations are associated with RSM, for e.g., the prediction o f
responses based on second-order polynomial equation is often
limited to low levels and results in poor estimation of optimal
formulations( Baishanetal.,2003 ).Anotherimportantlimitation
isthemetaboliccomplexityofthemicroorganisms.Whenalarg e
number of variables are involved, the development of rigorou s
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
models for a given biological reaction system on physical and
chemical basis is still a critical challenge. This is probabl y due
tothenon-linearnatureofthebiochemicalnetworkinterac tions
and in some cases the incomplete knowledge about the kinetics
involved in such systems ( Franco-Lara et al., 2006 ). Also, it is
quite complicated to study the interactions of more than ﬁve
variables and large variations in the factors can give misle ading
results possibly due to error, bias, or no reproducibility. To
overcome the limitations of RSM another technique, nowadays
ANNhasbeenwidelyusedbytheresearchers.
Artiﬁcialneuralnetwork
An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is a mathematical or
computational model that is inﬂuenced by the structural and/ or
functional aspects of the biological neural networks. Neura l
networks are typically applied in the estimation and multi-
step prediction problems, but can also be used as controllers
directly or as an adjuster of any process parameter for a
conventional controller. ANN mimics the learning ability o f the
brain (Bhagat, 1990 ), and consists of input (like synapse), which
are multiplied by weights (strength of respective signals) an d
then computed by a mathematical function which determines
the activation of neuron. In most cases ANN represents an
adaptive system that changes its structure according to exte rnal
or internal information that ﬂows through the network durin g
the learning phase. They are simply “trained” using a data set
and then applied to predict new data points. Prior knowledge
or equations is not essential for this training as the networ k
and system remains as a black box to the user. Signiﬁcant
characteristics of ANNs are that they can work smoothly with
large amounts of data, excel at complex pattern recognition
and require no mechanistic description of the system ( McCord-
Nelson and Illingworth, 1991 ). ANN is well suited for medium
design, as it generates a large amount of data that often cont ains
hidden pattern. The architecture of the ANN consists of three
layers of information known as neurons: a layer of “input”
units is connected to a layer of “hidden” units, which is furt her
connected to a layer of “output” units ( Figure3). The “learning
conditions” of neural networks are classiﬁed into three gro ups
assupervised (associative ),where the neural network is trained
by giving it input and output experimental data. Unsupervised
(Self-organization ) in which output unit is trained to respond
against clusters of pattern within the input. Diﬀerent from
the supervised, there is no prior set of groups into which the
patterns are to be classiﬁed; rather the system must develop i ts
own representation of the input stimuli. Reinforcement where
learning may be considered as an intermediate form of the
above two classes of learning. The learning system categori zed
its action as good or bad based on the environmental response
and accordingly adjusts its parameters. Generally, the param eter
adjustment is continued until the attainment of an equilibri um
state.
ANNs havebeenwidely appliedwithgreatsuccessforsystem
designing, modeling, optimization and control mainly due to its
capacity to learn ﬁlter noisy signals and generalize informat ion
through a systematic training procedure ( Foster and Katz, 1981;
Singh et al., 2009 ). The optimization techniques are mostly
generaltechniquesandcanbeemployedinvariousfermentati onprocesses with similar eﬃciency. Osama et al. (2013) used
ANN technique to optimize nutrient mist reactor for hairy root
growth and developed an eﬃcient model for optimizing the
culture conditions and also predicted the biomass productivi ty
eﬀectivelyunderdiﬀerentcultureconditions.Inanotherstud y,a
combinationofANNandgeneticalgorithm(GA)wasappliedfor
maximizingthenativeconcentrationandshelflifeofaspart ate-β-
semialdehydedehydrogenaseprotein( Khanetal.,2011 ).
Neural network can perform on problems which have non-
linear programs/relationships. When an element of the neural
network fails, even then it can continue working without any
problem by their parallel nature ( Vaidya et al., 2003 ). It can
be implemented in any application without any problem and
doesn’tneedtobere-programmed.Therearecertainlimitati ons
of neural networks, for e.g., it needs proper training to operat e
eﬃciently. In ANN, the quality of the input data for training
decidesthequalityoftheoutputdata.
Geneticalgorithm(GA)
A trained mathematical model serves as a ﬁtness function in
the determination of optimum concentration of the medium
componentsusingGA.GAmimicstheprocessofmutationandis
basedupontheprinciple“survivaloftheﬁttest”.Thisalgorit hmis
basedonthebiologicalprocessofevolution,i.e.,naturalse lection
(Houck et al., 1995 ). The GA repeatedly modiﬁes a population
of individual solutions. At each step, the GA selects some of t he
individual solutions at random from the current population as
parents. It then uses the selected ones to produce the oﬀ springs
for the next generation, thus over a successive generations, the
population “evolves” toward the most favorable solution. One
can apply GA to solve a variety of optimization problems that
arenotwellsuitedforstandardoptimizationalgorithms( Franco-
Lara et al., 2006 ), including problems in which the objective
function may be non-diﬀerentiable, discontinuous, stochast ic or
highly nonlinear. The GA follows mainly three types of rules
at each step to create the next generation from the current
population: Selection rule selects the individuals, known as
parents that contribute to the population of the next generatio n.
Crossoverrule combinestwoparentstoformchildrenforthenext
generation. Mutation rule applies random changes to individual
parents to form children. GA was successfully used to optimize
medium composition for rifamycin B production using mutant
strain of Amycolatopsis mediterranei at shake ﬂask level ( Bapat
andWangikar,2004 ).ByusingANNcoupledGAmethod, Singh
et al. (2009) , designed an optimized the media for actinomycin
V production by using a newly isolated strain of Streptomyces
triostinicus and reported 4-folds (yield 452 mg/l) higher yield
in optimized media in comparison to the normal production
medium (yield 110 mg/l). One of the major advantages of GA
is,itcanhandlealargeamountsofdatawithnonewguessinga t
eachexperiment,asthedirectionisautomaticallyset.Henc e,GA
isthebestmethodforsolvingcomplexoptimizationproblems.
Nelder–Meadsimplex
Nelder Mead (NM) simplex method is another statistical
technique, which has been found to be helpful in reducing the
expenses of classical optimizations and gives satisfactory r esults.
NM simplex method is based on a real-parameter black-box
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
FIGURE 3 | Multilayer feed forward network with one hidden laye r.
optimization method and works well with irregular objective
functions. The “term” simplex denotes a regular-sided ﬁgure
inn+1 dimension. For two dimensions, the simplex should
be an equiangular triangle and for three dimensions, it shou ld
be a tetrahedron. NM simplex method for the function of
nparameters compares the objective function at the n+1
verticesofasimplexandgivestheworstvertexthroughstepwi se
simpliﬁcation search ( Kennedy and Krouse, 1999 ). During this
process, the direction of betterment is achieved by shifting the
results away from the highest point with the smallest value.
During optimization process to maximize lipid production,
full factorial and multiple linear regressions were used to ﬁ t
the polynomials to the data obtained ( Kennedy and Krouse,
1999).
The NM simplex method frequently gives signiﬁcant
improvements in the primary iteration and produces quick and
satisfactory results. This technique can also be successfu lly used
incombinationwithANNtooptimizetheproductionofvarious
metabolites. Overall an improvement in the function value is
more practical rather than full optimization ( Singer and Nelder,
2009).Estimationoftheprocessparametersandprocesscontrols
aresomeofthepracticalproblems,wherethefunctionvalues, are
uncertain. Therefore, a high level of accuracy in solution i s not
necessary,andmaybeimpossibletocompute.Theproductionof
actinomycin D from Streptomyces sindenensis under submerged
fermentation conditions is one of the best example, where
the above combination has been used ( Tripathi et al., 2012 ).
They compared the results of ANN-GA combination with
ANN-Nelder-Meaddownhillsimplex(NMDS)optimizationand
reported that later was more eﬃcacious and gave roughly 12%higher yield than the yield obtained by ANN coupled with GA
under the same conditions. Optimum shake-ﬂask conditions
were further optimized at bioreactor level ( Khan and Tripathi,
2011). They used GA and NMDS separately to optimize the
fermentation parameters, like, air ﬂow rate and stirring rat e of
bioreactor for maximum actinomycin D production. Almost
similar optimum combination of fermentation parameters were
predicted by GA and NMDS. Nearly, 1.5-folds actinomycin D
production was increased as compared to the optimum point in
ashake-ﬂaskexperiment(1.26to ∼2gm/L).
PROBLEMS AND BOTTLE NECKS IN
MEDIUM OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES
Medium optimization involves large number of experiments
irrespective of media chosen, which accounts for labor cost
and is an open ended experiments. Rarely, the data generated
from the shake ﬂask media match exactly with the fermenter
studies (Kennedy et al., 1994; O’Kennedy et al., 2003 ). All shake
ﬂask studies suﬀer from four main weaknesses, pH cannot
be controlled, poor oxygen transfer capabilities, inadequat e
mixing and considerable evaporation during the process. It
is widely assumed that the best medium obtained in the
shake ﬂask culture method will be the best media in the
fermenter. Unfortunately, not many rigorous studies regard ing
the comparison of medium performances at diﬀerent scales
have been carried out in this line ( Gupta and Rao, 2003 ).
Furthermore, the industrial scale medium usually suﬀer from
the problems such as batch-batch variability, availability all
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 12 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
around the year, ﬂuctuations in the price, stability during t he
transport time cost, problems associated with bulk storage an d
time.
Microbes or cells are dynamic in nature with lot of internal
control mechanisms, but most media optimization studies tre at
them as black box or utilized solely for empirical data only.
We believe that the next generation of medium optimization
techniques should take the metabolic pathway regulatory
mechanism into consideration. Not only that even the rate
of mutations that occur in the particular medium under the
inﬂuence of medium components should also be considered, as
they might increase or decrease the yield or product which we
are interested. If mutant strains are available they should also
be explored in the medium optimization studies, as they might
give us a way to develop new process, where a totally new cheap
mediumcanbeused.
The most important thing is, various optimization studies
are focussed on the liquid culture based fermentation, but t here
are no such extensive methods available for solid or semi-
solid state fermentation techniques. Almost all the resear chers
encounter this problem, “when should one stop applying the
further optimizations techniques or which step is the end
point of optimization studies” at one stage or other. Designin g
a fermentation medium can be a never ending problem, as
the ﬁnal endpoint, e.g., yield is an arbitrary value, which is
depended upon various other factors. Most experts in the ﬁelds
always look out for new components or media to increase the
yield.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN OPTIMIZATION
TECHNIQUES IN DESIGNING OF
FERMENTATION MEDIUM
In addition to the strain improvement strategies, medium
optimization has been proved to be another valuable strategy
toward the enhancement of product yield and process
improvement. Evolution of medium formulations through
screening of various carbon and nitrogen sources and their
diﬀerent combinations can signiﬁcantly improve microbial
growth, viability and overall yield of product during process
development. Fermentation product cost could be reduced by
replacing expensive components with cheaper sources and/or
by increase in productivity. These are the goals of a successf ul
optimization strategy. There are still some points which need
to be considered for more precision and further optimizations ,
for e.g., every microbe has some limitations at their gene le vel
for the production of speciﬁc metabolite, thus search for a
new microbe with greater productivity is always required.
Sometimes microbes in the present conditions are not able
to utilize the cheaper raw material but through mutation it
might be possible to make them able to assimilate low cost
substrate with better performance. Genetic manipulation is
the alternate way to increase the productivity of the microbe s.
Recent concerns about the genetically modiﬁed microorganis m
have put a big question mark on the use of recombinant
microbes in large scale fermentation. Hence, the use of natu ralmicrobesisofgreatchoiceforvariousresearchersandindu strial
personnel.
Assubstratelimitationconditionisthekeyfactorofsecon dary
metabolite production therefore designing and optimization of
chemostat mode of production may increase the productivity
and reduce the loss of unused substrate. Further designing o f
mist or ﬂuidized bed bioreactor is the alternate to reuse the
microbe in long term and maximum utilization of substrate. I t
is diﬃcult to understand the precise nature of the microbe or
the other living system and the biology but with increase in
understandingitwillbefeasibletoselectsuitabledesignf orbetter
performance; for e.g., metabolic ﬂux is the turnover rate of an y
productormoleculesformedthroughametabolicpathwaywhich
is regulated by a series of enzymes involved in that particula r
pathway.Detailedknowledgeofmetabolicﬂuxanditsregulati on
could be helpful to design a medium or the performance of
mathematical models with greater accuracy. Moreover, prior
knowledgeofthebiosynthesisofthedesiredmetabolitesprov ide
the information about the intermediate(s) formed during th e
biosynthesis of that metabolite which in turn will be helpful
duringtheselectionofcarbon,nitrogenorsaltsolutionwh ichcan
alsoactasaninducerfortheproductionofdesiredmetabolite s.
CONCLUSIONS
Optimization of the fermentation media is an essential step
for metabolite production prior starting with semi-pilot/pilo t
production plans. In this critical review, conventional, and
advancedoptimizationtechniquesusedinmediumoptimization
process have been reviewed and discussed. The statistical
approaches were found to have potential to save experimental
time for the process development and quality improvement.
Also, optimization techniques help in reducing the overall
product cost. The designs and methods discussed in this revie w
have been analyzed on the basis of eﬃciency, simplicity and
time consumption, and their applications have been suggested
accordingly. However, the medium formulated after employin g
various designs still needs further evaluation under reali stic
production conditions and lastly with full scale models that
reﬂecttheproductionenvironment.Overall,thisreviewprov ides
a rationale for the selection of suitable updated technique
for the media optimization employed during the fermentation
process of metabolite production. Also, in recent years, a
novel approach of integrated mode of microbe cultivation, i.e .,
aerobic and anaerobic fermentation using suitable facultat ive
microbes have been tested and applied. Cheng et al. (2014)
has applied this integrated approach for the production of
xylitol and ethanol by using Candida tropicalis , and reported
that under aerobic conditions xylitol is the end product
that acts as a substrate for ethanol production by anaerobic
cultivation. Likewise, Huang et al. (2014) suggested that
switching of anaerobic/aerobic conditions during cultiva tion
stageaﬀectthebacterialcommunitycompositionandsubseque nt
degradation of chlorophenols in biocathode microbial fuel
cells. This integrated approach has several advantages, for
e.g., no supplementary operation unit needed, zero wastewater
generation,processingonsolidpre-treatedmaterial,andal so,no
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 13 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
need for sterilization; all of these advantages can help mak e the
biotechnology industry more economical and environmental ly
friendly.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceived and designed the study and experiments: VS,
SH, RN, AS, MP, CT. Performed the experiments: VS, SH,
RN, AS. Analyzed the data: VS, SH, RN, CT. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: RN, AS, MP, CT. Wrote the
paper:VS,SH,MP,CT.Allauthorsreviewedthemanuscript.FUNDING
VS is thankful to the Department of Science and Technology,
Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India, New
Delhi,Indiaforthefast-trackfellowship(SR/FT/LS-190/2 009).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CT and MP acknowledge Dr. S.K. Puri, Director, CSIR-Central
Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow, UP, India, for his
encouragementandfacilities.
REFERENCES
Adinarayana, K., and Ellaiah, P. (2002). Response surface optimiz ation of the
criticalmediumcomponentsfortheproductionofalkalineproteasebya newly
isolatedBacillussp.J.Pharm.Pharm.Sci. 5,272–278.
Aggarwal, A., and Singh, H. (2005). Optimization of machining
techniques—a retrospective and literature review. Sadhana 30, 699–711.
doi:10.1007/BF02716704
Baishan, F., Hongwen, C., Xiaolan, X., Ning, W., and Zongding, H. ( 2003).
Using genetic algorithms coupling neural networks in a study of
xylitol production: medium optimization. Process Biochem. 38, 979–985.
doi:10.1016/S0032-9592(02)00094-8
Banga, J., Praveen, V., Singh, V., Tripathi, C., and Bihari, V. (2 008). Studies
on medium optimization for the production of antifungal and antib acterial
antibiotics from a bioactive soil actinomycete. Med. Chem. Res. 17, 425–436.
doi:10.1007/s00044-007-9077-9
Banga, J., and Tripathi, C. K. M. (2009). Response surface method ology for
optimization of medium components in submerged culture of Aspergillus
ﬂavusfor enhanced heparinase production. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 49, 204–209.
doi:10.1111/j.1472-765X.2009.02640.x
Baoxin,Z.,Xiangjing,W.,andWensheng,X.(2011).Optimizatio noffermentation
medium for enhanced production of milbemycin by a mutant of Streptomyces
bingchenggensis BC-X-1usingresponsesurfacemethodology. Afr.J.Biotech. 10,
7225–7235.doi:10.5897/AJB11.077
Bapat,P.M.,andWangikar,P.P.(2004).Optimizationofrifamyci nBfermentation
in shake ﬂasks via a machine-learning-based approach. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 86,
201–208.doi:10.1002/bit.20056
Bhagat,P.(1990).Anintroductiontoneuralnets. Chem.Eng.Prog. 86,55–60.
Box, G. E., and Wilson, K. (1951). On the experimental attainment o f optimum
conditions. J.R.Stat.Soc.Series.BStat.Methodol. 13,1–45.
Castro, P. M., Hayter, P. M., Ison, A. P., and Bull, A. T. (1992). A pplication of
a statistical design to the optimization of culture medium for reco mbinant
interferon-gammaproductionbyChinesehamsterovarycells. Appl.Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 38,84–90.doi:10.1007/BF00169424
Chakravarti, R., and Sahai, V. (2002). Optimization of compactin pro duction in
chemicallydeﬁnedproductionmediumby Penicilliumcitrinum usingstatistical
methods. ProcessBiochem. 38,481–486.doi:10.1016/S0032-9592(02)00138-3
Chanin, M. N., Kuei, C.-H., and Lin, C. (1990). Using Taguchi d esign, regression
analysisandsimulationtostudymaintenanceﬂoatsystems. Int.J.Prod.Res. 28,
1939–1953.doi:10.1080/00207549008942844
Cheng, K.-K., Wu, J., Lin, Z.-N., and Zhang, J.-A. (2014). Ae robic and
sequential anaerobic fermentation to produce xylitol and ethanol using
non-detoxiﬁed acid pretreated corncob. Biotechnol. Biofuels 7:166.
doi:10.1186/s13068-014-0166-y
Desai, K., Akolkar, S., Badhe, Y., Tambe, S., and Lele, S. (2006) . Optimization
of fermentation media for exopolysaccharide production from Lactobacillus
plantarum using artiﬁcial intelligence-based techniques. Process Biochem. 41,
1842–1848.doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2006.03.037
Dubey, K. K., Haque, S., Jawed, A., Singh, B. P., and Behera, B. K. (2010).
Construction of recombinant Escherichia coli for enhanced bioconversion of
colchicine into 3-demethylated colchicine at 70 l bioreactor leve l.Process
Biochem. 45,1036–1042.doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2010.03.014Dubey, K. K., Jawed, A., and Haque, S. (2011). Enhanced extrac tion of 3-
demethylated colchicine from fermentation broth of Bacillus megaterium :
optimizationofprocessparametersbystatisticalexperimentaldesig n.Eng.Sci.
11,598–606.doi:10.1002/elsc.201000207
Dubey, K. K., Ray, A., and Behera, B. (2008). Production of demet hylated
colchicine through microbial transformation and scale-up process
development. Process Biochem. 43, 251–257. doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2007.
12.002
Elibol, M. (2004). Optimization of medium composition for actinorh odin
production by Streptomyces coelicolor A3 (2) with response surface
methodology. Process Biochem. 39, 1057–1062. doi: 10.1016/S0032-9592(03)
00232-2
Ferreira,S.L.C.,Bruns,R.E.,Ferreira,H.S.,Matos,G.D.,David,J .M.,Brandão,
G. C., et al. (2007). Box-Behnken design: an alternative for the optimization
of analytical methods. Anal. Chim. Acta 597, 179–186. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.
2007.07.011
Fisher, R. A. (1992). “The arrangement of ﬁeld experiments,” in Breakthroughs in
Statistics,edsS.KotzandN.L.Johnson(NewYork,NY:Springer-VerlagInc.) ,
82–91.doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9_8
Foster, J. W., and Katz, E. (1981). Control of actinomycin D bio synthesis in
Streptomycesparvullus :regulationoftryptophanoxygenaseactivity. J.Bacteriol.
148,670–677.
Franco-Lara, E., Link, H., and Weuster-Botz, D. (2006). Evaluat ion of
artiﬁcial neural networks for modelling and optimization of medium
composition with a genetic algorithm. Process Biochem. 41, 2200–2206.
doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2006.06.024
Gallo, M., and Katz, E. (1972). Regulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis:
catabolite repression of phenoxazinone synthase and actinomycin formation
byglucose. J.Bacteriol. 109,659–667.
Ghanem, N. B., Yusef, H. H., and Mahrouse, H. K. (2000). Production o f
Aspergillus terreus xylanase in solid-state cultures: application of the Plackett–
Burman experimental design to evaluate nutritional requirements. Bioresour.
Technol.73,113–121.doi:10.1016/S0960-8524(99)00155-8
Ghasemi, E., Raoﬁe, F., and Najaﬁ, N. M. (2011). Application of res ponse surface
methodologyandcentralcompositedesignfortheoptimisationofsu percritical
ﬂuid extraction of essential oils from Myrtus communis L.leaves. Food Chem.
126,1449–1453.doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.11.135
Gonzalez, R., Islas, L., Obregon, A.-M., Escalante, L., and Sanc hez, S. (1995).
Gentamicin formation in Micromonospora purpurea : stimulatory eﬀect of
ammonium. J.Antibiot. 48,479–483.doi:10.7164/antibiotics.48.479
Gouveia, E. R., Baptista-Neto, A., Badino, A. C. Jr., and Hokka, C.
O. (2001). Optimization of medium composition for clavulanic acid
production by Streptomyces clavuligerus .Biotechnol. Lett. 23, 157–161.
doi:10.1023/A:1010356231673
Guo, W.-l., Zhang, Y.-b., Lu, J-h., Jiang, L.-y., Teng, L.-r., Wang, Y., et al. (2010).
Optimization of fermentation medium for nisin production from Lactococcus
lactissubsp. lactis using response surface methodology (RSM) combined wi th
artiﬁcial neural network-genetic algorithm (ANN-GA). Afr. J. Biotechnol. 9,
6264–6272.
Gupta, A., and Rao, G. (2003). A study of oxygen transfer in shak e ﬂasks
using a non-invasive oxygen sensor. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 84, 351–358.
doi:10.1002/bit.10740
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 14 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
Gupte,M.,andKulkarni,P.(2003).Astudyofantifungalantibi oticproductionby
Thermomonospora spMTCC3340usingfullfactorialdesign. J.Chem.Technol.
Biotechnol. 78,605–610.doi:10.1002/jctb.818
Haaland, P. D. (1989). Experimental Design in Biotechnology . New York, NY:
MarcelDekker,Inc.
Houck, C. R., Joines, J., and Kay, M. G. (1995). A Genetic Algorithm for Function
Optimization:AMatlabImplementation .NCSU-IETR.95.
Huang, L., Shi, Y., Wang, N., and Dong, Y. (2014). Anaerobic/ae robic conditions
and biostimulation for enhanced chlorophenols degradation in bioc athode
microbial fuel cells. Biodegradation 25, 615–632. doi: 10.1007/s10532-
014-9686-1
Kennedy, M., and Krouse, D. (1999). Strategies for improving fermen tation
medium performance: a review. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 23, 456–475.
doi:10.1038/sj.jim.2900755
Kennedy, M., Reader, S., Davies, R. J., Rhoades, D., and Silby , H. (1994). The
scaleupofmycelialshakeﬂaskfermentations:acasestudyofgammali nolenic
acid production byMucor hiemalis IRL 51. J. Ind. Microbiol. 13, 212–216.
doi:10.1007/BF01569750
Keskin Gündo ˇgdu, T., Deniz, ˙I., Çali¸ skan, G., ¸ Sahin, E. S., and Azbar, N.
(2016). Experimental design methods for bioengineering applicatio ns.Crit.
Rev.Biotechnol. 36,368–388.doi:10.3109/07388551.2014.973014
Khan,M.,andTripathi,C.K.M.(2011).Optimizationoffermentati onparameters
for maximization of actinomycin D production. J. Chem. Pharma. Res. 3,
281–289.
Khan, S., Bhakuni, V., Praveen, V., Tewari, R., Tripathi, C. K. M. , and Gupta,
V. D. (2011). Maximizing the native concentration and shelf life of protein: a
multiobjectiveoptimizationtoreduceaggregation. Appl.Microbiol.Biotechnol.
89,99–108.doi:10.1007/s00253-010-2835-5
Lebrihi,A.,Lamsaif,D.,Lefebvre,G.,andGermain,P.(1992).Eﬀ ectofammonium
ions on spiramycin biosynthesis in Streptomyces ambofaciens .Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 37,382–387.doi:10.1007/BF00210997
Lin, T., and Demain, A. (1994). Leucine interference in the produ ction
of water-soluble red Monascus pigments. Arch. Microbiol. 162, 114–119.
doi:10.1007/BF00264383
Mao, X., Shen, Y., Yang, L., Chen, S., Yang, Y., Yang, J., et al. ( 2007). Optimizing
the medium compositions for accumulation of the novel FR-008/Can dicidin
derivativesCS101byamutantof Streptomyces sp.usingstatisticalexperimental
methods. ProcessBiochem. 42,878–883.doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2007.01.004
Marwick,J.D.,Wright,P.C.,andBurgess,J.G.(1999).Bioproce ssintensiﬁcation
for production of novel marine bacterial antibiotics through biore actor
operationanddesign. Mar.Biotechnol. 1,495–507.doi:10.1007/PL00011806
McCord-Nelson, M., and Illingworth, W. T. (1991). A Practical Guide to Neural
Nets.Boston,MA:Addison-WesleyLongmanPublishingCo.,Inc.
Muhammad, S. A., Ahmed, S., Ismail, T., and Hameed, A. (2014). Taguc hi’s
experimental design for optimizing the production of novel thermosta ble
polypeptide antibiotic from Geobacillus pallidus SAT4.Pak. J. Pharma. Sci. 27,
11–23.
Niwas, R., Singh, V., Singh, R., Tripathi, D., and Tripathi, C. (2 013).
Production, puriﬁcation and characterization of the cholesterol o xidase from
newly isolated Streptomyces sp.W. J. Micobiol. Biotechnol. 29, 2077–2085.
doi:10.1007/s11274-013-1371-8
O’Kennedy, R. D., Ward, J. M., and Keshavarz-Moore, E. (2003). E ﬀects of
fermentation strategy on the characteristics of plasmid DNA productio n.
Biotechnol.Appl.Biochem. 37,83–90.doi:10.1042/BA20020099
Osama, K., Somvanshi, P., Pandey, A. K., and Mishra, B. N. (2013) . Modelling of
nutrientmistreactorforhairyrootgrowthusingArtiﬁcialneuralne twork.Eur.
J.Sci.Res. 97,516–526.
Ozcengiz, G., Alaeddinoglu, N. G., and Demain, A. L. (1990). Reg ulation of
biosynthesis of bacilysin by Bacillus subtilis .J. Ind. Microbiol. 6, 91–100.
doi:10.1007/BF01576428
Pignatiello, J. J. Jr. (1988). An overview of the strategy and tac tics of Taguchi. IIE
Trans.20,247–254.doi:10.1080/07408178808966177
Poirier, A., and Demain, A. L. (1981). Arginine regulation of grami cidin S
biosynthesis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 20, 508–514. doi: 10.1128/AAC.
20.4.508
Praveen, V., Tripathi, D., Tripathi, C. K. M., and Bihari, V. (2008) . Nutritional
regulation of actinomycin-D production by a new isolate of Streptomyces
sindenensis usingstatisticalmethods. Ind.J.Exp.Biol. 46,139–144.Rajeswari, P., Arul Jose, P., Amiya, R., and Jebakumar, S. R. D. (2 014).
Characterization of saltern based Streptomyces sp. and statistical media
optimization for its improved antibacterial activity. Front. Microbiol. 5:753.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.00753
Reddy,P.R.M.,Reddy,G.,andSeenayya,G.(1999).Productio nofthermostable β-
amylase and pullulanase by Clostridium thermosulfurogenes SV2 in solid-state
fermentation:screeningofnutrientsusingPlackett-Burmandesig n.Bioprocess.
Eng.21,175–179.doi:10.1007/pl00009069
Rokem, J. S., Lantz, A. E., and Nielsen, J. (2007). Systems biolog y of
antibiotic production by microorganisms. Nat. Prod. Rep. 24, 1262–1287.
doi:10.1039/b617765b
Sánchez, S., Chávez, A., Forero, A., García-Huante, Y., Romero, A ., Sánchez, M.,
etal.(2010).Carbonsourceregulationofantibioticproduction .J.Antibiot. 63,
442–459.doi:10.1038/ja.2010.78
Sanchez, S., and Demain, A. L. (2002). Metabolic regulation of fe rmentation
processes. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 31, 895–906. doi: 10.1016/S0141-0229(02)
00172-2
Shih, I., Van, Y., and Chang, Y. (2002). Application of statisti cal experimental
methods to optimize production of poly ( γ-glutamic acid) by Bacillus
licheniformis CCRC12826. EnzymeMicrob.Technol. 31,213–220.doi:10.1016/
S0141-0229(02)00103-5
Silveira, R. G., Kakizono, T., Takemoto, S., Nishio, N., and Nag ai, S. (1991).
Medium optimization by an orthogonal array design for the growth of
Methanosarcina barkeri .J. Ferment. Bioeng. 72, 20–25. doi: 10.1016/0922-
338X(91)90140-C
Singer, S., and Nelder, J. (2009). Nelder-mead algorithm. Scholarpedia 4:2928.
doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.2928
Singh, N., and Rai, V. (2012). Optimization of cultural parameters f or antifungal
and antibacterial metabolite from microbial isolate; Streptomyces rimosus
MTCC10792fromsoilofChhattisgarh. Int.J.Phar.Pharm.Sci. 4,94–101.
Singh, N., Rai, V., and Tripathi, C. (2012). Production and optimi sation of
oxytetracycline by a new isolate Streptomyces rimosus using response surface
methodology. Med. Chem. Res. 21, 3140–3145. doi: 10.1007/s00044-011-
9845-4
Singh, V., Khan, M., Khan, S., and Tripathi, C. K. (2009). Optimiz ation of
actinomycin V production by Streptomyces triostinicus using artiﬁcial neural
network and genetic algorithm. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 82, 379–385.
doi:10.1007/s00253-008-1828-0
Singh, V., and Tripathi, C. (2008). Production and statistical optimization of a
novel olivanic acid by Streptomyces olivaceus MTCC 6820. Pro. Biochem. 43,
1313–1317.doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2008.07.015
Singh, V., Tripathi, C., and Bihari, V. (2008). Production, optimi zation and
puriﬁcation of an antifungal compound from Streptomyces capoamus MTCC
8123.Med.Chem.Res. 17,94–102.doi:10.1007/s00044-007-9040-9
Sujatha, P., Bapi Raju, K. V., and Ramana, T. (2005). Studies on a new marine
streptomyceteBT-408producingpolyketideantibioticSBR-22eﬀec tiveagainst
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus .Microbiol. Res. 160, 119–126.
doi:10.1016/j.micres.2004.10.006
Teruel, A. M. L., Gontier, E., Bienaime, C., Nava Saucedo, J., an d Barbotin,
J.-N. (1997). Response surface analysis of chlortetracycline and tetracycline
production with K-carrageenan immobilized Streptomyces aureofaciens .
EnzymeMicrob.Technol. 21,314–320.doi:10.1016/S0141-0229(97)00045-8
Theobald, U., Schimana, J., and Fiedler, H.-P. (2000). Microbial g rowth and
production kinetics of Streptomyces antibioticus Tü 6040. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek. 78,307–313.doi:10.1023/A:1010282818272
Tripathi, C. K., Khan, M., Praveen, V., Khan, S., and Srivastava, A. (2012).
Enhanced antibiotic production by Streptomyces sindenensis using artiﬁcial
neural networks coupled with genetic algorithm and nelder-mead down hill
simplex. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 22, 939–946. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1109.
09018
Tripathi, C., Praveen, V., Singh, V., and Bihari, V. (2004). Produ ction of
antibacterial and antifungal metabolites by Streptomyces violaceusniger and
media optimization studies for the maximum metabolite production. Med.
Chem.Res. 13,790–799.doi:10.1007/s00044-004-0118-3
Vaidya, R., Vyas, P., and Chhatpar, H. (2003). Statistical opti mization
of medium components for the production of chitinase by Alcaligenes
xylosoxydans .EnzymeMicrob.Technol. 33,92–96.doi:10.1016/S0141-0229(03)
00100-5
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 15 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087Singh et al. Strategies for Fermentation Medium Optimization
Vastrad, B. M., and Neelagund, S. E. (2011). Production and optimi zation of
tetracycline by various strains of Streptomyces under solid state fermentation
usingpineapplepeelasanovelsubstrate. Rec.Res.Sci.Technol. 3,1–8.
Wang, J.-C., Hu, S.-H., Liang, Z.-C., and Yeh, C.-J. (2005). Opt imization for the
production of water-soluble polysaccharide from Pleurotus citrinopileatus in
submerged culture and its antitumor eﬀect. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 67,
759–766.doi:10.1007/s00253-004-1833-x
Wang, Y., Fang, X., An, F., Wang, G., and Zhang, X. (2011). Improveme nt
of antibiotic activity of Xenorhabdus bovienii by medium optimization
using response surface methodology. Microb. Cell Fact. 10, 1–15.
doi:10.1186/1475-2859-10-98
Xiaobo, Z., Linyu, H., Yongcheng, L., and Zhongtao, L. (2006). Medium
optimization of carbon and nitrogen sources for the production of
eucalyptene A and xyloketal A from Xylariasp. 2508 using response surface
methodology. Process Biochem. 41, 293–298. doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2005.
06.002
Zhang, J., and Gao, N.-F. (2007). Application of response surface methodology
in medium optimization for pyruvic acid production of Torulopsis
glabrataTP19 in batch fermentation. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B. 8, 98–104.
doi:10.1631/jzus.2007.B0098Zhong, J., Zhang, X., Ren, Y., Yang, J., Tan, H., and Zhou, J. (20 14). Optimization
ofBacillus subtilis cell growth eﬀecting jiean-peptide production in fed batch
fermentation using central composite design. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 17,
132–136.doi:10.1016/j.ejbt.2014.04.010
Zhu, C.-H., Lu, F.-P., He, Y.-N., Zhang, J.-K., and Du, L.-X. (20 07).
Statistical optimization of medium components for avilamycin produc tion by
Streptomyces viridochromogenes Tü57-1 using response surface methodology.
J.Ind.Microbiol.Biotechnol. 34,271–278.doi:10.1007/s10295-006-0195-z
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
beconstruedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.
Copyright © 2017 Singh, Haque, Niwas, Srivastava, Pasupuleti an d Tripathi. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or repro duction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor a re credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordanc e with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitte d which does not comply
withtheseterms.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 16 January 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 2087