polymers 
Review
Modiﬁcation and Potential Application
of Short-Chain-Length
Polyhydroxyalkanoate (SCL-PHA)
Shichao Wang†, Wei Chen†, Hengxue Xiang *, Junjie Yang, Zhe Zhou and Meifang Zhu *
State Key Laboratory for Modiﬁcation of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science
and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China; wangscdhu@163.com (S.W.);
Ava_1227xxi@163.com (W.C.); yangjunjie@mail.dhu.edu.cn (J.Y.); zzhe@dhu.edu.cn (Z.Z.)
*Correspondence: hengxuexiang@163.com (H.X.); zhumf@dhu.edu.cn (M.Z.);
Tel.: +86-21-6779-2849 (H.X. & M.Z.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Academic Editor: Naozumi Teramoto
Received: 9 June 2016; Accepted: 21 July 2016; Published: 28 July 2016
Abstract: As the only kind of naturally-occurring biopolyester synthesized by various
microorganisms, polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) shows a great market potential in packaging, ﬁber,
biomedical, and other ﬁelds due to its biodegradablity, biocompatibility, and renewability. However,
the inherent defects of scl-PHA with low 3HV or 4HB content, such as high stereoregularity, slow
crystallization rate, and particularly the phenomena of formation of large-size spherulites and
secondary crystallization, restrict the processing and stability of scl-PHA, as well as the application
of its products. Many efforts have focused on the modiﬁcation of scl-PHA to improve the mechanical
properties and the applicability of obtained scl-PHA products. The modiﬁcation of structure and
property together with the potential applications of scl-PHA are covered in this review to give a
comprehensive knowledge on the modiﬁcation and processing of scl-PHA, including the effects
of physical blending, chemical structure design, and processing conditions on the crystallization
behaviors, thermal stability, and mechanical properties of scl-PHA.
Keywords: polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA); modiﬁcation; crystallization behavior; thermal stability;
mechanical property
1. Introduction
Bio-based polymers are produced from biomass resources using biological, physical, or chemical
methods. According to their biodegradability, bio-based polymers can be divided into two broad
categories, namely biodegradable and non-biodegradable polymers [ 1]. As shown in Figure 1,
biodegradable polymers, including cellulose, lignin, and chitin, can be produced directly from plants
and animals using physical or chemical methods. Alternatively, biodegradable polymers can be
obtained by biological fermentation [ 2] (such as PHA, bacterial cellulose) or chemical synthesis
(such as poly(lactic acid)). Non-biodegradable polymers synthesized partially from biomass include
polyurethane, polyester, polyamide 56, polyoleﬁn, epoxy, and phenolic resin. Renewability and
biocompatibility make bio-based polymers attractive as green materials and these polymers also have
potential applications in the biomedical ﬁeld [3–5].
Polymers 2016 ,8, 273; doi:10.3390/polym8080273 www.mdpi.com/journal/polymersPolymers 2016 ,8, 273 2 of 28
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 2 of 28 
  
Figure 1.  Classification of bio-based polymers. 
Bio-based polymers have attracted increasing attention over the last two decades, 
predominantly due to environmental concerns and th e realization of limited oil reserves [6]. Among 
all the bio-based polymers, PHA ha s received even more interest due to its biodegradability, 
biocompatibility, chemical dive rsity, and manufacture from renewable carbon resources by 
biological fermentation [7–9]. In 1926, Lemoigne first discovered and extracted polyhydroxybutyrate 
(P3HB) homo-polymer from microorganisms [10]. However, many disadvantages, including the poor thermal stability, high brittleness, and na rrow processing temperature window, restricted the 
development of P3HB until the 1970s, when the petroleum crisis and environmental pollution 
concerns arose [11]. Since the physical and chemic al properties of PHA are similar to those of 
common petroleum-based plastics such  as polypropylene, PHA is expected to be able to partially 
replace petroleum-based polymers, and to reduce en vironment pollution at the same time [9]. With 
the extensive study of PHA, more than 150 kinds of building blocks of PHA with different structures 
and special performances have been reported [12] . All of the developed PHAs are linear polyesters 
and their basic chemical structure can be roughly expressed as
(m = 1–3), where 
n is the degree of polymerization, and R is the alkyl group with different chain lengths and 
structures [13,14]. After po ly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB), 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBHV) and 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB4HB) were produced by Imperial Chemical 
Industries (ICI) and Metabolix Inc. in  1981 and 1992, respectively [15]. 
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHHx) was successfully synthesized in China 
seven years later. Figure 2 shows the general stru ctural formula of variou s copolymers of PHA. 
According to the number of carbon atoms in the monomer, PHA can be divided into 
short-chain-length PHA (scl-PHA), medium-chain-length PHA (mcl-PHA), and long-chain-length 
PHA (lcl-PHA), corresponding to 3–5, 6–14, and 15 or more  carbon atoms, respectively [16].  
Compared with mcl-PHA, scl-PHA has been extens ively investigated, partially due to its high 
production. The largest producer of scl-PHA is Tian an Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. (Ningbo, China), 
with an annual PHBHV production capacity of 2000t. However, the inherent structure defects of scl-PHA with low 3HV or 4HB content, including the high stereoregularity, slow crystallization rate, and the phenomena of formation of large-size spherulites and secondary crystallization, limit 
its further application in the packaging, textile, and biomaterial fields. To solve the problems 
mentioned above, methods such as physical blen ding and chemical structure design combined 
with processing conditions have been applied to improve the mechanical properties and applicability of scl-PHA [17].
 
Figure 1. Classiﬁcation of bio-based polymers.
Bio-based polymers have attracted increasing attention over the last two decades, predominantly
due to environmental concerns and the realization of limited oil reserves [ 6]. Among all the
bio-based polymers, PHA has received even more interest due to its biodegradability, biocompatibility,
chemical diversity, and manufacture from renewable carbon resources by biological fermentation [ 7–9].
In 1926, Lemoigne ﬁrst discovered and extracted polyhydroxybutyrate (P3HB) homo-polymer
from microorganisms [ 10]. However, many disadvantages, including the poor thermal stability,
high brittleness, and narrow processing temperature window, restricted the development of P3HB
until the 1970s, when the petroleum crisis and environmental pollution concerns arose [ 11]. Since
the physical and chemical properties of PHA are similar to those of common petroleum-based
plastics such as polypropylene, PHA is expected to be able to partially replace petroleum-based
polymers, and to reduce environment pollution at the same time [ 9]. With the extensive study
of PHA, more than 150 kinds of building blocks of PHA with different structures and special
performances have been reported [ 12]. All of the developed PHAs are linear polyesters and their
basic chemical structure can be roughly expressed as
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 2 of 28 
  
Figure 1.  Classification of bio-based polymers. 
Bio-based polymers have attracted increasing attention over the last two decades, 
predominantly due to environmental concerns and th e realization of limited oil reserves [6]. Among 
all the bio-based polymers, PHA ha s received even more interest due to its biodegradability, 
biocompatibility, chemical dive rsity, and manufacture from renewable carbon resources by 
biological fermentation [7–9]. In 1926, Lemoigne first discovered and extracted polyhydroxybutyrate 
(P3HB) homo-polymer from microorganisms [10]. However, many disadvantages, including the poor thermal stability, high brittleness, and na rrow processing temperature window, restricted the 
development of P3HB until the 1970s, when the petroleum crisis and environmental pollution 
concerns arose [11]. Since the physical and chemic al properties of PHA are similar to those of 
common petroleum-based plastics such  as polypropylene, PHA is expected to be able to partially 
replace petroleum-based polymers, and to reduce en vironment pollution at the same time [9]. With 
the extensive study of PHA, more than 150 kinds of building blocks of PHA with different structures 
and special performances have been reported [12] . All of the developed PHAs are linear polyesters 
and their basic chemical structure can be roughly expressed as
(m = 1–3), where 
n is the degree of polymerization, and R is the alkyl group with different chain lengths and 
structures [13,14]. After po ly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB), 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBHV) and 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB4HB) were produced by Imperial Chemical 
Industries (ICI) and Metabolix Inc. in  1981 and 1992, respectively [15]. 
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHHx) was successfully synthesized in China 
seven years later. Figure 2 shows the general stru ctural formula of variou s copolymers of PHA. 
According to the number of carbon atoms in the monomer, PHA can be divided into 
short-chain-length PHA (scl-PHA), medium-chain-length PHA (mcl-PHA), and long-chain-length 
PHA (lcl-PHA), corresponding to 3–5, 6–14, and 15 or more  carbon atoms, respectively [16].  
Compared with mcl-PHA, scl-PHA has been extens ively investigated, partially due to its high 
production. The largest producer of scl-PHA is Tian an Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. (Ningbo, China), 
with an annual PHBHV production capacity of 2000t. However, the inherent structure defects of scl-PHA with low 3HV or 4HB content, including the high stereoregularity, slow crystallization rate, and the phenomena of formation of large-size spherulites and secondary crystallization, limit 
its further application in the packaging, textile, and biomaterial fields. To solve the problems 
mentioned above, methods such as physical blen ding and chemical structure design combined 
with processing conditions have been applied to improve the mechanical properties and applicability of scl-PHA [17].
 
 (m= 1–3), where nis the
degree of polymerization, and Ris the alkyl group with different chain lengths and structures [13,14].
After poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB), poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBHV) and
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB4HB) were produced by Imperial Chemical
Industries (ICI) and Metabolix Inc. in 1981 and 1992, respectively [ 15]. Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-
3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHHx) was successfully synthesized in China seven years later. Figure 2
shows the general structural formula of various copolymers of PHA. According to the number
of carbon atoms in the monomer, PHA can be divided into short-chain-length PHA (scl-PHA),
medium-chain-length PHA (mcl-PHA), and long-chain-length PHA (lcl-PHA), corresponding to 3–5,
6–14, and 15 or more carbon atoms, respectively [16].
Compared with mcl-PHA, scl-PHA has been extensively investigated, partially due to its high
production. The largest producer of scl-PHA is Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. (Ningbo, China),
with an annual PHBHV production capacity of 2000t. However, the inherent structure defects of
scl-PHA with low 3HV or 4HB content, including the high stereoregularity, slow crystallization rate,
and the phenomena of formation of large-size spherulites and secondary crystallization, limit its
further application in the packaging, textile, and biomaterial ﬁelds. To solve the problems mentioned
above, methods such as physical blending and chemical structure design combined with processing
conditions have been applied to improve the mechanical properties and applicability of scl-PHA [ 17].Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 3 of 28
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 3 of 28 
  
Figure 2.  General structure of various copolymers of PHA.  
2. Modification of scl-PHA 
2.1. Basic Properties of scl-PHA 
2.1.1. Crystal Structure and Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA 
The crystal structures of P3HB and P3HV belong to the orthogonal crystal system [18] with cell 
parameters of ( a = 0.576 nm, b = 1.320 nm, c = 0.596 nm) and ( a = 0.932 nm, c = 0.556 nm, b = 1.002 nm) 
[19], respectively. As a copolyester of P3HB and P3HV, PHBHV is a kind of chiral polymer with a high degree of optical rotation. The crystal structure and d spacing of PHBHV with 0–95 mol % HV 
content have been studied with the help of X-ray di ffraction by Doi et al. [20]. As shown in Table 1, 
PHBHV presented a P3HB crystal structure when  HV content was below 37 mol %. With the 
increasing content of HV, the d spacing of (110) plane increased significantly, while those of the (020) 
and (002) planes remained unchanged, indicating that the side chains of HV units expanded the 
(110) plane of the P3HB lattice due to the steric effect. When the content of HV was between 53 and 
95 mol %, the crystal structure of PHBHV was similar to that of P3HV, and no significant change was found in all the d spacings of the P3HV lattice [20]. Surp risingly, the coexistence of both crystal 
phases and pseudoeutectic behavior of P3HB and P3HV occurred at a narrow composition range and an isodimorphism phenomenon was formed in PHBHV with 40 mol % HV content [21–24]. 
Similar to PHBHV, the crystallization mechanism an d crystal structure of P3HB4HB were similar to 
those of P3HB. The crystallization rate and the  d spacing were decreased while the radius of 
spherulite increased with the increasing content of 4HB [25]. 
Table 1.  Degree of crystallinity, crystal structure, and d spacings of PHBHV samples. Reprinted with 
permission from [20]. Copyright ( 1989) American Chemical Society. 
HV mol % Crystallinity （%） Crystal Structure dSpacings (nm) 
(020) (110) (002) (211) 
0 55 ± 5 P3HB 0.659 0.525 0.296 – 
9 58 ± 5 P3HB 0.664 0.532 0.294 – 
21 56 ± 5 P3HB 0.664 0.536 0.295 – 
37 52 ± 5 P3HB 0.663 0.546 0.298 – 53 63 ± 5 P3HV 0.503 0.695 – 0.342 
62 57 ± 5 P3HV 0.504 0.691 – 0.342 
83 66 ± 5 P3HV 0.503 0.691 – 0.346 95 70 ± 5 P3HV 0.503 0.691 – 0.343 
Figure 2. General structure of various copolymers of PHA.
2. Modiﬁcation of scl-PHA
2.1. Basic Properties of scl-PHA
2.1.1. Crystal Structure and Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA
The crystal structures of P3HB and P3HV belong to the orthogonal crystal system [ 18]
with cell parameters of (a= 0.576 nm, b= 1.320 nm, c= 0.596 nm) and ( a= 0.932 nm, c= 0.556 nm,
b= 1.002 nm) [19], respectively. As a copolyester of P3HB and P3HV , PHBHV is a kind of chiral
polymer with a high degree of optical rotation. The crystal structure and dspacing of PHBHV
with 0–95 mol % HV content have been studied with the help of X-ray diffraction by Doi et al. [ 20].
As shown in Table 1, PHBHV presented a P3HB crystal structure when HV content was below 37 mol %.
With the increasing content of HV , the dspacing of (110) plane increased signiﬁcantly, while those of
the (020) and (002) planes remained unchanged, indicating that the side chains of HV units expanded
the (110) plane of the P3HB lattice due to the steric effect. When the content of HV was between 53
and 95 mol %, the crystal structure of PHBHV was similar to that of P3HV , and no signiﬁcant change
was found in all the dspacings of the P3HV lattice [ 20]. Surprisingly, the coexistence of both crystal
phases and pseudoeutectic behavior of P3HB and P3HV occurred at a narrow composition range and
an isodimorphism phenomenon was formed in PHBHV with 40 mol % HV content [ 21–24]. Similar
to PHBHV , the crystallization mechanism and crystal structure of P3HB4HB were similar to those
of P3HB. The crystallization rate and the dspacing were decreased while the radius of spherulite
increased with the increasing content of 4HB [25].
Table 1. Degree of crystallinity, crystal structure, and dspacings of PHBHV samples. Reprinted with
permission from [20]. Copyright (1989) American Chemical Society.
HV mol % Crystallinity (%) Crystal StructuredSpacings (nm)
(020) (110) (002) (211)
0 55 5 P3HB 0.659 0.525 0.296 –
9 58 5 P3HB 0.664 0.532 0.294 –
21 56 5 P3HB 0.664 0.536 0.295 –
37 52 5 P3HB 0.663 0.546 0.298 –
53 63 5 P3HV 0.503 0.695 – 0.342
62 57 5 P3HV 0.504 0.691 – 0.342
83 66 5 P3HV 0.503 0.691 – 0.346
95 70 5 P3HV 0.503 0.691 – 0.343Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 4 of 28
With the increase of storage time, scl-PHA usually experiences a transition process from
viscoelasticity to brittleness. Normally, the secondary crystallization is considered to be the main reason
for the transition of scl-PHA. Figure 3 describes the brittle evolution mechanism for PHBHV . As shown
in Figure 3a, the amorphous region is ﬁrstly bounded by the crystalline region after the formation of
PHBHV products. Then, the interphase and rigid amorphous phase are formed in the amorphous
region by the effect of secondary crystallization. As a result, the scl-PHA products become relatively
brittle. In our previous work, we found that before the secondary crystallization developed to a large
degree, PHBHV still had a large elongation after heat drawing treatment. Therefore, we propose that
the brittleness of PHBHV obeys the rigid transformation of amorphous phase, as shown in Figure 3b.
The amorphous region can be frozen by rigid transformation due to the intermolecular interaction
or a change in environmental conditions, leading to a constrained amorphous phase. Unlike the
abovementioned rigid amorphous phase, this constrained structure can be rearranged under a certain
temperature. With the further development of secondary crystallization, the amorphous region will be
entirely bounded by the crystalline region and will not be able to undertake a tensile deformation even
at a high temperature.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 4 of 28 
 With the increase of storage time, scl-PHA us ually experiences a transition process from 
viscoelasticity to brittleness. Normally, the secondary crystallization is considered to be the main reason for the transition of scl- PHA. Figure 3 describes the brittl e evolution mechanism for PHBHV. 
As shown in Figure 3a, the amorphous region is fi rstly bounded by the crystalline region after the 
formation of PHBHV products. Then, the interphase  and rigid amorphous phase are formed in the 
amorphous region by the effect of secondary crystallization. As a result, the scl-PHA products 
become relatively brittle. In ou r previous work, we found that before the secondary crystallization 
developed to a large degree, PHBHV still had a large elongation after heat drawing treatment. Therefore, we propose that the brittleness of PH BHV obeys the rigid transf ormation of amorphous 
phase, as shown in Figure 3b. The amorphous region can be frozen by rigid transformation due to 
the intermolecular interaction or a change in en vironmental conditions, leading to a constrained 
amorphous phase. Unlike the abovementioned rigi d amorphous phase, this constrained structure 
can be rearranged under a certain temperature. With the further development of secondary crystallization, the amorphous region will be entire ly bounded by the crystalline region and will not 
be able to undertake a tensile deform ation even at a high temperature. 
 
Figure 3.  Brittle evolution mechanism for PHBHV: ( a) secondary crystallization; ( b) rigid 
transformation for amorphous phase. 
2.1.2. Thermal Properties of scl-PHA 
The Multiple Melting Behavior of scl-PHA 
The state of amorphous, semi-crystalline, or crystalline can be found in semi-crystallined 
scl-PHA according to the differences in chemical structure, molecular weight, and processing 
conditions. The double or multiple melting behavior  of scl-PHA has been observed with the help of 
DSC [26]. Normally, the multiple melting behavior of scl-PHA is related to the annealing condition, the heating rate, and the structure and morphology of crystals. The formation mechanism of the multiple melting behavior of scl-PHA has been intensively studied, and the identified mechanisms are listed as follows: (1) the melt–recrystallization–r emelt process; (2) the melting process of different 
crystals; (3) the melting process of lamellas with variety of morphologies; (4) the melting process of different molecular weights; and (5) the physical aging and/or relaxation of the rigid amorphous 
fraction [21]. In order to describe the melting behavi or of P3HB in a more accurate way, Wellen et al. 
systematically investigated the first melt behavior and its repeatability of P3HB using DSC. The analysis of DSC energy flow scans showed a comple x melting peak that can be resolved into three 
elementary peaks with different intensities at diffe rent melting temperatures. Results suggested that 
the peak temperature of P3HB depended on the he ating rate, while the total crystallinity detected 
was independent of the heating rate [27].  
Thermal Stability of scl-PHA 
Figure 3. Brittle evolution mechanism for PHBHV: ( a) secondary crystallization; ( b) rigid
transformation for amorphous phase.
2.1.2. Thermal Properties of scl-PHA
The Multiple Melting Behavior of scl-PHA
The state of amorphous, semi-crystalline, or crystalline can be found in semi-crystallined scl-PHA
according to the differences in chemical structure, molecular weight, and processing conditions.
The double or multiple melting behavior of scl-PHA has been observed with the help of DSC [ 26].
Normally, the multiple melting behavior of scl-PHA is related to the annealing condition, the heating
rate, and the structure and morphology of crystals. The formation mechanism of the multiple melting
behavior of scl-PHA has been intensively studied, and the identiﬁed mechanisms are listed as follows:
(1) the melt–recrystallization–remelt process; (2) the melting process of different crystals; (3) the melting
process of lamellas with variety of morphologies; (4) the melting process of different molecular weights;
and (5) the physical aging and/or relaxation of the rigid amorphous fraction [ 21]. In order to describe
the melting behavior of P3HB in a more accurate way, Wellen et al. systematically investigated the ﬁrst
melt behavior and its repeatability of P3HB using DSC. The analysis of DSC energy ﬂow scans showed
a complex melting peak that can be resolved into three elementary peaks with different intensities at
different melting temperatures. Results suggested that the peak temperature of P3HB depended on
the heating rate, while the total crystallinity detected was independent of the heating rate [27].Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 5 of 28
Thermal Stability of scl-PHA
Scl-PHA can be processed into ﬁlm and ﬁber using the melt processing method. However, the
thermal stability of scl-PHA should be fully considered during the melting process. In order to
process scl-PHA in a reasonable and effective way, it is necessary to study the thermal degradation
mechanism and control the thermal degradation of scl-PHA. Among all the thermal degradation
mechanisms of scl-PHA, the cis-elimination mechanism proposed by Murray et al. through analyzing
the volatile components and the changes of molecular weight during the degradation process of
P3HB is considered as the general pathway of scl-PHA [ 28]. As shown in Figure 4, a six-membered
ring ester serving as a transition state is formed between the ester oxygen and neighboring -C-H of
P3HB molecular chains, which induces the thermal degradation of P3HB [ 29]. On the one hand, the
formation of a six-membered ring is inﬂuenced by the negative inductive effect of the neighboring
methylene group at the -position to the ester oxygen [ 30]. The stronger the negative inductive effect
of the neighboring group, the more strongly the -C-H of the methylene group in the -position to the
ester oxygen is activated, which makes it easy to form the six-membered ring ester [ 31]. On the other
hand, the formation of the six-membered ring ester is also affected by the electron-donating effect of a
substituent group of -position carbon atoms to the ester oxygen. The strong electron-donating effect
of the substituent group makes it easy to form the six-membered ring ester [31,32].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 5 of 28 
 Scl-PHA can be processed into film and fiber using the melt processing method. However, the 
thermal stability of scl-PHA should be fully considered during the melting process. In order to process scl-PHA in a reasonable and effective way, it is necessary to study the thermal degradation 
mechanism and control the thermal degradation of scl-PHA. Among all the thermal degradation 
mechanisms of scl-PHA, the cis-elimination mechanism proposed by Murray et al. through 
analyzing the volatile components and the change s of molecular weight during the degradation 
process of P3HB is considered as the general pa thway of scl-PHA [28]. As shown in Figure 4, a 
six-membered ring ester serving as a transition  state is formed between the ester oxygen and 
neighboring β-C-H of P3HB molecular chains, which induces the thermal degradation of P3HB [29]. 
On the one hand, the formation of a six-membered ring  is influenced by the negative inductive effect 
of the neighboring methylene group at the β-position to the ester oxygen [30]. The stronger the 
negative inductive effect of the neighboring group, the more strongly the β-C-H of the methylene 
group in the β-position to the ester oxygen is activate d, which makes it easy to form the 
six-membered ring ester [31]. On the other hand, the formation of the six-membered ring ester is also 
affected by the electron-donating effect of a substituent group of α-position carbon atoms to the ester 
oxygen. The strong electron-donating effect of th e substituent group makes it easy to form the 
six-membered ring ester [31,32]. 
 
Figure 4.  Schematic of the thermal degradation of P3HB by random chain scission reaction. 
Reprinted with permission from [ 31]. Copyright © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. 
The degradation of P3HB can be divided into two stages according to the difference of 
temperature. When the processing temperature was between 160 ° and 180 °C, the random chain 
scission of molecular chains occurred and the thermal stability of P3HB decreased significantly. 
Further increasing the processing temperature to 180–200 °C, a drastic decrease in molecular weight 
of P3HB was found due to the rapid random scission according to the β-elimination mechanism 
[33,34]. The sensitivity of degradation behavior on temperature led to a narrow melt processing temperature window and a limited application considering that the melting temperature of P3HB was about 180 °C. To broaden the melt processing  temperature window of P3HB, a 3HV unit was 
introduced into the molecular chains of P3HB [32]. The melting temperature of P3HB first decreased and then increased with the increasing content of HV. When the content of HV was increased to 40 
mol %, the melting temperature of PHBHV decreased from 180 °C of P3HB to 75 °C. After that, the 
melting temperature of PHBHV began to increase with the further increase of 3HV unit. When the content of HV was up to 95 mol %, the melting temperature of PHBHV increased to 108 °C [20,33]. Although the melt processing te mperature window can be broadened to a certain extent, the cost 
was relatively high. Normally, the content of HV in commercial PHBHV is lower than 5 wt %. 
The residual metal ions of scl-PHA can also affect  the degradation process of scl-PHA [35]. It is 
well known that the commercialized scl-PHA usually contains a small amount of metal elements, 
such as Na
+ and Ca2+ [36]. As a kind of Lewis acid, Ca2+ and Mg2+ can interact with carboxylic groups 
to seize β-H atoms that are neighboring to carbon at oms on the ester oxygen. The formation of 
crotonyl leads to the scission degradation of scl-PHA molecular chains. Abe et al. found that hard acid cations like Ca
2+ and Mg2+ could catalyze the thermal degradation of P3HB. After the remove of 
Figure 4. Schematic of the thermal degradation of P3HB by random chain scission reaction. Reprinted
with permission from [31]. Copyright © 2008 Elsevier Ltd.
The degradation of P3HB can be divided into two stages according to the difference of temperature.
When the processing temperature was between 160and 180C, the random chain scission of
molecular chains occurred and the thermal stability of P3HB decreased signiﬁcantly. Further increasing
the processing temperature to 180–200C, a drastic decrease in molecular weight of P3HB was found
due to the rapid random scission according to the -elimination mechanism [ 33,34]. The sensitivity
of degradation behavior on temperature led to a narrow melt processing temperature window and a
limited application considering that the melting temperature of P3HB was about 180C. To broaden the
melt processing temperature window of P3HB, a 3HV unit was introduced into the molecular chains
of P3HB [ 32]. The melting temperature of P3HB ﬁrst decreased and then increased with the increasing
content of HV . When the content of HV was increased to 40 mol %, the melting temperature of PHBHV
decreased from 180C of P3HB to 75C. After that, the melting temperature of PHBHV began to
increase with the further increase of 3HV unit. When the content of HV was up to 95 mol %, the melting
temperature of PHBHV increased to 108C [20,33]. Although the melt processing temperature window
can be broadened to a certain extent, the cost was relatively high. Normally, the content of HV in
commercial PHBHV is lower than 5 wt %.
The residual metal ions of scl-PHA can also affect the degradation process of scl-PHA [ 35]. It is
well known that the commercialized scl-PHA usually contains a small amount of metal elements, such
as Na+and Ca2+[36]. As a kind of Lewis acid, Ca2+and Mg2+can interact with carboxylic groups to
seize-H atoms that are neighboring to carbon atoms on the ester oxygen. The formation of crotonyl
leads to the scission degradation of scl-PHA molecular chains. Abe et al. found that hard acid cationsPolymers 2016 ,8, 273 6 of 28
like Ca2+and Mg2+could catalyze the thermal degradation of P3HB. After the remove of residual
Ca2+ions using an acetic acid/chloroform solution, the weight loss temperature of P3HB increased
from 240 to 275C [34]. Metal ions in the form of carboxylic acid salts in P3HB molecular chains can
also accelerate the degradation of P3HB. A novel E1cB mechanism describing the carboxylate-induced
degradation of P3HB has been proposed by Kowalczuk et al. [ 37]. This mechanism explains the
dependence of P3HB thermal stability on the chemical structure of its end groups in the form of
carboxylic acid salts.
The weight loss, structure, and molecular weight of scl-PHA during the thermal degradation
process can be detected using conventional methods, including thermal gravimetric analyzer (TGA),
nuclear magnetic spectrum (NMR), and gel permeation chromatography (GPC) [ 38,39]. In order to
investigate the relationship between structure parameters and temperature or time, a series of coupling
techniques are adopted to monitor the thermal process of scl-PHA, such as thermal gravimetric
analysis coupled with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (TGA-FTIR), thermal gravimetric
analysis combined with mass spectrometry (TGA-DTA/MS), or pyrolysis gas chromatography
jointed with mass spectrometry (PyGC-MS) [ 40]. The main degradation products of PHBHV
during the thermal degradation process were analyzed using the PyGC-MS technique based on
-elimination mechanism. Taking PHBHV with 30 mol % HV as an example, the main degradation
products were mainly unsaturated carbonate and unsaturated ester with ﬁve carbon atoms, including
propylene (6.20%), 2-butenoic acid (45.47%), 2-pentenoic acid (25.81%), propenyl-2-butenoate (11.57%),
propenyl-2-pentenoate (5.39%), butyric-2-butenoate (1.93%), pentanoic-2-pentenoate (2.31%), and
carbon dioxide [ 40]. Based on the reported research, a comprehensive description of the whole thermal
degradation process and the corresponding mechanism of PHBHV are provided in Figure 5 [41].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 6 of 28 
 residual Ca2+ ions using an acetic acid/chloroform solution, the weight loss temperature of P3HB 
increased from 240 to 275 °C [34]. Metal ions in th e form of carboxylic acid salts in P3HB molecular 
chains can also accelerate the degradation of  P3HB. A novel E1cB mechanism describing the 
carboxylate-induced degradation of P3HB has be en proposed by Kowalczuk et al. [37]. This 
mechanism explains the dependence of P3HB therma l stability on the chemic al structure of its end 
groups in the form of carboxylic acid salts.  
The weight loss, structure, and molecular weight of scl-PHA during the thermal degradation 
process can be detected using conventional method s, including thermal gravimetric analyzer (TGA), 
nuclear magnetic spectrum (NMR), and gel permea tion chromatography (GPC) [38,39]. In order to 
investigate the relationship between structure pa rameters and temperature or time, a series of 
coupling techniques are adopted to monitor the thermal process of scl-PHA, such as thermal 
gravimetric analysis coupled with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (TGA-FTIR), thermal gravimetric analysis combined with mass spectrometry (TGA-DTA/MS), or pyrolysis gas chromatography jointed with mass spectrometry (PyGC-MS) [40]. The main degradation products 
of PHBHV during the thermal degradation proce ss were analyzed using the PyGC-MS technique 
based on β-elimination mechanism. Taking PHBHV with 30 mol % HV as an example, the main 
degradation products were mainly  unsaturated carbonate and unsatu rated ester with five carbon 
atoms, including propylene (6.20%), 2-butenoic  acid (45.47%), 2-pentenoic acid (25.81%), 
propenyl-2-butenoate (11.57%), propenyl-2-pentenoate (5.39%), butyric-2-butenoate (1.93%), 
pentanoic-2-pentenoate (2.31%), and carbon di oxide [40]. Based on the reported research, a 
comprehensive description of the whole thermal degradation process and the corresponding mechanism of PHBHV are provided in Figure 5 [41]. 
 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of PHBHV thermal degradatio n. Reprinted with permission from [41]. 
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of PHBHV thermal degradation. Reprinted with permission from [ 41].
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 7 of 28
Usually the poor thermal stability hinders the melt processing of scl-PHA. However, a series
of P3HB and PHBHV oligomers were produced by Marchessault et al. from another perspective
using the thermal degradation of scl-PHA [ 32]. Based on the work, Hakkarainen et al. developed an
efﬁcient process for chemical recycling of P3HB to functional monomers through microwave-assisted
degradation in green solvents (water, methanol, and ethanol), to achieve fast hydrolysis and monomeric
or oligomeric degradation products [ 42]. These obtained oligomers presented a well-deﬁned structure,
with a carboxylic acid end and an unsaturated end on each chain. The molecular weight of the produced
oligomers was affected by the hydroxyvalerate content and could be tuned by the reaction temperature
and the reaction time [ 32]. The oligomers of scl-PHA with low molecular weight provide the possibility
for the construction of PHA-based polymers using the methods of block polymerization and graft
polymerization. Furthermore, the thermal stability of P3HB with low molecular weight (LMWPHB)
was signiﬁcantly higher than that of neat P3HB. The addition of LMWPHB into P3HB effectively
decreased the crystallinity, crystallization rate, and melting temperature of P3HB, but increased the
ﬂexibility and degradation ability of P3HB [43].
2.2. Scl-PHA-Based Composites Prepared by Physical Blending
Since no catalyst is added during the fermentation process, scl-PHA has a relatively low
heterogeneous nucleation density during the crystallization process. In addition, the stereoregularity
of scl-PHA is relatively high and it is easy to form a brittle scl-PHA with large-size spherulites. In order
to overcome the brittleness and improve the mechanical properties of scl-PHA, physical blending
becomes an economical modiﬁcation method due to its low cost and simple operation. The additives
incorporated into scl-PHA can be divided into nanoparticles and polymers.
2.2.1. Scl-PHA/Nanocomposites
Inﬂuence of Nanoparticles on the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA
Improvement of the toughness and processability of scl-PHA can be achieved by simply
introducing inorganic nanoparticles to increase the nucleation density and decrease the spherulite
size [ 44]. In recent years, different inorganic nanoparticles have been introduced into the scl-PHA
matrix by melt or solution blending. The effects of additives on the crystallization, thermal stability,
mechanical properties, and biodegradability of scl-PHA have been intensively studied. For example,
the role of tungsten disulphide inorganic nanotubes (INT-WS 2) on the crystallization and melting
behavior of P3HB has been discussed from a kinetic point of view [ 45]. It was found that the
well-dispersed INT-WS 2played a dominant role in accelerating the crystallization rate and in reducing
the activation energy barrier towards nucleation of P3HB. A signiﬁcant increment of crystallization
temperature of P3HB was observed when only 0.1 wt % INT-WS 2was incorporated into the P3HB
matrix. Similar to INT-WS 2, boron nitride (BN), talc, hydroxyapatite (HA), and zinc stearate (ZnSt)
were also used as nucleation agents to modify the properties of P3HB4HB. Results suggested that
BN was the most efﬁcient nucleation agent to promote the crystallization rate of P3HB4HB, whereas
the degree of crystallization was not very high. The effect of nucleation was ﬁrst enhanced with the
increasing content of BN and then decreased slowly when the BN content exceeded 1 wt %. On the
contrary, the addition of talc increased the crystallization degree of P3HB4HB, but had little effect on the
crystallization rate. Different from BN and talc, the addition of HA and ZnSt had no promoting effect
on the crystallization of P3HB4HB, but decreased its crystallinity [ 46]. Carbon-based nanomaterial
was also adopted to improve the crystallization behavior of scl-PHA. Zhu et al. investigated the effect
of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on the crystallization behavior and the nucleation mechanism of PHBHV ,
and found that CNTs acted as an effective heterogeneous nucleation agent, inducing an increase
in crystallinity and crystal size of PHBHV . The nucleation and growth kinetics of spherulites were
also discussed based on the Lauritzen–Hoffman equation. Results suggested that the temperaturePolymers 2016 ,8, 273 8 of 28
corresponding to the maximum spherulitic growth rate shifted to a high level with the incorporation
of CNTs [47].
The reinforcement of scl-PHA with bio-based organic nanoparticles may hold particular interest
since it would allow the development of fully biodegradable nanocomposites produced from renewable
resources. The bio-based organic nanoparticles with high Young’s modulus and strength are widely
used in the modiﬁcation of scl-PHA [ 48,49], including cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) [ 50], chitosan
nanocrystal [ 51], and bacterial cellulose nanowhiskers (BCNW)[ 52]. CNC not only owns the basic
properties of cellulose, but also has a high speciﬁc surface area, a large length/diameter (L/D) ratio,
and an excellent hydrophilicity [ 53]. Qin et al. blended CNC with PHBHV in solution and found that
the incorporation of CNC increased the nucleation rate and crystallization rate of nanocomposites,
leading to a narrow distribution of the PHBHV crystallite size [ 54]. Similar to CNC, chitosan
nanocrystal also has a unique cationic structure, which is often used to enhance the properties of
scl-PHAs. Gu et al . prepared PHBHV/acetylated chitin nanocrystal ﬁlms using the solution-casting
method and investigated the crystallization behavior of PHBHV [ 55]. DSC results indicated that the
inﬂuence of chitin nanocrystal on the crystallization behavior of PHBHV matrix was changed from
suppression to assistance after the surface modiﬁcation. PHBHV/BCNW ﬁlms were also prepared by
Marta et al. using the same method and results showed that the incorporation of BCNW promoted
the crystallization and increased the glass transition temperature of PHBHV due to the restricted
polymeric chain mobility [52].
Effect of Nanoparticles on the Thermal Stability of scl-PHA
Based on the thermal degradation mechanism of scl-PHA, the addition of nanoparticles can
improve the thermal stability of scl-PHA to a certain extent. The commonly used nanoparticles
include titanium dioxide (TiO 2) [56], LDH [ 57], and clay [ 58–60]. Buzarovska et al. found that
the decomposition temperature of PHBHV increased from 236 to 253C when 1 wt % TiO 2was
incorporated, and the decomposition temperature further increased to 265C when the content of
TiO 2was up to 10 wt % [ 56]. The thermal degradation behavior of P3HB/poly(ethylene glycol)
phosphonates (PEOPAs)-modiﬁed layered double hydroxide (PMLDH) nanocomposites was also
investigated. The calculated Eavalue of P3HB/PMLDH nanocomposites was increased with the
increasing content of PMLDH, which could be attributed to the incorporation of more PMLDH loading
to P3HB, inducing a decrease in the degradation rate and an increase in the residual weight [ 57].
Bruzaud et al. prepared PHBHV/organically modiﬁed montmorillonite by the solution intercalation
method and found that the thermal stability was greatly enhanced by the addition of only a small
percentage of organoclay [ 58]. For example, the temperature corresponding to 50% degradation of
PHBHV-based nanocomposite increased from 270 to 300C with the addition of 5 wt % organoclay,
meaning that the thermal decomposition process of PHBHV/organoclay composite took more time to
start in the presence of a small percentage of organoclay. For the organic nanoparticles, several studies
showed that CNC was able to improve the thermal stability of PHAs [ 54], whereas a slight decrease
in the thermal degradation was observed in other cases [ 61,62]. Similar to CNC, the degradation
onset and maximum degradation temperature of PHBHV were slightly shifted from 239.4 to 245.0C
and 287.0 to 290.1C, respectively, when 1 wt % BCNW was incorporated. This phenomenon was
caused by the formation of a strong network held by hydrogen bonds between the matrix and the
nanoﬁller. However, further increases in nanoﬁller loading resulted in decreased thermal stability of
composites [52].
Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA Improved by Nanoparticles
In addition to accelerating nucleation and improving the thermal stability of scl-PHA,
nanoparticles can also improve the mechanical properties of scl-PHA. Park et al. reported the
PHBHV nanocomposite reinforced by graphene using the solution blending method. Samples
with 6 wt % graphene presented substantially high storage modulus, which was attributed to thePolymers 2016 ,8, 273 9 of 28
increased immobilization of PHBHV chains onto the surface of graphene [ 63]. Mualla et al. prepared
PHBHV bio-composites with incorporating untreated hydroxyapatite (HAP) and silane-treated HAP
(sHAP) nanoparticles using melt extrusion processing. Results showed that modiﬁed HAP could be
uniformly dispersed in PHBHV matrix and produced the toughness effect at an appropriate addition.
The Young’s modulus and tensile strength of PHBHV composite were increased by 15% and 48% with
the addition of 5 wt % sHAP , respectively [ 64]. Similar to HAP , the presence of cellulose nanowhiskers
(CNW) promoted a considerable chain orientation in the same direction of the applied load and greatly
enhanced the elongation-at-break of PHBHV through the slippage of CNW and the oriented molecules
during the plastic deformation process [ 65]. By incorporating 5 wt % CNW, the PHBHV/ CNW ﬁlm
showed 77% improvement in Young’s modulus, 35.5% increase in tensile strength, and 41% increase in
storage modulus, indicating that CNW was an effective reinforcing agent for PHBHV [ 62]. To further
improve the interfacial adhesion and mechanical performance of scl-PHA, modiﬁed CNC (mCNC)
with good compatibility was adopted. The storage modulus of P3HB4HB/mCNC nanocomposites
prepared by solution casting method was enhanced by 47% when incorporated with 3 wt % mCNC,
which was ascribed to the uniform dispersion of mCNC and the strong interfacial adhesion between
mCNC and the matrix. [66].
2.2.2. Scl-PHA/Polymer Composites
Inﬂuence of Polymers on the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA
Blending scl-PHA with other polymers is a practical and economical approach to tailor its
crystallization behavior [ 67]. The blended polymers can be divided into non-biodegradable and
degradable polymers. As for non-biodegradable polymers, the crystallization behavior of incompatible
crystalline/amorphous blends (such as PHBHV/polystyrene (PS) and PHBHV/polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA)) under different ratios and different crystallization temperatures has been
intensively investigated [ 68]. Results suggested that the dispersion state and blend ratio of amorphous
content had a decisive effect on the formation of PHBHV ring-banded spherulites. Similar results were
also found in PHBHV/thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) composites [ 67]. The addition of amorphous
TPU decreased the crystallinity of PHBHV and damaged the integrity of PHBHV spherulites; however,
banded spherulites of PHBHV still existed. The crystallization kinetics of P3HB and P3HB/polymer
vinyl acetate (PVAc) composites was investigated using broadband dielectric technique over a wide
range of frequencies (102–105Hz). The dielectric intensity of the amorphous segments, which was
proportional to the volume of the mobile amorphous phase, decreased exponentially with the increase
of the crystallization time, while the dielectric strength of the rigid amorphous segments, which is
related to the percentage of crystallinity in the composite, increased dramatically with the increase of
the crystallization time [69].
Blending scl-PHA with degradable polymers attracts even more interest, considering that
non-degradable polymers may pose environmental problems in the future. Among all the degradable
polymers, polycaprolactone (PCL) [ 70], poly(lactic acid) (PLA), poly(butylene succinate) (PBS),
lignin [ 71], and plant ﬁbers [ 72] were used to control the crystallization process of scl-PHA and
to prepare fully degradable composites [ 73]. Müller et al. reported the inﬂuence of PCL with different
molecular weights on the properties of P3HB. PCL with high molecular weight was immiscible
with P3HB despite the proportion of composite, leading to a separated crystallization phenomenon.
By decreasing the molecular weight of PCL, a partially miscible phenomenon was observed in the
P3HB/PCL composite [ 74]. Ozaki et al. investigated the miscibility of P3HB/PHBHHx/PLLA
composites with different ratios of P3HB, PHBHHx, and PLLA. Results showed that the crystal
lattice parameters of aandbdid not change with the changing of component ratios, suggesting that
the crystal structures of these polymers did not depend on the second component [ 75]. The addition of
PBS improved the thermal stability and crystallization property of P3HB4HB. A better compatibility
between P3HB4HB and PBS phases and a mutual promotion on the crystallization property werePolymers 2016 ,8, 273 10 of 28
found when the content of PBS was less than 30 wt % [ 76]. The effects of lignin on the crystallization
process of PHBHV could be classiﬁed in two opposite ways, namely the enhanced effect of nucleation
and the hindered effect of spherulites’ growth [ 71]. Unlike the abovementioned polymers, the addition
of kenaf ﬁbers had little effect on the crystallization kinetics of PHBHV , as analyzed by Buzarovska et a l.
using Avrami and Mo’s models [77].
Effect of Polymers on the Thermal Stability of scl-PHA
Similar to nanoparticles, some bio-based or petroleum-based polymers have also been used to
improve the thermal stability of scl-PHA. Roa et al. improved the thermal stability of P3HB through
the molecular interaction between the terminal hydroxyl groups from poly(propylene glycol) with
low molecular weight and the carbonyl groups from P3HB [ 78]. Blends of P3HB with PHO containing
98 mol % 3HV and 2 mol % 3HHx were prepared by melt compounding. Results showed that the
degradation onset temperature of P3HB gradually increased with the addition of PHO, and the shift in
temperature was as high as 20C for the blends containing 30 wt % PHO [ 79]. Idris et al. investigated
the effect of PLA on the thermal stability of PHBHV and found that the decomposition temperature
of PHBHV increased with the increasing content of PLA due to the higher thermal stability of PLA.
Besides, the decomposition behavior of PHBHV changed from one-step degradation to two-step
degradation [ 80]. A similar phenomenon was also found in PHBHV/epoxidized broccoli oil (EBO)
blends [81].
Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA Enhanced by Polymers
Polymers with excellent melt processability are also used to improve the physical properties and
reduce the cost of scl-PHA-based composites [ 82]. It has been reported that the miscibility between
scl-PHA and other polymers is far from satisfactory. Therefore, compatibilizers are always used to
improve the compatibility between the phases of scl-PHA and other polymers. For example, 5 wt %
oxidized polyethylene wax (OPW) was added into the blends of P3HB and low-density polyethylene
(LDPE) to improve the compatibility of the composite, and results showed that the tensile strength
and Young’s modulus of obtained composite were increased by the use of OPW [ 83]. Similar to
petroleum-based polymer, PLA [ 84], wood ﬂour [ 85], and plant polyphenols were used to improve
the mechanical properties of scl-PHA without counteracting its degradable property [ 86]. Normally,
the incorporated polymers must be thoroughly dried to avoid the degradation of scl-PHA caused
by moisture during the melt processing. Otherwise, the molecular weight of scl-PHA will decrease
due to the hydrolysis reaction induced by residual moisture [ 87,88]. Ma et al. prepared PHBHV/
PLA composites by melt blending and found that the ductility and toughness of PHBHV/ PLA
composites improved signiﬁcantly when the content of PHBHV was 10–30 wt %. As they mentioned,
the ﬁbrillation, partial interfacial debonding, PHBHV domain cavitation, and matrix yielding were
involved in the toughening mechanism of the fully bio-based blends [ 89]. Gregorova et al. reported
P3HB ﬁlms reinforced with inexpensive wood ﬂour using the melt pressing method and studied the
surface modiﬁcation of beech wood ﬂour on the mechanical properties of P3HB. Results showed that
the addition of 20% SA-WF (stearic acid treated wood ﬂour) increased the tensile strength and Young’s
modulus from 36.4 MPa and 2990 MPa of P3HB ﬁlm to 39.6 MPa and 3420 MPa of P3HB/SA-WF
ﬁlm, respectively. In order to avoid the thermal degradation and brittle transition of PHBHV , natural
plant polyphenols, such as tea polyphenols (TP) [ 90] and tannic acids (TA) [ 91], were also selected to
improve the mechanical properties of PHBHV . The crystallization behavior as well as the mechanical
properties of PHBHV could be regulated by the hydrogen bonding formed between plant polyphenols
and PHBHV , as shown in Figure 6. The elongation-at-break of PHBHV/TP composite ﬁlms improved
from 1.5% to 36.5%, while the tensile strength decreased from 14.0 to 6.6 MPa when 20% TP was
incorporated. Based on the work, PHBHV/TA ﬁlms were prepared by the solvent casting method.
Results showed that the elongation-at-break and tensile strength of PHBHV/TA ﬁlms increased to 14%
and 23.6 MPa when the percentage of added TA reached 10%.Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 11 of 28
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 11 of 28 
  
Figure 6.  Schematic diagram of the fo rmation of hydrogen bonding interaction between PHBHV and 
natural polyphenol. 
2.3. Chemical Structure Design of scl-PHA 
2.3.1. Influence of Chemical Structure Design on the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA 
To solve the disadvantages of scl-PHA mentio ned above, many studies have focused on 
chemical modification in an effort to regulate the stereoregularity of scl-PH A. The chemical structure 
of scl-PHA can be tailored by controlling the interaction between the molecular chains of scl-PHA 
and the incorporated components using grafting, block copolymerization, or crosslinking methods 
[92]. 
Graft Modification of scl-PHA 
By incorporating other components into scl-PH A chains with the method of grafting, the 
compatibility and crystallization behavior of scl-PHA can be effectively controlled through the formation of chemical bonds and non-covalent bonds between the two components. Gu et al. 
synthesized PHBHV- g-chitin by grafting PHBHV molecular chains onto a chitin backbone via 
chlorination. Although the surface modification re duced the number of hydroxyl groups of chitin, 
the crystallization of PHBHV was still limited due to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the 
carbonyls from PHBHV and the residual hydroxyls from chitin [93]. Similar to this work, the influence of the side-chain length and grafting density on the crystallization behavior of cellulose (EC)- g-PHBHV, synthesized through the homogeneous acylation reaction between EC a backbone 
and telechelic OH-terminated PHBHV oligomer as side chains by using 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) as a coupling agent, has also been investigated [94]. Results showed that the 
crystallization behavior can be modulated through controlling the lengths and grafting densities of 
PHBHV side chains. The degree of crystallinity of EC- g-PHBHV
 with a HDI/PHBHV fraction of 1.8 
decreased from 58.1% to 39.1% compared with that of PHBHV.  
scl-PHA-Based Block Copolymers 
Since the molecular weight of scl-PHA is relative ly high, it is hard to design a scl-PHA-based 
structure with excellent properties. Tailoring the mo lecules of scl-PHA into oligomers with different 
molecular weights and narrow MWD becomes a convenient method to design the chemical structure 
of scl-PHA-based polymers. Telechelic hydroxylated scl-PHA (scl-PHA-diols) with various 
molecular weights were obtained by the attack of hy droxyl groups of ethylene  glycol to ester groups 
of scl-PHA [95]. PHBHV- b-PEG [96] and P3HB-based polyurethane block copolymer (PEU) [97,98] 
were synthesized by using the coupling reaction with scl-PHA-diols as hard segments and PEG as soft segments. It has been found that the block copolymers had higher thermal stability but lower 
melting point and crystallinity compared with those of scl-PHA-diols. The crystallization behavior of PHBHV and PEG in double crystalline block copolymers was also investigated. Results suggested 
that the spherulites of PEG block and PHBHV block in the PHBHV- b-PEG copolymer were 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the formation of hydrogen bonding interaction between PHBHV and
natural polyphenol.
2.3. Chemical Structure Design of scl-PHA
2.3.1. Inﬂuence of Chemical Structure Design on the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA
To solve the disadvantages of scl-PHA mentioned above, many studies have focused on chemical
modiﬁcation in an effort to regulate the stereoregularity of scl-PHA. The chemical structure of scl-PHA
can be tailored by controlling the interaction between the molecular chains of scl-PHA and the
incorporated components using grafting, block copolymerization, or crosslinking methods [92].
Graft Modiﬁcation of scl-PHA
By incorporating other components into scl-PHA chains with the method of grafting,
the compatibility and crystallization behavior of scl-PHA can be effectively controlled through
the formation of chemical bonds and non-covalent bonds between the two components. Gu et al.
synthesized PHBHV- g-chitin by grafting PHBHV molecular chains onto a chitin backbone via
chlorination. Although the surface modiﬁcation reduced the number of hydroxyl groups of chitin,
the crystallization of PHBHV was still limited due to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the
carbonyls from PHBHV and the residual hydroxyls from chitin [ 93]. Similar to this work, the inﬂuence
of the side-chain length and grafting density on the crystallization behavior of cellulose (EC)- g-PHBHV ,
synthesized through the homogeneous acylation reaction between EC a backbone and telechelic
OH-terminated PHBHV oligomer as side chains by using 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) as a
coupling agent, has also been investigated [ 94]. Results showed that the crystallization behavior can be
modulated through controlling the lengths and grafting densities of PHBHV side chains. The degree
of crystallinity of EC- g-PHBHV with a HDI/PHBHV fraction of 1.8 decreased from 58.1% to 39.1%
compared with that of PHBHV .
scl-PHA-Based Block Copolymers
Since the molecular weight of scl-PHA is relatively high, it is hard to design a scl-PHA-based
structure with excellent properties. Tailoring the molecules of scl-PHA into oligomers with different
molecular weights and narrow MWD becomes a convenient method to design the chemical structure
of scl-PHA-based polymers. Telechelic hydroxylated scl-PHA (scl-PHA-diols) with various molecular
weights were obtained by the attack of hydroxyl groups of ethylene glycol to ester groups of
scl-PHA [ 95]. PHBHV- b-PEG [ 96] and P3HB-based polyurethane block copolymer (PEU) [ 97,98]
were synthesized by using the coupling reaction with scl-PHA-diols as hard segments and PEG as
soft segments. It has been found that the block copolymers had higher thermal stability but lower
melting point and crystallinity compared with those of scl-PHA-diols. The crystallization behavior of
PHBHV and PEG in double crystalline block copolymers was also investigated. Results suggested that
the spherulites of PEG block and PHBHV block in the PHBHV- b-PEG copolymer were crystallizedPolymers 2016 ,8, 273 12 of 28
individually on the same site, leading to the formation of concentric spherulites [ 99]. Zhu et al.
studied the inﬂuence of molecular structure on the crystallization behavior and thermal stability of
PHBHV in an effort to obtain a copolymer with high thermal stability and mechanical properties.
A series of crystalline/amorphous copolymers were designed by chemical block copolymerization,
including PMMA- b-PHBHV [ 100] and PS- b-PHBHV [ 101] triblock copolymers. They found that
the cold crystallization temperature of both PMMA- b-PHBHV and PS- b-PHBHV were shifted to a
higher temperature with the increasing content of amorphous component, and for PMMA- b-PHBHV
the increased value was up to 60C. What is more, scl-PHA-based block-polymers ( b-PHA)
can also be synthesized using biological technology; the crystallization behavior and mechanical
properties of scl-PHA-based copolymers depended on the structure and content of incorporated
components [102–105].
Crosslinking Modiﬁcation of scl-PHA
Partially cross-linked scl-PHA exhibits an improved melt strength characteristic without damaging
its biodegradability, which can be induced by chemical, radiation, light, or thermal treatment.
The processing performance of scl-PHA can be effectively improved by the partially cross-linked
structure and the enhanced chain entanglement. A partially cross-linked PHBHV/PBS composite was
prepared by melt blending and the overall crystallization rates of both PHBHV and PBS in their blends
were enhanced considerably. In addition, the nuclei density of PHBHV was also increased while the
spherulitic morphology did not change too much [ 106]. PHBHV/PEG copolymer networks were also
synthesized by using the free-radical solution polymerization method, as shown in Figure 7 [ 107].
The macromolecular network hindered the growth of crystalline segments of PEG and PHBHV , and a
complex spherulite morphology with an initial PHBHV pattern and later PEG pattern was observed in
the partially cross-linked PHBHV/PEG copolymer. This complexity was induced by the crystallization
of PHBHV followed by the crystallization of PEG, which was an interplay of the nucleation rate
and growth rate. Dong et al. prepared a series of branched/crosslinked P3HB4HB copolymers [ 108]
and PLA/P3HB4HB composites with high compatibility [ 109] by adding small amounts of dicumyl
peroxide (DCP) and triallylisocyanurate (TAIC) into a P3HB4HB matrix. The cold crystallization ability
of the copolymer was increased by the branching of molecular chains while the melting temperature
was decreased. The branches of molecular chains increased the space between molecular chains
after the branching reaction, which provided the space for the motion of molecular chains during
the heating process. As a result, the cold crystallization ability of P3HB4HB was enhanced. On the
contrary, the disordered branches led to a defective crystal and a lower Tm[108].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 12 of 28 
 crystallized individually on the same site, leading to the formation of concentric spherulites [99]. 
Zhu et al. studied the influence of molecular stru cture on the crystallization behavior and thermal 
stability of PHBHV in an effort to obtain a copo lymer with high thermal stability and mechanical 
properties. A series of crystalline/amorphous copolymers were designed by chemical block 
copolymerization, including PMMA- b-PHBHV [100] and PS- b-PHBHV [101] triblock copolymers. 
They found that the cold crystall ization temperature of both PMMA- b-PHBHV and PS- b-PHBHV 
were shifted to a higher temperature with the in creasing content of amorphous component, and for 
PMMA- b-PHBHV the increased value was up to 60 °C. What is more, scl-PHA-based 
block-polymers ( b-PHA) can also be synthesized using biol ogical technology; the crystallization 
behavior and mechanical properties of scl-PHA- based copolymers depended on the structure and 
content of incorporated components [102–105]. 
Crosslinking Modification of scl-PHA 
Partially cross-linked scl-PHA exhibits an improved melt strength characteristic without 
damaging its biodegradability, which can be induced by chemical, radiation, light, or thermal treatment. The processing performance of scl-PH A can be effectively improved by the partially 
cross-linked structure and the enhanced chain en tanglement. A partially cross-linked PHBHV/PBS 
composite was prepared by melt blending and the overall crystallization rates of both PHBHV and 
PBS in their blends were enhanced considerably. In  addition, the nuclei density of PHBHV was also 
increased while the spherulitic morphology did not change too much [106]. PHBHV/PEG copolymer networks were also synthesized by  using the free-radical solution polymerization method, as shown 
in Figure 7 [107]. The macromolecular network hind ered the growth of crystalline segments of PEG 
and PHBHV, and a complex spherulite morphology with an initial PHBHV pattern and later PEG 
pattern was observed in the partially cross-linked PHBHV/PEG copolymer. This complexity was induced by the crystallization of PHBHV followed by the crystallization of PEG, which was an 
interplay of the nucleation rate and growth rate. Dong et al . prepared a series of 
branched/crosslinked P3HB4HB copolymers [108]  and PLA/P3HB4HB composites with high 
compatibility [109] by adding small amounts of dicumyl peroxide (DCP) and triallylisocyanurate (TAIC) into a P3HB4HB matrix. The cold crystallization ability of the copolymer was increased by the branching of molecular chains while the melt ing temperature was decreased. The branches of 
molecular chains increased the space between molecular chains after the branching reaction, which 
provided the space for the motion of molecular chai ns during the heating process. As a result, the 
cold crystallization ability of P3HB4HB was enhanc ed. On the contrary, the disordered branches led 
to a defective crystal and a lower T
m [108]. 
 
Figure 7.  Synthesis of PHBHV/PEG copo lymer network. Reprinted with permission from [107]. 
Copyright © 2013 Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Figure 7. Synthesis of PHBHV/PEG copolymer network. Reprinted with permission from [ 107].
Copyright © 2013 Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 13 of 28
2.3.2. Effect of Chemical Structure Design on the Thermal Properties of scl-PHA
Chemical structure design methods are used to change the chemical bonding environment of
a six-membered ring ester in an effort to improve the thermal stability of scl-PHA [ 37].Ma et al.
synthesized P3HB- g-MA (maleic anhydride) with the assistance of styrene using the melt free-radical
grafting method. The graft ratio of MA on the P3HB macromolecule chains increased from 0.2
to 0.9 wt % and the degradation temperature ( Td-5%) of P3HB increased by 35C [110].The thermal
stability of PS- b-PHBHV triblock copolymers was analyzed by TGA and results showed that the
Td-5%and Tmaxof triblock copolymers increased by 30 and 40C compared with those of PHBHV ,
respectively [ 101]. Park et al. found that the thermal stability of P3HB was improved by the crosslinking
reaction between the epoxy group and terminal carboxyl group in polyglycidyl methacrylate
(PGMA) [ 111]. In addition, chain extension could also enhance the thermal stability of PHBHV by
changing the chemical environment of ester linkages to reduce the formation of a six-membered ring
ester during the thermal degradation process, as shown in Figure 8. Zhu et al. used 2,2-bis (2-oxazoline)
(BOX) as a chain extender and found that the T5%,T0,Tmax, and Tfof hydroxyl-terminated PHBHV
(HT-PHBV) increased by 30.6, 24.2, 19.4, and 19.1C, respectively [31].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 13 of 28 
 2.3.2. Effect of Chemical Structure Design on the Thermal Properties of scl-PHA 
Chemical structure design methods are used to change the chemical bonding environment of a 
six-membered ring ester in an effort to improve the thermal stability of scl-PHA [37]. Ma et al. 
synthesized P3HB- g-MA (maleic anhydride) with the assi stance of styrene using the melt 
free-radical grafting method. The graft ratio of MA on the P3HB macromolecule chains increased 
from 0.2 to 0.9 wt % and the degradation temperature ( Td-5%) of P3HB increased by 35 °C [110]. The 
thermal stability of PS- b-PHBHV triblock copolymers was analyzed by TGA and results showed that 
the Td-5% and Tmax of triblock copolymers increased by 30 and 40 °C compared with those of PHBHV, 
respectively [101]. Park et al. found that the thermal stability of P3HB was improved by the 
crosslinking reaction between the epoxy group and terminal carboxyl group in polyglycidyl 
methacrylate (PGMA) [111]. In addition, chain exte nsion could also enhance the thermal stability of 
PHBHV by changing the chemical environment of ester linkages to reduce the formation of a six-membered ring ester during the thermal degradat ion process, as shown in Figure 8. Zhu et al. 
used 2,2-bis (2-oxazoline) (BOX) as a chain extender and found that the T
5%, T0, Tmax, and Tf of 
hydroxyl-terminated PHBHV (HT-PHBV) increased by 30 .6, 24.2, 19.4, and 19.1 °C, respectively [31]. 
 
Figure 8. Reaction between PHBHV and BOX. Reprinted with permission from [31]. Copyright © 
2008 Elsevier Ltd.  
2.3.3. Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA Improved by Chemical Structure Design 
Chemical modification is usually needed to conduct with physical blending in order to obtain a 
satisfactory scl-PHA with excellent properties. The effect of partial crosslinking initiated by dicumyl peroxide (DCP) on the performance of PHBHV has been investigated. Dong et al. found that the 
elongation of PHBHV increased from 4% to 11 % when 1 wt % DCP was added [112]. They also 
found that the tensile/flexural strength  and impact toughness of P3HB/Poly(
D,L-lactic acid) (PDLLA) 
blends were improved after the partially crosslinking regardless of the composition of the blends, which was ascribed to the improvement of the compatibility between P3HB and PDLLA [113]. The mechanical properties of PEU synthesized using the block copolymerization were also investigated. All of the block copolymers had lower Young’s modulus and stress-at-break at 177 to 616 MPa and 9 to 18 MPa, respectively, as well as higher strain-a t-break at 12% to 1090% as compared with those of 
pristine PHB, which were 1143, 26 MPa, and 2%, respectively [108]. The improvement in ductility 
was attributed to the reduction of P3HB crystall inity, the presence of urethane bonds, and the 
plasticization effect of soft PEG segments.  
2.4. Processing of scl-PHA  2.4.1. Influence of Processing Condition on  the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA 
As a kind of linear bio-based polyester, scl-PHA owns a high stereoregularity and a low 
crystallization rate, leading to a large and visi ble banded spherulite. The crystal structure and 
crystallization behavior of scl-PHA are not only related to its structure, but also depend on the 
processing conditions. Similar with the chemical structure, processing conditions also have a great influence on the aggregation structure of scl-PH A, which determines the final performance of 
Figure 8. Reaction between PHBHV and BOX. Reprinted with permission from [ 31]. Copyright ©2008
Elsevier Ltd.
2.3.3. Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA Improved by Chemical Structure Design
Chemical modiﬁcation is usually needed to conduct with physical blending in order to obtain a
satisfactory scl-PHA with excellent properties. The effect of partial crosslinking initiated by dicumyl
peroxide (DCP) on the performance of PHBHV has been investigated. Dong et al. found that the
elongation of PHBHV increased from 4% to 11% when 1 wt % DCP was added [ 112]. They also found
that the tensile/ﬂexural strength and impact toughness of P3HB/Poly( D,L-lactic acid) (PDLLA) blends
were improved after the partially crosslinking regardless of the composition of the blends, which was
ascribed to the improvement of the compatibility between P3HB and PDLLA [ 113]. The mechanical
properties of PEU synthesized using the block copolymerization were also investigated. All of the
block copolymers had lower Young’s modulus and stress-at-break at 177 to 616 MPa and 9 to 18 MPa,
respectively, as well as higher strain-at-break at 12% to 1090% as compared with those of pristine PHB,
which were 1143, 26 MPa, and 2%, respectively [ 108]. The improvement in ductility was attributed to
the reduction of P3HB crystallinity, the presence of urethane bonds, and the plasticization effect of soft
PEG segments.
2.4. Processing of scl-PHA
2.4.1. Inﬂuence of Processing Condition on the Crystallization Behavior of scl-PHA
As a kind of linear bio-based polyester, scl-PHA owns a high stereoregularity and a low
crystallization rate, leading to a large and visible banded spherulite. The crystal structure and
crystallization behavior of scl-PHA are not only related to its structure, but also depend on thePolymers 2016 ,8, 273 14 of 28
processing conditions. Similar with the chemical structure, processing conditions also have a great
inﬂuence on the aggregation structure of scl-PHA, which determines the ﬁnal performance of scl-PHA
products. Many studies have focused on processing modiﬁcations in an effort to regulate the crystal
structure and crystallization behavior of scl-PHA [ 114]. For a given polymer, the crystallization rate
mainly depends on the processing temperature. An optimum balance can be reached between chain
mobility and lamellae growth at an intermediate temperature between Tmand Tg.Barham et al.
investigated the long period and unit cell dimension of PHBHV with 0–27 mol % HV content
crystallized at 23, 52, and 81C. Results suggested that the amount of co-crystallization of HV
in the crystal structure of P3HB decreased with the increase of crystallization temperature, and the
amount of HV in the crystal formed at 81C was reduced to two-thirds of that formed at room
temperature [ 115]. The crystal structure and spherulite morphology of P3HB crystallized from melt
ﬁlm and N,N-dimethyl formamide solution were also investigated, as well as the formation mechanism
of the banded spherulite under different crystallization conditions [ 116]. At the beginning of the
crystallization of P3HB from melt, the spherulite morphology was determined by the crystallization
rate of crystalline segments and the diffusion rate of molecules on the surface of crystals, while
the spherulite morphology of P3HB crystallized from solution was mainly affected by the twisted
alignment of lamellas. The crystallization behavior of scl-PHA has also been reported to be related
to the thickness of the samples. Wang et al. found that the banded spherulite, which was mainly
determined by the ratio between crystallization rate and diffusion rate, was easy to form by decreasing
the thickness of P3HB [117].
Besides the mentioned factors, the crystallization behavior of scl-PHA can also be effectively
controlled by the application of external ﬁelds during the process [ 118,119]. For example, cold-drawing
and two-step-drawing methods were used to increase the orientation of scl-PHA molecular chains
and generate a planar zigzag conformation. By using these special drawing techniques, Iwata et al.
successfully prepared P3HB [ 120] and PHBHV [ 121] ﬁbers and ﬁlms with high mechanical properties.
A new formation mechanism of -form crystals appearing in one-step drawn PHBHV ﬁbers after
isothermal crystallization can be described as follows: the -form lamellar crystals were produced
by cold-drawing and then the -form with planar zigzag conformation was developed during the
stretching in the second dimension of the constrained amorphous chains between -form crystals,
as depicted in Figure 9 [121].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 14 of 28 
 scl-PHA products. Many studies have focused on proc essing modifications in an effort to regulate 
the crystal structure and crystallization behavior  of scl-PHA [114]. For a given polymer, the 
crystallization rate mainly depends on the proc essing temperature. An optimum balance can be 
reached between chain mobility and lamellae growth at an intermediate temperature between Tm 
and Tg. Barham et al. investigated the long period and unit cell dimension of PHBHV with 0–27 mol 
% HV content crystallized at 23, 52, and 81 °C. Results suggested that the amount of 
co-crystallization of HV in the crystal struct ure of P3HB decreased with the increase of 
crystallization temperature, and the amount of HV in the crystal formed at 81 °C was reduced to 
two-thirds of that formed at room temperat ure [115]. The crystal st ructure and spherulite 
morphology of P3HB crystallized from melt film and N,N-dimethyl formamide solution were also 
investigated, as well as the formation mechan ism of the banded spherulite under different 
crystallization conditions [116]. At the beginning of the crystallization of P3HB from melt, the spherulite morphology was determined by the crystallization rate of crystalline segments and the diffusion rate of molecules on th e surface of crystals, while the spherulite morphology of P3HB 
crystallized from solution was mainly affect ed by the twisted alignment of lamellas. The 
crystallization behavior of scl-PHA has also been reported to be related to the thickness of the samples. Wang et al. found that the banded sphe rulite, which was mainly determined by the ratio 
between crystallization rate and diffusion rate, was easy to form by decreasing the thickness of 
P3HB [117]. 
Besides the mentioned factors, the crystallizatio n behavior of scl-PHA can also be effectively 
controlled by the application of external fiel ds during the process [118,119]. For example, 
cold-drawing and two-step-drawing methods were used to increase the orientation of scl-PHA 
molecular chains and generate a planar zigzag conformation. By using these special drawing techniques, Iwata et al. successfully prepared P3HB [120] and PHBHV [121] fibers and films with 
high mechanical properties. A new formation mechanism of β-form crystals appearing in one-step 
drawn PHBHV fibers after isothermal crystal lization can be described as follows: the α-form 
lamellar crystals were produced by cold-drawing and then the β-form with planar zigzag 
conformation was developed during  the stretching in the second dimension of the constrained 
amorphous chains between α-form crystals, as depicted in Figure 9 [121]. 
 
Figure 9.  Mechanism for generating the planar zigzag conformation ( β-form) in high-strength 
PHBHV fibers by different drawing methods: ( a) one-step-drawing without isothermal 
crystallization; ( b) one-step-drawing after isothermal crys tallization. Reprinted with permission 
from [121]. Copyright 2006 Amer ican Chemical Society. 
2.4.2. Effect of Processing Conditions on the Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA 
The processing conditions have a great effect on  the mechanical properties of scl-PHA. Scl-PHA 
with excellent properties can be obtained under di fferent processing conditions due to the formation 
Figure 9. Mechanism for generating the planar zigzag conformation ( -form) in high-strength
PHBHV ﬁbers by different drawing methods: ( a) one-step-drawing without isothermal crystallization;
(b) one-step-drawing after isothermal crystallization. Reprinted with permission from [ 121].
Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 15 of 28
2.4.2. Effect of Processing Conditions on the Mechanical Properties of scl-PHA
The processing conditions have a great effect on the mechanical properties of scl-PHA. Scl-PHA
with excellent properties can be obtained under different processing conditions due to the formation
of a special aggregation structure. Table 2 shows the mechanical properties of different scl-PHAs
obtained under different treatment conditions. After special treatment, highly orientated crystals can
be formed to enhance the mechanical properties of scl-PHA. Gordeyev et al. used the three-step stretch
method and obtained P3HB gel-spun ﬁbers with a tensile strength of 360 MPa and a Young’s modulus
of 5.6 GPa [ 122]. The enhancement of the mechanical properties of scl-PHA was not only caused by
the orientation of molecular chains but also by the formation of a planar zigzag conformation. Iwata’s
group established two kinds of drawing techniques (Figure 10) and obtained P3HB ﬁbers with high
tensile strength. As shown in Figure 10a, the melt-spun scl-PHA ﬁbers were quickly treated in ice water
and stretched at a temperature near the glass transition temperature. The orientated amorphous ﬁbers
were further stretched at room temperature and then annealed to ﬁx the extended polymer chains [ 123].
P3HB ﬁber with a tensile strength of 1320 MPa, a Young’s modulus of 18.1 GPa, and an elongation of
35% was obtained using this method. Figure 10b presents another method for preparing scl-PHA ﬁbers.
The melt-spun ﬁbers were also placed in the ice water bath for isothermal crystallization, and crystals
with small size were formed during the slow crystallization process. After that, the scl-PHA ﬁbers
were obtained by using a one-step-drawing method at room temperature. The tensile strength and
elongation-at-break of obtained PHBHV ﬁbers could reach up to 1065 MPa and 40%, respectively [ 121].
Table 2. Mechanical properties of scl-PHA ﬁbers/ ﬁlms.
Samples Mw PDI Processing methodsTensile
strength (MPa)Young’s
modulus (GPa)Elongation
(%)Ref.
P3HB3105–Gel spinning, three
step stretch360 5.6 37 [122]
4.21051.35Cold drawing,
heat treatment416 5.2 – [124]
3.721061.70Two-step cold
drawing, Annealing1320 18.1 35 [123]
PHBHV
(8% HV)11062.8Two-step cold
drawing, Annealing1065 8.0 40 [121]
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 15 of 28 
 of a special aggregation structure. Table 2 shows the mechanical properties of different scl-PHAs 
obtained under different treatment conditions. After special treatment, highly orientated crystals can 
be formed to enhance the mechanical properties of  scl-PHA. Gordeyev et al. used the three-step 
stretch method and obtained P3HB gel-spun fibers with a tensile strength of 360 MPa and a Young’s 
modulus of 5.6 GPa [122]. The enhancement of the mechanical properties of scl-PHA was not only 
caused by the orientation of molecular chains but also by the formation of a planar zigzag conformation. Iwata’s grou p established two kinds of drawing techniques (Figure 10) and obtained 
P3HB fibers with high tensile strength. As shown in Figure 10a, the melt-spun scl-PHA fibers were 
quickly treated in ice water and stretched at a temp erature near the glass tran sition temperature. The 
orientated amorphous fibers were further stretche d at room temperature and then annealed to fix 
the extended polymer chains [123]. P3HB fiber with a tensile strength of 1320 MPa, a Young’s 
modulus of 18.1 GPa, and an elon gation of 35% was obtained using this method. Figure 10b presents 
another method for preparing scl-PHA fibers. The melt -spun fibers were also placed in the ice water 
bath for isothermal crystallization, and crystals with small size were formed during the slow crystallization process. After that, the scl-PHA fibers were obtained by using a one-step-drawing method at room temperature. The tensile streng th and elongation-at-break of obtained PHBHV 
fibers could reach up to 1065 MPa and 40%, respectively [121].  
Table 2.  Mechanical properties of scl-PHA fibers/ films. 
Samples Mw PDI Processing methods Tensile strength 
(MPa) Young’s modulus 
(GPa) Elongation 
(%) Ref. 
P3HB 3 × 105 – Gel spinning, three step 
stretch 360 5.6 37 [122] 
4.2 × 
105 1.35 Cold drawing, heat 
treatment 416 5.2 – [124] 
3.72 × 
106 1.70 Two-step cold drawing, 
Annealing 1320 18.1 35 [123] 
PHBHV (8% 
HV) 1 × 106 2.8 Two-step cold drawing, 
Annealing 1065 8.0 40 [121] 
 
Figure 10.  Preparation methods for PHA fibers: ( a) One-step drawing without isothermal 
crystallization and ( b) One-step drawing after isothermal crystallization. Reprinted with permission 
from [121]. Copyright 2006 Amer ican Chemical Society. 
The mechanical properties of scl-PHA-based co mposites can also be enhanced by improving 
the orientation degree of nanoparticles in composites with the help of an external field. Wolcott et al. 
prepared the unidirectionally aligned CNW in a PHBHV matrix by using an external electric field. It was found that the arrangement of CNW in a PHBHV matrix was largely affected by the concentration of CNW. When the concentration of CNW was higher than 4 wt %, the movement of 
CNW would be limited by the high viscos ity of the PHBHV/CNW suspension [125]. 
3. Potential Applications of scl-PHA 
PHA is the only bio-based polyester family completely synthesized by biological means, and 
scl-PHA shows a significant potential for future applications in the packaging, fiber, and biomedical fields. The main reason is that scl-PHA has excell ent biological compatibility, a long absorbable 
period, and similar properties to general petr oleum-based polymers. Moreover, the large-scale 
Figure 10. Preparation methods for PHA ﬁbers: ( a) One-step drawing without isothermal
crystallization and ( b) One-step drawing after isothermal crystallization. Reprinted with permission
from [121]. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.
The mechanical properties of scl-PHA-based composites can also be enhanced by improving the
orientation degree of nanoparticles in composites with the help of an external ﬁeld. Wolcott et al.
prepared the unidirectionally aligned CNW in a PHBHV matrix by using an external electric
ﬁeld. It was found that the arrangement of CNW in a PHBHV matrix was largely affected by the
concentration of CNW. When the concentration of CNW was higher than 4 wt %, the movement of
CNW would be limited by the high viscosity of the PHBHV/CNW suspension [125].Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 16 of 28
3. Potential Applications of scl-PHA
PHA is the only bio-based polyester family completely synthesized by biological means, and
scl-PHA shows a signiﬁcant potential for future applications in the packaging, ﬁber, and biomedical
ﬁelds. The main reason is that scl-PHA has excellent biological compatibility, a long absorbable period,
and similar properties to general petroleum-based polymers. Moreover, the large-scale industrial
production of scl-PHA can be carried out in a green way without complex equipment, according to a
United States Patent (US 7582456 B2).
3.1. Scl-PHA as Packaging Material
Biodegradable packaging materials have potential as replacements for petroleum-based materials
to reduce environmental pollution. Biodegradable packaging materials can be degraded into
carbon dioxide and water by microorganisms via metabolism in the natural condition with suitable
temperature, humidity, and oxygen [ 126,127]. As the only biodegradable polymer that comes entirely
from nature, scl-PHA can be processed into bottles, bags, and ﬁlms using injection molding, blowing,
and pressing methods due to its good properties of biodegradability and oxygen permeability
resistance [ 128,129]. Coussy et al. investigated the sorption behavior, mechanical properties, and barrier
properties of PHBHV ﬁlm under realistic conditions of storage and food contact. It was found that
PHBHV ﬁlm was very stable in all the food liquid simulants tested (water, acetic acid 3% ( w/v),
ethanol 20% (v/v), iso-octane and olive oil) [ 130]. Kovalcik et al. prepared PHBHV/Kraft lignin ﬁlms
using a thermo-hydraulic press, which can be applied for packaging of various easily perishable
goods [ 131]. A reduction of permeability for oxygen by 77% and for carbon dioxide by 91% was
observed compared to neat PHBHV when 1 wt % lignin was incorporated. Diez-Vicente et al.
dispersed ZnO into scl-PHA with the method of solution spin coating and obtained a composite
ﬁlm with antibacterial properties, which could be applied in the food packaging ﬁeld. Without the
use of a coupling agent, nano-ZnO achieved a uniform dispersion in a PHBHV matrix, and also
proved effective in the nucleation of PHBHV . With the increased addition of nano-ZnO, the thermal
property, rigidity, strength, and tenacity of PHBHV ﬁlm increased signiﬁcantly. As shown in Figure 11,
when the content of nano-ZnO was up to 4 wt %, the Young’s modulus of PHBHV ﬁlm reached a
maximum while the water absorption reduced a minimum. This suggests that interactions were
formed between hydroxyl groups from the surface of ZnO and C=O groups from PHBHV molecular
chains, which improved the mechanical properties and gas barrier properties of the PHBHV ﬁlm [ 132].
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 16 of 28 
 industrial production of scl-PHA can be carried  out in a green way without complex equipment, 
according to a United States Patent (US 7582456 B2).  
3.1. Scl-PHA as Packaging Material 
Biodegradable packaging materials have pote ntial as replacements for petroleum-based 
materials to reduce environmental pollution. Bi odegradable packaging materials can be degraded 
into carbon dioxide and water by microorganisms via metabolism in the natural condition with suitable temperature, humidity, and oxygen [126 ,127]. As the only biodegradable polymer that 
comes entirely from nature, scl-PHA can be processed into bottles, bags, and films using injection molding, blowing, and pressing methods due to its good properties of biod egradability and oxygen 
permeability resistance [128,129]. Coussy et al. investigated the sorption behavior, mechanical 
properties, and barrier properties of PHBHV film under realistic conditions of storage and food 
contact. It was found that PHBHV film was very stable in all the food liquid simulants tested (water, acetic acid 3% ( w/v), ethanol 20% ( v/v), iso-octane and olive oi l) [130]. Kovalcik et al . prepared 
PHBHV/Kraft lignin films using a thermo-hydraulic press, which can be applied for packaging of various easily perishable goods [131]. A reductio n of permeability for oxygen by 77% and for carbon 
dioxide by 91% was observed compared to neat PHBHV when 1 wt % lignin was incorporated. Diez-Vicente et al. dispersed ZnO into scl-PHA with the method of solution spin coating and 
obtained a composite film with antibacterial pr operties, which could be applied in the food 
packaging field. Without the use of a coupling agen t, nano-ZnO achieved a uniform dispersion in a 
PHBHV matrix, and also proved effective in the nucleation of PHBHV. With the increased addition of nano-ZnO, the thermal property, rigidity, st rength, and tenacity of PHBHV film increased 
significantly. As shown in Figure 11, when the content of nano-ZnO was up to 4 wt %, the Young’s modulus of PHBHV film reached a maximum while the water absorp tion reduced a minimum. This 
suggests that interactions were formed between hydroxyl groups from the surface of ZnO and C=O 
groups from PHBHV molecular chains, which improved the mechanical properties and gas barrier 
properties of the PHBHV film [132]. 
 
Figure 11.  Young’s modulus and water uptake of PH BHV/ZnO film. Reprinte d with permission 
from [132]. Copyright 2014 Amer ican Chemical Society. 
However, the brittleness still restricts the further application of scl-PHA as a packaging 
material. In order to solve this problem, Ariffin et al. incorporated PHBHV into petroleum-based polyethylene (PE) and evaluated the recyclability of  the PE/PHBHV composite. It was found that the 
oxygen permeability of PE/PHBHV blend films containing up to 30 wt % PHBHV was reduced by 
19%–25%, and their water vapor transmission rate increased compared to those of neat PE. 
Furthermore, PHBHV in composite could be completely degraded into monomers and isolated from PE under 310 °C without polluting PE, and the PE component could be recycled and reused by other 
methods [133]. Similar to this work, bio-degradable and optically transparent films were prepared by blending PLA with P3HB using the melt proces sing method. P3HB and acetyl tributyl citrate 
Figure 11. Young’s modulus and water uptake of PHBHV/ZnO ﬁlm. Reprinted with permission
from [132]. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.
However, the brittleness still restricts the further application of scl-PHA as a packaging material.
In order to solve this problem, Arifﬁn et al. incorporated PHBHV into petroleum-based polyethylenePolymers 2016 ,8, 273 17 of 28
(PE) and evaluated the recyclability of the PE/PHBHV composite. It was found that the oxygen
permeability of PE/PHBHV blend ﬁlms containing up to 30 wt % PHBHV was reduced by 19%–25%,
and their water vapor transmission rate increased compared to those of neat PE. Furthermore, PHBHV
in composite could be completely degraded into monomers and isolated from PE under 310C without
polluting PE, and the PE component could be recycled and reused by other methods [ 133]. Similar to
this work, bio-degradable and optically transparent ﬁlms were prepared by blending PLA with P3HB
using the melt processing method. P3HB and acetyl tributyl citrate (ATBC) were used to improve the
crystallinity of PLA and the processability as well as the ﬂexibility of the ﬁlm. In addition, the thermal
stability of PLA/P3HB ﬁlm could be improved by the addition of CNC. The interaction between
ATBC and CNC improved the dispersion of CNC, and further increased the intermolecular interaction
between PLA and PHBHV chains [134].
3.2. Scl-PHA as a Fiber Material
Scl-PHA ﬁbers can be obtained using melt spinning, gel spinning, or electrospinning methods.
In terms of melt spinning, Zhu et al. made great efforts to improve the melt spinnability of PHBHV .
It was discovered that the melt spinning temperature of PHBHV was around 180–190C after
exploring the relationships between viscosity, shear rate, and temperature. However, the conventional
melt spinning method was not suitable for the spinning of neat PHBHV . PHBHV ﬁbers with a
strength of 1.85 cN/dtex and an elongation of 47.9% could be obtained after stretching through a
high-speed nozzle [ 135]. After the formation of scl-PHA ﬁbers, a transition process from viscoelasticity
to brittleness could be observed with the increase of storage time, which restricted their further
application. To solve the problem, Chen et al. blended PLA with PHBHV and obtained PLA/PHBHV
ﬁbers via the conventional melt-spinning and hot-drawing processes [ 136]. The tensile strength of
PLA/PHBHV (70/30) ﬁbers obtained under a take-up speed of 2500 m/min and a draw ratio of 1.6 was
above 2.0 cN/dtex, which pointed to a potential application in the textile ﬁeld. Hufenus et al. combined
PHBHV with PLA in a core/sheath conﬁguration and introduced a new spin pack concept [ 137].
The obtained ﬁbers showed an ultimate tensile stress of up to 0.34 GPa and an E-modulus of up
to 7.1 GPa. To further improve the mechanical properties of scl-PHA ﬁbers, drawing and heat
setting processes were applied after the formation of P3HB and PHBHV ﬁbers [ 138]. Besides the
melt spinning method, scl-PHA ﬁbers can also be prepared using the gel spinning method, which
contains the processes of extrusion, hot drawing, and annealing. Gordeyev et al. prepared the
gel-spun P3HB ﬁbers with a tensile strength of 360 MPa and a Young’s modulus of 5.6 GPa [ 122].
Different to melt and gel spinning, the electrospinning method is often used to prepare scl-PHA
nano-ﬁbers with special morphology [ 139], such as self-bundling yarn [ 140], coral-like structure [ 141],
and beaded structure [ 142], which are a useful prospect in the areas of tissue engineering, ﬁltration,
and sensors. Electrospun scl-PHA ﬁbers also have porous surface structure and microstructure, which
provides the possibility for hydrophilic or hydrophobic control and for the adhesion regeneration
of cells. For example, the contact angle of PHBHV electrospun ﬁlms could be controlled from 75.9
to 158[143]. Moreover, the surface structure of nano-ﬁbers can be further adjusted to control the
interfacial parameters using plasma treatment technology [142].
3.3. Scl-PHA as Biomaterial
Scl-PHA is conducive to the adhesion and proliferation of cells due to its excellent biocompatibility
and biodegradability, which makes it a hot topic in the areas of tissue engineering and biomedical
ﬁeld [ 144]. In terms of the applications in tissue engineering, Stanzl-Tschegg et al. investigated
the adhesive strength of bone-implant interface and in vivo degradation of P3HB composites [ 145].
Results showed that P3HB composites with ZrO 2and a high percentage of Heraﬁll®(30%) (which is
a composite made of calcium sulfate (CaSO 4), calcium carbonate (CaCO 3) and glycerol tripalmitate)
showed the highest values of bone accumulation around the implant and no signiﬁcant degradation of
the implants was found after 36 weeks in vivo . However, improvement of the mechanical propertiesPolymers 2016 ,8, 273 18 of 28
of the studied P3HB composites was necessary in order to obtain an appropriate load-bearing material.
Similar to physical blending, methods such as surface modiﬁcation [ 146] and chemical structure
design [ 147,148] are adopted to improve the hydrophobicity of scl-PHA ﬁlms and the recognition site
of cells. Grondahl et al. introduced carboxylic acid groups [ 149] and amino groups [ 150] onto the
surface of PHBHV using the radiation grafting method and ammonia plasma treatment to facilitate the
adhesion of biological groups. Based on the work, Huang et al. activated the surface of amino modiﬁed
PHBHV ﬁlm after a continuous reaction with cross-linking agents containing polyethylene glycol (PEG)
and amino acid (RGD), as described in Figure 12 [ 151]. It was found that the introduced PEG segments
signiﬁcantly improved the biological compatibility and decreased the non-speciﬁc absorption and the
risk of the formation of blood clots. PUHO scaffold was also prepared by coupling P3HB4HB with
poly(3-hydroxyhexanoate- co-3-hydroxyoctanoate) (P3HH3HO) with the help of 1,6-hexamethylene
diisocyanate (HDI) [ 147,148]. Results of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and platelet adhesion tests
showed that the platelet adhesion property of PUHO scaffold was higher than that of commercial
PLA material.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 18 of 28 
 improved the biological compatibility and decreased the non-specific absorption and the risk of the 
f o r m a t i o n  o f  b l o o d  c l o t s .  P U H O  s c a f f o l d  w a s  a l s o  p r e p a r e d  b y  c o u p l i n g  P 3 H B 4 H B  w i t h  poly(3-hydroxyhexanoate- co-3-hydroxyoctanoate) (P3HH3HO) with the help of 1,6-hexamethylene 
diisocyanate (HDI) [147,148]. Results of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and platelet adhesion tests 
showed that the platelet adhesion property of PU HO scaffold was higher than that of commercial 
PLA material.  
 
Figure 12.  Preparation and surface modification of PHBHV film. Reprinted with permission from 
[151] . Copyright 2011 Americ an Chemical Society. 
For the application of scl-PHA in the medical field, Koller et al . synthesized PHBHV and 
P(3HB- co-21.8%-3HV- co-5.1%-4HB) by a biological method using Haloferax mediterranei.  Both PHAs 
had low melting points and narrow molecular mass distributions, so could be used as potential candidates for the application in medical and pharmaceutical fields [152]. Scl-PHA microsphere shows an advantage in drug delivery and controlled release material due to its slow degradation rate. The degraded scl-PHA microsphere in the bo dy provides the space for tissue growth, and the 
degraded products would not produce acid accu mulation, which can cause tissue inflammation 
[153,154]. Chang et al. prepared a PHBHV/wollas tonite composite microsphere and incorporated 
gentamicin into the microsphere [155]. They found that the release behavior of gentamicin from the 
composite microspheres in deionized water was similar to that from pure PHBHV. However, the release rates of microspheres in a simulated body  fluid (SBF) and phosphate buffer solution (PBS) 
w e r e  m u c h  s l o w e r  t h a n  t h o s e  o f  p u r e  P H B H V .  T h e  r e l e a s e  t i m e  o f  9 0 %  g e n t a m i c i n  f o r  PHBHV/wollastonite microsphere was 22 days, while that for pu re PHBHV microsphere was only 
eight days. The mechanical properties and proc essability of slow-released microsphere can be 
enhanced by the addition of ch itosan (CTS) [156]. Wang et al. synthesized the drug-releasing 
microspheres of P3HB/CTS by single and double  emulsion methods and found that the size of 
microspheres could be controlled in the range of 800 nm–2 μm [157].  
3.4. Other Potential Applications of scl-PHA 3.4.1. Scl-PHA as a Source of Biofuel 
The application of scl-PHA as a source of biofuel is promising due to the fact that the low-cost 
scl-PHA used in this process can be obtained from activated sludge or  food industry waste 
[158,159]. The role of scl-PHA-based materials as biofuels was first proposed by Chen et al . in 2009 
[160]. P3HB methyl ester (3HBME) with a purity of 97% was synthesized by the esterification of 
P3HB via acid-catalyzed hydrolysis. Results showed that the combustion heats of 3HBME and ethanol were 20 and 27 kJ/g, respectively, while that of their blend with 10% 3HBME content was 
increased to 30 kJ/g. The producti on cost of PHA-based biofuels was also roughly estimated, which 
should be around $1200 per ton. In their subseq uent work, they blended 3HBME with 97# gasoline 
in volume ratios of 5%, 8.5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% and found that 3HBME had similar or better 
properties as a fuel additive compared with etha nol in terms of oxygen content, dynamic viscosity, 
flash point, and boiling point [161]. Similar work has also been reported by Chang et al . in an effort 
Figure 12. Preparation and surface modiﬁcation of PHBHV ﬁlm. Reprinted with permission from [ 151].
Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.
For the application of scl-PHA in the medical ﬁeld, Koller et al. synthesized PHBHV and
P(3HB- co-21.8%-3HV- co-5.1%-4HB) by a biological method using Haloferax mediterranei. Both PHAs
had low melting points and narrow molecular mass distributions, so could be used as potential
candidates for the application in medical and pharmaceutical ﬁelds [ 152]. Scl-PHA microsphere
shows an advantage in drug delivery and controlled release material due to its slow degradation rate.
The degraded scl-PHA microsphere in the body provides the space for tissue growth, and the degraded
products would not produce acid accumulation, which can cause tissue inﬂammation [ 153,154].
Chang et al. prepared a PHBHV/wollastonite composite microsphere and incorporated gentamicin
into the microsphere [ 155]. They found that the release behavior of gentamicin from the composite
microspheres in deionized water was similar to that from pure PHBHV . However, the release rates
of microspheres in a simulated body ﬂuid (SBF) and phosphate buffer solution (PBS) were much
slower than those of pure PHBHV . The release time of 90% gentamicin for PHBHV/wollastonite
microsphere was 22 days, while that for pure PHBHV microsphere was only eight days. The mechanical
properties and processability of slow-released microsphere can be enhanced by the addition of chitosan
(CTS) [ 156]. Wang et al. synthesized the drug-releasing microspheres of P3HB/CTS by single and
double emulsion methods and found that the size of microspheres could be controlled in the range
of 800 nm–2m [157].Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 19 of 28
3.4. Other Potential Applications of scl-PHA
3.4.1. Scl-PHA as a Source of Biofuel
The application of scl-PHA as a source of biofuel is promising due to the fact that the low-cost
scl-PHA used in this process can be obtained from activated sludge or food industry waste [ 158,159].
The role of scl-PHA-based materials as biofuels was ﬁrst proposed by Chen et al. in 2009 [ 160].
P3HB methyl ester (3HBME) with a purity of 97% was synthesized by the esteriﬁcation of P3HB
via acid-catalyzed hydrolysis. Results showed that the combustion heats of 3HBME and ethanol
were 20 and 27 kJ/g, respectively, while that of their blend with 10% 3HBME content was increased
to 30 kJ/g. The production cost of PHA-based biofuels was also roughly estimated, which should be
around $1200 per ton. In their subsequent work, they blended 3HBME with 97# gasoline in volume
ratios of 5%, 8.5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% and found that 3HBME had similar or better properties as a
fuel additive compared with ethanol in terms of oxygen content, dynamic viscosity, ﬂash point, and
boiling point [ 161]. Similar work has also been reported by Chang et al. in an effort to produce biofuel
n-butanol from glucose using an adapted P3HB synthesis pathway together with other metabolic
pathways [162].
3.4.2. Scl-PHA as a Precursor of Carbon Material
As a kind of polymer with plenty of alkyls and hydroxy fatty acids, scl-PHA can introduce
an additional oxygen element into a carbon precursor. Zhu et al. synthesized a spindle-like
hierarchical carbon structure of submicron dimension by the pyrolysis of a PHA/ferrocene/chloroform
precursor [ 163]. The electrochemical performance of the obtained carbon material showed a speciﬁc
capacitance of 188 F/g with excellent stability over 10,000 cycles. In addition, scl-PHA can also be used
to improve the melt spinnability of Kraft lignin and prepare continuously spooled lignin/scl-PHA
ﬁbers, which could be converted to low-cost carbon ﬁbers. Since the glass transition temperature of
Kraft lignin is relatively high, it is difﬁcult to obtain continuously spooled lignin ﬁbers due to the fact
that lignin melt will become brittle before being spooled. The incorporation of polymers with good
melt spinnability can improve the spinnabiliy of lignin [ 164], especially polymers that can maintain
the molten state for a long time during the melt spinning process. This special requirement seems to
be tailored for scl-PHA with a slow crystallization rate and a low glass transition temperature. We
found that the addition of 5% PHBHV could effectively improve the melt spinnability of lignin and the
obtained lignin/PHBHV composite ﬁbers were successfully converted to carbon ﬁbers. Related work
is ongoing and will be published in the near future.
4. Conclusions
As summarized in Figure 13, this review offers a comprehensive overview on the modiﬁcation
of scl-PHA with low 3HV or 4HB content in terms of crystallization behaviors, thermal stability, and
mechanical properties. The properties of scl-PHA can be improved to a certain extent by physical or
chemical modiﬁcation combined with the control of processing condition. Physical modiﬁcation mainly
refers to the blending of other polymers or nanoparticles with scl-PHA. By introducing polymers
into scl-PHA, the production cost of scl-PHA can be signiﬁcantly decreased, and the crystallization
properties can also be controlled due to the interaction between additives and scl-PHA, which is a
promising prospect for industrialization. Nanoparticles are incorporated into scl-PHA to increase the
nucleation density, improve the crystallization rate, and reduce the spherulite size of scl-PHA, while
the size distribution, dispersion, color, and heat resistance of added nanoparticles should be considered
sufﬁciently. Chemical modiﬁcation methods (such as grafting, blocking, and crosslinking) can be used
to tailor the chemical structure of scl-PHA by controlling the interaction between the molecular chains
of scl-PHA and the incorporated components, whereas the production costs of scl-PHA will be greatly
increased and the introduced components may inﬂuence the original biodegradable properties of
scl-PHA. In terms of processing conditions, scl-PHA ﬁbers with excellent mechanical properties canPolymers 2016 ,8, 273 20 of 28
be obtained via isothermal crystallization and a second drawing in ice water, which cannot achieve
continuous spinning currently. However, the modiﬁed scl-PHA is still far from satisfactory partially
due to the poor mechanical properties and the high production costs, leading to very few commercial
products of scl-PHA available on the market. In order to expand the application of scl-PHA in the
packaging, ﬁber, and biomedical ﬁelds, it is crucial to further enhance the properties of scl-PHA and
decrease the production or modiﬁcation costs, which will require the joint efforts of microbiologists,
chemists, polymer scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs. It is equally important to ﬁnd a new
application like carbon precursor for scl-PHA without any modiﬁcation. We hope that the strategy
of combining chemical, physical, and processing modiﬁcations can provide a train of thought for the
development of bacterial products.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 273 20 of 28 
  
Figure 13.  Overview of the modification and application of scl-PHA. 
Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknow ledge the support of the Program for Changjiang Scholars 
and Innovative Research Team in University (T 2011079, IRT1221). The project was funded by the China 
Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015M581498).  
Author Contributions:  Shichao Wang, Wei Chen, Hengxue Xiang, and Meifang Zhu conceived and designed 
the structure of this review; Hengxu e Xiang and Junjie Yang plotted the figures; Zhe Zhou and Meifang Zhu 
contributed materials/analysis tools; Sh ichao Wang and Wei Chen wrote the paper. 
Conflicts of Interest:  The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. Wilbon, P .A.; Chu, F.; Tang, C. Progress in renewabl e polymers from natural terpenes, terpenoids, and 
rosin. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2013 , 34, 8–37. 
2. Meier, M.A.R.; Metzger, J.O.; Schubert, U.S. Plant oil renewable resources as green alternatives in 
polymer science. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2007 , 36, 1788–1802. 
3. Petersen, K.; Væggemose Nielsen, P .; Bertelsen, G.; La wther, M.; Olsen, M.B.; Nilsson, N.H.; Mortensen, G. 
Potential of biobased materials for food packaging. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 1999 , 10, 52–68. 
4. John, M.; Thomas, S. Biofibres and biocomposites. Carbohydr. Polym. 2008 , 71, 343–364. 
5. Manavitehrani, I.; Fathi, A.; Badr, H.; Daly, S.; Shir azi, A.N.; Dehghani, F. Biomedical applications of 
biodegradable polyesters. Polymers 2016 , 8, 20. 
6. Gross, R.A.; Kalra, B. Biodegrada ble polymers for the environment. Science 2002 , 297, 803–807. 
7. Chen, G.Q.; Patel, M.K. Plastics derived from biological sources: Present and future: A technical and 
environmental review. Chem. Rev. 2012 , 112, 2082–2099. 
8. Poirier, Y.; Nawrath, C.; Somerville, C. Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates, a family of biodegradable 
plastics and elastomers, in bacteria and plants. Nat. Biotechnol. 1995 , 13, 142–150. 
9. Tan, G.Y.A.; Chen, C.L.; Li, L.; Ge, L.; Wang, L.; Razaad, I.M.N.; Li, Y.; Zhao, L.; Mo, Y.; Wang, J.-Y. Start a 
research on biopolymer Polyhydr oxyalkanoate (PHA): A review. Polymers 2014 , 6, 706–754. 
10. Kessler, B.; Witholt, B. Factors involved in the regulatory network of Polyhydroxyalkanoate metabolism. J. 
Biotechnol. 2001 , 86, 97–104. 
11. Guo, M.; Stuckey, D.C.; Murphy, R.J. Is it po ssible to develop biopolymer production systems 
independent of fossil fuels? Case study in energy profiling of Polyhydroxybutyratevalerate (PHBV). 
Green Chem. 2013 , 15, 706–717. 
Figure 13. Overview of the modiﬁcation and application of scl-PHA.
Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Program for Changjiang Scholars and
Innovative Research Team in University (T2011079, IRT1221). The project was funded by the China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation (2015M581498).
Author Contributions: Shichao Wang, Wei Chen, Hengxue Xiang, and Meifang Zhu conceived and designed
the structure of this review; Hengxue Xiang and Junjie Yang plotted the ﬁgures; Zhe Zhou and Meifang Zhu
contributed materials/analysis tools; Shichao Wang and Wei Chen wrote the paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Wilbon, P .A.; Chu, F.; Tang, C. Progress in renewable polymers from natural terpenes, terpenoids, and rosin.
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2013 ,34, 8–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Meier, M.A.R.; Metzger, J.O.; Schubert, U.S. Plant oil renewable resources as green alternatives in polymer
science. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2007 ,36, 1788–1802. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Petersen, K.; Væggemose Nielsen, P .; Bertelsen, G.; Lawther, M.; Olsen, M.B.; Nilsson, N.H.; Mortensen, G.
Potential of biobased materials for food packaging. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 1999 ,10, 52–68. [CrossRef]
4. John, M.; Thomas, S. Bioﬁbres and biocomposites. Carbohydr. Polym. 2008 ,71, 343–364. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 21 of 28
5. Manavitehrani, I.; Fathi, A.; Badr, H.; Daly, S.; Shirazi, A.N.; Dehghani, F. Biomedical applications of
biodegradable polyesters. Polymers 2016 ,8, 20. [CrossRef]
6. Gross, R.A.; Kalra, B. Biodegradable polymers for the environment. Science 2002 ,297, 803–807. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
7. Chen, G.Q.; Patel, M.K. Plastics derived from biological sources: Present and future: A technical and
environmental review. Chem. Rev. 2012 ,112, 2082–2099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Poirier, Y.; Nawrath, C.; Somerville, C. Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates, a family of biodegradable
plastics and elastomers, in bacteria and plants. Nat. Biotechnol. 1995 ,13, 142–150. [CrossRef]
9. Tan, G.Y.A.; Chen, C.L.; Li, L.; Ge, L.; Wang, L.; Razaad, I.M.N.; Li, Y.; Zhao, L.; Mo, Y.; Wang, J.-Y. Start a
research on biopolymer Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): A review. Polymers 2014 ,6, 706–754. [CrossRef]
10. Kessler, B.; Witholt, B. Factors involved in the regulatory network of Polyhydroxyalkanoate metabolism.
J. Biotechnol. 2001 ,86, 97–104. [CrossRef]
11. Guo, M.; Stuckey, D.C.; Murphy, R.J. Is it possible to develop biopolymer production systems independent
of fossil fuels? Case study in energy proﬁling of Polyhydroxybutyratevalerate (PHBV). Green Chem. 2013 ,15,
706–717. [CrossRef]
12. Steinbuchel, A.; Valentin, H.E. Diversity of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoic acids. Fems Microbiol. Lett. 1995 ,
128, 219–228. [CrossRef]
13. Bugnicourt, E.; Cinelli, P .; Alvarez, V .; Lazzeri, A. Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis,
characteristics, processing and potential applications in packaging. Express Polym. Lett. 2014 ,8, 791–808.
[CrossRef]
14. Ke, Y.; Zhang, X.Y.; Ramakrishna, S.; He, L.M.; Wu, G. Synthetic routes to degradable copolymers deriving
from the biosynthesized polyhydroxyalkanoates: A mini review. Express Polym. Lett. 2016 ,10, 36–53.
[CrossRef]
15. Lenz, R.W.; Marchessault, R.H. Bacterial polyesters: Biosynthesis, biodegradable plastics and biotechnology.
Biomacromolecules 2005 ,6, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Tappel, R.C.; Pan, W.Y.; Bergey, N.S.; Wang, Q.; Patterson, I.L.; Ozumba, O.A.; Matsumoto, K.; Taguchi, S.;
Nomura, C.T. Engineering escherichia coli for improved production of short-chain-length- co-medium-
chain-length Poly( R)-3-hydroxyalkanoate (scl- co-mcl PHA) copolymers from renewable nonfatty acid
feedstocks. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2014 ,2, 1879–1887. [CrossRef]
17. Chen, G.Q. A microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) based bio- and materials industry. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2009 ,38, 2434–2446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Bloembergen, S.; Holden, D.A.; Hamer, G.K.; Bluhm, T.L.; Marchessault, R.H. Studies of composition and
crystallinity of bacterial Poly( -hydroxybutyrate- co--hydroxyvalerate). Macromolecules 1986 ,19, 2865–2871.
[CrossRef]
19. Pundsack, A.; Bluhm, T. Technique for determining unit-cell constants of polyhydroxyvalerate using electron
diffraction. J. Mater. Sci. 1981 ,16, 545–547. [CrossRef]
20. Kunioka, M.; Tamaki, A.; Doi, Y. Crystalline and thermal properties of bacterial copolyesters:
Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate).
Macromolecules 1989 ,22, 694–697. [CrossRef]
21. Gunaratne, L.M.W.K.; Shanks, R.A. Multiple melting behaviour of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-
hydroxyvalerate) using step-scan DSC. Eur. Polym. J. 2005 ,41, 2980–2988. [CrossRef]
22. Bluhm, T.L.; Hamer, G.K.; Marchessault, R.H.; Fyfe, C.A.; Veregin, R.P . Isodimorphism in bacterial poly
(-hydroxybutyrate- co--hydroxyvalerate). Macromolecules 1986 ,19, 2871–2876. [CrossRef]
23. Mitomo, H.; Morishita, N.; Doi, Y. Composition range of crystal phase transition of isodimorphism in
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate). Macromolecules 1993 ,26, 5809–5811. [CrossRef]
24. Pan, P .; Inoue, Y. Polymorphism and isomorphism in biodegradable polyesters. Progress Polym. Sci. 2009 ,34,
605–640. [CrossRef]
25. Lu, X.P .; Wen, X.; Yang, D. Isothermal crystallization kinetics and morphology of biodegradable
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate). J. Mater. Sci. 2011 ,46, 1281–1288. [CrossRef]
26. Ding, C.; Cheng, B.; Wu, Q. Dsc analysis of isothermally melt-crystallized bacterial Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-
co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) ﬁlms. J. Thermal Anal. Calorim. 2011 ,103, 1001–1006. [CrossRef]
27. Wellen, R.M.R.; Rabello, M.S.; Fechine, G.J.M.; Canedo, E.L. The melting behaviour of
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) by DSC. Reproducibility study. Polym. Test. 2013 ,32, 215–220. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 22 of 28
28. Grassie, N.; Murray, E.; Holmes, P . The thermal degradation of poly(-( D)--hydroxybutyric acid):
Part 2-changes in molecular weight. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 1984 ,6, 95–103. [CrossRef]
29. Abe, H. Thermal degradation of environmentally degradable poly(hydroxyalkanoic acid)s. Macromol. Biosci.
2006 ,6, 469–486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Kopinke, F.D.; Remmler, M.; Mackenzie, K. Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters-i: Poly
(-hydroxybutyric acid). Polym. Degrad. Stab. 1996 ,52, 25–38. [CrossRef]
31. Liu, Q.S.; Zhu, M.F.; Wu, W.H.; Qin, Z.Y. Reducing the formation of six-membered ring ester during thermal
degradation of biodegradable PHBV to enhance its thermal stability. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2009 ,94, 18–24.
[CrossRef]
32. Nguyen, S.; Yu, G.e.; Marchessault, R. Thermal degradation of poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates): Preparation of
well-deﬁned oligomers. Biomacromolecules 2002 ,3, 219–224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Kunioka, M.; Doi, Y. Thermal degradation of microbial copolyesters: Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate). Macromolecules 1990 ,23, 1933–1936.
[CrossRef]
34. Kim, K.J.; Doi, Y.; Abe, H. Effects of residual metal compounds and chain-end structure on thermal
degradation of poly (3-hydroxybutyric acid). Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2006 ,91, 769–777. [CrossRef]
35. Arifﬁn, H.; Nishida, H.; Shirai, Y.; Hassan, M.A. Determination of multiple thermal degradation mechanisms
of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate). Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2008 ,93, 1433–1439. [CrossRef]
36. Hablot, E.; Bordes, P .; Pollet, E.; Avérous, L. Thermal and thermo-mechanical degradation of poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate)-based multiphase systems. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2008 ,93, 413–421. [CrossRef]
37. Kawalec, M.; Adamus, G.; Kurcok, P .; Kowalczuk, M.; Foltran, I.; Focarete, M.L.; Scandola, M.
Carboxylate-induced degradation of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)s. Biomacromolecules 2007 ,8, 1053–1058.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Janigová, I.; Lacík, I.; Chodak, I. Thermal degradation of plasticized poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) investigated
by DSC. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2002 ,77, 35–41. [CrossRef]
39. Aoyagi, Y.; Yamashita, K.; Doi, Y. Thermal degradation of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate], poly [ "-caprolactone],
and poly [( S)-lactide]. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2002 ,76, 53–59. [CrossRef]
40. Li, S.D.; He, J.D.; Yu, P .H.; Cheung, M.K. Thermal degradation of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) and poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) as studied by TG, TG-FTIR, and PY-GC/MS. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.
2003 ,89, 1530–1536. [CrossRef]
41. Xiang, H.X.; Wen, X.S.; Miu, X.H.; Li, Y.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Thermal depolymerization mechanisms of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate). Progress Nat. Sci. Mater. Int. 2016 ,26, 58–64. [CrossRef]
42. Yang, X.; Odelius, K.; Hakkarainen, M. Microwave-assisted reaction in green solvents recycles PHB to
functional chemicals. Acs Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2014 ,2, 2198–2203. [CrossRef]
43. Hong, S.G.; Hsu, H.W.; Ye, M.T. Thermal properties and applications of low molecular weight
Polyhydroxybutyrate. J. Thermal Anal. Calorim. 2013 ,111, 1243–1250. [CrossRef]
44. Ding, Y.C.; He, J.Y.; Yang, Y.Y.; Cui, S.J.; Xu, K.T. Mechanical properties, thermal stability, and crystallization
kinetics of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate)/calcium carbonate composites. Polym. Compos.
2011 ,32, 1134–1142. [CrossRef]
45. Naffakh, M.; Marco, C.; Ellis, G. Inorganic ws 2nanotubes that improve the crystallization behavior of poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate). Crystengcomm 2014 ,16, 1126–1135. [CrossRef]
46. Wang, L.; Wang, X.J.; Zhu, W.F.; Chen, Z.F.; Pan, J.Y.; Xu, K.T. Effect of nucleation agents on the crystallization
of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB4HB). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010 ,116, 1116–1123.
47. Shan, G.F.; Gong, X.; Chen, W.P .; Chen, L.; Zhu, M.F. Effect of multi-walled carbon nanotubes on
crystallization behavior of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate). Colloid Polym. Sci. 2011 ,289,
1005–1014. [CrossRef]
48. Abdul Khalil, H.; Bhat, A.; Ireana Yusra, A. Green composites from sustainable cellulose nanoﬁbrils:
A review. Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,87, 963–979. [CrossRef]
49. Hu, X.; Xu, C.; Gao, J.; Yang, G.; Geng, C.; Chen, F.; Fu, Q. Toward environment-friendly composites of
poly(propylene carbonate) reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2013 ,78, 63–68.
[CrossRef]
50. Salam, A.; Lucia, L.A.; Jameel, H. A novel cellulose nanocrystals-based approach to improve the mechanical
properties of recycled paper. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2013 ,1, 1584–1592. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 23 of 28
51. Mesquita, J.P .D.; Donnici, C.L.; Teixeira, I.F.; Pereira, F.V . Bio-based nanocomposites obtained through
covalent linkage between chitosan and cellulose nanocrystals. Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,90, 210–217. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
52. Martinez-Sanz, M.; Villano, M.; Oliveira, C.; Albuquerque, M.G.E.; Majone, M.; Reis, M.; Lopez-Rubio, A.;
Lagaron, J.M. Characterization of polyhydroxyalkanoates synthesized from microbial mixed cultures and of
their nanobiocomposites with bacterial. New Biotechnol. 2014 ,31, 364–376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Yang, J.; Wang, C.; Wang, K.; Zhang, Q.; Chen, F.; Du, R.; Fu, Q. Direct formation of nanohybrid shish-kebab
in the injection molded bar of polyethylene/multiwalled carbon nanotubes composite. Macromolecules 2009 ,
42, 7016–7023. [CrossRef]
54. Yu, H.Y.; Qin, Z.Y.; Liu, Y.N.; Chen, L.; Liu, N.; Zhou, Z. Simultaneous improvement of mechanical properties
and thermal stability of bacterial polyester by cellulose nanocrystals. Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,89, 971–978.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Wang, B.; Li, J.; Zhang, J.; Li, H.; Chen, P .; Gu, Q.; Wang, Z. Thermo-mechanical properties of the composite
made of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) and acetylated chitin nanocrystals. Carbohydr. Polym.
2013 ,95, 100–106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Buzarovska, A.; Grozdanov, A.; Avella, M.; Gentile, G.; Errico, M. Poly(hydroxybutyrate- co-hydroxyvalerate)/
titanium dioxide nanocomposites: A degradation study. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2009 ,114, 3118–3124. [CrossRef]
57. Wu, T.M.; Hsu, S.F.; Shih, Y.F.; Liao, C.S. Thermal degradation kinetics of biodegradable
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)/layered double hydroxide nanocomposites. J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2008 ,
46, 1207–1213. [CrossRef]
58. Bruzaud, S.; Bourmaud, A. Thermal degradation and (nano)mechanical behavior of layered silicate reinforced
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) nanocomposites. Polym. Test. 2007 ,26, 652–659. [CrossRef]
59. Mook Choi, W.; Wan Kim, T.; Ok Park, O.; Keun Chang, Y.; Woo Lee, J. Preparation and characterization
of poly(hydroxybutyrate- co-hydroxyvalerate)-organoclay nanocomposites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2003 ,90,
525–529. [CrossRef]
60. Wang, S.; Song, C.; Chen, G.; Guo, T.; Liu, J.; Zhang, B.; Takeuchi, S. Characteristics and biodegradation
properties of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/organophilic montmorillonite (PHBV/OMMT)
nanocomposite. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2005 ,87, 69–76. [CrossRef]
61. Jiang, L.; Morelius, E.; Zhang, J.; Wolcott, M.; Holbery, J. Study of the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhisker composites prepared by solution casting and melt processing.
J. Compos. Mater. 2008 ,42, 2629–2645. [CrossRef]
62. Ten, E.; Turtle, J.; Bahr, D.; Jiang, L.; Wolcott, M. Thermal and mechanical properties of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhiskers composites. Polymer 2010 ,51,
2652–2660. [CrossRef]
63. Sridhar, V .; Lee, I.; Chun, H.H.; Park, H. Graphene reinforced biodegradable poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-
hydroxybutyrate) nano-composites. Express Polym. Lett. 2013 ,7, 320–328. [CrossRef]
64. Oner, M.; Idotlhan, B. Fabrication of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) biocomposites with
reinforcement by hydroxyapatite using extrusion processing. Mater. Sci. Eng. C (Mater. Biol. Appl.) 2016 ,65,
19–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Patricio, P .; Pereira, F.V .; dos Santos, M.C.; de Souza, P .P .; Roa, J.P .B.; Oreﬁce, R.L. Increasing the elongation
at break of Polyhydroxybutyrate biopolymer: Effect of cellulose nanowhiskers on mechanical and thermal
properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013 ,127, 3613–3621. [CrossRef]
66. Zhang, R.; Zhu, C.J.; Shan, X.Y.; Xia, J.; Zhu, Q.; Hu, Y. Study on the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-
hydroxybutyrate)-based nanocomposites reinforced by surface modiﬁed nanocrystalline cellulose. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 2013 ,130, 2015–2022. [CrossRef]
67. Wang, S.C.; Xiang, H.X.; Wang, R.L.; Peng, C.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Morphology and properties of renewable
poly (3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) blends with thermoplastic polyurethane. Polym. Eng. Sci.
2014 ,54, 1113–1119. [CrossRef]
68. Jian, Y.; Zongbao, W.; Yang, W.; Xiangfa, W.; Qun, G. Crystallization behavior of incompatible PHBV/PS and
PHBV/PMMA crystalline/amorphous blends. Acta Polym. Sin. 2010 , 987–994.
69. Madbouly, S.A.; Mansour, A.A.; Abdou, N.Y. Crystallization kinetics of PHB/PVAc blends using time
resolved dielectric spectroscopy. Eur. Polym. J. 2007 ,43, 3933–3942. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 24 of 28
70. Ma, P .M.; Hristova-Bogaerds, D.G.; Zhang, Y.; Lemstra, P .J. Enhancement in crystallization kinetics of the
bacterially synthesized poly( -hydroxybutyrate) by poly(butylene succinate). Polym. Bull. 2014 ,71, 907–923.
[CrossRef]
71. Wang, S.C.; Xiang, H.X.; Wang, R.L.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Inﬂuence of amorphous alkaline lignin on the
crystallization behavior and thermal properties of bacterial polyester. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015 ,132, 41325.
72. Javadi, A.; Srithep, Y.; Pilla, S.; Lee, J.; Gong, S.; Turng, L.S. Processing and characterization of solid and
microcellular PHBV/coir ﬁber composites. Mater. Sci. Eng. C-Mater. Biol. Appl. 2010 ,30, 749–757. [CrossRef]
73. Nagarajan, V .; Misra, M.; Mohanty, A.K. New engineered biocomposites from poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-
3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV)/poly(butylene adipate- co-terephthalate) (PBAT) blends and switchgrass:
Fabrication and performance evaluation. Ind. Crops Prod. 2013 ,42, 461–468. [CrossRef]
74. Lovera, D.; Márquez, L.; Balsamo, V .; Taddei, A.; Castelli, C.; Müller, A.J. Crystallization, morphology, and
enzymatic degradation of polyhydroxybutyrate/polycaprolactone (PHB/PCL) blends. Macromol. Chem.
Phys. 2007 ,208, 924–937. [CrossRef]
75. Furukawa, T.; Sato, H.; Murakami, R.; Zhang, J.; Noda, I.; Ochiai, S.; Ozaki, Y. Comparison of miscibility
and structure of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyhexanoate)/poly( L-lactic acid) blends with those of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)/poly( L-lactic acid) blends studied by wide angle x-ray diffraction, differential
scanning calorimetry, and ftir microspectroscopy. Polymer 2007 ,48, 1749–1755.
76. Zhu, W.; Wang, X.; Chen, X.; Xu, K. Miscibility, crystallization, and mechanical properties of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate)/poly(butylene succinate) blends. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2009 ,
114, 3923–3931. [CrossRef]
77. Buzarovska, A.; Bogoeva-Gaceva, G.; Grozdanov, A.; Avella, M.; Gentile, G.; Errico, M. Crystallization
behavior of poly(hydroxybytyrate- co-valerate) in model and bulk PHBV/kenaf ﬁber composites. J. Mater. Sci.
2007 ,42, 6501–6509. [CrossRef]
78. Roa, J.P .; Patrício, P .S.d.O.; Oréﬁce, R.L.; Lago, R.M. Improvement of the thermal properties of poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate)(PHB) by low molecular weight polypropylene glycol (lmwPPG) addition. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 2013 ,128, 3019–3025. [CrossRef]
79. Nerkar, M.; Ramsay, J.A.; Ramsay, B.A.; Kontopoulou, M. Melt compounded blends of short and medium
chain-length poly-3-hydroxyalkanoates. J. Polym. Environ. 2014 ,22, 236–243. [CrossRef]
80. Zembouai, I.; Bruzaud, S.; Kaci, M.; Benhamida, A.; Corre, Y.-M.; Grohens, Y.; Taguet, A.; Lopez-Cuesta, J.-M.
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/polylactide blends: Thermal stability, ﬂammability and
thermo-mechanical behavior. J. Polym. Environ. 2014 ,22, 131–139. [CrossRef]
81. Audic, J.L.; Lemiegre, L.; Corre, Y.M. Thermal and mechanical properties of a polyhydroxyalkanoate
plasticized with biobased epoxidized broccoli oil. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2014 ,131, 39983. [CrossRef]
82. Ma, P . Partially bio-based thermoplastic elastomers by physical blending of poly(hydroxyalkanoate)s and
poly(ethylene- co-vinyl acetate). Express Polym. Lett. 2014 ,8, 517–527. [CrossRef]
83. Rosa, D.D.S.; Gaboardi, F.; Guedes, C.d.G.F.; Calil, M.R. Inﬂuence of oxidized polyethylene wax (OPW) on
the mechanical, thermal, morphological and biodegradation properties of PHB/LDPPE blends. J. Mater. Sci.
2007 ,42, 8093–8100. [CrossRef]
84. Jandas, P .J.; Mohanty, S.; Nayak, S.K. Morphology and thermal properties of renewable resource-based
polymer blend nanocomposites inﬂuenced by a reactive compatibilizer. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2014 ,2,
377–386. [CrossRef]
85. Gregorova, A.; Wimmer, R.; Hrabalova, M.; Koller, M.; Ters, T.; Mundigler, N. Effect of surface modiﬁcation of
beech wood ﬂour on mechanical and thermal properties of Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate)/wood ﬂour composites.
Holzforschung 2009 ,63, 565–570. [CrossRef]
86. Ahankari, S.S.; Mohanty, A.K.; Misra, M. Mechanical behaviour of agro-residue reinforced
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate), (PHBV) green composites: A comparison with traditional
Polypropylene composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2011 ,71, 653–657. [CrossRef]
87. Berthet, M.A.; Gontard, N.; Angellier-Coussy, H. Impact of ﬁbre moisture content on the structure/
mechanical properties relationships of PHBV/wheat straw ﬁbres biocomposites. Compos. Sci. Technol.
2015 ,117, 386–391. [CrossRef]
88. Teramoto, N.; Urata, K.; Ozawa, K.; Shibata, M. Biodegradation of aliphatic polyester composites reinforced
by abaca ﬁber. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2004 ,86, 401–409. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 25 of 28
89. Ma, P .; Spoelstra, A.B.; Schmit, P .; Lemstra, P .J. Toughening of poly (lactic acid) by poly
(-hydroxybutyrate- co--hydroxyvalerate) with high -hydroxyvalerate content. Eur. Polym. J. 2013 ,
49, 1523–1531. [CrossRef]
90. Xiang, H.X.; Chen, S.H.; Cheng, Y.H.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Structural characteristics and enhanced mechanical
and thermal properties of full biodegradable tea polyphenol/poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)
composite ﬁlms. eXPRESS Polym. Lett. 2013 ,7, 778–786. [CrossRef]
91. Xiang, H.X.; Li, L.L.; Wang, S.C.; Wang, R.L.; Cheng, Y.H.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Natural polyphenol tannic acid
reinforced poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) composite ﬁlms with enhanced tensile strength
and fracture toughness. Polym. Compos. 2015 ,36, 2303–2308. [CrossRef]
92. Yu, L.; Dean, K.; Li, L. Polymer blends and composites from renewable resources. Progress Polym. Sci. 2006 ,
31, 576–602. [CrossRef]
93. Wang, J.; Wang, Z.B.; Li, J.; Wang, B.J.; Liu, J.; Chen, P .; Miao, M.H.; Gu, Q. Chitin nanocrystals
grafted with poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) and their effects on thermal behavior of PHBV .
Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,87, 784–789. [CrossRef]
94. Yu, H.Y.; Qin, Z.Y.; Wang, L.F.; Zhou, Z. Crystallization behavior and hydrophobic properties of
biodegradable ethyl cellulose-g-poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate): The inﬂuence of the
side-chain length and grafting density. Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,87, 2447–2454. [CrossRef]
95. Liu, Q.; Shyr, T.W.; Tung, C.H.; Liu, Z.; Shan, G.; Zhu, M.; Deng, B. Particular thermal properties of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) oligomers. J. Polym. Res. 2012 ,19, 1–9. [CrossRef]
96. Liu, Q.; Zhu, M.; Chen, Y. Synthesis and characterization of multi-block copolymers containing poly
[(3-hydroxybutyrate)- co-(3-hydroxyvalerate)] and poly(ethylene glycol). Polym. Int. 2010 ,59, 842–850.
[CrossRef]
97. Haberlein, H.; Seliger, H.; Kohler, R.; Sulzberger, P . Cost-Effective synthesis of environmentally benign
materials on the basis of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate. Polimeros 2005 ,15, 122–126. [CrossRef]
98. Liu, K.L.; Choo, E.S.G.; Wong, S.Y.; Li, X.; Bin He, C.; Wang, J.; Li, J. Designing poly
(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate-based polyurethane block copolymers for electrospun nanoﬁber scaffolds with
improved mechanical properties and enhanced mineralization capability. J. Phys. Chem. B 2010 ,114,
7489–7498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Liu, Q.; Zhu, M.; Deng, B.; Tung, C.-H.; Shyr, T.-W. Evolution of concentric spherulites in
crystalline-crystalline poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)- b-poly (ethylene glycol) copolymers.
Eur. Polym. J. 2013 ,49, 3937–3946. [CrossRef]
100. Xiang, H.X.; Wang, S.C.; Wen, X.S.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Synthesis and thermostability of crystalline/
amorphous triblock copolymer consisting of PHBV and PMMA. Acta Polym. Sin. 2014 , 40–48.
101. Xiang, H.X.; Wang, S.C.; Wang, R.L.; Wen, X.S.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, M.F. Synthesis, structure and thermal
properties of poly(A- block -B-block -A) copolymer based on biodegradable poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) and amorphous polystyrene. Mater. Res. Innov. 2014 ,18, 864–868. [CrossRef]
102. Hu, D.; Chung, A.L.; Wu, L.P .; Zhang, X.; Wu, Q.; Chen, J.-C.; Chen, G.-Q. Biosynthesis and characterization
of polyhydroxyalkanoate block copolymer P3HB- b-P4HB. Biomacromolecules 2011 ,12, 3166–3173. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Li, S.Y.; Dong, C.L.; Wang, S.Y.; Ye, H.M.; Chen, G.-Q. Microbial production of polyhydroxyalkanoate block
copolymer by recombinant Pseudomonas putida .Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2011 ,90, 659–669. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
104. Tripathi, L.; Wu, L.P .; Chen, J.; Chen, G.Q. Synthesis of diblock copolymer poly-3-hydroxybutyrate
-block -poly-3-hydroxyhexanoate PHB- b-PHHx by a-oxidation weakened Pseudomonas putida KT2442. Microb.
Cell Factor. 2012 ,11, 54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Tripathi, L.; Wu, L.P .; Meng, D.; Chen, J.; Chen, G.Q. Biosynthesis and characterization of diblock copolymer
of p(3-hydroxypropionate)- block -p(4-hydroxybutyrate) from recombinant Escherichia coli .Biomacromolecules
2013 ,14, 862–870. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Ma, P .M.; Cai, X.X.; Wang, W.; Duan, F.; Shi, D.J.; Lemstra, P .J. Crystallization behavior of partially crosslinked
poly(-hydroxyalkonates)/poly(butylene succinate) blends. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2014 ,131, 41020. [CrossRef]
107. Xiang, H.X.; Wang, S.C.; Wang, R.L.; Zhou, Z.; Peng, C.; Zhu, M.F. Synthesis and characterization of an
environmentally friendly PHBV/PEG copolymer network as a phase change material. Sci. China-Chem. 2013 ,
56, 716–723. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 26 of 28
108. Bian, Y.J.; Han, L.J.; Han, C.Y.; Lin, H.J.; Zhang, H.L.; Bian, J.J.; Dong, L.S. Intriguing crystallization
behavior and rheological properties of radical-based crosslinked biodegradable poly(3-hydroxybutyrate -
co-4-hydroxybutyrate). Crystengcomm 2014 ,16, 2702–2714. [CrossRef]
109. Bian, Y.J.; Han, C.Y.; Han, L.J.; Lin, H.J.; Zhang, H.L.; Bian, J.J.; Dong, L.S. Toughening mechanism behind
intriguing stress-strain curves in tensile tests of highly enhanced compatibilization of biodegradable
poly(Lactic acid)/poly(3-hydroxybutyrate -co-4-hydroxybutyrate)blends. Rsc Adv. 2014 ,4, 41722–41733.
[CrossRef]
110. Ma, P .M.; Cai, X.X.; Lou, X.W.; Dong, W.F.; Chen, M.Q.; Lemstra, P .J. Styrene-assisted melt free-radical
grafting of maleic anhydride onto poly( -hydroxybutyrate). Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2014 ,100, 93–100.
[CrossRef]
111. Lee, S.N.; Lee, M.Y.; Park, W.H. Thermal stabilization of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) by poly(glycidyl
methacrylate). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2002 ,83, 2945–2952. [CrossRef]
112. Fei, B.; Chen, C.; Chen, S.; Peng, S.; Zhuang, Y.; An, Y.; Dong, L. Crosslinking of poly
[(3-hydroxybutyrate) -co-(3-hydroxyvalerate)] using dicumyl peroxide as initiator. Polym. Int. 2004 ,53,
937–943. [CrossRef]
113. Dong, W.F.; Ma, P .M.; Wang, S.F.; Chen, M.Q.; Cai, X.X.; Zhang, Y. Effect of partial crosslinking on morphology
and properties of the poly( -hydroxybutyrate)/poly( D,L-lactic acid) blends. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2013 ,98,
1549–1555. [CrossRef]
114. Laycock, B.; Halley, P .; Pratt, S.; Werker, A.; Lant, P . The chemomechanical properties of microbial
Polyhydroxyalkanoates. Progress Polym. Sci. 2014 ,39, 397–442. [CrossRef]
115. Barker, P .; Barham, P .; Martinez-Salazar, J. Effect of crystallization temperature on the cocrystallization of
hydroxybutyrate/hydroxyvalerate copolymers. Polymer 1997 ,38, 913–919.
116. Cao, Q.K.; Qiao, X.P .; Wang, H.; Liu, J.P . Spherulites structure and its growth mechanism from melt ﬁlm or
solution of PHB. Sci. China 2008 ,38, 700–704.
117. Liu, J.; Qiao, X.; He, S.; Cao, Q.; Wang, H. Inﬂuence of the thin-ﬁlm thickness and crystallization temperature
on the spherulitic structure of polymer thin ﬁlms. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010 ,115, 1616–1621. [CrossRef]
118. Xu, H.; Xie, L.; Chen, Y.H.; Huang, H.D.; Xu, J.Z.; Zhong, G.J.; Hsiao, B.S.; Li, Z.M. Strong shear ﬂow-driven
simultaneous formation of classic shish-kebab, hybrid shish-kebab, and transcrystallinity in poly(lactic
acid)/natural ﬁber biocomposites. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2013 ,1, 1619–1629. [CrossRef]
119. Yin, H.Y.; Wei, X.F.; Bao, R.Y.; Dong, Q.X.; Liu, Z.Y.; Yang, W.; Xie, B.H.; Yang, M.B. Enhancing
thermomechanical properties and heat distortion resistance of poly( L-lactide) with high crystallinity under
high cooling rate. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2015 ,3, 654–661. [CrossRef]
120. Iwata, T. Strong ﬁbers and ﬁlms of microbial polyesters. Macromol. Biosci. 2005 ,5, 689–701. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
121. Tanaka, T.; Fujita, M.; Takeuchi, A.; Suzuki, Y.; Uesugi, K.; Ito, K.; Fujisawa, T.; Doi, Y.; Iwata, T. Formation
of highly ordered structure in poly[( R)-3-hydroxybutyrate -co-(R)-3-hydroxyvalerate] high-strength ﬁbers.
Macromolecules 2006 ,39, 2940–2946. [CrossRef]
122. Gordeyev, S.A.; Nekrasov, Y.P .; Shilton, S.J. Processing of gel-spun poly( -hydroxybutyrate) ﬁbers. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 2001 ,81, 2260–2264. [CrossRef]
123. Iwata, T.; Aoyagi, Y.; Fujita, M.; Yamane, H.; Doi, Y.; Suzuki, Y.; Takeuchi, A.; Uesugi, K. Processing of a
strong biodegradable poly[( R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] ﬁber and a new ﬁber structure revealed by micro-beam
x-ray diffraction with synchrotron radiation. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2004 ,25, 1100–1104. [CrossRef]
124. Furuhashi, Y.; Imamura, Y.; Jikihara, Y.; Yamane, H. Higher order structures and mechanical properties of
bacterial homo poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) ﬁbers prepared by cold-drawing and annealing processes. Polymer
2004 ,45, 5703–5712. [CrossRef]
125. Ten, E.; Jiang, L.; Wolcott, M.P . Preparation and properties of aligned poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhiskers composites. Carbohydr. Polym. 2013 ,92, 206–213. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
126. Fabra, M.J.; Lopez-Rubio, A.; Lagaron, J.M. On the use of different hydrocolloids as electrospun adhesive
interlayers to enhance the barrier properties of Polyhydroxyalkanoates of interest in fully renewable food
packaging concepts. Food Hydrocolloids 2014 ,39, 77–84. [CrossRef]
127. Scarfato, P .; Di Maio, L.; Incarnato, L. Recent advances and migration issues in biodegradable polymers from
renewable sources for food packaging. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015 ,132, 42597. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 27 of 28
128. Fabra, M.J.; Sanchez, G.; Lopez-Rubio, A.; Lagaron, J.M. Microbiological and ageing performance of
polyhydroxyalkanoate-based multilayer structures of interest in food packaging. Lwt-Food Sci. Technol.
2014 ,59, 760–767. [CrossRef]
129. Cretois, R.; Follain, N.; Dargent, E.; Soulestin, J.; Bourbigot, S.; Marais, S.; Lebrun, L. Microstructure and
barrier properties of PHBV/organoclays bionanocomposites. J. Membr. Sci. 2014 ,467, 56–66. [CrossRef]
130. Chea, V .; Angellier-Coussy, H.; Peyron, S.; Kemmer, D.; Gontard, N. Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) ﬁlms for food packaging: Physical-chemical and structural stability under food contact
conditions. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2016 ,133, 41850. [CrossRef]
131. Kovalcik, A.; Machovsky, M.; Kozakova, Z.; Koller, M. Designing packaging materials with viscoelastic and
gas barrier properties by optimized processing of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) with lignin.
React. Funct. Polym. 2015 ,94, 25–34. [CrossRef]
132. Diez-Pascual, A.M.; Diez-Vicente, A.L. Zno-reinforced poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate)
bionanocomposites with antimicrobial function for food packaging. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014 ,
6, 9822–9834. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Norrrahim, M.N.F.; Arifﬁn, H.; Hassan, M.A.; Ibrahim, N.A.; Nishida, H. Performance evaluation and
chemical recyclability of a polyethylene/poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) blend for sustainable
packaging. Rsc Adv. 2013 ,3, 24378–24388. [CrossRef]
134. Arrieta, M.P .; Fortunati, E.; Dominici, F.; Lopez, J.; Kenny, J.M. Bionanocomposite ﬁlms based on plasticized
PLA-PHB/cellulose nanocrystal blends. Carbohydr. Polym. 2015 ,121, 265–275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Chen, L.; Wang, B.; Chen, Y.M.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, M.F. The formation of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) ﬁbers. J. Donghua Univ. 2007 ,33, 425–430.
136. Li, L.; Huang, W.; Wang, B.; Wei, W.; Gu, Q.; Chen, P . Properties and structure of polylactide/poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PLA/PHBV) blend ﬁbers. Polymer 2015 ,68, 183–194. [CrossRef]
137. Hufenus, R.; Reiﬂer, F.A.; Maniura-Weber, K.; Spierings, A.; Zinn, M. Biodegradable bicomponent ﬁbers from
renewable sources: Melt-spinning of poly(lactic acid) and poly (3-hydroxybutyrate)- co-(3-hydroxyvalerate).
Macromol. Mater. Eng. 2012 ,297, 75–84. [CrossRef]
138. Hufenus, R.; Reiﬂer, F.A.; Fernandez-Ronco, M.P .; Heuberger, M. Molecular orientation in melt-spun
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) ﬁbers: Effect of additives, drawing and stress-annealing. Eur. Polym. J. 2015 ,71,
12–26. [CrossRef]
139. El-hadi, A.M.; Al-Jabri, F.Y. Inﬂuence of electrospinning parameters on ﬁber diameter and mechanical
properties of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and polyanilines (PANI) blends. Polymers 2016 ,8, 97. [CrossRef]
140. Wang, X.; Zhang, K.; Zhu, M.; Yu, H.; Zhou, Z.; Chen, Y.; Hsiao, B.S. Continuous polymer nanoﬁber yarns
prepared by self-bundling electrospinning method. Polymer 2008 ,49, 2755–2761. [CrossRef]
141. Yang, D.Z.; Zhang, J.F.; Xue, J.; Nie, J.; Zhang, Z.P . Electrospinning of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) nanoﬁbers with feature surface microstructure. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013 ,127, 2867–2874.
[CrossRef]
142. Yoon, Y.I.; Moon, H.S.; Lyoo, W.S.; Lee, T.S.; Park, W.H. Superhydrophobicity of PHBV ﬁbrous surface with
bead-on-string structure. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2008 ,320, 91–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Zhu, M.; Zuo, W.; Yu, H.; Yang, W.; Chen, Y. Superhydrophobic surface directly created by electrospinning
based on hydrophilic material. J. Mater. Sci. 2006 ,41, 3793–3797. [CrossRef]
144. Wu, J.; Xue, K.; Li, H.Y.; Sun, J.Y.; Liu, K. Improvement of PHBV scaffolds with bioglass for cartilage tissue
engineering. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e71563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Meischel, M.; Eichler, J.; Martinelli, E.; Karr, U.; Weigel, J.; Schmoeller, G.; Tschegg, E.K.; Fischerauer, S.;
Weinberg, A.M.; Stanzl-Tschegg, S.E. Adhesive strength of bone-implant interfaces and in-vivo degradation
of PHB composites for load-bearing applications. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 2016 ,53, 104–118. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
146. Ke, Y.; Wang, Y.; Ren, L.; Wu, G.; Xue, W. Surface modiﬁcation of PHBV ﬁlms with different functional
groups: Thermal properties and in vitro degradation. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010 ,118, 390–398. [CrossRef]
147. Chen, Z.F.; Cheng, S.T.; Xu, K.T. Block poly(ester-urethane)s based on poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-
hydroxybutyrate) and poly(3-hydroxyhexanoate- co-3-hydroxyoctanoate). Biomaterials 2009 ,30, 2219–2230.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]Polymers 2016 ,8, 273 28 of 28
148. Ou, W.F.; Qiu, H.D.; Chen, Z.F.; Xu, K.T. Biodegradable block poly(ester-urethane)s based on
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-4-hydroxybutyrate) copolymers. Biomaterials 2011 ,32, 3178–3188. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
149. Grondahl, L.; Chandler-Temple, A.; Trau, M. Polymeric grafting of acrylic acid onto poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate): Surface functionalization for tissue engineering applications.
Biomacromolecules 2005 ,6, 2197–2203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Keen, I.; Broota, P .; Rintoul, L.; Fredericks, P .; Trau, M.; Grøndahl, L. Introducing amine functionalities on a
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- co-3-hydroxyvalerate) surface: Comparing the use of ammonia plasma treatment
and ethylenediamine aminolysis. Biomacromolecules 2006 ,7, 427–434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Wang, Y.Y.; Lu, L.X.; Shi, J.C.; Wang, H.F.; Xiao, Z.D.; Huang, N.P . Introducing RGD peptides on PHBV ﬁlms
through PEG-containing cross-linkers to improve the biocompatibility. Biomacromolecules 2011 ,12, 551–559.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Koller, M.; Hesse, P .; Bona, R.; Kutschera, C.; Atlic, A.; Braunegg, G. Biosynthesis of high quality
polyhydroxyalkanoate co-and terpolyesters for potential medical application by the archaeon Haloferax
mediterranei .Biomater. Regen. Med. 2007 ,253, 33–39.
153. Chen, W.H.; Tong, Y.W. PHBV microspheres as neural tissue engineering scaffold support neuronal cell
growth and axon-dendrite polarization. Acta Biomater. 2012 ,8, 540–548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Hazer, D.B.; Kılıçay, E.; Hazer, B. Poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate)s: Diversiﬁcation and biomedical applications.
Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2012 ,32, 637–647. [CrossRef]
155. Li, H.Y.; Chang, J. Preparation, characterization and in vitro release of gentamicin from PHBV /wollastonite
composite microspheres. J. Controlled Release 2005 ,107, 463–473. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Coutinho, D.F.; Pashkuleva, I.H.; Alves, C.M.; Marques, A.P .; Neves, N.M.; Reis, R.L. The effect of chitosan
on the in vitro biological performance of chitosan poly (butylene succinate) blends. Biomacromolecules 2008 ,
9, 1139–1145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Shih, W.J.; Chen, Y.H.; Shih, C.J.; Hon, M.H.; Wang, M.C. Structural and morphological studies on
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate acid) (PHB)/Chitosan drug releasing microspheres prepared by both single and
double emulsion processes. J. Alloys Compounds 2007 ,434–435 , 826–829. [CrossRef]
158. Gao, X.; Chen, J.C.; Wu, Q.; Chen, G.Q. Polyhydroxyalkanoates as a source of chemicals, polymers, and
biofuels. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2011 ,22, 768–774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Ravindran, R.; Jaiswal, A.K. Exploitation of food industry waste for high-value products. Trends Biotechnol.
2016 ,34, 58–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
160. Zhang, X.; Luo, R.; Wang, Z.; Deng, Y.; Chen, G.Q. Application of ( R)-3-hydroxyalkanoate methyl esters
derived from microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates as novel biofuels. Biomacromolecules 2009 ,10, 707–711.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Wang, S.Y.; Wang, Z.; Liu, M.M.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, X.J.; Chen, G.-Q. Properties of a new gasoline oxygenate
blend component: 3-hydroxybutyrate methyl ester produced from bacterial poly-3-hydroxybutyrate.
Biomass Bioenergy 2010 ,34, 1216–1222. [CrossRef]
162. Bond-Watts, B.B.; Bellerose, R.J.; Chang, M.C.Y. Enzyme mechanism as a kinetic control element for designing
synthetic biofuel pathways. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2011 ,7, 222–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Chen, Q.; Xiao, S.J.; Zhang, R.J.; Guo, F.M.; Wang, K.L.; Zhu, H.W. Spindle-Like hierarchical carbon structure
grown from polyhydroxyalkanoate/ferrocene/chloroform precursor. Carbon 2016 ,103, 346–351. [CrossRef]
164. Wang, S.; Li, Y.; Xiang, H.; Zhou, Z.; Chang, T.; Zhu, M. Low cost carbon ﬁbers from bio-renewable
lignin/poly(lactic acid) (PLA) blends. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2015 ,119, 20–25. [CrossRef]
©2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).