ARTICLE IN PRESS
Collagen as a carrier for on-site delivery of antibacterial drugs
Zbigniew Ruszczaka,b,*, Wolfgang Friessc
aINNOCOLL GmbH, Saal, Germany
bDermatology, UMDNJ, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, USA
cDepartment of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of Munich, Munich, Germany
Received 18 August 2003; accepted 26 August 2003
Abstract
Due to its biocompatibility and well-established safety profile, collagen represents a favourable matrix for on-site drug
delivery. In this review, we summarize some of the recent developments and applications of collagen as a biomaterial in drug
delivery systems for antibiotics, especially gentamicin. The main clinical and experimental applications covered include:
treatment and prophylaxis of bone and soft tissue infections, wound healing, as well as ophthalmic and periodontal treatment.Advantages of local drug application and the rationale of use local drug delivery systems for adjuvant (ancillary) therapy arediscussed. Recent efforts in the use of collagen and collagen-synthetic polymer composites for controlled drug delivery as well
as collagen-based diffusion membranes for prolonged drug release have also been included in this review.
D2003 Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved.
Keywords: Collagen; Collagen sponge; Antibiotic; Gentamicin; Wound healing; Ophthalmology; Periodontology; Collagen membrane;
Collagen/PLGA composite
Contents
1. Introduction ....................................................... 0
1.1. Rationale for local antibiotic delivery ......................................... 0
1.2. Carrier materials for local antibiotic delivery ..................................... 0
2. Collagen carriers for local delivery of antibacterial drugs .................................. 0
2.1. Drug release characteristics from collagen matrices and clinical experience in wound healing ............... 0
2.2. Clinical experiences in the use of collagen for local antibiotic delivery in ophthalmology ................. 0
2.3. Clinical experiences in the use of collagen for local antibiotic delivery in odontology. .................. 0
2.4. Diffusion restricted collagen sponge matrices ..................................... 0
2.5. Collagen/PLGA composite .............................................. 0
3. Future and perspectives .................................................. 0
References ......................................................... 0
0169-409X/$ - see front matter D2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.addr.2003.08.007* Corresponding author. Innocoll Inc., Innocoll GmbH, European Research and Development Center, Donaustr. 24, D-93342 Saal-Donau,
Germany. Fax: +49-9441-68600.
E-mail address: ruszczak@innocoll.de (Z. Ruszczak).www.elsevier.com/locate/addr
ADR-01272Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1. Introduction
Collagen is of particular interest as a natural poly-
mer for drug delivery since it is a major naturalconstituent of connective tissue and a major structuralprotein of any organ. Collagen is unique in its differentlevels of structural order: primary, secondary, tertiary
and quaternary. In vivo, collagen molecules form
fibers having a specific internal and structural orien-tation and strengthened together by two types ofcovalent cross-linking: intramolecular and intermolec-ular [1]. Intermolecular cross-linking is essential to
form macromolecular fibers and, consequently, for itsmechanical stability and other physical characteristics[2–4] . Biomaterials made of collagen offer several
advantages: they are biocompatible and non-toxic and
have well-documented structural, physical, chemical,biological and immunological properties [5–7] . Addi-
tionally, drug release kinetics can be influenced bymodification of the matrix characteristics (porosity,density) or by different chemical treatment regimesaffecting its degradation rate (see [2]).
It is important to define the term collagen before
discussing its potential delivery matrix properties.
Unfortunately, the term collagen is not consistentlyused in the literature. In many publications gelatin, athermally degraded collagen-derived product whichhas lost many properties of ‘‘real collagen’’ is alsonamed ‘‘collagen’’. The current main sources of col-lagen are animal skin, mostly bovine or porcine, orAchilles tendons, mostly bovine or equine. It has to be
stressed that collagen properties, i.e. mechanical
strength, fluid absorption volume or haemostatic ac-tivity differ depending on the animal source andanatomical location of the raw material. In case ofAchilles tendons, this organ consists mostly of colla-gen type-I (approx. 96%) and collagen type-III(approx. 3%) and some other proteins as, e.g. fibro-nectin or glycosaminoglycans. After extraction and
purification, the Achilles tendon-derived collagen con-
sists almost exclusively of collagen type-I. Dependingon preparation and purification technology, skin-de-rived collagen type I material may contain remaindersof fibronectin, elastin, glycosaminoglycans, neural andvascular components and different other collagentypes (e.g. III, IV, VII). Additionally, collagen-basedproducts are manufactured either from a ‘‘native’’, so-
called insoluble collagen (not enzymatically digested,degraded or dissoluted collagen consisting of intact
fibers in which primary through tertiary structuralorder has been preserved) or from soluble collagenwhich has been digested, degraded and dissoluted atextreme pH values or with enzymes leading to partialor complete removal of higher order fibril structures.Consequently, a higher-order in vivo-like structural
order may or may not be achieved industrially.
F i n a l l y ,d i f f e r e n ti nv i t r oa n di nv i v ob e h a v i o r
including drug release profiles may be obtained ifthe collagen product has been cross-linked additionally[8–10] . Furthermore, a sterilization process may ad-
ditionally influence the material properties [10]. The
diversity of collagen products described in the litera-ture and used as drug delivery systems, e.g. as pow-
ders, liquids, solid compressed masses, membranes or
sponges of different porosity and of different collagencontent, may lead to misinterpretation of study results,mostly in terms of mechanical, biological and drugdelivery properties.
In this review, the current progress in the use of
collagen sponges for delivery of antibacterial drugswill be discussed especially from the perspective of
marketed products. In parts of this paper in which our
own scientific, product development and manufactur-ing experience will be discussed, the term collagendescribes a highly purified, bovine or equine Achillestendon-derived, native, fibrillar, insoluble type-I col-lagen without any additional cross-linking.
1.1. Rationale for local antibiotic delivery
Despite a reduction in the risk of contamination due
to improved material, implant, and clean room tech-nique as well as preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis,infections still remain a feared complication in ortho-pedic and traumatic surgery [11]. In many surgical
disciplines, topical administration of antibacterial drugis not possible or practicable, and achieving of a
sufficient antibacterial dose by systemic delivery
may lead to adverse reactions negatively influencingoverall patient’s conditions. Especially the use ofspecific antibiotics may be limited by their highcumulative cell and organ toxicity. Moreover, insuffi-ciency in local blood supply due to post-traumatic orpost-operative tissue damage as well as inadequatetissue penetration or bacterial resistance increase the
local ineffectiveness of systemic antibiotic therapy,
Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 2ARTICLE IN PRESS
both in terms of preventive or curative drug adminis-
tration [12]. This dilemma can be resolved by local
delivery of antibiotics which ideally show: a lowallergization quota, stability at body temperature, tis-sue compatibility, bactericidal activity, a low rate ofbacterial resistance, broad spectrum activity, a low-resorption rate, no interference with wound healing
and chemical stability in the presence of biological
material such as pus or fibrin [13]. Local delivery has
been established successfully in the clinics specificallyfor aminoglycosides like gentamicin [14–16] and
tobramycin [17–20] but has also been studied with
minocycline [21], tetracycline [22], teicoplanin [23]or
sulbactam-cefoperazone [24]. Especially gentamicin
fulfills the abovementioned requirements for potential
local application for the most part. Gentamicin exhibits
bactericidal activity against a broad spectrum of micro-organisms including clinically critical microbes suchasPseudomonas aeruginosa ,Staphylococcus aureus ,
Proteus species, and Enterobacteriaceae. Therefore,
serious infections such as meningitis, endocarditis,pneumonia, or osteomyelitis caused by gram-negativepathogens are treated by parenteral application of
gentamicin, frequently in combination with other anti-
biotics [25]. Gentamicin represents a chemical mixture
with 16 different molecules having been identified[26]. The major components are based on the amino-
cyclitol 2-deoxystreptamine with two additional aminosugars (Fig. 1) . Gentamicin sulfate is characterized by
high solubility in water (>1 g/ml) but low solubility inorganic solvents (0.678 mg/ml in chloroform, 0.2 mg/
ml in methanol, 0.04 mg/ml in acetone) [27]. Because
of its polar nature, the oral resorption rate and thetissue penetration of gentamicin are poor and it islargely excluded from most cells [25]. Consequently,
tissue concentrations are lower than the correspondingplasma levels [28]. High-tissue concentrations are only
found in the renal cortex and in the endolymph andperilymph of the inner ear [29]. The incidence of
nephro- and ototoxicity has been attributed to thisaccumulation [30]. Gentamicin was approved by the
FDA in 1966. Against gram-negative aerobic rods,
aminoglycosides exhibit ‘‘concentration-dependentkilling’’ and a ‘‘post-antibiotic effect’’ (PAE). ‘‘Con-centration-dependent killing’’ describes the principlethat bactericidal effects increase as the concentrationincreases. PAE reflects the suppression of bacterialgrowth continues after the antibiotic concentrationfalls below the bacterial MIC. The post-antibiotic
effect can be bacteria specific, as well as drug specific
[31]. The PAE of aminoglycosides is short for most
gram-positive organisms ( < 2 h) and longer for gram-negative organisms (2–7 h), such as Escherichia coli ,
K. pneumoniae , and Ps. aeruginosa . Both of these
phenomena are being exploited in designing dosageregimens that employ higher doses administered atlonger intervals [31].
Approximately 30 to 60 min after intramuscular
injection, peak concentrations in plasma of approxi-mately 2 to 4 mg/l are reached. The therapeutic levelranges from 4 to 12 mg/l. Although it has not been yetestablished exactly what plasma concentration is toxic,careful drug monitoring is strongly recommended withan upper limit of 10–12 mg/l and a lower limit ofapproximately 2 mg/l ( t
1/2 plasma f2h )[29]. Based on
an intravenous injection or infusion every 8 h (3 /C21t o
2 mg/kg per day), the serum concentration in themiddle of the application interval is used to discrim-
Fig. 1. Structural formula of the gentamicin complex.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 3ARTICLE IN PRESS
inate microorganisms for their susceptibility to genta-
micin [32]. Accordingly, microbes with a minimal
inhibitory concentration (MIC) smaller or equal to thatconcentration at either low dose therapy - called thebreak point [33] - of 1 mg/l or at maximum dose
therapy of 4 mg/l are considered ‘‘sensitive’’ or ‘‘mod-erately sensitive’’, respectively [13]. Microorganisms
with a MIC higher than 4 mg/l are rated resistant. A
study testing more than 250,000 isolates from patientsshowed that the number of resistant microbes was upto 6% for Enterobacteriaceae, 10% for S. aureus and
Ps. aeruginosa , 20% for coagulase-negative Staphy-
lococci and 90% for Escherichia faecalis [16]. The
corresponding MIC for gentamicin-resistant sampleswas analyzed, and collectively, 62% of the resistant
isolates were inhibited by 16 mg/l gentamicin whereas
5% were resistant to even 64 mg/l. Gentamicin isactive against Enterobacteriaceae organisms includingE. coli ,Proteus ,Klebsiella ,Serratia ,Enterobacter,
andCitrobacter . In general, Ps. aeruginosa is usually
sensitive to gentamicin, although considerable vari-ability in its susceptibility exists. Other pseudomonalspecies also may be susceptible but are usually less so
than Ps. aeruginosa .S. aureus as well as many strains
ofStreptococcus are sensitive [34]. The main mecha-
nism of resistance to gentamicin is inactivation of theaminoglycoside by bacterial enzymes [29]. As could
be shown, there is a rather high number of patientswith at least partial resistance [16]. Secluded foci of
infection are difficult to treat systemically with genta-micin due to the extremely low concentrations in this
tissue of low blood supply and the limitation of the
gentamicin plasma levels by its vestibular, cochlear,and renal toxicity.
1.2. Carrier materials for local antibiotic delivery
The consequent need for local drug delivery has
been recognized since many years. During the last
decades, different forms of local drug delivery have
been used. The most common and simple way was tospread the drug in a powder form over the wound areaafter an extensive debridement and before woundclosure [35]. Consequently, high local concentrations
for a short period of time are achieved which poten-tially result in tissue damage. Another approach wasto applied drugs in liquid form by injection or
irrigation or, to extend the effectiveness by continuousperfusion. However, this method is labor intensive
and requires experienced nursing staff to avoid leak-age and drain blockage. Furthermore, the use ofimplantable pumps which can be refilled percutane-ously is described [36]. An additional method used
was to soak the cotton gauze or linen operativematerial with the drug and leave it in the wound until
the final closure. This procedure is still in use in many
countries to minimize the post-operative risk of infec-tion, e.g. in dirty abdominal wounds or in traumapatients.
The first step to standardized commercially avail-
able antibiotic delivery systems has been made early1970s. Buchholz and Engelbrecht [37] reported a
technique of local antibacterial therapy in treatment
of bone infection. The concept involved the prophy-
lactic placement of antibiotic-impregnated beadsmade from polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) bonecement into the bone cavity. Addition of macrolideantibiotics especially gentamicin to acrylic cementallows for sustained postsurgical anti-infectious treat-ment. However, the compression strength of cementcan be affected by added antibiotic [38,39] . Drug
release is typically extended for periods of weeks to
months and incomplete [40–42] . Bunetel et al. [43]
demonstrated a biphasic release with primary half-lives of 2.7 h in drainage fluid and 7.16 h in urine andsecondary half-lives of 13.5 and 47.12 h, respectively.The exothermic nature of the curing process of thecement assisted the antimicrobial effect of the antibi-otic. Besides the factors mentioned previously (see
Section 1.1), the selection of the antibiotic agents
suitable for use in PMMA bone cement was restrictedby (i) adequate water solubility to permit diffusion ofthe antibiotic from the cement, (ii) short-term heatstability at temperatures up to 100 jC which occur
frequently when the powdered polymer catalyst ismixed with the liquid monomer to form the bonecement and (iii) a bactericidal effect at low doses in
order to avoid any adverse effect of higher drug
loading on the mechanical properties of the bonecement. This initial use of antibiotic-impregnatedbone cement in the treatment of osteomyelitis wasvery successful with relatively few disadvantages, asfollows. First, the use of cement blocks inhibiteddrainage of secretions from the debridement area.Secondly, the same cement was also very difficult to
remove if redebridement was necessary.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 4ARTICLE IN PRESS
To overcome these drawbacks, a system with
antibiotic-impregnated cement beads strung on steelsurgical wire has been developed. These bead chainswere flexible and were impregnated with gentamicin.The antibiotic beads were designed to treat localizedinfections residing in bone and soft tissues [44–46] .
In the following years, gentamicin-impregnated
PMMA beads have been commercialized in Europe
under the trade name Septopal R. The product has not
been approved in the US. Based on this development,many US surgical and orthopedic centers started toprepare their own bone cement beads containingtobramycin, another FDA-approved aminoglycoside,to support systemically given drug by local adminis-tration. These homemade beads are now a non-
approved standard in local drug delivery in trauma,
orthopedics and soft tissue infections [47,48] . The
most substantial disadvantage of these bead systemsis the need to remove the beads after the infectionhas been treated. This removal surgery is usuallymore difficult than the implantation because of localtissue scaring and adhesion and may lead to postop-erative infection due to both the patient local and
systemic condition. In addition, the second procedure
poses the risk of additional pain, anaesthetic compli-cations, and inferring extra costs. Recently, a Dutchgroup of scientists has found that despite of antibioticrelease, beads act as a biomaterial surface at whichbacteria preferentially adhere, grow and potentiallydevelop antibiotic resistance [49]. Extensive culture
procedures indicated the presence of bacteria on
gentamicin-loaded beads in 18 of the 20 patients.
Nineteen of twenty-eight bacterial strains isolatedwere gentamicin resistant and cultures from threepatients yielded highly gentamicin-resistant sub-pop-ulations. In vitro release tests under sink-conditionsrevealed that gentamicin liberation from PMMAbeads increased steadily for several weeks (Fig. 2)
[50]. In vivo, PMMA beads slowly liberate gentami-
cin resulting in exudate levels of approximately 30
mg/l within the first day postoperatively and providelocal concentrations of approximately 5 mg/l forseveral weeks [51,52] . These levels are well above
the concentrations necessary to inhibit sensitive andmoderately sensitive ethiologically important patho-gens, whereas resistant microbes may not be affected.The effect in tissue approximately 1–2 mm away
from the implant, where the concentration will bemuch lower, is still unclear [13]. Following implan-
tation of PMMA beads, recurrence of infection mostlikely occurs within the first 2 weeks after surgery[53].
Inorganic materials like calcium sulfate or calcium
phosphate both as particles and cements can be utilizedto delivery antibiotics at bony sites for a few weeks’periods as well [18,54,55] . The addition of an antibi-
otic to cement may negatively affect their consistency
and porosity [55,56] . Carriers based on biodegradable,
synthetic polymers like polylactic acid, polyglycolic–polylactic acid, poly(ortho esters), polyhydroxybuty-rate–co-hydroxyvalerate have only been tested in afew studies. The systems studied were either mono-lithic implants [50,57] or microparticulate [58,59] . One
of the most advanced biodegradable synthetic systems
is Septacin R, a polyanhydride implant containing
gentamicin sulfate for osteomyelitis treatment. Thesystem has recently been reviewed by Li et al. [60].
Polymer-drug pellets are prepared by extrusion, pel-letizing and injection molding and g-irradiation. In
vitro and in vivo release sustains for approximately 4weeks. A similar gentamicin containing local deliverysystem has been described by Yang et al. [61]. The
authors used poly(oleic/linoleic acid dimmer: sebacic
acid (PolyOAD/LOAD:SA) loaded with 20% of gen-tamicin to form implantable beads. In an in vitrodissolution study, the gentamicin concentration peakwas found on day 2. The concentrations slowly de-creased and considerable amounts of gentamicin werestill released on day 50. From day 2 to day 50, the
Fig. 2. Gentamicin release in vitro from PMMA beads (Septopal R)
(modified from Ref. [50] ).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 5ARTICLE IN PRESS
gentamicin concentration in the releasing fluids was
from 59- to 42128-fold and 1.8 to 1314-fold of theMIC for S. aureus andE. coli , respectively. Further-
more, hydrogel-type systems based on fibrin glue orcalcium alginate have been tested in vivo and increasedlocal antibiotic levels and activity could be demon-strated [15,62–64] . Another recently introduced mod-
el describes gentamicin coating of metal implants as a
way to reduce postoperative complications [65]. In this
animal study, 10% gentamicin-loaded poly(
D,L-lac-
tide) (PDLLA) coating of orthopedic devices havebeen tested in preventing implant-related bacterialosteomyelitis. Bacteriological and radiological as wellas histological signs of infection were significantlyreduced in the gentamicin-coated group compared to
controls.
In the early 1980s, another commercial drug deliv-
ery system for antibiotics has been developed. Thissystem utilized a collagen sponge matrix as a carrierfor gentamicin and has two main advantages: (i) itleads to a very high local drug level without achievingsystemic drug concentration, and (ii) is fully biocom-patible and biodegradable which eliminates the need of
secondary surgery to remove a carrier. In the following
sections, this paper will subsequently provide a sys-tematic review of collagen as a drug carrier for anti-infective drug mostly in trauma, orthopedics, softtissue infection, dirty abdominal surgery and woundhealing.
2. Collagen carriers for local delivery of
antibacterial drugs
2.1. Drug release characteristics from collagen
matrices and clinical experience in wound healing
For local antibiotic delivery, the goal should be able
to maintain the highest possible, but not toxic, local
drug concentration without achieving systemic effects.
This can be achieved by physical and possibly alsochemical incorporation of the drug into a collagenmatrix in the course of the manufacturing process toassure drug immobilization. Drugs may be complexedto collagen through direct binding of the drug to freeamino or carboxylic groups of the collagen molecule[5]. Drug release occurs by diffusion from a collagen
matrix implanted or injected as such or polymerizedafter intra-tissue injection [5,6,16] . For example, a
tetracycline solution injected subcutaneously reacheda maximum serum concentration after 3 h whichslowly decreased within the next 20 h. When the sameamount of tetracycline solution was soaked into acollagen sponge and inserted into a natural bodycavity, the drug release was detected over a period of
14 days resulting in a relatively constant serum con-
centration of the drug [5].
This approach forms the principle of a currently
marketed collagen-based product designed for on-sitedelivery of gentamicin. This product has been primarilyapproved and marketed in Europe and is now availablealso in many different counties worldwide (manufac-turer: Innocoll, Saal/Donau, Germany, distributors: i.e.
Sulmycin R-Implant, Garacol R, Gentacoll R,G a r a -
mycinR-Schwamm, Collatamp R-G, Collatamp R-EG,
etc., Schering-Plough (USA) and its local subsidiariesor Collatamp R-G, Collatamp R-EG, Syntacoll (Swit-
zerland)). The matrix which delivers the drug is abiocompatible and locally re-modelable, partiallyclose-porous sponge in which the drug is incorporated.The design of the sponge and the drug incorporation by
colyophilization allow a uniform distribution of the
drug within the spongy matrix and assure an equal drugdose applied per square centimeter of the treatedsurface (Fig. 3) . Pore size of collagen sponges can be
adapted by the lyophilization process [66]. The colla-
gen used may be of either bovine or equine origin and isisolated from Achilles tendons. Collagen sponges usedfor the local gentamicin delivery of antibiotics have
been designed to assure a specific drug kinetic and
prevent potential development of resistance. Theunique character of the collagen matrix provides fivemajor advantages: (a) partial open porosity for quickrelease of the drug after implantation into the tissue, (b)partial close porosity for ‘‘secondary’’ release of thedrug enclosed within pores, (c) ‘‘tertiary’’ release of thedrug partially immobilized within the fibrillar collagen
structure, (d) a three-dimensional structure which
works as a ‘‘natural’’ distance barrier between the drugincorporated into the sponge and the surroundingenvironment and (e) a network which enhances cellpenetration and new tissue formation. Consequently,the collagen matrix provides both rapid and prolongedgentamicin release.
Pharmacokinetic data collected from over 1500
patients with either soft tissue-related or bone-relatedZ. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 6ARTICLE IN PRESS
infections demonstrate that surgical implantation of 1
to 5 gentamicin–collagen sponges which correspondsto a drug dose (gentamicin sulfate) of 200 to 1000 mg(depending on wound size, by always constant drugamount applied per square centimeter of wound area)which generated very high concentrations of gentami-cin (170–9000 Ag/ml) in the local tissue (depending of
a local tissue vascularization level and anatomical
localization). These levels of antibiotic, which are
achieved within 24 h following implantation of thesponges into the surgically debrided site, are wellabove the established MIC for gentamicin-sensitiveor low-sensitive organisms (4 and 8 Ag/ml, respective-
ly). At the same time, systemic levels of gentamicinremained well below the established toxicity thresh-olds of 10–12 Ag/ml for peak values and fell below 2
Ag/ml by 24 h for all patients evaluated. An example of
the in vitro and in vivo release profile of the product isshown in Fig. 4a and b . In vitro, the aminoglycoside is
rapidly release due to fast dissolution from the porousmatrix and liquid exchange with the incubation medi-um. The sustained in vivo release profile should assuretotal eradication of pathogenic bacteria from the woundarea by wound surface and volume-related manner
[67–69] . This release kinetic cannot be achieved using
local drug injection or powder spreading or drugloaded polymer beads. Despite the high local drugconcentration after in vivo administration of colla-gen–gentamicin sponges, significant or therapeuticserum gentamicin levels are not reached (Fig. 4c) .
Consequently, systemic side effects or cumulativeeffects with collagen–gentamicin implants have notbeen reported for more than 1 million patients treated.The efficacy of the gentamicin–collagen sponge in thetreatment and prevention of soft tissue-related infec-tions is supported by data from 661 patients whoreceived treatment with the gentamicin–collagen
sponge primarily for intra-abdominal-related surgeries
or wound infections following surgical procedures ortraumatic events. Approximately, 40% of these patientshad clean-contaminated or contaminated surgical pro-cedures. In the majority of cases, one to three sponges(corresponding to 200 to 600 mg of gentamicin sulfate,2.0 mg/cm
2of the sponge) were used. The combined
results of the randomized, controlled studies in these
patient populations yielded a positive outcome in favor
of the gentamicin–collagen sponge: 95.6% comparedwith 72.5% of patients healed by either primary inten-tion or without evidence of post-operative infection.Additionally, two controlled, parallel-group studiesshowed a reduction in duration of hospital stay by15% and 22%, respectively, when collagen–gentami-cin sponges ware used to support standard therapy.
Frequently, soaking of collagen sponges with anti-
bacterial drug containing solution is described [70,71] .
However, there is a significant difference whether thedrug is immobilized in a collagen matrix by immersionbefore use, by immersion and subsequent drying or by
Fig. 3. Commercially available collagen–gentamicin sponge (200 mg gentamicin sulfate and 280 mg highly purified native fibrillar collagen).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 7ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 4. (a) In vitro drug release profile from one collagen–gentamicin sponge (200 mg gentamicin sulfate and 280 mg collagen) collected by
standard EP/USP dissolution method; (b) local concentration of gentamicin in soft tissue (after implantation of 3 units of Sulmycin R-Implant,
total dose of 600 mg gentamicin sulfate), and (c) serum concentrations after implantation of three collagen–gentamicin sponges (Sulmycin R—
Implant, total dose of 600 mg gentamicin sulfate) into postoperative abdominal wound.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 8ARTICLE IN PRESS
incorporation of the drug into collagen dispersion
during the manufacturing process of a sponge or amembrane. A comparison study of five different anti-biotics (gentamicin sulfate, cefotaxim, fusidic acid,clindamicin, and vancomycin) ‘‘immobilized’’ in apre-prepared collagen sponge by soaking demonstratedthat drug was released completely within mostly 3–4
days if tested in adapted dissolution test [70]. Only in
case of gentamicin sulfate that dissolution continued upto day 7 and retained appropriate bacterial grow inhi-bition, regardless of what preparation was used (im-mersed in antibiotic solution or lyophilized sponge).This specific release of gentamicin cannot only beattributed to an ionic interaction between the aminogroups of the gentamicin and the carboxyl groups of the
collagen, since the same interaction occurs also in the
case of clindamycin and cefotaxime. Both drugs had,however, much shorter release time of only 1 day. Thisbinding of gentamicin sulfate to collagen fibersrequires further investigation [70].
Another way to achieve prolonged release of the
drug has been demonstrated by a product utilizingchemically modified antibiotics to decrease its water
solubility and—consequently—to prolong its local
bioavailability. Recently, a medical device (Septo-collR, Merck Biomet, Berlin, Germany) ancillary uti-
lizing two gentamicin salts, sulfate (high solubility) andcrobefat (low solubility) to protect collagen hemostaticsponge from potential infection has been approved inEurope. In this combination, gentamicin sulfate isreleased over a few hours while gentamicin crobefat
remains in place over days [72].
2.2. Clinical experiences in the use of collagen for
local antibiotic delivery in ophthalmology
The need to prolong the presence of the drug in the
tear pool has been recognized since many years.Diverse systems have been proposed to prevent quick
wash out of the drug. Some authors evaluated the
therapeutic effect of soft contact lenses on antibioticdelivery to the cornea [73,74] . Later in 1980, collagen
shields have been introduced as a drug delivery systemfor ophthalmic applicable antibiotics. The drugs ofchoice were gentamicin, widely used for treatment ofocular infections, as well as vancomycin. Collagencorneal shields, dry contact lens-shaped films have
been immersed with gentamicin or vancomycin solu-tion, respectively. Additionally, a mixture of gentami-
cin and vancomycin has been used [75]. Experiments
performed both in vitro and in rabbits demonstrated,that presoaked collagen shields released the majorityof gentamicin within the first 30 min, while vancomi-cyn was released gradually over 6 h. In vivo, thisrelease time was longer and the local drug concentra-
tion higher securing the drug dose well above the
therapeutic range. Negative, in particular, cell toxicside effects of the drug to rabbit eye have not beenfound. All of these characteristics in combination withthe potential for improvement of patient comfortduring treatment (i.e. for bacterial keratitis) make thecollagen shields an attractive modality for drug deliv-ery. Additionally to drug release, collagen corneal
shields have been previously found to speed up epi-
thelial cell differentiation and reduce stromal swellingin corneal wounding studies or in human studies aftercataract surgery [76–78] .
Untermann et al. [79] demonstrated that tobramy-
cin was released within 72 h .Collagen shields im-
mersed in two drug concentrations producedsignificantly higher (200 mg/ml) or higher (40 mg/
ml) concentration of antibiotic in the cornea than
subconjunctivally injected drug. However, drug-relat-ed toxic side effects have been observed in the high-concentration group. Local distribution of the drugwas found to be more reproducible and uniform. Alsoin this study, a positive effect of collagen on cornealwound healing has been described. Less promisingresults have been reported if similarly gentamicin-
soaked collagen shields have been used [80]. The
authors concluded that only a fortified topical genta-micin application pathway lead to therapeutic drugconcentration in the aqueous.
In another study, discussing the role of corneal
collagen shields as a drug delivery device for treat-ment of bacterial keratitis, gentamicin eye drops(13.6 mg/ml) and collagen ocular shields soaked with
13.6 mg/ml gentamicin solution for 5 min have been
analyzed [81]. It was found that the single use of
gentamicin-soaked collagen shields does not improvethe treatment if compared to topical delivery offortified antibiotic concentrations by drops every 30min over 24 h. However, if a combination of colla-gen shield (pre-soaked and not pre-soaked with thedrug) with a continuous administration of gentamicin
eye drops has been used, bacterial eradication wasZ. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 9ARTICLE IN PRESS
significantly more effective than in the group treated
with the standard gentamicin drops administrationalone. Collagen corneal shields discussed above havebeen approved by FDA as medical device class-I andlisted in the year 2000. Despite many positiveimpulses coming from different animal studies andfrom studies combining ophthalmic drug and anti-
inflammatory agents [82,83] , collagen ocular shields
containing drugs were never been further developedand approved as a product for treatment of ophthalmicinfections.
2.3. Clinical experiences in the use of collagen for
local antibiotic delivery in odontology
At the end of 1980s, collagen-derived matrices
containing tetracycline have been proposed for treat-ment of periodontal disease. The matrices have beenprepared by mixing 1% of bovine collagen solutionwith either 5 or 10 mg/ml of pulverized tetracycline,placing into plastic molds and air-drying or freeze-drying. Subsequently, collagen membranes have beenchemically cross-linked by immersion with 2% glu-
taraldehyde [84]. It was found that the degree of drug
release could be partially controlled by the collagenconcentration in the matrix and the time of the cross-linking process. If compared to other applications (e.g.intra-pocket drop application), tetracycline immobi-lized in glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen matrixreleased much slower. A therapeutic dose of the drugwas present in the pocket for up to 10 days. In patients
treated with collagen–tetracycline composites for a 4-
week time period in 1-week intervals, microbiologicalstudies demonstrated that bacterial eradication wasmuch more effective and bleeding index improved[85]. The clinical effects of a single application of a
5% metronidazole collagen device in periodontalpockets deeper than 5 mm can be improved in asso-ciation with debridement and without re-enforcement
of home care and hygiene as practiced by the patient at
any time [86].
Recently, PerioChip Rhas been developed in Israel
and approved both in US and Europe. PerioChip Ris a
small chip, rounded at one end, for insertion into theperiodontal pocket to support the standard therapy ofadult parodontitis. PerioChip Ris composed of 2.5 mg
of chlorhexidine-
D-gluconate in a non-porous biode-
gradable matrix of hydrolyzed gelatin cross-linkedwith glutaraldehyde. The product releases chlorhex-
idine subgingivally before and as the chip degradesover a total period of up to 7–10 days. The meanconcentration of chlorhexidine in the gingival crevic-ular fluid (GCF) was 2007 Ag/ml at 2 h and remained
in the range of 1400–1900 Ag/ml for the next 70 h [87].
Chlorhexidine remained at clinically effective levels
(MIC 125 Ag/ml) in the GCF of the periodontal
pockets for over 1 week without detectable systemicabsorption. PerioChip Ris completely degraded by
enzymes within 7 to 10 days and does not need to beremoved. It has been demonstrated that PerioChip R
used as an adjuvant to the classical surgical rootcleaning (SRP) enhance the reduction of pocket depthby approx. 0.4 mm within 6 months if compare to SRP
alone [87,88] .
2.4. Diffusion restricted collagen sponge matrices
Many efforts have been made to sustain antibiotic
release from collagen systems and to obtain the fol-lowing theoretical drug release characteristic: quickrelease in the initial phase following implantation into
the tissue followed by a possibly constant and high
level over a defined time period (e.g. up to 7 days) anda short end phase in which the drug level rapidly drops(Fig. 5) . It is still under discussion if such prolonged
‘‘Minivan-like’’ release model has advantages over thecurrently used products such as collagen gentamicinsponges containing either gentamicin sulfate or com-bination of gentamicin salts (see above). Additionally,
the activity area of the drug released from the product
should be restricted to the place of application and,possibly, to adjacent tissue, but the drug should not beavailable systemically.
Current known ways to change local kinetics in on-
site drug delivery using collagen-based matrices are:(a) increasing collagen content (up to 30%) to makethe matrix more dense and less permeable [89], (b)
cross-linking the matrix to make it less permeable and
longer standing [8,9,84] , (c) changing drug molecule
to make the drug less (water) soluble [72,90] , (d)
using diffusion restrictors in order to prolong thediffusion distance or to create a diffusion barrier[91], and (e) combination with other polymers, e.g.
coating the collagen sponge containing the antibioticadditionally with resorbable poly( a-hydroxy acid)
[92] or addition of anionic polymers such as alginicZ. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 10ARTICLE IN PRESS
acid or pectin [93] (see also Section 2.5). The diffu-
sion restriction approach will be discussed further indetail in this section.
Diffusion restrictors (barriers or multilayer design)
without changing the basic biological parameters ofthe collagen carrier appear to be a promising approach
since chemical modifications of collagen or the drug
can be avoided. Advanced technologies in manufac-turing of collagen-based implants allow to createnovel collagen-based materials, e.g. leather-like col-lagen sheets of different strength, collagen ‘‘pockets’’[94], or ‘‘pillows or tortellini-like’’ and collagen
‘‘sandwich’’-like structures of different permeabilityand porosity as well as collagen tubes and channels
with or without lumen (Fig. 6) [95] . The technology
allows manufacturing of collagen matrices having notonly different porosity and permeability, but alsodifferent wetting time, fluid absorption and drugrelease characteristics.
Preliminary data collected with novel collagen
matrix preparations demonstrated that depending onthe basic collagen content, the way of manufacturing
and applied combination of different matrix variants,
different drug release characteristic may be achieved[95]. For example, variation of compression pressure
at identical temperature and compression time leadsto different release profiles (Fig. 7) . It is important to
stress that the use of thermal compression at hightemperature and high pressure does not negativelyinfluence collagen nativity and main biological func-
tions (e.g. platelets docking capacity, cell growth invitro). As an alternative, a release restriction barrierin form of a collagen pillow cover can be applied tocoat a gentamicin–collagen sponge core. The drugrelease profile is changed significantly and an almost
linear release profile could be achieved (Fig. 8) . This
unique technology has been applied recently fordevelopment of a novel family of collagen-basedmatrices allowing specific drug release kinetic. An-other possibility is to prepare collagen membraneswhich during fluid absorption may expand into asponge-like, three-dimensional structure [91]. Such
matrix can be used to incorporate drug components
which are sensitive to final sterilization, since it may
be pre-fabricated, loaded and finally manufacturedunder sterile conditions.
2.5. Collagen/PLGA composite
Gentamicin release from a porous collagen sponge
is completed in vitro within 1 h and in vivo at well-
perfused sites within 1 to 4 days [10,14,96,97] .
Therefore, in accordance with Ipsen and Wachol-Drewek, an implantable, biodegradable drug deliverysystem based on collagen was developed providingan initial antibiotic dose followed by a sustaineddrug delivery of gentamicin within 1 week [70,98] .
The device was based on biodegradable poly(lac-Fig. 5. A model proposed for an optimal in vivo antibiotic delivery profile (‘‘minivan-like’’ release curve) based on quick initial release assuring
high on-site level that remains constant over a period of approximately 7 days and final quick dose reduction.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 11ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 6. (a) New highly absorbing collagen matrix developed for drug immobilization. Preparation by thermal compression, initial thickness of
0.03 mm. A ‘‘spontaneous’’ soaking of drug solution within 3 s (5.0 /C28.0 cm); (b) collagen tubes; (c) a collagen-based construct containing
both highly absorbing part (core) and low-absorbing part. Each of the parts can contain either in-process immobilized or secondary immobilized
drug component (with permission from Refs. [91,95] ).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 12ARTICLE IN PRESS
tide–co-glycolide) (PLGA) microparticles which
were combined with collagen in order to achieve
their fixation in an implantable drug delivery systempresenting the favourable effect of collagen onwound healing.Preparation of the microparticles was carried out
applying a W/O/W double emulsion technique [99].
An aqueous solution of the antibiotic was mixed withthe organic polymer solution and subsequently trans-ferred into a second aqueous phase. After hardening,
Fig. 8. In vitro drug release kinetic obtained from three different collagen-gentamicin constructs (containing identical drug dose, 200 mg each)
manufactured by thermal compression (identical pressure, time and temperature) using additional barrier (release restrictor) made of a plane
collagen. Type-1 /C2200–collagen/gentamicin sponge covered by one diffusion barrier; Type-2 /C2100–two collagen/gentamicin sponges (a 100
mg) covered by one diffusion barrier; Type 4 /C250–four collagen/gentamicin sponges (a 50 mg) covered by one diffusion barrier. (according to
Ref. [95] , modified)Fig. 7. In vitro drug release kinetic obtained from three different collagen-gentamicin constructs (containing identical drug dose, 200 mg each)
manufactured by different compression parameters. Type-I–10.0 kg/cm2, Type-II–2.5 kg/cm2, Type-4 /C250–2.5 kg/cm2. (according to Ref.
[95], modified).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 13ARTICLE IN PRESS
while stirred, the particles were separated and freeze
dried. This process ensured 15% loading of theparticles with gentamicin to allow for combinationof 5 mg microparticles (containing 0.75 mg gentami-cin) with an aqueous preparation containing 1 mgcollagen dispersed and 0.75 mg gentamicin dissolvedwhich is lyophilized to yield a homogeneous collagen/
PLGA microparticles implant [100] . A 50:50 polymer
mixtures of RG 503 and RG 502H yielded the desiredrelease profile over 1 week. The release of gentamicinwas connected with a decrease in polymer molecularweight and glass transition temperature until a struc-tural breakdown of the particles reaching a criticalmolecular weight of 15,000 Da occurred [100–102] .
At the same time, the water content increased and
reached its maximum after 3 days. Consequently, the
release of gentamicin from 50/50 RG 503/RG 502Hmicroparticles was completed after 7 days. Differentconcentrations, pH values and temperatures of thecollagen dispersion were tested rheologically, micro-scopically and spectroscopically to optimize process-ing of the composite including avoidance of particlesedimentation (Fig. 9) and particle loss upon incuba-
tion in liquid (Fig. 10) [103,104] . The final composite
was prepared using a 1% collagen dispersion, pH 4.5at room temperature (Fig. 11a, b) .
The collagen/PLGA microparticles dispersion with
additional free gentamicin for an initial burst waslyophilized to obtain an implant with microparticlesembedded homogeneously. Freezing the dispersion
with 5 jC/h increased the amount of initially liberated
gentamicin to 35% as compared to 15% to 20% for
the non-processed microparticles whereas the original
release profile could be preserved by freezing with 20jC/h (Fig. 12) [103] . The increase in the initial
liberation of gentamicin was due to longer exposureof the microparticles to the acidic aqueous environ-ment of the collagen dispersion. Additional investiga-tions demonstrated a marked loss of gentamicin frommicroparticles dispersed in the collagen gel at 4 and
22jC(Fig. 13) .A t4 0 jC, this loss was limited to
10% due to closing pores at a temperature above theglass transition temperature as shown microscopically[104] . Ethylene oxide as well as h- and g-irradiation
were tested for sterilization of the collagen/PLGAmicroparticles composite. All methods resulted in adecrease of molecular weight and glass transitiontemperature of polymer raw material and micropar-
ticles [103,105] . In addition, ethylene oxide treatment
yielded aggregation of microparticles leading to asubstantial increase in the initially liberated gentami-cin dose. Furthermore, chemical changes of gentami-cin after ethylene oxide sterilization could beidentified using NMR spectroscopy. Despite of adecrease in the molecular weight and glass transitiontemperature after irradiation, neither morphological
changes of the composites nor changes regarding the
Fig. 9. Sedimentation of PLGA microparticles in collagen
dispersions pH 4.5:0.1% at 22 jC(n), 0.56% at 22 jC(.) and
0.56% at 40 jC(E) (with permission from Ref. [104] ).Fig. 10. Microparticle loss from collagen sponge/PLGA micro-
particles composite in PBS: composites prepared at a freezing rate
of 5jC/h (a) and 20 jC/h (b) at 0.56%/22 jC(E), 1%/22 jC(D),
0.56%/40 jC(n), 1%/40 jC(5) collagen concentration/suspension
temperature (modified from Ref. [103] ).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 14ARTICLE IN PRESS
 
 
Fig. 11. Overview (a) and SEM of cross section (b) of collagen sponge/PLGA microparticles composite (1% collagen dispersion, 22 jC suspension
temperature, 20 jC/h freezing rate) and (c) g-sterilized collagen sponge/PLGA microparticles composite (with permission from Ref. [103] ).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 15ARTICLE IN PRESS
gentamicin release profile from h- and g-sterilized
material were observed. Free radicals, which couldonly be detected in gentamicin drug substance and atmarginal level in gentamicin-loaded microparticles,disappeared within 4 weeks. Additional microbiolog-ical testing verified the microbiological activity ofgentamicin liberated from h-sterilized collagen/PLGA
microparticles composites [104] . Storage at 4 jC/35%
r.h. for 3 months did not influence morphology,molecular weight, glass transition temperature andrelease profiles of microparticles and collagen/PLGAmicroparticles composites. However, storing at 25 jC/
60% r.h. and 40 jC/75% r.h. yielded a marked
decrease of molecular weight and glass transitiontemperature. This effect was due to a higher humidity,
water uptake into polymers and subsequent hydrolysis
of polymers and microparticles. Thus, the collagensponge/PLGA microparticles composite presents anadvancement in collagen carriers from antibioticswhich enables further delay of antibiotic release.The results are encouraging and in vivo testing wouldbe desirable.
Besides these monolithic porous or non-porous
systems, collagen gels [106] as well as collagen
microparticulates have been described in the literature[107,108] . Additionally, collagen-modified hyalur-onan microparticles have been found useful as local
antibiotic carrier [109] .
3. Future and perspectives
There is a growing interest in collagen as a drug
delivery vehicle. During the last 5 years, new develop-ments enhancing mechanical and saving biologicalperformance of collagen have been made. It seems
that the near feature may be a renaissance period for
collagen, an excellent natural, fully biocompatible andbiodegradable drug carrier material. Depending on itsfibrillar and structural nativity, process-controlleddegradation time (e.g. by enzymatic pre-treatmentbefore reconstitution into fibers or by chemicalcross-linking to stabilize the final construct) colla-gen-based products can assure a bright spectrum of
release kinetics. In products designed to have short
diffusion distance or having open porosity, immediate,almost explosive drug release may be achieved. Incontrast, product designed to have long or multilayer(multi-barrier) diffusion distance, having predomi-nantly closed pores, or utilizing high amount ofcollagen which results in long degradation time, canachieve prolonged drug release. These technological
possibilities open a new perspective, especially in
creation of product utilizing antibacterial drug foreither prophylactic or therapeutic use.
Fig. 12. Gentamicin release from collagen sponge/PLGA micro-
particles composites prepared from 1% collagen dispersion (22 jC/5
jC/h (n), 22jC/20jC(5), 40jC/5jC/h (.), 40jC/20jC/h (o));
additionally, original PLGA particles ( /C1/C1/C1) and a composite which
contains an additional 0.75 mg gentamicin bolus per mg collagennon-sterilized ( /C1/C1/C1
q/C1/C1/C1) andg-sterilized ( /C1/C1/C1z/C1/C1/C1).Fig. 13. Gentamicin loss from PLGA microparticles in acidic
environment pH 4.5 at 4–8 jC(5), 22jC(o) and 40 jC(4)
during collagen sponge/PLGA microparticles composite preparation(modified from Ref. [104] ).Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 16ARTICLE IN PRESS
Currently, drug delivery systems containing only
a single antibiotic drug (gentamicin) are available onthe market. The next generation of collagen–drugdelivery system will be focused on both drugcombination and different release profiles which willlead to better infection control. Moreover, togetherwith this development and better understanding of
benefits coming from local drug delivery, some new
collagen-based system may, in selected indications,even replace current standard of systemic antibiotictreatment.
It is important that clinical studies demonstrate the
optimum antibiotic delivery regime as a target. Thetechnical developments in collagen processing as wellas combination of collagen with other materials
should allow to specifically tailor the release rate to
the desired kinetic for local delivery.
References
[1] J.C. Brown, R. Timple, The collagen superfamily, Int. Arch.
Allergy Immunol. 107 (1995) 484–490.
[2] R.J. Todhunter, J.A.M. Wooton, G. Lust, R.R. Minor, Struc-
ture of equine type I and type II collagens, Am. J. Vet. Res.
55 (3) (1994) 425–431.
[3] J.Y . Exposito, C. Cluzel, R. Garrone, C. Lethias, Evolution
of collagens, Anat. Rec. 268 (2002) 302–316.
[4] S.H. Liu, R.S. Yang, R. Al-Shaikh, J.M. Lane, Collagen in
tendon, ligament and bone healing, Clin. Orthop. Res. 318
(1995) 265–278.
[5] M. Chvapil, Industrial uses of collagen, in: D.A.D. Parry,
L.K. Creamer (Eds.), Fibrous Proteins: Scientific, Industri-
al and Medical Aspects, Academic Press, London, 1979,pp. 247–269.
[6] J.A.M. Ramshaw, J.A. Werkmeister, V . Glattauer, Collagen-
based biomaterials, Biotechnol. Rev. 13 (1995) 336–382.
[7] K. Panduranga Rao, Recent developments of collagen-based
materials for medical applications and drug delivery, J. Bio-mater. Sci., Polym. Ed. 7 (7) (1995) 623–645.
[8] J. Angele, J. Abke, R. Kujat, H. Faltermeier, D. Schumann,
Z. Ruszczak, R. Mehrl, M. Nerlich, R. Kinner, C. Englert, R.Mueller, Influence of different collagen species on physico-
chemical properties of crosslinked collagen matrices, Bioma-
terials (2003) (submitted for publication).
[9] E. Lesiak-Cyganowska, D. Sladowski, J. Komender, Modi-
fication of collagen film by certain chemical agents, Arch.
Immunol. Ther. Exp. 49 (2001) 247–251.
[10] W. Friess, Drug Delivery Systems Based on Collagen, Shaker
Verlag, Aachen, 2000, ISBN, 3-8265-6994-6.
[11] E.W. Taylor, Surgical infection: current concerns, Eur. J.
Surg. 163 (S578) (1997) 5–9.
[12] S. Mehta, J.S. Humphrey, D.I. Dchenkmann, A.V . Seaber,T.P. Vail, Gentamicin distribution from collagen carrier,
J. Orthop. Res. 14 (1996) 749–754.
[13] H. Grimm, Bakteriologische und pharmakokinetische As-
pekte der topischen Antibiotikaanwendung, in: A. Stem-
berger, et al. (Eds.), Kollagen als Wirkstofftra ¨ger-Einsatz-
mo¨glichkeiten in der Chirurgie, Verlag Schattauer, Stuttgart,
1989, pp. 33–40.
[14] H.J.T. Rutten, P.H.A. Nijhuis, Prevention of wound infection
in elective colorectal surgery by local application of a gen-tamicin-containing collagen sponge, Eur. J. Surg. 163 (S578)
(1997) 31–35.
[15] V. Iannuccelli, G. Coppi, M. Bondi, M. Pinelli, A. Mingione,
R. Cameroni, Biodegradable intraoperative system for boneinfection treatment: II. In vivo evaluation, Int. J. Pharm. 143
(2) (1996) 187–194.
[16] A. Stemberger, H. Grimm, F. Bader, H.D. Rahn, R. Ascherl,
Local treatment of bone and soft tissue infections with thecollagen–gentamicin sponge, Eur. J. Surg. 163 (S578) (1997)
17–26.
[17] R.W. Lindsey, R. Probe, T. Miclau, J.W. Alexander, S.M.
Perren, The effects of antibiotic-impregnated autogeneic can-cellous bone graft on bone healing, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.
291 (1993) 303–312.
[18] C.L. Nelson, S.G. McLaren, R.A. Skinner, M.S. Smeltzer,
T.J. Roby, K.M. Olsen, The treatment of experimental osteo-
myelitis by surgical debridement and the implantation of
calcium sulfate tobramycin pellets, J. Orthop. Res. 20 (4)(2002) 643–647.
[19] K.J. Hendricks, D. Lane, T.A. Burd, K.J. Lowry, D. Day,
J.G. Phaup, J.O. Anglen, Elution characteristics of tobramy-
cin from polycaprolactone in a rabbit model, Clin. Orthop.Relat. Res. 392 (2001) 418–426.
[20] A. Gonzalez Della Valle, M. Bostrom, B. Brause, C. Harney,
E.A. Salvati, Effective bactericidal activity of tobramycin
and vancomycin eluted from acrylic bone cement, Acta Or-thop. Scand. 72 (3) (2001) 237–240.
[21] S. Galandiuk, W.R. Wrightson, S. Young, S. Myers, H.C.
Polk Jr., Absorbable, delayed-release antibiotic beads re-duce surgical wound infection, Am. Surg. 63 (9) (1997)831–835.
[22] M.P. Singh, R. Brady Jr., W. Drohan, M.J. MacPhee, Sus-
tained release of antibiotics from fibrin sealant, in: D.H.Sierra, R. Saltz (Eds.), Surgical Adhesives and Sealants,Technomic Publ., Lancaster, 1996, pp. 121–133.
[23] I. Yenice, S. Calis, H.S. Kas, M. Ozalp, M. Ekizoglu, A.A.
Hincal, Biodegradable implantable teicoplanin beads for thetreatment of bone infections, Int. J. Pharm. 242 (1–2) (2002)271–275.
[24] M.F. Yagmurlu, F. Korkusuz, I. Gursel, P. Korkusuz, U. Ors,
V. Hasirci, Sulbactam-cefoperazone polyhydroxybutyrate –co-hydroxyvalerate (PHBV) local antibiotic delivery system:
in vivo effectiveness and biocompatibility in the treatment of
implant-related experimental osteomyelitis, J. Biomed. Ma-ter. Res. 46 (4) (1999) 494–503.
[25] M.A. Sande, G.L. Mandell, Antimicrobial agents; the amino-
glycosides, in: A. Goodman Gilman, T.W. Rall, A.S. Nies, P.
Taylor (Eds.), Goodman and Gilman’s—The Pharmacologi-Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 17ARTICLE IN PRESS
cal Basis of Therapeutics, Pergamon, New York, USA, 1990,
pp. 1098–1116.
[26] R. Okachi, T. Nara, The aminoglycosides: properties, biosyn-
thesis, and fermentation, in: E.J. Vandamme (Ed.), Biotech-
nology of Industrial Antibiotics, Marcel Dekker, New York,USA, 1984, pp. 329–365.
[27] B.E. Rosenkrantz, J.R. Greco, J.G. Hoogerheide, E.M. Oden,
Gentamicin, Anal. Profiles Drug Subts. 9 (1980) 295–340.
[28] H. Lorentzen, F. Kallehave, H.J. Kolmos, U. Knigge, J. Bu ¨-
low, F. Gottrup, Gentamicin concentrations in human subcu-
taneous tissue, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 40 (1996)
1785–1789.
[29] D. Adam, W. Christ, Antibiotika und Chemotherapeutika;
antiinfektio ¨ s eT h e r a p i e ,i n :W .F o r t h ,D .H e n t s c h l e r ,W .
Rummel (Eds.), Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Wissen-
schaftsverlag, Mannheim, Germany, 1987, pp. 580–715.
[30] J.M. Aran, J.P. Erre, D. Lima da Costa, I. Debbarh, D. Dulon,
Acute and chronic effects of aminoglycosides on cochlear
hair cells, Ann. N.Y . Acad. Sci. 884 (1999) 60–68.
[31] http://www.medicine.mcgill.ca/cai/meded/drugdb/gentamicin
/gentamicin _db.htm .
[32] DIN-Norm 58940, Medical microbiology—methods for the
determination of susceptibility of pathogens (except myco-
bacteria) to antimicrobial agents (1989).
[33] M.E. Levison, L.M. Bush, Pharmacodynamics of antimicro-
bial agents, Infect. Dis. Clin. North Am. 3 (1989) 415–421.
[34] B.G. Katzung, Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, 8th
ed., McGraw-Hill/Appelton and Lange, New York, 2000,pp. 784–792.
[35] N. Rushton, Applications of local antibiotic therapy, Eur. J.
Surg. 163 (S578) (1997) 27–30.
[36] C.R. Perry, R.L. Pearson, Local antibiotic delivery in the
treatment of bone and joint infections, Clin. Orthop. Relat.
Res. 263 (1991) 215–226.
[37] H.W. Buchholz, E. Engelbrecht, Uber die Depotwirkung ei-
niger Antibiotika bei Vermischung mit dem Kunstharz Pala-
cos, Chirurgie 41 (1970) 511–513.
[38] R.C. Nelson, R.O. Hoffman, T.A. Burton, The effect of anti-
biotic additions on the mechanical properties of acrylic ce-ment, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 12 (4) (1978) 473–490.
[39] W.R. Krause, A. Hofmann, Antibiotic impregnated acrylic
bone cements: a comparative study of the mechanical proper-ties, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. 4 (4) (1989) 345–361.
[40] E. Diez-Pena, G. Frutos, P. Frutos, J.M. Barrales-Rienda,
Gentamicin sulphate release from a modified commercial
acrylic surgical radiopaque bone cement: I. Influence of thegentamicin concentration on the release process mechanism,Chem. Pharm. Bull. 50 (9) (2002) 1201–1208.
[41] H. van de Belt, D. Neut, D.R.A. Uges, W. Schenk, J.R. van
der Mei, H.C. van der Mei, H.J. Busscher, Surface rough-ness, porosity and wettability of gentamicin-loaded bone ce-
ments and their antibiotic release, Biomaterials 21 (19)
(2000) 1981–1987.
[42] L. Bunetel, A. Segui, F. Langlais, M. Cormier, Osseous con-
centrations of gentamicin after implantation of acrylic bone
cement in sheep femora, Eur. J. Drug Metab. Pharmacokinet.
19 (2) (1994) 99–105.[43] L. Bunetel, A. Segui, M. Cormier, E. Percheron, F. Langlais,
Release of gentamicin from acrylic bone cement, Clin. Phar-macokinet. 17 (4) (1989) 291–297.
[44] K. Klemm, Treatment of chronic bone infection with gen-
tamicin–PMMA chains and beads, Accid. Surg. 4 (1976)1–20.
[45] I.S. Bailey, N.J. Bundred, H.J. Pearson, P.R.F. Bell, Success-
ful treatment of an infected vascular graft with gentamicin
beads, Eur. J. Vasc. Surg. 1 (1987) 143–144.
[46] H. Wahlig, Gentamicin–PMMA: a drug delivered system in
treatment of chronic bone soft tissue infections, J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 10 (1982) 463–465.
[47] N.Y. Gunya, Infections of bone and joints. In: E. Sherry
(Ed.), Electronic Orthopedic Text Book 2003; http://
www.worldortho.com/database/etext/infection.html .
[48] C.E. Wheerlees, Textbook of Orthopedics 2001; http://
www.ortho-u.net/med.htm .
[49] D. Neut, H. van de Belt, L. Stokroos, J.R. van Horn, H.C.
van der Mei, H.J. Busscher, Biomaterial-associated infection
of gentamicin-loaded PMMA beads in orthopaedic revisionsurgery, J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 47 (2001) 885–891.
[50] C. Schmidt, R. Wenz, B. Nies, F. Moll, Antibiotic in vivo/in
vitro release, histocompatibility and biodegradation of gen-
tamicin implants based on lactic acid polymers and copoly-mers, J. Control. Release 37 (1995) 83–94.
[51] S.A ˚. Hedstrøm, L. Lidgren, S. Tørholm, R. O ¨nnerfa ¨lt, Anti-
biotic containing bone cement beads in the treatment of deepmuscle and skeletal infections, Acta Orthop. Scan. 51 (1980)863–869.
[52] P.L. Becker, R.A. Smith, R.S. Williams, J.P. Dutkowsky,
Comparison of antibiotic release from polymethylmatacry-late beads and sponge collagen, J. Orthop. Res. 12 (1994)737–741.
[53] G.H.I.M. Walenkamp, Gentamicin PMMA beads. A clinical,
pharmacokinetic and toxicological study. PhD Thesis, Uni-versity of Nijmegen, Netherlands, 1983.
[54] H. Winkler, O. Janata, C. Berger, W. Wein, A. Georgopoulos,
In vitro release of vancomycin and tobramycin from impreg-nated human and bovine bone grafts, J. Antimicrob. Chemo-ther. 46 (3) (2000) 423–428.
[55] M. Takechi, Y . Miyamoto, K. Ishikawa, M. Nagayama, M.
Kon, K. Asaoka, K. Suzuki, Effects of added antibiotics onthe basic properties of anti-washout-type fast-setting calciumphosphate cement, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 39 (2) (1998)
308–316.
[56] A. Ratier, I. Gibson, S.M. Best, M. Freche, J.L. Lacout, F.
Rodriguez, Setting characteristics and mechanical behaviorof a calcium phosphate bone cement containing tetracycline,
Biomaterials 22 (9) (2001) 897–901.
[57] F. Turesin, I. Gursel, V . Hasirci, Biodegradable polyhydrox-
yalkanoate implants for osteomyelitis therapy: in vitro anti-
biotic release, J. Biomater., Sci., Polym. Ed. 12 (2) (2001)
195–207.
[58] S. Prior, C. Gamazo, J.M. Irache, H.P. Merkle, B. Gander,
Gentamicin encapsulation in PLA/PLGA microspheres in
view of treating Brucella infections, Int. J. Pharm. 196
(2000) 115–125.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 18ARTICLE IN PRESS
[59] D. Sendil, I. Gursel, D.L. Wise, V. Hasirci, Antibiotic release
from biodegradable PHBV microparticles, J. Control. Re-lease 59 (1999) 207–217.
[60] C.L. Li, J. Deng, D. Stephens, Polyanhydride implant for
antibiotic delivery—from the bench to the clinic, Adv. DrugDeliv. Rev. 54 (7) (2002) 963–986.
[61] X.F. Yang, F.D. Zeng, Z.B. Zhou, K.X. Huang, H.B. Xu, In
vitro release and antibacterial activity of poly(oleic/linoleic
acid dimer: Sebacic acid)-gentamicin, Acta Pharmacol. Sin.24 (2003) 306–310.
[62] C.J. Woolverton, J.A. Fulton, S.J. Salstrom, J. Hayslip, N.A.
Haller, M.L. Wildroudt, M. MacPhee, Tetracycline deliveryfrom fibrin controls peritoneal infection without measurablesystemic antibiotic, J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 48 (6) (2001)
861–867.
[63] C.J. Woolverton, K. Huebert, B. Burkhart, M. MacPhee, Sub-
verting bacterial resistance using high dose, low solubilityantibiotics in fibrin, Infection (Munich) 27 (1) (1999) 28–33.
[64] P. Marone, V. Monzillo, C. Segu, E. Antoniazzi, Antibiotic-
impregnated fibrin glue in ocular surgery: in vitro antibacte-rial activity, Ophthalmologica 213 (1) (1999) 12–15.
[65] M. Lucke, G. Schmidmaier, S. Sadoni, B. Wildemann, R.
Schiller, N.P. Haas, M. Raschke, Gentamicin coating of met-
allic implants reduces implant-related osteomyelitis in rats,Bone 32 (5) (2003) 521–531.
[66] M. Geiger, W. Friess, Collagen sponge implants—applica-
tions, characteristics and evaluation: Part I, Pharm. Tech.Europe 14 (2002) 48–56.
[67] W. Attmanspacher, V. Dittrich, A. Schaetzler, H.W. Stedtfeld,
Mittelfristige Ergebnisse nach postoperativen Infektionen an
der Schulter, Unfallchirurg 103 (2000) 1048–1056.
[68] S.J. Humphrey, S. Mehta, A.V . Seaber, T.P. Vail, Pharmaco-
kinetics of a degenerable drug delivery system in bone, Clin.
Orthop. Res. 349 (1998) 218–224.
[69] S. Mehta, J.S. Humphrey, D.I. Dchenkmann, A.V . Seaber,
T.P. Vail, Gentamicin distribution from collagen carrier, J.
Orthoptera Res. 14 (1996) 749–754.
[70] Z. Wachol-Drewek, M. Pfeiffer, E. Scholl, Comparative in-
vestigation of drug delivery of collagen implants saturated inantibiotic solutions and a sponge containing gentamicin, Bi-
omaterials 17 (1996) 1733–1738.
[71] S. Baar, C. Schoerner, M. Roellinghoff, M. Radespiel-
Troeger, H.P. Huemmer, R.T. Carbon, Collagen patches im-pregnated with antimicrobial agents have high local antimi-
crobial efficacy and achieve effective tissue gluing, Infection
29 (2001) 27–31.
[72] U. Gruessner, M. Clemens, P.V. Pahlplatz, P. Sperling, J.
Witte, P. Sperling, H.R. Rosen, Improvement of perineal
wound healing by local administration of gentamicin-im-
pregnated collagen fleeces after abdominoperineal excisionof rectal cancer, Am. J. Surg. 182 (2001) 502–509.
[73] H.E. Kaufman, M.H. Uotila, A.R. Gasset, T.O. Wood, The
medical use of soft contact lenses, Trans. Am. Acad. Oph-thalmol. Otolaryngol. 75 (1971) 361–372.
[74] A.Y . Matoba, J.P. McCulley, The effect of therapeutic soft
tissue lenses on antibiotic delivery to the cornea, Ophtalmol-
ogy 92 (1985) 97–99.[75] R.B. Phienney, S.D. Schwartz, D.A. Lee, B.J. Mondino,
Collagen-shields delivery of gentamicin and vancomycin,Arch. Ophtalmol. 106 (1988) 1599–1604.
[76] J.V. Aquavella, M. del Cerro, P.S. Musco, The effect of a
collagen bandage lens on corneal wound healing, OphtalmicSurg. 18 (1987) 570–573.
[77] G. Renard, N. Bennani, P. Lutaj, C. Richard, C. Trinquand,
Comparative study of collagen corneal shield and subcon-
junctival injection at the end of cataract surgery, J. CataractRefract. Surg. 19 (1933) 48–51.
[78] J.V. Aquavella, J.J. Ruffini, J.A. LaCascio, Use of collagen
shields as a surgical adjunct, J. Cataract Refract. Surg. 14(1988) 492–495.
[79] S.R. Untermann, D.S. Rootman, J.M. HiIl, J.J. Parelman,
H.W. Thompson, H.E. Kaufman, Collagen shield drug deliv-
ery: therapeutic concentrations of tobramycin in the rabbitcornea and aqueous humor, J. Cataract Refract. Surg. 14(1988) 500–504.
[80] N. Baziuk, C.M. Gremillon Jr., G.A. Peyman, H.K. Cho,
Collagen shields and intraocular drug delivery: concentrationof gentamicin in the aqueous and vitreous of a rabbit eyeafter lensectomy and vitrectomy, Int. Ophthalmol. 16 (1992)
101–107.
[81] J. Silbinger, G.A. Stern, Evaluation of corneal collagen shields
as a drug delivery device for treatment of experimental Pseu-
domonas keratitis, Ophthalmology 99 (1992) 889–892.
[82] J.K. Milani, I. Verbkuh, U. Pleyer, H. Sumner, S.A. Adamu,
H.P. Halabi, H.J. Chou, D.A. Lee, B.J. Mondino, Collagenshields impregned with gentamicin-dexamethasone as a po-
tential drug delivery device, Am. J. Ophthalmol. 116 (1993)
622–627.
[83] C. LeBourlais, L. Acar, H. Zia, P.A. Sado, T. Needham, R.
Leverge, Ophthalmic drug delivery systems—recent advan-
tages, Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 17 (1) (1998) 33–58.
[84] M. Minabe, A. Uematsu, K. Nishijima, E. Tomomatsu, T.
Tamura, T. Hori, T. Umemoto, T. Hino, Application of local
drug delivery system to periodontal therapy. Development of
collagen preparations with immobilized tetracycline, J. Pe-riodontol. 60 (2) (1989) 113–117.
[85] M. Minabe, K. Takeuchi, E. Tomomatsu, T. Hori, T. Ume-
moto, Clinical effects of local application of collagen film-
immobilized tertacacline, J. Clin. Periodontol. 16 (1989)291–294.
[86] C.Y. Hitzig, C. Charbit, T. Bitton, M. Fosse, L. Teboul, L.
Hannoun, V . Varonne, Topical metronidazole as an adjunct to
subgingival debridement in the treatment of chronic perio-dontitis, J. Clin. Periodontol. 21 (1994) 146–151.
[87] W.A. Soskolne, P.A. Heasman, A. Stabholz, G.J. Smart, M.
Flashner, M. Flashner, H.N. Newman, Sustained local deliv-
ery of chlorhexidine in the treatment of periodontitis: a multi-center study, J. Periodontol. 68 (1997) 32–38.
[88] M.K. Jeffcoat, K.S. Bray, S.G. Ciancio, A.R. Dentino, D.H.
Fine, J.M. Gordon, J.C. Gunsolley, W.J. Killoy, R.A. Low-enguth, N.I. Magnusson, S. Offenbacher, K.G. Palcanis,H.M. Proskin, R.D. Finkelman, M. Flashner, Adjuvant use
of a subgingival controlled release chlorhexidine chip re-
duces probing depth and improves attachment level com-Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 19ARTICLE IN PRESS
pared with scaling and root planning alone, J. Periodontol. 69
(1998) 989–997.
[89] K. Fujioka, Y . Takada, S. Sato, T. Miyata, Novel delivery
system for proteins using collagen as a carrier material: the
minipellet, J. Control. Release 33 (1995) 307–315.
[90] R. Gericke, H. Wahlig, E. Dingeldein, Flavanone derivatives.
US Patent 4938257 (1990).
[91] Z. Ruszczak, R. Mehrl, J. Jeckle, M. Stoltz, Improved natural
polymer-based material for use in human and veterinarymedicine and method of manufacturing such. (2000). Patent
application No. WO-01/66159.
[92] A. Stemberger, M. Unkauf, D.E. Arnold, G. Blu ¨mel, Drug
carrier systems based on resorbable polyester collagen and/orbiomaterial combinations, in: C.G. Gebelein, T.C. Cheng,
C.C.M. Yang (Eds.), Cosm. Pharm. Appl. Polym., Plenum,
New York, USA, 1990, pp. 263–268.
[93] P. Fleckenstein, H. Wahlig, Dingeldein, E. Wirkstoff-Depot,
Dt. Off. 3429038 (1986).
[94] M. Antiszko, J. Grzybowski, A. Tederko, R. Braczko, High-
absorbing collagen membranes as carriers for antibacterialdrugs, Polim. Med. 26 (3–4) (1996) 21–27.
[95] Z. Ruszczak, R. Mehrl, M. Stoltz, J. Jeckle, Multilayer col-
lagen material for tissue reconstruction (2000). Patent appli-
cation No. WO-01/66162.
[96] L.G. Jørgensen, T.S. Sørensen, J.E. Lorentzen, Clinical and
pharmacokinetic evaluation of gentamicin containing colla-
gen in groin wound infections after vascular reconstruction,Eur. J. Vasc. Surg. 5 (1991) 87–91.
[97] T.S. Soerensen, A.I. Soerensen, S. Merser, Rapid release of
gentamicin from collagen sponge. In vitro comparison with
plastic beads, Acta Orthop. Scand. 61 (4) (1990) 353–356.
[98] T. Ipsen, P.S. Jørgensen, V . Damholt, C. Tørholm, Gentami-
cin – collagen sponge for local applications, Acta Orthop.
Scand. 62 (1991) 592–594.
[99] Y . Ogawa, M. Yamamoto, H. Okada, T. Yashiki, T. Shima-
moto, A new technique to efficiently entrap leuprolide ace-tate into microcapsules of polylactic acid or copoly (lactic/
glycolic) acid, Chem. Pharm. Bull. 36 (1988) 1095–1103.
[100] W. Friess, M. Schlapp, Modifying the release of gentamicin
from microparticles using a PLGA blend, Pharm. Dev. Tech-
nol. 7 (2) (2002) 235–248.
[101] W. Friess, M. Schlapp, Release mechanisms from gentamicin
loaded poly(lactic–co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microparticles,
J. Pharm. Sci. 91 (3) (2002) 845–855.
[102] C.G. Pitt, M.M. Gratzl, G.L. Kimmel, J. Surles, A. Schindler,
Aliphatic polyesters: II. The degradation of poly(
DL-lactide),
poly(epsilon-caprolactone), and their copolymers in vivo,
Biomaterials 2 (1981) 215–220.
[103] M. Schlapp, Kollagen/PLGA-Mikropartikel Komposite zur
gesteuerten Freigabe von Gentamicin, PhD Thesis, Erlangen,
Germany, 2001.
[104] M. Schlapp, W. Friess, Collagen/PLGA microparticle com-
posites for local controlled delivery of gentamicin, J PharmSci., in print.
[105] B. Bittner, K. Ma ¨der, C. Kroll, H.-H. Borchert, T. Kissel,
Tetracycline – HCl loaded poly (
D,L-lactide– co-glycolide)
microspheres prepared by a spray drying technique: influ-ence of g-irradiation on radical formation and polymer deg-
radation, J. Control. Release 59 (1999) 23–32.
[106] M.P. Singh, J. Stefko, J.A. Lumpkin, J. Rosenblatt, The ef-
fect of electrostatic charge interaction on release rates of
gentamicin from collagen matrices, Pharm. Res. 12 (8)
(1995) 1205–1210.
[107] M.S. El-Samaligy, P. Rohdewald, Reconstituted collagen
nanoparticles, a novel drug carrier delivery system, J. Pharm.
Pharmacol. 35 (1983) 537–539.
[108] W. Friess, Verfahren zur Herstellung von Kollagenmikropar-
tikeln. Offenlegungsschrift DE 19934894 (2001).
[109] J.E. Lee, J.C. Park, J.G. Kim, H. Suh, Preparation of collagen
modified hyaluronan microparticles an antibiotic carrier,
Yonsei Med. J. 42 (3) (2002) 291–298.Z. Ruszczak, W. Friess / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews xx (2003) xxx–xxx 20