14 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
 CurrentpSYCHIATRYAs the list of serotonergic agents
grows, recognizing hyperthermicstates and potentially dangerousdrug combinations is criticalto our patients’ safety.How to avoid, identify, & Serotonin syndrome15 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
pSYCHIATRYCurrent
romptly identifying serotonin syn-
drome and acting decisively can keepside effects at the mild end of the spec-
trum. Symptoms of this potentially dangeroussyndrome range from minimal in patients startingselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) tofatal in those combining monoamine oxidaseinhibitors (MAOIs) with serotonergic agents.
This article presents the latest evidence on
how to:
• reduce the risk of serotonin syndrome• recognize its symptoms• and treat patients with mild to life-threatening symptoms.
WHAT IS SEROTONIN SYNDROME?
Serotonin syndrome is characterized by changesin autonomic, neuromotor, and cognitive-behav-ioral function ( T able 1 ) triggered by increased
serotonergic stimulation. It typically results frompharmacodynamic and/or pharmacokinetic in-teractions between drugs that increase serotoninactivity .
1,2PHarvey Sternbach, MD
Clinical professor of psychiatry
UCLA Neuropsychiatric InstituteLos Angeles, CAtreat dangerous drug interactions
continuedactivity or reduced ability to
secrete endothelium-derivednitric oxide may diminish theability to metabolize serotonin.
2
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS
COMBINATIONSMAOIs.
Serotonin syndrome
has been reported as a result ofinteractions between MAOIs—including selegiline andreversible MAO-A inhibitors(RIMAs)—and various sero-tonergic compounds. These
reports have included fatalities,
4some of which
were preceded by severe hyperthermia with com-plications such as disseminated intravascularcoagulation, rhabdomyolysis, and renal failure.Some cases resulted from overdoses, but othersdid not.
Most disturbingly , some cases occurred after
patients had undergone
the traditional 2-week
washout from the MAOI and then
took a serotonergic agent.
5-7In one
instance,8a patient who had discon-
tinued fluoxetine for 6 weeks devel-
oped serotonin syndrome after starting
tranylcypromine. These cases remind
us to be vigilant when switching
patients from irreversible MAOIs to
serotonergic antidepressants or vice
versa—even when recommended wash-out timesare observed—and not to combine these agentsacutely .
Selegiline is a relatively selective MAO-B inhibitor
when used at 5 to 10 mg/d to treat Parkinson’s dis-ease, though it loses MAO-B selectivity whenused at higher dosages to treat depression. In astudy
9of 4,568 patients with Parkinson’s disease
who received selegiline (in dosages selective forMAO-B) plus an antidepressant:
• 11 (0.24%) experienced symptoms “possi-The syndrome was first identified in animal
studies, followed by case reports in humans. Thefirst review—with suggested diagnostic criteria—was published in 1991.
1
Since then, case reports have described sero-
tonin syndrome with many drug combinations,including nonpsychotropics and illicit drugs.Using an irreversible MAOI with a serotonergicagent is the most toxic reportedcombination, but any drug or com-bination that increases serotonincan, in theory , cause serotonin syn-drome ( T able 2 ). A clinical scale
3is
being developed to define and iden-tify this potentially dangerous state,but no consensus has emerged ondiagnostic criteria. 
Pathophysiology. Serotonin syndrome’s symptoms
and signs appear to result from stimulation ofspecific central and peripheral serotonin recep-tors, especially 5HT1a and 5HT2. Others—suchas 5HT3 and 5HT4—may also be involved incausing GI symptoms and may affect dopaminer-gic transmission.
Damaged vascular or pulmonary endotheli-
um, atherosclerosis, hypertension, or hypercho-lesterolemia may increase the risk for serotoninsyndrome. In patients with these common med-ical conditions, reduced endothelial MAO-A
How to recognize serotonin syndromeTable 1
System Clinical signs and symptoms
Autonomic Diaphoresis, hyperthermia, hypertension,
tachycardia, pupillary dilatation, nausea, diarrhea, shivering
Neuromotor Hyperreflexia, myoclonus, restlessness,
tremor, incoordination, rigidity, clonus, teeth chattering, trismus, seizures
Cognitive-behavioral Confusion, agitation, anxiety, hypomania,
insomnia, hallucinations, headache
CurrentpSYCHIATRY16 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003Serotonin
Some fatal MAOI-
serotonergicinteractions occurafter the usual2-week washout
continued on page 19bly” consistent with
serotonin syndrome• 2 others (0.04%) expe-rienced serious serotonin syndromesymptoms.
9
Serotonin syndrome has
been reported when MAO-B-selective doses of selegilinewere combined with meperi-dine
10and nortriptyline.11
This underscores the needfor caution when combiningthese agents, especially iftransdermal selegiline—which would not be MAO-B-selective—becomes avail-able for treating depression.
Moclobemide is a RIMA used
in treating depression andanxiety , with a purportedreduced risk of drug and foodinteractions compared withother MAOIs. Moclobemide is not approved inthe United States, but some patients obtain itelsewhere. 
Joffe and Bakish reported on safely combin-
ing moclobemide with SSRIs,
12and a review of
MAOIs—including RIMAs—indicated thatmoclobemide was involved in only 9 of 226 casesof adverse effects and 3 of 105 cases of definedserotonin syndrome.
13Most moclobemide-SSRI
interactions—including fatalities—involvedoverdoses in suicide attempts, although toxicsymptoms have been reported with clomipramineor meperidine taken at normal dosages.
14,15
In one study ,1618 healthy controls received
fluoxetine, 20 to 40 mg/d, for 23 days, then weregiven moclobemide, up to 600 mg/d, or placeboand observed for adverse effects. No indication ofserotonin syndrome was observed.
Linezolid is an oxazolidinone antibiotic with rela-
tively weak, nonspecific, but reversible MAOinhibition. Cases of potential serotonin syndrome
have been reported with linezolid plus paroxe-tine
17or sertraline.18Patients in each case were
medically ill and taking several other medica-tions, which complicates interpretation of thesereports. Nonetheless, physicians should be awareof the potential risk of serotonin syndrome if thisantibiotic is combined with serotonergic agents.
Atypical antipsychotics. Original diagnostic crite-
ria for serotonin syndrome excluded the additionof, or increase in, an antipsychotic prior to thesyndrome’s onset.
1However, serotonin syndrome
has been reported with combinations of risperi-done with paroxetine,
19olanzapine with mirtaza-
pine and tramadol,20and olanzapine with lithium
and citalopram.21The 5HT2 antagonist effect of
these atypical antipsychotics may have led indi-rectly to overactivation of 5HT1a receptors andserotonin syndrome. In each case, neurolepticmalignant syndrome was ruled out.
19 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
pSYCHIATRYCurrent
Actions Agents
Inhibit serotonin Fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram, 
reuptake escitalopram, paroxetine, clomipramine, 
venlafaxine, fluvoxamine, tramadol, trazodone, nefazodone, tricyclic antidepressants, amphetamine, cocaine, dextromethorphan, meperidine, St. John’s wort 
Increases serotonin Tryptophan
synthesis
Inhibit serotonin Phenelzine, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid,
metabolism selegiline (deprenyl), linezolid, moclobemide
Increase serotonin MDMA (“Ecstasy”), amphetamine, cocaine,
release fenfluramine
Increase serotonin Lithium, ECT
activity
Serotonin receptor Buspirone, sumatriptan and other “triptans” 
agonists used for migraineTable 2
Serotonergic agents and their actionscontinued from page 1620 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
 CurrentpSYCHIATRYnists used in treating migraine. Gardner and
Lynd24concluded that most patients tolerate
sumatriptan with SSRIs or lithium. They feltthey could not ensure the safety of sumatriptanwith MAOIs, however, because sumatriptanelimination depends on hepatic MAO activity .
Among the 5HT1D agonists, using suma-
triptan, zolmitriptan, rizatriptan, or almotriptanwith an MAOI or within 2 weeks of discontinu-ing an MAOI is contraindicated. Naratriptan andTramadol is an analgesic with opioid and sero-
tonin-reuptake inhibiting properties that ismetabolized by the cytochrome P (CYP)-450 iso-enzyme 2D6. Serotonin syndrome has beenreported from interactions between tramadol andsertraline
22and fluoxetine.23Possible causes
include SSRI inhibition of CYP 2D6 metabolismof tramadol, tramadol abuse,
23and multiple co-
administered medications.22
Sumatriptan is one of the selective 5HT1D ago-Serotonin syndrome
Signs and symptoms that differentiate 5 hyperthermic statesTable  3
Hyperthermic state Symptoms/signs Lab findings Cause
Serotonin Typically rapid onset with Nonspecific Increased
syndrome hyperreflexia, tremors, serotonergic tone
myoclonus, diaphoresis, confusion, agitation, or shivering; muscular rigidity not invariably present
Neuroleptic Variable rapidity of onset; Elevated CPK, Blockade of dopamine 
malignant severe muscular rigidity, leukocytosis receptors or abrupt 
syndrome diaphoresis, delirium, withdrawal of a 
fluctuating blood pressure, dopamine agonisttachycardia, extrapyramidalsymptoms
Lethal catatonia Muscular rigidity, Nonspecific Evidence of pre-existing
diaphoresis, delirium, psychosis (bipolar alternating extreme disorder, schizophrenia)excitement and stupor,tremors, hypertension
Anticholinergic Hot, dry skin, pupillary Nonspecific Agents that block central 
toxicity dilatation, tachycardia, and peripheral 
constipation, urinary muscarinic cholinergicretention, confusion, receptorshallucinations, muscularrelaxation 
Malignant Rapid onset, severe Elevated CPK, Inherited disorder
hyperthermia muscular rigidity, potassium, with onset after exposure 
ischemia, hypotension magnesium; to anesthetic agents
DIC; acidosis; that block therhabdomyolysis neuromuscular junction
CPK: creatine phosphokinase            DIC:  disseminated intravascular coagulation21 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
pSYCHIATRYCurrent
MISCELLANEOUS COMBINATIONS
Antiretroviral therapy. Five cases of serotonin syn-
drome were reported in HIV-infected patientstaking fluoxetine with antiretroviral therapy .
31
In particular, the use or addition of ritonavir—
a potent CYP 2D6
inhibitor—was implicated,
though saquinavir, efavirenz, or
grapefruit juice (all primarily CYP
3A4 inhibitors) were also used, sug-
gesting that pharmacokinetic interac-
tions increased serotonergic stimulation.
All five patients were taking multiple
additional medications and had complex
medical and/or psychiatric histories.
Reducing SSRI dosages by one-half
when used with ritonavir has been
recommended to minimize adverse effects froma pharmacokinetic interaction.
Erythromycin was reported to induce serotonin
syndrome in a 12-year-old boy when added toongoing treatment with sertraline, an effectbelieved to be secondary to CYP 3A4 inhibitionof sertraline metabolism.
32
Mirtazapine was reported to induce serotonin syn-
drome in an elderly man 8 days after it was addedto a regimen he had been taking for several yearsto treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
33
Serotonin syndrome also developed in a 12-year-old boy with Ewing’s sarcoma when the 5HT3antagonist ondansetron was added to mirtazap-ine and morphine
34and in an 11-year-old girl
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia whenondansetron was added to fentanyl. Interestingly ,another report
35suggested using mirtazapine to
treat serotonin syndrome caused by serotonergicantagonist effects.
Reports have associated the following combi-
nations with serotonin syndrome, perhaps as theresult of pharmacodynamic and/or pharmacoki-netic interactions:
• paroxetine plus dextromethorphan and
pseudoephedrinefrovatriptan appear less likely to interact with
MAOIs, based on FDA-approved labeling.
MDMA. 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, “Ecstasy”) is widely used as a recre-ational drug, especially at crowded dances(“raves”) and with other drugs.
25This illicit
amphetamine derivative stimu-lates the release of serotonin andinhibits its reuptake.
Kaskey reported the rapid
onset of serotonin syndromewhen a patient taking lithiumand phenelzine ingestedMDMA.
26Signs and symptoms
of serotonin syndrome also maydevelop when MDMA is used alone,facilitated by the high ambient temperatures oncrowded dance floors and the dancers’ relativedehydration.
Fatalities have been blamed on complications
including disseminated intravascular coagulation,rhabdomyolysis, and acute hepatic, renal, or car-diac failure.
25Cases are difficult to interpret
because of uncertainty about whether the victimingested MDMA or another agent or combination.
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum ) contains
numerous constituents, including hypericin andhyperforin, which have been found to inhibit thesynaptic uptake of monoamines, including sero-tonin.
27Which constituents are responsible for its
clinical effect is unclear. Adverse effects frommonotherapy include GI symptoms, confusion,dry mouth, dizziness, headache, fatigue, allergicskin reactions, photosensitivity , and urinary fre-quency .
27
Several cases of purported serotonin syn-
drome have been associated with St. John’s wortalone
28or in combination with SSRIs, nefazodone,
or fenfluramine.29,30GI symptoms and anxiety
were the primary complaints and resolved with-out complications (adjunctive cyproheptadinewas prescribed in two cases, though it is not clearthat this agent contributed to resolution).Cases of purported
serotonin syndromehave been associated with St. John’s wort 22 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
 CurrentpSYCHIATRYHOW TO RECOGNIZE
SEROTONIN SYNDROME
Signs and symptoms of sero-
tonin syndrome can overlapwith those seen in neurolepticmalignant syndrome, lethalcatatonia, malignant hyper-thermia, and anticholinergictoxicity ( T able 3 ),
1,36,37particu-
larly with fever or hyperther-mia (>40.5 °C, 105 °F). Fink
37
has opined that acute neuro-toxic syndromes such as sero-tonin syndrome and neurolep-tic malignant syndrome alsomeet criteria for catatonia andare therefore subtypes of cata-tonia. The types of drugs
involved and clinical findings can help distinguishthe various hyperthermic states ( T able 4 ).
As mentioned above, original diagnostic cri-
teria for serotonin syndrome excluded the addi-tion of, or increase in, an antipsychotic agent.This exclusion was intended to avoid confusionbetween serotonin syndrome and neurolepticmalignant syndrome. Co-administering antipsy-chotic and serotonergic agents requires height-ened awareness for both neurotoxic syndromes.
TREATING MILD TO SEVERE CASES
If a patient develops serotonin syndrome, imme-diately discontinue the suspected agent(s) andobserve carefully . In most cases, serotonin syndrome will resolve within 24 hours.
In mild cases, lorazepam, 1 to 2 mg slow IV
push every 30 minutes until excessive sedationdevelops, may help. In moderate to severe cases,agents that block serotonin’s action are recom-mended,
2including:
• cyproheptadine (4 mg po every 4 hours 
as needed, up to 20 mg in 24 hours)
• propranolol (1 to 3 mg IV every 5 min-
utes, up to 0.1 mg/kg).Serotonin syndrome
• paroxetine plus nefazodone• fluoxetine plus clomipramine and 
buspirone
• fluvoxamine plus buspirone• fluoxetine plus buspirone• amitriptyline plus meperidine and 
venlafaxine
• venlafaxine and dextroamphetamine• fluoxetine plus clomipramine.
Line BottomAny drug or combination that 
increases serotonin can, in theory,cause serotonin syndrome. Avoiding potentially dangerous drugcombinations, monitoring patientscarefully, and identifying and treatingserotonin syndrome early canminimize its morbidity and mortality.
Clinical signs that distinguish hyperthermic statesTable 4
Signs Possible diagnosis
Prominent muscular rigidity Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
malignant hyperthermia, catatonia
Myoclonus/hyperreflexia Serotonin syndrome
Diaphoresis Serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome, catatonia
Hot dry skin Anticholinergic toxicity
Elevated creatine Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
phosphokinase malignant hyperthermia
Family history of Malignant hyperthermia
anesthetic-induced hyperthermia23 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003
pSYCHIATRYCurrent
9. Richard IH, Kurlan R, T anner C, et al. Serotonin syndrome and the
combined use of deprenyl and an antidepressant in Parkinson’s dis-ease. Neurology 1997;48:1070-7.
10. Zornberg GL, Bodkin JA, Cohen BM. Severe adverse interaction
between pethidine and selegiline. Lancet 1991;337:246.
11. Hinds NP , Hillier CE, Wiles CM. Possible serotonin syndrome aris-
ing from an interaction between nortriptyline and selegiline in alady with parkinsonism. J Neurol 2000;247:811.
12. Joffe RT, Bakish D. Combined SSRI-moclobemide treatment of
psychiatric illness. J Clin Psychiatry 1994;55:24-5.
13. Hilton SE, Maradit H, Moller HJ. Serotonin syndrome and drug
combinations: focus on MAOI and RIMA. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin
Neurosci 1997;247:113-19.
14. Dardennes RM, Even C, Ballon N, et al. Serotonin syndrome
caused by a clomipramine-moclobemide interaction. J Clin
Psychiatry 1998;59:382-3.
15. Gillman PK.  Possible serotonin syndrome with moclobemide and
pethidine. Med J Aust 1995;162:554.Case reports attest to these agents’ potential
benefit. Other clinicians have reported using mir-tazapine,
35nitroglycerin,38and chlorpromazine.1
Serotonin syndrome symptoms resolved
within minutes when IV nitroglycerin was usedin a patient with serotonin syndrome and cardiacischemia. The authors hypothesized that nitro-glycerin, via nitric acid, provided an “off ” signalfor serotonin, though they did not advocate thisas a routine treatment.
38
The rationale for using chlorpromazine is its
potential to block serotonin receptors. I wouldavoid the routine use of any antipsychotic agentin this setting, however, to minimize the risk ofneuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Severe cases. Intensive care observation and
treatment is required for patients with severeserotonin syndrome, including evidence ofhyperthermia, DIC, rhabdomyolysis, renal fail-ure, or aspiration. In cases of hyperthermia, sup-portive measures and standard treatmentsinclude muscle relaxants, cooling, and endotra-cheal intubation. 
Severe complications are most likely with
interactions between MAOIs and serotonergicagents, especially in overdose. Therefore, usingsuch combinations requires close observation.
References
1. Sternbach H. The serotonin syndrome. Am J Psychiatry
1991;148:705-13.
2. Brown TM, Skop BP , Mareth TR. Pathophysiology and manage-
ment of the serotonin syndrome. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30:527-33.
3. Hegerl U, Bottlender R, Gallinat J, et al. The serotonin syndrome
scale: first results on validity . Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
1998;248:96-103.
4. Beasley CM Jr., Masica DN, Heiligenstein JH, et al. Possible
monoamine-oxidase inhibitor-serotonin uptake inhibitor interac-tion: fluoxetine clinical data and pre-clinical findings. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1993;13:312-20.
5. Ruiz F. Fluoxetine and the serotonin syndrome. Ann Emerg Med
1994;34:983-5.
6. Gitlin MJ. V enlafaxine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors and the sero-
tonin syndrome. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1997;17:66-7.
7. Kolecki P . V enlafaxine induced serotonin syndrome occurring after
abstinence from phenelzine for more than two weeks. Clin T oxicol
1997;35:211-12.
8. Coplan JD, Gorman JM. Detectable levels of fluoxetine metabolites
after discontinuation: an unexpected serotonin syndrome. Am J
Psychiatry 1993;15:837.Related resources
/trianglert Di Rosa AE, Morgante L, Spina E et al. Epidemiology and
pathoetiology of neurological syndromes with hyperthermia.Funct Neurol 1995;10:111-19.
/trianglert Radomski, JW , Dursun SM, Reveley MA, et al. An exploratory
approach to the serotonin syndrome: an update of clinicalphenomenology and revised diagnostic criteria. Med Hypothesis
2000;55: 218-24.
/trianglert Lane R, Baldwin D. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor-inducedserotonin syndrome: review. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1997;17:208-21.
Almotriptan • Axert 
Amitriptyline • Elavil
Buspirone • Buspar
Chlorpromazine • Thorazine
Citalopram • Celexa
Clomipramine • Anafranil
Cyproheptadine • Periactin
Dextroamphetamine • Dexedrine
Dextromethorphan • Delsym
Efavirenz • Sustiva
Escitalopram • Lexapro
Fenfluramine • Pondimin
Fentanyl • Sublimaze
Fluoxetine • Prozac
Fluvoxamine • Luvox
Frovatriptan • Frova
Isocarboxazid • Marplan
Linezolid • Zyvox
Meperidine • Demerol
Mirtazapine • R emeron
Moclobemide • AurorixNortriptyline • Pamelor
Naratriptan, • Amerge
Nefazodone • Serzone
Olanzapine • Zyprexa
Ondansetron • Zofran
Paroxetine • Paxil
Phenelzine • Nardil
Propranolol • Inderal
Risperidone • Risperdal
Ritonavir • Norvir
Rizatriptan • Maxalt
Saquinavir • Invirase
Selegiline • Eldepryl
Sertraline • Zoloft
Sumatriptan • Imitrex
Tramadol • Ultram
Tranylcypromine • Parnate
Trazodone • Desyrel
Venlafaxine • Effexor
Zolmitriptan • Zomig  DRUG BRAND NAMES
DISCLOSURE
Dr. Sternbach receives research grants from Otsuka America Pharmaceuticals
and Eli Lilly and Co. and owns stock in Merck & Co., Pfizer Inc., andJohnson & Johnson.
continued24 VOL. 2, NO. 5 / MAY 2003Serotonin syndrome
CurrentpSYCHIATRY
16. Dingemanse J, W allnofer A, Gieschke R, et al. Pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic interaction between fluoxetine and moclobemidein the investigation of development of the “serotonin syndrome.”Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998;63:403-13.
17. Wigen CL, Goetz MB. Serotonin syndrome and linezolid. Clin
Infect Dis 2002;34:1651-2.
18. Lavery S, Ravi H, McDaniel WW , et al. Linezolid and serotonin
syndrome. Psychosomatics 2001;42:432-4.
19. Hamilton S, Malone K. Serotonin syndrome during treatment with
paroxetine and risperidone. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2000;20:103-5.
20. Duggal HS, Fetchko J. Serotonin syndrome and atypical antipsy-
chotics. Am J Psychiatry 2002;159:672-3.
21. Haslett CD, Kumar S. Can olanzapine be implicated in causing
serotonin syndrome? Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2002;56:533-6.
22. Mason BJ, Blackburn KH. Possible serotonin syndrome associated
with tramadol and sertraline coadministration. Ann Pharmacother
1997;31:175-7.
23. Lange-Asschenfeldt C, W eigmann H, Hiemke C, et al. Serotonin
syndrome as a result of fluoxetine in a patient with tramadol abuse:plasma level-correlated symptomatology . J Clin Psychopharmacol
2002;22:440-1.
24. Gardner DM, Lynd LD. Sumatriptan contraindications and the
serotonin syndrome. Ann Pharmacother 1998;32:33-8.
25. Parrott AC. Recreational Ecstasy/MDMA, the serotonin syndrome
and serotonergic neurotoxicity . Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2002;
71:837-44.
26. Kaskey GB. Possible interaction between an MAOI and “Ecstasy .”
Am J Psychiatry 1992;149:411-12.
27. De Smet PA. Herbal remedies. N Engl J Med 2002;347:2046-56.
28. Parker V , Wong AH, Boon HS, et al. Adverse reactions to St. John’s
wort. Can J Psychiatry 2001;46:77-9.
29. Lantz MS, Buchalter E, Giambanco V . St. John’s wort and antide-
pressant drug interactions in the elderly . J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol
1999;12:7-10.
30. Beckman SE, Sommi RW , Switzer J. Consumer use of St. John’s
wort: a survey of effectiveness, safety , and tolerability .Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:568-74.
31. De Silva KE, Le Flore DB, Marston BJ et al. Serotonin syndrome
in HIV-infected individuals receiving antiretroviral therapy and flu-oxetine. AIDS 2001;15:1281-5.
32. Lee DO, Lee CD. Serotonin syndrome in a child associated with
erythromycin and sertraline. Pharmacotherapy 1999;19:894-6.
33. Hernandez JL, Ramos FJ, Infante J, et al. Severe serotonin syn-
drome induced by mirtazapine monotherapy . Ann Pharmacother
2002;36:641-3.
34. T urkel SB, Nadala JGB, Wincor MZ. Possible serotonin syndrome
in association with 5HT3 antagonist agents. Psychosomatics 2001;
42:258-60.
35. Hoes MJ, Zeijpveld JH. Mirtazapine as treatment for serotonin syn-
drome. Pharmacopsychiatry 1996;29:81.
36. Theoharides TC, Harris RS, W eckstein D. Neuroleptic malignant-
like syndrome due to cyclobenzaprine? J Clin Psychopharmacol
1995;15:79-81.
37. Fink M. T oxic serotonin syndrome or neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome? Pharmacopsychiatry 1996;29:159-61.
38. Brown TM, Skop BP . Nitroglycerin in the treatment of the sero-
tonin syndrome. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30:191-2.■■    Yes! Please continue my FREE subscription to 
CURRENT PSYCHIATRY .
■■    No, thanks
Name 
Address City State ZIP Specialty Type of Practice Signature 
(required)
Date
(required)
E- mail▼s a practicing psychiatrist
in clinical care, you are 
eligible for a complimentarysubscription.* Send us yourrequest today to guaranteeuninterrupted service.  
Your practice will continue to benefit from
review articles written by the specialty's leadingexperts, plus Primary Care Updates, Cases that Testyour Skills, Out of the Pipeline, and Pearls. You willenjoy the confidence that comes with being armed withpractical, evidence-based information.
Don’t wait!
Fax: 201-782-5319 Please print your name and address 
exactly as they appear on your mailing label. OR
Call: 201-505-5886 OR
E-mail: currentpsychiatry@dowdenhealth.com 
* Your specialty must be registered as psychiatry with the American
Medical Association to qualify for a free subscription to C URRENT
PSYCHIATRY .  Offer limited to psychiatrists in direct patient care, plus 
residents and faculty. If you are not receiving C URRENT PSYCHIATRY but 
meet the qualifications, please contact the AMA at 800-262-3211 toupdate your data.
Like what you’ve seen 
in C URRENT PSYCHIATRY ?▼▼A