-----------------------------------------· Chapter 4 
Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 
Luciana Pereira and Madalena Alves 
Contents 
4.1 Introduction......................................................................... ................................. 112 
4.2 Dye Structure s and Properties ..................................... .............................. ....................... 113 
4.3 Dye Applications ............................................................................................................. . 117 
4.4 Environmental Impact .................................................... .................................................. 117 
4.5 Wastewater Remediation ...................... ........................... · ................................................. 121 
4.5.1 Sorption ................................................... ....................................... ...................... 122 
4.5.2 Coagulation-Floccu lation-Prec ipitation ............................................................... 130 
4.5.3 Membrane Filtration .................................... ......................................... ............... 130 
4.5.4 Electrochemical Wastewater Treatment ........................................... .................... 131 
4.5.5 Advanced Oxidation Processes ................................................ ............................ 132 
4.5.6 Bioremediation ............................................................. .................................... .... 135 
4.6 Products Identificati on and Mechanisms of Dye Degradation .............. .......................... !52 
4.7 Conclusions ...................................................................................................................... !53 
4.8 Future Perspectives ................................... .......................... ......................................... .... !54 
References ............................................... .................................................................................. 154 
Abstract Dyes are an important class of synthetic organic compounds used in many 
industries, especially textiles. Consequently, they have become common industrial 
environmental pollutants during their synthesis and later during fibre dyeing. Tex­
tile industries are facing a challenge in the field of quality and productivity due to 
the globalization of the world market. As the highly competitive atmosphere and 
the ecological parameters become more stringent, the prime concern of the textile 
processors is to be aware of the quality of their products and also the environmen­
tal friendliness of the manufacturing processes. This in tum makes it essential for 
innovations and changes in these processes , and investigation s of appropriate and 
environmentally friendly treatment technologies or their residues. The large-scale 
production and extensive application of synthetic dyes can cause considerable envi­
ronmental pollution, making it a serious public concern. Legislation on the limits of 
M. Alves (CBI) 
IBB-Instituto Biotecnologia e Bioengenh aria, Centro Engenhar ia Biol6gica , Universidade do 
Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057, Braga, Portugal 
e-mail: madalena .alves@deb.uminho.pt 
A. Malik, E. Grohmann (eds.), Environmenta l Protection Strategies for Sustainable 111 
Development, Strategies for Sustainability , 
DOl I 0.1007/978-94-00 7-1 591-2_ 4, 0 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012 112 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
colour discharge has become increasingly rigid. There is a considerable urgent need 
to develop treatment methods that are effective in eliminating dyes from their waste. 
Physicochemical and biological methods have been studied and applied, although 
each has its advantages and disadvantages, with the choice being based on the waste­
water characteristics, available technology and economic factors. Some industrial­
scale wastewater treatment systems are now available; however, these are neither 
fully effective for complete colour removal nor do they address water recycling. 
This chapter outlines the background of dye chemistry, the application areas and 
the impact of dyeing effluents in the environment. The processes/techniques being 
implemented and developed for wastewaters remediation are revisited. 
Keywords Dye • Textile industry • Decolourisation • Physico-chemical treatment • 
Bioremediation 
4.1 Introduction 
Environmental pollution is one of the major and most urgent problems of the mod­
em world. Industries are the greatest polluters, with the textile industry generatings 
high liquid effluent pollutants due to the large quantities of water used in fabric 
processing . In this industry, wastewaters differing in composition are produced, 
from which coloured water released during the dyeing of fabrics may be the most 
problematic since even a trace of dye can remain highly visible. Other industries 
such as paper and pulp mills, dyestuff, distilleries, and tanneries are also producing 
highly coloured wastewaters. It is in the textile industry that the largest quantities 
of aqueous wastes and dye effluents are discharged from the dyeing process, with 
both strong persistent colour and a high biological oxygen demand (BOD), both of 
which are aesthetically and environmentally unacceptable (Wang et a!. 2007). In 
general, the final textile waste effluent can be broadly categorized into 3 types, high, 
medium and low strength on the basis of their COD.content (Table 4.1). 
The textile industry plays a major role in the economy of Asian and other coun­
tries. In India, it accounts for the largest consumption of dyestuffs at -80% (Mathur 
et a!. 2003), taking in every type of dye and pigment produced, this amounts to 
close to 80 000 tonnes. India is the second largest exporter of dyestuffs, after 
China. Worldwide, -106 tons of synthetic dyes are produced annually, of which 
1-1.5 x I 05 tons are released into the environment in wastewaters (Zollinger 1987). 
This release is because not all dye binds to the fabric during the dyeing processes; 
depending on the class of the dye, the losses in wastewaters can vary from 2% for 
basic dyes to as high as 50% for reactive dyes, leading to severe contamination of 
Table 4.1 Some characteris­
tics of typical textile effluents Wastewater type 
High strength 
Medium strength 
Low strength 1500 
970 
460 Conductivity (I'Scm-1) 
2900 
2500 
2100 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 113 
surface and ground waters in the vicinity of dyeing industries (O'Neill et a!. 1999). 
It is estimated that globally 280 000 tons of textile dyes are discharged in textile 
industrial effluent every year (Jin et al. 2007). Apart from the aesthetic point of 
view, dyes are undesirable because they can affect living creatures in the water dis­
charged as effluent into the environment. Industrial effluents containing synthetic 
dyes reduce light penetration in rivers and thus affect the photosynthetic activities 
of aquatic flora, thereby severely affecting the food source of aquatic organisms . 
The thin layer of discharged dyes that can form over the surfaces of the receiving 
waters also decreases the amount of dissolved oxygen, thereby affecting the aquatic 
fauna. Furthermore, dye-containing effluents increase biochemical oxygen demand. 
Dyes are in general stable organic pollutants that persist in the environment, and 
concern has been raised that such artificial compounds are xenobiotic. Therefore, 
methods for their degradation have been increasingly explored and development. 
Despite the number of successful systems employing various physicochemical and 
biological processes, economical removal of colour from effluents remains a major 
problem. Since these concerns about the environment are gaining momentum, it is 
necessary to develop better economically and environmentally friendly treatment 
technologies . Among the current pollution control technologies, biodegradation 
of synthetic dyes by various microbes is emerging as an effective and promising 
approach. The bioremediation potential of microbes and their enzymes acting on 
synthetic dyes has been demonstrated, with others needing to be explored in the fu­
ture as alternatives to conventional physicochemical approache s (Husain 2006; Ali 
201 0). It is obvious that each process has its own constraints in terms of cost, feasi­
bility, practicability, reliability, stability, environmental impact, sludge production, 
operational difficulty, pre-treatment requirements, the extent of the organic removal 
and potential toxic by-products. Also, the use of a single process may not com­
pletely decolourise the wastewater and degrade the dye molecules. Even when some 
processes are reported to be successful in decolourising a particular wastewater, the 
same may not be applicable to other types of coloured wastewaters. Cetiainly, the 
effective removal of dye from industrial coloured wastewater is a challenge to the 
manufactures and researchers, as some of the processes are neither economical nor 
effective. The amount of water consumed in textile industries must also be consid­
ered because the traditional textile finishing industry consumes -100 L of water in 
the processing of a kg of textile material. Consequently the potential of water re-use 
should be an objective when applying a particular wastewater treatment. 
In this chapter, all these issues will come under focus and discussion, based on 
the theoretical and practical aspects of each of them. 
4.2 Dye Structures and Properties 
The textile dyeing industry has been in existence for over 4000 years. In ancient 
times, dyes were obtained from natural sources and not everyone could po ssess 
coloured fabrics. For example, during the early Roman Empire period, only kings 114 
Fig. 4.1 EKample of two 
natural eKtracts obtained 
from madder-rot: Alizarin 
and Lucidin 
0 
Alizarin OH L. Pereira and M. Alves 
0 OH 
OH 
OH 
Lucidin 
and priests could wear purple dyed fabrics while in the middle-ages, scarlet dyed 
fabrics were reserved exclusively for important members of the clergy. Natural co­
louring agents are mainly of inorganic origin (clays, earths, minerals, metal salts, 
and even semi-precious stones, such as malachite) or organic dyestuffs traditionally 
divided into 2 groups, one of animal and the other of plant origin (Ackacha et al. 
2003). Undoubtedly, botanical sources were the most important, but a wide variety 
of other organisms was used, including lichens, insects and shellfish. Organic dyes 
present a broad spectrum of compounds with different physical and chemical prop­
erties. Among them, anthraquinone red colorants (e.g. cochineal , lac dye or madder 
root) are of special interest. Madder root has a long tradition as a dyestuff because 
of its bright red colour. The red pants ofNapolean's army and the red coats of the 
English soldiers in the 18/19th century were dyed with madder. However, extracts 
of Madder root contain mainly alizarin (1,2-dihydroxy-anthraquinone) and several 
by-products, in which lucidin (1,3-dihydroxy-2-hydroxymethyl-anthraquione) is of 
the special concern because it has proved to have mutagenic character, severely' 
constraining the use of Madder root (Fig. 4.1). Moreover, not every shade is directly 
available from a natural source. Synthetic dyes quickly replaced the traditional nat­
ural dyes. They cost less, offered a vast range of new colors, and imparted improved 
properties to the dyed materials. 
In 1856, William Henry Perkin accidentally discovered the world's first com­
mercially successful synthetic dye. By the end of the 19th century, 10 000 new 
synthetic dyes had been developed and manufactured. Nowadays, India, the former 
USSR, Eastern Europe, China, South Korea and Taiwan consume -600 thousand 
tons (kt) of dyes per annum. Since 1995, China has been the leading producer of 
dyestuffs, exceeding 200 kt per annum (Wesenberg et al. 2003). 
A large variety of dyestuffs is available, which can be natural or synthetic sub­
stances; but synthetic dyes are commonly used for textile fibres, whereas natural 
dyes tend to be reserved for the food industry. 
A dye can generally be described as a coloured substance that has an affmity for 
the substrate to which it is being applied. It is a coloured because it absorbs in the 
visible range of the spectrum at a certain wavelength (Table 4.2). In general, a small 
amount of dye in aqueous solution can produce a vivid colour, which is related with 
the high molar extinction coefficients. Colour can be quantified by spectrophotom ­
etry (visible spectra), chromatography (usually high performance liquid, HPLC) 
and h.igh performance capillary electrophoresis (Fig. 4.2). 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediati on 115 
Table 4.2 Colours of the vis-
ible spectrum: wavelengths Colour 
and frequencies intervals Red 
Orange 
Yellow 
Green 
Blue 
Violet Wavelength 
interval (nm) 
-700-635 
-635-590 
-590-560 
-560-490 
-490-450 
-450-400 Frequency 
interval (THz) 
-430-480 
-480-510 
-510-540 
-540-610 
-610-670 
-670-750 
The major structure element responsible for light absorption in dye molecules is 
the chromophore group, i.e., a delocalized electron system with conjugated double 
or simple bonds (Gomes 2001). Chromophores frequently contain heteroatoms as 
N, 0, and S, with non-bonding electrons. Common chromophores include -N=N­
(azo), =C=O (carbonyl),=C=C=, C=NH, -CH=N-, NO or N-OH (nitroso), 
-N02 or NO-OH (nitro) and C=S (sulphur). As a complement to the electron ac­
ceptors action are the groups called auxochromes, which are electron donors gener­
ally on the opposite side of the molecule and their basic function is to increase co­
lour. Indeed, the basic meaning of the word auxochrome is colour enhancer. Some 
auxochromes include -NH3, -COOH, HS03 and -OH. These groups also have the 
important property of giving a higher affmity to the fibre. The chromogen, which 
is an aromatic structure (normally benzene, naphtalene or anthracene rings), is part 
of a chromogen-chromophore structure along with an auxochrome . Synthetic dyes 
exhibit considerable structural diversity and thus possess very different chemical 
and physical properties. The chemical classes of dyes more frequently employed 
on an industrial scale are azo, anthraquinone, indigoid, xanthene , arylmethane and 
phthalocyanine derivatives (Fig. 4.3). Nevertheless, it needs to be emphasized that 
the overwhelming majority of synthetic dyes in current use are azo derivatives . 
The colour range obtained with this class of dyes is very wide (Gomes 2001 ). More 
than one azo group can be present in the dye structure, dyes then being classified 
as azo, disazo, trisazo or poliazo as they have one, two, three or more groups. The 
1.0 75 
0.8 
'*'~ ., E 0 50 ; 0.6 c 
0 -e 0 6 0 It) 
1':: 0.4 n; 
<( ::> 25 <( 
0.2 
0.0 0 ~ 300 500 600 700 800 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 a Wavelength (nm) b Retention time (min) 
Fig. 4.2 Visible spectra (a) and HPLC chromatogram (b) of I mM Acid Blue 62 (Pereira et al. 
2009b) 116 
Phenylazobenzene 
{Azo) 
ceo. 
.# 
Xanthene ~ CXY') c~ 
il 
Anthracene-9,1 0-dione 
Anthraquinonic 
Arylmethane L. Pereira and M. Alves 
lndigoid 
Phthalocyanine 
Fig. 4.3 Different chromophores: Azo, anthraquinonic, indigoid, xanthene, arylmethane and 
phthalocyanine dye structures 
anthraquinonic dyes are also widely used and comprise of a carbonyl group as­
sociated with a conjugated system of2 benzene rings. As with the azo dyes, substi­
tution groups in the aromatic rings are required to intensify the colour. The major 
difference is their need only of electron donors once the carbonyl groups are in the 
uniquely possible position to act as electron acceptors. 
Dyes are usually classified by their Colour Index (CI), developed by the Soci­
ety of Dyes and Colourist (1984),'which is edited every three months. It lists dyes 
firstly by a generic name based on its application and colour, then by assigning a 
5-digit CI number based on its chemical structure, if known (O'Neill et al. 1999). 
Examples include Acid Blue 120 (26400), Reactive Red 4 (18105), and Mordant Yel­
low 10 ( 1401 0). They can be grouped in different classes: acid, basic, direct, disperse, 
metallic, mordant, pigment, reactive, solvent, sulphur and vat dyes, which reflects 
their macroscopic behaviour and also their prevailing functionalities. They are used 
in accordance to their compatibility with the type of textile substrate being processed 
(Gomes 2001). Acid, direct and reactive dyes are water-soluble anionic dyes; basic 
dyes are cationic, whereas disperse, pigment and solvent dyes are non-ionic (Hao 
et al. 2000; Gomes 2001). Disperse dyes are sparing soluble in water for application 
in hydrophobic fibres from a aqueous dispersion. They are often of anthraquinone and 
sulfide structure, with many -C =0, -NH-and aromatic groups (Fu and V!raraghavan 
2001 ). Most of the mordant dyes are anionic, but some cationic ones also exist. In 
aqueous solution, anionic dyes carry a net charge due to the presence of sulphonate 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 117 
(S03-) groups, while cationic dyes carry a net positive charge due to protonated amine 
or sulfur containing groups. Sui phonic groups in the molecule provide solubility. Dis­
perse Vat dyes (of which indigo and woad are the most important examples) are water­
insoluble; however, under reducing conditions, they can be converted into a 'leuco' 
form (soluble in alkaline aqueous solutions), which penetrates the fibres during dye­
ing. Metal-complex dyes exhibit higher light and wash fastness due to the presence of 
transition metals, such as chromium, copper, nickel or cobalt that modify the surface 
chemistry between the dye molecule and the fabric (Hao et al. 2000; Gomes 2001 ). 
4_3 Dye Applications 
Approximately 40 000 different synthetic dyes and pigments are used industrially, 
and about 450 000 tons of dyestuffs are produced worldwide. Azo dyes are the 
largest and more versatile class of dyes, accounting for up to 50% of the annual 
production (Zollinger 1987). They are extensively used in many fields of up-to-date 
technology, in e.g., various branches of the textile industry, the leather tanning in­
dustry, paper production, food, colour photography, pharmaceuticals and medicine, 
cosmetic, hair colourings, wood staining, agricultural, biological and chemical re­
search, light-harvesting arrays, and photoelectrochemical cells (Kuhad et a!. 2004; 
Couto 2009). Moreover, synthetic dyes have been employed for the efficacious con­
trol of sewage and wastewater treatment, for the determination of specific surface 
area of activated sludge for ground water tracing, etc. (Forgacs et a!. 2004). 
· The largest consumer of these dyes is the textile industry, accounting for 2/3rds 
of its market. Different classes of dyes are used according to the fibres to which 
they can be applied. Reactive dyes are most commonly used as they can be ap­
plied to both in natural (wool, cotton, silk) and synthetic (modified actylics) fibres 
(O'Neill et al. 1999). Reactive dyes differ from other class of dyes in that their 
molecules contain one or more reactive groups capable of forming a covalent bond 
with a compatible fibre group. They have become very popular due to their high 
wet-fastness, brilliance and range of hues (Hao et al. 2000). Their use has increased 
as synthetic fibres became more abundant. Acid and basic dyes are used for dyeing 
all natural fibres (wool, cotton, silk) and some synthetics (polyesters, actylic and 
rayon). Direct dyes are classified this way because they are applied directly to cel­
lulose fibres. Furthermore, they are used for colouring rayon, paper, leather and to 
a small extent nylon. The application of mordant dyes is limited to the colouring 
of wool, leather, furs and anodised aluminium. Solvent dyes are used for colouring 
inks, plastics, and wax, fat and mineral oil products. 
4.4 Environmental Impact 
Colour is usually the first contaminant to be recognized in a wastewater because a 
very small amount of synthetic dyes in water ( < 1 ppm) are highly visible, affecting 
the aesthetic merit, transparency and gas solubility of water bodies. They adsorb 118 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Table 4.3 Colour concentrations limits and quantum of water generated from industries (adapted 
from Anjaneyulu et al. 2005) 
Industry Quantum of water Colour concentration Colour limits (hazen 
generated standards (hazen units) units) 
(m'ffon) USPHS BIS 
Textile 120 m'ffonfilno 1100-1300 0-25 20 
Pulp & Paper 
• Large 175 m1ffon"'"" 100-600 0--10 5-101 
• Small !50 m3ffon.,.,., 
Tannery 28 m3ffon~w hide 400-500 10-50 25 
Kraft mill 40 m3ffon 2100--2300 10--40 20 
Sugar 0.4 m3ffon.,., 150-200 5-10 20 
and reflect the sunlight entering water, thereby interfering with the aquatic spe­
cies growth and hindering photosynthesis. Additiona lly, they can have acute and/ 
or chronic effects on organisms depending on their concentration and length of 
exposure. Removal of colour from dye-containing wastewate r is the frrst and major 
concern, but the point of degrading dyes is not only to remove colour, but to elimi­
nate, or substantially decrease, the toxicity (i.e. detoxification) . 
Government legislation regarding the removal of dyes from industrial effluents 
is becoming increasingly stringent, especially in the more developed and develop­
ing countries (Robinson et al. 200 l ). Enforcement of the law will continue to ensure 
that textile and other dye-utilizing industries treat their dye-containing effluent to 
the required standards. In India, colour limits in industrial waters have also been 
set and have been made more stringent in the last few years. Table 4.3 presents the 
colour concentrations, their limits and the quantity of water generated from textile 
and other industries in United States and India (Anjaneyulu et al. 2005). Europe­
an Community (EC) regulations are also becoming more stringent (O'Neill et al. 
1999). A large variety of dyes can be found in real effluents. It has been estimated 
that-9% (or 40 000 tons) of the total amount ( 450 000 tons) of dyestuffs produced 
in the world are discharged in textile wastewaters (O'Neill et al. 1999). Desirable 
criteria when producing those dyes are their fixation degree to fibre and fastness 
(i.e. high stability in light and washing) and resistant to microbial attack. Indeed, 
dyes are design to resist to very harsh conditions, difficulting colour removal from 
textile wastewaters by the conventional wastewater treatments . The degree of ftxa­
tion of an individual dye varies with the type of fibre, shade and dyeing parameters . 
Dye fixation rate values are useful in giving an idea of the amount released , but can 
only be approximated . These losses are <2-10% for basic, disperse and direct dyes, 
but can reach 50% for reactive dyes (Al-Degs et al. 2000; Hao et al. 2000). This 
high degree for reactive dyes is due to the hydrolyzed form of reactive dyes which 
has no affinity for the fibres (Fig. 4.4). As nowadays, reactive dyes are the most 
commonly used in the textile industries, and there is a need for finding an efficient 
method dye removal with special attention to this class. Moreover, once in the ef­
fluents and due to their high stability, they may remain in the environment for a long 
time (-50 years). Because of their commercial importance, the impact and toxicity 
of dyes released in the environment have been extensively studied (Pinheiro et al. 4 Dyes-Environment al Impact and Remediation 119 
Reactive vinyl sulfone 
0 
S03Na 
pH=9-12 1 
temp = 30 -70 oc 
I Cellulose 
Fig. 4.4 Reactive dye undergoing hydrolysis (Hao et al. 2000) 
2004; Mathur et al. 2003; Puvaneswari et a!. 2006; Pereira et al. 2009a, b). As 
several thousand different synthetic dyes are employed, exhibit various biological 
activities, it is understandable that our knowledge concerning their behaviour in the 
environment and health hazards involved in their use, remain incomplete (Forgacs 
et al. 2004). In general, dyes have low toxicity in mammals and aquatic organisms 
(0 'Neill et al. 1999), but products formed by their biodegradation , mainly aromatic 
arnines from the anaerobic reduction of azo dyes (see "Dye biodegradation" sec­
tion), can be harmful (Razo-Flores et al. 1997; Pinheiro et al. 2004). Definitely, azo 
dyes that constitute the largest group of synthetic colorants used are consequently 
the most common synthetic dyes released into the environment (Zhao and Har­
din 2007; Ali 201 0). Some have been linked to bladder cancer, splenic sarcomas, 120 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
and hepatocarcinomas, producing nuclear anomalies in experimental animals and 
chromosoma l aberrations in cultured mammalian cells. An increased incidence of 
bladder cancer in dye workers exposed to large quantities of azo dyes has been re­
ported (Puvaneswari eta!. 2006). Assessment of the toxicity of dyes is therefore of 
the utmost importance. Various short-term screening methods have been developed 
to detect mutagenic/carcinogenic substances; these have played important roles not 
only in screening suspected chemicals, but also in studying the mechanisms of mu­
tagenesis and carcinogenesis, thereby providing useful information for assessing 
the genetic effects of chemicals in man. Microorganisms have several attributes 
that make them attractive for use in quick screening of effluents and chemicals for 
toxicity. In the review of Hao et a!. (2000) results on the toxicity valuation for the 
single cell alga, Selenastrum capricornutum, and for the fathead minnow, Pime­
phales promelas, are tabled. Other examples include the effect of the azo dye Sudan 
Orange G and the anthraquinonic dye Acid Blue 62 before and after an enzymatic 
treatment on the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Pereira eta!. 2009a, b). The Ames 
test is a common, well implemented method for the evaluation of mutagenic poten­
tial of many compounds (Ames et al. 1975). The mutagenic potential of the locally 
(Indian) available and used textile dyes has been evaluated by Mathur eta!. (2003) 
by the Ames test using theTA 100 strain of Salmonella typhimurium. Among the 
seven dyes tested, only one showed absence of mutagenic activity. The remaining 
six dyes were all positively mutagenic. 
Also of particular concern are more specific compounds, used throughout the 
wet-processing steps, that can be toxic to aquatic life. Those include heavy met­
als, surfactants (wetting agents), fabric rinsing and/or washing detergents and other 
additives such as salts, sodium sulphate, sulphuric acid and dispersive agents). Ad­
ditionally, dyeing baths often use extreme pH values (either acidic or alkaline, de­
pending on the dye) and high temperatures; they have high BOD and chemical 
oxygen demand (COD), solid, oil and possibly toxic organics that include phenols 
(Shrestha and Kazama 2007; Tiifekci et al. 2007). These compounds will change 
the effluent water, causing a variety of physiological and biochemical disturbance . 
It is noteworthy that each fibre being processed produces effluents of its own dis­
tinctive characteristics, and for all textiles mill processing the same fibre, effluent 
characteristics are broadly similar, although quantities will vary. Differences can 
also arise between different plants processing the same fibre due to variations in the 
production technology. The impact of dyeing factories on plants and fishes can be 
found in the review of Puvaneswari et a!. (2006). 
Pollution prevention programs also need to focus on reduction in water and en­
ergy consumption by introducing new technologies and the reuse of dyeing water 
after the treatment processes. The textile industry is a high consumer of water (Al­
legre et al. 2004), with an average of200 L water per kg of fibre. Another case of 
colour pollution is so-called "red-water", which results from trinitrotoluene (TNT) 
production generated in the purification stage (Hao et a!. 1994 ). Other coloured 
wastewaters result from other industrial processes , including the bleaching of pulp, 
paper and textile fibres. 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 121 
4.5 Wastewater Remediation 
The textile fmishing industry has been put under immense pressure to reduce use 
of harmful substances, especially mutagenic, carcinogenic, and allergenic effects of 
textile chemicals and textile dyes. There are regulations regarding the colour limits 
in effluents, which vary in different countries . 
Textile dye wastewater remediation is based not only in colour removal (deco­
lourisation), but also in the degradation and mineralization of the dye molecules. 
Indeed, decolourisation occurs when the molecules are removed from the solution 
or when the chromophore bond is broken, but the molecule in the first case, and 
the major fragments in the second, remain intact. The absorption of light by the as­
sociated molecules shifts from the visible to the ultraviolet or infrared region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. . 
A wide range of technologies has been developed for the removal of synthetic 
dyes from waters and wastewaters to decrease their envirorunental impact. These 
include: physical methods such as membrane-filtration processes (nanofiltration, 
reverse osmosis, electrodialysis) and sorption techniques; chemical methods such 
as coagulation or flocculation combined with flotation and filtration, precipitation­
flocculation with Fe(IT)/Ca(OH)2, electroflotation, electrokinetic coagulation, con­
ventional oxidation methods (e.g. with ozone), irradiation or electrochemical pro­
cesses; and biological methods, aerobic and anaerobic microbial degradation, and 
the use of pure enzymes. All of these procedures have advantages and disadvantage s. 
. Traditional wastewater treatment technologies are markedly ineffective for han­
dling wastewater of synthetic textile dyes because of the chemical stability of the 
pollutants (Forgacs et al. 2004). Additionally, they do not addr~ss the w_ater recy­
cling issue (Soares eta!. 2004). The major disadvantage of phys1cochem1cal m~th­
ods is primarily the high cost, low efficiency, limited versatility, need for special­
ized equipment, interference by other wastewater constituents, and the handling of 
the generated waste (van der Zee and Villaverde 2005; Kaushik and Malik 2009). 
Physical methods can effectively remove colour, but the dye molecules are not de­
graded, becoming concentrated and requiring proper disposal. With the chemical 
techniques, although the dyes are removed, accumulation of concentrated slu~ge 
can create a disposal problem. There is also the possibility that a secondary pollution 
problem arises because of the excessive amounts of chemicals involved. Recently, 
other emerging techniques -advanced oxidation processes, which are based on the 
generation of very powerful oxidizing agents such as hydroxyl radicals-have been 
applied with success in pollutant degradation (Arslan and Balcioglu 1999; Zhou an_d 
He 2007). Although these methods are efficient for the treatment of waters contami­
nated with pollutants, they are very costly and commercially unattractive . The high 
electrical energy demand and the consumption of chemical reagents are common 
problems. The development of efficient, economic and environn1entally friendly 
technologies to decrease dye content in wastewater to acceptable levels at afford­
able cost is of utmost importance (Couto 2009). Biological methods are generally 
considered envirorunentally friendly because they can lead to complete mineraliza -122 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
tion of organic pollutants at low cost (Pandey et a!. 2007). They also remove BOD, 
COD and suspended solids. The main limitation can be related in some cases to the 
toxicity of some dyes and/or their degradation products to the organisms used in 
the process. Indeed, the removal of dyes depends on their physical and chemical 
characteristics, as well as the selected treatment method, with no technology in use 
today having universal application. However, some of the processes do not satis­
factorily remove the colour and others are costly (Monda! 2008). The technologies 
used and those in development for the dye removal have been discussed in several 
reports (Vandevivere eta!. 1998; Robinson et al. 2001; Forgacs eta!. 2004; An­
janeyulu et al. 2005; Hai et al. 2007; Hao et al. 2007; Mondal2008) . 
4.5.1 Sorption 
Sorption of synthetic dyes on inexpensive and efficient solid supports has been con­
sidered a simple and economical method for their removal from water and waste­
water, producing high quality of water (Forgacs eta!. 2004; Allen and Koumanova 
2005), making it an attractive alternative for the treatment of contaminated waters, 
especially where the sorbent is inexpensive and does not require a pre-treatment 
step before its application. It is superior to other techniques for water re-use in 
terms of initial cost, flexibility and simplicity of design, ease of operation, lower 
interference with diurnal variation, and insensitivity to toxic pollutants. Some of the 
advantages of applying sorption (see Weber eta!. 1978; Mckay et al. 1999; Amin· 
2008) include: (1) less land area (half to quarter of what is required for a biological 
system); (2) lower sensitivity to diurnal variation; (3) not being affected by toxic 
chemicals; (4) greater flexibility in design and operation, and (5) superior removal 
of organic contaminants . Furthermore sorption does not result in the formation of 
harmful substances. 
Decolourisation by sorption is a result of two mechanisms , sorption and ion ex­
change, and is influenced by many physicochemical factors, such as, dye/sorbent 
interaction , sorbent surface area, particle size, temperature, pH, and contact time 
(Robinson et a!. 2001; Dhodapkar et a!. 2006; Jovancic and Radetic 2008). The 
nature of the bound between the dye and the adsorbent during sorption is impor­
tant for its effectiveness . Two types of sorption occur: physical sorption, when the 
interparticle bonds between the adsorbate and adsorbent are weak (van der Waals, 
hydrogen, and dipole-dipole); and chemical sorption, characterized by strong in­
terparticl e bonds due to an exchange of electrons (covalent and ionic bonds). The 
ftrst is usually a reversible process and the second irreversible (Allen and Kou­
manova 2005). 
An effective sorption model requires an accurate equilibrium isotherm, kinetic/ 
mass transfer relationships and coupling equations (Mckay 1998). The mass trans­
fer stage usually assumes a three-step model: (i) external film diffusion across the 
boundary layer, (ii) sorption at a surface site, and (iii) internal mass transfer within 
the particle, based on a pore or solid surface diffusion mechanism (Mckay and Swee-4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 123 
ney 1980). To explain the sorption mechanism and predict sorption uptake rates by 
adsorbent pellets, various assumptions have been applied to equilibrium data: linear 
isotherm (Dryden and Kay 1954), irreversible isotherm (Liapis 1987) and nonlinear 
isotherm (Tien 1961; Weber and Rummer 1965). Specific cases of nonlinear iso­
therms include the Langmuir equation (Langmuir 1918), the Freundlich equation 
(Freundlich 1906) and the Redlich-Peterson equation (Redlich and Peterson 1959). 
The Langmuir and Freundlich sorption isotherms (Eqs. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively) 
are the most commonly used to quantify the amount of adsorbate adsorbed by an 
adsorbent (Annadurai and Krishnan 1997; Al-Degs eta!. 2000, 2008). 
q, = Qmax KLC./(1 + KLCe) 
q, =KFC~ (Langmuir) 
(Freundlich) (1) 
(2) 
Where, q• (mmol·gAC -1) is the surface concentration of dye at equlibriun1 ; c. 
(mmol·dm3) is the equilibrium concentration of dye in solution; Qmax (mmol·gAc -1) 
is the amount of dye adsorbed at a complete monolayer coverage; KL (dm3.mmol-1) 
·is a constant that relates to the heat of sorption; KF [mmol·g-1(mmol·dm3t"l rep­
resents the sorption capacity when the dye equilibrium concentration (C.) equals 
one unit, and n represents the degree of dependence of sorption on the equilibrium 
concentration. 
Sorption is also related to the molecular size of the dye and the number of sulfon­
ic groups. Smaller dyes have higher sorption, whereas bigger molecules are more 
difficult to adsorb due to diffusion limitations (Allen and Koumanova 2005; Tsang 
eta!. 2007). 
Sorption methods, independently of the inorganic or organic character of the 
supports, have certain drawbacks . Since sorption processes are generally non-selec­
tive, other components of the wastewater can also be adsorbed by the support. Com­
petition between the sorbents can influence the dye-binding capacity of suppot1s in 
an unpredictable manner. Moreover , a sorption process removes the synthetic dyes 
from wastewater by concentrating them on the surface, without structurally chang­
ing them. When the support is regenerated, the fate of the resulting concentrated 
solution of dyes presents a problem that has not yet been satisfactorily solved. 
Large-scale applications based on the sorption process have to take all these fac­
tors into consideration . This technique can be successfully applied as a polishing 
step at the end of the treatment stage, to meet discharge colour standards . The re­
views of Allen and Koumanova (2005) and Monda! (2008) outline the fundamental 
principles of dye sorption and also evaluate a number of different adsorbents used 
in the removal of colorants from wastewaters. 
4.5.1.1 Activated Carbon 
Activated Carbon (AC) is the most widely used sorbent and therefore will be de­
scribed in more detail, but some of the fundamental principles outlined are also 
applicable to other adsorbents . 124 
Fig. 4.5 Image of Activated 
Carbon both in powder and 
block form (A C) L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Commercial ACs are available (Fig. 4.5), with different physical forms depend­
ing on their application. The type of carbon sorbent and its mode of preparation 
exert a marked influence on the sorption capacity (Pereira eta!. 2003; Forgacs eta!. 
2004), and both by their texture and surface chemistry determine the performance 
(Figueiredo et a!. 1999). The diversity of surface groups on AC (of acid and base 
character) makes it much more versatile than other adsorbents (Fig. 4.6) and the 
nature and concentration of surface functional groups can be modified by suitable 
chemical or thermal treatments. It is also possible to prepare carbons with different 
proportions of micro, meso and macropores (Rodriguez-Reinoso 1998; Figueire­
do et a!. 1999). This becomes advantageous once AC is modified physical and 
chemically, for specific applications, in order to optimise its performance. Liquid 
(HN03) and gas oxidation (02) produce samples with a higher amount of surface 
oxygen-containing groups. Nitric treatment increases in particular the carboxylic 
acid groups and the gas oxidation treatment is the most effective way to introduce 
less acidic ones, such as phenols and carbonyVquinone groups (Figueiredo et a!. 
1999; Pereira et al. 2003; Faria et al. 2005). No significant changes in the texture 
of the carbon are likely to occur with liquid phase treatments, while an increase of 
the micropore volume, mesopore surface area and average of the micropores with 
gas phase oxidation is usual; these changes increase as the degree of oxidation itself 
increases (Figueiredo et al. 1999). Thermal treatment at high temperature produce 
materials with a low amount of oxygen-containing groups and high basicity, result­
ing mainly from the ketonic groups remaining on the surface, fewer acidic groups, 
and the de localisation of Jt-electrons of the carbon basal planes (Moreno-Casti lha 
et al. 2000; Faria et al. 2005, 2008). 
Activated carbon samples are amphoteric in nature and therefore the pH of a 
dye solution plays an important role in the sorption process. As already mentioned, 
acidity and basicity is related to the chemical groups at the AC surface. The charge 
thereon is correlated with the pH of the solution. A convenient index of the propen­
sity of a surface to became either positively or negatively charged depends on the 
pH required to give a zero net surface charge (pH ). In a solution at pH<pH pzc pzc' 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 
Fig. 4.6 Possible surface 
groups at carbon surface 
(adapted from Figueiredo 
et at. 1999) 
0 125 
0 I! C - CARBOXYLIC \H 
- LACTONE 
-PHENOL 
0 -CARBONYL 
l ! \ -ANHYDRIDE I \ 0 -ETHER 
0 -QUINONE 
AC has a net positive surface charge and at pl-I>pHpzc a net negative charge. High 
sorption on AC is expected at high pH for cationic dyes and at low pH for an­
ionic dyes, due to electrostatic interaction and attractive forces (Coulomb's law). 
In contrast, when the pH of the solution is not in the ideal range, the electrostatic 
repulsive forces repel the dyes from theAC surface and it will be covered by the sol­
vent. Some experimental results also indicate that sorption capacity increases with 
a decrease in AC particle size (Mckay and Sweeney 1980; Al-Degs et al. 2000). 
This can be attributed to the large molecular diameter and chemical nature of the 
adsorbate species. Decolourisation is also dependent of other parameters, such as 
the molecular structure, pK0 and redox potential of the dye. Dye ionization (pro­
tonationldeprotonation) is also dependent on the pH of the solution. A variety of 
experimental techniques have been used to characterize the AC surfaces, including 126 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
chemical titration, temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), X-ray photoelec­
tron spectroscopy (XPS), mass spectrometry, NMR, infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR, 
DRIFTS) (Rodriguez -Reinoso 1987; Figueiredo et a!. 1999; Pereira et a!. 2003; 
Faria eta!. 2004; Shen eta!. 2008; Klein eta!. 2008). 
Carbon-based sorbents have excellent sorption properties for a considerable 
number of synthetic dyes (Pereira eta!. 2003; Malik 2004; Faria et a!. 2005, 2008; 
Al-Degs eta!. 2008). The possibility of using ofAC as a redox mediator in dye bio­
logical degradation has more recently, also been proposed (van der Zee eta!. 2001; 
Pereira eta!. 201 0; see also Sect. 4.5.6.4). However, preparation of carbon sorbents 
is generally energy-consuming, making commercially available products relatively 
expensive. Since a large amount of carbon sorbent is needed for the removal of 
dyes from a large volume of effluent, the high cost can hamper its application (Fu 
and Viraraghavan 2001; Forgacs eta!. 2004). In addition, the technology for manu­
facturing AC of good quality is not fully in place in developing countries. This has 
prompted a growing research interest in the production of low-cost alternatives to 
AC from a range of carbonaceous and mineral precursors. 
4.5.1.2 Other Adsorbents 
Research to fmd cheaper alternatives to AC has been discussed by Gupta and Suhas 
(2009). Sorption capacity and selectivity are also factors important when choosing 
the material for certain applications. Many materials have proved to be good candi­
dates, including inorganic and organic materials, some examples with their advan-· 
tages and disadvantages being given in Table 4.4. Many of the starting materials for 
these replacement adsorbents are agricultural or industrial by-products; hence their 
reuse as secondary adsorbents minimizes waste. But applicability of the sorption 
process is largely dependent on the availability of cheap adsorbents and thus recent 
initiatives in sorption process have sought economically sound adsorbents. 
4.5.1.3 Biosorption/Biomaterials 
Biosorption is defmed as the accumulation and concentration of pollutants from 
aqueous solutions using biological materials, thus allowing the recovery and/or 
environmentally acceptable disposal of pollutants. Biosorption, a property of both 
living and dead organisms (and their components), has been heralded for a number 
of years as a promising biotechnology for pollutant removal from solution and/or 
pollutant recovery, because of its efficiency and simplicity, as an analogous op­
eration to conventional ion-exchange technology, and the availability of biomass 
(Aksu 2005; Gadd 2009). Biosorption for dyes can also be adopted for the treatment 
of textile effluents since a wide variety of microorganisms including algae, yeasts, 
bacteria and fungi are capable of efficiently decolourising a huge range of dyes (Fu 
and Viraraghavan 2001; Padmesh eta!. 2005; Prigione eta!. 2008a, b; Bergsten-4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 
.!; 
" .;; .... 
0 
"' f > 1l ... 
0 "iij' 
E 
.... 
0 
" 0.. 
~ 
&j 
..... 
~ .. 
:0 
~ " " -e 
0 
~ < "' ~ ·u;_ 
~c: 
"' :..cB 
-~ ..c ~:s a ..,. 0 ::> 
4! 0 .?!;-u u.. co 
0 
0 
~ ..,. 
"' 8 ·€ 
c " "' a. "0 0 § ... 
..0 a. 
"' c c .9 
~~ ~ 
0 ..0"' 
0~"'0 
~ "' 0 0 > 0 -"' .. 
"' 
~ "0 
1ii .c ] -~-o-N 
V) .c c l 
~ ';::B [ 
I C':J C: :r:: ]08o.. 
Ci5 127 
;g 
0 .,; " " " ~ .c .... 
-0 "' :.§. E ~c..~~ 0 g -~ E II ~ <1:: 
~ ~ ~ s. ·-_,. E o B e _,. <T·-:r: 
(I) ~ "'0 0.. "' Ci 128 
" 0 c 
0 
.~ 
"0 " ;g 
" .0 
§ 
0 
b .. a " L. Pereira and M. Alves 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 129 
Torralba et a!. 2009). Although the mechanisms of biosorption are not yet fully 
explained, it seems to take place essentially on the cell wall. 
Textile dyes vary greatly in their chemistries and, therefore, their interactions 
with microorganisms/biomaterials depends on a particular dye and also on the spe­
cific chemistry of microbial biomass/biomaterial (Robinson et a!. 200 I; Erdem 
et a!. 2005). The use of biomass for wastewater treatment is increasing because 
it is available in large quantities at a low price. The major advantages of biosorp­
tion technology are its effectiveness in reducing the concentration of dyes down 
to very low levels, and the use of cheap biosorbent material. Fungal biomass can 
be produced economically using relatively simple fermentati on techniques and 
cheap growth media (Fu and Viraraghavan 2002). Generally, it can be eluted and 
regenerated by some solvents, such as methanol and ethanol, certain surfactants 
(e.g. non-ionic Tween), orNaOH solution. Biosorption as an emerging technology 
also attempts to overcome the selectivity disadvantage of conventional sorption 
processes. The use of dead rather than live biomass eliminates the problems of 
toxic waste and nutrient requirements. In spite of good sorption propetiies and 
high selectivity, the sorption process is slow. Clogging in some bioreactors has 
also been a limitation . Biosorption processes are particularly suitable for the treat­
ment of solutions containing dilute (toxic) dye concentrations. Biomass has a high 
potential as a sorbent because of its physico-chemical characteristics. Biosorption 
is strongly influenced by the functional groups in the fungal biomass, the specific 
surface properties, and the initial pH of the dye solution. Its performance also de­
pends on external factors such as salts and ions in solution that may be competing 
with the dye. 
Not only microorganisms, but other biomaterials are being increasingly used 
for economical and ecofriendly remediation of textile dye from effluents (Crini 
2006; Allen and Koumanova 2005; Monda! 2008). Chitin/Chitosan-based absor­
bents present a new group ofbioabsorbents that can remove dyes from wastewater 
(Chiou and Li 2002; Chatterjee eta!. 2005). Chitin is a naturally occurring deriv­
ative of cellulose and chitosan is a dervative of chitin. Chitosan is the deacylated 
form of chitin, which is a linear polymer of acylamino-D -glucose. Chitosan has 
the attraction of having a high content of amino and hydroxyl functional groups, 
giving it a high potential for dye sorption (Yoshida et a!. 1991, 1993; Juang et a!. 
1997; Chiou and Li 2002). These materials can contain amine or amide nitrogen 
in varying proportions, and have high sorption capacity for anionic dyes without, 
significant sorption for cationic dyes. Van der Walls attraction, hydrogen bond­
ing and Coulombic attraction are the main ones involved. Sorption capacity of 
chitosan increases with a decrease in pH: the -NH2 group is easily protonated 
in acid solution to become NH/, thereby creating electrostatic attraction to an­
ionic dyes. Chitin contains the amide group -CO-NI-I-which cannot easily be 
protonated, and hence less electrostatic attraction between the chitin and the dye 
molecules occurs. Some of the useful features of chitosan include its abundance 
(it is found in the skins or shells of anthropods), hydrophilicity , biodegradability 
and nontoxicity . 130 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
4. 5.2 Coagulation-Flocculation-Precipitation 
Coagulation is the destabilization of electrostatic interactions that exist between the 
molecules of reactive hydrolyzed dyes (or auxiliaries) and water through the addi­
tion of a chemical reagent, a coagulant (Allegre et al. 2004). Coagulation is used 
together with flocculation or sedimentation, with an efficiency that depends on the 
type of flocculant and the pH of the medium (Allegre et al. 2004; Monda! 2008). 
In practice, flocculation reagents are large synthetic polymers with a linear struc­
ture used along with FeC13, FeS04, AIC13 or Al2(S04)3. There have been reports of 
the use of several co-polymers, such as pentaethylene, hexamine and ethylediene 
dichloride , as flocculants for the decolourizing of dye effluents (Anjaneyulu et al. 
2005). Colour removal is accomplished by aggregation/precipitation and sorption 
of colouring substances onto the polynuclear coagulant species and hydrated flocks. 
The co-polymers have large pore diameters (up to -400 !liD), thereby enhancing the 
process of sorption on floes. 
Although these methods are advantageous in eliminating insoluble dyes (such 
as disperse), a large amount of sludge is produced leading to extra costs for its 
treatment (Hao et al. 2000). Acid, direct, vat, mordant and reactive dyes usually 
coagulate, but the resulting floc is of poor quality and does not settle well, yielding 
mediocre results. Cationic dyes simply do not coagulate. 
Some features of the coagulation process include (Soares et al. 2004): 
• Short detention times; 
• Good removal efficiencies; 
• Quick response to operational factors, making automation simple; 
• Equipment requiring less space than a biological lagoon (but nevertheless expen-
sive); 
• Removal of90% of suspended solids and -10-50% COD; 
• Performance dependent on the final floc formation and its setting quality 
• Overdoses of polyelectrolyte leading to residual concentrations of it in the efflu­
ent, and thus a detrimental effect on the nitrification process; 
• Dye colour in solid phase remaining a problem, although removal from the aque-
ous phase can be up to 90%; 
• Sludge production dependent on the nature of the flocculant used 
The high cost of chemicals for precipitation and pH adjustments, problems associ­
ated with dewatering and disposing of generated sludge, and the high concentration 
of residual cation levels left in the supernatant are some of the limitations of this 
method. 
4.5.3 Membrane Filtration 
Membrane filtration is another important process for separating dyes from aqueous 
solution. A membrane is a permeable or semi-permeable phase, often known as a 4 Dyes-Environmental impact and Remediation 131 
thin polymeric solid, which restricts the motion of certain species. A membrane is 
a barrier that allows one component of a mixture to permeate freely while hinder­
ing permeation of another component. Membrane techniques offer the appeal of 
recovering and reusing chemicals (dyes) for producing reusable water. This separa­
tion process has the ability to clarify, concentrate and, most importantly, to separate 
dye continuously from effluent. The technique effectively removes of all type of 
dyes, but produces highly concentrated sludge. Dissolved solids are not removed 
by this technique. Selection of a specific membrane depends on the e type of dye 
or wastewater composition, and on the process operation. Membranes with varying 
pore size can retain solutes according to their different molecular weight cutoffs 
(MWCO) and are classified as: reverse osmosis (<1000 MWCO), nanofiltration 
(500-15 000 MWCO) and ultrafiltration membranes (1000-100 000 MWCO). 
[Nanofiltration (NF) membranes are a new class of membranes , which have proper­
ties between those of ultrafiltration (UF), and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes.] 
The major drawbacks are the high costs of labour and of membrane replacement, 
· since membranes are prone to clogging and fouling. The need to be regenerated 
or changed at regular intervals, which entails high capital and energy costs, and 
this is not always technical and economically viable. Additionally, adsorbed dye 
molecules are not degraded but concentrated, and subsequently need to be disposed 
of. Membrane filtration is therefore more effective for low concentrated waters. 
Membrane blockage due to high dye concentration was observed by Ahmad et al. 
(2002). When the feed concentration of dye increased from 0.5 to 10 gV1, the flux 
decreased dramatically from 1904 to 208 Um2 h, and the average percentage rejec­
tion increased from 21 to 91%. 
4.5.4 Electrochemical Wastewater Treatment 
The electrochemical treatment of wastewater is a potential powerful method of pol­
lution control, offering high removal efficiency. The process includes electrooxida­
tion and electrocoagulation, which are relatively non-specific, and thus applicable 
to a variety of contaminants. 
The principle of electrochemical techniques is to send an electric current through 
electrodes resulting in different chemical reactions (Fig. 4.7). The reducing agent, 
instead of being added in the typical conventional method is replaced by an innova­
tive cathodic electron transfer (electrons are employed, instead of chemicals). An 
electrochem ical cell is used to perform the reduction/oxidation process. The dyeing 
apparatus is coupled to the electrochemical cell and the dye bath gets effectively 
reduced through an electrochemical process. The factors affecting electrochemical 
performance include current intensity, design geometry, stratification, type, number 
and spacing of electrodes used, pH, temperature, nature of electrolyte, surface ten­
sion, flow rate of wastewater and the properties of the dye (Hao et al. 2000). Higher 
degrees of decolourisation can be achieved by this method, although this does not 
imply a high COD reduction. Depending on electrolysis time and the applied poten-132 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
o=K=o 
0 
Indigo 
Fig. 4.7 Mechanism of the direct electrochemical reduction of indigo (Adapted from Roessler et 
al. 2001) 
tial, total decolourisation can be attained. The electrochemica l method of oxidation 
for colour removal is more efficient in the treatment of textile wastewater for the 
dyeing stage than for the total dyeing and finishing stages. Some of the advantages 
are non-hazardous resulting products, the little need for additional chemicals, and 
the low temperature required compared with other treatments (Kim et al. 2002b; 
Esteves and Silva 2004); furthermore no sludge is formed. In terms of apparatus, 
it does not require much space. Electrochemical processes generally have lower 
temperature requirements than those of other equivalent non-electrochemical treat­
ments, and no need for additional chemicals. The equipment and operations needed 
are generally simple, with the controls being easy and the electrochemical reactors 
compact. The high cost of the electricity requirement is the main limitation (Kim 
et al. 2002a). 
4.5.5 Advanced Oxidation Processes 
Oxidation is the most commonly used chemical decolouration processes because it 
is simple. Alternative to the traditional methods are the Advanced Oxidation Pro­
cesses (AOPs) based on the generation of highly reactive species, such as hydroxyl 
radicals ( •OH), that can oxidize quickly and non-selectively a broad range of or-4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 133 
ganic pollutants. Furthermore, several investigations have demonstrated that AOPs 
effectively remove colour and, in part, some organic content of dyestuffs. AOPs 
include (see Rauf and Ashraf2009): 
1. photolysis (UV); 
2. hydrogen peroxide, such as ~02 + UV, Fenton (~02 + Fe2•tfe3•), Fenton­
like reagents (~02 + Fe2•-solid/Fe3• -solid) and photo-Fenton (Hp2 + Fe2•t 
Fel++UV); 
3. ozone (ozonation, photo-ozonation, ozonation + catalysis, and 03 + ~02 and 
03 + Fe2•fFel+); and 
4. photocata lysis (semiconductor-mediated photocatalysis and Ti02 + 
CdS +combinations). 
AOPs have common principles in terms of the participation of hydroxyl radicals 
generally assumed to participate in the reaction. Although other species are also 
thought to be involved, the active species responsible for the destruction of con­
taminants in most cases is the hydroxyl radical (•OH), which is unstable and there­
fore very reactive. Hydroxyl radicals may attack organic molecules by extracting 
a hydrogen atom from the molecule under attack (Hao et al. 2000). The common 
pathway for the degradation of organics by the hydroxyl radical is as follows: 
eOH + RH -+ llzO + R• 
R• + 02 -+ ROO• 
ROO• + RH-+ ROOH + R• 
The oxidation potential of •OH is higher than that of other oxidizing agents 
(Table 4.5). Hydrogen peroxide (~02) is a widely used agent that needs to be ac­
tivated by, for example, UV light. Many methods of chemical decolourisation vary 
depending on the method by which ~02 becomes activated. H202 alone is often 
not effective and fails to react with a particular azo dye over a pH range of 3-9 .S 
(Hao et al. 2000). For light-mediated oxidation of dye molecules, UV of different 
wavelengths and visible light can be used. As expected, UV alone may not be ap­
plicable to wastewaters with high colour intensity. But the combination of UV and 
~02 can effectively decolourise dyes, and also reduce TOC and COD, and hence 
to a potential mineralization. 
Table 4.5 Oxidation poten­
tial for several oxidizing 
agents (Hao et al. 2000) Process 
02+4 W+2 e-->2Hp 
H202+2 H'+2 e--2 H20 
03+2 1-1•+2 e-->H202 
•OH+H'+e-->H20 E (V) 
1.23 
1.78 
2.07 
2.28 134 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
In Fenton's reactions, the combination of ferrous and ~02 serves two functions: 
oxidation of dye molecules by •OH and coagulation with iron ions. After addition 
of the iron and hydrogen peroxide, they react together to generate hydroxyl radicals 
in the following manner: 
Fe2+ + H202 -+ Fe3+ + eOH + OH-
Fe3+ + H202 -+ Fe2+ + eOOH + OH+ 
The generated hydroxyl radicals will in turn react with the pollutants and oxidize 
them. With the formation of Fe3+ and its complexes, the Fenton process can pre­
cipitate the dissolved solutes. Fenton's reagent is effective in decolourising both 
soluble and insoluble dyes, but leads to the formation of a sludge that can present 
disposal problems. The pH of wastewater needs to be acidified for effective utili­
zation of Fenton's reagent; if it is is too high, the iron precipitates as Fe(OH)3 and 
decomposes the ~02 to oxygen. The use of ozone, pioneered in the early 1970s, is 
due its high instability, making it a good oxidizing agent. Ozonation, as an effective 
oxidation process, has found application in the decolourisation of synthetic dyes; 
although it is ineffective in dispersing dyes and needs high pH values. With no re­
sidual or sludge formation and no toxic metabolites, ozonation leads to uncoloured 
effluent and low COD, suitable for discharge into aqueous systems. One major ad­
vantage is that ozone can be used in its gaseous state and therefore does not increase 
the volume of wastewater and sludge. The disadvantage of ozonation is the short 
half-life (typically being 20 min) of ozone, demanding continuous application and 
thereby making it a costly process. Operating costs for ozone have proved higher 
than for electrochemical treatment giving the same level of colour removal. 
Photocatalytic degradation is a part of AOP which has proven to be a promising 
technology for degrading organic compounds (RaufandAshraf2009) . Commercial 
dyes are designed to resist photodegradation, and hence the selection of optimal 
photocatalytic conditions for the decolourisation of dyes requires considerable ex­
pertise. Direct and indirect photocatalytic pathways are the 2 suggested mecha­
nisms for a given photocatalytic reaction. The effective and economic performance 
of the process is strongly dependent on the electrode materials, and many research­
ers have investigated electrochemical oxidation for azo dye degradation through 
operating parameter optimization using a variety of anodes. With the advancement 
of experimental techniques, semiconductors have been tested for their efficiencies 
in dye degradation, including Ti02, Vz05, ZnO, W03, CdS, Zr02 and their impreg­
nated forms (Rauf and Ashraf 2009). Other factors affecting photochemical reac­
tions include pH, light intensity, temperature and initial dye concentration . 
Ultraviolet photolysis combined with hydrogen peroxide (UV!Hz02) is one of 
the most appropriate AOP technologies for removing toxic organics from water 
because it probably occurs in nature itself (Schrank et al. 2007). While the UV/ 
~02 process appears to be very slow, costly and weakly effective for possible full­
scale application, the combination ofUV /Ti02 is more promising (Dominguez et al. 
2005). Ti02 during photocatalysis generates electron hole pairs when irradiated by 
the light of <380 nm wavelength. Organic pollutants are thus oxidized via direct 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 135 
hole transfer or, in most cases, attacked by the •OH radical formed in the irradiated 
Ti02 (Xu 2001). 
One of the disadvantages of AOP's is that they may also produce undesirable 
toxic products and release aromatic amines. In aqueous solution, photochemical 
degradation is likely to progress slowly, but there is no sludge production. 
4. 5. 6 Bioremediation 
Bioremediation is defmed as the biologically mediated breakdown of chemical 
compounds: microorganisms (filamentous fungi, yeasts, bacteria, actinomycetes 
and algae) or enzymes are applied to assist in the removal ofxenobiotics (synthetic 
organic compounds, which are not found in nature, and are thus foreign and new 
to the biota) from polluted environments. Biological processes are design to take 
advantage of the biochemical reactions that are carried out in living cells and/or via 
the enzymes synthesised by them. They are energy-dependent processes and usually 
involve the breakdown of the pollutant into a number of by-products. 
Biodegradation of synthetic dyes has been identified as an effective and envi­
ronmentally friendly solution (Fig. 4.8). Synthetic dyes are not commonly present 
in the environment, so they may not be readily biodegradable . Observations indi­
cate that dyes themselves are not biologically degradable, since microorganisms do 
Fig. 4.8 Dye bioremedia­
tion by: (a) mixed cultures, 
(b) isolated organisms, and 
(c) isolated enzymes (e) 
(Adapted from Kandelbauer 
and Guebitz 2005) 1~ .~ !/ ~F-:-._~ If"f . ~w -~· __ : 
. . • f_. "' ···*' 
Dyeing cloth Colored effluent 
Decolorized effluent 136 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
not use colour constituents as a source of food. For bioremediation, an additional 
carbon and energy source has to be present (Nigam et a!. 1996). In addition, syn­
thetic dyes are designed in such a way that they can be made resistant to microbial 
degradation under aerobic conditions. Also the high solubility in water of, espe­
cially, sulfonate dyes and their high molecular weight inhibit permeation through 
biological membranes. Bio-decolourisation of dyes may occur either by sorption on 
growing/living and dead microbial cells, biosorption, or biodegradation of the dyes 
by the cells (Fu and Viraraghavan 2001). In biosorption, the original structure of 
the dyes remains intact and the environmental pollution problem is not eradicated 
because the pollutant is not destroyed but instead becomes entrapped in the micro­
bial biomass (Ali 201 0). In contrast, in biodegradation the original dye structure is 
destroyed, and the pollutant is split into fragments by the microbial cells, sometimes 
achieving complete mineralization, i.e., conversion of the xenobiotic into C02, ~0 
and some salts of inorganic origin. Although many organic molecules are degraded, 
many others are recalcitrant due to their complex chemical structure, and to their 
synthetic origin and xenobiotic nature. The rates of dye decolourisation/biodegra­
dation are usually assessed by Monod-type kinetics. Zero, first and second-order 
reaction kinetics have been used to estimate colour removal rate constants using 
Eqs. 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5, respectively: 
C, = C0-k0t (zero order) 
C, = C0e-ku (first order) 
C, =1/C0+k2t (second order) (3) 
(4) 
(5) 
where C0 and c, are the initial and time of reaction concentrations, respectively; t is 
the reaction time, and k is the reaction rate constant (tirne-1). 
Biological treatment is often the most economical alternative compared with 
other physical and chemical processes. An advantage of biologica l treatment over 
certain physicochemical treatment methods is that > 70% of the organic material 
measured by the COD test can be converted to biosolids (Forgacs eta!. 2004). 
Development of an efficient dye degradation biotechnology requires application 
of a suitable selected strain and its use under favourable conditions to optimize its 
degradation potential (Novotny et a!. 2004; Lucas eta!. 2008). A number of micro­
organisms are capable of decolourising textile dyes, including bacteria, filamentous 
ftmgi and yeasts (Stolz 2001). The isolation of new strains or the adaptation of 
existing ones to the decomposition of dyes will probably increase the efficacy of 
bioremediation of dyes in the near future. The addition of activators (e.g. Tween 80, 
veratryl alcohol and manganese (IV) oxide) to the culture medium of P chrysospo­
rium for the production of lignolytic enzymes increased the decomposition rate of 
the dye Poly R-478 (Couto eta!. 2000). In many cases, it is preferable that suitable 
organisms excrete the active enzymes into the medium, otherwise transport into the 
cells becomes limiting for bio-elimination. Processes using immobilized growing 
cells or immobilized enzymes seem to be more promising than those involving free 
cells, since immobilization allows repeated use of the microbial cells. 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 137 
Some disadvantages of biological treatments are the requirement for a large land 
area, the sensitivity toward diurnal variation, the toxicity of some chemicals, and 
less flexibility in design and operation. 
4.5.6.1 Decolourisation by Mixed Cultures 
Utilization of microorganism consortia offers considerable advantages over the use 
of pure cultures in the degradation of synthetic dyes. Furthennore, mixed culture 
studies may be more comparable to practical situations. With the increasing com­
plexity of a xenobiotic, one cannot expect to find complete catabolic pathways in a 
single organism; a higher degree of biodegradation and even mineralization n1ight 
be accomplished when co-metabolic activities within a microbial community com­
plement one another (Nigam et a!. 1996; K.hadijah et a!. 2009). Using mixed cul­
tures instead of pure cultures, higher degrees of biodegradation and mineralization 
can be achieved due to synergistic metabolic activities of the microbial community 
(Ramalho eta!. 2004; K.hehra eta!. 2005; Ali 2010). The individual strains can at­
tack dye molecules at different positions, yielding metabolic end products that may 
be toxic; these can be further metabolised as nutrient sources to carbon dioxide, 
ammonia and water by another strain. Other species present may not be involved 
in bioremediation at all, but can stabilise the overall ecosystem (Kandelbauer and 
Gi.ibitz 2005). This type of mineralization is the safest way to assure that no poten­
tially harmful and unrecognized intermediate degradation products are released into 
the environment. Mixed consortia usually do not require sterile conditions and have 
greater stability towards changes in the prevailing conditions (pH, temperature and 
feed composition) compared with pure cultures (Ramalho et a!. 2004). Therefore, 
the use of mixed cultures is a good strategy for bioreactors. 
Biological activated sludge is the most common type of treatment system us­
ing mixed cultures. However, activated sludge technology has several inherent 
disadvantages, such as low biomass concentration and easy washout. It should be 
stressed that the composition of mixed cultures can change during the decomposi­
tion process due to the metabolism, which can interfere with the control of tech­
nologies using mixed cultures. 
4.5.6.2 Decolourisation by Isolated Organisms and Their Enzymes 
The use of an isolated culture system ensures that the data are reproducible and 
more readily interpreted. The detailed mechanisms of biodegradation can be un­
derstood in terms of biochemistry and molecular biology, and these disciplines can 
also be used to upregulate enzyme system to generate modified strains with en­
hanced biodegradation activities. The quantitative analysis of the kinetics of azo­
dye decolourisation by a particular bacterial culture can be meaningftlily valuable 
asset. Also, the response of the system to changes in operational parameters can be 
examined. Many strains and enzymes that can degrade dyes or other pollutants now 
been commercialized . Enzymes presently under investigation are still expensive 138 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Pycnoporus sanguineus 
Fig. 4.9 Examples of white-rot-fungi: Trametes hirsuta and Pycnoporus sanguineous 
due to the high cost of isolation, purification and production . Some commercial 
fungal enzymes and their costs are listed in table 2 of the review by Duran and 
Esposito (2000). 
Filamentous Fungi 
By far the most efficient single class of microorganisms in breaking down syn-. 
thetic dyes is the white-rot fungi (WRF; Fig. 4.9). White-rot fungi are a class of 
microorganisms that produce non-specific extracellular ligninolytic enzymes ca­
pable of extensive aerobic depolymerization and mineralization of lignin (Couto 
2009). Lignin is a complex chemical compound abundant in wood, being an in­
tegral pat1 of the cell walls of plants. Its degradation is a rate-limiting step in car­
bon recycling (Ohkuma et al. 2001). Microbial ability to metabolize lignin and its 
components is one of the plausible evolutionary origins of the degrading pathway 
of aromatic xenobiotics and/or environmental pollutants. The main extracellular 
enzymes participating in lignin degradation are lignin peroxidase (ligninase, LiP, 
EC 1.11.1.14), manganese peroxidase (MnP, EC 1.11.1.13), and the Cu-containing 
laccase (benzenediol:oxygen oxidoreductase, EC 1.10.3.2). A new group oflignino­
lytic heme-containing peroxidases, combining structural and functional properties 
of the LiPs and MnPs, are the versatile peroxidases (VPs). In addition, enzymes in­
volved in hydrogen peroxide production such as glyoxal oxidase (GLOX) and aryl 
alcohol oxidase (AAO) (EC 1.1.3.7) can be considered to belong to the ligninolytic 
system (Wesenberg et a!. 2003). It is the non-specificity of these enzymes synthe­
sized by WRF that makes them efficient degraders of a wide range of xenobiotics 
under aerobic conditions, including dyes (Ohkuma eta!. 2001; Wesenberg eta!. 
2003; Couto 2009). Phanerochaete chrysosporium was the first species identified 
that could degrade polymeric synthetic dyes (Glenn and Gold 1983). In addition to 
enzymatic biodegradation, fungi may decolourise solutions by biosorption (Fu and 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 139 
1 day 2 days 5 days 7 days 14 days 
Reactive Red 198 
Reactive Blue 21 
Reactive blue 214 · 
Mixture 
Fig. 4.10 Visual observation of different reactive dyes and a mixture decolouri sation by P simpli­
cissimum at increasing incubation times (adapted from Bergsten-Torralba et al. 2009) 
Viraraghavan 2002; Zeroual et al. 2006; Prigione 2008a, b). The cell-adsorbed dye 
can be further enzymatically decolourised. 
Long growth cycles and moderate decolourization rates limit the performance 
of fungal systems (Banat et a!. 1996). Fungi growth takes normally from three to 
seven days. They can be cultivate in different culture media, such as yeast extract, 
malt extract, agar, starch and potato dextrose using low pHs normally ranging from 
3 to 5 (Fu and Vrraraghavan 2001). The optimal growth temperature depends on 
the fungi, but is in the range of20-35 °C. In general, better decolourisation and bio­
degradation activities are also obtained at acidic or neural pH, and at temperatures 
between 20 and 35°C. The process can take hours, but more often several days (Ali 
20 10). For many recent publications on fungi decolourisation of synthetic dyes, see 
table 2 in Ali (20 l 0). Figure 4.1 0, is an example of decolourisation by the fungus, P. 
Simplicissimum, of several different single reactive dyes and their mixtures (Berg­
sten-Torralba eta!. 2009). Various type of reactor systems using fungi have been de­
scribed (Fu and Viraraghavan 2001; Kapdan and Kargi 2002), although, processes 
using immobilized growing cells look more promising than those using free cells, 
since the former can be repeatedly and continuously used in the remediation pro­
cess (Zhang et a!. 1999). Furthermore, immobilized cultures are more resilient to 
environmental perturbations, e.g. pH or exposure to toxic chemicals concentrations, 
than suspension cultures (Kuhad eta!. 2004; Couto 2009). Two interesting reviews 
on the use of immobilized fungi for dye decolourisation come from Couto (2009) 
and Mazmanci (2010). 140 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Bacteria 
Efforts to isolate bacterial cultures capable of degrading azo dyes started in the 
1970s with reports of Bacillus subtilis (Horistsu et al. 1977), followed by Aeromo­
nas hydrophilia (Idaka and Ogewa 1978) and Bacillus cereus (Wuhrrnann et al. 
1980). Numerous other bacteria capable of dye decolourisation have been found in 
the interim (Banat et al. 1996; Dave and Dave 2009). Khadijah et al. (2009) isolated 
1540 b~cteria and screened them for the ability to degrade azo dyes; from the ini­
tial screening in microtitre plates, 220 isolates showed decolourisation potential, of 
which 37 showed higher decolourised zones on dye-incorporated agar plates. In the 
final screening in liquid medium, 9 proved capable of degrading a wide spectrum 
of dyes. Bacteria degrade azo dyes reductively under anaerobic conditions to give 
colourless aromatic amines. These in tum need to be further degraded due to their 
possible toxic, mutagenic and/or carcinogenic character in humans and animals 
(Chen 2006). Human intestinal bacteria can also degrade azo dyes to carcinogenic 
aromatic amines (Chen 2006), which presents a public health problem where low 
amounts of dyes might be ingested. Anthraquinonic dyes are less susceptible to 
anaerobic reduction . Whole-cell biodegradation is often carried out by a number of 
enzymes working sequentially; however, as with other microorganism, only a few 
of the expressed bacterial enzymes are directly involved in dye biotransformation . 
The bacterial enzymes involved in the reductive azo bound cleavage are usually 
azoreductases, whose actions may depend on the presence of other substances such 
as cofactors, co-substrates or mediators . To avoid the formation of carcinogenic 
amines, aerobic conditions are preferable in aromatic amine degradation, but it 
should also be noted that some of them may be auto-oxidized to polymeric struc­
tures in the presence of oxygen (Kudlich et a!. 1999). Undeniably, the isolation of 
bacteria capable of aerobic decolourisation and mineralization of dyes has attracted 
interest, although, especially for sulfonated azo dyes, things have proven difficult 
(McMullan et al. 200 I). Contrary to the unspecific mechanism of azo dye bacterial 
reduction under anaerobic conditions, aerobic bacteria usually need to be specifi­
cally adapted to achieve a significant reductive process. This adaptation involves 
long-term aerobic growth in continuous culture in the presence of a very simple azo 
compound . Induction leads to the bacteria synthesis of azoreductases, specific fa~ 
the reduction of the inducer azo compound, or even others related compounds, in 
the presence of oxygen (Stolz 2001 ). Some strains of aerobic bacteria can degrade 
azo groups by special oxygen-tolerant azo reductases, but they have limited sub­
strate range (Zimmermann eta!. 1982; Nachiyar and Rajakumar 2005; Chen 2006). 
The concepts of anaerobic and aerobic biodegradation will be described in Sects. 
4.5.5.4 and 4.5.5.5. 
The use of bacteria is influenced by factors at the level of the cell, which in turn 
will influence the permeability and diffusion of dye molecules. Parameters, such as 
cell density, enzymes per cell, enzymatic catalytic efficiency, substrate charge and 
even cell permeability, can be modeled in order to achieve the highest removal rate 
(Martinez et al. 1999). Generally, unlike fungi, bacteria show better decolourisation 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 141 
and biodegradation activities at basic pH. In comparison to fungi, bacterial deco­
lourisation tends to be faster (Kalyani et al. 2009). 
For dye degradation in a bioreactor, immobilization of bacterial cells is also 
preferable. The advantages of using intact or immobilized cells for biocatalysis is 
that there is no need to recover and purify the enzymes involved in the process; in 
addition enzymes encapsulated in the cells may be more resistant to the operating 
conditions in the long term, in particular for decolouri sing model or real wastewa­
ters that are rich in salts, additives, surfactants, detergents and others compounds. 
In addition, costs associated with enzyme purification are negated. Cell immobiliza­
tion is an effective way to maintain continuous substrate degradation with concomi­
tant cell growth for the treatment of toxic materials. Compared with suspension 
cells, the main advantage of immobilized cells includes the retention of mict:oor­
ganisms in the reactor and hence protection of cells against toxic substances. The 
biocatalysts (cells) can be used in repeated cycles, which is of great importance 
when applied on an industrial scale. Indeed, Advanced Immobilized Cell Reactor 
technology has been developed specifically to attend for a cost effective treatment 
system that would accommodate shock load applications and be extremely flexible 
in its operation . One disadvantage of immobilization is the increased resistance of 
substrates and products to diffusion through matrices used for immobilization. Ow­
ing to the low solubility of oxygen in water and the high local cell density, oxygen 
transfer often becomes the rate-limiting factor in the performance of aerobic immo­
bilized cell systems. Thus, when aerobic cells are used, aeration technique becomes 
a very important consideration in bioreactor design technology. Immobilization 
coinmonly is accomplished using natural high molecular hydrophilic polymeric gel, 
such as calcium or sodium alginate, carrageenan and agarose (Palmieri et a!. 2005) 
or many synthetic polymers, such as poly-acrylamide (PAM), polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA) (Zhou et al. 2008). Activated carbon has also been used, especially in high 
performance bioreactors (Walker and Weatherley 1999; van der Zee and Villaverde 
2005). The recently developed BIOCOL process (Conlon and Khraisheh 2002) is a 
commercially available option for the treatment of azo dyes and uses a bacterium 
isolated from soil contaminated with textile wastewater as the biocatalyst . In this 
process, the bacterial cells are grown and immobilised on an activated carbon sup­
port material that adsorbs the target dye molecules and the potentially toxic amine 
breakdown products for biodegradation . As well as acting as an absorbent, the acti­
vated carbon can potentially promote the degradative activity of the biocatalyst (van 
der Zee eta!. 2001) 
Yeast 
Very little work has been devoted to the study of the decolourising ability of yeast, 
most often mentioning sorption as the main cause (Meehan et al. 2000; Donm.ez 
2002). Nevertheless, there are some reports on biodegradation by yeast strains, such 
as Candida zeylanoides (Martins eta!. 1999), Candida zeylanoides and lssatchenkia 
occidental is (Ramalho et al. 2002 and 2004, respectively). Yeast cells, like bacteria, 142 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
are capable of azo dye reduction to the corresponding amines. Testing adapted and 
unadapted cultures, Ramalho et al. (2004) found that the azo dye reduction activity 
was due to a constitutive enzyme and that activities were dependent on intact, active 
cells. Moreover, they noted that I. occidentalis (a dye reducer strain) has an absolute 
requirement of oxygen. Compared to bacteria and filamentous fungi, yeasts have 
some of the advantages of both: they not only grow rapidly like bacteria, but like 
filamentous fungi, they also have the ability to resist unfavourable environments 
(Yu and Wen 2005). In yeast, the ferric reductase system participates in the extracel­
lular reduction of dyes (Ramalho et al. 2005; Chen 2006). In general, yeasts show 
better decolourisation and biodegradation activities at acidic or neutral pH. 
4.5.6.3 Decolourisation by Isolated Enzymes 
Independent of the organism to which they belong, fungi, bacteria or yeast, the 
degradation of some compounds is catalysed by specific enzymes. Indeed, there is 
a growing recognition that enzymes can be used in many remediation treatments to 
target specific pollutants. In this direction, recent biotechnological advances have 
allowed the production of cheaper and more readily available enzymes through bet­
ter isolation and purification procedures. At the same time, fundamental studies on 
enzyme structures and enzymatic mechanisms have been conducted. 
The main enzymes involved in dye degradation are the lignin-modifying ex­
tracellular enzymes (laccase, lignin peroxidase, phenol oxidase, Mn-dependent 
peroxidase and Mn-independent peroxidase) secreted by WRF, and the bacteri:al 
azoreductases. Because of their high biodegradation capacity, they are of con­
siderable biotechnological interest and their application in the decolourisation 
process of wastewaters has been extensively investigated (Young and Yu 1997). 
Several enzymes have been isolated and characterised (Grigorious et al. 2000); 
however, azo reductases have little activity in vivo (Rus et a!. 2000). From an 
environmental point of view, the use of enzymes instead of chemicals or micro­
organisms presents several advantages, including the potential for scale-up, with 
enl1anced stability and/or activity, and at a lower cost through using recombinant­
DNA technology. Another advantage of using pure enzymes instead of the mi­
croorganism is that the expression of enzymes involved in dye degradation is not 
constant with time, but dependent on the growth phase of the organisms and is 
influenced by inhibitors that may be present in the effluent. Synthetic or natural 
redox mediators have, to be added many times to the enzymatic bath in order to 
achieve the total capacity of the enzyme(s) or even to make their work possible 
(see Sect. 4.5.6.4). 
The major drawback of using enzyme preparations is that once the enzymes 
become inactivated, it is of no use. Because enzymes can be inactivated by the 
presence of the other chemicals, it is likely that enzymatic treatment will be most 
effective in streams that have the highest concentrations of target contaminants but 
the lowest concentration of other compounds that could interfere with their action. 
In order to increase the potential use of enzymes in a wastewater bioremediation 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 143 
process, their immobilisation is recommended for biochemical stability and reuse, 
thereby reducing the cost (Duran and Esposito 2000; Kandelbauer et al. 2004). 
4.5.6.4 Anaerobic Dye Decolourisation 
Anaerobic processes convert the organic contaminants principally into methane and 
carbon dioxide. They usually occupy less space, can treat wastes containing up to 
30 000 mg L-1 of COD, have lower running costs, and produce less sludge. 
Azo dye degradation occurs preferentially under anaerobic or oxygen limited 
concentrations, acting as fmal electron acceptors during microbial respiration. Oxy­
gen, when it is present, may compete with the dyes. In many cases the decolouri­
sation of reactive azo dyes under anaerobic conditions is a co-metabolic reaction 
(Stolz 2001). Several mechanisms have been proposed for the decolourisation of 
azo dyes under anaerobic conditions (Rus et al. 2000). One of these is the reductive 
cleavage of the azo bond by unspecific cytoplasmic azo reductases using flavopro­
teins (FMN!lz and FAD~) as cofactors . A second proposed mechanism is an in­
tracellular, non-enzymatic reaction consisting of a simple chemical reduction of the 
azo bond by reduced flavin nucleotides. These reductive cleavages, with the trans­
fer of 4 electrons and the respective aromatic amine formation (Fig. 4.11), usually 
occur with low specific activities but are extremely nonspecific with regard to the 
organism involved and the dyes converted. Transport of the reduction equivalents 
from the cellular system to the azo compounds is also important, because the most 
relevant azo compounds are either too polar and/or too large to pass through the 
cell membrane (Rau and Stolz 2003). Mediators generally enable or accelerate the 
electron transfer of reducing equivalents from a cell membrane of a bacterium to the 
terminal electron acceptor, the azo dye (Kudlich et al. 1997; Rus et al. 2000; Keck 
eta!. 2002; VanderZee eta!. 2001). Such compounds can either result from the 
aerobic metabolism of certain substances by bacteria themselves or be added to the 
medium. They are enzymatically reduced by the cells and these reduced mediator 
compounds in tum reduce the azo group in a purely chemical reaction (Stolz 200 I). 
It has been suggested that quinoide redox mediators with standard redox potentials 
(EO') between -320 and -50 mV could function as effective redox mediators in 
the microbial reduction of azo dyes. The first example of an anaerobic cleavage 
of azo dyes by redox mediators which are naturally formed during the aerobic me­
tabolism ofxenobiotic compound was reported by Keck eta!. (1997). DosSantos 
et a!. (2005) studied the impact of different redox mediators on colour removal of 
R2 "J-L ___/\ _ Reduction 
HO . )=I N=N~RJ----+ 
R1 
Azo dye 
Fig. 4.11 Mechanism of an azo dye reduction h _/\_ 
HO )=I NH2 H2N~R 3 
R1 
Aromatic a mines 144 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
azo dye model compound; up to an eightfold increase in decolourisation rates were 
achieved compared with mediator-free incubations. Many authors have reported in­
crease of azo dye decolourisation rates in the presence of such molecules, either by 
membrane-bound respiratory chain or cytosolic enzymes (K.udlich eta!. 1997; Rau 
eta!. 2002; 2003; Ramalho eta!. 2004; Pearce eta!. 2006). The need in some cases 
for external addition of chemical mediators may increase the cost of the process. In 
crude extracts and crude enzyme preparations, low molecular weight compounds 
may be naturally present that act as natural enhancing compounds. The physiology 
of the possible reactions that result in a reductive cleavage of azo compounds un­
der anaerobic conditions differs significantly from the situation in the presence of 
oxygen because the redox active compounds rapidly react either with oxygen or azo 
dyes (Stolz 2001). Therefore, under aerobic conditions, oxygen and dyes compete 
for the reduced electron carriers. In bioremediation, an anaerobic treatment or pre­
treatment step can be a cheap alternative compared with an aerobic system because 
expensive aeration is omitted and the problem with bulking sludge is avoided. 
In addition to azo dyes, other classes of dyes have been degraded under anaero­
bic conditions (McMullan et a!. 2001 ), but the mechanisms are less well described. 
4.5.6.5 Aerobic Dye Decolourisation 
In aerobic pathways, azo dyes are oxidized without the cleavage of the azo bond 
through a highly non-specific free radical mechanism, forming phenolic type com­
pounds (Fig. 4.12). This mechanism avoids the formation of the toxic aromatic 
amines arising under reductive conditions (Chivukula and Renganahathan 1995; 
Chen 2006; Pereira eta!. 2009a). 
The main organisms involved in the oxidative degradation of dyes are the fungi 
WRF by the so-called lignolitic enzymes (Sect. 5.5.2.1 ). The application of these or­
ganisms or their enzymes in dye wastewater bioremediation have attracted increas­
ing scientific attention because they are able to degrade a wide range of organic 
pollutants, including various azo, heterocyclic and polymerise dyes (Abadulla et a!. 
2000; Wesenberg et a!. 2003). It is also noteworthy that they require mild condi­
tions, with better activities and stability in acidic media and at temperatures from 20· 
to 35°C. Oxidases can also be found in some bacteria, plants and animals. 
Peroxidase s, including LiP and MnP, use hydrogen peroxide to promote the one­
electron oxidation mechanism of chemicals to free radicals (Figs. 4.13 and 4.14, 
respectively). Those enzymes have an important role on the cellular detoxification 
R2 J\._ ___/\__ Oxidation 
HO )=I N=N~RJ- -----. 
At 
Azo dye Oxidation products 
Fig. 4.12 Mechanism of an azo dye oxidation 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 
Lignin Peroxidase 
Ferric 
Enzyme Compound II 
Fig. 4.13 Catalytic cycle of a mangane se peroxidase (Cameron et al. 2000) 145 
R 
of organisms by eliminating hydrogen peroxide. They are hemoproteins belonging 
to the oxidoreductase enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of phenols, biphenols, 
anilines, benzidines and related hetereoaromatic compounds, for which H202 is the 
fmal electron acceptor (Duran and Esposito 2000). The dye does not need to bind 
to the enzyme; instead oxidation occurs through simple electron transfer, either 
directly or through the action of low molecular weight redox mediators (Eggert 
et a!. 1996). Lignin peroxidase was discovered earlier than MnP and exhibits the 
common peroxidase catalytic cycle. It interacts with its substrates via a ping-pong 
mechanism, i.e. firstly it is oxidized by Hz02 through the removal of two electrons 
that give compound I, and further oxidized through the removal of one electron to 
give compound II, which oxidizes its substrate, returning to the resting enzyme. The 
active intermediates of LiP (i.e. com ponds I and II) have considerably higher reduc­
tion potentials than the intermediates of other peroxidise s, extending the number of 
chemicals that can be oxidised. MnP mechanism differs from that of LiP in using 
Mn+2 as a mediator. Once Mn+2 has been oxidized by the enzyme, Mn+l can oxidize 
organic substrate molecules. MnP compounds I and II can oxidize Mn+2 to Mn+3, 
but compound I can also oxidize some phenolic substrates. 146 
Manganese Peroxidase 
Ferric 
Enzyme Compound I 
Fig. 4.14 Catalytic cycle of a lignin peroxidase (Cameron et al. 2000) L. Pereira and M. Alves 
R 
Compound II 
The use of pure peroxidases for dye degradation, in place of the organism, re­
quires the addition of hydrogen veroxide. The pathways for the degradation of two 
sulfonated azo dyes by the peroxidise and ligninase of Phanerochaete chrysospo­
rium and by the peroxidise of Streptomyces chromofuscust have been proposed by 
Goszczynski eta!. (1994). More recently, Lopez et al. (2004) have proposed a deg­
radation pathway of Orange II by MnP enzyme. 
Laccases are another group of oxidoreductases, but these use oxygen as the fmal 
electron acceptor. This may be advantageous when using the pure enzyme, rela­
tively to peroxidases, since H202 and co factors are not needed. Laccases belong to 
the small group of named multicopper blue oxidase enzymes, and the mechanism 
of oxidative reactions catalysed by them involves the transfer of 4 single elec­
trons from the substrate to the fmal acceptor. Their catalytic centres consist of 3 
structurally and functionally distinct copper centres (Solomon et al. 1996; Stoj and 
Kosman et al. 2005). T1 copper ("blue copper") is a mononuclear centre involved 
in the substrate oxidation, whereas T2 and T3 form a trinuclear centre involved 
in the reduction of oxygen to water (Fig. 4.15). Owing to their high relative non­
specific oxidation capacity, laccases have proven useful for diverse biotechno logi­
cal applications including degradation of dyes (Abadulla et al. 2000; Husain 2006) 
and organic synthesis (Eggert et al. 1996; Riva 2006; Schroeder et al. 2007). The 
first described laccase had plant origin, the Japanese lacquer tree, Rhus vernicefera 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 147 
reduced 
laccase 02 / cu+ peroxide-level ~ HO-0\ intermediate 
----- -~---=::::,.+ Cu2
+ c 2+ Ill' 'o_.... u 
cu+ 
Cu2+ 
/ H-0 
Cu2+...... .....cu2+ 
0 
I 
resting H 
enzyme Cu2+ 
Fig. 4.15 Catalytic cycle of a laccase (Wesenberg et al. 2003) I 
H 
Cu2+ 
/ H-0 
I 
Cu2:_ ,.cu2+ 
0 
I 
H native 
Cu2+ intermediate 
(Yoshida and Takemori 1997). Nowadays, most of the known laccases have fungal 
(e.g. white-rot fungi) or plant origins, although a few have recently been identified 
and isolated from bacteria (Claus 2003; Gianfreda et al. 1999). The ability of a bac­
teriallaccase (CotA) to degrade a wide range of azo and anthraquinonic dyes was 
reported for the fust time by Pereira et a!. (2009a, b). The mechanism of azo dye 
degradation has been described by some authors (Chivukula and Renganahathan 
1995: Zille eta!. 2005; Pereira et al. 2009a). Antraquinonic dyes are also an impor­
tant class of dyes, although there is limited information on their physicochemical 
or biological degradation, and even less on the molecular mechanisms of trans­
formation (Pereira et a!. 2009b ). Based on the characterisation of intermediates 
and fmal products of the reaction, Pereira et al. (2009b) described the mechanistic 
pathway for the biotransformation of the anthraquinonic dye AB62 by the bacterial 
CotA -laccase. 
The mechanism of Indigo dye (the most important dye in the manufacturing of 
blue jeans) degradation by a laccase has also been described (Campos et al. 2001). 
The dye is cleaved under laccase catalyzed electron transfer to give isatin, which, 
after further decarboxylation, is catalyzed to the fmal stable oxidation product, an­
thranilic acid (Fig. 4.16). Likewise, in peroxidise-catalyzed decolourisation of Indi-148 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
H -..cq="' O_..~"' NH, OH_..~"' NH, OH 
.# .# 0 .# 
0 H o 0 
Indigo !satin Anthranilic acid 
Fig. 4.16 Mechanism of Indigo oxidation by purified laccases from Trametes hirsuta and Sclero­
tiwn rolfsii (Campos et al. 200 I) 
go Carmine, isatin sulfonic acid is formed, although a stable red oxidation product, 
probably a dimeric condensation product, was obtained (Podgornik et al. 2001). 
4.5.6.6 Combination of Anaerobic/Aerobic Processes for Dye Treatment 
Many dyes used in textile industry cannot be degraded aerobically as the enzymes 
involved are dye-specific. Anaerobic reduction of azo dyes is generally more sat­
isfactory than aerobic degradation, but the intermediate products (carcinogenic 
aromatic amines) must be further degraded. These colourless amines are, how­
ever, very resistant to further degradation under anaerobic conditions, and there­
fore aerobic conditions are required for complete mineralisation (Melgoza et al. 
2004; Forgacs et al. 2004; Pandey et al. 2007). For the most effective wastewater 
treatment, 2-stage biological wastewater treatment systems, are then necessary in 
which an aerobic treatment is introduced after the initial anaerobic reduction of the 
azo bond (Sponza and I~ik 2005; VanderZee and Villaverde 2005; see Fig. 4.17). 
The balance between the anaerobic and aerobic stages in this treatment system 
must be carefully controlled because it may become darker during re-aeration of a 
reduced dye solution. This is to be expected, since aromatic amines are spontane­
ously unstable in the presence of oxygen. Oxidation of the hydroxyl and amino 
groups to quinines and quinine imines can occur and these products can also un­
dergo dimerisation or polymerisation, leading to the development of new darkly 
coloured chromophores (Pereira et al. 2009a, b). However, with the establishment 
of correct operating conditions, many strains of bacteria are capable of achiev­
ing high levels of decolourisation when used in a sequential anaerobic/aerobic 
treatment process (Steffan et al. 2005; van der Zee and Villaverde 2005). Aerobic 
biodegradation of many aromatic amines has been extensively studied (Brown 
and Laboureur 1983; Pinheiro et al. 2004; van der Zee and Villaverde 2005), but 
these findings may not apply to all aromatic amines. Specially sulfonated aromatic 
amines are often difficult to degrade (Razo-Flores et al. 1996; Tan and Field et al. 
2000; Tan et al. 2005). Aromatic amines are commonly not degraded under an­
aerobic conditions. Melgoza et al. (2004) studied the fate of Disperse Blue 79 in 
a two-stage anaerobic/aerobic process; the azo dye was biotransformed to amines 
in the anaerobic stage and an increase of toxicity was obtained; the toxic amines 
were subsequently mineralized in the aerobic phase, resulting in the detoxification 
of the effluent. 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 149 
Anaerobic Aerobic 
azo dyes 
aromatic am1nes 
R~ ~C02+H20+NH3 
~NH2 ~ 
autoxidation 
Fig. 4.17 Azo dye degradation in a two-step (aerobic/anaerobic) process (van der Zee and Vil­
laverde 2005) 
The 2-stage treatment systems can be the result of many different combinations, 
such as 2 biological or 2 physicochemical processes, but also of combinations of 
both these types. The choice for the best treatments is related to many other factors, 
such as the type of effluent, the availability of the methods, the locality where it is 
to be applied, and others. 
4.5.6. 7 Factors Affecting Biodegradation of Dyes 
Ecosystems are dynamic environments with variable abiotic conditions, e.g. pH, 
temperature, dissolved oxygen, nitrate concentration, metals, salts, etc. Microor­
ganisms are affected by changes in these parameters, and consequently their decom­
posing activities are also affected. Other non-dye related parameters are the type 
and source of reduction equivalents, bacteria consortium, and cell permeability. 
Enzymes synthesised by microorganisms, when isolated, are also sensitive to the 
medium culture conditions in which they are applied. Usually, they proceed better 
in environments more suitable for the original microorganism. Textile wastewaters 
result from different classes of dyes, and consequently vary in their composition 
and pH. It is therefore important, while evaluating the potential of different mi­
croorganisms for dye degradation, to consider the effects of other present com-150 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
pounds. Optimization of abiotic conditions will greatly help in the development of 
industrial-scale bioreactors for bioremediation . Optimal pH and temperatures are 
always related to the environment where the organisms were collected, but usually 
fungi work better, either for growth or compounds degradation, in acidic or neutral 
media, whereas bacteria prefer alkaline conditions. Dye decolourisation proceeds 
better under acidic conditions for fungi and fungal enzymes (Abadulla et a!. 2000; 
Kandelbauer et a!. 2004; Almansa et a!. 2004; Zille eta!. 2005), but under alkaline 
conditions for bacteria and bacterial enzymes (Pereira et a!. 2009a). The optimal 
temperatures of microorganisms usually range from 20 to 35°C, but there are also 
others that tolerate higher values, although the stability may be compromised. Be­
yond the optimum temperature, the degradation activities of the microorganisms 
decrease because of slower growth, reproduction rate and the deactivation of en­
zymes responsible for degradation. 
Biodegradation of azo dyes and textile effluents can be affected by dye related 
parameters, such as class and type of azo dye, reduction metabolites, dye concen­
tration, dye side-groups and organic dye additives. Microbial activity can decrease 
with increasing dye concentration , which can be attributed to the toxicity of the 
dyes to the growing microbial cells at higher concentrations (in the biodegradation) 
and/or cell saturation (biosorption). In the most enzymatic decolourisation stud­
ies, the kinetics are described by Michaelis -Menten model and an increase of the 
rate with increase the dye concentration is observed up to a certain concentration 
(saturation) . At dye amounts higher than the optimal, the rates usually remain con­
stant due to saturation, but there are also some cases of inhibition at concentrations 
higher than the optimal. The inhibition concentration of dye is not the same for all 
the microorganisms , and for the same organisms, the inhibition concentration will 
depend on the dye. Adaptation of a microbial community to the compound is very 
useful in improving the rate of decolourisation process, due to the natural expres­
sion of genes encoding for enzymes responsible for its degradation, when previ­
ously exposed (Ramalho et a!. 2004). The fact that some dyes are biodegraded and 
others not, even under the same conditions, is explained by the role of the chemical 
structure of the dye on the process. Even when belonging to the same class and type, 
dyes differ in their structure and present different p Ka and potential redox. Zille et a!. 
(2004) studied the biodegradation under aerobic conditions of azo dyes by yeasts 
with reducing activity and by an oxidative enzyme, laccase, with or without media­
tor; they compared these 2 approaches on the basis of the electrochemical properties 
of dyes and bioagents. A linear increase of dye decolourisation with decreasing re­
dox potential of dye was obtained with laccase and laccase/mediator systems; in the 
reductive approach, they observed that the less negative the redox potential of the 
azo dye, the more favourable (and faster) its reduction. The redox potential should 
reportedly be below -450 to -500 mV for azo dye reduction to occur (Delee eta!. 
1998).lt is worth mentioning that the redox potential is influenced by other external 
factors, such as the pH of the solution. The redox potential of the enzymes may also 
be involved, although in many cases, enzymes with redox potential lower than that 
of the dyes can decolourise them. These facts can be understood in the light of the 
Nernst equation; any redox reaction is dependent on the formal redox potential, and 
on the concentrations of the reduced and oxidized species (Zille eta!. 2004). 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediati on 151 
Little information is available in the literature describing quantitatively the ef­
fects of dye chemical structure on the reactivity towards laccase oxidation. Almansa 
eta!. (2004) have synthesized 22 model azo-dyes of chemically very similar struc­
ture and studied the effect of substituents on the enzymatic kinetics of their deco­
lourisation. The model dyes only differed in nature and position of the substituent 
on the phenyl ring, which carried either a single methyl (-CH3), trifluoromethyl 
(-CF3), fluoro (-F), chloro (-Cl), bromo (-Br), nitro (-N02), or hydroxy (-OH) 
group in the ortho, meta or para-position with respect to the azo linkage. Without 
the assistance of an electron mediator, enzymatic degradation took place only with 
the hydroxy-substituted model azo-dyes. All other dyes were only degraded in the 
presence of mediator, except those substituted with trifluoromethyl that were not 
degraded at all. The electron withdrawing effect of 3 fluorine atoms proved strong 
enough to completely prevent the reaction. In general, they found that electron­
withdrawing substitutents diminish reaction rates whereas electron-donating groups 
·enhanced the susceptibility of the dye towards oxidative attack. Similar conclusions 
were previous reported by Chivukula and Renganathan (1995) and Kandelbauer 
eta!. (2004). 
Wastewaters from textile processing and dyestuff manufacture industries contain 
also substantial amounts of salts in addition to azo dye residues. Thus, microbial 
species capable of tolerating salt stress will be beneficial for treating such wastewa­
ters. High salt concentrations can also inhibit enzyme activity. 
All the referred factors have to be considered and studied for a full-scale applica­
tion. The influence of the flow rate of the effluent, the nature (concentration) of the 
effluent, the pursued extent of treatment, the location, the climatic conditions and 
the configuration of the reactor are all of great importance, not only for the success 
of the process itself, but also in terms of making it cost-effective. 
4.5.6.8 Genetic Engineering of Dye Degrading Organisms 
The vast majority of the current publications in the field of the synthetic dyes re­
moval from waters have dealt with the various aspects of the application of mi­
crobiological methods and techniques, with the search for new microorgani sms 
providing improved decomposition rates, and with the elucidation of the principal 
biochemical and biophysical mechanisms underlying the decolourisation process 
of dyes. Bioprocesses, whether involving the microorganisms themselves or their 
enzymes, are sufficiently versatile to be customised. Identification, isolation, and 
transfer of genes encoding degradative enzymes can greatly help in designing mi­
crobes with enhanced degradation capabilities . Thus, acclimatization and genetic 
engineering can both help in designing "super-degraders" . Of the two approaches, 
acclimatization is natural, since in this case the built-in genetic setup of the micro­
organism is not disturbed ; only some components are enabled. On the other hand, 
in genetic engineering , the natural genetic set-up of a microorganism is changed by 
incorporating a new gene or genes. Therefore , many scientists--especially environ­
mentalists -are skeptical about the usefulness of genetically modified organisms . 
They fear that such modified organisms may create new environm ental problems 152 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
(Ali 201 0). However, there is evidence that gene manipulation for the creation of re­
combinant strains with higher biodegradation capacity will be applied in the future. 
By cloning and transferring genes encoding for dye degrading enzymes, organisms 
could be designed that combine the abilities of mixed cultures within a single spe­
cie. A number of genes conferring the ability of dye decolourising have been identi­
fied. Successful decolourisation of an azo dye using Escherichia coli carrying the 
azoreductase gene from a wild-type Pseudomonas h1teola has been reported (Chang 
et al. 2000; Chang and Kuo 2000). This approach could become a useful alterna­
tive for shortening the extended time-periods otherwise needed to adapt appropriate 
cultures and isolated strains, respectively. CotA-laccase, a bacterial enzyme from 
Bacillus subtilis cloned and over-expressed in E. coli, has proved to be a thermoac­
tive and intrinsically thermostable enzyme with a high capacity for the decolourisa­
tion of azo and anthraquinonic dyes (Pereira et al. 2009a, b). The expression level 
of CotA-laccases in different E. coli host strains, growing under different culture 
conditions, was compared and a high-throughput screenings for the oxidation of 
dyes with high potential redox developed by Brissos et al. (2009). 
4.6 Products Identification and Mechanisms 
of Dye Degradation 
We have already pointed out that pollutant degradation, including dyes, vary ac­
cording to non-related and related dye parameters. Identification of the products 
from synthetic dyes biodegradation is most helpful in determining the mechanistic 
pathways involved. Such findings are not only important in the knowledge about 
the fate of organic pollutants, but indirectly in the assessment of the toxicity of the 
intermediates and main products, and also in describing the microbial system and/or 
enzymatic activities. Different microorganisms/enzymes may have different path­
ways of degradation depending on the particular dye structure; thus the strategy of 
the microbial system for dye degradation and many other factors has to be studied. 
Dyes, as colourants, absorb in the visible region of the spectra and each one has 
a maximal wavelength, depending on its visible colour (see Sect. 4.2); therefore, 
the easiest way to monitor dye degradation is by means of spectrophotometry, fol­
lowing the decrease in its absorbance. By this technique, all the molecules present 
are quantified, and intermediates and degradation products will contribute to the 
spectra absorbance . Various basic and advanced instrumental techniques of chroma­
tography such as gas chromatography (GC), high performance liquid chromatogra­
phy (HPLC), nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), mass spectrometry 
(Ion-trap, MALDI) and capillary electrophoresis (CE) are available to assist in the 
isolation and characterization of the intermediates and products of dye degradation, 
thereby giving new insight into the mechanism of biodegradation. Prior procedures 
of extraction of the aqueous sample with an organic solvent or filtration are adopted 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 153 
when a heterogeneous catalyst or solid reactant is employed, or when a pre-separa­
tion is needed. 
Quantification of C02 and NH3 produced in incubated culture media can also 
provide additional information. Recent studies on the on the mechanisms and path­
ways using those techniques have been published by Lopez et al. (2004), Vanhulle 
et al. (2008); Bafana et al. (2009) and Pereira et a!. (2009a, b). 
4. 7 Conclusions 
The management of textile industrial effluents is a complicated task, taking ·into 
consideration the complexity of the waste compounds that may be present, in ad­
dition to the dyes, and the numerous established options for treatment and reuse of 
water. Wide ranges of water pH, temperature, salt concentration and in the chemi­
cal structure of numerous dyes in use today add to the complication. Economical 
removal of colqur from effluents remains an important problem, although a number 
of successfu l systems employing various physicochemical and biological processes 
have been successfully implemented. Regulatory agencies are increasingly inter­
ested in new, efficient, and improved decolourisation teclmologies. Solid and evolv­
ing scientific knowledge and research is of the utmost relevance for the effective 
response to current needs. In view of the requirement for a technically and economi­
cally satisfactory treatment, a flurry of emerging technologies are being proposed 
and are at different stages of being tested for commercialization. A broader valida­
tion of these new technologies and the integration of different methods in the cur­
rent treatment schemes will be most likely in the near future, rendering them both 
efficient and economically viable. 
Conventiona l physicochemical treatments are not always efficient. The high 
cost, the generation of sludge and of other pollutants, and the need for sophisti­
cated technologies are limiting factors as well. Bioremediation of textile effluents 
is still seen as an attractive solution due to its reputation as a low-cost, sustainable 
and publicly acceptable technology. Microorganisms are easy to grow and the use 
of their isolated enzymes for textile dyes degradation is not expensive in relative 
terms because there is no need for high purity levels in treating effluents. Many 
microorganisms and enzymes have been isolated and explored for their ability and 
capacity to degrade dyes. Others have been modified by the genetic engineering 
tools to obtain "super and faster degraders". Biological processes may require two 
stages, especially for azo dyes, in which dyes are reduced in the first anerobic step 
to their respective aromatic amines, which are then oxidized and mineralized in a fi­
nal aerobic step. In some cases, a combinat ion of biological with physical-such as 
adsorption or filtration, or chemical such as coagulation/oxidation -processes may 
be necessary to achieve the desirable goal. Several low cost and efficient sorbents 
including natural wastes are very promising, not only due to the lower cost and high 
availability, but also a new utility is granted to those wastes. !54 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
4.8 Future Perspectives 
The increasing manufacture and application of synthetic dyes, taking into account 
their impact in the environment, needs an effective response in terms of modern and 
viable treatment processes of coloured effluents, prior to their discharge as waste 
into waterways: Biodegradation of synthetic dyes using different microorganisms 
and isolated enzymes offer a promising approach by themselves or in combination 
with conventional treatments. 
The complexity of dyes degradation and the existence of an immense variety of 
structurall y different dyes, indicates the need for more research. Moreover, the most 
of the available studies on dye degradation are referent to azo dyes; the studies shall 
· be extended to the other classes: anthraquinone, indigoid, xanthene, arylmethane 
and phthalocyanine derivatives. The pathways for dye degradation are also still not 
totally understood; walk in that direction has high relevance for the development 
of future modern technology. The increasing research in microbiology, molecular 
biology, chemistry and genetic fields associated with the degradation technology, 
are fundamental for that knowledge. Additionally, the effect of coloured substances 
and their products either in the environment or during the treatment processes will 
be better evaluated and understood. That better understand, in turn, will leads to a 
technology improvement and application of more efficient, either from existent or 
new, treatment processes. New microorganisms and enzymes, with broader sub­
strate specificity and higher activity, will also be found, isolated and studied for 
their ability and capacity as key agents in pollution remediation. Through the bene­
fits of genetic engineering, random or selective modificat ion of the microorganisms 
and enzymes can greatly help in designing microbes with higher catalytic power for 
a wider range of compounds. Optimization of the remediation process in terms of 
time, efficiency, stabilization and, as consequence, in costs will gain from this. The 
knowledge and evolution in biochemical, biological and process engineering is also 
essential for the establishment of processes at industrial scale. Promising processes 
seem to be the combination of more than one treatment, either biologic or chemical, 
for the complete mineralization and detoxification of the coloured effluent. 
The study and implementation of the new treatments shall not only be focused 
on pollution reduction, but also in the reuse of water and exploitation of the fmal 
by-products for other applications. 
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the PIDC/AMB/6933512006 project grants. L. 
Pereira holds a Pos-Doc fellowship (SFRH/BPD/2074412004). 
References 
Abadulla E, Tzanov T, Costa S, Robra K-H, Cavaco-Paulo A, Gubitz G (2000) Decolorization and 
detoxification of textile dyes with a laccase from Trametes hirsute. Appl Environ Microbial 
66:3357-3362 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation !55 
Ackacha MA, Polec-Pawlak K, Jarosz M (2003) Identification of anthraquinone coloring matters 
in natural red dyestuffs by high performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet and elec­
trospray mass spectrometr ic detection. J Sep Sci 26:1028-1034, doi: 10.!002/jssc.200301484 
Adak A, Bandyopadhyay M, Pal A (2005) Removal of crystal violet dye from wastewater by 
surfactant-modified alumina. Sep PurifTech 44:139-144, doi: I 0.10 16/j.seppur.2005.0 1.002 
Adak A, Pal A (2006) Removal kinetics and mechanism for crystal violet uptake by surfactant­
modified alumina. J Environ Sci Heal A, 41:228-2297, doi: I 0.1080110934520600872953 
Ahmad AL, Harris WA, Syafiie, Seng OB (2002) Removal of dye from wastewater of textile in­
dustry using membrane technology . J Techno136:31-44 
Aksu Z (2005) Application of biosorption for the removal of organic pollutants: a review. Proc 
Biochem 40:9-1026 
AI-Degs YS, Khraishen MAM, Allen SJ, Ahmad MN (2000) Effect of carbon surface chemistry on 
the removal of reactive dyes from textile effluent. Water Res 34:927-935 
AI-Degs YS, El-Barghouthi Ml, EI-Sheikh AH, Walker GM (2008) Effect of solution pH, ionic 
strength, and temperature on adsorption behaviour of reactive dyes on activated carbon. Dyes 
Pigments 77:16-23 
AI-Ghouti MA, Khraisheh MAM, Allen SJ, Ahmad MN (2003) The removal of dyes from textile 
wastewater: a study of the physical characteristics and adsorption mechanisms of diatoma­
ceous Earth. J Environ Manage 69:229-238 
Allen SJ, Koumanova B (2005) Decolourisation of water/wastewater using adsorption. J Univ 
Chern Techno! Metall43(3):175-192 
Ali H (20 I 0) Biodegradation of synthetic dyes-a review. Water Air Soil Poilu! doi:.l 007/s 11270-
010-0382-4 
Allegre C, Maisseub M, Charbita F, Moulin P (2004) Coagulation-flocculation-decantation 
of dye house effluents: concentrated effluents. J Hazard Mater Bll6:57-64, doi:l0.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2004 .07.005 
Almansa E, Kandelbauer A, Pereira L, Cavaco-Paulo A, Gubtiz G (2004) Influence of struc­
ture on dye degradation with laccase mediator systems. Biocat Biotransf 22:315-324, doi: 
10.1080/10242420400024508 
Alpat SK, Ozbayrak 0, Alpat S, Akcay H (2008) The adsorptio n kinetics and removal of cationic 
dye, Toluidine Blue 0, from aqueous solution with Turkish zeolite. J Hazard Mater 151:213-220 
Ames B, McCann J, Yamasaki E (1975) Methods for detecting carcinogens and mutagens with the 
Salmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test. Mut Res 31 :34 7-364 
Amin NK (2008) Removal of reactive dye from aqueous solutions by adsorption onto activated 
carbons prepared from sugarcane bagasse pith. Desalination 223:152-161, doi:l0.1016/j.de­
sal.2007.0 1.203 
Anjaneyulu Y, Chary NS, Raj DSN (2005) Decolourization of industrial effluents-available 
methods and emerging technologies-a review. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 4:245-273, doi: 
10.1007/sll l57-005-1246-z 
Annadurai G, Krishnan MRV (1997) Batch equilibrium adsorption of reactive dye onto natural 
biopolymer. Iranian Polymer Jovial6:169-175 
Annagan B, Turan M, Celik MS (2004) Equilibrium studies on the adsorption of reactive azo dyes 
into zeolite. Desalination 170:33-39 
Arslan I, Balcio~lu !A ( 1999) Degradation of commercial reactive dyestuffs by heterogenous and 
homogenous advanced oxidation processes: a comparative study. Dyes Pigments 43:95-108 
Badii K, Ardejani FD, Saberi MA, Limaee NY, Shafaei ZS (20 1 0) Adsorption of acid blue 25 dye 
on diatomite on aqueous solutions. Indian J Techno! 17 (1):7-16 
Bafana A, Chakrabarti T, Muthal P, Kanade G (2009) Detoxification of benzidine-based azo dye 
by E. gallinarum: time-cour se study. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 72:960-964 
Banal IM, Nigam P, Singh D, Marchant R (1996) Microbial decolorization of textile-dye-contain­
ing effluent: a review. Biores Technol58:217-227 
Bergsten-Torralba LR, Nishikawa MM, Baptista DF, Magalhaes DP, Da Silva M (2009) Deco­
lourisation of different textile dyes by Penicillium Simplicis and toxicity evaluation after fungal 
treatment. Braz J Microbial 40:808-817 156 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Brissos V, Pereira L, Munteanu F-D, Cavaco-Paulo A, Martins LO (2009) Expression system of 
CotA-Iaccase for directed evolution and high-throughput screenings for the oxidation of high 
redox potential dyes. J Biotechnol4:1-6, doi: 10.1002/biot.200800248 
Brown D, Laboureur P ( 1983) The aerobic biodegradability of primary aromatic amines. Chemo­
sphere 12:405-414 
Brown PA, Gill SA, Aile SJ (2000) Metal removal from wastewater using peat. Water Res 34 
(16):3907 -3916 
Cameron MD, Timofeevski S, Aust SO (2000) Enzymology of Phanerochaete chrysosporium with 
respect to the degradation of recalcitrant compounds and xenobiotics. Appl Microbial Biotech­
no! 54:751-758 
Campos R, Kandelbauer A, Robra KH, Cavaco-Paulo A, GUbitz GM (2001) Indigo degradation 
with purified laccases from 1/·ometes hirsuta and Sclerotium ro/fsii. J Biotechnol 89:131-139 
Chowdhury AN, Jesmeen SR, Hossain MM (2004) Removal of dyes from water by conducting 
polymeric adsorbent. Polym Adv Techno! 15:633-638 
Chang JS, Kuo TS (2000) Kinetics of bacterial decolorization of azo dye with Escherichia coli 
N03. Bioresour Technol75:107-ll 
Chang JS, Kuo TS, Chao YP, Ho JY, Lin PJ (2000) Azo dye decolorization with a mutant Esch­
erichia coli strain. Biotechnol Lett 22:807-812 
Chatterjee S, Chatterjee S, Chatterjee BP, Das AR, Guha AK (2005) Adsorption of a model an­
ionic dye, eosin Y, from aqueous solution by chitosan hydrobeads. J Colloid Interface Sci 
288(1):30-35 
Chen H (2006) Recent advances in azo dye degrading enzyme research. Curr Protein Peptide Sci 
7:101-111 
Chiou M-S, Li H-Y (2002) Equilibrium and kinetic modeling of adsorption of reactive dye on 
cross-linked chitosan beads. J Hazard Mater 3:233-248 
Chivukula M, Renganathan V (1995) Phenolic azo dye oxidation by laccase from Pyricu/m·ia 
01yzae. Appl Environ Microbiol61 :4374-4377 
Claus H (2003) Laccases and their occurrence in prokaryotes . Arch Microbial 179:145-150 
Conlon M, Khraisheh M (2002) Bioadsorption process for the removal of colour from textile ef­
fluent. GB Patent W00242228 
Couto SR (2009) Dye removal by immobilised fungi. Biotechno l Adv 27:227-235, doi: I 0.1 016/j. 
biotechadv.2008.12.00 1 
Couto SR, Rivela I, Muiloz MR, Sanroman A (2000) Ligninolytic enzymes production and the 
ability of decolourisation of Poly R-4 78 in packed-bed bioreactors by Phanerochaete chryso­
sporiu. Bioprocess Eng 23:287-93 
Crini G (2006) Non-conventional low-cost adsorbents for dye removal: A review. Biores Techno! 
97: I 061-1085, doi: 10.1016/j.biortech .2005.05.001 
Dave SR, Dave RH (2009) Isolation and characterization of Bacillus thuringiensis for Acid red 119 
dye Decolourisation . Biores Techno! I 00:49-253, doi: I 0.10 16/j.biortech.2008.05.0 19 
Delee W, O'Neill C, Hawkes FR, Pinheiro HM (1998) Anaerobic treatment of te><tile effluents: a 
review. J Chern Techno! Biotechnol 73:323-335 
Dhodapkar R, Rao NN, Pande SP, Kaul SN (2006) Removal of basic dyes from aqueous medium us­
ing a novel polymer: Jalshakti. Biores Technol97:877-885, doi: I 0.10 16/j.biortech.2005 .04.033 
Dominguez JR, Beltran J, Rodriguez 0 (2005) Vis and UV photocatalytic detoxification meth­
ods (using Ti02, Ti02/ 1-!202, Ti02/03, Ti02/S208-2, 03, H202, S208-2, Fe3+/H202 and 
Fe3+/H202/C204-2) for dyes treatment. Catalysis Today I 0 I :389-395 
Donmez G (2002) Bioaccumulation of the reactive textile dyes by C. tropicalis growing in molas­
ses medium. Enzyme Microb Techno! 30:363-366 
DosSantos AB, Madrid MP, Starns AJM, Van Lier JB, Cervantes FJ (2005) Azo dye reduction by 
mesophilic and thermophilic anaerobic consortia . Biotechnol Prog 21:1140-1145 
Dryden CE, Kay WB ( 1954) Kinetics of batch adsorption and desorption. Ind Eng Chern 46:2294-
2297 
Duran N, Esposito E (2000) Potential applications of oxidative enzymes and phenoloxidase-like 
compounds in wastewater and soil treatment: a review. Appl Catal B: Environ 28:83-99 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation !57 
Eggert C, Temp U, Eriksson KEL ( 1996) Laccase-producing white-rot-fungus lacking lignin per­
oxidase and manganese peroxidase. In: Jefries TW, Viikari L (eds) ACS Symposium Series 
655. Enzymes for Pulp and Paper Processing, Washington , DC, pp 130-1 SO 
Erdem E, Clllge.yen G, Donat R (2005) The removal of textile dyes by diatomite earth. J Colllnterf 
Sci 282:314-319, doi:l 0.1016/j.jcis.2004.08.166 
Esteves MF, Silva ID (2004) Electrochemical degradation of reactive blue 19 dye in textile waste­
water, 4th World Textile Conference AUTEX 2004, Roubaix, June, 2004 
Faria PCC, 6rflio JJM, Pereira MFR (2004) Adsorption of anionic and cationic dyes on activated 
carbons with different surface chemistries. Water Res 38(8):2043 -2052 
Faria PCC, Orfao JJM, Pereira MFR (2005) Mineralisation of coloured aqueous solutions by ozo­
nation in the presence of activated carbon. Water Res 39:1461-1470 
Faria PCC, Orflio JJM, Figueiredo JL, Pereira MFR (2008) Adsorption of aromatic compounds 
from the biodegradation of azo dyes on activated carbon. Appl Surface Sci 254:3497 -3503 
Figueiredo JL, Pereira MFR, Freitas MMA, Orflio JJM ( 1999) Modification of the surface chem­
istry of activated carbons. Carbon 37:1379-1389 
Forgacs E, Cserhati T, Oros G (2004) Removal of synthetic dyes from wastewaters: a review. 
Environ! Jnt 30:953-971, doi:IO.I016/j .envint. 2004.02.001 
Freundlich HZ (1906) Over the adsorption in solution. J Phys Chern 57:384-470 
Fu Y, Viraraghavan T (2001) Fungal decolorization of dye wastewaters: a review. Biores Techno! 
79:51-262 
Fu Y, Viraraghavan T (2002) Removal of Congo red from an aqueous solution by fungus Aspergil­
lus niger. Adv Environ Res 7(1):239-247 
Gadd GM (2009) Biosorption: critical review of scientific rationale, environmental importance 
and significance for pollution treatment. J Chern Techno! Biotechnol 84:3-28, doi: I 0.1002/ 
jctb.I999 
Gianfreda L, Xu F, Bollag J-M (1999) Laccases: a useful group of oxidoreductive enzymes . Bio­
remediation J 3: 1-25 
Glenn JK, Gold MH (1983) Decolorization of several polymeric dyes by the lignin-degrading 
basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium. Appl Environ Microbiol45 : 1741-1747 
Gomes JR (2001) Estrutura e Propriedades dos Corantes. Barbosa e Xavier Lda. Braga, Portugal 
Goszczynski S, Paszczynski A, Pasti-Grigsby MB, Crawford RL, Crawford DL ( 1994) New path­
way for degradation of sulfonated azo dyes by microbial peroxidases of Phanerochaet e cluyso­
sporium and Streptomyces chromofuscust. J Bacterial 176:1339-1347 
Grigorious D, Aline E, Patrick P, Rene B (2000) Purification and characterisation of the first 
bacterial laccase in the Rhizospheric bacterium Azospirillwn /ipofemm. Soil Bioi Biochem 
32:919-927 
Gupta VK, Suhas (2009) Application of low-cost adsorbents for dye removal-a review. J Environ 
Manag 90:2313-2342, doi: I 0.10 I6/j.jenvman.2008.11 .0 17 
Hai Fl, Yamamoto K, Fukushi K (2007) Hybrid treatment systems for dye wastewater. Crit Rev 
Environ Sci Technol37:315 -377 
Hao OJ, Phull KK, Chen JM (1994) Wet oxidation of TNT red water and bacterial toxicity of 
treated water. Water Res 28:283-290 
Hao OJ, Kim H, Chiang P-C (2000) Decolorization of watewater. Crit Rev Environ Sci Techno! 
30:449-505, doi.org/1 0.108011064338009 1184237 
Hao J, Song F, Huang F, Yang C, Zhang Z, Zheng Y, Tian X (2007) Production of laccase by a 
newly isolated deuteromycete fungus Pestalotiopsis sp. and its decolorization of azo dye. J 
Indus! Microbial Biotechnol 34(3):233 -240 
Horistsu H, Takada M, ldaka E, Tomoyda M, Ogewa T (1977) Degradation of P-amino azo ben­
zene by Bacillus subti/is. Eur J Appl Microbiol4:217 -224 
Husain Q (2006) Potential applications of the oxidoreductive enzymes in the decolourisation and 
detoxification of textile and other synthetic dyes from polluted water: a review. Crit Rev Bio­
technol26:201-221, doi: org/10.1080/07388550600969936 
Jdaka E, Ogewa Y (1978) Degradation of azo compounds by Aeromonas hydraphilia var. 2413. 
Soc Dye Colorist 94:91-94 !58 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
JinX, Liu G, Xu Z, Yao W (2007) Decolorization of a dye industry effiuent by Aspergillusfumiga­
tus XC6. Appl Microbial Biotechnol 74:239-243 
Jovancic P, Radetic M (2008) Advanced sorbent materials for treatment of wastewaters. Hdb En­
viron Chern 5:239-264, doi: 10.1007/698_5_ 097 
Juang R, Tseng R, Wu F, Lee S (1997) Adsorption behaviour of reactive dyes from aqueous solu­
tion on chitosan. 1 Chern Techno! Biotechnol70:391-399 
Kandel bauer A, Guebitz GM (2005) Bioremediation for the decolorization of textile dyes, a re­
view. In: Lichtfouse E, Schwarzbauer 1, Robert D (eds) Environmental chemistry. Springer­
Verlag, Heidelberg, pp 269-288 
Kandelbauer A, Maute 0, Kessler RW, Erlacher A, Gi!bitz GM (2004) Study of dye decoloriza­
tion in an immobilized laccase enzyme-reactor using online spectroscopy. Biotechnol Bioeng 
87:552-563 
Kalyani DC, Telke AA, Dhanve RS, 1adbav JP (2009) Ecofriendly biodegradation and detoxifica­
tion of Reactive Red 2 textile dye by newly isolated Pseudomonas sp. SUKI. 1 Hazard Mater 
163:35-742 
Kannan C, Sundaram T, Palvannan T (2008) Environmentally stable adsorbent of tetrahedral silica 
and non-tetrahedral alumina for removal and recovery of malachite green dye from aqueous 
solution. J Hazard Mater 157:137-145, doi:l0.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.12.116 
Kapdan IK, Kargi F (2002) Biological decolorization of textile dyestuff containing wastewater by 
Coriolus versicolor in a rotating biological contactor. Enzyme Microbiol Technol30:195 -199 
Karaca S, Giirses A, Bayrak R (2004) Effect of some pretreatments on the adsorption of methylene 
blue by Balkaya lignite. Energy Convers Manag 45:1693-1704 
Kausbik P, Malik A (2009) Fungal dye decolorization: recent advances and future potential. En­
viron Int 35:127-141 
KeckA, Klein 1, Kudlich M, Stolz A, Knackmuss H1, Mattes R (1997) Reduction ofazo dyes by 
redox mediators originating in the naphthalenesulfonic acid degradation pathway of Sphin­
gomonas sp. strain BN6. Appl Environ Microbiol63:3684-3690 
Keck A, Rau 1, Reemtsma T, Mattes R, Stolz A, Klein 1 (2002) Identification of quinoidc redox 
mediators that are formed during the degradation of napbthalene-2-sulfonate by Sphingomonas 
xenophaga BN6. Appl Environ Microbiol68:4341-4349 
Khadijab 0, Lee KK, Abdullah MFF (2009) Isolation, screening and development of local bacte­
rial consortia with azo dyes decolourising capability. Malaysian 1 Microbiol5(1):25-32 
Khehra MS, Saini HS, Sharma DK, Chadha BS, Chimni SS (2005) Decolorization of various azo 
dyes by bacterial consortium. Dyes Pigments 67:55-61 
Kim T-H, Park C, Leec 1, Shin E-B, Kim S (2002a) Pilot scale treatment of textile wastewater by 
combined process (fluidized biofilm process--chemical coagulation-electrochemical oxida­
tion). Water Res 36:3979-3988 
Kim T-H, Park C, Shin E-B, Kim S (2002b) Decolorization of disperse and reactive dyes by con­
tinuous electrocoagulation process. Desalination 150:165-175 
Klein KL, Melechko AV, McKnight TE, Retterer ST, Rack PD, Fowlkes ID, Joy DC, Simpson 
ML (2008) Surface characterization and functionalization of carbon nanofibers. J Appl Phys 
103:1-23 
Kudlich M, Keck A, Klein 1, Stolz A (1997) Localization of the enzyme system involved in an­
aerobic reduction of azo dyes by Sphingomonas sp. Strain BN6 and effect of artificial redox 
mediators on the rate ofazo dye reduction . Appl Environ Microbiol63:369!-3694 
Kudlich M, Hetheridge M1, Knackmuss H-1, Stolz A (1999) Autooxidation reactions of different 
aromatic or/ho-ami nohydroxynaphthal enes which are formed during the anaerobic reduction 
of sulfonated azo dyes. Environ Sci Technol33:896-901, doi: 10.1021/es9808346 
Kuhad RC, Sood N, Tripathi KK, Singh A, Ward OP (2004) Developments in microbial methods 
for the treatment of dye effiuents. Adv Appl Microbiol 56:185-213 
Langmuir I ( 1918) The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of gases, mica and platinium. 1 Am 
Chern Soc 40:1361-1403 
Liapis AI (1987) Fundamentals of adsorption. Engineering Foundation , New York 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation !59 
L6pez C, Valade AG, Combourieu B, Mielgo I, Bouchon B, Lema 1M (2004) Mechanism of en­
zymatic degradation of the azo dye Orange II determined by ex situ 1 H nuclear magnetic 
resonance and electrospray ionization -ion trap mass spectrometry. Anal Biochem 335:135-149 
Lucas M, Mertens V, Corbisier A-M, Vanhulle S (2008) Synthetic dyes decolourisation by white­
rot fungi: development of original microtitre plate method and screening . Enzyme Microbial 
Technol42:97 -106 
Mazmanci MA (20 I 0) Decolorization of azo dyes by immobilized fungi. In: Atacag Erkurt H (ed) 
Biodegradation of azo dyes. Hdb Env Chern SpringerNerlag Berlin, Heidelberg, 9 pp 169-
181, doi: 10.1007/698_2009_51 
McKay G (1998) Application of surface diffusion model to the adsorption of dyes on bagasse pith. 
Adsorption 4:361-372 
McKay G, Sweeney AG (1980) Principles of dye removal from textile effiuent. Water Air Soil 
Pollut 14:3-11 
Mckay G, Porter JF, Prasad GR (1999) The removal of dye colours from aqueous solutions by 
adsorption on low-cost materials. Water Air Soil Pollut 114:423-438 
McMullan G, Meehan C, Conneely A, Kirby N, Robinson T, Nigam P, Banal IM, Marchant R, 
Smyth WF (200 l) Microbial decolourisation and degradation of textile dyes. Appl Microbial 
Biotechnol56:81-87, doi: !0.1007/s00 2530000587 
Malik PK (2004) Dye removal from wastewater using activated carbon developed from sawdust: 
adsorption equilibrium and kinetics. J Hazard Mater B 113:81-88 
Martinez MB, Flickinger MC, Nelsestuen GL (1999) Stady-state enzyme kinetics in the Esch­
erichia coli perisplam: a model of a whole cell biocatalyst. 1 Biotechnol 71:59-66 
Martins MA, Cardoso MH, Queiroz M1, Ramalho MT, Oliveira-Campos AM ( 1999) Biodegrada­
tion of azo dyes by the yeast Candida zeylanoides in batch aerated cultures. Chemosphere 
38:2455-2460 
Mathur N, Bhatnagar P, Bakre P (2003) Assessing mutagenicity of textile dyes from Pali(Raja sthan) 
using Ames bioassay. Appl Ecol Environ Res 4(1): 111-118 
Melgoza RM, Cruz A, Buitron G (2004) Anaerobic/aerobic treatment of colorants present in textile 
effiuents. Water Sci Technol50:149 -155 
Meehan C, Banal IM, McMullan G, Nigam P, Smyth F, Marchant R (2000) Decolorization of rem­
azol black-Busing a thermotolerant yeast, K marxianus IMB3. Environ lnt 26:75-79 
MohanD, Singh KP, Singh G, Kumar K (2002) Removal of dyes from wastewater using flyash, a 
low-cost adsorbent . Ind Eng Chern Res 4 I :3688-3695 
Monda! S (2008) Methods of dye removal from dye house effiuent-an overview. Environ Eng Sci 
25:383-396, doi: 10.1089/ees.2007.0049 
Mareno-Castilla C, L6pez-Ram6n MV, Carrasco- Marin F (2000) Changes in surface chemistry of 
activated carbons by wet Oxidation. Carbon 38:1995-200 I 
Nachiyar CV, Rajakumar GS (2005) Purification and characterization of an oxygen insensitive 
azoreductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Enzyme Microb Techno! 36:503-509 
Nigam P, McMullan G, Banal IM, Marchant R (1996) Decolourisation of effiuent from the textile 
industry by a microbial consortium. Biotechnol Lett 18:117-120 
Nigam P, Armour G, Banal lM, Singh D, Marchant R (2000) Physical removal of textile dyes and 
solid state fermentation of dye adsorbed agricultural residues. Bioresour Techno! 72:219-226 
Novotny C, Svobodova K, Kasinath A, Erbanova P (2004) Biodegradation of synthetic dyes by 
Irpex lacteus under various growth conditions. Int Biodet Biodeg 54:215-223, doi: I 0.10 16/j. 
ibiod.2004.06.003 
Ohkuma M, Maeda Y, 1ohjima T, Kudo T (2001) Lignin degradation and roles of white rot fungi: 
Study on an efficient symbiotic system in fungus-growing termites and its application to biore­
mediation. Riken Review, Focused Ecomol Sci Res 42:39-42 
O'Neill C, Hawkes FR, Hawkes DL, Lourenyo ND, Pinheiro HM, Delee W (1999) Colour in 
textile effiuents-sources, measurement, discharge consents and simulation: a review. 1 Chern 
Techno! Biotechnol74:1009-1018 
Ozdemir 0, Armagan B, Turan M, Celik MS (2004) Comparison of the adsorption characteri stics 
of azo-reactive dyes on mezoporous minerals. Dyes Pigments 62:49-60 160 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
Padmesh TVN, Yijayaraghavan K, Sekaran G, Velan M (2005) Batch and column studies on bio­
sorption of acid dyes on fresh water macro alga Azol/afi/icu/oides. J Hazard Mater 125:121-
129, doi: 10.1016/j .jhazmat. 2005.05.014 
Palmieri G, Cennamo G, Sannia G (2005) Remazol Brilliant BlueR decolourization by the fungus 
Pleurotus oso·eatus and its oxidative enzymatic system. Enzyme Microbial Techno! 36:17-24 
Pandey A, Singh P, Iyengar L (2007) Bacterial decolorization and degradation of azo dyes. lnt 
Biodet Biodeg 59:73-84 
Pearce CI, Lloyd JR, Guthrie JT (2006) The removal of colour from textile wastewater using 
whole bacterial cells: a review. Dyes Pigments 58:179-196 
Pereira MFR, Soares SF, Orfiio JJM, Figueiredo JL (2003) Adsorption of dyes on activated car­
bons: influence of surface chemical groups. Carbon 41:811-821 
Pereira L, Coelho AV, Viegas CA, Santos MMC, Robalo MP, Martins LO (2009a) Enzymatic 
biotransformation of the azo dye Sudan Orange G with bacterial CotA-laccase. J Biotechnol 
139:68-77, doi: 10.1016/j .jbiotec.2008.09.001 
Pereira L, Coelho AV, Viegas CA, Ganachaud C, Iacazio G, Tron T, Robalo MP, Martins LO 
(2009b) On the mechanism of biotransformation of the anthraquinonic dye acid blue 62 by 
laccases. Adv Synt Catal 351:1857-1865, doi: I 0.1002/adsc .200900271 
Pereira L, Pereira R, Pereira MFR, VanderZee FP, Cervantes FJ, Alves MM (2010) Thermal 
modification of activated carbon surface chemistry improves its capacity as redox mediator for 
azo dye reduction. J Hazard Mater 183:931-939 
Pinheiro HM, Touraud E, Thomas 0 (2004) Aromatic amines from azo dye reduction: status re­
view with emphasis on direct UV spectrophotometric detection in textile industry wastewaters. 
Dyes Pigments 61:121-139 
Podgornik H, Poljansek 1, Perdih A (2001) Transformation of indigo carmine by Phanerochaete 
chtysosporium ligninolytic enzymes . Enzyme Microb Techno! 29:166-172 
Prigione V, Varese GC, Casieri L, Marchisio VF (2008a) Biosorption of simulated dyed effluents 
by inactivated fungal biomasses. Bioresour Techno! 99:3559-3567 
Prigione V, ligini V, Pezzella C, Anastasi A, Sannia G, Varese GC (2008b) Decolorisation and 
detoxification of textile effluens by fungal biosorption. Water Res 42:2911-2920 
Puvaneswar i N, Muthukrishnan J, Gunasekaran P (2006) Toxicity assessment and microbial deg­
radation of azo dyes. Indian J Exp Biol44:618 -626 
Ramalho PA, Scholze H, Cardoso MH, Ramalho MT, Oliveira-Campos AM (2002) Improved con­
ditions for the aerobic reductive decolorisation of azo dyes by Candida zeylanoides. Enzyme 
Microb Techno! 31:848-854 
Ramalho PA, Cardoso MH, Cavaco-Paulo A, Ramalho MT (2004) Characterization of azo reduc­
tion activity in a novel ascomycete yeast strain. Appl Environ Microbial 70:2279-2288 
Ramalho PA, Sara iva S, Cavaco-Paulo A, Casal M, Cardoso MH, Ramalho MT (2005) Azo reduc­
tase activity of intact Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells is dependent on the fre 1 p component of 
plasma membrane ferric reductase . Appl Environ Microbial 71:3882-3888 
Rau J, Knackmuss HJ, Stolz A (2002) Effects of different quinoid redox mediators on the anaero­
bic reduction ofazo dyes by bacteria. Environ Sci Technol36:1497-1504 
Rau J, Stolz A (2003) Oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases NfsA and NfsB of Escherichia coli func­
tion under anaerobic conditions as lawsone-dependent azo reductase . Appl Environ Microbial 
69:3448-3455, doi: 10.1128/AEM.69.6.3448-3455.2003 
Rauf MA, Ashraf SS (2009) Fundamenta l principles and application of heterogeneous photocata­
lytic degradation of dyes in solution. Chern Eng J 151:10-18, doi: 10.1016/j.cej.2009.02.026 
Razo-Flores E, Donlon BA, Field JA, Lettinga G (1996) Biodegradability ofN-substituted aromat­
ics and alkylphenols under methanogenic conditions using granular Sludge. Water Sci Techno! 
33:47-57 
Razo-Flores E, Luijaten M, Donlon B, Lettinga G, Field A (1997) Complete biodegradation of the 
azo dye azodisalicylate under anaerobic conditions. Environ Sci Techno! 31:2098-2103 
Redlich 0, Peterson DL (1959) A useful adsorption isotherm. J Phys Chern 63:1024-1026 
RivaS (2006) Laccases: blue enzymes for green chemistry. Trends Biotechnol 24 (5):219-226, 
doi: I 0.10 16/j.tibtech.2006.03.006 4 Dyes-Environmental Impact and Remediation 161 
Robinson T, McMullan G, Marchant R, Nigam P (200 1) Remediation of dyes in textile effluent: a 
critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative. B iores Techno! 
77:247-255 
Rodriguez-Reinoso F, Martin-Martinez JM, Prado-Burguete C, McEnaney B (1987) A standard 
adsorption isotherm for the characterization of activated carbons. J Phys Chern 91 :515-516 
Rodriguez-Reinoso F ( 1998) The role of carbon materials in the heterogeneous catalysis. Carbon 
36 (3): 159-175 
Roessler A, Dossenbach 0, Meyer U, Marte W, Rys P (2001) Direct electrochemical reduction of 
indigo. Chimia 55:879-882 
Rus R, Rau J, Stolz A (2000) The function of cytoplasmatic reductases in the reduction of azo dyes 
by bacteria. Appl Environm Microbial 66:1429-1434 
Schrank SG, dos Santos JN, Souza OS, Souza EES (2007) Decolourisation eftects of Vat Green 01 
textile dye and textile wastewater using H202/UV process. J Photochem Photobiol A: Chern 
186:125-129, doi: I 0.10 16/j.jphotochem.2006.08.00 I 
Schroeder M, Pereira L, Couto SR, Erlacher A, Schoening K-U, Cavaco-Paulo A, Guebitz GM 
(2007) Enzymatic synthesis ofTinuvin. Enzyme Microb Technol40: 1748-1752, doi: 10.10 16/j. 
enzmictec.2006.11 .026 
Shrestha S, Kazama F (2007) Assessment of surface water quality using multivariate statistical 
techniques : a case study of the Fuji river basin, Japan. Environ Model Software 22:464-475 
Shen W, Li Z, Liu Y (2008) Surface chemical functional groups modification of porous carbon. 
Recent Patents Chern Eng I :27-40 
Soares GMB, Miranda TM, Oliveira-campos AMF, Hrdina R, Costa-Ferreira M, Amorim MTP 
(2004) Current situation and future perspectives for textile effluent decolourisation. Paper pre­
sented at the Textile Institute 83rd World Conference, Shanghai, China, 23-7 May , 2004 
Society of Dyes and Colourist (1984) Colour Index, vol. 1, 3rd ed., S.O.C., A. Ass. Tex. Chern. 
Colour 
Solomon EI, Sundaram UM, Machonkin TE ( 1996) Multicopper oxidases and oxygenases. Chern 
.Rev 96:2563-2605 
Sponza DT, I~ik M (2005) Reactor performance and fate of aromatic amines through decoloriza­
tion of Direct Black 38 dye under anaerobic/aerobic sequentilas. Process Biochem 40:35-44 
Stoj CS, Kosman OJ (2005) Copper proteins: Oxidases . In: King RB (ed) Encyclopedia of inor­
ganic chemistry, Vol II, 2nd edn. John Wiley and Sons, New York, pp 1134-1159 
Steffan S, Bardi L, Marzona M (2005) Azo dye biodegradation by microbial cultures immobilized 
in alginate beads. Environ Int 31:201-205, doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2004.09.0 16 
Stolz A (200 1) Basic and applied aspects in the microbial degradation of azo dyes. Appl Microbial 
Biotechnol 56:69-80, doi: 10.1007/s002530100686 
Tan NCO, Field JA (2000) Biodegradation of sulfonated aromatic compounds . In: Environmental 
Technologies to Treat Sulfur Pollution Principles and Engineering. IWA Publishing, London, 
pp 377-392 
Tan NCO, van Leeuwen A, van Voorthuinzen EM, Slenders P, Prenafeta -Boldu FX, Temmink H, 
Lettinga G, Field JA (2005) Fate and biodegradability of sulfonated aromatic amines. Biodeg­
radation 16:527-537 
lien C (1961) Adsorption kinetics of a non-flow system with nonlinear equilibrium relationship. 
Aiche J 7:410-419 
Tsang OCW, Hu J, Liu MY, Zhang W, Lai KCK, Lo IMC (2007) Activated carbon produced from 
waste wood pallets: adsorption of three classes of dyes. Water Air Soil Pollut 184:141-155, 
doi:.l 007/s 11270-007-9404-2 
Tlifekci N, Sivri 1 N, Toroz I (2007) Pollutants of textile industry wastewater and assessment of its 
discharge limits by water quality standards. Turkish J Fish Aquatic Sci 7:97-103 
VanderZee FP, Bouwman RHM, Strik DPBTB, Lettinga G, Field JA (200 1) Application of redox 
mediators to accelerate the transformation of reactive azo dyes in anaerobic bioreactors. Bio­
technol Bioeng 75:691-701 
Van der Zee FP, Villaverde S (2005) Combined anaerobic-aerobic treatment of azo dyes-a short 
review ofbioreactors studies. Water Res 39:1425-1440 162 L. Pereira and M. Alves 
VanderZee FP, Cervantes FJ (2009) Impact and application of electron shuttles on the redox (bio) 
transformation of contaminants: a review. Biotechnol Adv 27:256-277 
Vandevivere PC, Bianchi R, Verstraete W (1998) Treatment and reuse of wastewater from the 
textile wet-processing industry: review of emerging technologies. J Chern Techno! Biotechnol 
72:289-302 
Vanhulle S, Enaud E, Trovaslet M, Billottet L, Kneipe L, Jiwan J-LH, Corbisier A-M, Marchand­
Brynaert J (2008) Coupling occurs before breakdown during biotransformation of acid blue 
62 by white rot fungi. Chemos ph ere 70: I 097-11 07, doi: I 0.10 16/j.chemosphere .2007 .07.069 
Walker GM, Weatherley LR (1999) Biological activated carbon treatment of industrial wastewater 
in stirred tank reactors. Chern Eng J 75:201-206 
Wang S, Wu H (2006) Environmental-benign utilisation of fly ash as low-cost adsorbents. J Haz­
ard Mater B 136:482-501, doi:l0.1016/j.jhazmat.2006 .01.067 
Wang XJ, Gu XY, Lin DX, Dong F, Wan XF (2007) Treatment of acid rose dye containing waste­
water by ozonizing-biological aerated filter. Dyes Pigments 74(3):736 
Weber Jr WJ, Rummer RR (1965) Intraparticle transport of sulphonated alkylbenzenes in a porous 
solid: diffusion and non-linear adsorption . Water Resour Res I :361-365 
Weber WJ, Pirbazari M, Melson GL (1978) Biological growth on activated carbon: an investiga­
tion by scanning electron microscopy. Environ Sci Tech 127:817-819 
Wesenberg D, Kyriakides I, Agathos SN (2003) White-rot fungi and their enzymes for the treatment 
of industrial dye effluents. BiotechnolAdv 22:161-187, doi:IO.I016/j.biotechadv .2003.08.011 
Wuhrmann K, Mechsner KI, Kappeler TH (1980) Investigation on rate determining factors in the 
microbial reduction of azo dyes. Environ J Appl Micrabiol9 :325-338 
Xu Y (2001) Comparative studies of the Fe3+/2+UV, H202-UV, 1102-UV vis system for the de­
colorization of a textile dye X-3B in water. Chemosphere 43: II 03-1107 
Yoshida H, Fukuda S, Okamoto A, Kataoka T ( 1991) Recovery of direct dye and acid dye by ad­
sorption on chitosan fiber-equilibria. Wat Sci Teclmol23(7/9):1667-1676 
Yoshida H, Okamoto A, Kataoka T (1993) Adsorption of acid dye on cross-linked chitosan fibers: 
equilibria. Chern Eng Sci 48:2267-2272 
Yoshida H, Takemori T (1997) Adsorption of direct dye on cross-linked chitosan fiber: break­
through curve. Water Sci Technol35:29-37 
Young H, Yu J (1997) Ligninax catalyzed decolorization of synthetic dyes. Water Res 31(5): 1187-
1193 
Yu Z, Wen X (2005) Screening and identification of yeasts for decolorizing synthetic dyes in in­
dustrial wastewater . Int Biodet Biod 56:109-114 
Zeroual Y, Kim BS, Kim CS, Blaghen M, Lee KM (2006) A comparative study on biosorption 
characteristics of certain fungi for bromophenol blue dye. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 134:51...{)0 
Zhang FM, Knapp JS, Tapley KN ( 1999) Development of bioreactor systems for decolorization of 
orange II using white-rot fungus. Enzyme Microb Technol24 :48-53 
Zhao X, Hardin I (2007) HPLC and spectrophotometric analysis of biodegradation of azo dyes by 
Pleurotus ostreatus. Dyes Pigments 73:322-325 
Zhou XF, Zhang YL, Xu DQ, Cao WH, Dai CM, Qiang ZM, Yang Z, Zhao JF (2008) Treatment 
of succinonitrile wastewater by immobilized high efficiency microorganism strains. Water Sci 
Technol58:911-918 
Zhou M, He J (2008) Degradation of azo dye by three clean advanced oxidation processes: wet 
oxidation, electrochemical oxidation and wet electrochemical oxidation-A comparative study. 
Electrochimica Acta 53:1902-1910 
Zille A, Ramalho P, Tzanov T, Millward R, Aires V, Cardoso MH, Ramalho MT, Gtibitz GM, 
Cavaco-Paulo A (2004) Predicting dye biodegradation from redox potentials. Biotechnol Prog 
20:1588-1592 
Zille A, G6macka B, Rehorek A, Cavaco-Paulo A (2005) Degradation of Azo Dyes by Trametes 
villosa Laccase under long time oxidative conditions. Appl Environ Microbial 71 :6711...{)718 
Zimmermann T, Kulla HG, Leisinger T (1982) Properties of purified Orange II azoreductase, the 
enzyme initiating azo dye degradati on by Pseudomonas KF46. Eur J Biochem 129:197-203 
Zollinger H (1987) Colour chemistry-synthesis, properties and applications of organic dyes and 
pigments. VCH, New York, p 92 Chapter 5 
Molecular Detection of Resistance and Transfer 
Genes in Environm ental Samples 
Elisabeth Grohmann and Karsten Arends 
Contents 
5.1 Introduction ........................................... ................................................. .......................... 164 
5.2 Molecular Detection Methods .......................................................................................... 165 
5.2.1 DNA Hybridizat ion .............................................................................................. 166 
5.2.2 PCR (Simple and Multiplex PCR) ..................................................... .................. 166 
5.2.3 Quantitative PCR ............................................................ ..................................... 166 
5.2.4 DNAMicroarray ....................................... ................................... ........................ 167 
5.3 Antibiotic Resistance ................................... .................................... ................... ............. 167 
5.3.1 Mechanisms of Antibiotic Resistance .................................................................. 168 
5.3 .2 Antibiotic Resistance Genes in the Environment ... ........................................ .. ... 169 
5.4 Heavy Metal Resistance .................................................................... ............................... 176 
5.4.1 Mechanisms of Heavy Metal Resistance ............................................................. 176 
5.4.2 Heavy Metal Resistance Genes in the Environment ............................................ 177 
5.5 Key Transfer Genes .......................................................................................................... 180 
5.5.1 Detection of Transfer Genes in the Environment ............................. ................... 181 
5.6 Conclusions ................ ................................................................................... ................... 184 
5.7 Perspectives ...................................................................................................................... 184 
References ..................................................................... ............................................................ 185 
Abstract Horizontal plasmid transfer is the most important means of spreading 
resistance to antibiotics and heavy metals, as well as virulence genes, to closely and 
remotely related microorganisms thereby increasing the horizontal gene pool in so 
diverse habitats such as soils, wastewater, aquifer recharge systems and glacier ice. 
An overview about the currently used molecular tools to detect and quantify the 
abundance of antibiotic and heavy metal resistance and transfer genes in aquatic 
and terrestrial environments is provided. Habitats studied range from nutrient rich 
environments such as manured agricultural soils to oligotrophic habitats such as 
drinking water or glaciers in the Antarctic. The state of the art in antibiotic and 
heavy meta l resistance mechanisms and monitoring of conjugative transfer factors 
E. Grohrnann (BI) 
Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 
79106 Freiburg, Germany 
e-mail: elisabeth.grohrnann@uniklinik-freiburg .de 
A. Malik, E. Grohrnann (eds.), Environmental Protection Strategies for Sustainable 163 
Development, Strategies for Sustainability, 
DOl 10.1007/978-94-007-1591-2 _5, 0 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012 