International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 15–30
© 2006 Dove Medical Press Limited. All rights reserved15REVIEW
Abstract:  Developing scaffolds that mimic the architecture of tissue at the nanoscale is one
of the major challenges in the field of tissue engineering. The development of nanofibers has
greatly enhanced the scope for fabricating scaffolds that can potentially meet this challenge.Currently, there are three techniques available for the synthesis of nanofibers: electrospinning,
self-assembly, and phase separation. Of these techniques, electrospinning is the most widely
studied technique and has also demonstrated the most promising results in terms of tissueengineering applications. The av ailability of a wide range of natural and synthetic biomaterials
has broadened the scope for development of nanofibrous scaffolds, especially using the
electrospinning technique. The three dimensional synthetic biodegradable scaffolds designedusing nanofibers serve as an excellent framewo rk for cell adhesion, proliferation, and
differentiation. Therefore, nanofibers, irrespective of their method of synthesis, have been
used as scaffolds for musculoskeletal tissue engineering (including bone, cartilage, ligament,and skeletal muscle), skin tissue engineering , vascular tissue engineering, neural tissue
engineering, and as carriers for the controlled delivery of drugs, proteins, and DNA. This
review summarizes the currently av ailable techniques for nanofiber synthesis and discusses
the use of nanofibers in tissue engineering and drug delivery applications.
Keywords:  electrospinning, phase separation, self-assemb ly, nanofiber, biomaterial, tissue
engineering, scaffold, drug delivery
Introduction
Tissue repair by autologous cell/tissue transplantation is one of the most promising
techniques for tissue regeneration. However, autografts are associated with limitationssuch as donor site morbidity and limited availability. An alternative to autografts is
allografts (ie, tissue taken from another subject of the same species). Allografts are
not limited in supply; however, they have the potential to cause an immune responseand also carry the risk of disease transfer. Tissue engineering has emerged as an
excellent approach for the repair/regeneration of damaged tissue, with the potential
to circumvent all the limitations of autologous and allogenic tissue repair.
Tissue engineering represents an emerging interdisciplinary field that applies the
principles of biological, chemical, and engineering sciences towards the goal of tissue
regeneration (Skalak and Fox 1988; Langer and Vacanti 1993; Hoerstrup and Vacanti2004). Tissue engineering approaches make use of biomaterials, cells, and factors
either alone or in combination to restore, maintain, or improve tissue function. The
tissue engineering strategy generally involves the isolation of healthy cells from apatient, followed by their expansion in vitro. These expanded cells are then seeded
onto a three dimensional (3D) biodegradable scaffold that provides structural support
and can also act as a reservoir for bioactive molecules such as growth factors. Thescaffold gradually degrades with time to be replaced by newly grown tissue from the
seeded cells (Langer and Vacanti 1993).Rajesh Vasita
Dhirendra S Katti
1Department of Biological Sciences
and Bioengineering, Indian Instituteof T echnology – Kanpur, Kanpur,Uttar Pradesh,  India
Correspondence: Dhirendra S Katti
Department of Biological Sciences andBioengineering, Indian Institute ofTechnology – Kanpur, Kanpur-208016,Uttar Pradesh, IndiaTel +91 512 259 4028Fax +91 512 259 4010Email dsk@iitk.ac.inNanofibers and their applications in tissueengineeringInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 16Vasita and Katti
Biomaterials play a crucial role in tissue engineering by
serving as 3D synthetic frameworks (commonly referred to
as scaffolds, matrices, or constructs) for cellular attachment,proliferation, and in growth ultimately leading to new tissue
formation. A number of novel approaches have been
developed for the fabrication of biomaterial-based 3Dscaffolds (Atala and Lanza 2002). More recently, nanofiber-
based scaffolding systems are being explored as scaffolds
for tissue engineering (Ma and Zhang 1999; Kisiday et al2002; Li et al 2002).
The development of nanofibers has enhanced the scope
for fabricating scaffolds that can potentially mimic thearchitecture of natural human tissue at the nanometer scale.
The high surface area to volume ratio of the nanofibers
combined with their microporous structure favors celladhesion, proliferation, migration, and differentiation, all
of which are highly desired properties for tissue engineering
applications (Bhattari et al 2004; Ma et al 2005a). Therefore,current research in this area is driven towards the fabrication,
characterization, and applications of nanofibrous systems
as scaffolds for tissue engineering. Due to their potential,the nanofiber-based systems are also being pursued for a
variety of other biological and non-biological applications
(Li et al 2002; Wang et al 2002a, 2002b; Nair et al 2004).
This review summarizes the currently available
approaches for the fabrication of nanofibers and discusses
their application in the engineering of a variety of tissuetypes.
Methods for nanofiber synthesis
Currently, there are three techniques available for the
synthesis of nanofibers: electrospinning, self-assembly, andphase separation. Of these, electrospinning is the mostwidely studied technique and also seems to exhibit the mostpromising results for tissue engineering applications.Nanofibers synthesized by self-assembly and phase
separation have had relatively limited studies that explored
their application as scaffolds for tissue engineering.
Although there are a number of techniques for the
synthesis of carbon nanofibers, such as chemical vapordeposition using a template method (Che et al 1998),
catalytic synthesis (catalytic deposition, floating catalyst
method) (Teo et al 2003), synthesis using radiofrequency-supported microwave plasmas (Cui et al 2000), thedescription of each of these techniques is beyond the scopeof this review. Therefore, for carbon and alumina nanofibers,the discussion is restricted to their applications in tissueengineering.Electrospinning
Electrospinning represents an attractive technique for theprocessing of polymeric biomaterials into nanofibers. This
technique also offers the opportunity for control overthickness and composition of the nanofibers along with
porosity of the nanofiber meshes using a relatively simple
experimental setup (Doshi and Reneker 1995; Reneker andChun 1996; Dzenis 2004; Jayaraman et al 2004).
Although the concept of electrospinning or electro-
spraying has been known for more than a century, polymericnanofibers produced by electrospinning have become a topic
of great interest only in the past decade (Rayleigh 1882;
Doshi and Reneker 1995). The high surface area and highporosity of electrospun nanofibers allow favorable cell
interactions and hence make them potential candidates for
tissue engineering applications (Li et al 2002; Smith andMa 2004; Khil et al 2005; Ma et al 2005a).
In the electrospinning process, fibers ranging from 50
 nm
to 1000  nm or greater (Reneker and Chun 1996; Shin et al
2001a; Fridrikh et al 2003) can be produced by applying an
electric potential to a polymeric solution (Hohman et al
2001a, 2001b) (see Figure 1a). The solution is held at thetip of a capillary tube by virtue of its surface tension. The
electrical potential applied provides a charge to the polymer
solution. Mutual charge repulsion in the polymer solutioninduces a force that is directly opposite to the surface tension
of the polymer solution. An increase in the electrical
potential initially leads to the elongation of the hemisphericalsurface of the solution at the tip of the capillary tube to
form a conical shape known as the Taylor cone (Doshi andReneker 1995; Yarin et al 2001). A further increase causesthe electric potential to reach a critical value, at which itovercomes the surface tension forces to cause the formationof a jet that is ejected from the tip of the Taylor cone. The
charged jet undergoes instabilities and gradually thins in
air primarily due to elongation and solvent evaporation(Zeleny 1914; Reneker et al 2000; Shin et al 2001a, 2001b;Frenot et al 2003). The charged jet eventually formsrandomly oriented nanofibers that can be collected on astationary or rotating grounded metallic collector (Doshi
and Reneker 1995; Kameoka and Craighead 2003) (see
Figure 1b).
Electrospinning has originated from electrospraying,
where an electric charge is provided to a conducting liquidand produces a jet which splits into fine particles thatresemble a spray, hence the name electrospraying (Rayleigh
1882; Zeleny 1914). However, when a polymer is used in
place of a low-molecular-weight substance for theInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 17Nanofibers for tissue engineering
electrospraying process, the long-chain nature of polymers
does not allow the splitting of the jet into particles. Instead,the jet undergoes instabilities and thins to form nanofibers.Therefore, one has to use polymers (natural or synthetic) toform nanofibers using the electrospinning/electrosprayingtechnique.
A wide range of polymers has been used to electrospin
nanofibers. Natural polymers such as collagen (Huang et al2001; Matthews et al 2002; Gersbach et al 2004; Shields etal 2004), gelatin (Zhang et al 2005), chitosan (Bhattarai etal 2005; Geng et al 2005), hyaluronic acid (Um et al 2004),and silk fibrion (Jin et al 2002, 2004) have been used toproduce nanofibers that can form potential scaffolds fortissue engineering applications. More recently, nanofibersof protein (Li et al 2005; Woerdeman et al 2005) have beendemonstrated to have promising use in tissue engineering.
Among the synthetic polymers explored for the
fabrication of nanofibers, poly(lactic acid) (PLA) (Yang etal 2004, 2005), polyurethane (PU) (Verreck et al 2003b;
Riboldi et al 2005), poly( ε-caprolactone) (PCL) (Reneker
et al 2002; Li et al 2003; Li et al 2005c), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) (Luu et al 2003; Kim et al 2004;
Uematsu et al 2005), poly(ethylene-co-vinylacetate) (PEV A)
(Kenawy 2002), and poly(l-lactide-co- ε-caprolactone)
(PLLA-CL) (Mo et al 2004; Mo and Weber 2004) have been
well studied.
The process of electrospinning is affected by two sets
of parameters: system parameters and process parameters.
(1) System parameters such as polymer molecular weight
and distribution determine the rate of degradation ofnanofibers. System parameters such as polymer solution
properties, ie, viscosity, surface tension, and conductivity,
determine the nanofiber diameter and reduce the possibilityof bead formation. (2) Process parameters such as orifice
diameter, flow rate of polymer, and electric potential
influence fiber diameter. Process parameters such as distancebetween capillary and metal collector determine the extent
of evaporation of solvent from the nanofibers, and deposition
on the collector, whereas motion of collector determinesthe pattern formation during fiber deposition. The systemic
and process parameters vary with different polymeric
systems and in most cases lend themselves to modification,thereby enabling tailoring of nanofibers for specific end uses
(Shin et al 2001b; Zong et al 2002; Fridrikh et al 2003;
Katti et al 2004).
During the process of electrospinning, the charge on the
polymer solution makes it possible to control its trajectory
using an electric field (Hohman et al 2001a, 2001b). Thiscontrol enables the production of oriented nanofibers that
can be useful in the designing of scaffolds for tissue
engineering (Sundaray et al 2004; Li et al 2005a).Conventional electrospinning produces nanofibers that are
randomly oriented. Recent studies on nanofibers explore
the possibility of providing an orientation to the nanofibers.The intent for nanofiber alignment is driven by the desire to
direct cell growth and achieve more defined cell growth.
This would especially be useful in some tissue engineering
applications such as neural tissue engineering, where
directional neuronal/axonal growth is desired (Yang et al
2005). Some of the recent studies have tried to achieve
nanofiber alignment by making use of a rotating disc with
sharpened edges for deposition of nanofibers (Theron et al
2001; Sundaray et al 2004; Lee et al 2005; Yang et al 2005).
The sharpened edge provides concentrated amounts of
electrostatic force that causes the attraction of ions and
deposition of the nanofibers along the edge of the rotating
Figure 1 (a) Schematic of the electrospinning process. (b) Scanning electron
micrograph of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanofibers synthesized usingthe electrospinning technique (scale bar
 = 10 µm). Source for 1b: Katti DS,
Robinson KW, Ko FK, et al. 2004. Bioresorbable nanofiber based systems forwound healing and drug delivery: optimization of fabrication parameters.J Biomed Mater Res , 70B:286–96. Copyright © 2004 J Wiley. Reprinted with
permission of John Wiley & Sons Inc.(b)(a)International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 18Vasita and Katti
disc to produce aligned nanofibers. Sundaray et al (2004)
demonstrated that several other parameters can influence
the alignment of nanofibers, such as reduction in inter
electrode distance, higher polymer concentration, and use
of single sharp pin as a collecting electrode (Sundaray et al
2004). In another recent study, Li et al (2005a) developed a
method for collecting electrospun nanofibers using patterned
electrodes. They demonstrated that by introducing insulating
gaps on the conductive collector, uniaxially aligned
nanofibers can be obtained. In this study, the authors took
advantage of the fact that discrete fiber segments tend to
align themselves in the direction of minimum net torque to
obtain orientation. These studies indicated that alignment
and assembly of nanofibers can be altered by varying the
design pattern of the collecting electrode.
Along with the advantage of producing nanofiber meshes
with high porosity and surface area, the electrospinning
technique can be applied to a wide variety of natural and
synthetic polymers, making it a very versatile technique.
However, this technique is also associated with limitations
such as broad range of fiber thickness, random orientation
of nanofibers, and low mechanical properties of the fiber
meshes. Overall, electrospinning is a relatively robust and
simple technique to produce nanofibers from a wide variety
of polymers.
Self-assembly
Eukaryotic cells can sense their local environment throughcell receptors that recognize their corresponding extra-cellular tissue markers such as collagen and fibronectin.Therefore, mimicking the extracellular matrix (ECM) usingbiomaterials would be a logistic approach for engineering
of a variety of tissue types. To mimic the human ECM,
Berndt et al synthesized a peptide amphiphile (PA)-basedself-assembling system with the goal of designing a simple
self-assembly system that allows for the formation of
thermally stable protein-like molecular architectures. Theauthors developed PAs that consisted of a dialkyl chainmoiety (hydrophobic component/tail group) attached to anN-alpha amino group of a peptide chain (hydrophilic
component/head group), resulting in a “peptide amphiphile”
(Berndt et al 1995). The peptide head groups were derivedfrom the ECM collagen ligand sequence. The synthesized
PA hydrophilic head group consisted of  Gly-Val-Lys-Gly-
Asp-Lys-Gly-Asn-Pro-Gly-Trp-Pro-Gly-Ala-Pro [IV-H1],which is similar to the human α1 (IV) 1263-1277 collagen
sequence. In another study, Yu et al replaced the dialkylchains of the PA used in the previous study with monoalkyl
chains (Berndt et al 1995; Yu et al 1996, 1998; Fields et al
1998). They demonstrated that with an increase in the length
of the monoalkyl chain from C
6 to C16, the thermal stability
of the PA increased because of the hydrophobic interaction
between alkyl chains (Yu et al 1998). Both the dialkyl and
monoalkyl chain-based PAs readily self-assembled to form
a stabilized triple-helical conformation in an aqueous solvent
at the liquid–air interface (Yu et al 1996, 1999).
In a more recent study, Malker et al determined the
bioactivity of the PA self-assemblies by incorporating
bioactive sequences within the PA. Their results indicated
that the formation of the triple-helix for such a PA (ie,
containing a bioactive sequence) produced an ordered
structure of the bioactive sequence on the exterior of the
triple helix that led to a favorable cell response (ie, cell
adhesion, spreading, and proliferation) because of the
similarity of the self-assembled triple helix to natural ECM.
The results of this study and another previous study by Fields
et al indicated that these PA structures have potential to be
used as surface coatings for biomaterials to improve
biocompatibility (Fields et al 1998; Malkar et al 2003).
Based on prior knowledge of PA self-assembling systems
(Berndt et al 1995; Stupp et al 1997; Fields et al 1998; Yu et
al 1998; Malkar et al 2003), Stupp et al designed di- and tri-
block PAs that self-assembled into a rod-like architecture.
By engineering the peptide head group of the PA, the authors
developed a new technique for the self-assembly of PAs
into nanofibers using pH control (Hartgerink et al 2001).
The synthesis of the PA involved the following salient
features (Hartgerink et al 2001).
1. Incorporation of phosphoserin residue to enable
enhanced hydroxyapatite (HA) mineralization.
2. Incorporation of RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) peptide to increase
integrin-mediated cell adhesion.
3. Incorporation of four consecutive  cystine residues, which
form inter-molecular disulfide bonds that polymerize to
provide improved structural stability.
4. Incorporation of a flexible linker region consisting of
three glycine residues to provide flexibility to the head
group.The preparation of nanofibers involved reduction of
cystine residues of the PA to free thiol groups using
dithiotheritol followed by acidification below pH 4 to cause
self-assembly of the PAs into cylindrical micelles/
nanofibers. The resulting nanofibers had a hydrophobic core
of alkyl residues and a hydrophilic exterior lined by peptideInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 19Nanofibers for tissue engineering
residues. Their results indicated that the nanofibers produced
by self-assembly were approximately 5–8  nm in diameter
and several microns in length (see Figure 2). Hartgerink etal further investigated the mineralization potential of thesenanofibers. The authors observed the formation of HAcrystals that were oriented along the length of the nanofibers.This nanoscale orientation resembles the orientation of HAcrystals in mineralized ECM and collagen fibers of bonetissue. Since the mineralized, self-assembled nanofiberswere similar to the lowest level of the hierarchical structureof bone tissue, the authors believe that the nanofibers showpotential to be used as primary building blocks for theengineering of bone or other mineralization tissue(Hartgerink et al 2001).
In another study, Hartgerink et al (2002) investigated
the effect of variations in the molecular structure of the PAson the self-assembled nanofibers. It was observed thatmodifications in the alkyl chain length of the PA alter thepH sensitivity of nanofibers, which affects self-assembly.Modification of the C- terminal region (ie, the region that isexpressed on the surface of the nanofibers after self-assembly) led to changes in length and stiffness of the
nanofibers. Replacement of cystine residues by alanine didnot affect the self-assembly of the PAs into nanofibers. These
results suggested that the self-assembled nanofibers show
potential for development as novel biomaterials (Hartgerink
et al 2002; Hwang et al 2002). This study also introduced
three different methods of forming self-assembled PAs,
including pH-controlled self-assembly, drying on surface-
induced self-assembly, and divalent-ion-induced self-
assembly. The study demonstrated that PAs can be self-
assembled reversibly into nanofibers that result in the
formation of gels through pH changes. These PA nanofibers
can also be reversibly polymerized to improve their stability.
The reversibility of these two procedures makes the self-
assembly technique attractive as it enables the fabrication
of remarkably versatile materials. In addition, this technique
produces a good yield of nanofibers with low polydispersity.
Therefore, the self-assembly technique, by virtue of the
modifications possible in the structure of the PA, enables a
variety of self-assemblies including layered and lamellar
structures, and by virtue of the aforementioned reversibilities
lends flexibility to the system. Thus, the self-assembly
technique shows good potential f or further exploration with
the goal of designing novel scaffolds for tissue engineering
applications.
Phase separation
The motivation to mimic the 3D structure of collagen present
in natural ECM, led Ma and Zhang to develop a new
technique called thermally induced liquid  – liquid phase
separation for the formation of nanofibrous foam materials
(Ma and Zhang 1999; Zhang and Ma 2002). The nanofibrous
foams produced using the phase separation technique arevery similar in size to the natural collagen present in the
ECM of tissue in terms of their size (50–500
 nm) (see
Figure 3). This technique involves five basic steps (Ma andZhang 1999; Zhang and Ma 2002).
1. Dissolution of polymer.
2. Liquid–liquid phase separation process.3. Polymer gelation (controls the porosity of nanoscale
scaffolds at low temperature).
4. Extraction of solvent from the gel with water.5. Freezing and freeze-drying under vacuum.
Gelation was found to be the most critical step that controlled
the porous morphology of the nanofibrous foams. Theduration of gelation varied with polymer concentration and
gelation temperature. Low gelation temperature led to the
formation of the nanoscale fiber networks, whereas highgelation temperature led to the formation of a platelet-like
Figure 2 Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of nanofibers formed from
peptide amphiphile molecules (N terminus – C10H19O and Peptide – CCCCGG
GS(PO4)RGD) that self-assembled by drying directly onto a TEM grid without
adjusted pH (negatively stained with phosphotungstic acid). The morphology ofthe nanofibers was similar to that observed by pH-induced self-assembly. Source:Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI. 2002. Peptide-amphiphile nanofibers: aversatile scaffold for the preparation of self-assembling materials. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A , 99:5133–8. Copyright © 2002 National Academy of Sciences, USA.
Reprinted with permission of the National Academy of Sciences, USA.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 20Vasita and Katti
structure due to the nucleation of crystals and their growth.
This limitation of platelet-like structure formation wasovercome by increased cooling rates that produced uniformnanofibers. However, the average diameter of fibers wasnot significantly affected by gelation condition or polymerconcentration. Process parameters such as polymerconcentration were found to have a significant effect on thenanofiber properties. An increase in polymer concentrationdecreased porosity and increased mechanical properties(Young’s modulus and tensile strength). Other processparameters, such as type of polymer, type of solvent, andthermal treatment also influenced the morphology of thenanofibrous scaffolds (Zhang and Ma 2000).
The 3D porous continuous fibrous network formed by
the phase separation process showed high porosity of about98% within blocks of the material (Ma and Zhang 1999).The authors introduced macroporosity into the scaffold byincorporating porogens such as sugar and salt in the moldalong with the polymer solution during phase separation.The macroporosity was introduced with the intent ofimproving mass transport, cell distribution, and tissue
organization. Therefore, scaffolds obtained by this methodhad three levels of architecture: first, macroporous(~100
 µm) wherein the pore size and shape is controlled by
porogen; second, interfiber distance, which is determined
by polymer concentration; and third, fiber diameter (Zhang
and Ma 2000, 2002). The authors then studied thesenanofibrous scaffolds for their interaction with osteoblasticcells. The results demonstrated that the nanofibers increased
cell adhesion and protein adsorption (fibronectin andcollagen), which are properties that are necessary for cell
and ECM interaction (Woo et al 2003). The authors
attributed the increased cell attachment and distribution inthese 3D macroporous scaffolds to their architecture.
The advantage of the phase separation process is that it
is a relatively simple procedure and the requirements are
very minimal in terms of equipment compared with the
previously discussed techniques, electrospinning, and self-
assembly. It is possible to directly fabricate the scaffold for
a desired anatomical shape of a body part with a mold.
Another advantage is the simultaneous presence of nano
and macro architecture that can be beneficial in terms of
cell response at the nanofiber level, and in terms of cell
distribution and tissue architecture at the macroporosity level
(Ma and Choi 2001).
Natural polymeric materials for
nanofibers
Natural polymers offer the advantage of being very similar,
often identical, to macromolecular substances present in the
human body. Therefore, the biological environment is
prepared to recognize and interact with natural polymers
favorably. Some of the na tural polymers used as biomaterials
are collagen, hyaluronic acid, gelatin, chitosan, elastin, silk,
and wheat protein (Yannas 2004).
Collagen is the most popular and well investigated
natural biomaterial (Shields et al 2004). Collagen nanofibers
(Matthews et al 2002) have been demonstrated to show
compatibility with a number of cell types, including
myoblasts and chondrocytes (Gersbach et al 2004; Shields
et al 2004). In addition, the cross-linking in collagen type II
scaffolds provides good mechanical properties, thereby
making these scaffolds a suitable environment for cell
growth (Shields et al 2004). Huang et al studied the blending
of type I collagen nanofibers (produced by electrospinning)
with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO). Their results demonstrated
that due to a high number of inter-molecular interactions
between collagen and PEO, the mechanical strength of the
nanofiber system was significantly increased (Huang et al
2001). These studies illustrated the promising role of
collagen in tissue engineering.
Chitosan is another natural biomaterial that has been used
to make nanofibers (Geng et al 2005). Nonwoven or aligned
chitosan/PEO (90:10) nanofibers have been developed using
the electrospinning technique. These nanofibers possessed
structural integrity in water and their cell studies
demonstrated enhanced attachment of human osteoblasts
Figure 3 Scanning electron micrograph of poly(l-lactic acid) (PLLA) nanofibrous
foam synthesized from 2.5% (wt/v) PLLA/tetrahydrofuran solution at a gelationtemperature of 8°C using the phase separation technique (image 500
 ×). Source:
Ma PX, Zhang R. 1998. Synthetic nano-scale fibrous extracellular matrix. J Biomed
Mater Res , 46:60–72. Copyright © 1998 J Wiley. Reprinted with permission of
John Wiley & Sons Inc.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 21Nanofibers for tissue engineering
and chondrocytes onto the nanofibers. In addition, the cells
maintained their characteristic morphology and viability onthese nanofibers, thereby indicating good cytocompatibility
(Bhattarai et al 2005). Hence, chitosan nanofibers could be
a good candidate material f or scaffolds in tissue engineering.
Hyaluronic acid is a natural component of the ECM of
tissue and has been used as a biomaterial. Um et al (2004)
developed nanofibers of hyaluronic acid using the techniqueof electrospinning and electroblowing (blowing hot air
during the process of electrospinning). The authors observed
that electrospinning of hyaluronic acid does not allow theconsistent production of high-quality nonwoven nanofibers.
Therefore, they employed a new technique of electroblowing
that was a combination of electrospinning and air flow. Inthis study, the authors successfully produced nanofibers of
hyaluronic acid via electrospinning and by blowing air at
57
 °C with a 70  ft/hour flow rate.
Another natural biomaterial that has been well studied
is gelatin. Zhang et al (2005) developed gelatin/PCL
composite fibrous scaffolds using the electrospinningtechnique. Their study indicated that the composite
nanofibers have improved mechanical strength and
wettability compared with gelatin or PCL alone. In addition,the nanofibrous scaffold of gelatin-PCL showed good cellattachment, growth, and migration of bone marrow stromal
cells. Therefore, composite nanofibers of natural and
synthetic materials could be a good methodology forimproving mechanical properties of natural biomaterials for
tissue engineering applications.
Silk fibroin is another potential natural biomaterial for
nanofibrous scaffolds (Jin et al 2002). Min et al (2004) have
reported the in vitro cytocompatibility of silk nanofibers
with keratinocytes and fibroblasts. The cytocompatibility,fiber diameter, and high porosity together make it a suitable
candidate material for scaffolding technology.
Recent studies by Li et al (2005b) explored the possible
usage of electrospun protein fibers as scaffolds for tissue
engineering. The authors developed human tropoelastin for
electrospinning. The results of this study indicated thattropoelastin nanofibers seeded with human embryonic
palatal mesenchymal cells supported cell adhesion and
proliferation satisfactorily when compared with nanofibersof collagen or elastin. In another recent study, Woerdeman
et al (2005) have explored the possibility of using wheat
gluten, a plant protein, as a new material for electrospinningnanofibers that can be used for tissue engineering
applications.Therefore, based on these studies a wide variety of
natural polymers have been explored for the synthesis of
nanofibers as scaffolds for tissue engineering.
Synthetic polymeric materials for
nanofibers
Synthetic polymers represent the largest class of bio-
materials (Peter et al 1998; Cooper et al 2004). A wide
variety of synthetic polymers has been used to form
nanofibers. These include PLA (Tu et al 2003; Yang et al2004); poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) (Ma et al 2005b)for blood vessel tissue engineering; PCL (Li et al 2005c) inneural and cartilage tissue engineering; and several co-polymeric compounds such as PLLA-CL as a biomimetic
ECM for smooth muscle and endothelial cells (Mo et al
2004; Mo and Weber 2004); PLGA (Katti et al 2004;Uematsu et al 2005), one of the most commonly usedpolymers to fabricate nanofiber s for bone and cartilage tissue
engineering and controlled drug delivery; PEV A (Kenawyet al 2002) nanofibers for controlled drug delivery; and
PLGA-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLGA-PEG) block
copolymeric nanofibrous scaffolds produced via electro-spinning as a matrix for DNA delivery (Luu et al 2003).Recently, carbon and alumina nanofibers have been exploredas biomaterials for applications in dental and orthopedicimplants (Elias et al 2002; Price et al 2003a; Price et al
2003b; Webster et al 2005). Therefore, a large variety of
synthetic polymers has been explored for nanofiber synthesisprimarily because of the electrospinning technique that
easily lends itself to synthetic polymer usage.
Applications of nanofibers in tissue
engineering
A variety of methods has been reported previously for the
fabrication of scaffolds to be used in tissue engineering
(Atala and Lanza 2002). However, in the past decade,nanofibrous systems have been developed and explored as
potential scaffolds for tissue engineering (Ma and Zhang
1999; Li et al 2002; Smith and Ma 2004; Ma et al 2005a).By virtue of their high surface area and porosity, they have
the potential to provide enhanced cell adhesion and by virtue
of the similarity of their 3D architecture to natural ECM,they provide an excellent micro/nano environment for cells
to grow and perform their regular functions (Doshi and
Reneker 1995; Stupp et al 1997; Zhang and Ma 2000).Therefore, nanofibrous systems have been strongly pursued
as scaffolds for tissue engineering applications.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 22Vasita and Katti
Nanofibers for musculoskeletal
tissue engineering
Many materials (natural and synthetic) have been explored
as nanofibrous scaffolding materials for bone, cartilage,
ligament, and skeletal muscle tissue engineering, includingHA (Ramay and Zhang 2003), chitosan (Bhattarai et al
2005), PLGA (Uematsu et al 2005), carbon (Price et al
2003b) and aluminum nanofibers (Webster et al 2005).Although nanofibers have been studied as scaffolds for
multiple tissue types, musculoskeletal tissue is probably the
most well studied.
Nanofibers for bone tissue engineering
The design of scaffolds for bone tissue engineering is based
on the physical properties of bone tissue such as mechanical
strength, pore size, porosity, hardness, and overall 3D
architecture.  For bone tissue engineering, scaffolds with a
pore size in the range of 100–350  µm and porosity greater
than 90% are preferred for better cell/tissue in-growth andhence enhanced bone regeneration (Bruder and Caplan2000; Hutmacher 2000).
Yoshimoto et al (2003) developed nonwoven PCL
scaffolds by electrospinning for the purpose of bone tissueengineering. To understand the influence of mesenchymalstem cells (MSCs) on nanofibers, MSCs derived from bonemarrow of neonatal rats were seeded on the nanofibrous
scaffold. The results indicated that the MSCs migrated inside
the scaffold and produced abundant extracellular matrix inthe scaffold. In continuation to this study, Shin et al testedthe PCL nanofibers along with MSCs in vivo in a rat model.Their results demonstrated ECM formation throughout thescaffold along with mineralization and type I collagen
synthesis (Shin et al 2004). These studies demonstrated that
PCL-based nanofibrous scaffolds are potential candidatesfor bone tissue engineering.
In another study, Ramay et al used HA with β-tricalcium
phosphate ( β-TCP) to develop biodegradable nano-
composite porous scaffolds (Ramay and Zhang 2004). β-
TCP/HA scaffolds built from HA nanofibers with β-TCP
as a matrix were used to fabricate porous scaffolds by atechnique that integrated the gel casting technique with thepolymer sponge method (Ramay and Zhang 2003). Theirin vitro results demonstrated that incorporation of HAnanofibers as a second component in β-TCP significantly
increased the mechanical strength of the porous composite
scaffolds. This study introduced nano-composites with HAnanofibers as a promising scaffolding system for load
bearing applications such as bone tissue engineering.Nanofibers for cartilage tissue
engineering
Articular cartilage tissue has a limited capacity for repair
due to the reduced availability of chondrocytes and complete
absence of progenitor cells in the vicinity of the wound tomediate the repair process. The chondrocytes available for
repair are embedded in the dense extracellular matrix of the
articular surface which restricts their mobility and hencelimits their contribution to the wound healing process
(McPherson and Tubo 2000). In addition, articular cartilage
is an avascular tissue which further limits its capacity toself-regenerate. To provide a solution to this problem,
multiple surgical techniques have been developed, but with
limited success (Colwell et al 2001). Therefore, tissueengineering as a potential approach to regenerate cartilage
tissue holds good promise. One of the methods of
engineering cartilage tissue is through the use of 3Dscaffolds combined with chondrocytes or progenitor cells
(Tuli et al 2003; Li et al 2005c).
Li et al developed PCL-based nanofibrous scaffolds by
electrospinning (Li et al 2003, 2005c). These scaffolds were
then seeded with fetal bovine chondrocytes (FBC) and
studied for their ability to maintain chondrocytes in a maturefunctional state. Their results demonstrated that FBCs
seeded on the PCL nanofibers were able to maintain their
chondrocytic phenotype by expressing cartilage-specificextracellular matrix genes like aggrecan, collagen type II
and IX, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (Li et al
2003). Further, FBCs exhibited a spindle or round shape onthe nanofibrous scaffold in contrast to a flat, well-spread
morphology as seen when cultured on tissue culture
polystyrene. Another interesting finding from this study wasthat serum-free medium produced more sulfated proteo-
glycan-rich cartilaginous matrix when compared with the
same cultured in monolayer on tissue culture polystyrene.These results demonstrated that the bioactivity of FBCs
depends on the architecture of the scaffold and the
composition of the culture medium. Hence, the PCLnanofibers show potential to be further explored as scaffolds
for cartilage tissue engineering.
In a more recent study, Li et al have further explored the
PCL nanofibers for cartilage tissue engineering. In this study,
the authors used adult bone marrow-derived MSCs alongwith PCL nanofibers to test if the nanofibrous scaffoldssupported in vitro MSC chondrogenesis. Their resultsindicated that PCL nanofibers in the presence of a memberof the transforming growth factor- β family caused the
differentiation of MSCs to chondrocytes that wasInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 23Nanofibers for tissue engineering
comparable to that caused by cell aggregates or pellets (Li
et al 2005c). However, since the PCL nanofibrous scaffolds
possess better mechanical properties than cell pellets, theyshow potential to be developed as a scaffolding system for
MSC delivery and hence cartilage tissue engineering.
Kisiday et al (2002) developed a self-assembling peptide
hydrogel scaffold for cartilage repair. They used the peptide
KDK-12 that had a sequence of (AcN-KLDLKLDLKLDL-
CNH2) (where K is lysine, D is aspartic acid, and L isleucine). This peptide was seeded with bovine chondrocytes
and then allowed to self assemble into a hydrogel. The
chondrocyte-seeded hydrogels were then studied for theirability to support chondrocyte proliferation, ECM
production, and phenotype maintenance. Their results
demonstrated that the chondrocytes were able to producecartilage-like ECM which was rich in proteoglycan and type
II collagen (phenotypic markers of chondrocytes). Further,
the authors observed that the mechanical propertiescontinuously increased with time, which was indicative of
the continuous deposition of glycosaminoglycan-rich matrix
by the chondrocytes. In addition, the ability to design thepeptide may offer advantages in controlling scaffold
degradation, cell attachment, and growth factor delivery.
Therefore, the self-assembling peptide hydrogel scaffoldmay be a suitable candidate for cartilage tissue engineering.
Nanofibers for ligament tissue
engineering
Ligaments are bands of dense connective tissue responsible
for joint movement and stability. Ligament ruptures resultin abnormal joint kinematics and often irreversible damage
of the surrounding tissue leading to tissue degenerative
diseases, which do not heal naturally and cannot becompletely repaired by conventional clinical methods (Lin
et al 1999; Goulet et al 2000). Recently, tissue engineering
methods involving nanofibers have been successfullyemployed to meet this challenge (Lin et al 1999). In
particular, aligned nanofibers enhanced cell response and
hence were explored as scaffolds for ligament tissueengineering.
Lee et al studied the effects of PU nanofiber alignment
and direction of mechanical stimuli on the extracellularmatrix generation of human ligament (anterior cruciate)fibroblasts (HLF) (Lee et al 2005). Conventional electro-spinning produces randomly oriented nanofibers; however,the authors made use of a rotating target to achieve
electrospun fibers that were aligned. The fibers were then
seeded with HLFs to study the influence of alignment onHLF behavior. Their results demonstrated that HLFs were
spindle shaped, oriented in the direction of nanofibers, andshowed enhancement in the synthesis of ECM proteins
(collagen) on aligned nanofibers when compared with
randomly oriented nanofibers. In addition, the authors alsostudied the effect of direction of mechanical stimuli on theECM produced by HLFs. For this study the authors seededHLFs on parallel aligned, vertically aligned to the straindirection, and randomly oriented PU nanofibers. The results
demonstrated that HLFs were more sensitive to strain in the
longitudinal direction. Therefore,  this study concluded that
aligned nanofibrous scaffolds showed promise for use in
ligament tissue engineering (Lee et al 2005).
Nanofibers for skeletal muscle tissue
engineering
Skeletal muscles are responsible for voluntary movement
of the body and once damaged (by disease or trauma) aredifficult to regenerate in adults (DiEdwardo et al 1999).Therefore, tissue engineering of skeletal muscle, althoughchallenging, is an exciting alternative to surgical techniquesfor skeletal muscle regeneration. Riboldi et al (2005) have
explored the use of electrospun microfibers made from
degradable polyester urethane (PEU) as scaffolds for skeletalmuscle tissue engineering. Based on their preliminarystudies using primary human satellite cells (biopsy from a38-year-old female), C2C12 (murin myoblast cell line), andL6 (rat myoblast cell line), their results indicated that the
electrospun microfibers of PEU showed satisfactory
mechanical properties and encouraging cellular responsein terms of adhesion and differentiation. Based on thesestudies, the electrospun microfibers of PEU show potentialto be further explored as a scaffolding system for skeletalmuscle tissue engineering.
Nanofibers for skin tissue engineering
Skin wounds normally heal by formation of epithelializedscar tissue rather than by regeneration of full skin (Clarkand Singer 2000). Of the two layers of skin, epidermis anddermis, the epidermis has less capacity to heal; however,
when large areas of the epidermis need to be replaced,
normal regeneration is lacking. Further, the dermis has anenormous capacity to regenerate. The scar tissue that formsin the absence of dermis lacks elasticity, flexibility, and
strength of the normal dermis (Clark and Singer 2000;
Parenteau et al 2000). Consequently, scar tissue limits
movements, causes pain, and is cosmetically undesirable.Therefore, engineered skin tissue would be an excellentInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 24Vasita and Katti
alternative, not only to close the wound but also to stimulate
the regeneration of the dermis. Along with collagen, several
other natural and synthetic polymers have been exploredfor skin tissue engineering (Matthews et al 2002); however,
the use of these biomaterials as nanofibers has been very
limited. Min et al (2004) developed nonwoven silk fibroinnanofibers by electrospinning for skin tissue engineering.
Due to their high porosity and high surface area to volume
ratio, fibroin nanofibers coated with type I collagen werefound to promote keratinocytes/fibroblast adhesion and
spreading. Therefore, the silk fibroin nanofibers show
potential to be developed as a scaffold for skin tissueengineering.
Khil et al (2003) studied PU electrospun nanofiber
membranes for the purpose of wound dressings. The PUnanofiber membranes provided excellent oxygen
permeability and controlled water evaporation. By virtue
of these properties, the nanofiber membranes allowed fluidfrom the wound to exude out while preventing dehydration
of the wound. Further, the ultra-fine porosity of the PU
nanofiber membranes disallowed invasion by exogenousmicroorganisms. These results indicated that the PU
nanofiber membranes showed potential to be developed as
wound dressing materials.
Nanofibers for blood vessel tissue
engineering
From the days of research on developing vascular grafts
using materials that produce minimal interaction with the
inflowing blood and adjacent tissues, researchers have comea long way to develop constructs at the nanoscale that
interact with cells and cause blood vessel formation.
Conventional electrospinning produces randomly
oriented nanofibers; however, Mo et al developed an aligned
biodegradable PLLA-CL (75:25) nanofibrous scaffold using
a rotating collector disc for collection of aligned electrospunnanofibers (Mo and Weber et al 2004). These aligned
nanofibers were explored to fabricate tubular scaffolds that
could be used for engineering blood vessels. Their resultsdemonstrated that the nano-sized fibers mimic the
dimensions of natural ECM, provide mechanical properties
comparable to human coronary artery, and form a welldefined architecture for smooth muscle cell adhesion and
proliferation (Mo and Weber 2004; Mo et al 2004; Xu et al
2004b).
Aligned fibers not only give structural integrity but also
maintain vasoactivity as they provide necessary mechanicalstrength needed to sustain high pressure of the human
circulatory system (Xu et al 2004a). Xu et al (2004a) studied
the response of endothelial cells along with smooth musclecells (SMCs) on the aligned nanofibers of PLLA-CL, and
their results demonstrated that both the cell types showed
enhanced adhesion and proliferation rates on the nanofibrousscaffold. In addition, it was observed that the SMCs
cytoskeleton organization was along the direction of the
nanofibers. These results suggested that aligned nanofibersmay provide for a good scaffolding system for vascular
tissue engineering.
It is now established that there is a significant effect of
nanoscale-textured surface roughness on cell response in
terms of cell adhesion and proliferation (Webster et al 2001).
It is also known that cells attach and organize very well
around fibers with diameters smaller than them (Xu et al
2004a). Therefore, Ma et al processed a conventional
polymer, PET, into a nonwoven nanofibrous mat by
electrospinning, and modified its surface by grafting gelatin
(Ma et al 2005b). Their study demonstrated enhanced
spreading and proliferation of endothelial cells on the
modified PET nanofiber mats, while preserving their
phenotype. Based on this study, gelatin-modified PET
nanofibers could be potential candidates for the engineering
of vascular grafts.
Boland et al (2004) developed electrospun micro and
nanofibrous scaffolds from natural polymers such as
collagen and elastin with the goal of developing constructs
for vascular tissue engineering. Their results demonstrated
that electrospun collagen and elastin nanofibers were able
to mimic the complex architecture required of vascular
constructs and were able to provide good mechanical
properties that are desired in the environment of the blood
stream. Their study indicated that micro and nanofibrous
scaffolds synthesized from natural polymers such as
collagen and elastin could be useful in the engineering of
artificial blood vessels.
Nanofibers for neural tissue engineering
In the nervous system, degeneration of neurons or glial cells
or any unfavorable change in the extracellular matrix ofneural tissue can lead to a wide variety of clinical disorders.Neural tissue repair is a daunting challenge because almost
all neural injuries lead to an irreversible loss of function
(Fine et al 2000). Neural tissue engineering aims to repairneural tissue by employing biological tools such as normal
or genetically engineered cells and ECM equivalents alongInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 25Nanofibers for tissue engineering
with potent synthetic tools such as biomaterials for scaffold
design and/or drug delivery systems.
Yang et al have studied the potential of poly(l-lactic acid)
(PLLA)-based electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds for the
purpose of neural tissue engineering. Their study involved
understanding the influence of the nanofibrous scaffolds on
neural stem cells (NSCs). Their results indicated that
randomly oriented nanofibers (150–350  nm) not only
supported neural stem cell adhesion but also promoted NSC
differentiation (Yang et al 2004, 2005). The authors
attributed the aforementioned findings to higher surface area
and roughness of the nanofibers. Yang et al have recently
reported another study wherein they tried to understand the
role of aligned nanofibers in neural tissue engineering. They
obtained aligned nanofibers by collecting nanofibers on the
edge of a rotating disc. The 3D scaffolds were fabricated to
desired thickness by adjusting the collecting time; however,
after approximately 30 minutes, residual charges on the
collecting fibers led to random collection of the fibers on
top of the scaffold. The scaffolds with oriented nanofibers
were then studied with NSCs to determine the influence of
nanofiber orientation on NSCs. The results demonstrated
that NSCs elongated and their neurites outgrew along the
direction of the fiber orientation of the aligned nanofibers.
Further, it was observed that the NSCs show increased rate
of differentiation on aligned nanofibers compared with
microfibers. Therefore, the aligned PLLA nanofibrous
scaffolds show potential to be developed for neural tissue
engineering (Yang et al 2005).
Semino et al (2004) developed a self-assembling peptide
scaffold with a goal of studying 3D culture and cell
entrapment. Hippocampal slice and neuroprogenitor cells
from the dentate gyrus region were cultured on top of the
self-assembled nanofibrous scaffold. At the interaction layer
between the hippocampal slice and the nanofibrous scaffold,migrating cell populations were readily enriched and
entrapped. After 1 week of culture, glial cells and neurons
increasingly migrated into the peptide scaffold to anapproximate depth of 400–500
 µm from the edge of the
tissue slice. Entrapped cells collected from the migration
zone were used to initiate new culture. A noteworthyobservation from these experiments was that the mitoticactivity of neural cells was maintained for 3 days aftermigration and the authors attribute this to the presence of
the nanofibrous scaffold environment that is similar to the
ECM of the cells in their native environment. The
understanding gained in this study takes us one step closerto the development of a technology for neural progenitor
cell isolation and enrichment in vitro. This technology once
developed could greatly enhance the ability of scientists toisolate neural progenitor cells and hence engineer neural
tissue.
Nanofibers for controlled drug
delivery
Controlled delivery systems are used to improve the
therapeutic efficacy and safety of drugs by delivering them
to the site of action at a rate dictated by the need of the
physiological environment. A wide variety of polymericmaterials have been used as delivery matrices, and the choice
of the delivery vehicle polymer is determined by the
requirements of the specific application (Heller and Hoffman2004). Polymeric nanofibers have recently been explored
for their ability to encapsulate and deliver bioactive
molecules for therapeutic applications.
Kenawy et al (2002) studied PEV A, PLA, and their 50:50
blend-based electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds for the
delivery of tetracycline hydrochloride in periodontalapplications. Their results demonstrated that the initial rate
of release of tetracycline hydrochloride from the scaffold is
high during the first 10–12 hours, most likely due to releaseof drug sequestered on the nanofiber surface. Electrospun
PEV A showed a higher release rate when compared with
the electrospun nanofiber meshes of pure PLA or 50/50PLA/PEV A. Electrospun PEV A released 65% of its drug
content within 120 hours, whereas a 50/50 blend of PLA
and PEVA gave about 50% release of tetracyclinehydrochloride for the same duration. These results indicated
that the rate of release of tetracycline hydrochloride can be
controlled by modulating the ratio of PLA and PEV A in thepolymeric blend. Therefore, the nanofibrous delivery system
showed potential to be employed in the treatment of
periodontal diseases.
In another study, Verreck et al (2003b) have
demonstrated the use of (nonbiodegradable polymer
scaffolds) PU nanofibrous scaffolds produced by electro-spinning for the delivery of water-insoluble drugs such as
intraconazole and ketanserin. In their study, the authors
obtained an amorphous nanodispersion of the water-insoluble drug on the nanofibrous scaffold. The large surface
area of the nanofibrous scaffold allowed fast and efficient
solvent evaporation that gave limited time for crystallizationof incorporated drug, and favored the formation of an
amorphous dispersion (Verreck et al 2003a). These studiesInternational Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 26Vasita and Katti
demonstrated that the release of poorly water-soluble drugs
from water-insoluble polymers is possible and that the rate
of release can be tailored by altering the concentration ofthe polymer. Another study by Kim et al (2003, 2004)
demonstrated the potential use of PLGA nanofibrous
scaffolds for controlled release of hydrophilic antibiotics.The authors incorporated Mefoxin
® (cefotoxin sodium) into
PLGA nanofibers during the process of electrospinning.
Inhibited growth of Staphylococcus aureus indicated  that
the bioactivity and structure of the antibiotic drug is not
affected by the process of electrospinning.
The above studies elucidate that nanofibrous scaffolds
are suitable carriers for both hydrophilic and hydrophobic
drugs, and that the drug release rate can be tailored by
modulation of the nanofibrous scaffold’s morphology,porosity, and composition.
Nanofibers for DNA, protein, and
enzyme delivery
With the availability of multiple gene delivery systems, the
selection of the most appropriate gene delivery vehicle tomeet the needs of a particular therapeutic application can
be challenging. Viral- and plasmid-based delivery vehicles
are currently used for the production of therapeutic proteins
to elicit a desired biological response (Fradkin et al 2000).
This would especially be useful in the field of tissueengineering, wherein it would be possible to cause the
production of a desired protein (growth factor) that can
enhance the process of tissue regeneration. Therefore, genedelivery systems have been explored for applications in the
engineering of a variety of tissues. The most commonly used
carrier-based systems for gene delivery are cationicliposomes and condensing agents such as poly(ethyl-
enimine), and poly (l-lysine). More recently, biomaterial-
based gene delivery systems have been explored and areproving to be a promising approach. Various biomaterials
such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), PLGA, and PLA-PEG
copolymers are currently being investigated for gene andprotein delivery (Funhoff et al 2005).
Scaffolds for gene delivery need to provide structural
stability and site specific delivery of genes along withprotection of genes from the biological system until it is
released. Further, the released DNA needs to retain its
structural integrity until it is taken up by the desired cells.
Luu et al studied PLGA and PLA-PEG block copolymer
based nanofibrous scaffolds for plasmid DNA delivery (Fang
and Reneker 1997; Luu et al 2003). Their results indicatedthat the electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds delivered the genein a controlled manner at the targeted site and consequently
caused cell transfection and desired bioactivity. Thisapproach showed higher transfection efficiency whencompared with naked DNA added directly to the culturemedium. Increasing the amount of DNA during scaffoldfabrication increased transfection efficiency of the nanofiberDNA system. The architecture and material properties ofthe nanofibrous scaffold affect the rate at which the DNA isreleased. Therefore, the release profile of the DNA can becontrolled by tailoring scaffold parameters like nanofiberdiameter, pore size of scaffold, and degradation rate of thepolymer. Through these modifications it is possible to sustainthe delivery of DNA over a longer duration. Overall, thissystem seems ideally suited for the sustained/controlleddelivery of intact DNA over a period of several months.
Jia et al (2002) used alpha-chymotripsin attached to
electrospun polystyrene nanofibers (120
 nm) as a catalytic
system and examined its catalytic efficiency in biotrans-formations. Their results indicated that the nanofibrous
enzyme system had a higher hydrolytic activity (65%) thanimmobilized enzyme, and three times more nonaqueousactivity than immobilized alpha-chymotrypsin in organicsolvents. The authors proposed that covalent binding of theenzyme to the nanofiber increased enzyme stability ordecreased structural denaturation. They believe that thisincreased stability may be the reason for enhanced activityof the enzymes attached to the nanofibers. Therefore, thenanofibers show potential to be developed as catalyticsystems to be used in biotransformations.
In a recent study, Zeng et al (2005) developed poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PV A) electrospun nanofibers for protein delivery.PV A nanofibrous scaffolds were loaded with bovine serumalbumin or luciferase proteins. The PV A nanofibers werethen coated with poly(p-xylylene) (PPX) using chemicalvapor deposition. The coated and uncoated PV A nanofibrous
scaffolds were then studied for release kinetics andbioactivity of the released proteins under physiological
conditions. The results demonstrated that intact protein/
enzyme was continuously released from both the nanofibertypes and their bioactivity was preserved after release fromthe nanofibrous scaffolds. However, the PPX-coatednanofibers exhibited significantly retarded release ratescompared with the uncoated PV A nanofibers. Therefore, this
study showed that the nanofibrous scaffold could be a good
candidate material for controlled enzyme/protein delivery.
All the above studies demonstrated the potential of
nanofibers as controlled delivery systems, and hence demandexploration at greater depth to enable this technology to
benefit the patient.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 27Nanofibers for tissue engineering
Application of carbon nanofibers
in tissue engineering
Apart from having nanoscale fiber dimensions similar to
HA and collagen fibers present in bone, carbon nanofibers
have exceptional mechanical properties (three times that ofbone tissue), thereby giving a strong rationale to investigate
them for application in orthopedic or dental tissue
engineering (Elias et al 2002). Further, carbon nanofibershave also been shown to exhibit excellent conductivity,
which might make them potential candidates for neural
tissue engineering applications. The carbon-nanofiber-basedimplants can surpass in some ways the conventional metal
alloy implants used in orthopedics, as they have excellent
cytocompatibility properties (Price et al 2003b) andcomplications associated with leachables in the form of
metal ions released from implants do not arise. In terms of
mechanical properties, carbon nanofibers possess a Young’smodulus of 2
 TPa, which is significantly higher than that of
bone, whereas the tensile strength of carbon nanofibers
almost equals that of bone (Elias et al 2002). Therefore,Price et al explored the possibility of using carbon nanofibers
for bone tissue engineering. They compared osteoblast
adhesion on carbon nanofibers with that of conventionalcarbon fibers (Elias et al 2002; Price et al 2004) and showed
greater osteoblast adhesion on carbon nanofibers. To
determine the properties that caused enhanced adhesion oncarbon nanofibers, the authors studied osteoblast adhesion
on PLGA-coated carbon nanofibers. Their results indicated
that PLGA-coated carbon nanofibers also showed enhancedosteoblast adhesion compared with conventional carbon
fibers. The authors attributed this behavior to increased
surface energy (due to high surface area of the nanofibers),nanometer topography, and surface chemistry of the fibers
(Price et al 2004) (see Figure 4).
Due to their electrical conductivity, carbon nanofibers
were initially explored as electrically conducting fibers, in
nanoelectronic devices, field emitters, and also in reinforce-
ment (Wal et al 2002; Hammel et al 2004). More recently,due to their conductivity, carbon nanofibers are being
explored as potential candidates for neural tissue
engineering. To determine the cytocompatibility of carbonnanofibers as neural implants, McKenzie et al (2004) studied
the interaction of astrocytes (glial scar tissue-forming cells)
and carbon nanofibers in terms of adhesion and proliferation.
Their studies demonstrated that functions of astrocytes wereminimized on nanoscale fibers and led to reduced scar tissue
formation. Based on these observations, the authors
concluded that minimized glial scar tissue formation andpositive interaction with neurons are properties that would
strongly support the success of a neural implant. Therefore,carbon nanofibers need to be investigated further to establish
their potential use in neural tissue engineering.
Applications of alumina nanofibers
in tissue engineering
Osteointegration is a major requirement for bone and dental
implantation. It has been demonstrated that a decrease in surface
feature size can enhance osteointegration (Webster 2001).
Alumina, titania, HA, and their composites are the most
well studied materials for both dental and orthopedicapplications. Due to similarity between physical geometryof HA and aluminum nanofibers, Price et al hypothesizedthat alumina nanofibers may enhance osteointegration (Priceet al 2003a). They studied the influence of aluminananofibers on the behavior of osteoblast cells. Their resultsdemonstrated that the alumina nanofibers enhanced celladhesion and synthesis of osteoblastic phenotypic markerssuch as alkaline phosphates and calcium (Webster et al 2005).
The above studies elucidate that carbon and aluminum
nanofibers can be promising materials for orthopedic/dental
tissue engineering applications.
Conclusion
Mimicking the architecture of ECM is one of the major
challenges of tissue engineering . Amongst all the approaches
used to prepare ECM synthetically, the approach using
Figure 4 High magnification scanning electron micrograph of carbon nanofiber
compacts. The carbon nanofibers were prepared using a chemical vapordeposition technique with a pyrolitic aromatic hydrocarbon outer layer (PR-1AG [nanophase]). The resulting carbon nanofibers were compacted serially in asteel-tool die via a uniaxial pressing cycle (0.2–0.4
 GPa over a 5-minute period)
at room temperature and the resulting carbon fiber compacts were used in thecell experiments (scale bar
 = 1 µm). Source: Elias KL, Price RL, Webster TJ. 2002.
Enhanced function of osteoblasts on nanometer diameter carbon fibers.Biomaterials , 23:3279–87. Copyright © 2002. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 28Vasita and Katti
nanofibers has shown the most promising results. Nanofibers
can be formed using either one of the three prevailing
techniques: electrospinning, self-assembly, or phaseseparation. Electrospinning is the most widely studied
technique and has also shown the most promising results.
The availability of a large range of natural and syntheticbiomaterials has fueled the area of nanofiber synthesis,
especially using the electrospinning technique.
Nanofibers, irrespective of their method of synthesis,
have provided for scaffolds with high surface area and
enhanced porosity. These properties have been demonstrated
to have a significant effect on cell adhesion, proliferation,and differentiation. Hence nanofibrous matrices are currently
being explored as scaffolds for musculoskeletal tissue
engineering (including bone, cartilage, ligament, andskeletal muscle), skin tissue engineering, neural tissue
engineering, vascular tissue engineering, and controlled
delivery of drugs, proteins, and DNA. The results of all thesestudies clearly indicate that nanofiber-based scaffolds show
excellent potential to be developed for a variety of tissue
engineering applications.
Acknowledgments
DSK would like to acknowledge the initiation grant (IITK/
BSBE/20040046) support provided by Indian Institute of
Technology-Kanpur.
References
Atala A, Lanza RP. 2002. Methods of tissue engineering. San Diego:
Academic Pr.
Berndt P, Fields GB, Tirrell M. 1995.  Synthetic lipidation of peptides and
amino acids: monolayer structure and properties. J Am Chem Soc ,
117:9515–22.
Bhattarai SR, Bhattarai N, Yi HK, et al. 2004. Novel biodegradable
electrospun membrane: scaffold for tissue engineering. Biomaterials ,
25:2595–602.
Bhattarai N, Edmondson D, Veiseh O, et al. 2005. Electrospun chitosan-
based nanofibers and their cellular compatibility. Biomaterials . In
press.
Boland ED, Matthews JA, Pawlowski KJ, et al. 2004. Electrospinning
collagen and elastin: preliminary vascular tissue engineering. Front
Biosci , 9:1422–32.
Bruder SP, Caplan AI. 2000. Bone regeneration through cellular
engineering. In Lanza RP, Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of
tissue engineering. 2nd ed. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 683–96.
Che B, Lakshmi BB, Martin CR, et al. 1998. Chemical vapour based
synthesis of carbon nanotubes and nanofibers using a template method.
Chem Mater , 10:260–7.
Clark RAF, Singer AJ. 2000. Wound repair: basic biology to tissue
engineering. In Lanza RP, Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of
tissue engineering. 2nd ed. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 855–78.
Colwell CW, D’Lima DD, Lotz M. 2001. Articular cartilage repair. In
Brighton CT (ed). Clinical orthopaedics and related research. V olume
391S. Pennsylvania: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.Cooper SL, Visser SA, Hergenrother RW, et al. 2004. Polymer. In Ratner
BD, Hoffman AS, Schoen FJ, et al (eds). Biomaterial science: an
introduction to materials in medicine. 2nd ed. San Diego: ElsevierAcademic Pr. p 67–79.
Cui H, Zhou O, Stoner BR. 2000. Deposition of aligned bamboo-like carbon
nanotubes via microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition.J Appl Phys , 88:6072–4.
DiEdwardo CA, Petrosko P, Acarturk TO, et al. 1999. Muscle tissue
engineering. Clin Plast Surg , 26:647–56 (ix–x).
Doshi J, Reneker DH. 1995. Electospinning process and application of
electrospun fibers. J Electrostat , 35:151–60.
Dzenis Y. 2004. Spinning continuous fibers for nanotechnology. Science ,
304:1917–19.
Elias KL, Price RL, Webster TJ. 2002. Enhanced functions of osteoblasts
on nanometer diameter carbon fibers. Biomaterials , 23:3279–87.
Fang X, Reneker DH. 1997. DNA fibers by electrospinning. J Macromo
Sci Phys  B, 36:169–73.
Fields GB, Lauer JL, Dori Y , et al. 1998. Protein-like molecular
architecture: biomaterial applications for inducing cellular receptor
binding and signal transduction. Biopolymers , 47:143–51.
Fine EG, Valentini RF, Aebischer P . 2000. Nerve regeneration. In Lanza
RP, Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of tissue engineering. 2nd
ed. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 785–96.
Fradkin LG, Ropp JD, Warner JF. 2000. Gene-based therapeutics. In Lanza
RP, Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of tissue engineering. 2nd
ed. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 383–97.
Frenot A, Chronakis I. 2003. Polymer nanofibers assembled by
electrospinning. Curr Opin Coll Inter Sci , 8:64–75.
Fridrikh SV , Yu JH, Brenner MP, et al. 2003. Controlling the fiber diameter
during electrospinning. Phys Rev Lett , 90:144502–1, 144502–4.
Funhoff AM, Monge S, Teeuwen R, et al. 2005. PEG shielded polymeric
double-layered micelles for gene delivery. J Control Release , 102:
711–24.
Geng X, Kwon OH, Jang J. 2005. Electrospinning of chitosan dissolved in
concentrated acetic acid solution. Biomaterials , 26:5427–32.
Gersbach CA, Byers BA, Pavlath GK, et al. 2004. Runx2/Cbfa1-genetically
engineered skeletal myoblasts mineralize collagen scaffolds in vitro.
Biotechnol Bioeng , 88:369–78.
Goulet F, Rancourt D, Cloutier R, et al. 2000. Tendons and ligaments. In
Lanza RP, Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of tissue engineering.
2nd ed. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 711–22.
Hammel E, Tang X, Trampert M, et al. 2004. Carbon nanofibers for
composite applications. Carbon , 42:1153–8.
Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI. 2001. Self-assembly and
mineralization of peptide-amphiphile nanofibers. Science , 294:
1684–8.
Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI. 2002. Peptide-amphiphile nanofibers:
a versatile scaffold for the preparation of self assembling materials.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 99:5133–8.
Heller J, Hoffman AS. 2004. Drug delivery system. In Ratner BD, Hoffman
AS, Schoen FJ, et al (eds). Biomaterial science: an introduction tomaterials in medicine. 2nd ed. San Diego: Elsevier Academic Pr.
p 629–48.
Hoerstrup SP, Vacanti JP. 2004. Overview of tissue engineering. In Ratner
BD, Hoffman AS, Schoen FJ (eds). Biomaterial science: anintroduction to materials in medicine. 2nd ed. San Diego: Elsevier
Academic Pr. p 712–27.
Hohman MM, Shin M, Rutledge G, et al. 2001a. Electrospinning and
electrically forced jets I. Stability theory. Phys Fluids , 13:2201–20.
Hohman MM, Shin M, Rutledge G, et al. 2001b. Electrospinning and
electrically forced jets. II Applications. Phys Fluids , 13:1–16.
Huang L, Nagapundi K, Apkarian RP, et al. 2001. Engineered collagen-
PEO nanofibers and fabrics. J BioMater Sci Polym Ed , 12:979–93.
Hutmacher DW. 2000. Scaffolds in tissue engineering bone and cartilage.
Biomaterials , 21:2529–43.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 29Nanofibers for tissue engineering
Hwang JJ, Harrington DA, Klok HA, et al. 2002. Cell-synthetic surface
interaction: self-assembling biomaterials. In Atala A, Lanza RP (eds).
Methods of tissue engineering. San Diego: Academic Pr. p 741–50.
Jayaraman K, Kotaki M, Zhang Y , et al. 2004. Recent advances in polymer
nanofibers. J Nanosci Nanotechnol , 4:52–65.
Jia H, Zhu G, Vugrinovich B, et al. 2002. Enzyme-carrying polymeric
nanofibers prepared via electrospi nning for use as unique biocatalysts.
Biotechnol Prog , 18:1027–32.
Jin HJ, Chen J, Karageorgiou V , et al. 2004. Human bone marrow stromal
cell responses on electrospun silk fibroin mats. Biomaterials , 25:
1039–47.
Jin HJ, Fridrikh SV , Rutledge GC, et al. 2002. Electrospinning Bombyx
mori silk with poly(ethylene oxide). Biomacromolecules , 3:1233–9.
Kameoka J, Craighead HG. 2003. Fabrication of oriented polymeric
nanofibers on planer surfaces by electrospinning. Appl Phys Lett ,
83:371–3.
Katti DS, Robinson KW, Ko FK, et al. 2004. Bioresorbable nanofiber based
systems for wound healing and drug delivery: optimization offabrication parameters. J Biomed Mater Res , 70B:286–96.
Kenawy ER, Bowlin GL, Mansfield K, et al. 2002. Release of tetracycline
hydrochloride from electrospun poly(ethylene-co-vinylacetate),
poly(lactic acid), and a blend. J Control Release , 81:57–64.
Khil MS, Bhattarai SR, Kim HY , et al. 2005. Novel fabricated matrix via
electrospinning for tissue engineering. J Biomed Mater Res B-Appl
Biomater , 72B:117–24.
Khil MS, Cha DI, Kim HY, et al. 2003. Electrospun nanofibrous
polyurethane membrane as wound dressing. J Biomed Mater Res  B
Appl Biomater , 67:675–9.
Kim K, Luu YK, Chang C, et al. 2004. Incorporation and controlled release
of a hydrophilic antibiotic using poly(lactic-co-glycolide) based
electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds. J Control Release , 98:47–56.
Kim K, Yu M, Zong X, et al. 2003. Control of degradation rate and
hydrophilicity in electrospun non-woven poly (D,L-lactide) nanofiberscaffolds for biomedical applications. Biomaterials , 24:4977–85.
Kisiday J, Jin M, Kurz B, et al. 2002. Self-assembling hydrogel peptide
hydrogel fosters chondrocytes extracellular matrix production and cell
division: implications for cartilage tissue repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A , 99:9996–10001.
Langer R, Vacanti J. 1993. Tissue engineering. Science , 260:920–6.
Lee CH, Shin HJ, Cho IH, et al. 2005. Nanofiber alignment and direction
of mechanical strain affect the ECM production of human ACLfibroblast. Biomaterials , 26:1261–70.
Li D, Ouyang G, McCann JT, et al. 2005a. Collecting electrospun
nanofibers with patterned electrodes. Nano Lett , 5:913–16.
Li M, Mondrinos MJ, Gandhi MR, et al. 2005b. Electrospun protein fibers
as matrices for tissue engineering. Biomaterials . In press.
Li WJ, Danielson KG, Alexander PG, et al. 2003.
 Biological response of
chondrocytes cultured in three-dimensional nanofibrous poly( ε-
caprolactone) scaffolds. J Biomed Mater Res A , 67A:1105–14.
Li WJ, Laurencin CT, Caterson EJ, et al. 2002. Electrospun nanofibrous
structure: a novel scaffold for tissue engineering. J Biomed Mater
Res, 60:613–21.
Li WJ, Tuli R, Okafor C, et al. 2005c. A three-dimensional nanofibrous
scaffold for cartilage tissue engineering using human mesenchymal
stem cells. Biomaterials , 26:599–609.
Lin VS, Lee MC, O’Neal S, et al. 1999. Ligament tissue engineering using
synthetic biodegradable fiber scaffolds. Tissue Eng , 5:443–51.
Luu YK, Kim K, Hsiao BS, et al. 2003. Development of a nanostructured
DNA delivery scaffold via electrospinning of PLGA and PLA–PEGblock copolymers. J Control Release , 89:341–53.
Ma PX, Choi JW. 2001.  Biodegradable polymer scaffolds with well-defined
interconnected spherical pore network. Tissue Eng , 7:23–33.
Ma PX, Zhang R. 1999. Synthetic nano-scale fibrous extracellular matrix.
J Biomed Mater Res , 46:60–72.
Ma Z, Kotaki M, Inai R, et al. 2005a. Potential of nanofiber matrix as
tissue-engineering scaffolds. Tissue Eng , 11:101–9.Ma Z, Kotaki M, Yong T, et al. 2005b. Surface engineering of electrospun
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) nanofibers towards development of
a new material for blood vessel engineering. Biomaterials , 26:
2527–36.
Malkar NB, Lauer-Fields JL, Juska D, et al. 2003. Characterization of
peptide-amphiphiles possessing cellular activation sequences.
Biomacromolecules , 4:518–28.
Matthews JA, Wnek GE, Simpson DG, et al. 2002. Electrospinning of
collagen nanofibers. Biomacromolecules , 3:232–8.
McKenzie JL, Waid MC, Shi R, et al. 2004. Decreased functions of
astrocytes on carbon nanofiber materials. Biomaterials , 25:1309–17.
McPherson JM, Tubo R. 2000. Articular cartilage injury. In Lanza RP,
Langer R, Vacanti J (eds). Principles of tissue engineering. 2nd
 ed.
San Diego: Academic Pr. p 697–710.
Min BM, Lee G, Kim SH, et al. 2004. Electrospinning of silk fibroin
nanofibers and its effect on the adhesion and spreading of normal
human keratinocytes and fibroblasts in vitro. Biomaterials , 25:
1289–97.
Mo X, Weber HJ. 2004. Electrospinning P(LLA-CL) nanofiber: a tubular
scaffold fabrication with circumferential alignment. Macromol Symp ,
217:413–16.
Mo XM, Xu CY, Kotaki M, et al. 2004. Electrospun P(LLA-CL) nanofiber:
a biomimetic extracellular matrix for smooth muscle cell and
endothelial cell proliferation. Biomaterials , 25:1883–90.
Nair LS, Bhattacharya S, Bender JD, et al. 2004. Fabrication and
optimization of methylphenoxy substituted polyphosphazene
nanofibers for biomedical applications. Biomacromolecules , 5:
2212–20.
Parenteau NL, Hardin-Young J, Ross RN. 2000. Skin. In Lanza RP, Langer
R, V acanti J (eds). Principles of tissue engineering. 2nd ed. San Diego:
Academic Pr. p 879–87.
Peter SJ, Miller MJ, Yasko AW, et al. 1998. Polymer concepts in tissue
engineering. J Biomed Mater Res (Appl Biomater) , 43:422–7.
Price RL, Ellison K, Haberstr oh KM, et al. 2004. Nanometer surface
roughness increases select osteoblast adhesion on carbon nanofiber
compacts. J Biomed Mater Res , 70A:129–38.
Price RL, Gutwein LG, Kaledin L, et al. 2003a. Osteoblast function on
nanophase alumina materials: influence of chemistry, phase and
topography. J Biomed Mater Res , 67A:1284–93.
Price RL, Waid MC, Haberstroh KM, et al. 2003b. Selective bone cell
adhesion on formulations containing carbon nanofibers. Biomaterials ,
24:1877–87.
Ramay HRR, Zhang M. 2003. Preparation of porous hydroxyapatite
scaffolds by combination of the gel casting and polymer spongemethods. Biomaterials , 24:3292–302.
Ramay HRR, Zhang M. 2004. Biphasic calcium phosphate nanocomposite
porous scaffolds for load-bearing bone tissue engineering.Biomaterials , 25:5171–80.
Rayleigh JWG. 1882. On the equilibrium of liquid conducting masses
charged with electricity. Lond Edinburgh Dulin Phil Mag , 44:184–6.
Reneker DH, Chun I. 1996. Nanometer diameter fibers of polymer
produced by electrospinning. Nanotechnology , 7:216–23.
Reneker DH, Kataphinan W, Theron A, et al. 2002. Nanofiber garlands of
polycaprolactone by electrospinning. Polymer , 43:6785–94.
Reneker DH, Yarin AL, Fong H, et al. 2000. Bending instability of
electrically charged liquid jets of polymer solutions in electrospinning.
J Appl Phys , 87:4531–47.
Riboldi SA, Sampaolesi M, Neuenschwander P, et al. 2005. Electrospun
degradable polyesterurethane membranes: potential scaffolds forskeletal muscle tissue engineering. Biomaterials , 26:4606–15.
Semino CE, Kasahara J, Hayashi Y , et al. 2004. Entrapment of migrating
hippocampal neural cells in three-dimensional peptide nanofiberscaffold. Tissue Eng , 10:643–55.
Shields KJ, Beckman MJ, Bowlin GL, et al. 2004. Mechanical properties
and cellular proliferation of electrospun collagen type II. Tissue Eng ,
10:1510–17.International Journal of Nanomedicine 2006:1(1) 30Vasita and Katti
Shin M, Yoshimoto H, Vacanti JP. 2004. In vivo bone tissue engineering
using meshenchymal stem cells on a novel electrospun nanofibrous
scaffold. Tissue Eng , 10:33–41.
Shin YM, Hohman MM, Brenner MP, et al. 2001a. Electrospinning: a
whipping fluid jet generates submicron polymer fibers. Appl Phys Lett ,
78:1–3.
Shin YM, Hohman MM, Brenner MP, et al. 2001b. Experimental
characterization of electrospinning: the electrically forced jet andinstabilities. Polymer , 42:9955–67.
Skalak R, Fox CF (eds). 1988. Tissue engineering. NewYork: Alan R Liss,
Inc.
Smith LA, Ma PX. 2004. Nanofibrous scaffolds for tissue engineering.
Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces , 39:125–31.
Stupp SI, LeBonheur V , Walker K, et al. 1997. Supramolecular materials:
self-organized nanostructures. Science , 275:384–9.
Sundaray B, Subramaniam V, Natrajan TS, et al. 2004. Electrospinning of
continuous aligned polymer fibers. Appl Phys Lett , 84:1222–4.
Teo KBK, Singh C, Chhowalla M, et al. 2003. Catalytic synthesis of carbon
nanotubes and nanofibers. In Nalwa HS (ed). Encyclopedia of
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. California: American Scientific
Publ.
Theron A, Zussman V , Yarin AL. 2001. Electrospinning field-assisted
alignment of electrospun nanofibers. Nanotechnology , 12:384–90.
Tu C, Cal Q, Yang J, et al. 2003. The fabrication and characterization of
poly(lactic acid) scaffolds for tissue engineering by improved solid-liquid phase separation. Polym Adv Technol , 14:565–73.
Tuli R, Li WJ, Tuan RS. 2003. Curr ent state of cartilage tissue engineering.
Arthritis Res Ther , 5:235–8.
Uematsu K, Hattori K, Ishimoto Y, et al. 2005. Cartilage regeneration using
mesenchymal stem cells and a three-dimensional poly (lactic-co-
glycolic acid) (PLGA) scaffold. Biomaterials , 26:4273–9.
Um IC, Fang D, Hsiao BS, et al. 2004. Electrospinning and electro-blowing
of hyaluronic acid. Biomacromolecules , 5:1428–36.
Verreck G, Chun I, Peeters J, et al. 2003a. Prepara tion and characterization
of nanofibers containing amorphous drug dispersions generated byelectrostatic spinning. Pharm Res , 20:810–17.
Verreck G, Chun I, Rosenblatt J, et al. 2003b. Incorporation of drugs in an
amorphous state into electrospun nanofibers composed of a water-
insoluble, nonbiodegradable polymer. J Control Release , 92:349–60.
Wal RLV , Berger GM, Ticich TM, et al. 2002. Application of laser-induced
incandescence to the detection of carbon nanotubes and carbon
nanofibers. Appl Opt , 41:5678–90.
Wang X, Drew C, Soo-Hyoung L, et al. 2002a. Electrospun nanofibrous
membranes for highly sensitive optical sensors.  Nano Lett , 2:1273–5.
Wang X, Drew C, Soo-Hyoung L, et al. 2002b. Electrospinning technology:
a novel approach to sensor application. Macromol Sci Part A , 39:
1251–8.
Webster TJ, Hellenmeyer EL, Price RL. 2005. Increased osteoblast function
on theta+delta nanofiber alumina. Biomaterials , 26:953–60.
Webster TJ, Schadler LS, Siegel RW, et al. 2001. Mechanisms of enhanced
osteoblast adhesion on nanophase alumina involve vitronectin. Tissue
Eng, 7:291–301.Woerdeman DL, Ye P, Shenoy S, et al. 2005. Electrospun fibers from wheat
protein: investigation of the interplay between molecular structure andthe fluid dynamics of the electrospinning process. Biomacromolecules ,
6:707–12.
Woo KM, Chen VJ, Ma PX. 2003. Nano-fibrous scaffolding architecture
selectively enhanced protein adsorption contributing to cell attachment.
J Biomed Mater Res , 67A:531–7.
Xu CY , Inai R, Kotaki M, et al. 2004a. Aligned biodegradable nanofibrous
structure: a potential scaffold for blood vessel engineering.
Biomaterials
, 25:877–86.
Xu CY, Inai R, Kotaki M, et al. 2004b. Electrospun nanofiber fabrication
as synthetic extracellular matrix and its potential for vascular tissue
engineering. Tissue Eng , 10:1160–8.
Yang F, Murugan R, Wang S, et al. 2005. Electrospinning of nano/micro
scale poly(L-lactic acid) aligned fibers and their potential in neural
tissue engineering. Biomaterials , 26:2603–10.
Yang F, Xu CY, Kotaki M, et al. 2004. Characterization of neural stem
cells on electrospun poly(L-lactic acid) nanofibrous scaffold. J Biomat
Sci Polym Ed , 15:1483–97.
Yannas IV . 2004. Natural materials. In Ratner BD, Hoffman AS, Schoen
FJ, et al (eds). Biomaterial science: an introduction to materials in
medicine. 2nd ed. San Diego: Elsevier Academic Pr. p 127–36.
Yarin AL, Koombhongse S, Reneker DH. 2001. Taylor cone and jetting
from liquid droplets in electrospinning of nanofibers. J Appl Phys ,
91:4836–46.
Yoshimoto H, Shin YM, Terai H, et al. 2003. A biodegradable nanofiber
scaffold by electrospinning and its potential for bone tissue
engineering. Biomaterials , 24:2077–82.
Yu YC, Berndt P, Tirrell M, et al. 1996.  Self-assembling amphiphiles for
construction of protein molecular architecture. J Am Chem Soc ,
118:12515–20.
Yu YC, Tirrell M, Fields GB. 1998.  Minimal lipidation stabilizes protein-
like molecular architecture. J Am Chem Soc , 120:9979–87.
Yu YC, Roontga V, Daragan V A, et al. 1999. Structure and dynamics of
peptide-amphiphiles incorporating triple-helical protein-like moleculararchitecture. Biochemistry , 38:1659–68.
Zeleny J. 1914. The electrical discharge from liquid points and a hydrostatic
method of measuring the electric intensity at their surface. Phys Rev ,
3:69–91.
Zeng J, Aigner A, Czubayko F, et al. 2005. Poly (vinyl alcohol) nanofibers
by electrospinning as a protein delivery system and the retardation ofenzyme release by additional polymer coatings. Biomacromolecules ,
6:1484–8.
Zhang R, Ma PX. 2000. Synthetic nanofibrillar extracellular matrices with
predesigned macroporous architetures. J Biomed Mater Res , 52:
430–8.
Zhang R, Ma PX. 2002. Processing of polymer scaffolds: phase separation.
In Atala A, Lanza RP (eds). Methods of tissue engineering. San Diego:
Academic Pr. p 715–24.
Zhang Y, Ouyang H, Lim CT, et al. 2005. Electrospinning of gelatin fibers
and gelatin/PCL composite fibrous scaffolds. J Biomed Mater Res
Part B: Appl Biomater , 72B:156–65.
Zong X, Kim K, Fang D, et al. 2002. Structure and process relationship of
electrospun biodegradable nanofiber membrane. Polymer , 43:
4403–12.