Citation: Pyrzynska, K.
Preconcentration and Removal of
Pb(II) Ions from Aqueous Solutions
Using Graphene-Based
Nanomaterials. Materials 2023 ,16,
1078. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ma16031078
Academic Editor: Aymen
Amine Assadi
Received: 8 December 2022
Revised: 21 January 2023
Accepted: 25 January 2023
Published: 26 January 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
materials
Review
Preconcentration and Removal of Pb(II) Ions from Aqueous
Solutions Using Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
Krystyna Pyrzynska
Department of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland; kryspyrz@chem.uw.edu.pl
Abstract: Direct determination of lead trace concentration in the presence of relatively complex
matrices is often a problem. Thus, its preconcentration and separation are necessary in the analytical
procedures. Graphene-based nanomaterials have attracted signiﬁcant interest as potential adsorbents
for Pb(II) preconcentration and removal due to their high speciﬁc surface area, exceptional porosi-
ties, numerous adsorption sites and functionalization ease. Particularly, incorporation of magnetic
particles with graphene adsorbents offers an effective approach to overcome the separation prob-
lems after a lead enrichment step. This paper summarizes the developments in the applications of
graphene-based adsorbents in conventional solid-phase extraction column packing and its alternative
approaches in the past 5 years.
Keywords: graphene-based nanomaterials; Pb(II) ions; adsorption; aqueous solutions
1. Introduction
Among the heavy metals, lead is extremely toxicant, affecting multiple body sys-
tems, and is particularly harmful to young children. Exposure to lead can result in
significant health issues, such as damage to brain, kidney, liver, bones, blood and the
nervous system [ 1,2]. The main contamination sources of this element are anthropogenic,
such as chemical and battery manufacturing, plastic and printing industries, smelt-
ing and mining operations. Due to its non-biodegradable nature and continuous use,
lead content accumulates in the environment. Keeping in view the severe toxicity of
lead ions, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has established 1.0 mg/L as the
maximum permissible concentration of Pb in industrial wastewater and 0.015 mg/L
in drinking water, while the World Health Organization (WHO) has set a maximum
guideline value of 0.01 mg/L. The European Commission (EC) has proposed lead limits
down to 0.005 mg/L [3] . Thus, the development of new analytical procedures for the
accurate and sensitive determination of lead is of great importance.
Despite the high sensitivity provided by the atomic and mass spectrometric techniques
in trace analysis, a preconcentration step is very often needed to improve their limits of
detection further. Additionally, matrix components which cause spectral interference
can be removed during this step. Solid phase extraction (SPE) is commonly used as a
preconcentration technique owing to its simple procedure, high preconcentration factor and
minimal regeneration costs [ 4,5]. The application of alternative approaches to conventional
SPE column-packing such as solid phase microextraction (SPME) [ 6,7] and dispersive
micro solid phase extraction (DMSPE) [ 8,9] have been also evaluated with carbon-derived
materials in the sample preparation step. In recent years, analyte-loaded nanoparticles with
magnetic properties were introduced that can be easily isolated from a sample solution by
applying an external magnetic ﬁeld [10,11].
Industrial efﬂuents can contain dissolved lead as well as its various compounds,
such as lead salts, oxides, and sulﬁdes. Lead accumulation over time can cause severe
ecological problems in water reservoirs due to their toxicity and biocumulation in food
chains [ 12]. It is also a potential health hazard for humans and plants as lead has the
Materials 2023 ,16, 1078. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma16031078 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/materialsMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 2 of 19
tendency to be absorbed through the skin, respiratory and digestive systems. Thus, the
need for efﬁcient methods of removing lead ions from wastewater before release into the
environment is a matter of concern [ 13–15]. Various treatment technologies have been
employed for the removal of lead, such as chemical precipitation, adsorption, ion exchange,
chemical oxidation, membrane-based ﬁltration, electrochemical treatment. The selection
of the most suitable treatment for lead-contaminated wastewater depends on its initial
concentration, pH, environmental impacts as well as economic parameters compared to
other technologies. Generally, most of the recent studies have focused on adsorption due
to easy operation, high sorption capacity and improved selectivity for speciﬁc metal ions.
Other techniques have some limitations such as generation of a large amount of sludge,
low efﬁciency, high energy consumption and costly disposal.
Over the last decade, various nanomaterials have been widely applied as powerful
adsorbents for trace metal preconcentration and removal of environmental contaminants
as they exhibit large surface area, fast adsorption capability and easy functionalization or
coatings [ 16–20]. Among them, graphene derivatives such as graphene oxide and reduced
graphene oxide have been integrated in various sample preparation steps, improving
the detection sensitivity and selectivity [ 21–24]. As these nanomaterials utilise mostly
one type of interaction, nanocomposites can combine the properties of carbon materials
with metal and metal oxide nanoparticles or chelating polymers [ 25–27]. This allows for
further improvement in efﬁciency of extraction as a result of the synergistic effects resulting
from interactions between different materials. Nanocomposities exhibit intrinsic surface
reactivity and can strongly chemisorb several substances, with applications in a variety
of ﬁelds. Their properties can be easily modulated by controlling the methods of their
production and additionally the versatile synergistic interactions.
This review presents the last ﬁve years of achievement in the use of graphene-based
nanomaterials in solid phase extraction for preconcentration of lead ions in analytical
processes as well as its removal from aqueous solutions such as sewage. Different works
that provide interesting results for this application are summarized. Interested readers
could ﬁnd more details concerning earlier contributions in the review papers [27–31].
2. Graphene and Its Derivatives
In recent years, carbon-based nanomaterials, such as graphene (G), graphene oxide
(GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), have become one of the research hotspots.
They exhibit high surface area, unique structural regularity, chemical inertness, electrical
conductivity, thermal and mechanical stability. Graphene is considered the fundamen-
tal structure of all carbon allotropes and much research has been done in the field of
analytical extraction processes involving graphene and its derivatives as the main ma-
terial [ 30,32]. Graphene is a single-atom-thick sheet of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms
arranged in a planar honeycomb structure. It can be stacked to form graphite and rolled
to form carbon nanotubes (Figure 1) [ 32]. According to Siegel, the nanomaterials can
be classified into four categories depending on the dimension in which the size effect
on the resultant property becomes apparent [ 33]. Zero dimensional (0D) nanomaterials
(fullerenes and quantum dots) have all the three dimensions less than 100 nm. Carbon
nanotubes belong to a one dimensional (1D) category where only one dimension is larger
than 100 nm. Graphene is an example of a two dimensional (2D) nanomaterial with two
dimensions greater than 100 nm, while graphite (no dimensions are greater than 100 nm)
belongs to three dimensional (3D) nanostructures.Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 3 of 19
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  3 of 19 
 
 
  
Figure 1. Formation of carbon -based nanomaterials [32].  
However, the agglomeration of graphene sheets due to the strong van der Waals in-
teractions  causes a great loss of accessible surface area for the adsorbates. It can be avoided 
selecting suitable dispersion methods and functionalizing the fillers [34].  
Graphene oxide is produced by oxidation of graphite, which leads to increased spac-
ing between the layers. The classic chemical oxidation methods for the preparation of GO 
utilize strong oxidants such as H 2SO 4, KMnO 4 and NaNO 3 [35]. Several mo dification s 
based on the Hummers method include preoxidation treatment,  changing the oxidation 
intercalation agent, and electrochemically, ultrasonic or microwave assisted  methods. A 
detailed review of GO preparation methods by oxidation of graphite is giv en by Singh et 
al. [36].  
GO exhibits good hydrophilicity and dispersion in water unlike graphene and graph-
ite powder because of the presence of oxygen containing functional groups, such as –OH 
and –COOH attached to graphene layers. These functional groups present on the edges 
and the basal plane of GO play an important role in the the removal processes of heavy 
metal ions. GO can form magnetic nanocomposites through electrostatic interactions be-
tween the negatively charged GO nanosheets and the positively c harged surface of Fe 3O4 
nanoparticles, combining  the high adsorption properties of GO and the convenience of 
magnetic separation of Fe 3O4 nanoparticles [22]. Furthermore, graphene and GO can be 
modified or functionalized with the appropriate groups, which facilitates the preparation 
of hybrid nanoparticles. [23,24,27,32].  
Reduced graphene oxide is the form of GO that is processed by chemical, thermal 
and electrochemical methods [37]. After reduction, the interlayer distance of rGO  is de-
creased due to the partial deoxygenation  as well as agglomeration of reduced graphene 
oxide sheets. The residues of polar groups can improve rGO wettability and it behave s 
like a hydrophilic -hydrophobic balanced sorbent. The properties of rGO can var y depend-
ing on the method of preparation. The scheme of a typical synthesis procedure for gra-
phene derivatives from graphite as a starting material is presented in Figure 2 [38].  
Figure 1. Formation of carbon-based nanomaterials [32].
However, the agglomeration of graphene sheets due to the strong van der Waals
interactions causes a great loss of accessible surface area for the adsorbates. It can be
avoided selecting suitable dispersion methods and functionalizing the ﬁllers [34].
Graphene oxide is produced by oxidation of graphite, which leads to increased
spacing between the layers. The classic chemical oxidation methods for the preparation
of GO utilize strong oxidants such as H 2SO4, KMnO 4and NaNO 3[35]. Several modifi-
cations based on the Hummers method include preoxidation treatment, changing the
oxidation intercalation agent, and electrochemically, ultrasonic or microwave assisted
methods. A detailed review of GO preparation methods by oxidation of graphite is given
by Singh et al. [36].
GO exhibits good hydrophilicity and dispersion in water unlike graphene and graphite
powder because of the presence of oxygen containing functional groups, such as –OH
and –COOH attached to graphene layers. These functional groups present on the edges
and the basal plane of GO play an important role in the the removal processes of heavy
metal ions. GO can form magnetic nanocomposites through electrostatic interactions
between the negatively charged GO nanosheets and the positively charged surface of Fe 3O4
nanoparticles, combining the high adsorption properties of GO and the convenience of
magnetic separation of Fe 3O4nanoparticles [ 22]. Furthermore, graphene and GO can be
modiﬁed or functionalized with the appropriate groups, which facilitates the preparation
of hybrid nanoparticles. [23,24,27,32].
Reduced graphene oxide is the form of GO that is processed by chemical, thermal and
electrochemical methods [ 37]. After reduction, the interlayer distance of rGO is decreased
due to the partial deoxygenation as well as agglomeration of reduced graphene oxide
sheets. The residues of polar groups can improve rGO wettability and it behaves like a
hydrophilic-hydrophobic balanced sorbent. The properties of rGO can vary depending
on the method of preparation. The scheme of a typical synthesis procedure for graphene
derivatives from graphite as a starting material is presented in Figure 2 [38].Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 4 of 19
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  4 of 19 
 
 
  
Figure 2. Scheme of a typical procedure for graphene derivatives from graph ite as a starting material 
[33].  
3. Adsorption Parameters  
The important parameters which affect the efficiency of adsorption include pH value 
of the solution, surface charge of sorbent and its amount, extraction time, temperature as 
well as concentration a nd volume of eluent. In acidic medium, the functional groups are 
protonated and competi tion occurs in adsorption between H+ and Pb(II) ions. With in-
creasing pH value, sorption of metal ions is enhanced. At pH < 6 the predominant lead 
species is Pb2+, while  in the range of pH 7 –10 Pb(OH)+ and Pb(OH) 2 mainly  occur  [30]. 
Thus, in this pH range of solution, besides sorption on the nanoparticles, Pb(OH) 2 may 
have a significant participation. On the other hand, as the pH of a solution increases, more 
hydroxyl and carboxylic acid groups are ionised ; thus, the surface charge of carbon -based 
materials becomes more negative. Li et al . [39] found that both GO a nd rGO are negatively 
charged over a very wide pH range but the magnitude of rGO zeta potential was lower 
than that of GO at the same pH. For this reason the proposed pH for sorption of Pb(II) 
was mainly in the range of 5 –7. Commonly, the efficiency of ads orption increases when 
the sorbent amount and extraction time increas e and  equilibrium  can be achieved . 
Sometimes the presence of variety of metal ions, which are usually found in natural 
samples, can have a competitive effect on the sorption process of Pb (II) and cause a de-
crease in its adsorption efficiency. For this reason, high adsorbent capacity as well as se-
lectivity is beneficial. Competitive adsorption experiments using GO showed that the af-
finity of divalent metal ions decreas ed in the order: Pb(II ) > Cu(II) ≫ Cd(II) > Zn(II) [40]. 
The dispersibility of GO in water changes remarkably after adsorption of metal ions and 
the tendency to agglomerate and precipitate was observed.  
Usually, the traditional “one variable on time” approach was used to find o ptimum 
sample pH, sorbent amount, extraction time and volume of eluent for a Pb(II) extraction 
process. The chemometric techniques based on factorial designs and response surface 
methodology were additionally applied in order to identify the relationship b etween in-
dependent variables. As the example of such methodology, Figure 3a shows the response 
surface plots representing the interaction of the main parameters for Pb(II) removal to find 
their best combination ensuring the highest process efficiency using  EDTA grafted GO 
and magnetic chitosan [41]. As can be seen, removal efficiency strongly depends on the 
pH value as this parameter affects the surface charge of the used nanocomposite and sub-
sequently the electrostatic interactions between Pb(II) ions and adsorbent. Moreover, at 
high levels of both adsorbent and Pb(II), maximum removal efficiency can be achieved. 
The relative  contribution of these parameters decreases in the order: Pb(II) concentration 
Figure 2. Scheme of a typical procedure for graphene derivatives from graphite as a starting material [ 33].
3. Adsorption Parameters
The important parameters which affect the efﬁciency of adsorption include pH value
of the solution, surface charge of sorbent and its amount, extraction time, temperature
as well as concentration and volume of eluent. In acidic medium, the functional groups
are protonated and competition occurs in adsorption between H+and Pb(II) ions. With
increasing pH value, sorption of metal ions is enhanced. At pH < 6 the predominant lead
species is Pb2+, while in the range of pH 7–10 Pb(OH)+and Pb(OH) 2mainly occur [ 30].
Thus, in this pH range of solution, besides sorption on the nanoparticles, Pb(OH) 2may
have a signiﬁcant participation. On the other hand, as the pH of a solution increases, more
hydroxyl and carboxylic acid groups are ionised; thus, the surface charge of carbon-based
materials becomes more negative. Li et al. [ 39] found that both GO and rGO are negatively
charged over a very wide pH range but the magnitude of rGO zeta potential was lower
than that of GO at the same pH. For this reason the proposed pH for sorption of Pb(II) was
mainly in the range of 5–7. Commonly, the efﬁciency of adsorption increases when the
sorbent amount and extraction time increase and equilibrium can be achieved.
Sometimes the presence of variety of metal ions, which are usually found in natural
samples, can have a competitive effect on the sorption process of Pb(II) and cause a decrease
in its adsorption efﬁciency. For this reason, high adsorbent capacity as well as selectivity
is beneﬁcial. Competitive adsorption experiments using GO showed that the afﬁnity of
divalent metal ions decreased in the order: Pb(II) > Cu(II) Cd(II) > Zn(II) [ 40]. The
dispersibility of GO in water changes remarkably after adsorption of metal ions and the
tendency to agglomerate and precipitate was observed.
Usually, the traditional “one variable on time” approach was used to find optimum
sample pH, sorbent amount, extraction time and volume of eluent for a Pb(II) extraction
process. The chemometric techniques based on factorial designs and response surface
methodology were additionally applied in order to identify the relationship between
independent variables. As the example of such methodology, Figure 3A shows the
response surface plots representing the interaction of the main parameters for Pb(II)
removal to find their best combination ensuring the highest process efficiency using
EDTA grafted GO and magnetic chitosan [ 41]. As can be seen, removal efficiency
strongly depends on the pH value as this parameter affects the surface charge of the
used nanocomposite and subsequently the electrostatic interactions between Pb(II) ions
and adsorbent. Moreover, at high levels of both adsorbent and Pb(II), maximum removal
efficiency can be achieved. The relative contribution of these parameters decreases
in the order: Pb(II) concentration > adsorbent dose > pH > adsorbent dose/Pb(II)
concentration ratio (Figure 3B). According to the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference (ANFI)
system and desirability function, an adsorbent amount of 9.75 mg, lead concentrationMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 5 of 19
of22.35 mg/L , pH of 8.38, temperature of 51.89C and 22.20 min contact time should
provide 90.32% of Pb(II) removal. The values for a genetic algorithm approach were
found to be 9.50 mg, 24.00 mg/L, 8.00, 49.32C, and 22.20 min, respectively, at which
93.98% removal efficiency could be attained [41].
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  5 of 19 
 
 
 > adsorbent dose > pH > adsorbent dose/Pb(II) concentration ratio ( Figure 3b). According 
to the adaptive neuro -fuzzy inference (ANFI) system and d esirability function, an adsor-
bent amount of 9.75 mg, lead concentration of 22.35 mg/L, pH of 8.38, temperature of 51.89 
° C and 22.20 min contac t time should provide 90.32% of Pb(II) removal . The values for a 
genetic algorithm approach were found to be 9.50 mg, 24.00 mg/L, 8.00, 49.32 °C, and 22.20 
min, respectively, at which 93.98% removal ef ficiency could be attained [41].  
 
Figure 3. (A) three -dimensional response surface plots for the effect of Pb(II) concentration vs. pH; 
(B) the effect of Pb(II) concentration vs. adsorbent dose using GO -chitosan -Fe3O4-EDTA nanocom-
posite; ( C) Relative importance of adsorption parameters for Pb(II) removal  using EDTA grafted 
GO and magnetic chitosan  [41].  
4. Isotherm, Thermodynamic and Kinetic Studies  
Adsorption capacity on the studied graphene -based nanoparticles was increas ed by 
increasing the equilibrium Pb(II) concentration until saturation of th e adsorbent. Mostly 
Freundlich and Langmuir isotherm models were used to explain the mechanism of Pb(II) 
uptake, the nature of active sites on their surface and to evaluate the maximum adsorption 
capacity values. The Freundlich model mainly descri bes a mul tilayer and heterogeneous 
process, while the Langmuir model specifies a monolayer adsorption process on a homo-
geneous surface with all the adsorption sites of equal affinity . The other employed iso-
therm models were Dubin –Redushkewich and Temkin models. Con sider ing the obtained 
regression coefficient (R2) of the adsorption isotherms, in most cases the calculated results 
showed that the Langmuir model gave  a better fitting in comparison to to the other three 
isotherms. The equation for this model is as: q = qm • KL ce/(1 + KLce), where q is the amount 
of metal ions adsorbed per gram of sorbent, ce denotes the equilibrium concentration in 
solution, qm is the monolayer theoretical saturation capacity and KL represents the Lang-
muir constant that relates to th e affinity of binding sites. The values of qm and KL were 
calculated from the intercept and slope of the linear plot  of 1/ q against 1/ ce. The adsorption 
capacity is an important factor because it determines how much sorbent is required for 
quantitative sep aration or preconcentration of the analyte from a given solution.  
Figure 3. (A) three-dimensional response surface plots for the effect of Pb(II) concentration vs. pH;
(B) the effect of Pb(II) concentration vs. adsorbent dose using GO-chitosan-Fe 3O4-EDTA nanocom-
posite; ( C) Relative importance of adsorption parameters for Pb(II) removal using EDTA grafted GO
and magnetic chitosan [41].
4. Isotherm, Thermodynamic and Kinetic Studies
Adsorption capacity on the studied graphene-based nanoparticles was increased by
increasing the equilibrium Pb(II) concentration until saturation of the adsorbent. Mostly
Freundlich and Langmuir isotherm models were used to explain the mechanism of Pb(II)
uptake, the nature of active sites on their surface and to evaluate the maximum adsorption
capacity values. The Freundlich model mainly describes a multilayer and heterogeneous
process, while the Langmuir model speciﬁes a monolayer adsorption process on a homoge-
neous surface with all the adsorption sites of equal afﬁnity. The other employed isotherm
models were Dubin–Redushkewich and Temkin models. Considering the obtained regres-
sion coefﬁcient (R2) of the adsorption isotherms, in most cases the calculated results showed
that the Langmuir model gave a better ﬁtting in comparison to to the other three isotherms.
The equation for this model is as: q=qmKLce/(1 + KLce), where qis the amount of metal
ions adsorbed per gram of sorbent, cedenotes the equilibrium concentration in solution, qm
is the monolayer theoretical saturation capacity and KLrepresents the Langmuir constant
that relates to the afﬁnity of binding sites. The values of qmandKLwere calculated from
the intercept and slope of the linear plot of 1/ qagainst 1/ ce. The adsorption capacity is
an important factor because it determines how much sorbent is required for quantitative
separation or preconcentration of the analyte from a given solution.
Azan et al. reported that the Langmuir isotherm showed better ﬁtting for removal of
Pb(II) using graphene oxide at 20 and 30C temperatures, while at 40C, the Freundlich
isotherm was more appropriate in describing the adsorption mechanism [ 42]. It is probably
related to distortion of surface homogeneity at that temperature, and as a consequence
adsorption was not limited to monolayer formation.Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 6 of 19
Thermodynamic parameters, DG,DHandDS, are indicators of the possible type
and mechanism of the adsorption process. The positive value of enthalpy ( DH) speciﬁes
that the adsorption process is endothermic in nature, while a positive DSvalue shows an
increase in the randomness at the solid-surface interface. Furthermore, the Gibss free energy
(DG) can be evaluated according to the equation: DG=DH TDS. The mostly negative
reported DGvalue demonstrated the spontaneous nature of the adsorption process at
room temperature. For example, Foroughi et al. reported enthalpy changes ( DH) of 21.62
to 26.65 kJ/mol, entropy changes ( DS) of 0.1259 kJ/mol K and Gibbs free energy ( DG)
of 15.90 kJ/mol for adsorption of Pb(II) onto GO@chitosn@Fe 3O4-EDTA nanocomposite
in the temperature range of 298–338 K [ 41]. These results revealed an endothermic and
spontaneous adsorption process.
In order to compare the kinetics of lead ion removal in a quantitative way, the experi-
mental data were ﬁtted to the kinetic models. Pseudo-ﬁrst and pseudo-second order models
are the most often employed approaches. The rate constants k 1and k 2were evaluated from
the most common linearized forms of these models:
ln(q 0 qt) = ln(q e) k1t pseudo-ﬁrst order
t/q t= 1/k 2qe2+ t/q e pseudo-second order
The vast majority of published papers reported better ﬁtting to pseudo-second-order
model, suggesting a chemisorption proces. However, some papers criticize the use of the
lineralized form of that model [43–45].
For further analysis of the adsorption kinetics, the diffusion model proposed by Weber
and Morris is considered. This model states that when the plot q(t) = f(t0.5) is linear and
passes through the origin (0,0), the intraparticle diffusion is the dominating limiting factor.
For the case where the linearity is ensured but the plot does not pass through the origin, the
adsorption may be limited by ﬁlm diffusion. Such conclusions have been drawn studying
the kinetics of adsorptive removal of lead from water using graphene oxide [42].
5. Preconcentration of Pb(II) for Analytical Applications
The composition of the analyzed sample is often very complex and the concentration
of Pb(II) ions is low. The matrix components could cause several interferences during
recording of the analytical signals, and thus, obtaining an accurate and reliable result is
very difﬁcult. Using a preliminary preconcentration step in the analytical procedure, the
interference components are removed with simultaneous improvement of the method
sensitivity. Choosing selective sorbent for this purpose requires consideration of the sample
matrix and technique for the ﬁnal detection, while using adequate experimental conditions
such as sorbent mass, volume of loading sample and eluent higher enrichment factors is
important. The eluent volume has a signiﬁcant effect on obtaining the highest analytical
signal. Low volume would not permit quantitative desorption, while a large volume dilutes
the analyte and consequently the value of the enrichment factor (EF, deﬁned as the ratio of
sample volume to eluent volume) is decreased.
In comparison to conventional sorbent materials, graphene-based nanoparticles pos-
sess great properties, such as high surface area, enhanced mechanical and chemical stability,
and possibility of functionalisation (e.g., hydroxylation, carboxylation, amidation, thio-
lation, silinization and polymer grafting) to increase their selectivity. Thus, they have
found several applications in analytical extraction processes [ 27,46,47]. In the classical
SPE technique, GO and rGO can be packed in minicolumns, cartridges and pipette-tips or
implemented in polymeric membranes.
Sorption of Pb(II) on an unmodified GO surface mainly involves the electrostatic attrac-
tion between the opposite charges and surface complexation. However, its recovery using
dispersive solid-phase extraction in the pH range of 4–6 was only about 60% [ 48]. With
rGO, under the same conditions, the metal removal increased to 90%. Graphene oxide, syn-
thesized by the well-known modified Hummer method using graphite from waste dry cellMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 7 of 19
battery, showed in the batch experiments 98.9% removal of Pb from its 10 mg/L solution
at pH 4. The maximum adsorption capacity was calculated to be 55.80 mg/g [ 42], while
Guerrero-Fajardo et al. reported impressive adsorption capacity for Pb(II) of 987.3 mg/g for
GO prepared from graphite sheets [ 44]. An even higher value (1119 mg/g) was reported
earlier for GO prepared through the oxidation of graphite using potassium dichromate [49].
The addition of magnetic properties to the GO derivatives facilitates their collection
from a sample solution. Such a procedure can be successfully used for extraction purposes,
even from difﬁcult to handle samples, without high speed centrifugation and ﬁltration.
Soylak et al. reported at least 95% recovery of lead ions at pH 6 (from a solution containing
10g of Pb in 100 mL) on magnetic graphite oxide at 2 min of time with the vortex
mixing [ 50]. The maximum sorption capacity of 9.9 mg/g was obtained and the limit of
detection was 28 g/L using ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) for detection.
Due to the corrosive power of 3 mol/L HNO 3in 10% acetone used as the eluent, that sorbent
was replaced after 10 cycles of sorption/desorption processes. With partially reduced
graphene oxide-Fe 3O4composite, prepared through in situ coprecipitation, the equilibrium
was reached in 10 min with the sorption of 95.8% and 373.1 mg/g quantity [ 51]. For
protection of the magnetic core against leaching in acidic media and oxidation/dissolution
as well as for improving their reusability, the synthesized Fe 3O4@GO nanoparticles were
additionally coated with a silica shell structure [ 52,53]. The ICP MS detection with a silica-
coated magnetic GO nanocomposite preconcentration step exhibited the linear range of
0.05–60 g/L with the limit of detection (LOD) of 3.64 ng/L for Pb(II) analysis in water
samples. Some applications with polymers replacing SiO 2for coating can be also found in
the literature [54,55].
Several compounds, including well-known reagents and the new materials, have been
reported for the functionalization of GO surface that enables more interactions between
these functional groups and Pb(II). It has been proved several times that bonding different
chemical linkers to graphene or its coating improves the sorption efﬁciency and selectivity.
Thus, a key parameter for development of the new and innovative sorbents for selective
preconcentration of lead ions is modiﬁcation of the carbon surface.
The attachment of dimethylglyoxime ligand to GO@Fe 3O4adsorbent, using 3-
chloropropyl-trimethoxy silane (CPTMS) as a spacer, resulted in higher extraction effi-
ciency and selectivity for Pb(II) in comparison to the direct binding of this ligand to the
surface of the nanocomposite [ 56]. Additionally, smaller particle size with higher ratio
of the surface to volume were synthesized. Relatively low EF value (23) and sorption
capacity (45.05 mg/g) values were obtained with sonication for 9 min contact time.
Sorbent was found to be reusable for at least 14 sequential cycles and was applied for
quantification of trace amounts of lead in water, hair and nail samples. This method
made possible the determination of Pb(II) in the range of 20.0–600 ng/mL with LOD of
7 ng/mL using flame AAS detection and in the range of 0.5–3.0 ng/mL with graphite
furnace AAS (LOD = 0.2 ng/mL).
For magnetic graphite oxide adsorbent with attached 8-hydroxyquinoline ligand,
a much higher preconcentration factor of 130 was reported for 5 min of extraction and
22 mg of the sorbent amount [ 57]. Thus, trace amounts of Pb(II) (simultaneously also
Cd(II)) from high-volume samples can be quantiﬁed. In addition, a very low limit of
detection ( 0.09 ng/mL ) allowed the determination of lead in agriculture products (tomato,
mushroom, lettuce) with simply FAAS detection.
According to the reports given by Akbarzade et al. [ 58], under the optimum conditions
(pH, 5.0, 1 mg of adsorbent, 50 L of 0.4 mol/L HCl for elution), a very high enrich-
ment factor of 600 was reached using magnetic reduced graphene oxide modiﬁed with
2-(4-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) by the DSPE method. It was applied for selective precon-
centration and determination of lead ions in various waters and food samples. Modiﬁcation
of magnetic graphene oxide with 2-mercapto-benzothiazole (2-MBT) [ 59] and EDTA [ 41]
have also been proposed.Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 8 of 19
A schematic diagram for the synthesis of Fe 3O4@GO-MBT nanocomposite is pre-
sented in Figure 4 [ 59]. Brieﬂy, GO sheets were ﬁrstly synthesis by the Hummer procedure
from graphene powder in H 2SO4. Then, in the ice bath, NaNO 3, KMnO 4and H 2O2
were added slowly and stirred for 45 min. GO sheets were washed in HCl solution,
centrifuged and dried. Continuing the procedure, the mixture of Fe(II) and Fe(III) salts
was added under stirring, alkalized with ammonia aqueous solution and kept at 90C
for 4 h under the nitrogen atmosphere. The reaction of magnetic graphene oxide with
3-chloropropyltrimethoxysilane (CPTMS) was carried out under nitrogen atmosphere for
12 h. After washing and drying overnight, GO@Fe 3O4@CPTMS nanocomposites were
dispersed in N,N0-dimethylformamide containing 2-MBT. At each stage of relatively long
synthesis, the FT-IR spectrum, EDS and TGA analyses were applied to conﬁrm the synthe-
sis and properties of the obtained GO@Fe 3O4, CPTMS@GO-Fe 3O4, and GO@Fe 3O4@MBT
nanocomposites. The maximum sorption capacity of the ﬁnal GO@Fe 3O4@MBT nanocom-
posite was calculated as 179 mg/g in the presence of Cd(II) and Cu(II) ions, for which also
signiﬁcant values were obtained (164 and 156 mg/g, respectively) [ 54]. It was applied for
preconcentration and separation of Pb(II) prior to its determination in different waters and
agricultural products using the FAAS detection method with a linear dynamic range of
1–140 ng/mL and LOD of 0.35 ng/mL.
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  8 of 19 
 
 
 (0.09 ng/mL) allowed the determination of lead in agriculture products ( tomato , mush-
room, lettuce ) with simply FAAS detection.  
According to the reports given by Akbarzade et al. [58], u nder the optimum condi-
tions (pH, 5.0, 1 mg of adsorbent, 50 μL of 0.4 mol/L HCl for elution) , a very high enrich-
ment factor of 600 was reached using magnetic reduced graphene oxide modified with 2 -
(4-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) by the DSPE method. It was a pplied for selective precon-
centration and determination of lead ions in various waters and food samples. Modifica-
tion of magnetic graphene oxide with 2 -mercapto -benzothiazole (2 -MBT) [59] and EDTA 
[41] have also been proposed.  
A schematic  diagram for the s ynthesis of Fe 3O4@GO -MBT nanocomposite is pre-
sented in Figure 4 [59]. Briefly, GO sheets were firstly synthesis by the Hummer procedure 
from graphene powder in H 2SO 4. Then, in the ice bath , NaNO 3, KMnO 4 and H 2O2 were 
added slowly and stirred  for 45 min. GO sheets were wash ed in HCl solution, centrifuged 
and dried. Continuing the procedure, the mixture of Fe(II) and Fe(III) salts was added 
under stirring, alkalized with ammonia aqueous solution and  kept at 90 ° C f or 4 h under 
the nitrogen atmosphere. The reaction of magnetic graphene oxide with 3 -chloropropyltri-
methoxysilane (CPTMS) was carried out under nitrogen atmosphere for 12 h. After wash-
ing and drying overnight, GO@Fe 3O4@CPTMS nanocomposites  were dispersed i n N,N′ -
dimethylformamide containing 2 -MBT. At each stage of relatively long synthesis, the FT -
IR spectrum, EDS and TGA analyses were applied to confirm the synthesis and properties 
of the obtained GO@Fe 3O4, CPTMS@GO -Fe3O4, and GO@Fe 3O4@MBT nanocomposites. 
The maximum sorption capacity of the final GO@Fe 3O4@MBT nanocomposite was calcu-
lated as 179 mg/g in the presence of Cd(II) and Cu(II) ions, for which also significant val-
ues were obtained (164 and 156 mg/g, respectively) [54]. It was applied for preconcent ra-
tion and separation of Pb(II) prior to its determination in different waters and agricultural 
products using the FAAS detection  method with a linear dynamic range  of 1–140 ng/mL 
and LOD of 0.35 ng/mL.  
 
Figure 4. A schematic diagram for the synthesis of 2 -mercaptobenzothiazole modified GO/Fe 3O4 
nanocomposite [59].  
Figure 4. A schematic diagram for the synthesis of 2-mercaptobenzothiazole modiﬁed GO/Fe 3O4
nanocomposite [59].
Seidi et al. [ 60] synthesized magnetic chitosan-salen grafted GO for lead analysis in
whole blood using dispersive SPE coupled with FAAS detection. The proposed Schiff base
ligand was synthesized using a mixture of salicylaldehyde and 1,3-diamino-2-propanol
in a 2:1 molar ratio. The application of chitosan as a cross-linker ensures the stability of
the magnetic nanoparticles and also improves dispersibility of the ﬁnal product in water
solutions. Its sorption capacity was 357 mg/g for an extraction time of 33 min. The protec-
tive effect of chitosan was also used for preparation of embedded 1,5-diphenylcarbazone
grafted magnetic GO with magnetic chitosan [ 61]. According to the authors, this effect
could be attributed to the increasing chitosan polymer rigidity using glutaraldehyde as
a the cross-linker reagent. The preconcentration factor, deﬁned as the slope ratio of the
calibration curves with and without a preconcentration step, was 13.5 and a maximum
adsorption capacity of 58 mg/g was reported for Pb(II). Finally, the proposed method afterMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 9 of 19
an enrichment step followed by FAAS detection with LOD of 0.13 ng/mL was applied for
trace lead determination in various water samples. However, the direct analysis enabled
Pb(II) quantiﬁcation only in wastewater. For other samples (tap, well water and seawater),
recovery studies were performed to investigate their applicability. The obtained results
were in the range of 92.3–109% [61].
The novel nanocomposite of GO@Fe 3O4@chitosan-EDTA was synthesized via an
amidation reaction between carboxylic groups of EDTA and amino groups of chitosan [ 41].
The scheme for its synthesis and the proposed mechanism for its interaction with Pb(II) are
presented in Figure 5. Central composite design-based models were developed to evaluate
the impact of sorption parameters and describe removal of lead ions. Under the optimum
conditions (pH 8, adsorbent dose 9.50 mg and sonication time 22.2 min), its maximum
adsorption capacity was speciﬁed to be 666.7 mg/g. The signiﬁcance of the main adsorption
parameters decreased in the order: Pb(II) concentration (30%), amount of sorbent (21%)
> sample pH (12%). It was postulated that the electrostatic interactions between GO and
Pb(II), ion exchange between NH 3+from chitosan and lead ions, chelation between EDTA
and Pb(II) or EDTA with chitosan amine groups were involved. The presence of coexisting
ions, such as (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Cl , CO 32 , and SO 42 ) in environmental
aqueous samples as well as in wastewaters, affects the sorption of Pb(II) only at above
mixture concentration of 10 mg/L. After six adsorption-desorption cycles only about 8%
loss occurred in its efﬁciency.
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  10 of 19 
 
 
  
Figure 5. Schematic of the sy nthesis procedure of GO -Fe3O4-chitosan -EDTA nanocomposite and the 
proposed mechanism for its interaction with Pb(II) [41].  
Similarly to chitosan, other polymers and their mixtures were successfully loaded 
onto Fe3O4@GO surface using in situ polymerization, such as polyimide [62], polyaniline -
polypyrolle [63 ] and polypyrrole -polythiophene [64]. Further,  magnetic reduced gra-
phene oxide was wrapped with polydopamine [65]. In some cases, Fe 3O4@GO adsorbent 
was firstly modified with silica nanopar ticles, which enable retention of the polymer with 
hydroxyl groups present on the silica surface through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic 
interactions [63.64]. SEM and TEM images showed uniform wrapping with the used pol-
ymers. Only for Fe 3O4@rGO -polyimid e material , an inhomogeneous morphology with the 
size less than 30 nm was reported [62]. Among these nanocomposites with polymers, 
Fe3O4@rGO -polydopamine nanocomposite showed the highest preconcentration factor of 
200 for Pb(II), but the lowest  adsorption capacity (35.2 mg/g) [65]. It can be reused at least  
eight times with no analytes carrying over during the magnetic SPE procedure.  
Ionic liquids (ILs) have recently been widely used for the development of various 
types of adsorbents, because they can inter act with several molecules through different 
interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, π -π, electrostatic, dispersive and dipolar interac-
tions [66,67]. Moreover, their properties and adsorptive selectivity can be matched by ad-
justing the structure of their c onstituent anion (inorganic or organic) and large asymmetric 
cation. Fe 3O4@GO nanospheres were  dispersed in ionic liquid 1 -butyl -3-methylimidazo-
lium tetra - fluoroborate (BmimBF 4) to form a ferrofluid for extraction of Pb(II) complexed 
with 1,5 -bis(di -2-pyridil) methylene thio -carbon yl hydrazine [68]. The ferrofluid and a 
sample were kept in contact for 5 min and after separation using the magnet, elution was 
performed  with 1 mL of 5% HNO 3 solution. This  was applied in magnetic DMSPE and 
graphite furnace AAS for determination of Pb(II) in seawater samples in the concentration 
range of 0.04 –0.025 µg/L with LOD of 0.008 µg/L. Similar Fe 3O4@GO/BmimBF 4 nanocom-
posite have been proposed by Rofouei et al. but the Pb(II) ions were earlier complexed 
with 1 -(2-pyridylazo) -2-naphthol [69]. Following magnetic separation , the ions were 
eluted from the sorbent with acetonitrile. Response was linear in the 1.5 to 100 μg/L metal 
Figure 5. Schematic of the synthesis procedure of GO-Fe 3O4-chitosan-EDTA nanocomposite and the
proposed mechanism for its interaction with Pb(II) [41].
Similarly to chitosan, other polymers and their mixtures were successfully loaded
onto Fe 3O4@GO surface using in situ polymerization, such as polyimide [ 62], polyaniline-
polypyrolle [ 63] and polypyrrole-polythiophene [ 64]. Further, magnetic reduced graphene
oxide was wrapped with polydopamine [ 65]. In some cases, Fe 3O4@GO adsorbent was
ﬁrstly modiﬁed with silica nanoparticles, which enable retention of the polymer with
hydroxyl groups present on the silica surface through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic
interactions [ 63,64]. SEM and TEM images showed uniform wrapping with the used
polymers. Only for Fe 3O4@rGO-polyimide material, an inhomogeneous morphology withMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 10 of 19
the size less than 30 nm was reported [ 62]. Among these nanocomposites with polymers,
Fe3O4@rGO-polydopamine nanocomposite showed the highest preconcentration factor of
200 for Pb(II), but the lowest adsorption capacity (35.2 mg/g) [ 65]. It can be reused at least
eight times with no analytes carrying over during the magnetic SPE procedure.
Ionic liquids (ILs) have recently been widely used for the development of various
types of adsorbents, because they can interact with several molecules through different
interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, -, electrostatic, dispersive and dipolar inter-
actions [ 66,67]. Moreover, their properties and adsorptive selectivity can be matched
by adjusting the structure of their constituent anion (inorganic or organic) and large
asymmetric cation. Fe 3O4@GO nanospheres were dispersed in ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium tetra- ﬂuoroborate (BmimBF 4) to form a ferroﬂuid for extraction of
Pb(II) complexed with 1,5-bis(di-2-pyridil) methylene thio-carbonyl hydrazine [ 68]. The
ferroﬂuid and a sample were kept in contact for 5 min and after separation using the
magnet, elution was performed with 1 mL of 5% HNO 3solution. This was applied
in magnetic DMSPE and graphite furnace AAS for determination of Pb(II) in seawater
samples in the concentration range of 0.04–0.025 g/L with LOD of 0.008 g/L. Similar
Fe3O4@GO/BmimBF 4nanocomposite have been proposed by Rofouei et al. but the Pb(II)
ions were earlier complexed with 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol [ 69]. Following magnetic
separation, the ions were eluted from the sorbent with acetonitrile. Response was linear in
the 1.5 to 100 g/L metal ion concentration range with inductively coupled plasma optical
emission spectroscopy (ICP OES) quantiﬁcation and LOD of 0.1 g/L. Standard water
samples spiked with lead were analyzed with relative recoveries within the range of 90.5%
to 107.5%.
Apart from Fe 2O3or Fe 3O4, various metal and metal oxide nanoparticles have been
decorated on the surface of graphene or graphene oxide to enhance their adsorption
properties and to broaden the applications [ 70]. These nanoparticles act also as a stabilizer
against the aggregation of individual graphene sheets, which is caused by strong van
der Waals interactions. The ceria nanoparticles were attached on the graphene by using
non-ionic surfactant Triton-X100 and the obtained graphene/CeO 2nanosheets appear as
an attractive composite in sorption of Pb(II) [ 71]. The combination of dispersive solid phase
microextraction with detection using energy-dispersive X-ray ﬂuorescence spectrometry
(EDXRF) allows direct analysis on the nanocomposite surface without the need for elution
which decreases the whole analysis time and reduces the cost. The sorption process is very
fast (5 min) and the maximum adsorption capacity for Pb(II) was calculated as 75.6 mg/g.
In recent years, biosorption processes using various natural materials has attracted
attention and several studies have reported the development of aptamer-based biosensors
or their combination with different nanomaterials for applications in food and environmen-
tal analysis [ 72]. Shamsipur et al. [ 73] proposed the new magnetic biosorbent obtained by
covalent immobilization of aptamer as afﬁnity probe on a Fe 3O4@GO surface (Figure 6).
It was applied for preconcentration of Pb(II) based on hairpin oligonucleotides forming
G-quadruplex structure in the presence of target ions. An enrichment factor of 50 was
obtained for blood and urine samples using 500 L of 0.4 mol/L EDTA as an eluent. The
proposed method was characterized by high selectivity, a low detection limit of 0.05 g/L
and wide linearity of the calibration curve over the range of 0.3–867 g/L.
The metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) constructed by metal ions or their clusters and
organic ligands through coordination bonds are considered as a favorable platform for ad-
sorption of Pb(II) due to large surface areas, permanent porosity, multi-functionalization,
changeable structures and open metal sites [ 74]. The combination of MOFs with magnetic
graphene-based materials improved the overall structural properties and introduced magnetic
separation. The nanocomposite with Zr(IV) ions (denoted as UiO66-NH 2) and Fe 3O4@GO
nanoparticles exhibited the maximum adsorption capacity at pH 6 for Pb(II) at 344.8 mg/g
with 60 min contact time [ 75]. This high adsorption was mainly attributed to the complexation
with the amino groups from UiO66-NH 2and oxygen containing groups (mainly hydroxyl
and carboxyl) by GO. That nanocomposite selectively adsorbed Pb(II) in the presence of otherMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 11 of 19
metal ions such as Na(I), K(I), Al(III), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) with an EF value of 40. It
showed satisfactory recovery of lead ions from different environmental samples.
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  11 of 19 
 
 
 ion concentration range with inductively co upled plasma optical emission spectroscopy  
(ICP OES) quantification and LOD of 0.1 μg/L. Standard water samples spiked with lead 
were analyzed  with relative recoveries within the range of 90.5% to  107.5%.  
Apart from Fe 2O3 or Fe 3O4, various metal and metal oxide nanoparticles have been 
decorated on the surface of graphene or graphene oxide to enhance their adsorption prop-
erties and to broaden the applications [70]. These nanoparticles  act also as a stabilizer 
against the aggregation of individual graphene sh eets, which is caused by strong van der 
Waals interactions.  The ceria nanoparticles were attached on the graphene by using non -
ionic surfactant Triton -X100 and the obtained graphene/CeO 2 nanosheets appear as an 
attractive composite in sorption of Pb(II) [7 1]. The combination of dispersive solid phase 
microextraction with detection using energy -dispersive X -ray fluorescence spectrometry 
(EDXRF) allows direct analysis on the nanocomposite surface without the need for elution 
which  decreases  the whole analysis  time and reduces the cost. The sorption process is very 
fast (5 min) and the maximum adsorption capacity for Pb(II) was calculated as 75.6 mg/g.  
In recent years, biosorption processes using  various natural materials has attracted 
attention and several studies have reported the development of aptamer -based biosensors 
or their combination with different nanomaterials for applications in food and environ-
mental analysis [72]. Shamsipur et al . [73] proposed the new magnetic biosorbent obtained 
by covalent immobilization of aptamer as affinity probe  on a Fe3O4@GO surface ( Figure 
6). It was applied for preconcentration of Pb(II) based  on hairpin oligonucleotides forming 
G-quadruplex structure in the  presence of target ions. An enrichment factor of 50 was 
obtained for blood and urine samples using 500 µL of 0.4 mol/L EDTA as an eluent. The 
proposed method was characterized by high selectivity, a low detection limit of 0.05 µg/L 
and wide linearity of t he calibration curve over the range of 0.3 –867 µg/L.  
 
Figure 6. Scheme for synthesis of Fe 3O4@GO nanocomposite with hairpin aptamer and the proce-
dure for preconcen tration of Pb(II) using  this biosorbent [73].  
The metal -organic frameworks (MOFs) constructe d by metal ions or their clusters 
and organic ligands through coordination bonds are considered as a favorable platform 
for adsorption of Pb(II) due to large surface areas, permanent porosity, multi -functionali-
zation, changeable structures and open metal sites [74]. The combination of MOFs with 
magnetic graphene -based materials improved the overall structural properties and intro-
duced magnetic separation. The nanocomposite with Zr(IV) ions (denoted as  UiO66 -NH 2) 
and Fe3O4@GO nanoparticles exhibited the maximum adsorption capacity at pH 6 for 
Pb(II) at 344.8 mg/g with 60 min contact time [75]. This high adsorption was mainly at-
tributed to the complexation with the amino groups from UiO66 -NH 2 and oxygen con-
taining groups (mainly hydroxyl and carboxyl) by GO. That nanocomposite selectively 
adsorbed Pb(II) in the presence of other metal ions such as Na(I), K(I), Al(III), Ni(II), Cu(II)  
Figure 6. Scheme for synthesis of Fe 3O4@GO nanocomposite with hairpin aptamer and the procedure
for preconcentration of Pb(II) using this biosorbent [73].
Other interesting adsorptive materials include layered double hydroxides (LDHs),
two-dimensional nanostructures that consist of layers of metal oxides with a positive
charge and charge balancing hydrated anions between the layers [ 76]. They have the
general formula [M2+1–xM3+x(OH) 2]x+[(An )x/nmH 2O], where M2+and M3+are the di-
valent and trivalent cations, respectively, while An 1represents the intercalating anions.
Several possible mechanisms are proposed for adsorption of metal ions, such as surface
complexation, isomorphic substitution, surface precipitation, and electrostatic interaction
and chelation. The combination of LDH with GO can increase the the adsorption capacity
and selectivity [ 77–79]. An SPE procedure based on GO/ZnCr LDH was developed for
determination of Pb(II) in human hair samples followed by GF AAS determination [ 78].
Under the optimized extraction conditions (sample pH 6, sorbent amount 10 mg, 0.5 mL
of NaNO 3eluent volume), a preconcentration factor of 10 was obtained and adsorbent
capacity was 16.9 mg/g. It should be mentioned that the removal of Cu(II), Cr(VI) and
Fe(III) was similar to Pb(II). However, as was examined, these ions did not disturb Pb(II)
sorption due to its higher adsorption capacity of GO/ZnCr LDH.
Recently, GO decorated with fullerenol nanoparticles C 60(OH) 22has been proposed
for efficient removal of Pb(II) ions in complex matrix samples [ 80]. The low solubility of
fullerenes in water was overcome by a simple hydroxylation reaction with NaOH in the
presence of quaternary ammonium cations and then grafting the obtained fullerenols
to the surface of GO. This research showed enormous adsorption of C 60(OH) 22toward
Pb(II) ions of 1307 mg/g at pH 5.5 and high resistance to ionic strength up to 1 mol/L.
The experments indicated that the main mechanism of adsorption was an inner-sphere
model based on surface complexation with different types of coordination of Pb(II) to
the oxygen functional groups.
Examples of the recent applications of graphene-based materials for the preconcentra-
tion of Pb(II) using the SPE technique are presented in Table 1.Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 12 of 19
Table 1. The examples of the recent applications of graphene-based materials for the preconcentration
of Pb(II) using SPE technique.
Sorbent Sample MatrixAdsorption
Eluent EF or PF *qmax
(mg/g)Ref.pH Time (min)
Fe3O4@GO@chitosan-Schiff base Blood 6.3 30 0.8 mol/L HNO 3 20 * 357 [41]
GO modiﬁed with NaOH Meat 5 5 1.5 mol/L HNO 3 14 * 25 [48]
Fe3O4@GO@SiO 2 Water 5 4 5% HNO 3 60 168.6 [52]
GO@mesoporous
silicaWater, sediment, hair 5 10 0.15 mol/L HNO 3 15 255 [53]
Fe3O4@GO@SiO 2-
DimethyloximeWater, hair, nail 7.7 9 2.7 mol/L HNO 3 15.5 45 [56]
Fe3O4@GO-8HQVegetables, ﬁsh,
mushrooms5.5 5 0.74 mol/L HCl 130 150 [57]
Fe3O4@rGO-PAR Water, juice, rice 5 0.4 mol/L HCl 600 133 [58]
Fe3O4@GO-MBT Water 6 4 0.4 mol/L HCl 400 179 [59]
Fe3O4@GO@chitosan
-DPCWater 6.2 24 3 mol/L HNO 3 13.5 * 58 [61]
Fe3O4/GO@
polyimideFish, mollusc tissues 6 15 0.5 mol/L HCl 140 340 [55]
Fe3O4@GO@SiO 2@polyaniline-
polypyrroleWater, rice,
milk, wine5 5% HNO 3 60 213 [56]
Fe3O4@GO@SiO 2@
polypyrrole-
polythiopheneWater, apple, tomato 5.8 1 mol/L HNO 3 36 * 230 [57]
Fe3O4@GO/BmimBF 4 Seawater, algae 5 25 0.5 mol/L HCl 200 42.7 [58]
Fe3O4@GO-hairpin aptamers Waterwith
DPTH5 5% HNO 3 200 — [68]
Fe3O4@GO with
aminated MOFBlood, urine 7 20 0.4 mol/L EDTA 50 — [73]
GO/ZnCr/LDH Water 6 60 5% HNO 3 — 344.8 [75]
GO/C 60(OH) 2 Hair 6 —1 mol/L NaNO 3,
pH 410 16.9 [78]
Highly saline
water5.5 60 — 200 1307 [80]
EF: enrichment factor (the ratio of sample volume to eluent volume); * PF: preconcentration factor (the slope ratio of
the calibration curves with and without preconcentration); asterisk: it is connected with PE parameter; q max: maxi-
mum adsorption capacity; 8HQ: 8-hydroxyquinoline; DPC: 1,5-diphenylcarbazone; MBT: 2-mercaptobenzothiazole;
PAR: 2-(4-pyridylazo)resorcinol; BmimBF 4: 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate; DPTH: 1,5-bis(di-2-
pyridil)thiocarbonlydrazine; MOF: metal-organic framework; LDH: layered double hydroxide.
It is noteworthy to add that graphene-based materials are also used in membrane
preconcentration techniques for removal of metal ions [ 81]. GO-based membrane can be
stabilized by hydrogen bonding with cellulose as a matrix [ 82] or intercalation of oxidized
carbon nanotubes [ 83]. The GO/CNTs membranes can be applied both under vigorous
shaking and ﬂow conditions. The afﬁnity of metal ions toward such membranes decreases
in the order: Pb(II) > Cu(II) > Cd(II) > Zn(II) > Ni(II) > Co(II) [83]. Adsorption is based on
chelation via hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the membrane surface and the maximum
adsorption capacity for Pb(II) ions at pH 5 was calculated as 98 mg/g. The membrane may
be used at least for 10 adsorption/desorption cycles.
Together with the fast development of the new nanomaterials for preconcentration
purposes, great importance is nowadays attached to the quality of the measurement data in
analytical methodologies. The validation of the proposed procedures for Pb(II) determina-
tion after an enrichment step was reported in terms of sensitivity, linearity and precision in
many of the cited papers. Accuracy of the developed methods was assessed by analyzing
appropriate certiﬁed reference materials.Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 13 of 19
6. Removal of Pb(II) from Wastewaters
The removing of toxic lead ions from industrial and mining waste efﬂuents has become
a key concern [ 14,15,84,85]. Its presence in the environment may cause long-term health
risks to humans and ecosystem. Among various treatments for removal of Pb(II), adsorption
methods using synthetic and natural adsorbents offer relatively low costs of operation,
materials, and waste discharge. Some disadvantages can be limited adsorption capacity of
most applied materials and the need for their more frequent replacement. Thus, adsorption
is best used for wastes with moderate to low concentrations of lead.
Various parameters such as temperature, contact time, lead ion concentration, the
chemical structure of the adsorbent, its amount, and the presence of other pollutants
influence the adsorption process for lead removal. However, the type and chemical
structure of an adsorbent and its adsorption capacity are the most critical factors in
successful performance.
Graphene oxide functionalized with polyethylenimine (GO-BPEI) in the form of highly
porous foams has been proposed for removal of Pb(II) from waters at a large scale [ 86].
A schematic representation of its synthesis is presented in Figure 7. This nanocomposite
exhibits an unusually large adsorption capacity as 3390 mg/g at pH 5, but the kinetics of
the adsorption process are very slow; adsorption equilibrium was obtained after 400 min.
The GO-BPEI foam saturated with lead ions can be regenerated upon treatment with nitric
acid. However, a 20% decrease in the adsorption capacity was observed after ten cycles,
probably caused by hydrolysis of amide bonds in the adsorbent structure. The performance
of the proposed adsorbent has been checked only for tap water with the presence of alkaline
metal ions (up to 75 mg/L) as a matrix but not for real wastewater samples.
Materials  2023 , 16, 1078  14 of 19 
 
 
  
Figure 7. Schematic representation of the GO - branched polyethylenimine synthesis [86].  
Piperazine -modified magnetic graphene oxide (Pip@MGO) nanocomposite also ex-
hibits high adsorption capacity for lead ions , taking advantage of the coordinating capa-
bility of piperaz ine for metal ions and also the high surface area of graphe ne oxide [87] . 
At pH 6 it is equal to 558.2 mg/g. In order to evaluate the application of the proposed 
method in removing lead ions from real samples, river and seawater samples as well as 
petroche mical wastewater were spiked by know n concentration s of Pb(II) at 5 and 10 
mg/L concentration level and the adsorption process was performed using only 7 mg of 
Pip@MGO adsorbent. The recoveries were in the range of 93 –99% but the removal 
efficiency of lead ions was reduced to less than 90% after four consecutive adsorption -
regeneration cycles.  
Nickel ferrite based reduced graphene oxide (NFrGO) nanocomposite was used  by 
Lingamdinne et al. for the removal of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solutio n [87,88]. For its 
preparation, hydrazine hydrate was added to the GO dispersion, followed by nickel ni-
trate and ferric nitrate solution at pH > 12 (at 2:1 molar ratio) in an inert atmosphere. Then 
the mixture was heat ed at 120 °C for 5  h. Ferrite’s nanoco mposite can be easily separated 
using an external magnetic field and can be reused several times without any structural 
changes. Its maximum adsorption capacity  derived from Langmuir isotherm model was 
121.95 mg/g at room temperature and this value can be maintain ed for up to four cycles 
[88]. Unfortunately, NFrGO nanocomposite, due to the small particle size (32.0  ± 2.0 nm), 
cannot be directly used in continuous column experiments, only in batch treatment mode. 
The nanocomposite of graphene oxide  with manganese ferrite, developed by a one-pot 
hydrothermal method , also possess es great adsorption properties for the selective Pb(II ) 
ions removal from the aqueous medium [89]. Adsorption equilibrium occurs after 30 min 
and gives a maximum adsorption capacity of 621.1 mg/g  [90]. 
Amongst the adsorbents that have been developed to solve water pollution, metal -
organic frameworks and their  composites have drawn great attention due to their high 
surface area, ordered porosity and adjustable functionalization [74,91]. Various functional 
groups can be introduced into MOFs using ligand modification or MOF functionalization 
to obtain their speci fic chemical and physical properties.  
The incorporation of melamine into Zr -MOFs was successfully performed by the 
oven -promoted method  [92]. It has a sphere -like morphology and a diameter of about 50 
nm. The adsorption capacity for Pb(II) was increased to  205 mg/g under the conditions of 
pH 5 and 40 °C in comparison to the  unmodified MOFs (122 mg/g). The coordination in-
teraction between the amino groups and lead ions was confirmed as the adsorption mech-
anism. Lu et al. proposed a hydrothermal method to mod ify an Fe-based MOF with gra-
phene oxide, forming a sandwich structure [93]. This composition exhibits the adsorption 
capacity of 128.6 mg/g and an efficient adsorption rate within 15 min for the removal of 
lead ions. The introduction into the structure of MOFs  of other functional groups, such as 
Figure 7. Schematic representation of the GO- branched polyethylenimine synthesis [86].
Piperazine-modiﬁed magnetic graphene oxide (Pip@MGO) nanocomposite also ex-
hibits high adsorption capacity for lead ions, taking advantage of the coordinating capability
of piperazine for metal ions and also the high surface area of graphene oxide [ 87]. At pH 6
it is equal to 558.2 mg/g. In order to evaluate the application of the proposed method in
removing lead ions from real samples, river and seawater samples as well as petrochemical
wastewater were spiked by known concentrations of Pb(II) at 5 and 10 mg/L concentration
level and the adsorption process was performed using only 7 mg of Pip@MGO adsorbent.
The recoveries were in the range of 93–99% but the removal efﬁciency of lead ions was
reduced to less than 90% after four consecutive adsorption-regeneration cycles.
Nickel ferrite based reduced graphene oxide (NFrGO) nanocomposite was used
by Lingamdinne et al. for the removal of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solution [ 87,88].
For its preparation, hydrazine hydrate was added to the GO dispersion, followed by
nickel nitrate and ferric nitrate solution at pH 12 (at 2:1 molar ratio) in an inert
atmosphere. Then the mixture was heated at 120C for 5 h. Ferrite’s nanocomposite
can be easily separated using an external magnetic field and can be reused several
times without any structural changes. Its maximum adsorption capacity derived from
Langmuir isotherm model was 121.95 mg/g at room temperature and this value canMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 14 of 19
be maintained for up to four cycles [ 88]. Unfortunately, NFrGO nanocomposite, due to
the small particle size (32.0 2.0 nm), cannot be directly used in continuous column
experiments, only in batch treatment mode. The nanocomposite of graphene oxide with
manganese ferrite, developed by a one-pot hydrothermal method, also possesses great
adsorption properties for the selective Pb(II) ions removal from the aqueous medium [ 89].
Adsorption equilibrium occurs after 30 min and gives a maximum adsorption capacity
of 621.1 mg/g [90].
Amongst the adsorbents that have been developed to solve water pollution, metal-
organic frameworks and their composites have drawn great attention due to their high
surface area, ordered porosity and adjustable functionalization [ 74,91]. Various functional
groups can be introduced into MOFs using ligand modiﬁcation or MOF functionalization
to obtain their speciﬁc chemical and physical properties.
The incorporation of melamine into Zr-MOFs was successfully performed by the oven-
promoted method [ 92]. It has a sphere-like morphology and a diameter of about 50 nm.
The adsorption capacity for Pb(II) was increased to 205 mg/g under the conditions of pH 5
and 40C in comparison to the unmodiﬁed MOFs (122 mg/g). The coordination interaction
between the amino groups and lead ions was conﬁrmed as the adsorption mechanism. Lu
et al. proposed a hydrothermal method to modify an Fe-based MOF with graphene oxide,
forming a sandwich structure [ 93]. This composition exhibits the adsorption capacity of
128.6 mg/g and an efﬁcient adsorption rate within 15 min for the removal of lead ions. The
introduction into the structure of MOFs of other functional groups, such as thiol, hydroxyl,
carboxyl and N-containing groups, has been shown to be highly beneﬁcial for effective
Pb(II) removal [92]. For example, Zheng et al. prepared an MOF structure with imidazole
groups, that are considered as active sites for adsorbing heavy metal ions. The optimum
pH for Pb(II) removal was 7 and the maximum adsorption capacity of this MOF adsorbent
was 537.6 mg/g [ 94]. Its adsorption selectivity to remove Pb(II) from solutions rich in other
heavy metals was conﬁrmed. The ability of MOF adsorbent to remove Pb(II) conﬁrmed
its superior adsorption selectivity. The authors generally examine these nanocomposities
under laboratory conditions, underlining only their big potential for the removal of Pb(II)
from industrial wastewater. However, there are no results for real sample applications.
7. Conclusions and Future Works
Graphene-based nanomaterials, such as graphene oxide and reduced graphene ox-
ide, have attracted signiﬁcant interest in recent years for preconcentration and removal
of heavy metal ions, including toxic Pb(II), and the number of scientiﬁc reports on this
subject is constantly growing. They exhibit huge surface area, good thermal and mechanical
stability, and ease of surface modiﬁcation. Similar to carbon nanotubes, graphene-based
nanoparticles can be modiﬁed using polymers, metal oxides as well as doping with het-
eroatoms. Functionalization with magnetic nanoparticles facilitates the separation of Pb
loaded adsorbent from the solution. In the described works, a particular focus has been
placed on the factors affecting the adsorption process; factors such as adsorbent dose, pH,
initial concentration, and contact time were addressed, which determine the performance
of graphene-based materials as useful adsorbents.
However, it should be noticed that while graphene derivatives have advantages
such as high adsorption capacity or selectivity, some drawbacks can also be found for
their application in lead preconcentration and removal. The synthesis of the proposed
adsorbents is often time-consuming due to multi-stage processes and it requires appropriate
high skills.
Future research on graphene-based materials for preconcentration purposes in ana-
lytical procedures should concentrate on molecularly imprinted polymers (MIP) due to
their excellent selectivity and speciﬁc separation. Molecular imprinting has been widely
recognized as a potential technique for the synthesis of tailor-made recognition materials
through the formation of a polymer network around a template molecule. They are de-
signed with a particular cavity of a suitable size and structure to remove a given analyte byMaterials 2023 ,16, 1078 15 of 19
chemisorption or physicosorption process [ 95]. Although covalent interactions used in ad-
sorption processes can enhance their selectivity compared to non-covalent binding, further
quantitative elution of an analyte can encounter difﬁculties. The imprinted ﬁlm prepared
on the surface of GO or rGO can improve the access to the surface binding sites, increase
the response kinetics and enable the rebinding and extraction of the template molecules.
Moreover, grafting such adsorbents with magnetic particles makes its separation much
easier after the preconcentration step.
The application of natural components with several hydroxyl, amine and carboxyl
groups, such as chitosan, cellulose, -cyclodextrin and amino acids, in the green synthesis
of functionalized graphite-based nanoparticles makes an attractive material in both an
economic and an environmental perspective. The control of solution pH can change the
surface charge of these functional groups. Thus, by choosing appropriate conditions, the
electrostatic interaction with Pb(II) ions could be enhanced.
Despite the unique properties of MOFs, such as tunable porosity, large surface area
and chemically stability, the number of their applications in wastewater remediation is
still limited [ 96]. Therefore, the development of novel families of water-stable MOFs,
with potential application in the technological processes, should be a research area of
continued interest.
It should be noticed that most research studies only examine generally carbon-based
nanomaterials under laboratory conditions, while wastewaters usually contain different
pollutants in different combinations. Thus, further studies are required in large-scale
practical environments.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Debnath, B.; Singh, W.S.; Manna, K. Sources and toxicological effects of lead on human health. Indian J. Med. Spec. 2019 ,10, 66–71.
2. Boskabady, M.; Marefati, N.; Farkhondeh, T.; Shakeri, F.; Farshbaf, A.; Boskabady, M.H. The effect of environmental lead exposure
on human health and the contribution of inﬂammatory mechanisms, a review. Environ. Int. 2018 ,120, 404–420. [CrossRef]
3. Tsaridou, C.; Karabelas, A.J. Drinking water standards and their implementation—A critical assessment. Water 2021 ,13, 2918.
[CrossRef]
4. Azzouz, A.; Kailasa, S.K.; Lee, S.S.; Rasc ón, A.J.; Ballesteros, E.; Zhang, M.; Kim, K.H. Review of nanomaterials as sorbents in
solid-phase extraction for environmental samples. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2018 ,108, 347–369. [CrossRef]
5. Li, Y.K.; Yang, T.; Chen, M.L.; Wang, J.H. Recent advances in nanomaterials for analysis of trace heavy metals. Crit. Rev. Anal.
Chem. 2021 ,51, 353–372. [CrossRef]
6. Reyes-Garces, N.; Gionfriddo, E.; G ómez-R íos, G.A.; Alam, M.N.; Boyacı, E.; Bojko, B.; Singh, V .; Grandy, J.; Pawliszyn, J.
Advances in solid phase microextraction and perspective on future directions. Anal. Chem. 2019 ,90, 302–360. [CrossRef]
7. Treviño, M.J.S.; Zaraz ùa, S.; Płotka-Wasylka, J. Nanosorbents as materials for extraction processes of environmental contaminants
and others. Molecules 2022 ,27, 1067. [CrossRef]
8. Chisvert, A.; C árdenas, S.; Lucena, R. Dispersive micro-solid phase extraction. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2019 ,112, 226–233.
9. Bagheri, A.R.; Aramesh, N.; Gong, Z.; Cerda, V .; Lee, H.K. Two-dimensional materials as a platform in extraction methods: A
review. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2022 ,152, 116606. [CrossRef]
10. Öztürk, E.; Dalgıç, G.D.; Büyükpınar, Ç.; Bakırdere, S. Magnetic nanoparticles based solid phase extraction methods for the
determination of trace elements. Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2020 ,52, 231–249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Corps Ricardo, A.I.; Abujaber, F.; Guzm án Bernardo, F.J.; Martin-Doimeadios, R.C.R.; Rios, A. Magnetic solid phase extraction as
a valuable tools for elemental speciation analysis. Trends Environ. Anal. Chem. 2020 ,27, e00997. [CrossRef]
12. Kumar, A.; Kumar, A.; Cabral-Pinto, M.; Chaturvedi, A.K.; Shabnam, A.A.; Subrahmanyam, G.; Mondal, R.; Gupta, D.K.; Malyan,
S.K.; Kumar, S.S.; et al. Lead Toxicity: Health Hazards, Inﬂuence on Food Chain, and Sustainable Remediation Approaches. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 2179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Chowdhury, I.R.; Chowdhury, S.; Mazumder, M.A.J.; Al-Ahmet, A. Removal of lead ions (Pb2+) from water and wastewater: A
review on the low-cost adsorbents. Appl. Water Sci. 2022 ,12, 185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 16 of 19
14. Arbabi, M.; Hemati, S.; Amiri, M. Removal of lead ions from industrial wastewater: A review of removal methods. Int. J.
Epidemiol. Res. 2015 ,2, 105–109.
15. Qasem, N.A.A.; Mohammed, R.H.; Lawal, D.U. Removal of heavy metal ions from wastewater: A comprehensive and critical
review. Npj Clean Water 2021 ,4, 36. [CrossRef]
16. Khan, W.A.; Arain, M.B.; Soylak, M. Nanomaterials-based solid phase extraction and solid phase microextraction for heavy
metals food toxicity. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2020 ,145, 111704. [CrossRef]
17. Nouri, N.; Khorram, P .; Duman, O.; Sibel, T.; Hassan, S. Overview of nanosorbents used in solid phase extraction techniques for
the monitoring of emerging organic contaminants in water and wastewater samples. Trends Environ. Anal. Chem. 2020 ,25, e00081.
[CrossRef]
18. Gusain, R.; Kumar, N.; Sinha Ray, S. Recent advances in carbon nanomaterial-based adsorbents for water puriﬁcation. Coord.
Chem. Rev. 2020 ,405, 213111. [CrossRef]
19. Vesali-Naseh, M.; Vesali Naseh, M.R.; Ameri, P . Adsorption of Pb (II) ions from aqueous solutions using carbon nanotubes: A
systematic review. J. Clean. Prod. 2021 ,291, 125917. [CrossRef]
20. Pyrzynska, K. Nanomaterials in speciation analysis of metals and metalloids. Talanta 2020 ,212, 120784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. de Toffoli, A.L.; Maciel, E.V .S.; Fumes, B.H.; Lanças, F.M. The role of graphene-based sorbents in modern sample preparation
techniques. J. Sep. Sci. 2018 ,41, 288–302. [CrossRef]
22. Manousi, N.; Rosenberg, E.; Deliyanni, E.A.; Zachariadis, G.A. Sample preparation using graphene-oxide-derived nanomaterials
for the extraction of metals. Molecules 2020 ,25, 2411. [CrossRef]
23. Kumar, M.; Chung, J.S.; Hur, S.H. Graphene composites for lead ions removal from aqueous solutions. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 2925.
[CrossRef]
24. Grajek, H.; Jonik, J.; Witkiewicz, Z.; Wawer, T.; Purchała, M. Applications of graphene and its derivatives in chemical analysis.
Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2020 ,50, 445–471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Navrotskaya, A.G.; Aleksandrova, D.D.; Krivoshapkina, M.; Sillanpää, M.; Krivoshapkin, P .V . Hybrid materials based on carbon
nanotubes and nanoﬁlters for environmental analysis. Front. Chem. 2020 ,8, 546. [CrossRef]
26. Díez-Pascual, A.M. Carbon-based polymer nanocomposites for high-performance applications. Polymers 2020 ,12, 872. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
27. Pena-Pereira, F.; Romero, V .; de la Calle, I.; Lavilla, I.; Bendicho, C. Graphene-based nanocomposites in analytical extraction
processes. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2021 ,142, 116303. [CrossRef]
28. Gonzalez-Salamo, J.; Socas-Rodriguez, B.; Hernandez-Borges, J.; Rodriguez-Delgado, M.A. Nanomaterials as sorbents for food
sample analysis. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2016 ,85, 203–220. [CrossRef]
29. Bhatia, M.; Babu, B.R.S.; Sonawane, S.H.; Gogate, P .R.; Girhard, A.; Reedy, E.R.; Pola, M. Application of nanoadsorbents for
removal of lead from water. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017 ,14, 1135–1154. [CrossRef]
30. Ali, I.; Basheer, A.A.; Mbianda, X.; Burakov, A.; Galunin, E.; Burakova, I.; Mkrtchyan, E.; Tkachev, A.; Grachev, V . Graphene based
adsorbents for remediation of noxious pollutants from wastewater. Environ. Int. 2019 ,127, 160–180.31. [CrossRef]
31. Chawla, J.; Kumar, R.; Kaur, I. Carbon nanotubes and graphenes as adsorbents for adsorption of lead ions from water: A review.
J. Water Supply Res. Technol. 2015 ,64, 641–659. [CrossRef]
32. Nakano, H.; Tetsuka, H.; Spencer, M.J.S.; Morishita, T. Chemical modiﬁcation of group IV graphene analogs. Sci. Technol. Adv.
Mater. 2018 ,19, 76–100. [CrossRef]
33. Siegel, R.W. Synthesis and properties of nanophase materials. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 1993 ,168, 189–197. [CrossRef]
34. Dideikin, A.T.; Vul, A.Y. Graphene oxide and derivatives: The place in graphene family. Front. Phys. 2019 ,6, 149. [CrossRef]
35. Chen, X.; Qu, Z.; Liu, Z.; Ren, G. Mechanism of oxidization of graphite to graphene oxide by the Hummers metod. ACS Omega
2022 ,7, 23503–23510. [CrossRef]
36. Singh, R.K.; Kumar, R.; Sing, D.P. Graphene oxide: Strategies for synthesis, reduction and frontier applications. RSC Adv.
2016 ,6, 64993. [CrossRef]
37. Azizighannad, S.; Mitra, S. Stepwise reduction of graphene oxide (GO) and its effects on chemical and colloidal properties. Sci.
Rep. 2018 ,8, 10083. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Liu, Q.; Shi, J.; Jiang, G. Application of graphene in analytical sample preparation. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2012 ,17, 1–11.
[CrossRef]
39. Li, M.J.; Liu, C.M.; Xie, Y.B.; Cao, H.B.; Zhao, H.; Zhang, Y. The evolution of surface charge on graphene oxide during the
reduction and its application in electroanalysis. Carbon 2014 ,66, 302–311. [CrossRef]
40. Sitko, R.; Turek, E.; Zawisza, B.; Malicka, E.; Talik, E.; Heimann, J.; Gagor, A.; Feist, B.; Wrzalik, R. Adsorption of divalent metal
ions from aqueous solutions using graphene oxide. Dalton Trans. 2013 ,42, 5682–5689. [CrossRef]
41. Foroughi, M.; Azqhandi, M.H.A. A biological-based adsorbent for a non-biodegradable pollutant: Modeling and optimization of
Pb(II) remediation using GO-CS-Fe 3O4-EDTA nanocomposite. J. Mol. Liq. 2020 ,318, 114077. [CrossRef]
42. Azam, G.; Kabir, H.; Shaikh, A.A.; Ahmed, S.; Mahmud, M.; Yasmin, S. A rapid and efﬁcient adsorptive removal of lead from
water using graphene oxide prepared from waste dry cell battery. J. Water Process. Eng. 2022 ,46, 102597. [CrossRef]
43. Revellame, E.D.; Fortela, D.L.; Sharp, W.; Hernandez, R.; Zappi, M.Z. Asdorption kinetic modeling using pseudo-ﬁrst order and
pseudo-second ordar rate laws: A review. Clean. Eng. Technol. 2020 ,1, 100032. [CrossRef]Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 17 of 19
44. Tran, H.N.; You, S.J.; Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A.; Chao, H.P . Mistakes and inconsistencies regarding adsorption of contaminants
from aqueous solutions: A critical review. Water Res. 2007 ,120, 88–116. [CrossRef]
45. Robati, D. Pseudo-second-order kinetics equations for modeling adsorption systems for removal of lead ions using multi-walled
carbon nanotubes. J. Nanostruc. Chem. 2013 ,3, 55. [CrossRef]
46. Jing, W.; Wang, J.; Kuipers, B.; Bi, W.; Chen, D.D.Y. Recent application of graphene and grapgene-based materials as sorbents in
trace analysis. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2021 ,137, 116212. [CrossRef]
47. Li, Y.; Lan, S.; Zhu, T. Recent advances of graphene-based sorptive materials in extraction: A review. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem.
2021 ,142, 116319. [CrossRef]
48. Manousi, N.; Deliyanni, E.; Zachariadis, G. Multi-element determination of toxic and nutrient elements by ICP-AES after
dispersive solid-phase extraction with modiﬁed graphene oxide. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 8722. [CrossRef]
49. Guerrero -Fajardo, C.; Giraldo, L.; Moreno-Piraj án, J. Preparation and characterization of graphene oxide for Pb(II) and Zn(II)
ions adsorption from aqueous solution: Experimental, thermodynamic and kinetic study. Nanomaterials 2020 ,10, 1022. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
50. Soylak, M.; Acar, D.; Yilmaz, E.; El-Khodary, S.A.; Morsy, M.; Ibrahim, M. Magnetic graphene oxide as an efﬁcient adsorbent for
the separation and preconcentration of Cu(II), Pb(II), and Cd(II) from environmental samples. J. AOAC Int. 2017 ,100, 1544–1550.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Guo, T.; Bulin, C.; Li, B.; Zhao, Z.; Yu, H.; Sun, H.; Ge, X.; Xing, R.; Zhang, B. Efﬁcient removal of aqueous Pb(II) using partially
reduced graphene oxide-Fe 3O4.Adsorpt. Sci. Technol. 2018 ,36, 1031–1048. [CrossRef]
52. Mo, J.; Zhou, L.; Li, X.; Li, Q.; Wang, L.; Wang, Z. On-line separation and preconcentration on a mesoporous silica-grafted
graphene oxide adsorbent coupled with solution cathode glow discharge-atomic emission spectrometry for the determination of
lead. Microchem. J. 2017 ,130, 353–359. [CrossRef]
53. Suo, L.; Dong, X.; Gao, X.; Xu, J.; Huang, Z.; Ye, J.; Lu, X.; Zhao, L. Silica-coated magnetic graphene oxide nanocomposite based
magnetic solid phase extraction of trace amounts of heavy metals in water samples prior to determination by inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry. Microchem. J. 2019 ,149, 104039. [CrossRef]
54. Gul, A.; Nader, K.; Khaligh, G.; Julkapli, N.M. Surface modiﬁcation of carbon-based nanoadsorbents for the advanced wastewater
treatment. J. Mol. Struct. 2021 ,1235 , 130148. [CrossRef]
55. Joshi, D.J.; Koduru, J.R.; Malek, N.I.; Hussain, C.M.; Kailasa, S.K. Surface modiﬁcations and analytical applications of graphene
oxide: A review. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2021 ,144, 11648. [CrossRef]
56. Barabi, S.; Seidi, M.; Manouchehri, R.; Alizadeh, M. Lead analysis by SPE/FF-AAS: A comparative study based on dimethylgly-
oxime functionalized silica-coated magnetic iron/graphene oxides. Anal. Biochem. 2022 ,653, 11473. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Dahaghin, R.; Mousavi, H.Z.; Sajjadi, S.M. Synthesis and application of magnetic graphene oxide modiﬁed with 8-
hydroxyquinoline for extraction and preconcentration of trace heavy metal ions. ChemistrySelect 2017 ,2, 1282–1289.
[CrossRef]
58. Akbarzade, S.; Chamsaz, M.; Rounaghi, G.H. Highly selective preconcentration of ultra-trace amounts of lead ions in real water
and food samples by dispersive solid phase extraction using modiﬁed magnetic graphene oxide as a novel sorbent. Anal. Methods
2018 ,10, 2081–2087. [CrossRef]
59. Dahaghin, Z.; Mousavi, H.Z.; Sajjadi, S.M. Trace amounts of Cd(II), Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions monitoring using Fe 3O4@graphene
oxide nanocomposite modiﬁed via 2-mercaptobenzothiazole as a novel and efﬁcient nanosorbent. J. Mol. Liq. 2017 ,231, 386–395.
[CrossRef]
60. Seidi, S.; Majd, M.; Rezazadeh, M.; Shanehsaz, M. Magnetic nanocomposite of chitosan-Schiff base grafted graphene oxide for
lead analysis in whole blood. Anal. Biochem. 2018 ,553, 28–37. [CrossRef]
61. Ghorbanian, N.; Seidi, S.; Ghasemi, J.B.; Sadeghi, S.J. Dispersive solid phase extraction of lead in water samples using embed-
ded 1,5-diphenylcarbazone grafted graphene oxide in microporous magnetic chitosan coupled with ﬂame atomic absorption
spectrometry. J. Iran. Chem. Soc. 2019 ,16, 1411–1421. [CrossRef]
62. Mehdinia, A.; Ramezani, M.; Jabbari, A. Preconcentration and determination of lead ions in ﬁsh and mollusk tissues by
nanocomposite of Fe 3O4@graphene oxide@polyimide as a solid phase extraction sorbent. Food Chem. 2017 ,237, 1112–1117.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Suo, L.; Zhao, J.; Dong, X.; Gao, X.; Li, X.; Xu, J.; Lu, X.; Zhao, L. Functionalization of a SiO 2-coated magnetic graphene oxide
composite with polyaniline–polypyrrole for magnetic solid phase extraction of ultra-trace Cr(III) and Pb(II) in water and food
samples using a Box–Behnken design. New J. Chem. 2019 ,43, 12126–12136. [CrossRef]
64. Molaei, K.; Bagheri, H.; Asgharinezhad, A.A.; Shamsipur, M. SiO 2-coated magnetic graphene oxide modiﬁed with polypyrrole–
polythiophene: A novel and efﬁcient nanocomposite for solid phase extraction of trace amounts of heavy metals. Talanta 2017 ,
167, 607–616. [CrossRef]
65. Mehdinia, A.; Heydari, S.; Jabbari, A. Synthesis and characterization of reduced graphene oxide-Fe 3O4@polydopamine and
application for adsorption of lead ions: Isotherm and kinetic studies. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2020 ,239, 121964. [CrossRef]
66. Wang, N.; Cui, B. An overview of ionic liquid-based adsorbents in food analysis. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2022 ,146, 116496.
[CrossRef]
67. Chatzimitakos, T.; Stalikas, C. Carbon-based nanomaterials functionalized with ionic liquids for microextraction in sample
preparation. Separations 2017 ,4, 14. [CrossRef]Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 18 of 19
68. Montoro-Leal, J.P .; Garc ía-Mesa, C.; Siles Cordero, M.T.; L ópez Guerrero, M.M.; Alonso, E.V . Magnetic dispersive solid phase
extraction for simultaneous enrichment of cadmium and lead in environmental water samples. Microchem. J. 2020 ,155, 104796.
[CrossRef]
69. Rofouei, M.; Jamshidi, S.; Seidi, S.S.; Saleh, A. A bucky gel consisting of Fe 3O4nanoparticles, graphene oxide and ionic liquid as
an effcient sorbent for extraction of heavy metal ions from water prior to their determination by ICP-OES. Microchim. Acta 2017 ,
184, 3425–3432. [CrossRef]
70. Khan, M.; Tahir, M.N.; Adil, S.F.; Khan, H.U.; Siddiqui, M.R.H.; Al-warthan, A.A.; Tremel, W. Graphene based metal and metal
oxide nanocomposites: Synthesis, properties and their applications. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015 ,3, 18753.
71. Baranik, A.; Gagor, A.; Queralt, I.; Margu í, E.; Sitko, R.; Zawisza, B. Ceria nanoparticles deposited on graphene nanosheets
for adsorption of copper(II) and lead(II) ions and of anionic species of arsenic and selenium. Microchim. Acta 2018 ,185, 264.
[CrossRef]
72. McConnell, E.M.; Nguyen, J.; Li, Y. Aptamer-based biosensor for environmental monitoring. Front. Chem. 2020 ,8, 434.
[CrossRef]
73. Shamsipur, M.; Farzin, L.; Tabrizi, M.A.; Sheibani, S. Functionalized Fe 3O4/graphene oxide nanocomposites with hairpin
aptamers for the separation and preconcentration of trace Pb2+from biological samples prior to determination by ICP MS. Mater.
Sci. Eng. C 2017 ,77, 459–469. [CrossRef]
74. Chen, Y.; Bai, X.; Ye, Z. Recent progress in heavy metal ion decontamination based on metal–organic Framework. Nanomaterials
2020 ,10, 1481. [CrossRef]
75. Wang, Y.; Lin, K.; Liu, Y.; Deng, X. Nanocomposities of functionalized metal-organic frameworks and magnetic graphene oxide
for selective adsorption and efﬁcient determination of lead(II). J. Solid State Chem. 2022 ,313, 123300. [CrossRef]
76. da Gama, B.M.V .; Selvasembian, R.; Giannakoudakis, D.A.; Triantafyllidis, K.S.; McKay, G.; Meili, L. Layered double hydroxides
as rising-star adsorbents for water puriﬁcation: A brief discussion. Molecules 2022 ,27, 4900. [CrossRef]
77. Wani, A.A.; Khan, A.M.; Yahiya, G.; Manea, K.; Shahadat, M.; Ahammad, S.Z.; Ali, S.W. Graphene-supported organic-inorganic
layered double hydroxides and their environmental applications: A review. J. Clean. Prod. 2020 ,273, 122980. [CrossRef]
78. Mirzaee, M.T.; Seiidi, S.; Alizadeh, R. Pipette-tip SPE based on graphene/ZnCr LDH for Pb(II) analysis in hair samples followed
by GFAAS. Anal. Biochem. 2021 ,612, 113949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Xie, Y.; Yuan, X.; Wu, Z.; Zeng, G.; Jiang, L.; Peng, X.; Li, H. Adsorption behavior and mechanism of Mg/Fe layered double
hydroxide with Fe 3O4-carbon spheres on the removal of Pb(II) and Cu(II). J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2019 ,536, 440–455. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
80. Sitko, R.; Musielak, M.; Serda, M.; Talik, E.; Gagor, A.; Zawisza, B.; Malecka, M. Graphene oxide decorated with fullerenol
nanoparticles for highly efﬁcient removal of Pb(II) ions and ultrasensitive detection by total-reﬂection X-ray ﬂuorescence
spectrometry. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2021 ,277, 119450. [CrossRef]
81. Castro-Muñoz, R.; Cruz-Cruz, A.; Alfaro-Sommers, Y.; Aranda-Jarillo, L.X.; Gontarek-Castro, E. Reviewing the recent develop-
ments of using graphene-based nanosized materials in membrane separations. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016 ,52, 3415–3452.
[CrossRef]
82. Sitko, R.; Musielak, M.; Zawisza, B.; Talik, E.; Gagor, A. Graphene oxide/cellulose membranes in adsorption of divalent metal
ions. RCS Adv. 2016 ,6, 96595–96605. [CrossRef]
83. Musielak, M.; Gagor, A.; Zawisza, B.; Talik, E.; Sitko, R. Graphene oxide/carbon nanotube membranes for highly efﬁcient removal
of metal ions from water. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019 ,11, 28582–28590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Wu, Y.; Pang, H.; Liu, Y.; Wang, X.; Yu, S.; Fu, D.; Chen, J.; Wang, X. Environmetal remediation of heavy metal ions by
novel-nanomaterials: A review. Environ. Pollut. 2019 ,246, 608–620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Aigbe, U.O.; Osibote, O.A. Carbon derived nanomaterials for the sorption of heavy metals from aqueous solution: A review.
Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 2021 ,16, 100578. [CrossRef]
86. Pakulski, D.; Czepa, W.; Witomska, S.; Aliprandi, A.; Pawlu´ c, P .; Patroniak, V .; Ciesielski, A.; Samori, P . Graphene oxide-branched
polyethylenimine foams for efﬁcient removal of toxic cations from water. J. Mater. Chem. A 2018 ,6, 9384–9390. [CrossRef]
87. Alboghbeish, M.; Larki, A.; Saghanezhad, S.J. Effective removal of Pb(II) ions using piperazine-modiﬁed magnetic graphene
oxide nanocomposite; optimization by response surface methodology. Sci. Rep. 2022 ,12, 9658. [CrossRef]
88. Lingamdinne, L.P .; Kim, I.S.; Ha, J.H.; Chang, Y.Y.; Koduru, J.R.; Yang, J.K. Enhanced adsorption removal of Pb(II) and Cr(III) by
using nickel ferrite-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite. Metals 2017 ,7, 225. [CrossRef]
89. Lingamdinne, L.P .; Koduru, J.R.; Chang, Y.Y.; Karri, R.R. Process optimization and adsorption modeling of Pb(II) on nickel
ferrite-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite. J. Mol. Liq. 2018 ,250, 202–211. [CrossRef]
90. Verma, M.; Kumar, A.; Singh, K.P .; Kumar, R.; Kumar, V .; Srivastava, C.M.; Rawat, V .; Rao, G.; Kumari, S.; Sharma, P .; et al.
Graphene oxide-manganese ferrite (GO-MnFe 2O4) nanocomposite: One-pot hydrothermal synthesis and its use for adsorptive
removal of Pb2+ ions from aqueous medium. J. Mol. Liq. 2020 ,315, 113769. [CrossRef]
91. Feng, M.; Zhang, P .; Zhou, H.C.; Virender, K.; Sharma, V .K. Water-stable metal-organic frameworks for aqueous removal of heavy
metals and radionuclides: A review. Chemosphere 2018 ,209, 783–800. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Yin, N.; Wang, K.; Xia, Y.; Li, Z. Novel melamine modiﬁed metal-organic frameworks for remarkably high removal of heavy
metal Pb(II). Desalination 2018 ,430, 120–127. [CrossRef]Materials 2023 ,16, 1078 19 of 19
93. Lu, M.; Li, L.; Shen, S.; Chen, D.; Han, W. Highly effcient removal of Pb2+by a sandwich structure of metal-organic framework/GO
composite with enhanced stability. New J. Chem. 2019 ,43, 1032–1037. [CrossRef]
94. Zheng, Y.; Rao, F.; Zhang, M.; Li, J.; Huang, W. Efﬁcient, selective, and reusable metal–organic framework-based adsorbent for the
removal of Pb(II) and Cr(VI) heavy-metal pollutants from wastewater. Clean. Eng. Technol. 2021 ,5, 100344. [CrossRef]
95. BelBruno, J.J. Molecularly Imprinted Polymers. Chem. Rev. 2019 ,119, 94–119. [CrossRef]
96. Mon, M.; Bruno, R.; Ferrando-Soria, J.; Armentano, D.; Pardo, E. Metal–organic framework technologies for water remediation:
Towards a sustainable ecosystem. J. Mater. Chem. A 2018 ,6, 4912–4947. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.