 
©2018 The Joint Commission | May be copied and distributed | Depart ment of Corporate Communications  
  
 
Official “Do Not Use” List  
 This list is part of the Information Management standards  
 Does not apply to preprogrammed health information 
technology systems (i.e. electronic medical records or CPOE systems), but remains under consideration for the future  
 
Organizations contemplating introduction or upgrade of such systems should 
strive to eliminate the use of dangerous abbreviations, acronyms, symbols and 
dose  designations from the software.   
Official “Do Not Use” List  
Do Not Use  Potential Problem  Use Instead  
U, u (unit)  
 Mistaken for “0” 
(zero), the number “4” 
(four) or “cc”  Write "unit"  
IU (International 
Unit)  
 Mistaken for IV 
(intravenous) or the 
number 10 (ten)  Write "International 
Unit"  
Q.D., QD, q.d., qd 
(daily)  
 
Q.O.D., QOD, q.o.d, 
qod 
(every other day)  Mistaken for each 
other  
 
Period after the Q 
mistaken for "I" and 
the "O" mistaken for "I  Write "daily"  
  
Write "every other 
day"  
Trailing zero (X.0 
mg)*  
Lack of leading zero 
(.X mg)  Decimal point is 
missed  Write X mg  
Write 0.X mg  
MS 
   
MSO
4 and MgSO 4 Can mean morphine 
sulfate or magnesium 
sulfate  
 
Confused for one 
another  Write "morphine 
sulfate"  
Write "magnesium 
sulfate"  
 
 
1 Applies to all orders and all medication -related documentation that is 
handwritten (including free- text computer entry) or on pre -printed forms.  
 
*Exception:  A “trailing zero” may be used only where required to demonstrate 
the level of precision of the value being reported, such as for laboratory results, 
imaging studies that report size of lesions, or catheter/tube sizes. It may not be 
used in medication orders or other medication -related documentation.  
 Development of the “Do Not Use” List  
In 2001, The Joint Commission issued a Sentinel Event Alert  on the subject of 
medical abbreviations. A year later, its Board of Commissioners approved a National Patient Safety Goal requiring accredited organizations to develop and implement a list of abbreviations not  to use. In 2004, The Joint Commission 
created its “Do Not Use” List to meet that goal. In 2010, NPSG.02.02.01 was integrated into the Information Management standards as elements of 
performance 2 and 3 under IM.02.02.01.  
 
9/18  
For more  information  
• Contact the Standards 
Interpretation Group at 
630-792-5900.  
• Complete the Standards 
Online Question Submission 
Form . 
 