ISSN 1064-2293, Eurasian Soil Science, 2015, Vol. 48, No. 9, pp. 959–967. © Pleiades Publishing, Ltd., 2015.
Original Russian Text © T.G. Dobrovol’skaya, D.G. Zvyagintsev, I.Yu. Cherno v, A.V. Golovchenko, G.M. Zenova, L.V. Lysak, N.A. M anucharova, O.E. Marfenina, L.M. Polyan-
skaya, A.L. Stepanov, M.M. Umarov, 2015, publishe d in Pochvovedenie, 2015, No. 9, pp. 1087–1096.
959INTRODUCTION
“Soil systems are complex multicomponent for-
mations with the high spatial and temporal variabil-
ity , so the study of their life and functioning is a
labor-consuming problem; to gain success, coopera-
tive efforts of many like-minded specialists are
required” [9]. Soil microbiologists surely belong to
these like-minded specialists, because one of the
central problems of ecology—the organization and
stability of biological systems—cannot be solvedwithout the data on the numbers and structural-
functional organization of soil microbial communi-
ties. It should be remembered that up to 60–90% of
the biomass on our planet is composed by microor-
ganisms that mainly dwell in soils. THE POOL AND STRUCTURE 
OF MICROBIAL BIOMASS IN THE SOILS
Estimate of population density of soil microorgan-
isms is of primary importance for understanding the
microbiological processes proceeding in the soil. Theconcepts of population density and biomass of micro-
organisms changed as new advanced methods were
developed. Forest litter, sod, and upper humus hori-zons, where population density of bacteria is 5–10 times greater than their population density in min-
eral horizons, are biotopes with maximal concentra-
tion of bacterial cells in many studied soils. Biomassreserves and structure were calculated on the basis ofobtained data on the population densities of the main
groups of microorganisms (table). Maximum biomass
was recorded in the horizons, where population den-ON THE CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE BIRTH OF G.V. DOBROVOL’SKII
The Role of Microorganisms in the Ecological Functions of Soils
T. G. Dobrovol’skaya, D. G. Zvyagintsev, I. Yu . Chernov, A. V. Golovchenko, G. M. Zenova, 
L. V. Lysak, N. A. Manucharova, O. E. Marfenina, L. M. Polyanskaya,
A. L. Stepanov, and M. M. Umarov
Faculty of Soil Science, Moscow State University, Moscow, 119991 Russia
e-mail: dobrtata@mail.ru
Received March 18, 2015
Abstract —The results of long-term investigations performed by researchers from the Department of Soil
Biology at the Faculty of Soil Science of Moscow Stat e University into one of the major functions of soil
microorganisms—sustenance of the turnover of matter and energy in the biosphere—are discussed. Data on
the population densities of soil microbes and on the mi crobial biomass in different types of soils are presented.
The systemic approach has been applied to study the st ructural-functional organization of the soil microbial
communities. The role of eukaryotic and prokaryotic microorganisms in the carbon and nitrogen cycles is
elucidated. It is argued that the high population de nsity and diversity of microorganisms are necessary to
maintain the turnover of chemical elements in terrestr ial ecosystems. The viability of microbes stored in the
soils is important. New data on the preservation and survival of bacteria in nanoforms are presented. It is
shown that peatlands and paleosols are natural banks, wh ere microbes can be preser ved in a viable state for
tens of thousands years.
Keywords : microbial biomass, microbial diversity , nanoform s, pool of microorganisms, structural-functional
arrangement, environmental functions, bacteria, fungi 
DOI: 10.1134/S1064229315090033
Stores of microbial biomass (kg/ha (%)) in some zonal soil types
Soil T otal biomass BacteriaMycelium
Spores of fungi
actinomycetic fungal
Gray forest 5670 661 (11.6) 38 (0.8) 3127 (55.1) 1845 (32.5)
Soddy-podzolic 13946 195 (1.4) 27 (0.2) 11914 (85.4) 1811 (13.0)Ordinary chernozem 15123 421 (2.8) 66 (0.4) 13282 (87.8) 1353 (9.0)
Chestnut 31830 280 (0.8) 41 (0.1) 28689 (90.1) 2821 (8.9)960
EURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015DOBROVOL’SKAYA et al.
sity of fungi was great (a s in chernozem or chestnut
soil), the thickness of soil horizon B2 was great (as in
gray forest or soddy-podzolic soil), or both factors
were combined as in mountain cinnamonic soil.Prokaryotic biomass in most soil types comprises no
more than 3%, excluding gray forest soil, in which the
portion of prokaryotes was 4 times greater (12%). Thevalues of total microbial biomass vary from several tons(in gray forest soil) to tens of tons (in chernozem,
soddy-podzolic, and chestnut soil). Most biomass falls
on the fungal mycelium (55–90%), and only 8 to 33%are presented by spores [28, 29].
Hence, the soil microbial community is absolutely
dominated by fungi in the biomass, and this is the
group which fulfills the destruction of plant material. Itis borne in a commonly found deficiency of fixed nitro-gen in soil despite a great amount of nitrogen-fixing
bacteria. Fungi do the main share of the work on plant
residues destruction, but they do not fix nitrogen.
STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONAL 
ARRANGEMENT OF SOIL
MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES
Systemic approach is required to understand and
assess how microbial communities are arranged in
space and in time. Such an approach was developed by
the staff of Soil Biology Department [6, 15]. It includesvertical-layer, successional, locus-oriented, and geo-graphical methodical procedures for studying the struc-
tural-functional arrangement of microbial communi-
ties in terrestrial ecosystems.
Using the discussed approaches for studying the
ecology of natural microbial communities allowed the
revealing of some particular regularities in the struc-
tural-functional arrangement of soil microbial com-munities. It was demonstrated that microorganismsare found in all layers of terrestrial ecosystems; their
distribution is nonuniform; both population density
and taxonomic composition of microbial communi-ties vary from layer to layer; the position of an organ-ism in the vertical line is not accidental, as this posi-
tion correlates with its functions and type of ecological
strategy . The main spheres of microbial life in differentgeographical zones are concentrated in different lay-
ers, and the set of dominants in these layers character-
izes the type of ecosystem and reflects the specific fea-tures of a natural zone. 
V ertical-layer and geographical approaches were
developed most thoroughly by the example of yeast
fungi, for which especially abundant data were accu-mulated on their distribution in biogeocenoses of dif-ferent natural zones. It was shown that the structure
of yeast communities varied significantly in the series
of substrates that corresponded to different stages ofplant residue destruction, as well as along the latitudi-nal gradient. The availability of simple sugars
decreases in the course of plant residue destruction, so
the environment becomes more and more extreme foryeasts as typical copiotrophs. This is reflected in the
decrease of their total abundance and species diversity .
At the same time, the ratio between the relative abun-
dances of dominating eurybiontic species and greatertaxonomic groups significantly changes in the zonal
series. In addition to the above, relationships are found
between particular adaptive features of yeast fungi andthe most important environmental factors: frequen-cies of thermotolerant species increases from the north
to the south, and frequencies of psychrophilic species
increases from the south to the north; polytrophy ofsoil yeast communities is higher in high latitudes,where the degree of mineralization of organic matter is
low; the species widely distributed in the areas of cli-
matic pessimum demonstrate the trend towards theformation of resting structures.
Latitudinal-zonal trends were found almost for all
integral parameters of the structure of yeast communi-
ties in soils and on plant substrates. Mean values oftotal population density of yeasts, species diversity , andparameters of ecological structure of yeast communi-
ties vary , essentially depending on the latitude. These
are trends, i.e. regular increase or decrease in wide lat-itudinal ranges, rather than significant changes. Mostparameters of yeast population density and diversity
vary in latitudinal range in the same way: they give
maximum values most often in the boreal zone and thedecrease in the areas of climatic pessimum, i.e. in Arc-tic and in deserts, demonstrating the law of optimum.
In other words, yeasts at large have the same stance
towards global environmental factors as many otherlarge taxonomic and ecological groups of plants andanimals. Hence, yeasts being a very small and special-
ized group of fungi can be a representative and efficient
model to study fundamental problems of synecologyand biogeography .
Specific loci—the habitats of peculiar microor-
ganisms which are not practically found in such
“background” substrates as plants, plant residues, andsoils, representing the vertical-layer or spatial-succes-sional series—exist of course  in every type of ecosys-
tem. The examples of such loci can be presented by
soil neoformations, excrements and intestines of soilinvertebrates, ant nests, algal accretions, etc.
The population density and taxonomic structure of
microbial communities vary not only in space, but also
in time. T emporal changes in microbial complex,which are described as microbial successions, are notaccidental, and are caused not only by external effects.
They are determined also by internal events in natural
substrates. Biogeocenotic horizons are visual images,“still photographs”, of particular succession stages of
microorganisms, formed in the course of plant resi-
dues decomposition. The study of microbial succes-sion under stable model conditions enables revealingthe dominants at all stages of succession and deter-
mining their environmental functions.
All environmental functions of soil microorgan-
isms are so diverse and numerous that they areEURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015THE ROLE OF MICROORGANISMS IN THE ECOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF SOILS 961
included into every of 16 types of soil biogeocenotic
functions [15, 16]. We shall discuss in this review one
of primary functions of soil microbial communities,
the transformation of carbon and nitrogen, being per-formed by both eukaryotic and prokaryotic microor-
ganisms.
CARBON CYCLE IN THE SOILS
The experiments performed suggest an important
part of microbial processes of carbon cycle in the for-mation of recent atmosphere composition and emis-
sion and sink of greenhouse gases in different ecosys-
tems. Gas exchange between soil and atmosphere runsmost actively in soils with a high content of organiccarbon, which is determined by significant microbial
diversity and active process of microbial transforma-
tion of 
СО2 and СН4 in soil by corresponding physio-
logical groups of microorganisms.
The data on the intensity of production and
adsorption of carbon dioxide and methane in soils ofthe main bioclimatic zones in the European part of
Russia suggest that the microbial potential of absorp-
tion of greenhouse gases in zonal soils exceed as a rulethe extent of their production.
The increasing flux of greenhouse gases from soils
is the result of disturbance of dynamic equilibriumbetween the processes of their production and absorp-
tion under the influence of environmental factors and
anthropogenic effects on the soil: application of min-eral and organic fertilizers; artificial irrigation and
often connected with it destruction of soil aggregates
and development of soil salinization; application ofcrop-protection agents (herbicides); accumulation ofheavy metals and radionuclides; acid precipitations
and other factors.
Specific character of organic matter oxidation was
found in peat soils, where predominant methane pro-
duction was found, and production of carbon dioxidewas the result of ground water table drawdown. Takinginto consideration the trend towards land aridization
and the increase of the areas subjected to artificial
drainage, we can consider that these processes (addi-tionally to known negative environmental results) willpromote the increased emission of 
СО2 f r o m  s o i l  t o
atmosphere. Maximum emission of СО2 is observed
under moisture close to field moisture capacity(
⎯0.1 atm). The intense emission of carbon dioxide
and methane occurs under the changing water regime
of soil (drying–moistening).
Aggregate composition of the soil has a significant
influence on the carbon cycle: as aggregate size
increases, the rate of organic matter decreases.Destruction of soil structure and soil dispersion pro-mote formation of oxidative conditions, increase of
СО2 emission, and the increase of its portion in the
flux of greenhouse gases from soil to atmosphere [33].NITROGEN CYCLE IN SOILS
Not one of the parameters of the soil environmen-
tal status is as connected with  soil as nitrogen. It is true
that appearance in primary (Precambrian) fine earth
of such inherent and important function as fertility(not only in the narrow “agronomical” sense, but in
much broader general biological sense as essential
component for all living beings) was determined by theappearance in its composition of available nitrogen,supposedly in the form of ammonium compounds.
Thereafter other nitrogen compounds appeared and
were accumulated in the course of their microbiologi-cal transformation and, hence, formed the nitrogenpool of soil. So it is not by coincidence that the param-
eters of activity of the main chains of the nitrogen
cycle, namely , nitrogen fixation, nitrification, anddenitrification, are widely used for the assessment ofthe ecological status of soil [10]. According to the
present-day ideas, these processes are performed by
most microbial populations of the soil and reflectrather completely real (actual, but not potential) phys-iological-biochemical status. The analyses are carried
out using the methods of gas chromatography with
high sensitivity and rapidity , allowing analyzing thesamples of great volumes (replications), and thisallows performing full statistical treatment of the
results and judging about ecological status of the soil. 
Nitrogen fixation.  The greatest paradox of life is
that each and ev ery organism on the Earth, being inpermanent need of available nitrogen compounds and
having no way to lay nitrogen in stock, is in the ocean
of molecular nitrogen, whic h not simply surround, but
figuratively impregnates it. Only nitrogen-fixing bac-teria (diazotrophs) can provide not only themselves,
but the whole biosphere with “biological nitrogen” (in
the form of amino acids, amino sugars, proteins, etc.)and, just as important, to lay it in stock, converting
into soil organic matter humus and realizing in doing
so the fertility , the most important environmentalproperty of soil. Nitrogen fixation and assimilation iscomparable in terms of the scale and importance for
wildlife only with the other global process, photosyn-
thesis. It was considered for a long time [1] that nitro-gen fixation is inherent only to a narrow range ofmicroorganisms (
Azotobacter, Clostridium,  and Rhizo-
bium ). There were attempts to assess the biological
activity of soil by their population density , and to usethis parameter to characterize the environmentalfunctions of soil. It has been proved by now that most
prokaryotic microorganisms can fix nitrogen: eubac-
teria and archaea, chemolithotrophs, phototrophs andheterotrophs, aerobes, microaerophiles and anaer-obes, trichome, budding, and mycelial, Gram-posi-
tive, and Gram-negative ones [34]. Moreover, it was
found that it is nitrogen fixation, which in the world ofprokaryotes is the most widely spread physiological-biochemical property . Eukaryotes, fungi, plants, and
animals were excluded with finality from nitrogen fix-
ers. Eukaryotes have no capability for nitrogen fixation962
EURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015DOBROVOL’SKAYA et al.
and form with prokaryotes–diazotrophs diverse com-
munities with one common feature, namely , close
coupling of the biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen and
carbon, which in turn is clearly reflected in the envi-ronmental functions of soils populated by these organ-
isms. Maximum productivity of nitrogen fixation is
observed in legume–rhizobium symbioses, reaching350 kg of fixed nitrogen per hectare over a growingperiod. Symbioses of some nonleguminous plants
(alder, sea buckthorn, raspberry , etc.) with actino-
mycetes from the 
Frankia  genus have approximately a
similar productivity . The symbioses of cyanobacte-rium from the 
Nostoc  genus and water fern azolla are
abundant in tropical and subtropical regions. Associa-
tive nitrogen fixation is most widely spread in natureand runs in the rhizosphere and phyllosphere of allplants. Though its productivity is lower and averaged
50–100 kg/ha per season, it plays the key role in the
nitrogen budget of most terrestrial ecosystems, andthis is reflected in the environmental functions of thesoil. The conclusion was drawn on the basis of pre-
sented data that nitrogen is not the limiting factor in
natural biogeocenoses, because all links of nitrogenbiogeochemical cycle are well-balanced. Alternatively ,it is strongly disturbed due to regular treatment of soil,
crop rotations, and removal of essential amount of
nitrogen with yield.
Nitrification. The process of nitrification (oxida-
tion of ammonium compounds into nitrites and
nitrates), which is carried out by two fundamentally
different groups of microorganisms, autotrophic andheterotrophic nitrifiers, is an important and highly-informative parameter of the ecological status of the
soil. The key role in nitrif ication process was attributed
to the first group for a long time, and the activity ofheterotrophic nitrifiers as the source of oxidized nitro-gen was not even considered. Recently , we succeeded
in revealing the leading role of the second group, espe-
cially in soils of the podzolic zone, due to new meth-ods for studying the nitrogen fixation (inhibitor analy-sis). One more type of nitrification, ammonium oxi-
dation at the expense of nitrates under anaerobic
conditions (anammox process), was found alsorecently . Irrespective of mechanisms, the nitrification
process is used widely to characterize the ecological
status of soil.
Denitrification.  In the course of denitrification,
oxidized nitrogen compounds turn into nitrous oxide(
N2O), or molecular nitrogen ( N2), and the activities
of these processes are used as an integrated parameter
of ecological status of the soil. According to recentideas, denitrification as well as nitrogen fixation is car-ried out by the representatives of most groups of
prokaryotic microorganisms. Formation of nitrous
oxide is typical for soils with pH values below seven,structureless, salinized, and contaminated with heavymetals, pesticides, etc. Nitrous oxide (“laughing gas”)
is known as one of the main factors of ozone screen
destruction in the Earth’s troposphere, and, therefore,its emission from the soil is closely connected with
ecological status of the soil. 
THE ROLE OF FUNGI IN ORGANIC MATTER 
TRANSFORMATION IN SOIL
We understand that under soil fungi there are fungi
which are permanently and regularly isolated from soiland from different substrates in the soil. According to
the present-day ideas, fungi produce maximal micro-
bial biomass among soil inhabitants. They can com-prise 50–90% of total biomass of microorganisms inthe soil. Fungi are preserved in soil in the form of spore
pool, spores germinate under favorable conditions
with germ tubes, and mycelium develops actively . It isthe mycelial type of structure and development of fun-gal colonies in the form of repeated mycelial modules
which allows fungi to distribute actively in the soil and
colonize different organic substrates. The content offungi in the litter of moist soils enriched with organic
matter can reach a thousand meters of mycelium per
gram of substrate [25].
Fungi have the adsorptive type of nutrition, i.e.
they can absorb nutrients through the entire surface oftheir body and have thus the most important effect on
the transformation of substances and on soil structure.
According to our rough estimate, the area of such sur-face, for example in soddy-podzolic soil, accounts for
several cm
2 per one gram of soil. Soils are peculiar by
their great diversity of fungi; representatives of Zygo-mycota, Glomeromycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomy-cota, and Mitisporicfungi phyla. The total number of
genera or the much fewer species of soil-inhabiting
fungi is yet known. The number of cultivated species offungi can reach thousands by the most conservativeestimate [40]. Using modern methods of molecular
biology for identification of fungi in soil significantly
increases this value at the expense of revealing fungalgroups (mostly of basidial fungi), which were not for-merly accounted with the cultural methods. Fungi
perform diverse functions in soils, namely destruction
of organic substances, transformation of mineral ele-ments, and transport of nutr ients from soils to plants;
they participate in mutualistic symbiosis (mycorrhiza,
lichens) and in trophic chains of soil invertebrate ani-
mals, in the production of secondary metabolites,detoxification of soils, synthesis of humic acids, struc-ture formation, etc. [39].
Fungi play the key role in the processes of organic
substances destruction. They participate in the trans-formation of the most diverse groups of organic sub-stances in nature: mono- and disaccharides, polysac-
charides (hemicellulose, cellulose, starch, and chitin),
organic acids, alcohols, wax, paraffins, cyclic com-pounds (for example, phenols), and complex naturalpolymers (lignin and humic substances). Different
ecological-trophic groups of fungi were classified on
the basis of their capability for assimilating particularEURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015THE ROLE OF MICROORGANISMS IN THE ECOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF SOILS 963
organic substances: saccharolytic, cellulose-decom-
posing, keratinolytic, lignin-decomposing, etc.
In nature, organic substances, namely plant resi-
due falling on the soil surface, are decomposed in theprocess of succession: successive change of different
groups of fungi. Classical pattern of succession during
litter destruction looks as follows: development offungi consuming sugars, then active hydrolytic fungidecomposing cellulose, which can develop in parallel
with quickly growing copiotrophs, then slowly grow-
ing cellulose-decomposing and lignin-decomposingfungi appear. As the succession runs and the productsof organic substances destru ction come to the soil, the
groups can develop which consume more simple
organic substances. Fungi, being satisfied with a littlecontent of available sugars and possessing peculiarkinetic parameters, associat e themselves with primary
destructors of particular substrate at all stages of
destruction. These are oligotrophic fungi, or so called“microflora of dispersion” [13]. The relationship of
fungi from different genera and species with certain
stages of succession is observed. The representatives ofzygomycetes participate actively in the destruction ofsugars at the first stages, and ascomycetes participate
in cellulose decomposition. The capability for lignin
destruction is the uncanny ability of fungal organisms.Only basidial fungi have this ability in nature. Com-plete destruction of tree residues in nature would be
impossible without their participation.
Production of physiologically active substances,
which can affect the development of other organismsin the soil, is one of most important environmental
functions of fungi. When transforming the organic
substrates, fungi can release into the environmentantibiotics, toxins, and growth-promoting substances,
and can have inhibiting or stimulating effects on soil
bacteria, other fungi, invertebrate animals, and plants.
PROKARYOTIC HYDROLYTIC COMPLEXES 
OF SOIL
Integrated study of hydrolytic prokaryotic com-
plexes formed depending on the structure of biogeo-cenosis and environmental factors is actively performedat Soil Biology Department [7, 17, 37]. Functional
importance of hydrolytic prokaryotic microbial com-
plexes in terrestrial ecosystems was determined on thebasis of ecophysiological criteria, and the degree of theirtolerance to extreme parameters of environmental fac-
tors was determined [23]. Alternate version was devel-
oped of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),which provided the possibility to evaluate the popula-tion density and the phylogenetic composition of meta-
bolically active bacterial hydrolytic complexes in verti-
cal layers of terrestrial ecosystems. Population densityof metabolically active cells of hydrolytic complexescomprises one third of population density of all
prokaryotic organisms in above-ground, ground, and
soil layers of biogeocenoses. The differences were foundin the phylogenetic structure of metabolically active
hydrolytic prokaryotic complexes in spatial-succes-
sional series. If the destruction of biopolymers in the
above-ground layer is performed mostly by the group ofproteobacteria (
α- and β-), so the portion of firmicutes
and actinobacteria increases in the hydrolytic com-
plexes of all studied soil types. Hence, specific hydro-lytic prokaryotic complex is formed in every layer.
New function was found of mycelial forms of acti-
nobacteria in the development of hydrolytic complex.
Respiration of the complex in a wide range of values
(moisture, organic matter input, succession) can beessentially controlled by actinomycetes, the role ofwhich is determined not so much by their direct
hydrolytic activity as by th eir regulatory function con-
nected apparently with the production of biologicallyactive substances [23].
SOIL AS NATURAL POOL 
OF MICROORGANISMS
The protective function of soil, i.e. preservation in
viable state of different surviving stages of microorgan-
isms, is of great importance for conservation of biodi-
versity . Soil is also the source of discovering anddescribing numerous unknown forms of life. Forexample, the phenomenon of uncultivated microor-
ganisms suggests that true diversity of soil biota is sig-
nificantly higher than current estimates. Determina-tion of soil conditions promoting the formation and
conservation of biodiversity and particularities of soil
biota formation in different soil loci is the necessarytask of further investigations [38].
Peatlands and paleosols, in which viable microbes
are preserved during hundreds, thousands, and even
tens of thousands years, are the peculiar long-term
pools keeping the microorganisms.
The problem of wetland conservation as the reser-
voirs for accumulation great amounts of carbon is con-nected directly with the problem of conservation the
microbial diversity on the planet. Recent bogs in
Northern Eurasia were formed during the Holocene.The age of the most ancient of them does not exceed12000 years [36]. If we consider the whole profile of
peat deposit, it is instructive to present the data on the
age of every horizon determined with the radiocarbonmethod. For example, it was found in the dynamics ofpeat accumulation in the Bakchar Bog (southern taiga
in West Siberia) that at the oligotrophic stage of devel-
opment, the layer 0–10 cm has an age of 5 years, 10–38 cm 15 years, 38–52 cm 34 years, and 58–72 cm318 years. The lowest layer, 150–160 cm, has the age
more than 1000 years [30].
The reserves of microbial biomass in peat deposits
comprise in the meter-layer several t/ha and tens oft/ha per the whole profile. Fungal component pre-dominates in the structure of microbial biomass in
most analyzed peatlands. It is presented by mycelium
in the upper layers and mostly by spores of fungi and964
EURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015DOBROVOL’SKAYA et al.
yeast-like cells in the lower ones. The portion of not
only spores, but also of bacterial cells, becomes high in
the lower horizons [2, 3, 7].
The study of a peatbog as of  a soil body with a spe-
cial profile allowed revealing the following regularities
in the vertical distribution of microorganisms:
(a) bacteria, actinomycetic mycelium, spores of
fungi, and yeast-like cells were found throughout thewhole profile. Their population density in the deep lay-
ers could be the same or even greater than in the upper
ones. Fungal mycelium was found mostly in the upperone-meter layer; its density decreased down the soil
profile;
(b) seasonal dynamics of the parameters of micro-
organisms’ abundance was observed not only in theupper, but also in the lower layers of peatbogs, and this
brings us to the assumption about the real reproduc-
tion of the part of microbial complex at these depths;
(c) all layers of peatlands have the potential activity
of nitrogen fixation and denitrification;
(d) microorganisms can be in a viable state in the
whole profile of a peatbog, and this is confirmed bytheir growth on nutrient media when inoculated from
different depths down to the parent rock;
(e) bacteria of hydrolytic complex, potentially
capable of destructing polymers, were found in all sea-
sons and at all depths of peatlands.
Presented facts demolish the view about the “steril-
ity” of the lower layers in the peat deposit and can bean additional argument for including the term “peat
soil” to the whole layer of peat deposit irrespective of
its thickness [2].
Conditions unfavorable for fungi in the deep layers
of peat deposits block their participation in the pro-
cesses of destruction of organic substances and promotefurther accumulation and conservation in the peatlandsof plant residues, as well as in microbial biomass.
As aeration down peat deposit becomes worse,
fungi give place to bacteria, the density of which can besimilar to that in the upper horizons, or can graduallydecrease down the profile. At that, bacteria work
under relatively narrow and specific conditions. Func-
tions of bacteria in the highmoor peatlands are verydiverse. Some of them are performed only by prokary-
otes (nitrogen fixation, methane production and oxi-
dation, and sulfate reduction); production of antibiot-ics, inhibiting growth of pathogenic fungi by bacteriainhabiting the high moors, protects sphagnum mosses
from diseases. Transformation of different polysac-
charides, sugars, organic acids, and phenols, amongothers, seems to be the most important functions ofmicrobes. Degradation of toxic phenolic compounds
is one of most important functions of bacteria in bog
ecosystems, so that functioning of hydrolytic microor-ganisms becomes possible in some loci [4, 8].
However, low rate of plant residue destruction in
bog ecosystems resulting in peat accumulation forces
us to think of which factors limit the functioning ofviable microorganisms in deep layers of peat bed. The
analysis of these factors is given in a comprehensive
monograph [35] and in several papers [3, 7]. 
T h e  s t u d y  b y  t h e  t e a m  o f  s c i e n t i s t s  h e a d e d  b y
D.G. Zvyagintsev and D.A. Gilichinskii showed that
microbial communities are preserved for a very long
time and maintain their initial features in permafrostof different ages from the Arctic and Antarcticregions [14].
Characteristics of microbial communities in buried
paleosols are indicative of the biospheric processes inthe earlier stages of the Holocene [5]. Active strains ofhydrolytic microorganisms obtained from the ancient
soils can be used in biotechnology . In this relation,
hydrolytic complexes of soil microbes attract specialattention. It was found that fungal communities in the
buried Late Pleistocene and Holocene paleosols are
represented by their spores rather than by mycelium,and the activation of fungal destroyers is not pro-nounced [24]. The structure and specific features of
microbial complexes in chestnut paleosols under
burial mounds of different ages (ca. 4500 and 3500 yrs)and in their recent analogues were studied. It was dem-onstrated that the potential activity of hydrolytic
microbes in the buried paleosols was higher than that
in the recent soils. The FISH method showed that theportion of metabolically active cells of prokaryotes inthe paleosol (after application of the growth-initiating
polysaccharide) reached 50% of the total isolated
prokaryotic community . The response of the microbialcommunity of the paleosols to the introduction ofpolysaccharide was more active than that of the micro-
bial community of the recent soils. The difference in
phylogenetic structures of prokaryotic metabolicallyactive hydrolytic complexes of buried and recent soilswas determined. Hydrolytic complex in the recent soil
is more diverse in comparison with that of paleosols, in
which the groups of Actinobacteria (both unicellularand mycelial representatives) and Proteobacteria
acted as hydrolytic dominants [41].
Botanical gardens play an important role in preser-
vation of the microbial pool under urban conditions.For example, great diversity was demonstrated for the
bacterial complexes in the lower part of the profile of
recreazems and culturozems in the territories ofbotanical gardens. This emphasized the importantenvironmental function of botanical gardens perform-
ing preservation not only of plants, but also of bacterial
gene pool [31].
NANOFORMS OF BACTERIA 
AS THE TECHNIQUE OF SURVIVAL
AND LONG PRESERVATION IN SOIL
Recent concept on microorganisms’ survival in
natural environments stipulates their transformationto the so-called “not cultivated, but viable state”. The
decrease of cell size and high resistance of cells to
physical and chemical effects is the distinctive featureEURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015THE ROLE OF MICROORGANISMS IN THE ECOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF SOILS 965
of such state. The decrease of cell size results in the
appearance of ultramicroforms of bacteria (nano-
forms). The phenomenon of nanotransformation in
natural environments (in water and soil), as well as inpure cultures, was found for some bacteria as far back
as in the last century [1, 12, 27, 19].
Small prokaryotic organisms with linear size less
than 0.2 
μm (some authors consider less than 0.4 μm)
are classified recently as nanoforms. Other terms areused additionally to describe nanoforms in scientific
literature: ultramicrobacteria, nanobacteria, dwarf
cells, filterable forms of prokaryotes, 
l-forms [11].
Nanoforms of bacteria have drawn close attention of
microbiologists, soil scientists, hydrobiologists, geolo-
gists, and medical workers in last the decade becausethey were found in soil, on the surface of rocks andminerals, and within Mars meteorites [11, 26, 42].
Research performed in Soil Biology Department
(2007–2015) provides evidence of wide distribution of
nanoforms of bacteria in soils. Population density ofnanoforms in studied soils of Russia (soddy-podzolic,
gray forest, chernozem, raised peaty bog, and moun-
tain soils of the Caucasus) was very high and com-prised tens and hundreds of million cells per gram ofsoil. The portion of nanoforms of bacteria reached 5–
10% of the number of cells accounted with direct
microscopic method [21, 22].The study of prokaryoticcommunities of cryptogamous wastelands in East Ant-arctic revealed a significant population density (tens of
million cells per 1 g) and portion of nanoforms of bac-
teria (70–80% of total number of isolated cells) in soils[18]. High population density of nanoforms of bacte-ria was recorded in urban soils contaminated with
petroleum products and heavy metals, up to 100 mil-
lion cells per 1 g, and their portion reached 15% [20].
Taxonomic position of nanoforms of bacteria from
chernozem, mountain meadow soil, highmoor peat-
land, and some soils of Antarctic was studied with the
help of FISH method. Representatives of Archaea(10–16%) and Bacteria (26–35%) domains werefound among these forms of bacteria. Gram-negative
bacteria from the Proteobacteria (classes Alpha-,
Beta-, Gamma-, and Deltaproteobacteria) andCytophaga phyla dominate the Bacteria domain. Theportion of not identified cells from nanoforms of bac-
teria was greater than that from bacteria of common
size (up to 55%), and this attests to the presenceamong these forms of bacteria of unknown or poorlystudied taxa.
Soil loci, iron-manganic nodules, were found in
soddy-podzolic and soddy-meadow soils; a significantpart of the bacteria there (up to 40%) was presented bynanoforms, and poorly studied Acidobacteria and
Planctomycetes phyla were found among them [20–
22]. These results allow the assumption that theseultrafine forms of prokaryotes participate in the pro-cess of iron–manganic nodules formation. High via-
bility is their distinctive feature. The portion of viable
cells is always greater among the nanoforms of bacteria(75–95%), in comparison with this parameter (60–
65%) for bacteria of common size [18, 21, 22]. Elec-
tron-microscopic study of nanoforms of bacteria in
soils and underlying deposits carried out with themethods of scanning and transmission microscopy
also suggests high viability of such cells: the presence
of a dividing cell was found; ultrastructural character-istics of some cells were similar to those of dormantforms [32].
Environmental meaning of transition of prokary-
otes to the state of nanoforms can be considered as amanifestation of life strategy  for the survival of micro-
organisms upon the occurrence of unfavorable condi-
tions (temperature, moisture, deficiency of life spacein soil neoformations, etc.). It is apparent that nano-forms of bacteria represent a significant, but least
understood, part of soil bacterial diversity , because
there is among them a great portion of not identifiedcells additionally to the known taxa. The study of truenanobacteria preserving their small size during the
whole life cycle deserves special attention.
CONCLUSIONS
Microorganisms perform the long-range and very
significant role in the environmental functions of soils.
They are critical in climax ecosystems in supportinghomeostasis by some chemical and physicochemicalparameters. This is achieved owing to the great biom-
ass of microorganisms and their taxonomic diversity .
As a rule, microbes can perform processes in twoopposite directions, i.e. they always bring the systeminto the equilibrium state. The reserve dormant pool
composed of very diverse microbes is always in soils for
greater system stability . These can be nanoforms,spores, not cultivated forms, and latent forms. Theypass into active state upon the disturbance of homeo-
stasis. Agriculture with application of high rates of
mineral fertilizers and some toxic chemicals causesirreversible disturbance of homeostasis and soil degra-dation. Every soil type has its own ultimate resistance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Russian Scientific
Foundation, project no. 14-50-00029.
REFERENCES
1. S. N. Winogradsky , Soil Microbiology (Nauka, Moscow ,
1952) [in Russian].
2. A. V. Golovchenko, T . G. Dobrovolskaya, and
D. G. Zvyagintsev , “Microbiological assessment of
peatbog as the profile soil,”  V estn. T omsk. Gos. Peda-
gog. Univ ., Ser. Biol. Nauki, No. 4(78), 46–53 (2008).
3. A. V. Golovchenko, D. G. Zvyagintsev , A. V. Kurakov ,
and T . A. Semenova, “ Abundance, diversity , viability ,
and factorial ecology of fungi in peatbogs,” Eurasian
Soil Sci. 46 (1), 74–90 (2013).966
EURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015DOBROVOL’SKAYA et al.
4. A . V . G olo v ch enko, T . A. P a nkr ato v , T . G . D obr o v ol-
skaya, and O. S. Kukharenko, “Peat soils as a pool ofbacterial diversity ,” in 
The Role of Soils in the Biosphere ,
Tr. Inst. Ekol. Pochvoved., No. 10, 181–209 (2010).
5. V. A. Demkin, T . S. Demkina, T . E. Khomutova, and
M. V. El’tsov , “Soil evolution and climate dynamics in
dry steppes of the Privolzhskaya Upland during the last3500 years,” Eurasian Soil Sci. 
45 (12), 1095–1109
(2012).
6. T . G. Dobrovolskaya, Structure of Soil Bacterial Com-
munities  (Akademkniga, Moscow , 2002) [in Russian].
7. T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, A. V. Golovchenko, and
D. G. Zvyagintsev , “ Analysis of ecological factors limit-ing the destruction of high-moor peat,” Eurasian SoilSci. 
47 (3), 182–193 (2014).
8. T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, A. V. Golovchenko, L. V. Lysak,
D. G. Zvyagintsev , and T . A. Pankratov , “ Assessment ofthe bacterial diversity in soils: evolution of approachesand methods,” Eurasian Soil Sci. 
42 (10), 1138–1147
(2009).
9. G. V. Dobrovol’skii and E. D. Nikitin, Ecological Func-
tions of Soil  (Moscow State University , Moscow , 1986)
[in Russian]. 
10. G. V. Dobrovol’skii and M. M. Umarov , “Soil, micro-
organisms, and nitrogen in the biosphere,” Priroda
(Moscow), No. 6, 15–22 (2003).
11. V. I. Duda, N. E. Suzina, V. N. Polivtseva, and
A. M. Boronin, “Ultramicrobacteria: formation ofthe concept and contribution of ultramicrobacteria tobiology ,” Microbiology (Moscow) 
81 (4), 379–390
(2012).
12. D. G. Zvyagintsev , Soil and Microorganisms  (Moscow
State University , Moscow , 1987) [in Russian].
13. D. G. Zvyagintsev , I. P . Bab’eva, T . G. Dobrovol’skaya,
G. M. Zenova, and L. V. Lysak, “V ertical layer structure
of microbial communities of forest biocenoses,” Mik-
robiologiya 62 (1), 5–36 (1993).
14. D. G. Zvyagintsev , D. A. Gi lichinskii, S. A. Blagodatsky ,
E. A. V orob’eva, G. M. Khlebnikova, A. A. Arkhangelov ,and N. N. Kudryavtseva, “Storage duration of microor-
ganisms in permafrost sedimentary rocks and buried
soils,” Mikrobiologiya, 
54 (1), 155–161 (1985).
15. D. G. Zvyagintsev ,, T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, I. P . Bab’eva,
G. M. Zenova, L. V. Lysak, and O. E. Marfenina, “Therole of microorganisms in biogeocenotic soil func-tions,” Pochvovedenie, No. 6, 63–77 (1992).
16. D. G. Zvyagintsev ,, T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, I. P . Bab’eva,
G. M. Zenova, L. V. Lysak, and O. E. Marfenina, “Therole of microorganisms in biogeocenotic soil functions,”in 
Structural and Functional Role of Soils and Soil Biota in
the Biosphere  (Nauka, Moscow , 2003), pp. 115–124. 
17. G. M. Zenova, M. S. Dubrova, and D. G. Zvyagintsev ,
“Structural-functional specificity of the complexes ofpsychrotolerant soil actinomycetes,” Eurasian Soil Sci.
43 (4), 447–452 (2010).
18. A. G. Kudinova, L. V. Lysak, V. S. Soina, N. S. Mergelov ,
A. V. Dolgikh, and I. G. Shorkunov , “Bacterial commu-
nities in the soils of crypto gamic barrens of East Antarc-tica (the Larsemann Hills and Thala Hills oases),”
Eurasian Soil Sci. 48 (3), 276–287 (2015).
19. V. Yu. Litvin, A. L. Gintsburg, V. I. Pushkareva, and
Yu. M. Romanova, “Reversible transition of patho-genic bacteria into the rest (nonculturable): ecologicaland genetic mechanisms,” V estn. Ross. Akad. Med.
Nauk, No. 1, 7–13 (2000).
20. L. V. Lysak, M. S. Kadulin, I. A. Konova, E. V. Lapy-
gina, A. V. Ivanov , and D. G. Zvyagintsev , “Populationnumber, viability , and taxonomic composition of thebacterial nanoforms in iron-manganic concretions,”Eurasian Soil Sci. 
46 (6), 668–675 (2013).
2 1 .L .  V .  L y s a k ,  E .  V .  L a p y g i n a ,  I .  A .  K o n o v a ,  a n d
D. G. Zvyagintsev , “Population density and taxo-
nomic composition of bacterial nanoforms in soils of
Russia,” Eurasian Soil Sci. 43 (7), 765–770 (2010).
2 2 . L .  V .  L y s a k ,  E .  V .  L a p y g i n a ,  M .  S .  K a d u l i n ,  a n d
I. A. Konova, “Number, viability , and diversity of thefilterable forms of prokar yotes in sphagnum high-
moor peat,” Biol. Bull. 
41 (3), 228–232 (2014).
23. N. A. Manucharova, Hydrolytic Prokaryotic Complexes
of Terrestrial Ecosystems  (Universitetskaya Kniga, Mos-
cow , 2014) [in Russian]. 
24. O. E. Marfenina, E. V. Gorbatovskaya, and M. V. Gor-
lenko, “Mycological characterization of the occupa-tion deposits in excavated medieval Russian settle-ments,” Microbiology (Moscow) 
70 (6), 738–742
(2001).
25. T . G. Mirchink, Soil Mycology (Moscow State Univer-
sity , Moscow , 1988) [in Russian].
26. I. E. Mishustina, “Nanobiology of the ocean,” Biol.
Bull. 31 (5), 495–497 (2004).
27. D. I. Nikitin, “ Application of electron microscopy for
analysis of soil suspensions,” Pochvovedenie, No. 6,86–91 (1964).
28. L. M. Polyanskaya, V . V . Geidebrekht, A. L. Stepanov ,
and D. G. Zvyagintsev , “Distribution of population andbiomass within the profiles of zonal types of soils,”Pochvovedenie, No. 3, 322–328 (1995).
29. L. M. Polyanskaya, A. V. Golovchenko, and D. G. Zvya-
gintsev , “Microbial mass in soils,” Dokl. Akad. Nauk 
344
(6), 846–848 (1995).
30. Yu. I. Preis, O. R. Sorokovenko, and I. V. Kur’ina,
“Reconstruction of water balance in southern taigabogs of Western Siberia in the Holocene using the dataon the T emnoe peat mining site,” in 
Proceedings of the
VII All-Russia Symposium with International Participa-tion “Environment and Climate Monitoring “KOSK–2010”
 (Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences,
T omsk, 2010), pp. 121–123.
31. A. V. Rappoport, L. V. Lysak, O. E. Marfenina,
A. A. Rakhleeva, M. N. Stroganova, V. A. Terekhova,and N. V. Makarova, “Soil-ecological studies in botan-ical gardens (by example of Moscow and St. Peters-burg),” Byull. Mosk. O-va. Ispyt. Prir., Otd. Biol. 
118
(5), 45–56 (2013).
32. V . S. Soina, L. V . Lysak, I. A. Konova, E. V . Lapygina,
and D. G. Zvyagintsev , “Study of ultramicrobacteria
(nanoforms) in soils and subsoil deposits by electronEURASIAN SOIL SCIENCE  V ol. 48  No. 9  2015THE ROLE OF MICROORGANISMS IN THE ECOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF SOILS 967
microscopy ,” Eurasian Soil Sci. 45 (11), 1048–1056
(2012).
33. A. L. Stepanov , Microbial Release and Consumption of
Greenhouse Gases in Soils  (Moscow State University ,
Moscow , 2009) [in Russian]. 
34. M. M. Umarov , A. V. Kurakov , and A. L. Stepanov ,
Microbial Transformation of Nitrogen in Soil  (GEOS,
Moscow , 2007) [in Russian].
35. Activity of Microbial Complexes in Upper Peatbogs: Anal-
ysis of the Reasons of a Slow Decomposition of Peat
(KMK, Moscow , 2013) [in Russian].
36. N. A. Khotinskii, Holocene of Northern Eurasia
(Nauka, Moscow , 1977) [in Russian].
37. I. Yu. Chernov , T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, and L. V. Lysak,
“Soil and microbial diversity ,” in The role of Soil in For-
mation and Preservation of Biological Diversity  (KMK,
Moscow , 2011), pp. 22–85.
38. I. Yu. Chernov , T . G. Dobrovol’skaya, and L. V. Lysak,
“Problems and prospects of studies of biodiversity ofsoils,” in The role of Soil in the Biosphere and Human
Life (Moscow State University of Forestry , Moscow ,
2012), pp. 35–69. 
39. M. J. Carlile, S. C. Watkinson, and G. W. Gooday , The
Fungi (Academic, San Diego, 2001). 
40. K. H. Domsh, W. Gams, and T . H. Anderson, Compen-
dium of Soil Fungi  (IHW-V erlag et V erlagsbuchhand-
lung, 2007).
41. N. A. Manucharova, E. M. Kol’tsova, A. L. Stepanov ,
E. V. Demkina, V. A. Demkin, and G. I. El’Registan,“Comparative analysis of the functional activity and
composition of hydrolytic microbial complexes from
the lower V olga barrow and modern chestnut soils,”Microbiology (Moscow) 
83 (5), 674–683 (2014).
42. N. Panikov , “Contribution of nanosized bacteria to the
total biomass and activity of a soil microbial commu-nity ,” Adv . Appl. Microbiol. 
57, 245–296 (2005).
Translated by T. Chicheva