UCSF
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Temporal and spatial coordination of chromosome movement, spindle formation, and 
nuclear envelope breakdown during prometaphase in Drosophila melanogaster embryos.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8zn5357x
Journal
Journal of Cell Biology, 111(6)
ISSN
0021-9525
Authors
Hiraoka, Y
Agard, DA
Sedat, JW
Publication Date
1990-12-01
DOI
10.1083/jcb.111.6.2815
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of CaliforniaTemporal and Spatial Coordination of Chromosome Movement, 
Spindle Formation, and Nuclear Envelope Breakdown 
During Prometaphase in Drosophila melanogaster Embryos 
Yasushi Hiraoka, David A. Agard, and John W. Sedat 
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0554 
Abstract. The spatial and temporal dynamics of 
diploid chromosome organization, microtubule ar- 
rangement, and the state of the nuclear envelope have 
been analyzed in syncytial blastoderm embryos of 
Drosophila melanogaster during the transition from 
prophase to metaphase, by three-dimensional optical 
sectioning microscopy. Time-lapse, three-dimensional 
data recorded in living embryos revealed that congres- 
sion of chromosomes (the process whereby chromo- 
somes move to form the metaphase plate) at 
prometaphase occurs as a wave, starting at the top of 
the nucleus near the embryo surface and proceeding 
through the nucleus to the bottom. The time-lapse 
analysis was augmented by a high-resolution analysis 
of fixed embryos where it was possible to unambigu- ously trace the three-dimensional paths of individual 
chromosomes. In prophase, the centromeres were 
found to be clustered at the top of the nucleus while 
the telomeres were situated at the bottom of the nu- 
cleus or towards the embryo interior. This polarized 
centromere-telomere orientation, perpendicular to the 
embryo surface, was preserved during the process of 
prometaphase chromosome congression. Correspond- 
ingly, breakdown of the nuclear envelope started at the 
top of the nucleus with the mitotic spindle being 
formed at the positions of the partial breakdown of the 
nuclear envelope. Our observations provide an exam- 
ple in which nuclear structures are spatially organized 
and their functions are locally and coordinately con- 
trolled in three dimensions. 
M ITOSIS requires a precise coordination of cytoplas- 
mic and nuclear events: chromosome condensa- 
tion, fragmentation of the endoplasmic reticulum, 
vesicularization of the Golgi apparatus, nuclear envelope 
breakdown, spindle formation, chromosome segregation, 
and reformation of the nuclear envelope. Control mecha- 
nisms involved in the initiation of mitosis have been exten- 
sively studied genetically and biochemically (reviewed in 
Nurse, 1990). These lead to dramatic changes in phosphory- 
lation of a number of proteins including histones and lamins; 
for example, chromosome condensation is accompanied by 
phosphorylation of histone HI and H3 (Matthews and Brad- 
bury, 1978; Gurley et al., 1978), nuclear envelope break- 
down is likely to be caused by phosphorylation of lamins 
(Ward and Kirschner, 1990; Heald and McKeon, 1990; Pe- 
ter et al., 1990), and phosphorylation of centrosomes in- 
creases their microtubule-organizing capacity (Vandr6 and 
Borisy, 1985). It remains to determine the temporal and spa- 
tial relationships of these events to build a complete picture 
of this dynamic process. In this paper, we have analyzed the 
dynamics of the three-dimensional arrangement of chromo- 
somes within the nucleus and have sought to relate the ob- 
served spatial patterns to the dynamics of the nuclear enve- 
lope and microtubule organization during the prometaphase transition. A key aspect of this work has been the three- 
dimensional microscopic examination of individual nuclei, 
which provides the unique capability of direcdy visualizing 
transient, ephemeral structures, and interactions. 
Early embryos of Drosophila melanogaster provide a 
powerful system for studying dynamic aspects of the mitotic 
cycle. In the first 13 nuclear cycles of Drosophila embryos, 
nuclei divide every 10-20 min (Zalokar and Erk, 1976). At 
late syncytial blastoderm stage from nuclear cycles 10-13, 
nuclei form a monolayer on the embryo surface, providing 
as many as 5,000 geometrically related examples of nuclear 
structures in a single embryo. Nuclear divisions are essen- 
tially synchronous with a shallow gradient of mitotic stages 
along the length of the embryo (Foe and Alberts, 1983). This 
gradient allows the time dependence of the chromosome ar- 
rangement to be examined by simply viewing closely spaced 
nuclei in a single fixed embryo. Another advantage of Dro- 
sophila is that a number of mutations affecting chromosome 
structure and mitosis during these stages of embryogenesis 
have been obtained (reviewed in Glover, 1989). In addition, 
the small number of chromosomes (2 n = 8) simplifies the 
identification of chromosomes and the analysis of their spa- 
tial relationships. 
Until recently, it has only been possible to examine the 
© The Rockefeller University Press, 0021-9525/90/12/2815/14 $2.00 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111 (No. 6, Pt. 2), Dec. 1990 2815-2828 2815 
nondisrupted, three-dimensional arrangement of chromo- 
somes in certain specialized tissues containing polytenized 
giant chromosomes such as salivary gland nuclei in Dro- 
sophila melanogaster (Mathog et al., 1984; Hochstrasser et 
al., 1986). By contrast, in diploid tissues, chromosome ar- 
rangement has been studied mostly using squash prepara- 
tions of chromosomes and statistical models to infer their 
three-dimensional arrangement (reviewed in Avivi and Feld- 
man, 1980). The major difficulty associated with the direct 
examination of diploid chromosomes was their considerably 
smaller size. Drosophila diploid chromosomes (with widths 
of 0.2-0.4 #m in the condensed states) are packed in a nu- 
cleus of 4-5 #m diameter. In dramatic contrast, the diameter 
of a polytene nucleus is 30/zm and each polytene chromo- 
some has a width of 3 #m. Thus, an increase of nearly an 
order of magnitude in resolution over that obtained for the 
studies on polytene chromosomes was required to examine 
diploid chromosomes. 
Recent technological developments in light microscopy, 
using computational image processing (reviewed in Agard 
et al., 1989; Fay et al., 1989) or confocal microscopes (re- 
viewed in Brakenhoff et al., 1989) to remove out-of-focus 
image information, have made it possible to examine the 
three-dimensional organization of diploid chrom'osomes 
directly in intact cells (Agard et al., 1988; Rawlins and Shaw, 
1988; Oud et al., 1989). Unfortunately, currently available 
confocal microscopes have proved to be too insensitive to 
record useful three-dimensional data for the very small Dro- 
sophila embryonic chromosomes. Thus, in our procedures, 
three-dimensional microscopic images are recorded on a 
cooled, charge-coupled device (CCD) l using an ordinary 
fluorescence microscope (Hiraoka et al., 1987; Aikens et 
al., 1989) and the out-of-focus image information is com- 
putationally removed (Agard et al., 1989). Furthermore, 
using the computational approach it is now possible to exam- 
ine living samples in three dimensions by time-lapse, optical 
sectioning microscopy (Minden et al., 1989; Hiraoka et al., 
1989). 
In this report, we describe the evolution of the spatial or- 
ganization of chromosomes during the transition from pro- 
phase to metaphase and their interactions with nuclear enve- 
lope and mitotic spindle in Drosophila syncytial blastoderm 
embryos. This was accomplished by three-dimensional, op- 
tical sectioning microscopy, using both time-lapse optical 
sectioning of nuclei in living embryos and high-resolution 
optical sectioning in fixed embryos. The time-lapse record- 
ing scheme allows analysis of the dynamic behavior of chro- 
mosomes in individual nuclei as a function of time. This was 
augmented by the high-resolution analysis in fixed embryos 
where the exact locations of the centromeres and telomeres 
can be determined and the individual chromosome arms 
traced in three dimensions and uniquely identified. The spa- 
tial relationships among chromosomes, microtubules, and 
the nuclear envelope were examined by simultaneous obser- 
vation of multiple cellular components in three dimensions. 
Our results revealed that in blastoderm stage embryos, pro- 
phase and metaphase chromosomes have a geometrically po- 
larized arrangement relative to the embryo surface, and 
that this polarized arrangement is preserved during pro- 
1. Abbreviations used in this paper: CCD, charge-coupled device; DAPI, 
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. metaphase chromosome congression (the process whereby 
chromosomes move together and pack tightly to form the 
metaphase plate). Importantly, prometaphase chromosome 
congression, nuclear envelope breakdown, and mitotic spin- 
die formation all take place in a polarized fashion starting 
near the embryo surface. An implication of our observations 
is that prometaphase chromosome congression, nuclear en- 
velope breakdown, and mitotic spindle formation are locally 
regulated and that the three-dimensional, spatial organiza- 
tion of nuclear structures is important for the coordination 
of their functions. 
Materials and Methods 
Microscope System Description 
Two CCD microscope systems were used for data collection. (a) A liquid 
nitrogen-cooled CCD camera (Photometrics, Ltd., Tucson, AZ) with a 640 
× 1,024 pixel CCD chip (RCA) is coupled to a Zeiss in~'erted Axiomat mi- 
croscope; microscope lamp shutter, focus movement, and CCD data collec- 
tion are controlled by a VAX 8650 computer (Hiraoka et al., 1987). (b) A 
Peltier-cooled CCD camera (Photometrics, Ltd.) with a 1,340 × 1,027 pixel 
CCD chip (Kodak-Videk) is coupled to an Olympus inverted microscope 
IMT-2; microscope lamp shutter, focus movement, CCD data collection, 
and filter combinations are controlled by a MicroVax IIl workstation (Min- 
den et al., 1989; Hiraoka et al., 1989). 
Optical Sectioning Microscopy of Chromosomes in 
Living Embryos 
Rhodamine-labeled calf thymus histones H2A and H2B (a gift of Dr. J. S. 
Minden) were microinjected to Drosophila embryos 30 rain after oviposi- 
tion. The injected histones are incorporated into chromosomes during the 
periods of DNA replication and allow visualization of chromosomes in the 
living state during several mitotic cycles. Embryos injected with histones 
and observed under the microscope develop normally to hatching. The de- 
tails of the methods are described in Minden et al. (1989). 
The embryos were illuminated with a 100 W mercury arc lamp attenu- 
ated 20-fold and observed on the Olympus IMT-2 microscope using an 
Olympus oil immersion objective lens (40×; NA = 1.3) and a high selec- 
tivity rhodamine filter combination (Omega Optical, Inc., Brattleboro, 
VT). The CCD pixel size corresponds to 0.17 t~m in the specimen plane. 
To speed up image readout, images were taken on a small portion of the 
CCD, 256 x 256 pixels corresponding to a 44 × 44/~m area. Five optical 
section images were taken by stepping the microscope focus in increments 
of 1/~m with an exposure time of 0.1 s. It took 5 s to read out each image; 
thus, 25 s for one cycle of a focus series. This was repeated continuously 
as a time course: 
Optical Sectioning Microscopy of Chromosomes in 
Fixed Embryos 
Drosophila embryos were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde (freshly prepared 
from paraformaldehyde) in a 1:1 mixture of heptane/buffer A (15 mM Pipes 
pH 7.0, 80 mM KC1, 20 mM NaC1, 0.5 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM 
spermidine, 0.2 mM spermine, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol); chorion and 
vitelline membrane were removed as described previously (Mitchison and 
Sedat, 1983). The embryos were stained with 0.1 ~g/ml 4',6-diamidino-2- 
phenylindole (DAPI) and examined on a Zeiss Universal microscope to de- 
termine their developmental stage from the density of nuclei on embryo sur- 
face (Foe and Alberts, 1983). The selected embryos were attached to a glass 
slide by adhesion to poly-L-lysine and mounted in buffer A as a immersion 
medium without coverslip. For high-resolution imaging of chromosomes, 
optical section images were collected on the CCD at focus step of 0.2 or 
0.25/zm using a Zeiss water immersion coverslip-free objective lens (63 x; 
NA = 1.2) on a Zeiss Axiomat microscope. The CCD pixel size corre- 
sponds to 0.070/~m in the specimen plane. 
Indirect lmmunofluorescence and Optical Sectioning 
Microscopy of Triply Stained Embryos 
For indirect immunofluorescence microscopy, embryos were prepared as 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2816 
l~gure 1. A cytological map of DAPI-staining patterns. (A) Squash 
preparation of chromosomes from a male embryo stained with 
DAPI. (B) Computationally straightened chromosomes (left) and 
diagram of DAPI-stalning patterns (right). In the diagram, dark 
regions represent bright fluorescence in DAPI staining; short verti- 
cal bars represent the position of centromere. 
described above but with one modification; taxol (10/zl of a 0.5 mM solution 
in dimethylsuifoxide) was added to the fixation mixture (5 mi of heptane 
and 5 mi of buffer A containing 3.7 % formaldehyde) to stabilize microtu- 
bules (Karr and Alberts, 1986). Antibody staining was carried out as de- 
scribed previously (Fuchs et al., 1983) in a 96-well microtiter plate. Whole 
fixed embryos were incubated with PBT (PBS/0.1% Triton X-100) contain- 
ing 10% normal goat serum, and then incubated with a mouse monoclonal 
antibody against Drosophila melanogaster lamin, B9 (Kuo et al., 1982) and 
a rat monoclonal antibody against yeast a-tubulin, YL1/2 (Kiimartin et al., 
1982; Accurate Chemical & Scientific Corp., Westbury, NY) in PBT. Loca- 
tions of lamin and tubulin were detected by incubation of these embryos 
with rhodamine-conjuga~d goat anti-mouse lgG (with minimal cross- 
reaction to rat serum proteins; Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories, 
Avondale, PA) and fluorescein-conjngated goat anti-rat IgG (with minimal 
cross-reaction to mouse serum proteins; Jackson lmmuno Research 
Laboratories) in PBT containing 10% normal goat serum. The embryos 
were mounted in buffer A containing 0.1 #g/mi DAPI. The triply stained 
embryos were observed on the Olympus IMT-2 microscope using an 
Olympus oil immersion objective lens (60x; NA = 1.3). The CCD pixel 
size corresponds to 0.11 /~m in the specimen plane. Optical section data 
were collected on the CCD at 0.2-/~m focus intervals by repeating the fol- 
lowing sequence at each focal plane. Three images were obtained sequen- 
tially for chromosomes (DAPI), microtubules (fluorescein), and nuclear 
envelope (rhodamine), and then microscope focus was stepped by 0.2/~m. 
High selectivity excitation and barrier filter combinations (Omega Optical, 
Inc.) for DAPI, fluorescein, and Texas red were used (Texas red filter com- 
bination was used for rhodamine-labeled specimens). For wavelength 
switching during data collection, excitation and barrier filters are mounted 
on wheels rotated by a microsteppiag motor controlled by the Micro VAX. 
A single dichroic mirror with triple-band pass properties (Omega Optical, 
Inc.) designed for wavelengths of DAPI, fluorescein, and Texas red was 
used to eliminate significant image displacement during the wavelength 
switching, thus allowing the triple-color images to be superimposed without further alignment (the residual translational displacement was estimated 
using multicolor fluorescent beads under the observation conditions; x, y, 
and z displacements are 0.023, 0.062, and 0.084 #m, respectively, between 
DAPI and Texas red images, and 0.292, 0.131, and 0.285/~m, respectively, 
between DAPI and fluorescein images). 
Image Processing and Analysis 
Image processing and analysis are carried out on a VAX8650 computer or 
attached FPS 264 array processor (Floating Point Systems, Inc., Beaverton, 
OR) using programs written in Fortran. The out-of-focus information was 
removed by a three-dimensional iterative, deconvolution method with a non- 
negativity constraint (Agard et ai., 1989) using the optical transfer function 
experimentally determined for the objective lens used (Hiraoka ct al., 
1990). Unlike subtraetive methods such as the nearest neighbor deblurring 
method appropriate for larger biological structures (Agard and Sedat, 1983; 
Agard, 1984), this apprnaeh effectively moves the out-of-focns photons back 
to their correct positions within the object, thereby maintaining a high 
signal-to-noise ratio. By using current computer technology, three-dimen- 
sional deconvolution (25 iterations) can be performed in 1-2 h for a 512 
× 512 x 64 pixel image. Images were further processed, as necessary, to 
enhance local contrast (Belmont et al., 1987), or to detect chromosome 
boundaries based on the three-dimensional intensity gradient (Chen et al., 
1989). 
An interactive modeling program to trace chromosome paths in a three- 
dimensional data stack is based on an earlier implementation (Mathog, 
1985). Details of the computer algorithms are described in Chen et al. 
(1989). This program can open up to eight windows on a display screen at 
one time and display computationally rotated multiple views of the same 
object in each window. Chromosome paths are traced by a cursor and 
recorded as sets of three-dimensional coordinates, while the multiple im- 
ages from various view angles are updated simultaneously to follow the cur- 
sor movement. Modeling and image display are carried out on a Parallax 
model 1280 graphic display with a 12 Mbyte image memory (Parallax 
Graphics Inc., Santa Clara, CA). 
Software for computational manipulation of grey level information as- 
sociated with traced chromosome paths to straighten or dissect the chromo- 
somes has been developed. Grey level information associated with the 
selected chromosome paths is discriminated by thresholding the grey level 
intensity and/or detecting chromosome edges based on the intensity gra- 
dient, and dissected from the rest of chromosomes. The dissected chromo- 
somes are recomposed as the outlines filled with a particular color. Each 
traced chromosome can be computationally straightened by a combination 
of operations of rotation, translation and transformation based on the three- 
dimensional geometry. 
Identification of Chromosomes 
Drosophila melanogaster has two sets of four chromosomes (X(Y), 2, 3, 
and 4) that can be identified by their shapes and DAPI-stalning patterns. 
Chromosome 4 is the smallest and is recognized as a tiny bright spot; chro- 
mosomes 2 and 3 are metacentric and each arm is shorter than that of sex 
chromosomes X and Y, which are telocentric and acrocentric, respectively. 
Thus, 10 chromosome arms should be recognized in a diploid nucleus (two 
sets of X(Y), 2L, 2R, 3L and 3R; chromosome 4 and the short arm of chro- 
mosome Y are ignored). The Y chromosome is the most distinctive with 
its bright heterochromatic blocks along the entire chromosome. Although 
the euchromatic arms of chromosomes 2 and 3 have relatively few distinc- 
tive features, these chromosomes can be distinguished from one another by 
the heterochromatic blocks near the centromere. These features were 
deduced from spread chromosome preparations (Fig. 1); similar results 
have been previously reported (Kaufmann, 1934; Holmquist, 1975; Gatti 
et al., 1976; Halfer, 1981; Gatti and Pimpinelli, 1983). 
Results 
We examined three-dimensional nuclear structures in Dro- 
sophila melanogaster embryos specifically at nuclear cycles 
12 and 13 while nuclei divide rapidly and essentially syn- 
chronously. Nuclei were viewed from a direction perpendic- 
ular to the embryo surface; thus microscopic images are ap- 
proximately parallel to the embryo surface unless described 
otherwise. In this report, the "top" of a nucleus refers to loca- 
Hiraoka et al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2817 
Figure 2. Optical sectioning 
and image processing of em- 
bryonic nuclei. Low magnifi- 
cation view (A) of a whole em- 
bryo stained with a DNA-spe- 
cific fluorescent dye, DAPI. 
Every bright spot distributed 
throughout the embryo surface 
represents a single individual 
nucleus. An example of optical 
sections from a three-dimen- sional data stack before (B) 
and after (C) the removal of 
out-of-focus image contamina- 
tion. ~nsional image 
data were obtained at 0.25-~m 
focus intervals under computer 
control. Each displayed 
sec- 
tion is separated by 0.5 #rn 
in the focus (z) direction. The 
out-of-focus information was 
removed by an iterative decon- 
volution method with a non- 
negativity constraint (Agard 
et al., 1989) using the optical 
transfer function experimen- tally determined for the objec- 
tive lens used (Hiraoka et al., 
1990). 
tions near the embryo surface whereas the "bottom" refers to 
locations toward the embryo interior. 
Determination of Chromosome Arrangement V~thin a 
Diploid Nucleus 
Three-dimensional data were collected as a series of images 
recorded at different focal planes by stepping the microscope 
focus. For the high-resolution analysis of chromosome orga- 
nization in fixed specimens, optical section images were 
taken at 0.2-0.25-#m focus intervals and computationally 
processed to remove out-of-focus image information as de- 
scribed in Materials and Methods. An example of such opti- 
cal sectioning of diploid prophase nuclei in fixed embryos is 
shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 A shows an entire Drosophila embryo 
prepared and fixed under conditions previously shown to 
preserve chromosome structure by electron microscopy (Bel- 
mont et al., 1989) and stained with the nonintercalative 
DNA-specific fluorescent dye, DAPI. Optical sections, be- 
fore and after the image processing, are shown in Fig. 2, B 
and C, respectively. The image processing employed here, 
three-dimensional iterative, constrained deconvolution, acts 
to improve the microscopic resolution by recovering an esti- 
mate of the true object from the observed microscopic image 
using knowledge of the microscope's point-spread function, 
or a smearing function (for a discussion of mathematical ba- 
sis of this method, see Agard et al., 1989; also see Materials 
and Methods). To trace the paths of chromosomes in an em- bryonic diploid nucleus, image processing of this type is ab- 
solutely essential, because an embryonic diploid nucleus is 
so small that the point spread function covers almost the en- 
tire nucleus. Note that chromosome strands barely resolved 
in the original image are clearly resolved following image 
processing (Fig. 2, B and C). 
The processed three-dimensional data were analyzed to 
determine the spatial arrangement of chromosomes within 
the nucleus. First, paths of chromosomes were traced in 
three dimensions using interactive computer software op- 
timized for examining complex biological images (Chen et 
al., 1989; also see Materials and Methods). Once chromo- 
some paths were determined, a computational dissection 
scheme was used to visualize the structural features of the 
chromosomes (see Materials and Methods). Second, the 
traced paths were identified as belonging to particular chro- 
mosomes by their characteristic DAPI-staining patterns and 
also by their shapes. To accomplish this, a cytological map 
of DAPI-staining patterns for diploid chromosomes was 
made from spread chromosome preparations that were fixed 
and stained under the conditions used for the three-dimen- 
sional analysis (see Fig. 1 in Materials and Methods). 
An example of a model representing the traced three- 
dimensional paths of the chromosomes is shown in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 3 A shows a projected view of a diploid prophase nu- 
cleus reconstructed from the processed optical section data 
presented in Fig. 2 C. Models of chromosome paths that 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2818 
were traced and identified are shown in Fig. 3, B and C, in 
top and side views, respectively. All of the chromosomes 
were identified (X, Y, 2, 3 and 4) and each is presented using 
a different color. Centromeres and telomeres are marked by 
closed and open circles, respectively. To aid in the examina- 
tion of chromosome organization, the modeled paths can be 
used as a guide to computationally dissect the chromosomes 
from within the prophase nucleus (Fig. 3 D) and to then 
reconstruct the nucleus with each chromosome appropri- 
ately colored (Fig. 3 E, compare with Fig. 3 A). Note spe- 
cifically that the configuration of the third chromosomes, ob- 
scured in the projected view by the remaining chromosomes, 
can be clearly seen in the dissected view. These capabilities 
of modelling greatly facilitated the interpretations described 
in the next section. 
Spatial Arrangement of Chromosomes in 
Prophase Nuclei 
Chromosome paths were traced for 13 prophase nuclei. 
These nuclei shared several common features. The nucleus 
presented in Fig. 3 represents a typical example of late 
prophase nuclei. Two homologous sets of chromosomes can 
be clearly seen, indicating that homologous chromosomes 
are not synapsed (Fig. 3, B and D). Centromeres were found 
to cluster along a line as indicated by arrow heads in Fig. 3 
B. Based on observations from the living data (see Fig. 4 A 
below), this line forms what will later become the axis of 
metaphase plate. Examined from the top, the arrangement 
of chromosomes seems to be roughly spherical in shape 
(Fig. 3 B). However, when examined in a side view from the 
direction of the centromere line-up, the very early stage of 
chromosome congression in the top portion of nucleus can 
be seen as an indentation (shown by arrows in Fig. 3 C). 
By using the side view of the model (Fig. 3 C), it can be 
clearly seen that the centromeres are located in the top half 
of the nucleus near the embryos surface (top of the figure), 
the telomeres in the bottom half of the nucleus, and that the 
chromosome arms are oriented approximately perpendicular 
to the embryo surface. This polarized centromere-telomere 
orientation of autosomal as well as sex chromosomes per- 
pendicular to the embryo surface was observed in all the 
prophase nuclei examined. 
It is also clear from the data (Fig. 3, B-D) that telomeres 
of homologous chromosomes are closely associated at the 
bottom of the nucleus (indicated by asterisk in Fig. 3 D). In 
this nucleus, all four telomeres of the third chromosomes are 
near each other, with two of them touching each other; the 
telomeres of one arm of the second chromosomes are also 
associated. Association of telomeres was commonly ob- 
served in prophase nuclei, often making it difficult to detect 
the precise ends of individual chromosomes. 
The total length of the prophase chromosomes contained 
within a nucleus ranged from 64 to 78/~m (average 70 + 
6/zm for 13 examples) as expected for two separate sets of 
chromosomes (Holmquist, 1975; Halfer, 1981; Pimpinelli et 
al., 1976). This provides a further indication that homolo- 
gous chromosomes are not synapsed. 
Prometaphase Chromosome Congression 
Takes Place in a Polarized Fashion Starting at the 
Top of the Nucleus 
To examine how prophase chromosomes change their three- dimensional arrangement as they approach metaphase, we 
followed chromosomes in the living state. Chromosomes in 
living Drosophila embryos were visualized by microinjec- 
tion of fluorescently labeled histones that are subsequently 
incorporated into newly replicated chromatin (Minden et 
al., 1989; Hiraoka et al., 1989). Owing to temporal con- 
straints caused by the very rapid mitotic cycle, optical sec- 
tion data were taken on the CCD at five focal planes span- 
ning the nucleus with a 1-#m focus step every 5 s. Such 
three-dimensional data sets were collected as a function of 
time to make a time-lapse series of optical section data. 
Fig. 4 A shows, for a single nucleus, the morphological 
changes occurring from prophase to metaphase displayed as 
a focus series (left to right represents the progression from 
the bottom to top of the nucleus) and as a time course (shown 
vertically; time to the metaphase/anaphase transition is rep- 
resented with the negative sign). Based on this data, forma- 
tion of the metaphase plate (visualized as a rectangular 
shape) can be seen to initiate at the top of the nucleus, and 
to progress from top to bottom by the passage through the 
nucleus of a smooth wave of chromosome congression (indi- 
cated by asterisks in Fig. 4 A). 
This process of chromosome congression was quantified 
by measuring the ellipticity of chromosome figures at differ- 
ent focal planes as a function of time. The width measured 
in the short axis was normalized to the length along the long 
axis, where the long axis (L) was defined by the direction of 
metaphase plate and the short axis (S) was defined to be per- 
pendicular to the long axis (see Fig. 4 A). This ratio of the 
short axis to the long axis (S/L) was measured at three focal 
planes, each separated by 2 #m. The ratio is 1 for the spheri- 
cal morphology occurring in prophase and decreases toward 
metaphase. The ratio was averaged over 14 nuclei and plot- 
ted for each focal plane as a function of time (Fig. 4 E), to- 
gether with examples for three individual nuclei (Fig. 4, 
B-D). This shows that the width of chromosome figures 
decreases earlier at the top of the nucleus than at bottom. 
This differential behavior of chromosome congression is not 
a result of the time-lapse interval, as the 5-s delay per section 
was taken into consideration in the plotting. 
By using the averaged data shown in Fig. 4 E the speed 
of the wave of congression can be estimated. It takes the wave 
2 min to travel the 4 #m from the top to the bottom of the 
nucleus or 2 #m/min. Note that at this developmental stage 
the duration of the mitotic cycle is 22 min. Once the wave 
reaches the bottom of the nucleus, formation of the 
metaphase plate is complete. Chromosomes then remain on 
the metaphase plate for an additional 3 min before separating 
in anaphase. During this period, chromosomes are making 
elastic motions, or swaying, inside the metaphase plate. 
The Polarized Arrangement of Chromosomes 
Is Maintained During the Process of Metaphase 
Plate Formation 
To analyze the detailed arrangement of chromosomes from 
prophase to metaphase, fixed preparations were examined. 
The same overall three-dimensional nuclear morphology ob- 
served in living embryos was also seen in fixed embryos. Fig. 
5 shows a portion of a fixed embryo, displayed as a focus se- 
ries. By comparison with the living preparation shown in 
Fig. 4 A, it can be seen that a series of nuclei of gradually 
Hiraoka et al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2819 
Figure 3. Stereo model for prophase chromo- 
some arrangement. (A) Stereo projection was 
made from 32 optical section images, each 
separated by 0.25 #m, of the nucleus (Fig. 2 C) 
after image processing. (B) A model made by 
tracing chromosome paths. (C) Side view of 
the same model viewed from the direction 
shown by the arrowheads in (B). In the side 
view, the embryo surface is on the upper side 
of the figure. Color for chromosome: X, yel- 
low; Y, red; 2, green; 3, blue; 4,purple. Closed 
and open circles represent centromeres and 
telomeres, respectively. (D) Chromosomes 
were computationally dissected by isolating 
cylinders surrounding the traced paths. Dis- 
sected from the prophase nucleus shown in A. 
Telomeric association is shown by asterisk. Ar- 
rowhead represents centromere. Arrows on 
third chromosomes indicate the bending of 
chromosomes at homologous sites. (E) Recom- 
posed from the dissected individual chromo- 
somes with pseudocolor for each chromosome. 
changing morphology were spaced along the mitotic gra- 
dient in a single embryo (in this example, nuclei at the right 
initiated mitosis earlier). The nuclear structures at the left 
show a spherical appearance at the bottom (inside the em- 
bryo) but show a rectangular shape at the top (near the em- 
bryo surface), whereas nuclei to the right show a nearly rec- 
tangular shape throughout the entire focal series. 
The spatial arrangement of chromosomes was analyzed in 
these early metaphase plates (12 examples examined). Fig. 
6 shows an example of a reconstruction of chromosomes in 
the metaphase plate indicated by the arrow in Fig. 5. In 
metaphase, unlike in prophase, the telomeres were not as- sociated, resulting in complete separation of homologous 
chromosomes; all the expected 10 telomeres (two sets of 
X(Y), 2L, 2R, 3L and 3R; see Materials and Methods) were 
clearly detected at the bottom of the metaphase plate as 
shown in Fig. 6 A. Starting at the telomeres, the three-di- 
mensional paths of all the 10 chromosome arms were traced 
up to the centromeres at the top of the metaphase plate (see 
Fig. 6, B and C; the numbers for chromosome arms in Fig. 6 
C correspond to those for the telomeres in Fig. 6 A). Chro- 
mosome arms were oriented predominantly perpendicular to 
the embryo surface similar to those in prophase. This can be 
seen in a side view of a model for the traced chromosomes 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2820 
(Fig. 6 B; compare with Fig. 3 C) and cross-secrion views 
of the metaphase l~late (Fig. 6 C). In the sectional views, all 
10 chromosome arms, running perpendicular to the embryo 
surface, can be seen as numbered in Fig. 6 C 
Due to the intrinsic properties of microscopic image for- 
marion, the microscopic resolution along the optical axis is 
relatively lower than that in the microscope field plane (for 
detailed discussion, see Agard, 1984). Since we are viewing 
embryos from a direction perpendicular to the embryo sur- 
face, we wished to test whether the polarized orientation of 
chromosomes perpendicular to the embryo surface was an 
artificial result of the viewing direction. To eliminate this 
possibility, we examined chromosome organization in an 
edge view of embryos that were cut in half by a razor blade. 
Consistent results were obtained from this viewing direction 
as well. In this view, chromosome arms mostly fit within an 
image plane, running from the surface to inside the embryo 
with centromeres localized near the embryo surface (data not 
shown). The Nuclear Envelope Breaks Down Differentially, 
Initiating at the Position of Mitotic Spindle Formation 
at the Top of the Nucleus 
To examine the involvement of microtubules and the nuclear 
envelope in the process of chromosome congression, we 
observed microtubules and the nuclear envelope at the pro- 
metaphase transition. Whole-mount embryos were fixed and 
fluorescently stained using well-characterized, antitubulin 
and antilamin antibodies. Microscopic images for each of 
three fluorescent stainings for chromosomes, microtubules, 
and nuclear envelope were obtained sequentially in the 
same field and at the same focal plane. This was repeated at 
0.2-#m focus intervals to make a set of aligned, triple-color, 
three-dimensional image data as described in Materials and 
Methods. 
As shown in Fig. 7, the chromosomes again showed the ar- 
rangement typical of prometaphase, that is, a spherical ap- 
pearance at the bottom and a rectangular shape at the top 
Hiraoka et al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2821 
oil, I oa 
o6 
0a 
02 
-60 -50 -4O -30 
oe 
o6 
o4 
. . , ~ . o2 i 
-60 -50 -40 -30 ,oI ol 
O8 
O6 
04 
02 
-60 -50 -40 -30 
Time(min) 
O8 
06 
01 
0~ L 
-60 -50 -40 -30 
Tlmalm~n) Figure 4. Optical sectioning of 
chromosomes in a living em- 
bryo. (,4) Single nucleus is 
displayed as a focus series (left 
to right ) and as a time course 
(top to bottom). Optical sec- 
tion was taken at 1-#m focus 
interval from bottom (inside 
the embryo) to top (near ghe 
embryo surface) of the nu- 
cleus. The top portion of the 
nucleus (right side) was packed 
earlier than the bottom por- 
tion (left side). Numbers on 
the left represent time to the 
mctaphase-anaphase transition 
in minutes:seconds with the 
negative sign. (B-E) Width of 
chromosome figures at differ- 
ent focal planes. Ratios of the 
short axis to the long axis of a 
chromosome figure (S/L) at 
three focus planes are plotted 
as a function of time, for three 
individual nuclei (B, C, and 
D) and for the average of 14 
nuclei (E). Time is repre- 
sented to the metaphase-ana- 
phase transition in minutes 
with the negative sign. Top 
(-); middle (o); bottom (o). 
(Fig. 7 A). Mitotic spindles were observed at the top, on both 
sides of the rectangular array of centromeres (the top panel 
in Fig. 7 B). The nuclear envelope remained spherical for 
the bottom half of the nucleus although it looked somewhat 
fragmented (the bottom two panels in Fig. 7 C), whereas the 
top portion of nuclear envelope had already broken down 
(the top panel in Fig. 7 C). Regions of partial breakdown of 
the nuclear envelope are indicated by arrows in Fig. 7 C. In- 
~terphase embryos fixed and stained under the identical con- 
ditions have an intact nuclear envelope (data not shown, and 
also Fuchs et al., 1983; Paddy et al., 1990). 
Fig. 8 shows superimposed images of chromosomes, mi- 
crotubules, and nuclear envelope. In this figure, the spatial 
relationships of these three structures can be seen. The posi- 
tions of the partial nuclear envelope breakdown correspond 
to the location of the mitotic spindle (arrows in Fig. 8). Sig- 
nificantly, close location of chromosomes to the nuclear en- 
velope, with an indication of attachment, can be seen at the 
bottom half of the nucleus (examples indicated by arrow- 
heads in Fig. 8). 
Discussion 
We have analyzed the three-dimensional arrangement of 
chromosomes, the nuclear envelope, and microtubules from 
prophase to metaphase in Drosophila melanogaster syncy- 
tial blastoderm embryos. The arrangement of chromosomes was analyzed by three-dimensional, optical sectioning mi- 
croscopy both in fixed and living embryos; their spatial rela- 
tionships with microtubules and the nuclear envelope were 
examined by multiple-wavelength, optical sectioning micros: 
copy in fixed preparations. The time-lapse optical sectioning 
of living embryos not only acts as an ideal control for possi- 
ble artifacts in the fixed preparations but also provides the 
unique capability of observing the behavior of individual 
nuclei over time. On the other hand, the high-resolution opti- 
cal sectioning in fixed embryos complements the living data 
recorded by necessity at lower spatial resolution. These 
approaches have allowed us to reexamine mitotic events, 
paying special attention to the role that three-dimensional or- 
ganization plays in mitotic function. Our results have demon- 
strated that prometaphase chromosome congression takes 
place in a geometrically polarized fashion, progressing se- 
quentially as a wave from the top to the bottom of the nu- 
cleus. Furthermore, such polarized behavior of the chromo- 
somes is temporally and spatially coherent with mitotic 
spindle formation and nuclear envelope breakdown. The 
spatial and temporal patterns of chromosomes, mitotic spin- 
dles and the nuclear envelope occurring during the blasto- 
derm stage embryonic mitoses are shown schematically in 
Fig. 9. 
Arrangement of Chromosomes in Blastoderm Embryos 
The polarized configuration of interphase chromosomes 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2822 
Figure 5. Mitotic gradient in a fixed embryo. A small portion of a 
fixed embryo stained with DAPI is shown at four focal planes, each 
separated 1 #m along the focus direction, from the interior (bottom) 
to the surface (top) of the embryo. In this example, the mitotic gra- 
dient started at the right and proceeded through to the left (nuclei 
at the right are more advanced in mitosis). 
with centromeres and telomeres on each end of the nucleus 
has been inferred in a wide range of species (reviewed in 
Avivi and Feldman, 1980; Comming, 1980; Fussel, 1984), 
for example, by the use of laser irradiation of small regions 
of chromosomes (Cremer et al., 1982), or by radioactive 
labeling of late replication regions at centromeres and telo- 
meres (Fussel, 1975). In Drosophila melanogaster, the po- 
larized arrangement was demonstrated by directly tracing 
the three-dimensional paths of chromosomes within polytene 
nuclei (Mathog et al., 1984; Hochstrasser et al., 1986), or 
by using prematurely condensed chromosomes observed in 
oxygen-deprived embryos (Foe and Alberts, 1985). It should 
be noted that in syncytial blastoderm stage embryos, chro- 
mosomes are not only polarized but also have a defined geo- 
metrical orientation relative to the embryo surface. In inter- 
phase nuclei, centromeres are observed as several bright 
spots of centromeric heterochromatin clustered in a small re- gion near the embryo surface (Foe and Alberts, 1985; for 
similar observations in Drosophila virilis, see Ellison and 
Howard, 198 I). Correspondingly, asters of microtubules are 
formed and duplicated at the top of the nuclei near the em- 
bryo surface (Karr and Alberts, 1986). 
We have shown here that this aligned configuration of 
chromosomes is preserved during the transition from pro- 
phase to metaphase (see Fig. 9). The metaphase plate is 
formed as a wave of chromosome compaction, progressing 
from centromeres to telomeres, preserving the positions of 
centromeres and telomeres relative to the embryo surface. 
Thus, in Drosophila embryos, metaphase chromosomes are 
polarized in a parallel arrangement with centromeres closest 
to the embryo surface, whereas those in other well-studied 
species are radially arranged with centromeres toward the 
center and telomeres toward the periphery of the metaphase 
plate (Chaly and Brown, 1988; Belmont et al., 1989). How- 
ever in Kc cells, a cultured Drosophila cell line derived from 
embryos, chromosomes on the metaphase plate are radially 
arranged similarly to their mammalian counterparts (Swed- 
low, J. R., unpublished results). Therefore, the alignment of 
nuclear structures may be related to a cytoskeletal organiza- 
tion particular to blastoderm stage embryos and be impor- 
tant in the developmental process. 
The polarized centromere-telomere arrangement is gener- 
ally believed to be a relic of the configuration formed during 
anaphase chromosome movement. However, it is interesting 
to note that during the process of forming the metaphase 
plate, the combination of congression and condensation 
leaves the chromosomes straight and highly polarized. 
Hence it might be possible that polarization is developed and 
reinforced in both metaphase and anaphase, and subse- 
quently carries over to interphase. It should also be noted 
that in anaphase, the centromere-telomere orientation is 
parallel to the embryo surface and must rotate to resume the 
interphase upright orientation (see Fig. 9). Observations of 
nuclear behavior in living embryos show that unevenly 
spaced, divided nuclei are shuffled by a cytoplasmic motion 
at the transition from telophase to interphase, and reposi- 
tioned to an evenly spaced arrangement (Minden et al., 
1989). It is likely that the nuclear rotation takes place in ac- 
company with this extensive repositioning of the nuclei. 
Our analysis of the chromosome paths shows that, with the 
exception of telomeric association during prophase, homolo- 
gous chromosomes are distinctly separate from one another. 
Furthermore, our in situ hybridization experiments using a 
DNA probe for histone genes indicate that homologous 
chromosomes are also separate in interphase syncytial blas- 
toderm embryos (Hiraoka, Y., S. J. Parmelee, M. C. Rykow- 
ski, D. A. Agard, and J. W. Sedat, manuscript in prepara- 
tion). This apparently contradicts genetic experiments on 
transvection which suggest that homologous chromosomes 
are associated (Lewis, 1954; Green, 1959; Jack and Judd, 
1979; Gelbart, 1982). This contradiction can be reconciled 
by hypothesizing that the formation of homologous chromo- 
some association only occurs after the syncytial blastoderm 
stage. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that 
transvection has been, as yet, reported only in differentiated 
tissues (reviewed in Wu and Goldberg, 1989) and is sup- 
ported by our observations of in situ hybridization for his- 
tone genes indicating that the association of homologous 
Hiraoka ct al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2823 
Figure 6. Chromosome arrangement in the 
metaphase plate. (A) Surface contour model 
in stereo. The model was constructed from 
the three-dimensional intensity gradient. It is 
viewed from the embryo interior. (B) Side view 
of a model for traced chromosome paths. In the 
side view, the embryo surface is on the upper 
side of the figure. (C) Cross-section views of 
metaphase plate at two different focal planes, 
separated by 2/xm, corresponding to the posi- 
tions marked in R The edges of chromosomes 
are displayed as the intensity gradient. Each 
chromosome arm is labeled by the same num- 
ber in A and C. 
chromosomes occurs before gastrulation (Hiraoka, Y., S. J. 
Parmelee, M. C. Rykowski, D. A. Agard, and J. W. Sedat, 
manuscript in preparation). During the syncytial blastoderm 
stage, synchronous mitotic cycles are driven by maternal 
stores of transcripts. Once embryos become cellularized, 
marked changes in patterns of gene expression are known to 
occur with the onset of differentiation (Anderson and Len- 
gyel; 1979). This might be accompanied by changes of chro- 
mosome spatial organization. 
The association of telomeres has been reported in a wide 
range of organisms (reviewed in Ashley and Wagenaar, 1974; 
Dancis and Holmquist, 1979). It is unknown whether this 
phenomenon is a direct consequence of the telomeric DNA 
sequences (Young et al., 1983; reviewed in Blackburn and 
Szostak, 1984; Zakian, 1989; Blackburn, 1990) or an in- direct consequence of the tendency of telomeres to attach to 
the nuclear envelope (reviewed in Dancis and Holmquist, 
1979; Holmquist and Dancis, 1979; Young et al., 1983; 
Hochstrasser et al., 1986). The fact that telomeres are sepa- 
rated in metaphase when the nuclear envelope disappears 
may support the latter case. 
Coordination of the Polarized Events 
Our ability to identify chromosomes and define their ar- 
rangement within the simple, monolayer geometry of syn- 
chronously dividing nuclei greatly facilitated the analysis of 
the spatial relationship between chromosomes and other cel- 
lular components at defined mitotic stages. We infer from 
our results that the initial congression of centromeres is 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 11 l, 1990 2824 
Figure 7. Optical sections of em- 
bryos triply stained for chromo- 
somes, microtubules, and the nu- 
clear envelope. Optical sections 
were obtained at 0.2-#m focus in- 
tervals. Selected optical sections 
are displayed for chromosomes 
(A), microtubules (B), and nu- 
clear envelope (C) at four focal 
planes, each separated by 1 #m 
along the focus direction, from 
the interior (bottom) to the sur- 
face (top) of the embryo. Bar, 
5 #m. 
mediated by the mitotic spindle through the partially de- 
graded nuclear envelope. (In earlier studies, the geometric 
changes associated with this initial stage of partial nuclear 
envelope breakdown had been recognized as an invagination 
of the nuclear envelope on both sides of the metaphase plate; 
Fuchs et al., 1983). At this stage, chromosomes in the bot- 
tom half of the nucleus appear to be still anchored onto the 
nuclear envelope, generating a characteristic shape with a 
spherical bottom and a rectangular top (for a schematic dia- 
gram, see Fig. 9). As chromosomes sequentially detach 
from the nuclear envelope, they move to pack into the meta- 
phase plate. Although the majority of chromosome conden- 
sation has occurred during the period from interphase to prophase, chromosomes shorten by an additional 2-fold dur- 
ing prometaphase (Hiraoka, Y., unpublished results). This 
further condensation is generally considered to be distinct 
from the movement that defines congression. However, it is 
possible that chromosome condensation may provide the ac- 
tual driving force that pull the chromosome arms onto the 
plate. 
The geometrically polarized sequence of changes in nu- 
clear structures observed during the process of prometa- 
phase chromosome congression prompts us to hypothesize 
a wave of signals starting at the top of the nucleus and travel- 
ing through the nucleus to the bottom. The observed speed 
of this wave, 2 t~m/min, is much too slow for a diffusion- 
Hiraoka et al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2825 
Figure 8. Superimposed images of chromosomes, microtubules, 
and the nuclear envelope. Chromosomes, microtubules, and nu- 
clear envelope are displayed in blue, green, and red, respectively. 
The images were superimposed from the top three rows in Fig. 7. mediated process (for the diffusion of dextran of various 
sizes in cytoplasm; see Luby-Phelps et al., 1986), and sug- 
gests that the signal may actually transit along structures 
such as microtubules or intermediate filaments. An interest- 
ing alternative is that the processes of chromosome congres- 
sion and nuclear envelope breakdown may be processive, 
and that once initiated at the top of the nucleus, they both 
continue essentially independently until complete. 
The fact that preferential breakdown of the nuclear enve- 
lope occurs just where the mitotic spindle is formed suggests 
that nuclear envelope breakdown and mitotic spindle forma- 
tion are controlled locally and possibly by a common mecha- 
nism. Such a mechanism provides a reasonable candidate for 
initiating the wave. Because of its importance in regulating 
and coordinating mitotic cycle events, it is plausible that 
phosphorylation is involved in either the trigger or the 
propagated signal, or both. For example, both nuclear enve- 
lope breakdown and the microtubule-organizing capacity of 
centrosomes are likely to be regulated by phosphorylation 
(reviewed in Nurse, 1990). However, if phosphorylation 
were the key to the spatially-coordinated events described 
here, then one would expect to see a gradient of phosphory- 
lation within a single nucleus, for which there is, as yet, no 
evidence. 
It is unknown what molecular machines are required to 
maintain the geometrically-polarized organization of nuclear 
structures relative to the embryo surface, although it has 
been reported that changes in the organization of microtu- 
bules and actin filaments take place at the embryo cortex 
regions at the end of the nuclear cycle 9 when nuclei migrate 
to the embryo surface to form the monolayer (Karr and AI- 
berts, 1986). Observations have been reported indicating 
that nuclei that fail nuclear division, as a result of muta- 
tions (Sullivan et al., 1990) or chromosomal cross-linking 
(Minden et al., 1989; I-Iiraoka et al., 1989) move to the em- 
bryo interior while normal nuclei remain at the surface. 
Moreover, the uncoupling of behaviors of nuclei and mitotic 
apparatus has been demonstrated in mutant embryos de- 
ficient of nuclear division (Freeman et al., 1986) or in em- 
bryos in which nuclear DNA replication had been blocked 
by an inhibitor to DNA polymerase ot (Raft and Glover, 
1988). In those cases, centrosomes continue their duplica- 
tion and segregation without nuclear division or cytokinesis 
(Freeman et al., 1986; Raffand Glover, 1988; Sullivan et al., 
1990). 
Thus, it appears that there are mechanisms that engage 
nuclei in the proper position with the proper alignment, and 
that distinguish damaged nuclei and eliminate them from the 
developmental process. It is tempting to speculate that un- 
coupling of the well-coordinated nuclear processes results in 
the loss of the affected nuclei from the blastoderm layer. One 
implication of our observations is that the organized arrange- 
ment of chromosomes might facilitate coordinated interac- 
tions among chromosomes, mitotic apparatus, and the nu- 
clear envelope to ensure the rapid and yet precise mitoses 
at the syncytial blastoderm stage. 
We thank Dr. M. Gatti for providing his cytological maps of Drosophila 
melanogaster diploid chromosomes, Hans Chen for computer software de- 
velopment~ Jonathan Minden for his help in mieroinjecting embryos, and 
Michael Paddy for his help in spread chromosome preparations. We also 
thank Mary Rykowski, Hirohisa Masuda, Toknko Haraguchi, and Eliza- 
beth Blackburn for critical reading of the manuscripts. 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2826 
Embryo Surface 
f 
Cantromeras 
1 Telomares 
Intarphase Prophaaa Metaphase Anaphase Interphase Figure 9. Spatial arrangement 
of embryonic chromosomes in 
the mitotic cycle. Chromo- 
some arrangement during the 
mitotic cycle is shown relative 
to embryo surface. From in- 
terphase to metaphase, cen- 
tromeres are situated at one 
side of the nucleus near the 
embryo surface and telomeres 
at the other side. Metaphase 
plate is formed as a wave from 
the top to the bottom side. 
During the process of ana- 
phase chromosome separa- 
tion, chromosome arms are 
oriented parallel to the em- 
bryo surface and centromeres 
converge into a small region 
as they are pulled by the mi- 
totic spindles. By interphase, 
chromosomes rotate to recover 
the upright centromere-telomere orientation. Based on analyses of mitosis in living embryos, the durations of prometaphase, metaphase, 
and anaphase are '~2, 3, and 1.7 min, respectively, while the total duration of mitotic cycle is 22 min at 23°C in the 13th nuclear cycle 
(similar values are reported in Minden et al., 1989). Lower panel is a schematic diagram of chromosomes (lightly shaded; darkly shaded 
circles, centromeres), nuclear envelope (cross-hatched), and mitotic spindle (thick lines) during prometaphase. The top portion of the 
nuclear envelope breaks down first; mitotic spindle is formed through the partially degraded nuclear envelope. Chromosomes are packed 
into the metaphase plate as a wave from the top to the bottom as the nuclear envelope sequentially breaks down. 
We thank Dr. M. Gatti for providing his cytological maps of Drosophila 
melanogaster diploid chromosomes, Hans Chen for computer software de- 
velopment, Jonathan Minden for his help in microinjecting embryos, and 
Michael Paddy for his help in spread chromosome preparations. We also 
thank Mary Rykowski, Hirohisa Masuda, Tokuko Haraguchi, and Eliza- 
beth Blackburn for critical reading of the manuscripts. 
This work was supported by grants from National Institute of Health to 
J. W. Sedat (GM-25101) and D. A. Agard (GM-31627). J. W. Sedat and 
D. A. Agard are Howard Hughes Investigators. D. A. Agard is also a Na- 
tional Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator. Y. Hiraoka was 
supported by Damon Runyon-Walter Winchell Cancer Research Fund Fel- 
lowship DRG903. 
Received for publication 16 July 1990 and in revised form 5 September 
1990. 
References 
Agard, D. A. 1984. Optical sectioning microscopy: cellular architecture in 
three dimensions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 13:191-219. 
Agard, D. A., and J. W. Sedat. 1983. Three-dimensional architecture ofa poly- 
tene nucleus. Nature (Lond.). 302:676-681. 
Agard, D. A., Y. Hiraoka, and J. W. Sedat. 1988. Three-dimensional light mi- 
croscopy of diploid Drosophila chromosomes. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton. 
10:18-27. 
Agard, D. A., Y. Hiraoka, P. Shaw, and J. W. Sedat. 1989. Fluorescence mi- 
croscopy in three dimensions. Methods Cell Biol. 30:353-377. 
Aikens, R. S., D. A. Agard, and J. W. Sedat. 1989. Solid-state imagers for 
microscopy. Methods Cell BioL 29:291-313. 
Anderson, K. V., and J. A. Lengyel. 1979. Rates of synthesis of major classes 
of RNA in Drosophila embryos. Dev. Biol. 70:217-231. 
Ashley, T., and E. B. Wagenaar. 1974. Telomeric association of gametic and 
somatic chromosomes in diploid and autotetraploid Ornithogahm virens. 
Can. J. Genet. Cytol. 16:61-76. 
Avivi, L., and M. Feldman. 1980. Arrangement of chromosomes in the inter- 
phase nucleus of plants. Hum. Genet. 55:281-295. 
Belmont, A. S., J. W. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 1987. A three-dimensional ap- 
proach to mitotic chromosome structure: Evidence for a complex hierarchi- 
cal organization. J. Cell Biol. 105:77-92. 
Belmont, A. S., M. B. Braunfeld, J. W. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 1989. Large- 
scale chromatin structural domains within mitotic and interphase chromo- 
somes in vivo and in vitro. Chromosoma (Bed.). 98:129-143. 
Blackburn, E. H. 1990. Telomeres: structure and synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 265:5919-5921. 
Blackburn, E. H., and J. W. Szostak. 1984. The molecular structure of centro- 
meres and telomeres. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 53:163-194. 
Brakenhoff, G. J., E. A. van Spronsen, H. T. van der Voort, and N. Narminga. 
1989. Three-dimensional confocal microscopy. Methods Cell Biol. 30: 
379-398. 
Chaly, N., and D. L. Brown. 1988. The prometaphase configuration and chro- 
mosome order in early mitosis. J. Cell Sci. 91:325-335. 
Chen, H., J. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 1989. Manipulation, display, and analysis 
of three-dimensional biological images. In The Handbook of Biological Con- 
focal Microscopy. J. Pawley, editor. IMP Press, Madison, Wisconsin. 
127-135. 
Comming, D. E. 1980. Arrangement ofchromatin in the nucleus. Hum. Genet. 
53:131-143. 
Cremer, T., C. Cremer, H. Baumann, E.-K. Luedke, K. Sperling, V. Teuber, 
and C. Zorn. 1982. Rabl's model of the interphase chromosome arrangement 
tested in chinese hamster cells by premature chromosome condensation and 
laser-UV microbeam experiments. Hum. Genet. 60:46-56. 
Dancis, B. M., and G. P. Holmquist. 1979. Telomere replication and fusion 
in eukaryotes. J. Theor. Biol. 78:211-224. 
Ellison, J. R., and G. C. Howard. 1981. Non-random position of the AT rich 
DNA sequences in early embryos of Drosophila virilis. Chromosoma 
(Berl.). 83:555-561. 
Fay, F. S., W. Carrington, and K. E. Fogarty. 1989. Three-dimensional molec- 
ular distribution in single cells analysed using the digital imaging micro- 
scope. J. Microsc. 153:133-149. 
Foe, V. E., and B. M. Alberts. 1983. Studies of nuclear and cytoplasmic be- 
havior during the five mitotic cycles that precede gasturation in Drosophila 
embryogenesis. J. Cell Sci. 61:31-70. 
Foe, V. E., and B. M. Alberts. 1985. Reversible chromosome condensation in- 
duced in Drosophila embryos by anoxia: visualization of interphase nuclear 
organization. J. Cell Biol. 100:1623-1636. 
Freeman, M., C. Nusslein-Volhard, and D. M. Glover. 1986. The dissociation 
of nuclear and centrosomal division in gnu, a mutation causing giant nuclei 
in Drosophila. Cell. 46:457--468. 
Fuchs, J.-P., H. Giloh, C.-H. Kuo, H. Saumweber, and J. W. Sedat. 1983. 
Nuclear structure: determination of the fate of the nuclear envelope in 
Drosophila during mitosis using monoclonal antibodies. J. Cell. Sci. 64: 
331-349. 
Fussel, C. P. 1975. The position ofinterphase chromosomes and late replicating 
DNA in centromere and telomere regions of Allium cepa L. Chromosoma 
(Berl.). 50:201-210. 
Fussel, C. P. 1984. Interphase chromosome order: a proposal. Genetica (The 
Hague). 62:193-201. 
Gatti, M., and S. PimpineUi. 1983. Cytological and genetic analysis of the Y 
chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster. I. Organization of the fertility fac- 
tors. Chromosoma (Berl.). 88:349-373. 
Hiraoka et al. Spatial Coordination of Polarized Nuclear Events 2827 
Gatti, M., S. PimpineUi, and G. Santini. 1976. Characterization of Drosophila 
heteroehromatin. I. Staining and decondensation with Hoechst 33258 and 
quinaerine. Chromosoma (Berl.). 57:351-375. 
Gelbart, W. M. 1982. Synapsis-dependent allelic complementation at the de- 
eapentaplegic gene complex in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA. 79:2636-2640. 
Glover, D. M. 1989. Mitosis in Drosophila. jr Cell Sci. 92:137-146. 
Green, M. M. 1959. Spatial and functional properties of pseudoalleles at the 
white loons in Drosophila melanogaster. Heredity. 13:303-315. 
Gurley, L. R., J. A. D'Anna, S. S. Barham, L. L. Deaven, and R. A. Tobey. 
1978. Historic phosphorylation and chromatin structure during mitosis in 
Chinese hamster cells. Eur. J. Biochem. 84:1-15. 
Halfer, C. 1981. lnterstain heteroehromatin polymorphisms in Drosophila me- 
lanogaster. Chromosoma (Berl. ). 84:195-206. 
Heald, R., and F. McKeon. 1990. Mutations of phosphorylation sites in lamin 
A that prevent nuclear lamina disassembly in mitosis. Cell. 61:579-589. 
Hiraoka, Y., J. W. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 1987. The use of a charge-coupled 
device for quantitative optical microscopy of biological structures. Science 
(Wash. DC.). 238:36--41. 
Hiranka, Y., J. S. Minden, J. R. Swedlow, J. W. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 
1989. Focal points for chromosome condensation and dacondensation from 
three-dimensional in vivo time-lapse microscopy. Nature (Lond.). 342: 
293-296. 
Hiraoka, Y., J. W. Sedat, and D. A. Agard. 1990. Determination of three- 
dimensional imaging properties of a light microscope system: Partial confo- 
cal behavior in epifluorescence microscopy. Biophys. J. 57:325-333. 
Hochstrasser, M., D. Mathog, Y. Gruenhaum, H. Saumweber, and J. W. 
Sedat. 1986. Spatial organization of chromosomes in the salivary gland 
nuclei of Drosophila melanogaster. J. Cell Biol. 102:112-123. 
Holmquist, G. 1975. Hoechst 33258 fluorescent staining of Drosophila chromo- 
somes. Chromosoma (Berl.). 49:333-356. 
Holmquist, G. P., and B. Dancis. 1979. Telomere replication, kinetochore or- 
ganization, and satellite DNA evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
76:4566-4570. 
Jack, J. W., and B. H. Judd. 1979. Allelic pairing and gene regulation: a model 
for the zeste-white interaction in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA. 76:1368-1372. 
Karr, T. L., and B. M. Alberts. 1986. Organization of the cytoskeleton in early 
Drosophila embryos. J. Cell Biol. 102:1494-1509. 
Kanfmann, B. P. 1934. Somatic mitoses of Drosophila melanogaster. J. Mor- 
phol. 56:125-155. 
Kilmartin, J. V., B. Wright, and C. Milstein. 1982. Rat monoclonal antibodies 
derived by using a new nonsecreting rat cell line. J. Cell Biol. 93:576-582. 
Kuo, C. H., H. Giloh, A. B. Blumenthal, and J. W. Sedat. 1982. A library 
of monoolonal antibodies to nuclear proteins from Drosophila melanogaster 
embryos. Exp. Cell Res. 142:141-154. 
Lewis, E. B. 1954. The theory and application of a new method of detecting 
chromosomal rearrangements in Drosophila melanogaster. Am. Nat. 88: 
225-239. 
Luby-Phelps, K., D. L. Taylor, and F. Lanni. 1986. Probing the structure of 
cytoplasm. J. Cell Biol. 102:2015-2022. 
Mathog, D. 1985. Light microscope based analysis of three-dimensional struc- 
ture: applications to the study of Drosophila salivary gland nuclei. II. AI- gorithms for model analysis. J. Microsc. 137:253-273. 
Mathog, D., M. Hoohstrasser, Y. Grnenhaum, H. Saumweber, and J. W. 
Sedat. 1984. Characteristic folding pattern of the polytene chromosomes in 
Drosophila salivary gland nuclei. Nature (Lond.). 308:414--421. 
Matthews, H., and E. Bradbury. 1978. The role of histone H1 phosphorylation 
in the cell cycle: turbidity studies of HI-DNA interactions. Exp. Cell Res. 
111:343-351. 
Minden, J. S., D. A. Agard, J. W. Sedat, and B. M. Alberts. 1989. Direct cell 
linage analysis in Drosophila melanogaster by time-lapse, three-dimensional 
optical microscopy of living embryos. J. Cell Biol. 109:505-516. 
Mitchinson, T. J., and J. W. Sedat. 1983. Localization of antigenic deter- 
minants in whole Drosophila embryos. Dev. Biol. 99:261-264. 
Nurse, P. 1990. Universal control mechanism regulating onset of M-phase. Na- 
ture (Lond.). 344:503-508. 
Oud, J. L., A. Mans, G. J. Brakenhoft, H. T. M. van der Voort, E. A. van 
Spronsen, and N. Nanninga. 1989. Three-dimensional chromosome ar- 
rangement of Crepis capillaris in mitotic prnphase and anaphase as studied 
by confooal scanning laser microscopy. J. Cell Sci. 92:329-339. 
Paddy, M. R., A. S. Belmont, H. Saumweber, D. A. Agard, and J. W. Sedat. 
1990. Interphase nuclear envelope lamins form a discontinuous network in 
interphase nuclei which interacts with only a fraction of the chromatin in the 
nuclear periphery. Cell. 62:89-106. 
Peter, M., J. Nakagawa, M. Dorde, J. C. Labb~, and E. A. Nigg. 1990. In 
vitro disassembly of the nuclear lamina and M phase-specific phosphoryla- 
tion of lamins by cdc2 kinase. Cell. 61:591-602. 
Pimpinelli, S., G. Santini, and M. Gatti. 1976. Characterization of Drosophila 
heterochromatin. II. C- and N-banding. Chromosoma (Berl.). 57:377-386. 
Raft, J. W., and D. M. Glover. 1988. Nuclear and cytoplasmic mitotic cycles 
continue in Drosophila embryos in which DNA synthesis is inhibited with 
aphidicolin. J. Cell Biol. 107:2009-2019. 
Rawlins, D. J., and P. J. Shaw. 1988. Three-dimensional organization of chro- 
mosomes of Crepis capillaris by optical tomography. J. Cell Sci. 91: 
401-414. 
Sullivan, W., J. S. Minden, and B. Alberts. 1990. daughterless-abo-like, a 
Drosophila maternal-effect mutation that exhibits abnormal centrosome 
separation during the late blastderm divisions. Development. In press. 
Vandr6, D. D., and G. G. Borisy. 1985. The interphase-mitosis transformation 
of the microtubule network in mammalian cells. In Cell Motility: Mechanism 
and Regulation. H. Ishikawa, S. Hatano, H. Sato, editors. University of 
Tokyo Press, Japan. 389-401. 
Ward, G. E., and M. W. Kirschner. 1990. Identification of cell cycle-regulated 
phosphorylation sites on nuclear lamin C. Cell. 61:561-577. 
Wu, C. T., and M. L. Goldberg. 1989. The Drosophila zeste gene and transvec- 
tion. Trends Genetics. 5:189-194. 
Young, B. S., A. Pession, K. L. Traverse, C. French, andM. L. Pardue. 1983. 
Telomere region in Drosophila share complex DNA sequences with pericen- 
tric heterochrnmatin. Cell. 34:85-94. 
Zakian, V. A. 1989. Structure and function of telomeres. Annu. Rev. Genet. 
23:579-604. 
Zalokar, M., and I. Erk. 1976. Division and migration of nuclei during early 
embryogenesis of Drosophila melanogaster. J. Microsc. Biol. Cell. 25: 
97-106. 
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 111, 1990 2828 
