polymers 
Review
Cracks in Polymer Spherulites: Phenomenological
Mechanisms in Correlation with Ring Bands
Eamor M. Woo1,* and Graecia Lugito1
Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, No. 1, University Road, Tainan 701-01,
Taiwan; graecia_lugito@yahoo.com
*Correspondence: emwoo@mail.ncku.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-6275-7575 (ext. 62670)
Academic Editor: Alexander Böker
Received: 18 July 2016; Accepted: 30 August 2016; Published: 2 September 2016
Abstract: This article reviews possible mechanisms of various crack forms and their likely correlations
with interior crystal lamellae and discontinuous interfaces in spherulites. Complex yet periodically
repetitive patterns of cracks in spherulites are beyond attributions via differences in thermal expansion
coefﬁcients, which would cause random and irregular cracks in the contract direction only. Cracks in
brittle polymers such as poly( L-lactic acid) (PLLA), or poly(4-hydroxyl butyrate) (PHB), or more
ductile polymers such as poly(trimethylene terephthalate) (PTT) are examined and illustrated,
although for focus and demonstration, more discussions are spent on PLLA. The cracks can take
many shapes that bear extremely striking similarity to the ring-band or lamellar patterns in the same
spherulites. Crack patterns may differ signiﬁcantly between the ring-banded and ringless spherulites,
suggesting that the cracks may be partially shaped and governed by interfaces of lamellae and
how the lamellar crystals assemble themselves in spherulites. Similarly, with some exceptions,
most of the cracks patterns in PHB or PTT are also highly guided by the lamellar assembly in either
ring-banded spherulites or ringless spherulites. Some exceptions of cracks in spherulites deviating
from the apparent crystal birefringence patterns do exist; nevertheless, discontinuous interfaces in
the initial lamellae neat the nuclei center might be hidden by top crystal over-layers of the spherulites,
which might govern crack propagation.
Keywords: crack patterns; PLLA; ring-banded spherulites
Preface
To sum up as a preface, the crack types in polymer spherulites may be grouped into three categories:
(A) Tri-branch star (or sometimes four-branch star) short cracks that usually occur in nuclei centers.
Such crack pattern (tri-branch) is caused by parallel aligned sheaf-like lamellae orienting
perpendicularly to substrates. The tri-branch cracks (cleaved usually when exposed to solvent or
upon etching) are parallel to the shish crystal lamellae in nuclei centers.
(B) Radial short cracks that are parallel to the lamellae bundles radially-grown in spherulites.
Such short radial cracks are indications of interfaces between the radially oriented lamellae
in spherulites. These radial short cracks are usually segregated periodically by the circumferential
cracks in the same spherulites.
(C) Circumferential long cracks that may assume four major patterns: (1) circular and concentric;
(2) clockwise or counterclockwise spirals (similar to Archimedean spirals); (3) hexagonal shapes;
or (4) hexagonal in inner portion, but circular in outer portion. Such long and circumferential
cracks are often coinciding with the ring patterns commonly seen in spherulites.
Conventionally, cracks are dealt by thermal stress and contraction upon cooling from Tcto ambient
(DT) owing to directional differences in thermal expansion (CTE) in the spherulites. Such models took
Polymers 2016 ,8, 329; doi:10.3390/polym8090329 www.mdpi.com/journal/polymersPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 2 of 25
account of only the directional differences in radial vs. tangential directions of spherulites, but did not
look into the detailed lamellae assembly habits. As examples, PLLA spherulites have been found to
exhibit as many as four crack types of different directions and patterns, which made it difﬁcult to be
explained simply by directional CTE. It should be emphasized here that differences in coefﬁcients of
thermal expansion certainly are present in any materials upon temperature changes; however, cracks
of ﬁxed patterns indicate that there might be other factors beyond the CTE differences. Mechanisms
beyond the contraction via CTE differences are probed.
1. Introduction
Using gallstone spherulite crystals as models for covering all spherulites of organic compounds
or polymers, Burns [ 1] illustrated relationships between stresses and cracks. Spherulites in general
have spherical symmetry, but crystal properties are anisotropic in the radial and tangential directions.
Cracks and ring-banded morphology in semicrystalline polymers have been extensively investigated
and widely reported in the literature. The presence of large-size spherulites in a polymeric material can
be the cause of brittleness, mainly via the formation of cracks that are expected to have negative impact
on properties. Poly( L-lactic acid) (PLLA), like poly(4-hydroxy butyrate) (PHB), is a biodegradable
polymer that is known to be brittle, possible owing to presence of cracks formed in cooling. Being brittle,
they both are more prone to cracks-induced property deterioration. The optical sign of PLLA
spherulites is of negative birefringence [ 2–4], while that of PHB is of positive birefringence [ 4,5].
However, both biodegradable polymers (PLLA and PHB) are capable of forming ring-banded
spherulites when crystallized at suitable Tcs, and developing various patterns of cracks upon cooling
from Tcs to ambient. PHB forms ring-banded spherulites more readily when melt-crystallized within
a suitable range of Tcs (usually Tc= 9020C). By contrast to PHB, PLLA is less distinct in showing
ring-banded patterns in melt-crystallization. Formation of ring bands in PLLA can be inﬂuenced
by some kinetic constraints, such as solution and melt vs. cold crystallization. In much earlier
reports on neat PLLA, most investigators claimed that ring-band behavior could be observed only
in solution-crystallized ﬁlms, and not in melt-crystallized ones [ 3]. As examples, Sarasua et al. [ 6],
and Gazano et al. [ 7] observed only ringless spherulites of PLLA from melt crystallization. Later,
Xu et al. [ 8] demonstrated that ring-banded spherulites in neat PLLA could be obtained via cooling
schemes, but isothermal melt-crystallization from the melt typically led to ringless spherulites. PLLA
samples melted for longer time and PLLA grades with lower Mws and melting points are more likely
to form ring-banded spherulites, as well as developing apparent cracks. The maximum temperature
(Tmax) polymer melts are held before quenching for melt-crystallization at a Tcmay also inﬂuence
the spherulite patterns; this is to say that complete melting to erase the crystalline residues in PLLA
may inﬂuence the tendency of formation of ring-banded spherulites. Moreover, Yasuniwa et al. [ 9]
have reported that ring-banded spherulites in PLLA occur at Tc= 121–131C by melt-crystallization.
Ring-banded PLLA spherulites may be seen when melt-crystallized at 125~140C. However, at same
Tc, ringless PLLA spherulites are resulted when the samples are subjected to cold-crystallization rather
than melt-crystallization [ 10]. Apparently, behavior of ring bands in PLLA and many polymers had
remained to be ellusive for a long time.
PHB has a chemical structure similar to PLLA; thus, it is informative to compare the spherulite
morphologies of these two polymers especially in terms of banding and cracking behavior. Both PLLA
and PHB crystallize into large-size spherulites in virgin forms. Behavior of cracks in crystallized PLLA
or PHB has attracted attention of many investigators. In the case of PHB, two types of cracks have been
reported: radial and circumferential cracks. Barham and Keller [ 5], who pioneered work on PHB cracks,
have theorized that such circumferential cracks in PHB might have originated from the stress induced
by the difference in thermal expansion coefﬁcients (CTE) between the radial and circumferential
directions during cooling process. Many investigators reported that crack formation in polymers
occurs sometimes during crystallization, cooling processes, or by contacting with a solvent [ 11–13].
Other investigators, such as Martinez-Salazar et al. [ 14], have explained that the radial expansionPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 3 of 25
coefﬁcient is much greater than the circumferential one; thus, they theorized that a large tensile stress
in the radial direction during the cooling process may be responsible. The result is circumferential
cracks in spherulites. Nevertheless, an opposed question should be raised: lamellae in spherulites are
grown and oriented in the radial direction with many lamellae being interfaced in the lateral direction;
then, how can “radial” CTE be larger that circumferential CTE? That is, an alternative mechanism is
necessary if this opposed question cannot feasibly answered.
In addition, complexity in cracks in polymers may be further puzzled by presence of glass
substrates on samples. Hobbs et al. [ 15] have observed circumferential cracks during growth of PHB
spherulites between two glass surfaces and found ﬁne circles on PHB spherulites differing from the
coarse shape of the cracks. On same PHB cracks, Xu et al. [ 16] proposed that those ﬁne circles as
“terraces” are resulted from instability of the moving boundaries of the conﬁned molten ﬁlm. Polymer
samples crystallized with free top surface or conﬁned in two glass slides may inﬂuence the cracks.
Fraschini et al. [ 17] have discussed that circumferential cracks can also appear in ringless spherulites of
PLLA in the constrained samples crystallized between glass slides only. As PLLA ﬁlms are deposited
on different substrates (glass, quartz, and Kapton), similar cracks are present upon cooling as long as
polymer ﬁlms are crystallized between two substrates. He et al. [ 18] have observed both circumferential
and hexagonal cracks in ringless spherulites of PLLA melt-crystallized at 135C after quenching in
liquid nitrogen, and they proposed that rhythmic growth and thermal shrinkage being the two main
factors accounting for formation of periodic cracks.
In addition to neat polymers, cracks in polymer blends have also been reported. Recently, the crack
behavior of PLLA in PHB/PLLA blend or racemic or non-equimolar PLLA/poly( D-lactic acid) (PDLA)
complex systems [ 19] were investigated. For the PHB/PLLA binary crystalline/crystalline blend,
Woo et al. [20] observed that radial cracks were found to aggregate on the circumferential bright bands
(ridge band) but never on the dark bands (valley band) of spherulites, which are similar to those in neat
PLLA. In the PHB/PLLA blend, crystallization takes place sequentially; the interlamellar structuring of
PLLA at primary crystallization is superimposed by the PHB crystals at later stage, resulting in cracks
patterns roughly governed by the lamellar assembly of PLLA (primary crystallization). These radial
cracks, not circumferentially aligned, cannot be adequately interpreted by the temperature-induced
coefﬁcients of thermal expansion (CTE) upon cooling, as proposed earlier by Keller et al. [ 14] or
Hobbs et al. [15]. In the non-equimolar PLLA/PDLA complex system, unmelted sc-PLA crystals serve
as nuclei for later-crystallized PLLA [19].
Cracks in crystallized spherulites, like ring bands in poly( L-lactic acid) (PLLA), PHB,
poly(trimethylene terephthalate) (PTT), and many other polymers have initiated objectives for
this paper. Although cracks in polymers had long been attributed to stress differences between
the circumferential and radial contractions are responsible; yet, many other factors may be at
work beyond simple thermal contraction differences in two directions. Contraction owing to CTE
differences in the radial vs. transverse directions may apply to explain the presence of smooth circular
circumferential cracks in the ringless PLLA spherulites. However, CTE alone is not sufﬁcient to
explain the simultaneous presence of short radial cracks and dual circular cracks in the ring-banded
spherulites. Mechanisms of cracks in polymer spherulites including PLLA have to be modiﬁed and
updated, by realizing that there exist many potentially discontinuous interfaces between lamellae
or their bundles in the radial and circumferential directions within the spherulites. This article
will further expound about the possible sites of discontinuity and interfaces in the crystals of
a ring-banded or ringless spherulite, and how these interfaces may act as weak spots of separation
during cooling-induced contraction.
Typically, the spherulites in crystallized polymers show cracks upon cooling; yet in many
circumstances, the ring-band morphology, and crystal lamellae therein, of the PLLA or PHB spherulites
could be parallel to the crack patterns. This fact indicates that crystal lamellae assembly in spherulites,
interfaces between the lamellae bundles, and their orientation patterns at speciﬁc Tccan further
determine the formation and patterns of cracks upon cooling from Tcto ambient. For widerPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 4 of 25
coverage, another ring-banded and crack-prone polymer, poly(trimethylene terephthalate) (PTT),
is also discussed. The complexity between optical ring-band patterns and mechanical cracks is yet to be
investigated in details, and rarely any reports have been dedicated to the issue of connection between
the two critical phenomena in crystallized spherulites. Correlations between the cracks and ring-band
morphology in spherulites of PLLA or other polymers were attempted in this study. This article aimed
at interpretations based on phenomenological mechanisms of cracks in polymer spherulites that might
have intimate correlation with ring bands.
Some reports in the classical literature tended to view the lamellae crystals in ring-banded
spherulites as continuous spiral twist single-crystals orderly and synchronously packed to form
optically birefringent patterns as elaborated in a review article by Lotz and Cheng [ 21], who continued
and extended the original models much earlier proposed by Keller [ 22], and Keith and Padden [23,24] ,
respectively. Such views of continuous spiral-twist lamellae, however, are not essential and perhaps
become less practical based on several recent solid evidence from studies taking alternative approaches
and with aids of recent advancement in instrument [ 25–28]. The intricate novel views on lamellae
assembly in ring bands could shed new lights helping to understand the cracks in spherulites.
By shedding new lights on such possible correlations, mechanisms on cracks can be further clariﬁed.
2. Cracks in Ring-Banded vs. Ringless PLLA Spherulites
Cracks in constrained (free top surface) vs. unconstrained samples (sandwiched between
two substrates) of LMw-PLLA ( Mw= 11k) can be signiﬁcantly different in ring bands, which
correspondingly alter the cracks in spherulites upon cooling [ 29]. Using free surface vs. top
conﬁnement on PLLA ﬁlms during crystallization, this example demonstrates that crack patterns
vary with respect to ring bands. PLLA ﬁlms upon crystallization with top conﬁnement develop
ring bands. Cracks also vary with respect to these two situations. Unconstrained PLLA samples
upon crystallization do not show ring-banded spherulites; yet, they can show cracks upon cooling.
Nevertheless, the cracks in ringless PLLA spherulites (free surfaces) differ completely with those in
ring-banded PLLA spherulites (top-covered ﬁlms). These facts suggest that as the lamellae and their
assembly differ in spherulites (ringless vs. ring-banded), cracks may differ correspondingly.
Figure 1 shows that all PLLA ( Mw= 11k) spherulites are ringless (ﬁlm on glass substrate,
uncovered) when crystallized at Tc= (Figure 1a) 120, (Figure 1b) 125, (Figure 1c) 130, and (Figure 1d)
135C, respectively, and cooled to ambient temperature. Note that the tri-branch star-like cracks
at nuclei center are universally present in all PLLA samples crystallized at low or high Tcs.
O’Donohue, et al. [30] reported that even in natural gallstone crystals (taken from clinical gallbladders),
there are tri-branch cracks (nick-named as “Mercedes-Benz sign” by authors), which are similar to those
in the crystallized PLLA spherulites shown in this ﬁgure. Figure 1 further shows that circumferential
cracks in PLLA(11k) spherulites apparently are in the uncovered/unconstrained samples (free top
surfaces). One can see clearly that the cracks in the ringless PLLA spherulites change in a systematic
trend (circular concentric to irregular circumferential, then ﬁnally to truncated zigzag arcs) as T c
is increased from low to high (120 to 135C). The lamellae in high Tc-crystallized (135C) are
apparently much coarser than those crystallized at lower Tc, and they tend to have discontinuity
between the lamellae in the radial direction, leading to discontinuous interfaces prone to be ruptured
into visible cracks upon cooling-induced contraction. An earlier report by Fraschini et al. [ 17] claimed
that circumferential cracks appeared only in ringless spherulites of PLLA that are crystallized in
unconstrained samples. Our updated studies [ 29,31,32] have shown that, as a matter of fact, PLLA
spherulites of ringless lamellar patterns could display circumferential crack types, regardless of
constraints or not.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 5 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 5 of 25 
 
Figure 1.  Cracks upon cooling from Tc a s  r e v e a l e d  i n  o p t i c a l  m i c r o s c o p y  m o r p h o l o g y  o f  P L L A  
spherulites crystallized with no top cover (unconstrained) at Tc: (a) 120 °C; ( b) 125 °C; ( c) 130 °C; and 
(d) 135 °C. Reproduced from Ref. [29] with permission from Springer (scale bar = 50 μm in all graphs). 
Top-covered PLLA films display entirely differe nt patterns of cracks. Figure 2 shows POM and 
OM morphology of PLLA(11k) films cr ystallized with a top cover at Tc ranging from 120 to 135 °C, 
where distinct ring-banded spherulites appear at Tc = 125 and 130 °C, respectively. For the samples 
crystallized at 120 °C or 135 °C, the PLLA spherulites are ringless with smooth lamellae of fine and 
thin textures. Note that for thes e two ringless PLLA spherulites ( Tc = 120 and 135 °C, respectively), 
the cracks are correspondingly similar to those seen  in the ringless PLLA spherulites discussed in 
Figure 1. However, for samples crystallized at 12 5 and 130 °C, the PLLA spherulites show distinct 
ring bands with alternating bright and dark bands of  the rings, with the dark bands apparently owing 
to light extinction. These ring-ban ded PLLA samples crystallized at Tc = 125 and 130 °C, upon being 
cooled to ambient, develop cracks (short radial cracks + twin circumferential cracks) that are 
dramatically different from those in the ring less PLLA spherulites crystallized at same Tc = 125 and 
130 °C shown in Figure 1. Note carefully that there are actually “dual-rings”, whose positions roughly coincide with the optical dark-bright transitions of  alternating bands in the ring-banded spherulites. 
More precisely, the twin circumferential cracks ar e located and coincide with the boundaries of the 
bright and dark bands. For PLLA films crystallized at any T
c with or without top confinement, the 
lamellae there in the ring-banded spherulites or ri ngless ones are intimately correlated to the crack 
types formed during cooling from Tc to ambient. 
Figure 1. Cracks upon cooling from Tcas revealed in optical microscopy morphology of PLLA
spherulites crystallized with no top cover (unconstrained) at Tc: (a) 120C; (b) 125C; (c) 130C; and
(d) 135C. Reproduced from Ref. [ 29] with permission from Springer (scale bar = 50 m in all graphs).
Top-covered PLLA ﬁlms display entirely different patterns of cracks. Figure 2 shows POM
and OM morphology of PLLA(11k) ﬁlms crystallized with a top cover at Tcranging from 120 to
135C, where distinct ring-banded spherulites appear at Tc= 125 and 130C, respectively. For the
samples crystallized at 120C or 135C, the PLLA spherulites are ringless with smooth lamellae
of ﬁne and thin textures. Note that for these two ringless PLLA spherulites ( Tc= 120 and 135C,
respectively), the cracks are correspondingly similar to those seen in the ringless PLLA spherulites
discussed in Figure 1. However, for samples crystallized at 125 and 130C, the PLLA spherulites
show distinct ring bands with alternating bright and dark bands of the rings, with the dark bands
apparently owing to light extinction. These ring-banded PLLA samples crystallized at Tc= 125 and
130C, upon being cooled to ambient, develop cracks (short radial cracks + twin circumferential
cracks) that are dramatically different from those in the ringless PLLA spherulites crystallized at
same Tc= 125 and 130C shown in Figure 1. Note carefully that there are actually “dual-rings”,
whose positions roughly coincide with the optical dark-bright transitions of alternating bands in the
ring-banded spherulites. More precisely, the twin circumferential cracks are located and coincide with
the boundaries of the bright and dark bands. For PLLA ﬁlms crystallized at any Tcwith or without
top conﬁnement, the lamellae there in the ring-banded spherulites or ringless ones are intimately
correlated to the crack types formed during cooling from Tcto ambient.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 6 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 6 of 25 
 
Figure 2.  Cracks upon cooling from Tc a s  r e v e a l e d  i n  o p t i c a l  m i c r o s c o p y  m o r p h o l o g y  o f  P L L A  
spherulites crystallized with a top cover at Tc: (a) 120 °C; ( b) 125 °C; ( c) 130 °C; and ( d) 135 °C. 
Reproduced from Ref. [29] with perm ission from Springer (scale bar = 50 μm in all graphs). 
Cracks and their formation in spherulites may be influenced by the crystallinity or Mws, and, 
thus, brittleness of polymers. Using PLLA grades of three different Mws (11k, 120k, and 258k) as 
examples, Woo et al. [31] have shown that multiple types of cracks, i.e., circumferential and/or short 
radial cracks, are massively present in low-molecular-weight PLLA (LM w-PLLA-11k), which has a 
high crystallinity and probably the least mechanical strength. Upon cooling the LM w-PLLA-11k from 
most crystallization temperatures, cracks easily  form and the crack patterns are dependent on the 
lamellar morphology within the spherulites as already discussed in Figures 1 and 2. As proven by Woo et al. [31], the crystallinity of PLLA of differ ent grades varies from 73% (measured by DSC) for 
LM
w-PLLA-11k to 47% for HM w-PLLA-258k. With a higher M w-PLLA-120k, hexagonal cracks, rather 
than circular circumferential ones, occur sponta neously during cooling pr ocess to ambient after 
crystallized at high Tc = 135 °C. The crack pattern of PLLA-120k films (either with or without a top 
cover) crystallized at 135 °C is of a hexagonal geometry. Although it is intuitive to attribute this hexagonal pattern of cracks to hexagonal (110) growth plane, as He et al. did [18]; nevertheless, it is difficult to rationale why at other T
cs or for other PLLA grades, the cracks in spherulites are circular, 
instead of hexagonal. We will further expound the hexagonal-shape cracks later by correlating with 
hexagonal ring bands in PLLA spherulites. For even higher M w-PLLA (HM w-PLLA-258k), no cracks 
Figure 2. Cracks upon cooling from Tcas revealed in optical microscopy morphology of PLLA
spherulites crystallized with a top cover at Tc: (a) 120C; (b) 125C; (c) 130C; and ( d) 135C.
Reproduced from Ref. [29] with permission from Springer (scale bar = 50 m in all graphs).
Cracks and their formation in spherulites may be inﬂuenced by the crystallinity or Mws, and, thus,
brittleness of polymers. Using PLLA grades of three different Mws (11k, 120k, and 258k) as examples,
Woo et al. [ 31] have shown that multiple types of cracks, i.e., circumferential and/or short radial
cracks, are massively present in low-molecular-weight PLLA (LM w-PLLA-11k), which has a high
crystallinity and probably the least mechanical strength. Upon cooling the LM w-PLLA-11k from most
crystallization temperatures, cracks easily form and the crack patterns are dependent on the lamellar
morphology within the spherulites as already discussed in Figures 1 and 2. As proven by Woo et al. [ 31],
the crystallinity of PLLA of different grades varies from 73% (measured by DSC) for LM w-PLLA-11k
to 47% for HM w-PLLA-258k. With a higher M w-PLLA-120k, hexagonal cracks, rather than circular
circumferential ones, occur spontaneously during cooling process to ambient after crystallized at high
Tc= 135C. The crack pattern of PLLA-120k ﬁlms (either with or without a top cover) crystallized
at 135C is of a hexagonal geometry. Although it is intuitive to attribute this hexagonal pattern of
cracks to hexagonal (110) growth plane, as He et al. did [ 18]; nevertheless, it is difﬁcult to rationale
why at other Tcs or for other PLLA grades, the cracks in spherulites are circular, instead of hexagonal.
We will further expound the hexagonal-shape cracks later by correlating with hexagonal ring bands
in PLLA spherulites. For even higher M w-PLLA (HM w-PLLA-258k), no cracks of any types (either
circumferential or radial cracks) are present in PLLA ﬁlms crystallized at Tc= 135C upon either slowPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 7 of 25
cooling or quench-cooling by dipping the samples into liquid nitrogen. The high-M wPLLA usually has
a lower crystallinity and higher mechanical properties and less brittleness. It should be noted that the
HM w-PLLA-258k crystallized at Tc= 130–135C does not develop the extinction–band rings as seen in
LM wPLLA grades (11k or 120k); thus, as a result, it does not show cracks as those seen in LM wPLLA
upon cooling (except for a few inter-spherulite boundary voids). These observations demonstrate yet
another strong correlation between lamellar assembly in spherulites and crack patterns, indicating most
of the cracks (though not all types) tend to follow the assembly pattern of lamellae in spherulites (either
ring-banded or ringless) and detachment into cracks most likely occurs at interfaces of discontinuity
among lamellae.
Interestingly, as LM w-PLLA (11k) is blended with HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k) at 1:1 ratio,
crystallized at same Tc= 130–135C and cooled, the crack patterns are entirely different from those in
neat LM w-PLLA (11k) or neat HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k). The LM w-PLLA/HM w-PLLA (1:1) blend
displays an entirely different spherulitic morphology and the crack patterns of the LM w/HM wblend
also follow the lamellae assembly. Figure 3 shows cracks and spherulitic birefringence patterns in
PLLA-11k blended (1:1) with PLLA-152k and PLLA-258k, respectively, at Tc= 130C and cooled
to ambient. Both uncovered samples (Figure 3a) and uncovered samples (Figure 3b) are shown for
comparison. For either covered or uncovered LM w-PLLA/HM w-PLLA blend samples, the spherulitic
birefringence and cracks are similar, except that the crack density are higher in the covered blends
(i.e., inter-crack spacing is smaller) than the uncovered samples. Apparently, the spherulitic
birefringence of the LM w/HM wblend (50:50) resembles neither that of neat LM w-PLLA-11k nor
that of neat HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k), and so do the crack patterns. Once again, the fact further
reinforces that as the spherulite birefringence is changed (reﬂecting variation in lamellae assembly in
spherulites), the crack pattern will correspondingly vary. For neat LM w-PLLA (11k), there are distinct
extinction rings in the birefringent spherulites, with twin circumferential cracks superimposed on
the extinction rings, and short radial cracks truncated by the circumferential cracks (as shown earlier
in Figure 1). For the LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-152 or LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-258k blends,
neither extinction rings nor twin circumferential or short radial cracks are present.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 7 of 25 
of any types (either circumferential or radial cracks) are present in PLLA films crystallized at Tc = 135 
°C upon either slow cooling or quench-cooling by dipping the samples into liquid nitrogen. The high-
Mw PLLA usually has a lower crystallinity and higher mechanical properties and less brittleness. It 
should be noted that the HM w-PLLA-258k crystallized at Tc = 130–135 °C does not develop the 
extinction–band rings as seen in LM w PLLA grades (11k or 120k); thus, as a result, it does not show 
cracks as those seen in LM w PLLA upon cooling (except for a few inter-spherulite boundary voids). 
These observations demonstrate yet another stro ng correlation between lamellar assembly in 
spherulites and crack patterns, indicating most of th e cracks (though not all types) tend to follow the 
assembly pattern of lamellae in spherulites (either ring-banded or ringless) and detachment into cracks most likely occurs at interfaces of discontinuity among lamellae. 
Interestingly, as LM
w-PLLA (11k) is blended with HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k) at 1:1 ratio, 
crystallized at same Tc = 130–135 °C and cooled, the crack patterns are entirely different from those 
in neat LM w-PLLA (11k) or neat HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k). The LM w-PLLA/HM w-PLLA (1:1) blend 
displays an entirely different spheruliti c morphology and the crack patterns of the LM w/HM w blend 
also follow the lamellae assembly. Figure 3 shows cracks and spherulitic birefringence patterns in PLLA-11k blended (1:1) with PLLA-152k  and PLLA-258k, respectively, at T
c = 130 °C and cooled to 
ambient. Both uncovered samples (Figure 3a) an d uncovered samples (Figure 3b) are shown for 
comparison. For either covered or uncovered LM w-PLLA/HM w-PLLA blend samples, the spherulitic 
birefringence and cracks are similar, except that the crack density are higher in the covered blends 
(i.e., inter-crack spacing is smaller) than the uncovered samples. Apparently, the spherulitic birefringence of the LM
w/HM w blend (50:50) resembles neither that of neat LM w-PLLA-11k nor that 
of neat HM w-PLLA (152k or 258k), and so do the crack patte rns. Once again, the fa ct further reinforces 
that as the spherulite birefringence is changed (reflecting variation in lamellae assembly in spherulites), the crack pattern will correspondingly vary. For neat LM
w-PLLA (11k), there are distinct 
extinction rings in the birefringent spherulites, with twin circumferential cracks superimposed on the 
extinction rings, and short radial cracks truncated by the circumferential cracks (as shown earlier in 
Figure 1). For the LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-152 or LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-258k blends, 
neither extinction rings nor twin circumfere ntial or short radial cracks are present. 
 
Figure 3.  POM (a–f) and OM (a’–f’) micrographs show ing cracks and corresponding spherulitic 
morphologies of LM w-PLLA blended with HM w PLLA (50/50) melt-crystallized at Tc = 130 °C and 
cooled to ambient: ( a–c) samples with top cover (constrained); and ( d–f) samples without top cover. 
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [31]. 
Figure 3. POM (a–f) and OM (a’–f’) micrographs showing cracks and corresponding spherulitic
morphologies of LM w-PLLA blended with HM wPLLA (50/50) melt-crystallized at Tc= 130C and
cooled to ambient: ( a–c) samples with top cover (constrained); and ( d–f) samples without top cover.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [31].
LM w-PLLA (11k) crystallizes into ringless or ring-banded spherulites depending on Tc,Mw,
and/or cover conﬁnement, leading to two categories of the crack patterns. In the ring-bandedPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 8 of 25
LM w-PLLA spherulites, two different crack types are present: (I) twin-circumferential cracks in
the transitional boundaries; and (II) radial short-segmental voids locating on the bright (ridge)
bands in spherulites. If the high-M wPLLA is blended with LM w-PLLA, crack forms in the
blends are dramatically modiﬁed, owing to the fact that the ring band behavior in the blends is
dramatically different from those in the LM w-PLLA. For the LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-152k
or LM w-PLLA-11k/HM w-PLLA-258k blends, neither extinction rings nor twin circumferential
or short radial cracks (observed in neat LM w-PLLA) are present, but the crack forms in the
LM w-PLLA/HM w-PLLA blends more resemble those in the neat HM w-PLLA.
3. Temperature-Dependence and Reversibility of Cracks
Consistently, when viewed in an optical microscopy, cracks are not observable in crystallized
polymer samples when held at Tcwithout cooling; nevertheless, ring bands or crystal orientations
in spherulites are visible at this Tc. When the Tc-crystallized polymer samples are cooled down to
ambient (or any temperatures much lower than Tc), cracks of various types appear upon cooling,
whose patterns depend on the ring-banded or ringless morphologies. Apparently, crystallization
temperature, or other kinetic factors (diluents, solvents, conﬁnement by substrates, etc.), constitutes
some of the main factors affecting the spherulite morphology, which in turn determines how the crack
patterns may appear in ﬁnal cooled spherulites. Although smooth single circumferential cracks in
PLLA ringless spherulites had been widely disclosed in the literature, the simultaneous presence
of twin-circumferential and short-radial cracks in the ring-banded LM w-PLLA-11k spherulites were
ﬁrst reported by Woo et al. [ 29]. Apparently, for the same material, the cracks in the ringless and
ring-banded PLLA spherulites, both crystallized at same Tcbut with free surface vs. top conﬁnement,
respectively, differ signiﬁcantly. Given the same contraction owing to CTE, the fact of dramatically
different crack patterns suggests that ring-banded spherulites have different lamellae assembly from
the ringless one, leading to different cracks. A recent study [ 29] has revealed that the cracks would be
reversible with temperature heating/cooling cycles; that is, cracks in cooled samples would disappear
if the samples are brought from ambient to Tcor above, and then would re-appear again upon cooling.
For the cracks of all three or four types in crystallized LM w-PLLA-11k, they are all reversible as
temperature cycles are between Tcto ambient and backward from ambient to Tc. Apparently, cracks
occur and become visible only upon cooling from Tcof fully crystallized PLLA samples; nevertheless,
the crack patterns are intimately guided by the crystal assembly in the spherulites.
For controlled cooling rates (10~90C/min), cracks appear only slowly and progressively,
one after another, to a ﬁnal stable state. For the ring-banded spherulites in LM w-PLLA crystallized
atTc= 125C,there are no cracks visible at Tc. Conversely, as the 125C-crystallized PLLA is
further cooled at a programmed rate ﬁrst from Tcto an intermediate temperature = 60C, a few
radial segmental cracks ﬁrst appear, but not all cracks. With further cooling to a lower T= 40C,
the twin-circumferential cracks start to appear sequentially, but not yet in full circles of cracks.
Only when the samples are ﬁnally cooled to 26C and held for a long enough time, all three or
four types of cracks (twin circumferential circular cracks, short radial cracks, and tri-star cracks on
nuclei center) eventually are all visible. These facts suggest that cracks are a kinetically slow process,
much lagging behind temperature equilibration. Contraction by temperature cooling is at work,
but much slower detachment in the inter-lamellar interfaces takes time to go to full scales of cracking.
The fact of slow appearance of PLLA cracks with cooling is in line with the experimental observation
of bulk properties that melt-cast PHB sheets normally become brittle on storage [ 15]. Thus, simple
contraction by CTE directional differences alone, without taking into account the lamellae assembly in
spherulites, may not be adequate in accounting for the slow process of formation of cracks.
AFM depth proﬁles in the PLLA spherulites of unconstrained vs. constraint PLLA samples
were analyzed using AFM for measuring the crack depths in PLLA crystallized at various Tc
(120–135C) [29]. The crack depth increases with Tcto a maximum ( Tc= 125C), with a depth
of 650 nm or 457 nm for the uncovered and covered samples, respectively), and then it decreases
slightly with further increase of Tcbeyond 125C for uncovered or covered PLLA samples alike.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 9 of 25
The crack depth, however, does not propagate through the entire ﬁlm thickness, and is limited to the
upper surfaces.
Different materials (glass vs. other substrates) have been examined as top covers for polymer
ﬁlms to crystallize, and then cooled to ambient. Same optical birefringence patterns and same cracks
are resulted and it does not matter whether glass slides, polyimide (PI) or Teﬂon ﬁlms are used as the
materials of top covers, as long as ﬁlm samples are covered during crystallization. The differences
of the top-cover materials do not seem to effect a change in the ring-banded patterns or cracks in
spherulites in PLLA [ 29]. Ring bands in spherulites are always present in crystallized PLLA ﬁlms if the
ﬁlms are conﬁned between two surfaces, and cracks are resulted upon cooling. Although the material
of the substrates (or top covers) may not be an inﬂuencing factor for formation of the ring-banded
spherulites in PLLA, the cover conﬁnement on sample ﬁlms imposes an inherent change in lamellae
assembly in the spherulites, which further inﬂuence the crack patterns. Stress alone by the cover on
samples may create some additional stresses, but it may not be sufﬁcient to account for the complex
changes in crack patterns between samples with covers or no covers. In addition, some argued that
secondary crystallization by holding long time at T cmight create further stress for cracking [ 12,13].
However, it should be emphasized that no cracks in PLLA appear during isothermal crystallization
atTcfor any long time. Apparently, secondary crystallization-induced stress is not the inﬂuencing
factor for the formation of cracks in PLLA samples. Secondary crystallization does have possibility
of generating more lamellar branches grown from main lamellae; nevertheless, these ﬁner branches
would not further alter the crack patterns.
Woo et al. [ 11] have shown a thorough study on mechanisms of alteration of lamellae assembly
in spherulites as PLLA samples [blended with diluent poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)] crystallized with
top-conﬁnement vs. top-free samples. It is the changes in the lamellae assembly (owing to conﬁnement)
that induce signiﬁcant changes in patterns of cracks. Figure 4 shows the ring band patterns in
PLLA/PEO blend vary with Tc, diluent composition, and (Figure 4a) top conﬁnement or (Figure 4b)
free top surface on sample ﬁlms. The interplay of diluent PEO composition, conﬁnement, and Tc
leads to quite complex inﬂuence on the ring band patterns in crystallized PLLA spherulites. With the
presence of high contents of PEO in blends, ring-banded spherulites are common in top-covered
sample ﬁlms at all Tcs; while ringless spherulites are more likely in unconﬁned ﬁlms at low Tcs (lower
than 110C). To sum up, the ring-band patterns vary from circular concentric, to counter-clockwise
spirals, then S-shape wheels, and ﬁnally to hexagonal-dendritic spherulites. Interestingly, all these
geometric shapes of cracks have been all reported in PLLA crystallized ﬁlms under various conditions.
Figure 4c shows SEM graph of PEO/PLLA (83/17) blend (free top surface), crystallized at Tc= 120C,
then cooled to RT. The exposed interior PLLA lamellae show numerous interfaces and cracks resulted
from lamellar branching or twisting to different orientations. Apparently, the variation in the optical
birefringence patterns in PLLA spherulites reﬂects a change in the interior crystal lamellae assembly;
thus, the inter-lamellar interfaces also vary, leading to different crack forms when spherulites are cooled.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 9 of 25 
for the uncovered and covered samples, respectively ), and then it decreases slightly with further 
increase of Tc beyond 125 °C for uncovered or covered PLLA samples alike. The crack depth, 
however, does not propagate through the entire film  thickness, and is limited to the upper surfaces. 
Different materials (glass vs. other substrates) ha ve been examined as top covers for polymer 
films to crystallize, and then cooled to ambient. Same optical birefringence patterns and same cracks are resulted and it does not matter whether glass slides, polyimide (PI) or Teflon films are used as 
the materials of top covers, as long as film sample s are covered during crystallization. The differences 
of the top-cover materials do not seem to effect a change in the ring-banded patterns or cracks in 
spherulites in PLLA [29]. Ring bands in spherulites are always present in crystallized PLLA films if the films are confined between two surfaces, and cracks are resulted upon cooling. Although the 
material of the substrates (or top covers) may not be an influencing factor for formation of the ring-
banded spherulites in PLLA, the cover confinement on  sample films imposes an inherent change in 
lamellae assembly in the spherulites, which further influence the crack patterns. Stress alone by the cover on samples may create some additional stresses , but it may not be sufficient to account for the 
complex changes in crack patterns between samples w i t h  c o v e r s  o r  n o  c o v e r s .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  s o m e  
argued that secondary crystallizat ion by holding long time at T
c might create further stress for 
cracking [12,13]. However, it should be emphasized that no cracks in PLLA appear during isothermal 
crystallization at Tc for any long time. Apparently, secondary crystallization-induced stress is not the 
influencing factor for the formation of cracks in PLLA samples. Secondary crystallization does have 
possibility of generating more lamellar branches grown from main lamellae; nevertheless, these finer branches would not further alter the crack patterns. 
Woo et al. [11] have shown a thorough study on mechanisms of alteration  of lamellae assembly 
in spherulites as PLLA samples [blended with diluent poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)] crystallized with top-confinement vs. top-free samples. It is the changes in the lamellae assembly (owing to 
confinement) that induce significant changes in pa tterns of cracks. Figure 4 shows the ring band 
patterns in PLLA/PEO blend vary with T
c, diluent composition, and (Figure 4a) top confinement or 
(Figure 4b) free top surface on sample films. The interplay of diluent PEO composition, confinement, and T
c leads to quite complex influence on the ring band patterns in crystallized PLLA spherulites. 
With the presence of high contents of PEO in blends, ring-banded spherulites are common in top-covered sample films at all T
cs; while ringless spherulites are more likely in unconfined films at low 
Tcs (lower than 110 °C). To sum up, the ring-band patterns vary from circular concentric, to counter-
clockwise spirals, then S-shape wheels, and finally to hexagonal-dendritic spherulites. Interestingly, 
all these geometric shapes of cracks have been a ll reported in PLLA crystallized films under various 
conditions. Figure 4c shows SEM graph of PEO/PLLA (83/17) blend (free top surface), crystallized at T
c = 120 °C, then cooled to RT. The exposed interior  PLLA lamellae show numerous interfaces and 
cracks resulted from lamellar branching or twisting to different orientations. Apparently, the variation in the optical birefringence patterns in PLLA spherulites reflects a change in the interior 
crystal lamellae assembly; thus, the inter-lamellar interfaces also vary, leading to different crack 
forms when spherulites are cooled. 
 
Figure 4. Cont.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 10 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 10 of 25 
 
Figure 4.  Schemes of PLLA spherulites in crystallized PEO/PLLA blend film samples with ( a) free top 
surface and ( b) top confined films, of different compositions and crystallized at a range of 
temperatures (100–130 °C); and ( c) SEM graph of PEO/PLLA (83/17) blend without top-cover 
confinement, crystallized successively at Tc = 120 °C, then cooled to room temperature. Interior 
lamellae showing orientation-induced cracks and inte rfaces. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 
[11]. 
Ring bands and lamellar patterns in crystallized LM w-PLLA(11k) could be easily discerned using 
POM via birefringence patterns, but the detailed la mellar textures associated with the ring bands 
were hidden and seemingly covered by a top layer that prevented detectability using SEM without 
etching the samples. The crack patterns in crystall ized and cooled PLLA could be further observed 
by SEM or AFM in greater details. Figure 5 show s SEM analysis on sample s of p-dioxane-etched LM w-
PLLA crystallized with ring bands and cracks (short-radial and twin circumferential cracks). Objective is to show correlation between the cracks and interior lamellae assembly. The SEM graphs show discontinuous optically bright (rough) and dark (smooth) bands in the spherulites of LM
w-
PLLA isothermally crystallized at 125 °C, in which the circumferential cracks act as boundaries 
between these two bands. Short radial cracks are never seen in the dark (smooth) bands and are 
located only on the bright (rough) band, which separate the radially oriented lamellar bundles in the bright band. The cracks remain the same before an d after p-dioxane etching, but the lamellar textures 
in the etched PLLA sample are fully exposed after et ching. The short radial cracks are parallel to the 
interfaces of the radial lamellae; furthermore, the circumferential cracks are the interfaces of the radially-oriented lamellae and another group of la mellae whose textures are dramatically different 
from the radially-oriented lamellae. The perfect matc hing between the spacing of circumferential ring 
bands and inter-distance of circumferential cracks in the LM
w-PLLA spherulites melt-crystallized 
(films confined between two glasses) at Tc = 125 °C suggests an inti mate correlation between the 
cracks and interior lamellae assembly [29]. 
Figure 4. Schemes of PLLA spherulites in crystallized PEO/PLLA blend ﬁlm samples with ( a) free
top surface and ( b) top conﬁned ﬁlms, of different compositions and crystallized at a range of
temperatures (100–130C); and ( c) SEM graph of PEO/PLLA (83/17) blend without top-cover
conﬁnement, crystallized successively at Tc= 120C, then cooled to room temperature. Interior lamellae
showing orientation-induced cracks and interfaces. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [11].
Ring bands and lamellar patterns in crystallized LM w-PLLA(11k) could be easily discerned using
POM via birefringence patterns, but the detailed lamellar textures associated with the ring bands
were hidden and seemingly covered by a top layer that prevented detectability using SEM without
etching the samples. The crack patterns in crystallized and cooled PLLA could be further observed
by SEM or AFM in greater details. Figure 5 shows SEM analysis on samples of p-dioxane-etched
LM w-PLLA crystallized with ring bands and cracks (short-radial and twin circumferential cracks).
Objective is to show correlation between the cracks and interior lamellae assembly. The SEM graphs
show discontinuous optically bright (rough) and dark (smooth) bands in the spherulites of LM w-PLLA
isothermally crystallized at 125C, in which the circumferential cracks act as boundaries between
these two bands. Short radial cracks are never seen in the dark (smooth) bands and are located
only on the bright (rough) band, which separate the radially oriented lamellar bundles in the bright
band. The cracks remain the same before and after p-dioxane etching, but the lamellar textures in
the etched PLLA sample are fully exposed after etching. The short radial cracks are parallel to the
interfaces of the radial lamellae; furthermore, the circumferential cracks are the interfaces of the
radially-oriented lamellae and another group of lamellae whose textures are dramatically different
from the radially-oriented lamellae. The perfect matching between the spacing of circumferential ring
bands and inter-distance of circumferential cracks in the LM w-PLLA spherulites melt-crystallized
(ﬁlms conﬁned between two glasses) at Tc= 125C suggests an intimate correlation between the cracks
and interior lamellae assembly [29].Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 11 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 11 of 25 
 
Figure 5.  S E M  g r a p h s  o f  L M w-PLLA-11k isothermally crystallized at 125 °C with a top cover 
(constrained) showing: ( a) band with radial cracks; and ( b) band with twin circumferential cracks in 
spherulites of PLLA isothermally crystallized at 125 °C and etched with p-dioxane. Reproduced from 
Ref. [29] with permission from Springer. 
4. Cracks in PLLA Spherulites Crystalliz ed with sc-PLA as Nuclei or Templates 
One of our recent studies has proven that intr oduction of stereocomplex poly(lactic acid) (sc-
PLA) crystals as small nuclei or sc-PLA spherulit es into PLLA has great influence on crack patterns 
or reducing/eliminating the cracks via altering the in ter-phase boundaries in cr ystallized mixtures of 
poly( L-lactic acid) (LM w-PLLA-11k) blended with poly( D-lactic acid) (HM w-PDLA-124k) as a non-
racemic 90/10 mixture. Figure 6 shows POM morphology and cracks of PLLA/PDLA of non-equimolar (non-racemic) mixture (90/10) subjected to T
max = 190 °C and Tmax = 240 °C, respectively, 
then both crystallized at Tc = 140 °C and cooled to ambient. By heating the mixture at Tmax = 190 °C or 
240 °C, respectively, the unmelted sc-PLA tiny resi dual crystals serve as heterogeneous nuclei to 
induce later-crystallized LM w-PLLA into straight-stalk dendritic spherulites with plenty of radially 
oriented cracks. The radial cracks, though bent and twisted with lamellae, are apparently located on 
the inter-phases or interfaces of these generally radial-oriented dendrites.  On the other hand, by 
heating the mixture at Tmax = 240 °C, the PLA-complex crystals were completely melted and upon 
lowering temperature to Tc = 140 °C, sc-PLA first crystallize into  Maltese-cross spherulites that serves 
as templates for later-crystallizing LM w-PLLA to attach. Co-crystallization of LM w-PLLA-11k with 
the pre-existing sc-PLA templating spherulites tends to be as compact as that of sc-PLA spherulites, 
thus showing virtually no cracks at all. In gene ral, the sc-PLA spherulites as templates for later-
crystallizing LM w-PLLA-11k to crystallize (Figure 6a) can suppress the occurrence of stressed 
interphases in dendritic lamellae in the LM w-PLLA-11 spherulites crystallized with tiny sc-PLA nuclei 
(Figure 6b). One can see that LM w-PLLA-11k so crystallized with a small amount of PDLA (10 wt %) 
in either case of Figure 6a,b develops comp letely different spherulitic morphologies and 
correspondingly different crack tendencies as those seen in neat LM w-PLLA-11k (shown earlier in 
Figures 1 and 2). Note that the background thin  dendritic thin crystals (indicated by arrows) 
underneath the strongly birefringent PLLA dend rites were judged to be sc-PLA (minor 10–20 
percentages in the blend) for two proven reasons: (1) they are very thin and very weakly birefringent that are formed much more quickly at T
c = 140 °C than the later-forming PLLA dendrites (strongly 
birefringent); and (2) these thin background dendritic crystals did not melt upon re-heating to 170 °C, where the strongly birefringent PLLA dendrites melt completely. They finally melt only after 
heating to 230–240 °C ( T
m of sc-PLA). 
Figure 5. SEM graphs of LM w-PLLA-11k isothermally crystallized at 125C with a top cover
(constrained) showing: ( a) band with radial cracks; and ( b) band with twin circumferential cracks in
spherulites of PLLA isothermally crystallized at 125C and etched with p-dioxane. Reproduced from
Ref. [29] with permission from Springer.
4. Cracks in PLLA Spherulites Crystallized with sc-PLA as Nuclei or Templates
One of our recent studies has proven that introduction of stereocomplex poly(lactic acid)
(sc-PLA) crystals as small nuclei or sc-PLA spherulites into PLLA has great inﬂuence on crack
patterns or reducing/eliminating the cracks via altering the inter-phase boundaries in crystallized
mixtures of poly( L-lactic acid) (LM w-PLLA-11k) blended with poly( D-lactic acid) (HM w-PDLA-124k)
as a non-racemic 90/10 mixture. Figure 6 shows POM morphology and cracks of PLLA/PDLA
of non-equimolar (non-racemic) mixture (90/10) subjected to Tmax= 190C and Tmax= 240C,
respectively, then both crystallized at Tc= 140C and cooled to ambient. By heating the mixture at
Tmax= 190C or 240C, respectively, the unmelted sc-PLA tiny residual crystals serve as heterogeneous
nuclei to induce later-crystallized LM w-PLLA into straight-stalk dendritic spherulites with plenty of
radially oriented cracks. The radial cracks, though bent and twisted with lamellae, are apparently
located on the inter-phases or interfaces of these generally radial-oriented dendrites. On the other hand,
by heating the mixture at Tmax= 240C, the PLA-complex crystals were completely melted and upon
lowering temperature to Tc= 140C, sc-PLA ﬁrst crystallize into Maltese-cross spherulites that serves
as templates for later-crystallizing LM w-PLLA to attach. Co-crystallization of LM w-PLLA-11k with the
pre-existing sc-PLA templating spherulites tends to be as compact as that of sc-PLA spherulites, thus
showing virtually no cracks at all. In general, the sc-PLA spherulites as templates for later-crystallizing
LM w-PLLA-11k to crystallize (Figure 6a) can suppress the occurrence of stressed interphases in
dendritic lamellae in the LM w-PLLA-11 spherulites crystallized with tiny sc-PLA nuclei (Figure 6b).
One can see that LM w-PLLA-11k so crystallized with a small amount of PDLA (10 wt %) in either
case of Figure 6a,b develops completely different spherulitic morphologies and correspondingly
different crack tendencies as those seen in neat LM w-PLLA-11k (shown earlier in Figures 1 and 2).
Note that the background thin dendritic thin crystals (indicated by arrows) underneath the strongly
birefringent PLLA dendrites were judged to be sc-PLA (minor 10–20 percentages in the blend) for
two proven reasons: (1) they are very thin and very weakly birefringent that are formed much more
quickly at Tc= 140Cthan the later-forming PLLA dendrites (strongly birefringent); and (2) these thin
background dendritic crystals did not melt upon re-heating to 170C, where the strongly birefringent
PLLA dendrites melt completely. They ﬁnally melt only after heating to 230–240C (Tmof sc-PLA).Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 12 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 12 of 25 
 
Figure 6.  POM ( left) and OM ( right ) morphology of PLLA/PDLA (90/10) samples subjected to ( a) Tmax 
= 190 °C then Tc = 140 °C, in comparison to ( b) Tmax = 240 °C then crystallized at Tc = 140 °C, cooled to 
ambient and melted/recrystallized again at Tmax = 190 °C and Tc = 140 °C. Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [19]. 
Similarly, if PLLA is blended with another polyme r that is slower-crystallizing than PLLA, then 
PLLA will serve as templates for the slower-crystal lizing polymer to crystallize sequentially. Example 
is demonstrated with a 50/50 mixture of LM w-PLLA with poly(4-hydroxy butyrate) (PHB), as 
reported in one of our recent studies [20]. Crystallization of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) was performed on previously crystallized templates of poly(L-lactic acid) (LM
w-PLLA-11k) in mixtures of 
two semicrystalline polymers, PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend, and cracks, lamellar assembly, and ring band patterns, were analyzed. The PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend was crystallized first at T
c = 100 °C (ringless 
spherulites) or 120 °C (ring-banded spherulites) , then cooled to ambient, where PHB further 
crystallizes and cracks show up. At Tc = 100 or 120 °C, only LM w-PLLA-11k can crystallize while PHB 
remains as an amorphous liquid; then at ambien t temperature, the PHB component can crystallize 
by following the preformed PLLA lamellar crystals as templates. Figure 7 shows, when crystallized at T
c = 100 °C and cooled, there are no ring bands in  spherulites and no cracks are seen, except for 
small tri-branch cracks on the nuclei centers. At this low Tc = 100 °C, pure LM w-PLLA-11k would also 
display no ring bands an d no cracks. Thus, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) behaves similarly to neat 
LM w-PLLA-11k, as the later-crystallizing PHB simply crystallizes at ambient by following the pre-
crystallized PLLA templates. 
 
Figure 7.  POM ( a) and OM ( b) micrographs showing no cracks (except for tiny cracks on nuclei 
centers) on small ringless spherulites of PHB/LM w-PLLA-11k blend isothermally crystallized at Tc = 
100 °C, with top cover, then cooled to ambient. Re printed with permission from Ref. [20]. Copyright 
(2011) American Chemical Society. 
By comparison, Figure 8 shows when LM w-PLLA-11k/PHB (50/50) blend is crystallized at Tc = 
120 °C and cooled, there are concentric ring bands in the spherulites and short radial cracks are seen, 
which are similar to those in neat LM w-PLLA-11k. Again, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend behaves 
Figure 6. POM ( left) and OM ( right ) morphology of PLLA/PDLA (90/10) samples subjected to
(a)Tmax= 190Cthen Tc= 140C, in comparison to ( b)Tmax= 240C then crystallized at Tc= 140C,
cooled to ambient and melted/recrystallized again at Tmax= 190C and Tc= 140C. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [19].
Similarly, if PLLA is blended with another polymer that is slower-crystallizing than PLLA,
then PLLA will serve as templates for the slower-crystallizing polymer to crystallize sequentially.
Example is demonstrated with a 50/50 mixture of LM w-PLLA with poly(4-hydroxy butyrate) (PHB),
as reported in one of our recent studies [ 20]. Crystallization of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) was
performed on previously crystallized templates of poly(L-lactic acid) (LM w-PLLA-11k) in mixtures
of two semicrystalline polymers, PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend, and cracks, lamellar assembly, and ring
band patterns, were analyzed. The PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend was crystallized ﬁrst at Tc= 100C
(ringless spherulites) or 120C (ring-banded spherulites), then cooled to ambient, where PHB further
crystallizes and cracks show up. At Tc= 100 or 120C, only LM w-PLLA-11k can crystallize while PHB
remains as an amorphous liquid; then at ambient temperature, the PHB component can crystallize
by following the preformed PLLA lamellar crystals as templates. Figure 7 shows, when crystallized
atTc= 100C and cooled, there are no ring bands in spherulites and no cracks are seen, except for
small tri-branch cracks on the nuclei centers. At this low Tc= 100C, pure LM w-PLLA-11k would
also display no ring bands and no cracks. Thus, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) behaves similarly to
neat LM w-PLLA-11k, as the later-crystallizing PHB simply crystallizes at ambient by following the
pre-crystallized PLLA templates.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 12 of 25 
 
Figure 6.  POM ( left) and OM ( right ) morphology of PLLA/PDLA (90/10) samples subjected to ( a) Tmax 
= 190 °C then Tc = 140 °C, in comparison to ( b) Tmax = 240 °C then crystallized at Tc = 140 °C, cooled to 
ambient and melted/recrystallized again at Tmax = 190 °C and Tc = 140 °C. Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [19]. 
Similarly, if PLLA is blended with another polyme r that is slower-crystallizing than PLLA, then 
PLLA will serve as templates for the slower-crystal lizing polymer to crystallize sequentially. Example 
is demonstrated with a 50/50 mixture of LM w-PLLA with poly(4-hydroxy butyrate) (PHB), as 
reported in one of our recent studies [20]. Crystallization of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) was performed on previously crystallized templates of poly(L-lactic acid) (LM
w-PLLA-11k) in mixtures of 
two semicrystalline polymers, PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend, and cracks, lamellar assembly, and ring band patterns, were analyzed. The PHB/PLLA (50/50) blend was crystallized first at T
c = 100 °C (ringless 
spherulites) or 120 °C (ring-banded spherulites) , then cooled to ambient, where PHB further 
crystallizes and cracks show up. At Tc = 100 or 120 °C, only LM w-PLLA-11k can crystallize while PHB 
remains as an amorphous liquid; then at ambien t temperature, the PHB component can crystallize 
by following the preformed PLLA lamellar crystals as templates. Figure 7 shows, when crystallized at T
c = 100 °C and cooled, there are no ring bands in  spherulites and no cracks are seen, except for 
small tri-branch cracks on the nuclei centers. At this low Tc = 100 °C, pure LM w-PLLA-11k would also 
display no ring bands an d no cracks. Thus, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) behaves similarly to neat 
LM w-PLLA-11k, as the later-crystallizing PHB simply crystallizes at ambient by following the pre-
crystallized PLLA templates. 
 
Figure 7.  POM ( a) and OM ( b) micrographs showing no cracks (except for tiny cracks on nuclei 
centers) on small ringless spherulites of PHB/LM w-PLLA-11k blend isothermally crystallized at Tc = 
100 °C, with top cover, then cooled to ambient. Re printed with permission from Ref. [20]. Copyright 
(2011) American Chemical Society. 
By comparison, Figure 8 shows when LM w-PLLA-11k/PHB (50/50) blend is crystallized at Tc = 
120 °C and cooled, there are concentric ring bands in the spherulites and short radial cracks are seen, 
which are similar to those in neat LM w-PLLA-11k. Again, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend behaves 
Figure 7. POM ( a) and OM ( b) micrographs showing no cracks (except for tiny cracks on nuclei centers)
on small ringless spherulites of PHB/LM w-PLLA-11k blend isothermally crystallized at Tc= 100C,
with top cover, then cooled to ambient. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 20]. Copyright (2011)
American Chemical Society.
By comparison, Figure 8 shows when LM w-PLLA-11k/PHB (50/50) blend is crystallized at
Tc= 120Cand cooled, there are concentric ring bands in the spherulites and short radial cracks arePolymers 2016 ,8, 329 13 of 25
seen, which are similar to those in neat LM w-PLLA-11k. Again, the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend
behaves and displays spherulitic morphologies and crack patterns similarly to neat LM w-PLLA-11k.
The SEM graphs in Figure 5 for pure LM w-PLLA-11k at Tc= 125C with a top cover show morphology
and cracks that are almost identical to the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The only difference is
that there are no twin circumferential cracks in the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The short radial
cracks, as clearly shown in the SEM graphs, are resulted from the interfacial boundaries between the
radial-oriented lamellae.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 13 of 25 
and displays spherulitic morphologies and crack patterns similarly to neat LM w-PLLA-11k. The SEM 
graphs in Figure 5 for pure LM w-PLLA-11k at Tc = 125 °C with a top cover show morphology and 
cracks that are almost identical to the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The on ly difference is that there 
are no twin circumferential cracks in the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The short radial cracks, as 
clearly shown in the SEM graphs, are resulted from  the interfacial boundaries between the radial-
oriented lamellae. 
 
Figure 8.  SEM micrographs for PHB/LM w-PLLA (50/50) blend samples ( Tc = 120 °C): ( a) unetched; ( b) 
solvent-etched; and ( c,d) zoom-in SEM graphs of the bright ridg e band in ring-banded spherulites of 
Graphs ( a,b), respectively. Reprinted wi th permission from Ref. [20]. Copyright (2011) American 
Chemical Society. 
To prove universal behavior, LM w-PLLA-11k is blended with anot her polymer, poly(ethylene 
oxide) (PEO), at 50/50 ratio and crystallized at Tc = 110 °C, and then cooled to ambient. Again, the 
spherulite morphology and short radial cracks in th e PLLA/PEO blend are quite similar to those in 
pure LM w-PLLA-11k. To analyze the height profiles of the lamellae parallel to the radial cracks, AFM 
characterization and results are shown in Figure 9, which reveals that there are concentric ring bands and short radial cracks in the spherulite s, almost identical to those in neat LM
w-PLLA-11k. The novel 
AFM analysis on the banded and cracked PLLA spheru lites shows that there is no spiral lamellar 
plate but the lamellae wave up and down to create corresponding ridge and valley bands. Short radial 
cracks are located on the bulged concave portio ns, where radially-oriented lamellae show inter-
lamellar detachments into cracks. 
 
Figure 9.  AFM height image on water-etched spherulites  of PEO/PLLA (50/50) blend crystallized at 
Tc = 110 °C and cooled to ambient. Two discrete macro-lamellae (I,II) marked for height profile 
analysis. Reprinted from Ref. [33]. Copyri ght (2012), with permission from Elsevier. 
Figure 8. SEM micrographs for PHB/LM w-PLLA (50/50) blend samples ( Tc= 120C): ( a) unetched;
(b) solvent-etched; and ( c,d) zoom-in SEM graphs of the bright ridge band in ring-banded spherulites
of Graphs ( a,b), respectively. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 20]. Copyright (2011) American
Chemical Society.
To prove universal behavior, LM w-PLLA-11k is blended with another polymer, poly(ethylene
oxide) (PEO), at 50/50 ratio and crystallized at Tc= 110C, and then cooled to ambient. Again,
the spherulite morphology and short radial cracks in the PLLA/PEO blend are quite similar to those
in pure LM w-PLLA-11k. To analyze the height proﬁles of the lamellae parallel to the radial cracks,
AFM characterization and results are shown in Figure 9, which reveals that there are concentric ring
bands and short radial cracks in the spherulites, almost identical to those in neat LM w-PLLA-11k.
The novel AFM analysis on the banded and cracked PLLA spherulites shows that there is no spiral
lamellar plate but the lamellae wave up and down to create corresponding ridge and valley bands.
Short radial cracks are located on the bulged concave portions, where radially-oriented lamellae show
inter-lamellar detachments into cracks.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 13 of 25 
and displays spherulitic morphologies and crack patterns similarly to neat LM w-PLLA-11k. The SEM 
graphs in Figure 5 for pure LM w-PLLA-11k at Tc = 125 °C with a top cover show morphology and 
cracks that are almost identical to the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The on ly difference is that there 
are no twin circumferential cracks in the LM w-PLLA/PHB (50/50) blend. The short radial cracks, as 
clearly shown in the SEM graphs, are resulted from  the interfacial boundaries between the radial-
oriented lamellae. 
 
Figure 8.  SEM micrographs for PHB/LM w-PLLA (50/50) blend samples ( Tc = 120 °C): ( a) unetched; ( b) 
solvent-etched; and ( c,d) zoom-in SEM graphs of the bright ridg e band in ring-banded spherulites of 
Graphs ( a,b), respectively. Reprinted wi th permission from Ref. [20]. Copyright (2011) American 
Chemical Society. 
To prove universal behavior, LM w-PLLA-11k is blended with anot her polymer, poly(ethylene 
oxide) (PEO), at 50/50 ratio and crystallized at Tc = 110 °C, and then cooled to ambient. Again, the 
spherulite morphology and short radial cracks in th e PLLA/PEO blend are quite similar to those in 
pure LM w-PLLA-11k. To analyze the height profiles of the lamellae parallel to the radial cracks, AFM 
characterization and results are shown in Figure 9, which reveals that there are concentric ring bands and short radial cracks in the spherulite s, almost identical to those in neat LM
w-PLLA-11k. The novel 
AFM analysis on the banded and cracked PLLA spheru lites shows that there is no spiral lamellar 
plate but the lamellae wave up and down to create corresponding ridge and valley bands. Short radial 
cracks are located on the bulged concave portio ns, where radially-oriented lamellae show inter-
lamellar detachments into cracks. 
 
Figure 9.  AFM height image on water-etched spherulites  of PEO/PLLA (50/50) blend crystallized at 
Tc = 110 °C and cooled to ambient. Two discrete macro-lamellae (I,II) marked for height profile 
analysis. Reprinted from Ref. [33]. Copyri ght (2012), with permission from Elsevier. 
Figure 9. AFM height image on water-etched spherulites of PEO/PLLA (50/50) blend crystallized
atTc= 110C and cooled to ambient. Two discrete macro-lamellae (I,II) marked for height proﬁle
analysis. Reprinted from Ref. [33]. Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 14 of 25
Recently, Sasaki et al. [ 34] articulately reported and analyzed spiral crack patterns observed
for spherulites of poly(L-lactic acid) ( Mw= 210k, L-isomer content: 98%) melt-crystallized at
Tc= 110 or 120C. The as-cast PLLA ﬁlm was approximately 5–25 m. They found from the
cross-sectional SEM images of as-quenched spherulitic plates of PLLA specimens that the cracks span
from the top surface to the PLLA/substrate interface. In addition, they found numerous concentric
circular ring-type cracks or right-handed and left-handed spiral cracks in the crystallized spherulites.
After etching treatments, delamination (from substrates) of PLLA spherulites occurs. As a result of
the delamination, deformation or fragmentation of the spherulite occurs on several occasions; in the
severest case, the center part of the detached spherulite is lost, leaving an open-circle ring of the
PLLA spherulites. For the spiral-shape cracks, Sasaki et al. [34] conducted sophisticate analyses of
plotting the distance r from the spherulite center to the trajectory of the spiral against the rotation
angle , and attempted to model the CTE contraction patterns using an “Archimedean spiral” (in polar
coordinates: r = a + b ),including the energy released during cracking. They concluded that they
“have demonstrated characteristic spiral crack patterns on polymer spherulites for the ﬁrst time”,
and “there is no solid evidence that the observed spiral pattern originates from any periodic lamellar
assembled structures”.
Sasaki et al. [ 34] claimed that the present PLLA spherulites exhibited a non-banded structure,
and thus no direct correlation between the crack pattern and the spherulitic structure was suggested.
However, they also speculated (yet unproven) that the type and handedness of the crack pattern
depends on the geometry of an initial crack, which is governed by the lamellar structure in the center
part of spherulite. This is a key point. One of our recent wok on lamellar assembly in chiral PLLA or
PDLA spherulites has given a clue [ 35]. With thicker PLLA specimens, the ring banded patterns may be
hidden, becoming optically invisible, owing to repeated covering of later-grown crystals; nevertheless,
the crystal assembly near the nuclei center remains the same. We have proven recently [ 35] that for
thicker PLLA samples (diluted with high contents of PEO for convenience of etching out to expose the
skeleton PLLA lamellae), growth begins with nucleation as PLA hexagonal crystals, but eventually,
growth continues to take a ﬁnal spiral pattern. Since the growth rate of spherulites is higher in thicker
ﬁlms, bending occurs with a larger curvature as crystals radiate out from the hexagon center and such
larger curvature combine with faster growth induces the formation of spiral growth. The growth from
the nuclei center is originally spiral in both counter-clockwise and clockwise directions. Nevertheless,
they may not all grow equally, and if one dominates the other, the spiral can become either clockwise or
counterclockwise. Such lamellar assembly near the nuclei center might be submerged in thicker PLLA
specimens; yet, it provides initiation for crack propagation and patterns. We believe that, regardless
of the visibility of ring band patterns in PLLA as the optical bands tend to be hidden or disrupted in
thicker samples, the inherent lamellae assembly, either near the nuclei center or in ﬁnal spherulites,
is accountable for the spiral cracks as reported in Sasaki and coworkers’ work on cracks. Furthermore,
if one inspect the spiraling ring-band patterns that we have revealed in crystallized PLLA as discussed
in Figure 4, it is apparent that there exists apparent correlation between the ring bands and spiral
crack patterns reported by Sasaki et al. [ 34], suggesting that lamellae assembly in spiral ring bands
and interfaces between successive bands with hidden discontinuity might initiate the crack patterns to
be similarly in spirals (either clockwise or counterclockwise senses).
5. Correlation of Cracks with Hexagonal Ring Patterns and Disappearance of Rings in
Increasingly Thicker Specimens
Cracks or their patterns in crystallized polymer ﬁlms upon cooling, as discussed, can be dependent
of the ﬁlm thickness. Similar dependence can also be seen in ring band patterns of crystallized polymers.
Woo et al. [ 36] investigated the thickness dependence of ring-band patterns in LM w-PLLA-11k ﬁlms,
which were all crystallized at same Tc= 112C, but thickness of sample ﬁlms were varied systematically
from 400 to 3000 nm. Figure 10 shows LM w-PLLA-11k [ 36] melt-crystallized at Tc= 112C of ﬁlms
at various sample thicknesses, 400 nm, 800 nm, 2000 nm, and 3000 nm, as indicated on the top ofPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 15 of 25
the graphs. Concentric ring bands (low birefringence) of hexagonal shapes are present in ﬁlms of
400 and 800 nm. The bottom graph in Figure 10 shows the AFM image of the hexagonal ring bands
in 112C-crystallized PLLA-11k ﬁlm of 800 nm (and cooled to ambient), revealing apparent deep
crevices between the successive hexagon-shape bands. The band spacing apparently increases with
ﬁlm thickness almost linearly. For PLLA ﬁlms of 2000 nm, the birefringent ring bands are strong in
optical birefringence and quite wide (~40 m in band width) separated with a very narrow extinction,
which according to corresponding AFM height analysis (not shown here) on same sample is a sharp
drop toward the glass substrate. For ﬁlms of thickness = 3000 nm or thicker, the optical bands are no
longer seen. To sum up, the discontinuity between the ring bands (regardless of hexagonal or circular
shapes) are apparent for ﬁlm thickness of 400, 800, and 2000 nm. The thicker LM w-PLLA-11k ﬁlm
of 3000 nm crystallizes to ringless spherulites; nevertheless, as discussed earlier, interfaces and ring
bands may be covered up and hidden, and possibility still exists that they are able to initiate cracks of
either circular or hexagonal shapes upon cooling.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 15 of 25 
shapes are present in films of 400 and 800 nm. Th e bottom graph in Figure 10 shows the AFM image 
of the hexagonal ring bands in 11 2 °C-crystallized PLLA-11k film of  800 nm (and cooled to ambient), 
revealing apparent deep crevices between the su ccessive hexagon-shape ba nds. The band spacing 
apparently increases with film thickness almost linearly. For PLLA films of 2000 nm, the birefringent 
ring bands are strong in optical birefringence and quite wide (~40 μm in band width) separated with 
a very narrow extinction, which according to corre sponding AFM height analysis (not shown here) 
on same sample is a sharp drop toward the glass subs trate. For films of thickness = 3000 nm or thicker, 
the optical bands are no longer seen. To sum up, th e discontinuity between the ring bands (regardless 
of hexagonal or circular shapes) are apparent for f ilm thickness of 400, 800, and 2000 nm. The thicker 
LM w-PLLA-11k film of 3000 nm crystallizes to ringless spherulites; nevertheless, as discussed earlier, 
interfaces and ring bands may be covered up and hid den, and possibility still exists that they are able 
to initiate cracks of either circular or hexagonal shapes upon cooling. 
 
Figure 10.  POM ( top) and OM ( bottom ) micrographs of LM w-PLLA-11k melt-crystallized at Tc = 112 
°C at various sample thickness as indicated on th e top of the graphs Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [36]. 
Furthermore, Figure 11 shows zoom-in to inte r-band zone using AFM analysis (AFM height 
profile and phase image), which clearly reveals inter-band discontinuity in the hexagonal-shaped rings (for film thickness = 800 nm) in LM
w-PLLA-11k spherulite. The depth of inter-band depletion 
zone is at least 200 nm out of the film thickness of about 800 nm. The graphs are shown such that the radial growth direction is from right to left-hand side. Apparently, if cracks are to propagate, they will naturally follow the inter-band crevices, which are of a hexagon shape (as shown earlier in Figure 
10). 
 
Figure 10. POM ( top) and OM ( bottom ) micrographs of LM w-PLLA-11k melt-crystallized at
Tc= 112Cat various sample thickness as indicated on the top of the graphs Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [36].
Furthermore, Figure 11 shows zoom-in to inter-band zone using AFM analysis (AFM height
proﬁle and phase image), which clearly reveals inter-band discontinuity in the hexagonal-shaped
rings (for ﬁlm thickness = 800 nm) in LM w-PLLA-11k spherulite. The depth of inter-band depletion
zone is at least 200 nm out of the ﬁlm thickness of about 800 nm. The graphs are shown such that the
radial growth direction is from right to left-hand side. Apparently, if cracks are to propagate, they will
naturally follow the inter-band crevices, which are of a hexagon shape (as shown earlier in Figure 10).
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 15 of 25 
shapes are present in films of 400 and 800 nm. Th e bottom graph in Figure 10 shows the AFM image 
of the hexagonal ring bands in 11 2 °C-crystallized PLLA-11k film of  800 nm (and cooled to ambient), 
revealing apparent deep crevices between the su ccessive hexagon-shape ba nds. The band spacing 
apparently increases with film thickness almost linearly. For PLLA films of 2000 nm, the birefringent 
ring bands are strong in optical birefringence and quite wide (~40 μm in band width) separated with 
a very narrow extinction, which according to corre sponding AFM height analysis (not shown here) 
on same sample is a sharp drop toward the glass subs trate. For films of thickness = 3000 nm or thicker, 
the optical bands are no longer seen. To sum up, th e discontinuity between the ring bands (regardless 
of hexagonal or circular shapes) are apparent for f ilm thickness of 400, 800, and 2000 nm. The thicker 
LM w-PLLA-11k film of 3000 nm crystallizes to ringless spherulites; nevertheless, as discussed earlier, 
interfaces and ring bands may be covered up and hid den, and possibility still exists that they are able 
to initiate cracks of either circular or hexagonal shapes upon cooling. 
 
Figure 10.  POM ( top) and OM ( bottom ) micrographs of LM w-PLLA-11k melt-crystallized at Tc = 112 
°C at various sample thickness as indicated on th e top of the graphs Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [36]. 
Furthermore, Figure 11 shows zoom-in to inte r-band zone using AFM analysis (AFM height 
profile and phase image), which clearly reveals inter-band discontinuity in the hexagonal-shaped rings (for film thickness = 800 nm) in LM
w-PLLA-11k spherulite. The depth of inter-band depletion 
zone is at least 200 nm out of the film thickness of about 800 nm. The graphs are shown such that the radial growth direction is from right to left-hand side. Apparently, if cracks are to propagate, they will naturally follow the inter-band crevices, which are of a hexagon shape (as shown earlier in Figure 
10). 
 
Figure 11. Cont.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 16 of 25
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 16 of 25 
Figure 11.  AFM height images of hexagonal-shaped rings in LM w-PLLA-11k spherulite melt-
crystallized at Tc = 112 °C: ( a) full image; ( b) zoomed-in image; and ( c) height profile. 
There appears to be some proven correlations betw een the crystal assembly as revealed in optical 
birefringence and cracks; however, further compounded the problem is that cracks tend to be 
influenced by many factors: film thickness, Tc, top glass cover, cooling speed and time (slow cooling 
vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen), mo lecular weight of polymers, etc. In several situations, correlations 
may be difficult or impossible to assess. An inte resting example is demonstrated here. Figure 12 
shows cracks in OM micrographs and cracks/birefringence patterns of HM w-PLLA-152k melt-
crystallized at Tc = 135 °C (sample films were uncovered vs. covered for comparison). The crack 
behavior of this HM w-PLLA-152k grade is apparently different from that of LM w-PLLA-11k (Figures 
1 and 2). At Tc = 135 °C, HM w-PLLA-152k crystallizes into only ringless spherulites, with or without 
glass covers on sample films. After crystallization at Tc = 135 °C and upon cooling, cracks in both 
PLLA samples (with or without top glass cover) develop extensively. Although both samples develop cracks, there are noticeable differences in the main  characteristics for the uncovered films (Figure 12a) 
and covered films (Figure 12b). The crack shape and density are dramatically different between the samples crystallized and cooled with free surfaces  vs. samples with top-cover glass. For the 
uncovered HM
w-PLLA films (Figure 12a), the cracks resemble the Archimedean continuous spirals 
but are of a hexagonal shape near the nuclei center, gradually transforming into circular spirals as they traverse to external peripherals. The hexagon or circular spirals are mostly continuous within 
the spherulites. This is quite interesting feature in th at the cracks are not only spiral, but also hexagon 
shape. On the other hand, for covered HM
w-PLLA films (Figure 12b), the cracks in the covered films 
are mostly concentric circles and much denser (tha n the uncovered films); in addition, most of the 
cracks are discontinuous and tend to  be shattered into broken pieces. These facts in the covered PLLA 
samples suggest that additional stresses by to p glass cover on crystallized and cooled PLLA 
spherulites may cause additional cracks. 
 
Figure 12.  OM ( top) and POM ( bottom ) micrographs of HM w-PLLA (152k) melt-crystallized at Tc = 
135 °C showing cracks and optical birefringenc e in crystallized an d cooled samples: ( a,a’) sample 
uncovered; and ( b,b’) sample covered with top glass. 02468 1 0
x (µm)-200-1000100z (nm)c
Figure 11. AFM height images of hexagonal-shaped rings in LM w-PLLA-11k spherulite
melt-crystallized at Tc= 112C: (a) full image; ( b) zoomed-in image; and ( c) height proﬁle.
There appears to be some proven correlations between the crystal assembly as revealed in
optical birefringence and cracks; however, further compounded the problem is that cracks tend to
be inﬂuenced by many factors: ﬁlm thickness, Tc, top glass cover, cooling speed and time (slow
cooling vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen), molecular weight of polymers, etc. In several situations,
correlations may be difﬁcult or impossible to assess. An interesting example is demonstrated here.
Figure 12 shows cracks in OM micrographs and cracks/birefringence patterns of HM w-PLLA-152k
melt-crystallized at Tc= 135C (sample ﬁlms were uncovered vs. covered for comparison). The crack
behavior of this HM w-PLLA-152k grade is apparently different from that of LM w-PLLA-11k (Figures 1
and 2). AtTc= 135C, HM w-PLLA-152k crystallizes into only ringless spherulites, with or without
glass covers on sample ﬁlms. After crystallization at Tc= 135C and upon cooling, cracks in both
PLLA samples (with or without top glass cover) develop extensively. Although both samples develop
cracks, there are noticeable differences in the main characteristics for the uncovered ﬁlms (Figure 12a)
and covered ﬁlms (Figure 12b). The crack shape and density are dramatically different between the
samples crystallized and cooled with free surfaces vs. samples with top-cover glass. For the uncovered
HM w-PLLA ﬁlms (Figure 12a), the cracks resemble the Archimedean continuous spirals but are of
a hexagonal shape near the nuclei center, gradually transforming into circular spirals as they traverse
to external peripherals. The hexagon or circular spirals are mostly continuous within the spherulites.
This is quite interesting feature in that the cracks are not only spiral, but also hexagon shape. On the
other hand, for covered HM w-PLLA ﬁlms (Figure 12b), the cracks in the covered ﬁlms are mostly
concentric circles and much denser (than the uncovered ﬁlms); in addition, most of the cracks are
discontinuous and tend to be shattered into broken pieces. These facts in the covered PLLA samples
suggest that additional stresses by top glass cover on crystallized and cooled PLLA spherulites may
cause additional cracks.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 16 of 25 
Figure 11.  AFM height images of hexagonal-shaped rings in LM w-PLLA-11k spherulite melt-
crystallized at Tc = 112 °C: ( a) full image; ( b) zoomed-in image; and ( c) height profile. 
There appears to be some proven correlations betw een the crystal assembly as revealed in optical 
birefringence and cracks; however, further compounded the problem is that cracks tend to be 
influenced by many factors: film thickness, Tc, top glass cover, cooling speed and time (slow cooling 
vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen), mo lecular weight of polymers, etc. In several situations, correlations 
may be difficult or impossible to assess. An inte resting example is demonstrated here. Figure 12 
shows cracks in OM micrographs and cracks/birefringence patterns of HM w-PLLA-152k melt-
crystallized at Tc = 135 °C (sample films were uncovered vs. covered for comparison). The crack 
behavior of this HM w-PLLA-152k grade is apparently different from that of LM w-PLLA-11k (Figures 
1 and 2). At Tc = 135 °C, HM w-PLLA-152k crystallizes into only ringless spherulites, with or without 
glass covers on sample films. After crystallization at Tc = 135 °C and upon cooling, cracks in both 
PLLA samples (with or without top glass cover) develop extensively. Although both samples develop cracks, there are noticeable differences in the main  characteristics for the uncovered films (Figure 12a) 
and covered films (Figure 12b). The crack shape and density are dramatically different between the samples crystallized and cooled with free surfaces  vs. samples with top-cover glass. For the 
uncovered HM
w-PLLA films (Figure 12a), the cracks resemble the Archimedean continuous spirals 
but are of a hexagonal shape near the nuclei center, gradually transforming into circular spirals as they traverse to external peripherals. The hexagon or circular spirals are mostly continuous within 
the spherulites. This is quite interesting feature in th at the cracks are not only spiral, but also hexagon 
shape. On the other hand, for covered HM
w-PLLA films (Figure 12b), the cracks in the covered films 
are mostly concentric circles and much denser (tha n the uncovered films); in addition, most of the 
cracks are discontinuous and tend to  be shattered into broken pieces. These facts in the covered PLLA 
samples suggest that additional stresses by to p glass cover on crystallized and cooled PLLA 
spherulites may cause additional cracks. 
 
Figure 12.  OM ( top) and POM ( bottom ) micrographs of HM w-PLLA (152k) melt-crystallized at Tc = 
135 °C showing cracks and optical birefringenc e in crystallized an d cooled samples: ( a,a’) sample 
uncovered; and ( b,b’) sample covered with top glass. 02468 1 0
x (µm)-200-1000100z (nm)c
Figure 12. OM ( top) and POM ( bottom ) micrographs of HM w-PLLA (152k) melt-crystallized at
Tc= 135Cshowing cracks and optical birefringence in crystallized and cooled samples: ( a,a’) sample
uncovered; and ( b,b’) sample covered with top glass.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 17 of 25
6. Cracks in Spherulites of Ductile Polymers in Comparison with Brittle Polymers
Isotactic polypropylene (iPP) is a ductile polymer, and usually its spherulites do not develop
cracks upon cooling as those seen in PLLA or PHB. However, for a huge isotactic polypropylene
(iPP , Mw= 260k) spherulite (under uniaxial tension deformation), Nitta and Takayanagi reported [ 37]
that circumferential arc-shape cracks appeared in the polar zone of spherulite while radial craze-like
fracture appeared in the equatorial region (perpendicular to the stretching direction). With respect
to changes in the dominant lamellae in the iPP spherulite (number of tangential lamellae in all
negative-sign at Tc= 130C or mixed neg/pos-sign spherulites at Tc= 145C), the crack patterns also
change correspondingly. An alternative study by Nowacki et al. on iPP [ 38] reported that upon simple
cooling of iPP (without imposed tension), only radial cracks may occur near the spherulites boundaries
(weak spots) during cooling process. That is, the cracks in iPP are mainly in inter-spherulitic areas,
but not within the spherulites, and they claimed that local stresses or holes weaken the material; hence,
the areas occluded during crystallization constitute “weak spots” of the spherulitic structure [ 38].
Unlike the ductile iPP spherulites, brittle spherulites such as PLLA and PHB, may have more substantial
“weak spots” within the large spherulites, leading to corresponding intra-spherulitic cracks.
Once again, these comparative facts on iPP further demonstrate that the crack patterns, either in
ductile iPP or relatively brittle PLLA or PHB spherulites, can be governed by the pre-assembled
lamellae and their interfaces in the spherulites. Similarly, for large spherulites such as those in brittle
PLLA or PHB, weak spots are not just in inter-spherulite boundaries, but also in intra-spherulites,
where boundaries/interfaces among the lamellae may exist in sporadic or regular patterns within
the spherulites.
7. Cracks in PHB Spherulites
Barham and Keller [ 5] were among the early pioneers who investigated cracks and brittleness in
PHB in 1986. They brieﬂy discussed about the possible correlation between cracks and “pre-existing
microstructures” in lamellae of spherulites, and modes of fracture of bulk PHB. Barham and Keller [ 5]
believed that the brittleness of PHB sheets is due to preexisting cracks found within the spherulites,
and they also proposed that ductility might be achieved by “healing” of the cracks, or by crystallizing
to lead to crack-free sheets. However, they emphasized that the mechanisms of crack formation remain
open issues. Barham and Keller [ 5] at that time recognized that there is the possibility of a link between
the radial cracks and the crystal growth regime, which clearly invites much further work. Clearly,
they strongly felt that there might be correlations between the cracks and lamellae microstructures.
However, at that time, they were not sure about how to establish correlations for details of mechanisms,
partially owing to at that time they used only tools of optical microscopy (and mechanical tests of
bulk properties), which limited probing into the hierarchical microstructures in spherulites. Later in
1989, Keller et al. [ 14] further investigated cracks in PHB and found that two types of cracks are
at two different temperatures of crystallization: radial cracks at low The radial cracks occur at low
crystallization temperature ( Tc= ~80C), and circumferential cracks on cooling spherulites crystallized
at higher temperature ( Tc= ~100C). Using X-ray analysis, they measured the variation of the Bragg
spacings in (110) and (200) planes with the temperature, which increase with different slopes in these
two directions. They proposed that different radial and circumferential thermal expansion coefﬁcients
(CTE), which generate large internal stress, leading to the cracks. However, we would like to caution
here two critical points that might not have been accounted in that study. One is that PHB spherulites
are not composed of all single-crystal lamellae with monotonous variations in directional lattice
planes. Secondly, crystallization of PHB at Tc= 80 vs. 100Ccan lead to entirely different lamellar
microstructures (e.g., Maltese-cross vs. ring-banded spherulites, respectively, at 80 and 100C).
Without examining the detailed interior microstructures of PHB spherulites at these two
temperatures, it may be premature to attribute to differences in CTE in two directions. However,
Keller et al. [14], in the study of cracks in PHB, did correctly discuss about a case of polyethylene in
another study on PE [ 39] to state: “However, in that case of polyethylene (PE) spherulites, the differencePolymers 2016 ,8, 329 18 of 25
in the expansion coefﬁcients is NOT accounted for by cracking but by the twisting, or radiating lamellae,
as manifested by changes in the periodic extinction band spacing” (by referring to the similar extinction
rings discussed earlier in Figures 1 and 2 for PLLA). Cracks in polymers are a result of directional
contraction upon cooling; nevertheless, microstructures in spherulites developed at speciﬁc Tcs should
be taken into consideration for fuller account.
The fact that the microstructures of lamellae in spherulites should be accounted for in analyzing
cracks in spherulites can also be envisioned by an article by Hobbs et al. [ 40] on AFM analysis on
polymer spherulites. They have demonstrated, using AFM imaging, varieties of crystals in growing
spherulites during initial growth and secondary growth during subsequent cooling; and these crystal
features in spherulites include: shish-kebab, screw dislocations, branching lamellae from screw
dislocations, etc., in PE or iPP . Such assembly of polycrystals, in either ring-banded or ringless
spherulites alike, inevitably involves amply interfaces and possible weakened boundaries. These facts
evidently suggest that polymer spherulites are not composed of only continuous single-crystal lamellar
plates monotonously radiating out from nuclei centers. Inter-lamellae boundaries, in radial or
circumferential directions, should be accounted.
Crystallization of polymer ﬁlms on substrates is attributed by some investigators to the main cause
of stress for cracking. Hobbs et al. [ 15], in 1996 in another study on cracks in PHB, reported: “We have
shown that cracks and crazes formed in spherulites of PHB, during growth and on cooling, are due to
constraints imposed by the supporting substrate of the thin ﬁlm and are therefore unlikely to be of
importance in determining the ultimate mechanical properties of the bulk material”. Nevertheless,
we want to caution here again that although polymer-substrate contact is indeed a potential site of
stress, the substrate alone cannot be the main cause of stress leading to variety of crack forms as seen
in LM w-PLLA discussed earlier. Cracks including short radial, circumferential, and tri-branch cracks,
are seen on the top free surfaces of LM w-PLLA, which are far away from the polymer-substrate interface.
It is worthy to demonstrate that the substrate-polymer contact and stress is not fully accountable for
the cracks, although the contact with substrate (or conﬁnement by top cover) may alter the lamellae
assembly of polymers being crystallized. As discussed earlier in Figures 1 and 2, LM w-PLLA-11k
ﬁlms covered with a glass cover would display ring bands and corresponding circumferential and
short radial cracks when crystallized at Tc= 125~130C. However, top glass covers were treated with
a release agent (to reduce the contact stresses), and effects of the treated top glass on crystallization
and cracks on ﬁlms were assessed. Figure 13 shows that for the same LM w-PLLA-11k crystallized
with a glass cover that had been pre-treated with a release agent, the PLLA ﬁlms displayed ringless
spherulites, instead of ring-banded ones. With cooling to ambient, cracks still develop in the ringless
spherulites, although the crack forms are different from those in covered ﬁlms (or normal substrate
glass untreated with release agent). These facts suggest that stress between the substrate and polymers
alone does not govern the mechanisms of cracks and that substrate interfaced with polymer ﬁlms might
alter the lamellae assembly (ring-banded vs. ringless) and corresponding crack patterns, but cracks
may still be present. Effects of surface treatment of the glass substrate or glass cover on spherulite
morphology were investigated. Either the glass substrate or glass cover was coated with a release
agent. Figure 13 also shows cracks as revealed in POM and OM morphology of LM w-PLLA-11k
spherulites isothermally crystallized at 130C and cooled, where sample ﬁlms were on (a) glass
substrate untreated but glass cover pre-treated with a release agent; and (b) both glass substrate and
glass cover were coated with a release agent. Interestingly, no ring bands are seen in either PLLA
samples (substrate treated or substrate/cover treated with release agent) when crystallized at 130C.
By comparison, earlier Figures 1 and 2 already have shown that the PLLA spherulites are distinctly
ring-banded if the PLLA ﬁlms are conﬁned in untreated glass cover and substrate and crystallized
at 130C. Release agent apparently releases the polymers from such interactions with the substrate,
thus relieves the stress; however, cracks are still present in cooled ﬁlms. Regardless of ring-banded
or ringless morphology in release agent-applied substrate or top cover, cracks are still present in the
crystallized and cooled LM w-PLLA ﬁlms. Crystallization temperature and top-cover conﬁnementPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 19 of 25
or substrate contact with polymers are several of the main factors affecting patterns of cracks and
occurrence of either ring-banded or ringless spherulites of PLLA.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 19 of 25 
factors affecting patterns of cracks and occurrence of  either ring-banded or ringless spherulites of 
PLLA. 
 
Figure 13.  Irregular tangential cracks and ring less spherulites as revealed in POM ( left column) and 
OM ( right  column) for LM w-PLLA-11k isothermally cr ystallized at 130 °C: ( a) glass substrate 
untreated but glass cover pre-trea ted with release agent; and ( b) both glass substrate and cover treated 
with release agent (scale bar = 50 μm in all graphs). 
In addition, previous observations have shown that circumferential cracks do not run through 
the entire thickness of films; actually, most cracks are confined within the upper half of polymer films. 
The stresses should be maximum at the substrate- polymer interfaces but minimal at the free top 
surfaces; yet cracks are confined on the top portions of films. Thus, cracks in PLLA cannot be simply 
or properly interpreted by the convention mech anisms of the stresses generated at substrate 
interfaces. 
Xu et al. [16] reported crac ks in PHB crystallized at Tc = 90 °C and cooled, using alternative 
substrates (polyimide and poly(ethylene terephthalat e) films). As shown in Figure 14, there are two 
distinct circumferential cracks in PHB films crystallized (at 90 °C) between two polyimide slides 
(Figure 14a). Although the number of cracks is fewer than that of ring bands, it is obvious that the circumferential circular cracks follow exactly the tr acts of the boundaries of the ring bands. In 
addition, short cracks are present on the nuclei center. 
 
Figure 14.  PHB spherulites crystallized at 90 °C fr om the melt films sandwiched between: ( a) 
polyimide slides; and ( b) poly(ethylene terephthalate) slides. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16]. 
In 2010, Ye et al. [41] also studied PHB, a chiral polymer, to assess the correlation of surface stress 
with lamellae shapes and chiral senses using theoreti cal simulations, which show that the distribution 
of anisotropic surface stresses has considerable infl uence on the morphologies of lamellar crystals, 
Figure 13. Irregular tangential cracks and ringless spherulites as revealed in POM ( leftcolumn) and
OM ( right column) for LM w-PLLA-11k isothermally crystallized at 130C: (a) glass substrate untreated
but glass cover pre-treated with release agent; and ( b) both glass substrate and cover treated with
release agent (scale bar = 50 m in all graphs).
In addition, previous observations have shown that circumferential cracks do not run through
the entire thickness of ﬁlms; actually, most cracks are conﬁned within the upper half of polymer
ﬁlms. The stresses should be maximum at the substrate-polymer interfaces but minimal at the free top
surfaces; yet cracks are conﬁned on the top portions of ﬁlms. Thus, cracks in PLLA cannot be simply
or properly interpreted by the convention mechanisms of the stresses generated at substrate interfaces.
Xu et al. [ 16] reported cracks in PHB crystallized at Tc= 90C and cooled, using alternative
substrates (polyimide and poly(ethylene terephthalate) ﬁlms). As shown in Figure 14, there are two
distinct circumferential cracks in PHB ﬁlms crystallized (at 90C) between two polyimide slides
(Figure 14a). Although the number of cracks is fewer than that of ring bands, it is obvious that the
circumferential circular cracks follow exactly the tracts of the boundaries of the ring bands. In addition,
short cracks are present on the nuclei center.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 19 of 25 
factors affecting patterns of cracks and occurrence of  either ring-banded or ringless spherulites of 
PLLA. 
 
Figure 13.  Irregular tangential cracks and ring less spherulites as revealed in POM ( left column) and 
OM ( right  column) for LM w-PLLA-11k isothermally cr ystallized at 130 °C: ( a) glass substrate 
untreated but glass cover pre-trea ted with release agent; and ( b) both glass substrate and cover treated 
with release agent (scale bar = 50 μm in all graphs). 
In addition, previous observations have shown that circumferential cracks do not run through 
the entire thickness of films; actually, most cracks are confined within the upper half of polymer films. 
The stresses should be maximum at the substrate- polymer interfaces but minimal at the free top 
surfaces; yet cracks are confined on the top portions of films. Thus, cracks in PLLA cannot be simply 
or properly interpreted by the convention mech anisms of the stresses generated at substrate 
interfaces. 
Xu et al. [16] reported crac ks in PHB crystallized at Tc = 90 °C and cooled, using alternative 
substrates (polyimide and poly(ethylene terephthalat e) films). As shown in Figure 14, there are two 
distinct circumferential cracks in PHB films crystallized (at 90 °C) between two polyimide slides 
(Figure 14a). Although the number of cracks is fewer than that of ring bands, it is obvious that the circumferential circular cracks follow exactly the tr acts of the boundaries of the ring bands. In 
addition, short cracks are present on the nuclei center. 
 
Figure 14.  PHB spherulites crystallized at 90 °C fr om the melt films sandwiched between: ( a) 
polyimide slides; and ( b) poly(ethylene terephthalate) slides. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16]. 
In 2010, Ye et al. [41] also studied PHB, a chiral polymer, to assess the correlation of surface stress 
with lamellae shapes and chiral senses using theoreti cal simulations, which show that the distribution 
of anisotropic surface stresses has considerable infl uence on the morphologies of lamellar crystals, 
Figure 14. PHB spherulites crystallized at 90C from the melt ﬁlms sandwiched between: ( a) polyimide
slides; and ( b) poly(ethylene terephthalate) slides. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16].
In 2010, Ye et al. [ 41] also studied PHB, a chiral polymer, to assess the correlation of surface stress
with lamellae shapes and chiral senses using theoretical simulations, which show that the distributionPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 20 of 25
of anisotropic surface stresses has considerable inﬂuence on the morphologies of lamellar crystals,
and that alteration of the direction of surface stresses may change the twisting chirality. Nevertheless,
the assumptions of PHB lamellae in that study were based on a continuously spiraling twist (handily
adapted from the model of DNA molecular double spirals). Models of continuous spiral twist lamellae
(like a spiral ribbon) were regarded as mechanism of periodic optical banding in spherulites since
Keller, Keith, and Padden et al. initiated the concepts [ 22–24]. With much more advanced and
powerful modern instruments than those available in 1960s, solid proofs on “continuity” and “source
for twisting” are still unproven or have been controversially debated to date for nearly ﬁfty years,
which suggests that critical pieces of evidence in support of the continuous-twist proposals are yet to be
justiﬁed with clearer and stronger evidence. Opposite to that, long-time assumed opinion of continuous
spirals for banding is expressed by some recent advances. This updated concept was novel for banding
mechanisms, and also extremely critical in assessing the cracks in banded spherulites. Woo et al. [ 25]
in 2012 have demonstrated corrugate-board-like structures with apparently inter-ring discontinuity in
crystallized and ring-banded poly(ethylene adipate) (PEA). Similarly, in 2013, Schultz [ 42] claimed in
a re-visit of his old 2004 AFM data [ 43] for poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBH)
ring-banded spherulites that he emphatically reverted the opinion of continuous twisting to that
“unusual discontinuity” may exist in the bands, and “what observed here does not accord with any
extant models of crystal twisting.” Note here that both PEA and PHBH crystallize into ring-banded
spherulites with optical birefringence patterns similar to PHB.
8. Cracks in Poly(Trimethylene Terephthalate) (PTT) Ring-Banded Spherulites
Poly(trimethylene terephthalate) (PTT), being a much tougher polymer than PLLA or PHB, shows
cracks only in more severe circumstances. Yao and Yang [ 44] studied cracking in poly(trimethylene
terephthalate) (PTT) spherulites grown between two substrates, crystallized at Tc= 190C and cooled
to lower temperatures or ambient (120, 90, 40C). They reported that PTT spherulites grown between
two polyimide and two Teﬂon sheets showed no cracks, but PTT ﬁlm grown between two glass
sheets lubricated with silicon oil displayed reduced number of cracks but did not totally eliminate
cracks. With PTT grown on a single substrate (top free surface) at same Tc= 190C, ring-bands
and cracks also appeared. The number of cracks in PTT was low compared to that of spherulites
grown between two glass surfaces; however, in thicker PTT ﬁlms (>30 m), cracks are still present in
crystallized and cooled PTT ﬁlms. It should be noted that most of cracks in the PTT ﬁlms roughly
follow the ring-band patterns in the crystallized PTT ﬁlms, although the cracks are more smoothly
circular than the zigzag ring bands. This may be rationalized by cracks being likely initiated from some
lamellae interfacial boundaries, but propagating more or less in a course not necessarily along the
zigzag patterns. By comparison, cracks are never seen when the thickness of PTT ﬁlms is smaller than
20 um. Again, this fact testiﬁes that stress of polymer-substrate contact alone is not sufﬁcient for cracks.
The stress should be decreasingly less for the top surface of thicker PTT ﬁlms; nevertheless, cracks
develop in thicker ﬁlms with single side of glass substrate, but not in thinner ﬁlms. They claimed that
this behavior in PTT is similar to the case of PHB [15].
Kuboyama and Ogizawa [ 45] studied solvent-dipping induced cracks in PTT, where PTT
spherulites were ﬁrst isothermally crystallized at 195C in ﬁlms with thickness of about 5, 10 and
20m, and the specimens were dipped into chloroform to cause cracking. As shown in Figure 15,
the banded pattern and cracks are simultaneously present in PTT spherulites (irregularly ring-banded
atTc= 195C). Like the results we have shown and discussed earlier for the case of LM w-PLLA
spherulites, the solvent-dipping induced cracks in the crystallized PTT ﬁlms roughly coincide with
the ring-band patterns. The facts reinstates that cracks most likely are initiated in the interfacial
boundaries between lamellar bundles as manifested by the ring-band patterns in PTT spherulites.
The authors also commented that the cracks in thinner ﬁlms (Figure 2a,b of Ref. [ 45]) are less ordered.
They also observed that the cracking pattern in PTT ﬁlms is mostly concentric; however, the number
of cracks in the thinner PTT ﬁlms was more than that in the thicker one. This fact indicates thatPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 21 of 25
the spacing between cracks increased monotonically with increase of the thickness of PTT specimen.
They also attempted to probe possible correlations between the ring bands and cracks in the PTT
spherulites by examining two PTT specimens, one being isothermally crystallized at Tc= 160C
(ringless) and the other 195C (ring-banded). Ringless PTT spherulite isothermally crystallized at
160C, cooled and dipped into solvent, exhibits only one sporadic crack line near the external periphery
of spherulites. They concluded that in the PTT banded spherulite, the concentric multiple cracks are
formed periodically that correlate well with the banded pattern. However, other than pointing out the
correlation, they did not establish how or why the cracks are in correlation with the ring band.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 21 of 25 
spherulites by examining two PTT specimens, one being isothermally crystallized at Tc = 160 °C 
(ringless) and the other 195 °C (ring-banded). Ringless PTT spherulite isothermally crystallized at 160 °C, cooled and dipped into solvent, exhibits only on e sporadic crack line near the external periphery 
of spherulites. They concluded that in the PTT banded  spherulite, the concentric multiple cracks are 
formed periodically that correlate well with the banded pattern. However, other than pointing out 
the correlation, they did not establish how or why th e cracks are in correlation with the ring band. 
 
Figure 15.  Polarized light micrograph showing cracks an d ring bands in PTT spherulite isothermally 
crystallized at 195 °C and cooled/dipped in  solvent. Film thickness is about 20 μm. Reprinted by 
permission from Macmillan Publishers  Ltd Ref. [45], copyright (2008). 
In two of our recent studies dealing with interior lamellae assembly in PTT banded spherulites 
[46,47], we discovered for the first time that in the ring-banded PTT spherulites, there exists 
discontinuity and interfacial boundaries between the successive bands in PTT spherulites. This 
critical finding in ring-banded PTT provides tips of how circular cracks might be initiated, as well as 
how lamellae crystals are assembled in the ring-banded PTT spherulites. Such finding points a new direction of understanding the cracks not only in PTT, but also in other polymers like PLLA and PHB. In addition, all the trends in the cracks in PTT films of different thickness in the Kuboyama and 
coworkers’ study [45] are consistently and striking ly in agreement with the variation trends of the 
ring bands in crystallized PTT of different thickness that we just disclosed recently [46,47]. 
Note that PTT crystallized at 165 °C has strong birefringent ring bands, but the PTT films does 
not develop intra-spherulite cracks (except for inte r-spherulite impingement cracks) in the PTT films 
crystallized at 165 °C and cooled. This behavior of lacking cracks in 165 °C-crystallized PTT films is quite different from what observed by Ogizawa and Kuboyama, who reported extensive cracks in 
ring-banded PTT films (5–20 μm) crystallized at T
c = 195 °C and cooled/dipped in solvents [45]. 
Apparently, Tc and/or solvent dipping is one of main parameters influencing the crack formation in 
PTT or other polymers. Woo et al . [46,47] studied the ring-banded PTT spherulites (regularly ring-
banded at Tc = 165 °C, and cooled to ambient), and found obvious inter-ring crevices (discontinuity) 
by etching with potassium permanganate (KMnO 4). Figure 16 shows results of PTT film crystallized 
at 165 °C, cooled and etched for 20 min in KMnO 4 solution. Figure 16a is POM graph of virgin PTT 
(unetched) with birefringence bands of high orders with extinct Maltese-cross, and Figure 16b shows 
SEM graph PTT spherulites (permanganate etched) wi th either spiral crevices. The POM, with the 
Maltese-cross interference and lack of resolution, may be hard to tell exactly that they are spiral or 
concentric rings, but the SEM graph tells more clearly that these are spirals originating from the nuclei 
centers. Etching with potassium permanganate on  165 °C-crystallized PTT with ring bands removed 
the species of either amorphous matters or stressed crystals at interfaces, exposing the hidden discontinuity between the ring bands. One can see th at the rings (in continuous spiral or circular 
shapes) between the crevices remain intact and not etched by KMnO
4, indicating the lamellae 
growing along the circular rings (or spiral rings), with branches growing at nearly perpendicularly. 
The fact suggests an opposed view to extant models of continuous spiral-twist lamellae radiating and 
extending from nuclei center to peripheral. Thes e spiral-shaped interfaces between the spiraling 
lamellae originating from the nuclei center may guide the cracks upon cooling. 
Figure 15. Polarized light micrograph showing cracks and ring bands in PTT spherulite isothermally
crystallized at 195C and cooled/dipped in solvent. Film thickness is about 20 m. Reprinted by
permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd Ref. [45], copyright (2008).
In two of our recent studies dealing with interior lamellae assembly in PTT banded
spherulites [46,47] , we discovered for the ﬁrst time that in the ring-banded PTT spherulites, there exists
discontinuity and interfacial boundaries between the successive bands in PTT spherulites. This critical
ﬁnding in ring-banded PTT provides tips of how circular cracks might be initiated, as well as how
lamellae crystals are assembled in the ring-banded PTT spherulites. Such ﬁnding points a new
direction of understanding the cracks not only in PTT, but also in other polymers like PLLA and
PHB. In addition, all the trends in the cracks in PTT ﬁlms of different thickness in the Kuboyama and
coworkers’ study [ 45] are consistently and strikingly in agreement with the variation trends of the ring
bands in crystallized PTT of different thickness that we just disclosed recently [46,47].
Note that PTT crystallized at 165C has strong birefringent ring bands, but the PTT ﬁlms
does not develop intra-spherulite cracks (except for inter-spherulite impingement cracks) in the PTT
ﬁlms crystallized at 165C and cooled. This behavior of lacking cracks in 165C-crystallized PTT
ﬁlms is quite different from what observed by Ogizawa and Kuboyama, who reported extensive
cracks in ring-banded PTT ﬁlms (5–20 m) crystallized at Tc= 195C and cooled/dipped in
solvents [ 45]. Apparently, Tcand/or solvent dipping is one of main parameters inﬂuencing the
crack formation in PTT or other polymers. Woo et al. [ 46,47] studied the ring-banded PTT spherulites
(regularly ring-banded at Tc= 165C, and cooled to ambient), and found obvious inter-ring crevices
(discontinuity) by etching with potassium permanganate (KMnO 4). Figure 16 shows results of PTT
ﬁlm crystallized at 165C, cooled and etched for 20 min in KMnO 4solution. Figure 16a is POM
graph of virgin PTT (unetched) with birefringence bands of high orders with extinct Maltese-cross,
and Figure 16b shows SEM graph PTT spherulites (permanganate etched) with either spiral crevices.
The POM, with the Maltese-cross interference and lack of resolution, may be hard to tell exactly that
they are spiral or concentric rings, but the SEM graph tells more clearly that these are spirals originating
from the nuclei centers. Etching with potassium permanganate on 165C-crystallized PTT with ring
bands removed the species of either amorphous matters or stressed crystals at interfaces, exposing
the hidden discontinuity between the ring bands. One can see that the rings (in continuous spiral or
circular shapes) between the crevices remain intact and not etched by KMnO 4, indicating the lamellae
growing along the circular rings (or spiral rings), with branches growing at nearly perpendicularly.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 22 of 25
The fact suggests an opposed view to extant models of continuous spiral-twist lamellae radiating
and extending from nuclei center to peripheral. These spiral-shaped interfaces between the spiraling
lamellae originating from the nuclei center may guide the cracks upon cooling.
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 22 of 25 
 
Figure 16.  Birefringent rings and crevic es between the rings in PTT sp herulite crystallized at 165 °C: 
(a) POM graph of virgin PTT; and ( b) SEM graph of 20 min KMnO 4-etched PTT. Reproduced from 
Ref. [47] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cracks in spherulites occur immediately upon quenching to ambient. In PTT ring banded 
spherulites, when cracks develop, th ey always follow the tracts of the ring-band patterns. Figure 17 
shows POM graphs for PTT films (ca. 40 μm) that were melt at Tmax = 260 °C for 2, 5, 10, and 30 min, 
quenched to Tc = 165 °C for full crystallization and cooled to ambient RT. Interestingly, the ring bands 
are of a counterclockwise spiral; the cracks, though  not in the same number of the ring bands, are 
also of the same counterclockwise spiral. The spiral  optical ring bands are sl ightly distorted near the 
core (see POM graph at 10 min); similarly, the spiral  cracks are also distorted on the same spots (see 
OM graph at 30 min). 
 
Figure 17.  POM graphs showing PTT melt at Tmax = 260 °C for: ( a) 2 min; ( b) 5 min; ( c) 10 min; and ( d) 
30 min, and then quenched to 165 °C for full crysta llization before cooled to RT. All the graphs are 
taken at RT. 
9. Conclusions 
Several common factors are identified for infl uencing the cracks in PLLA, PHB, or PTT: Tc, film 
thickness, Mw, ductility, spherulite patterns of ring band or dendrite patterns at Tc, prior crystals as 
templates, growth/contraction under constrained vs. unconstrained (covered with glass or not) 
conditions, etc. Even cooling speed and time (slo w cooling vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen) might 
influence the extent of cracking. Spherulite si ze is also associated with cracks. Different Tc alters not 
only the sizes but also the birefringence patterns of  spherulites, and cracks in PLLA are spherulite-
size dependent. Apparently, it takes a critical spherulite size for formation of cracks. For small 
spherulites (<1 μm) or ductile spherulites, cracks are less likely to develop. Film samples crystallized 
with a top glass cover usually develop more extensiv e cracks, or entirely different patterns of cracks, 
than do ones with free top surfaces. 
Figure 16. Birefringent rings and crevices between the rings in PTT spherulite crystallized at 165C:
(a) POM graph of virgin PTT; and ( b) SEM graph of 20 min KMnO 4-etched PTT. Reproduced from
Ref. [47] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Cracks in spherulites occur immediately upon quenching to ambient. In PTT ring banded
spherulites, when cracks develop, they always follow the tracts of the ring-band patterns. Figure 17
shows POM graphs for PTT ﬁlms (ca. 40 m) that were melt at Tmax= 260C for 2, 5, 10, and 30 min,
quenched to Tc= 165C for full crystallization and cooled to ambient RT. Interestingly, the ring bands
are of a counterclockwise spiral; the cracks, though not in the same number of the ring bands, are also
of the same counterclockwise spiral. The spiral optical ring bands are slightly distorted near the core
(see POM graph at 10 min); similarly, the spiral cracks are also distorted on the same spots (see OM
graph at 30 min).
Polymers 2016 , 8, 329 22 of 25 
 
Figure 16.  Birefringent rings and crevic es between the rings in PTT sp herulite crystallized at 165 °C: 
(a) POM graph of virgin PTT; and ( b) SEM graph of 20 min KMnO 4-etched PTT. Reproduced from 
Ref. [47] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cracks in spherulites occur immediately upon quenching to ambient. In PTT ring banded 
spherulites, when cracks develop, th ey always follow the tracts of the ring-band patterns. Figure 17 
shows POM graphs for PTT films (ca. 40 μm) that were melt at Tmax = 260 °C for 2, 5, 10, and 30 min, 
quenched to Tc = 165 °C for full crystallization and cooled to ambient RT. Interestingly, the ring bands 
are of a counterclockwise spiral; the cracks, though  not in the same number of the ring bands, are 
also of the same counterclockwise spiral. The spiral  optical ring bands are sl ightly distorted near the 
core (see POM graph at 10 min); similarly, the spiral  cracks are also distorted on the same spots (see 
OM graph at 30 min). 
 
Figure 17.  POM graphs showing PTT melt at Tmax = 260 °C for: ( a) 2 min; ( b) 5 min; ( c) 10 min; and ( d) 
30 min, and then quenched to 165 °C for full crysta llization before cooled to RT. All the graphs are 
taken at RT. 
9. Conclusions 
Several common factors are identified for infl uencing the cracks in PLLA, PHB, or PTT: Tc, film 
thickness, Mw, ductility, spherulite patterns of ring band or dendrite patterns at Tc, prior crystals as 
templates, growth/contraction under constrained vs. unconstrained (covered with glass or not) 
conditions, etc. Even cooling speed and time (slo w cooling vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen) might 
influence the extent of cracking. Spherulite si ze is also associated with cracks. Different Tc alters not 
only the sizes but also the birefringence patterns of  spherulites, and cracks in PLLA are spherulite-
size dependent. Apparently, it takes a critical spherulite size for formation of cracks. For small 
spherulites (<1 μm) or ductile spherulites, cracks are less likely to develop. Film samples crystallized 
with a top glass cover usually develop more extensiv e cracks, or entirely different patterns of cracks, 
than do ones with free top surfaces. 
Figure 17. POM graphs showing PTT melt at Tmax= 260C for: ( a) 2 min; ( b) 5 min; ( c) 10 min;
and ( d) 30 min, and then quenched to 165C for full crystallization before cooled to RT. All the graphs
are taken at RT.
9. Conclusions
Several common factors are identiﬁed for inﬂuencing the cracks in PLLA, PHB, or PTT:
Tc, ﬁlm thickness, Mw, ductility, spherulite patterns of ring band or dendrite patterns at Tc, prior
crystals as templates, growth/contraction under constrained vs. unconstrained (covered with glass or
not) conditions, etc. Even cooling speed and time (slow cooling vs. dipping in liquid nitrogen) might
inﬂuence the extent of cracking. Spherulite size is also associated with cracks. Different Tcalters notPolymers 2016 ,8, 329 23 of 25
only the sizes but also the birefringence patterns of spherulites, and cracks in PLLA are spherulite-size
dependent. Apparently, it takes a critical spherulite size for formation of cracks. For small spherulites
(<1m) or ductile spherulites, cracks are less likely to develop. Film samples crystallized with a top
glass cover usually develop more extensive cracks, or entirely different patterns of cracks, than do
ones with free top surfaces.
All the crack patterns ever reported in the literature include: (1) tri-branch cracks; (2) short radial
cracks; and (3) circumferential long cracks. These may assume four major patterns: (a) circular and
concentric; (b) clockwise or counterclockwise spirals (similar to Archimedean spirals); (c) hexagonal
shapes; or (d) hexagonal in inner portion, but circular in outer portion. The ﬁrst two types of cracks
(tri-branch and short radial types) are apparently a result of easy cracking along the parallel-oriented
lamellae (or lamellar bundles) with interfaces. The long and circumferential cracks (circular or
hexagonal shapes) are often coinciding with the ring patterns commonly seen in ring-banded
spherulites. The striking similarity between the crack patterns and ring bands in spherulites suggests
a possibility of correlations between the cracks in lamellae assembly in the ring-band spherulites.
Circumferential cracks tend to follow the same tracks of lamellae packed in the banded spherulites.
Crack formation and types of cracks in ring-banded spherulites are intimately associated with the
crystal orientation, and patterns of crystalline lamellae and spherulites.
Updated studies have shed new light that there exists distinct discontinuity and interfaces
between the successive ring bands, contrary to the conventional beliefs that lamellae are continuously
spiral-twist in ring-banded spherulites. Such updated views via interior lamellae dissection and
analysis on banded spherulites provide avenues for circumferential cracks to develop upon cooling
contraction. Spherulites are composed of complex hierarchical polycrystalline species, and they
should not be viewed as being composed of straight radially-oriented lamellae or DNA-like spiraling
single-crystal lamellae radiating out from a common center.
Exception of lack of correlations can be seen in circular or hexagonal circumferential cracks in
some ringless spherulites. Although ring band patterns are absent (or invisible) in ringless spherulites,
the cracks may be initiated near the nuclei center, where lamellae are oriented in speciﬁc patterns to
guide crack to propagate. In the ringless spherulites, usually two types of circumferential cracks are
common: (a) the smooth circumferential cracks; and (b) irregular and discontinuous circumferential
cracks. In some rarer circumstances, spiral cracks can take a hexagon shape in the inner core, gradually
transforming into circular helical in the outer periphery of spherulites. Such complex shapes of cracks
are certainly hard to explain by simple directional differences in CTE, without accounting for the
interior lamellae assembly that may guide the cracks. Usually, the smooth circumferential cracks
are present in the ringless spherulites crystallized at lower Tcwhile the irregular/discontinuous
cracks are in the ringless spherulites crystallized at generally higher Tc. Lamellar bundles in low- Tc
crystallized ringless spherulites are thinner with fewer branches, leading to cracks to propagate
more smoothly. On the other hand, lamellar bundles in high- Tc-crystallized ringless spherulites are
much thicker with more branches and apparent twisting/scrolling, leading to cracks to propagate
with intermittent interruptions. Irregular and discontinuous cracks are resulted. Cleary, the crack
types, depths, and patterns in the ringless spherulites differ signiﬁcantly from those in ring-banded
spherulites, owing to the substantial differences of lamellae assembly in these two types of spherulites.
It is critical to note that for either ring-banded or ringless spherulites of all polymers, the cracks mostly
coincide with the weaker interfaces or discontinuities in the lamellae packed within the spherulites.
Acknowledgments: This work has been ﬁnancially supported by a basic research grant (MOST-105-
2221-E006-246-MY3) for three consecutive years from Taiwan Ministry of Science and Technology(MOST), to which
the authors express their gratitude. This research was also partially supported by the Ministry of Education,
Taiwan, in aim for the Top University Project to National Cheng Kung University (NCKU) for ﬁscal years
of 2015–2016.
Author Contributions: This feature/review article is contributed by two authors. Eamor M. Woo initiated and
wrote most of the paper upon invitation. Graecia Lugito helped in editing of graphs, proofreading of correctness
of all references, formatting, and securing copyright permissions.Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 24 of 25
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.
References
1. Burns, S.J. Stresses and Cracks in Spherulites from Transformation Strains. Scr. Mater. 1996 ,35, 925–931.
[CrossRef]
2. Vasanthakumari, R.; Pennings, A.J. Crystallization Kinetics of Poly( L-lactic acid). Polymer 1983 ,24, 175–178.
[CrossRef]
3. Nakafuku, C.; Sakoda, M. Melting and Crystallization of Poly( L-lactic acid) and Poly(ethylene oxide) Binary
Mixture. Polym. J. 1993 ,25, 909–917. [CrossRef]
4. Blümm, E.; Owen, A.J. Miscibility, Crystallization and Melting of Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)/Poly( L-lactide)
Blends. Polymer 1995 ,36, 4077–4081. [CrossRef]
5. Barham, P .J.; Keller, A.J. The Relationship between Microstructure and Mode of Fracture
in Polyhydroxybutyrate. J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 1986 ,24, 69–77. [CrossRef]
6. Sarasua, J.R.; Prud’homme, R.E.; Wisniewski, M.; Borgne, A.L.; Spassky, N. Crystallization and Melting
Behavior of Polylactides. Macromolecules 1998 ,31, 3895–3905. [CrossRef]
7. Gazzano, M.; Forcarete, M.L.; Riekel, C.; Scandola, M. Structural Study of Poly( L-lactic acid) Spherulites.
Biomacromolecules 2004 ,5, 553–558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Xu, J.; Guo, B.H.; Zhou, J.J.; Li, L.; Wu, J.; Kowalczuk, M. Observation of Banded Spherulites in Pure
Poly( L-lactide) and its Miscible Blends with Amorphous Polymers. Polymer 2005 ,46, 9176–9185. [CrossRef]
9. Yasuniwa, M.; Tsubakihara, S.; Iura, K.; Ono, Y.; Dan, Y.; Takahashi, K. Crystallization Behavior of
Poly( L-lactic acid). Polymer 2006 ,47, 7554–7563. [CrossRef]
10. Wang, Y.; Funari, S.S.; Mano, J.F. Inﬂuence of Semicrystalline Morphology on the Glass Transition of
Poly( L-lactic acid). Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2006 ,207, 1262–1271. [CrossRef]
11. Woo, E.M.; Lugito, G.; Tsai, J.H. Effects of Top Conﬁnement and Diluents on Morphology in Crystallization
of Poly( L-lactic acid) Interacting with poly(ethylene oxide). J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2015 ,53,
1160–1170. [CrossRef]
12. Wunderlich, B. Macromolecular Physics ; Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 1977.
13. Dell’erba, R.; Groeninckx, G.; Maglio, M.; Malinconica, M.; Migliozzi, A. Immiscible Polymer Blends
of Semicrystalline Biocompatible Components: Thermal Properties and Phase Morphology Analysis of
PLLA/PCL Blends. Polymer 2001 ,42, 7831–7840. [CrossRef]
14. Martinez-Salazar, J.; Sanchez-Cuesta, M.; Barham, P .J.; Keller, A.J. Thermal expansion and spherulite cracking
in 3-hydroxybutyrate/3-hydroxyvalerate copolymers. J. Mater. Sci. Lett. 1989 ,8, 490–492. [CrossRef]
15. Hobbs, J.K.; McMaster, T.J.; Miles, M.J.; Barham, P .J. Cracking in Spherulites of Poly(hydroxybutyrate).
Polymer 1996 ,37, 3241–3246. [CrossRef]
16. Xu, J.; Guo, B.H.; Chen, G.Q.; Zhang, Z.M. Terraces on Banded Spherulites of Polyhydroxyalkanoates.
J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2003 ,41, 2128–2134. [CrossRef]
17. Fraschini, C.; Plesu, R.; Sarasua, J.R.; Prud’homme, R.E. Cracking in Polylactide Spherulites. J. Polym. Sci.
Part B Polym. Phys. 2005 ,43, 3308–3315. [CrossRef]
18. He, Y.; Fan, Z.; Wei, J.; Li, S. Morphology and Melt Crystallization of Poly( L-lactide) Obtained by Ring
Opening Polymerization of L-lactide with Zinc Catalyst. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2006 ,46, 1583–1589. [CrossRef]
19. Nurkhamidah, S.; Woo, E.M. Effects of Stereocomplex Nuclei or Spherulites on Crystalline Morphology and
Crack Behavior of Poly( L-lactic acid). Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2011 ,212, 1663–1670. [CrossRef]
20. Nurkhamidah, S.; Woo, E.M. Cracks and Ring Bands of Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) on Precrystallized
Poly( L-lactic acid) Template. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2011 ,50, 4494–4503. [CrossRef]
21. Lotz, B.; Cheng, S.Z.D. A Critical Assessment of Unbalanced Surface Stresses as the Mechanical Origin of
Twisting and Scrolling of Polymer Crystals. Polymer 2005 ,46, 577–610. [CrossRef]
22. Keller, A.J. Investigations on Banded Spherulites. J. Polym. Sci. 1959 ,39, 151–173. [CrossRef]
23. Keith, H.D.; Padden, F.J., Jr. Twisting Orientation and the Role of Transient States in Polymer Crystallization.
Polymer 1984 ,25, 28–42. [CrossRef]
24. Keith, H.D.; Padden, F.J., Jr. Banding in Polyethylene and Other Spherulites. Macromolecules 1996 ,29,
7776–7786. [CrossRef]Polymers 2016 ,8, 329 25 of 25
25. Woo, E.M.; Wang, L.Y.; Nurkhamidah, S. Crystal Lamellae of Opposite Orientations by Three-Dimensional
Dissecting onto Spherulites of Poly(ethylene adipate) Crystallized in Bulk Form. Macromolecules 2012 ,45,
1375–1383. [CrossRef]
26. Lugito, G.; Woo, E.M. Interior Lamellar Assembly in Correlation to Top-Surface Banding in Crystallized
Poly(ethylene adipate). Cryst. Growth Des. 2014 ,14, 4929–4936. [CrossRef]
27. Woo, E.M.; Lugito, G. Origins of Periodic Bands in Polymer Spherulites. Eur. Polym. J. 2015 ,71, 27–60.
[CrossRef]
28. Lugito, G.; Woo, E.M.; Hsieh, Y.T. Transitional Ring Bands Constructed by Discrete Positive- and
Negative-Birefringence Lamellae Packed in Poly(1,6-hexamethylene adipate) Spherulites. Macromolecules
2015 ,48, 7953–7967. [CrossRef]
29. Nurkhamidah, S.; Woo, E.M. Correlation of Crack Patterns and Ring Bands in Spherulites of Highly
Crystalline Poly( L-lactic acid). Colloid Polym. Sci. 2012 ,290, 275–288. [CrossRef]
30. Meyers, M.A.; O’Donohue, N. The Mercedes-Benz Sign: Insight into the Dynamics of Formation and
Disappearance of Gallstones. Am. J. Roentgenol. 1973 ,119, 63–70. [CrossRef]
31. Nurkhamidah, S.; Woo, E.M. Effects of Crystallinity and Molecular Weight on Crack Behavior in Crystalline
Poly( L-lactic acid). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2011 ,122, 1976–1985. [CrossRef]
32. Woo, E.M.; Lugito, G.; Nurkhamidah, S. Shapes and Origins of Cracks and Correlations with Lamellae
Assembly in Poly( L-lactic acid). Macromol. Symp. 2016 , in press.
33. Lee, L.T.; Woo, E.M.; Hsieh, Y.T. Macro- and Micro-Lamellar Assembly and Mechanisms for Unusual
Large-Pitch Banding in Poly( L-lactic acid). Polymer 2012 ,53, 5313–5319. [CrossRef]
34. Matsuda, F.; Sobajima, T.; Irie, S.; Sasaki, T. Spiral Crack Patterns Observed for Melt-Grown Spherulites of
Poly( L-lactic acid) upon Quenching. Eur. Phys. J. E 2016 ,39, 41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Woo, E.M.; Lugito, G.; Tsai, J.H.; Müller, A.J. Hierarchically Diminishing Chirality Effects on Lamellar
Assembly in Spherulites Comprising Chiral Polymers. Macromolecules 2016 ,49, 2698–2708. [CrossRef]
36. Nurkhamidah, S.; Woo, E.M. Unconventional Nonbirefringent or Birefringent Concentric Ring-Banded
Spherulites in Poly( L-lactic acid) Thin Films. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2013 ,214, 673–680. [CrossRef]
37. Nitta, K.H.; Takayanagi, M. Direct Observation of the Deformation of Isolated Huge Spherulites in Isotactic
Polypropylene. J. Mater. Sci. 2003 ,38, 4889–4894. [CrossRef]
38. Nowacki, R.; Kolasinska, J.; Piorkowska, E. Cavitation during Isothermal Crystallization of Isotactic
Polypropylene. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2001 ,79, 2439–2448. [CrossRef]
39. Barham, P .J.; Keller, A. The Problem of Thermal Expansion Polyethylene Spherulites. J. Mater. Sci. 1977 ,12,
2141–2148. [CrossRef]
40. Hobbs, J.K.; Farrance, O.E.; Kailas, L. How Atomic Force Microscopy Has Contributed to Our Understanding
of Polymer Crystallization. Polymer 2009 ,50, 4281–4292. [CrossRef]
41. Ye, H.M.; Wang, J.S.; Tang, S.; Xu, J.; Feng, X.Q.; Guo, B.H.; Xie, X.M.; Zhou, J.J.; Li, L.; Wu, Q.; et al. Surface
Stress Effects on the Bending Direction and Twisting Chirality of Lamellar Crystals of Chiral Polymer.
Macromolecules 2010 ,43, 5762–5770. [CrossRef]
42. Schultz, J.M. Unusual “Twisting” Morphology in Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate)
Spherulites. Macromolecules 2013 ,46, 4227–4229. [CrossRef]
43. Xu, J.; Guo, B.H.; Zhang, Z.M.; Zhou, J.J.; Jiang, Y.; Yan, S.; Li, L.; Wu, Q.; Chen, G.Q.; Schultz, J.M.
Direct AFM Observation of Crystal Twisting and Organization in Banded Spherulites of Chiral
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate). Macromolecules 2004 ,37, 4118–4123. [CrossRef]
44. Yao, C.; Yang, G. Cracking in Poly(trimethylene terephthalate) Spherulites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2009 ,111,
1713–1719. [CrossRef]
45. Kuboyama, K.; Ougizawa, T. Solvent Induced Cracking and Morphology in Banded Spherulite of
Poly(trimethylene terephthalate). Polym. J. 2008 ,40, 1005–1009. [CrossRef]
46. Lugito, G.; Woo, E.M. Three types of banded structures in highly birefringent poly(trimethylene terephthalate)
spherulites. J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2016 ,54, 1207–1216. [CrossRef]
47. Lugito, G.; Woo, E.M. Novel approaches to study the crystal assembly in banded spherulites of
poly(trimethylene terephthalate). CrystEngComm 2016 ,18, 6158–6165. [CrossRef]
©2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).