Technical Report No. 80
ISSN -0773-8072-80
Brussels, July 2001Aquatic Toxicity of MixturesECETOC Technical Report No. 80
© Copyright - ECETOC 
European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals4 Avenue E. Van Nieuwenhuyse (Bte 6), B-1160 Brussels, Belgium.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of thecopyright holder. Applications to reproduce, store, copy or translate should be made tothe Secretary General. ECETOC welcomes such applications. Reference to the document,its title and summary may be copied or abstracted in data retrieval systems withoutsubsequent reference.
The content of this document has been prepared and reviewed by experts on behalf of
ECETOC with all possible care and from the available scientific information. It is providedfor information only. ECETOC cannot accept any responsibility or liability and does notprovide a warranty for any use or interpretation of the material contained in thispublication.Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
CONTENTS
SUMMARY 1
1. INTRODUCTION 2
2. BACKGROUND 3
2.1 Mixture Toxicity: Terminology and Classification 3
2.1.1 Types of joint actions 4
2.1.2 Models of mixture toxicity, with emphasis on TU approach 5
2.2 Modes of Toxic Action of Organic Substances 7
2.2.1 Non-specific modes of action: "Non-polar Narcosis", "Baseline Toxicity" 7
2.2.2 Specific Modes of Action 8
2.2.3 QSARs 8
2.3 Implications for the Toxic Effects of Mixtures 8
3. ACUTE TOXICITY IN THE LABORATORY 10
3.1 Acute Toxicity of Mixtures 10
3.2 Acute Toxicity of Metals 10
3.3 Acute Toxicity of Pesticides 11
3.4 Acute Toxicity of Surfactants 12
3.5 Acute Toxicity of General Chemicals and of Complex Mixtures 12
3.6 Summary 15
4. CHRONIC TOXICITY IN THE LABORATORY 16
4.1 Chronic Toxicity of Metals 16
4.2 Chronic Toxicity of Pesticides 17
4.3 Chronic Toxicity of Surfactants 18
4.4 Chronic Toxicity of General Chemicals 18
4.5 Discussion 20
4.6 Prediction of the Chronic Toxicity of Mixtures Based on Acute Toxicity 21
5. BEYOND ROUTINE LABORATORY TESTS: MORE REALISTIC EXPOSURES 22
5.1 Introduction 22
5.2 Factors Modifying the Toxic Effects of Mixtures 22
5.3 Model Ecosystems, Field Studies and Effluent Studies 23
6. ASSESSING THE TOXIC EFFECTS OF MIXTURES OF SUBSTANCES IN THE ENVIRONMENT 26
6.1 Introduction 26
6.2 PEC/PNEC Summations 26
6.3 Use of a Correction Factor 29
6.4 Environmental Monitoring 30
6.5 Discussion on Application of Approaches 1-5 31
6.6 Conclusions 32
ECETOC TR No.807. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 34
7.1 Laboratory Exposures 34
7.2 More Realistic Exposures: Model Ecosystems, Field and Effluent Studies 34
7.3 Approaches to Assessing the Toxic Effects of Mixtures 34
7.4 Recommendations 34
GLOSSARY 36
ABBREVIATIONS 38
APPENDIX 1. ENVIRONMENTALLY REALISTIC STUDIES 39
BIBLIOGRAPHY 46
MEMBERS OF THE TASK FORCE 58
MEMBERS OF THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE 59Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80SUMMARY
The inherent toxicity of a substance to aquatic organisms is typically determined via
single species laboratory tests. Results from these tests are used to determine a PredictedNo Effect Concentration (PNEC) for ecosystems per substance. Since organisms in theenvironment are exposed simultaneously to a wide array of substances, it is importantto understand the potential effects of mixtures to aquatic organisms. The effects ofmixtures can be generally categorised as additive, greater than additive (synergism)and less than additive (antagonism). Effects that correspond to the addition of toxicitiesfor each mixture component are considered additive. 
Via acute toxicity tests, mixtures of substances that are chemically related or have the
same mode of action are generally found to be additive. However, some "groups" ofsubstances when tested in relatively simple mixtures do not behave in a readilypredictable manner (e.g. metals and some pesticides). Even so there are only a fewexamples in the literature of synergism where the effects are more than three timesgreater than those predicted from additivity of acute toxic effects. When large numbersof substances are present in mixtures at low concentrations relative to their individualacute toxicities, additivity of acute toxic effects is closely followed. This holds true evenwhen the substances are not related chemically, or exhibit different modes of actionwhen acting as acute toxicants alone. This phenomenon for organic substances has beencalled "baseline toxicity", or narcosis.
The same theory applies to chronic toxicity tests. That is, if organic mixture components
are at concentrations below the level exerting chronic toxicity, then additivity can beexpected - thereby supporting the concept of baseline toxicity. Mixture components withthe same mode of action can be expected also to act additively. However, it is not possibleto make generalisations about the chronic toxicity of mixtures containing metals. Suchmixtures can give responses across the entire range of interactions from antagonismto synergism. This may be due largely to different modes of action and differences inmetal speciation in mixtures compared to single toxicant tests. 
While data from model ecosystems, field studies and effluent studies are generally
limited and difficult to interpret from the standpoint of the toxic effects of mixtures ofsubstances, the evidence tends to support the basic concept of additivity , particularlywhen the role bioavailability can play in reducing toxic effects under environmentalconditions is taken into account. Predicted mixture effects based on body residues fromorganisms exposed in the field indicate that additivity of substances below their PNECs(baseline toxicity approach) is sufficiently conservative for protection of aquatic resources.
1Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.802Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.801Exposure to mixtures in the environment will be the result of the integration of differing partitioning
and loss processes for individual substances, which results in different temporal and spatialdistributions and concentrations of these individual substances in the environment. Therefore, thisreport focuses on environmental mixtures rather than product formulations or other 'initial' mixtureswhich are not present as such in the environment.1. INTRODUCTION 
Single-species laboratory aquatic toxicity tests are used widely in the assessment of the
potential impact of substances in the aquatic environment. In these laboratory tests,toxicity is normally determined for single substances. The toxicity observed in thesestudies may be used to calculate a Predicted No Effect Concentration (PNEC) for theindividual substance. In the environment however, organisms will be exposedsimultaneously to a variety of substances
1. This report discusses how the potential effect
of these mixtures of substances in the environment might be addressed.
Exposure to more than one substance at the same time may: elicit toxic effects which would be expected if the toxicities of the individual substances
were simply added together (concentration addition); 
 elicit toxic effects less than would be expected if the toxicities of the individual
substances were simply added together (less than additive; antagonism); or 
 elicit toxic effects greater than would be expected if the toxicities of the individual
substances were simply added together (more than additive; synergism). 
The challenge for environmental toxicologists and regulators is to assess to what extent
consideration of the toxic effects of mixtures of substances is needed, and how this mightbe achieved to protect adequately the environment. This report reviews the current stateof knowledge and considers some possible approaches. The report does not address thetesting of preparations in the context of mixtures of substances prepared for sale asproducts. 
Different models describing the toxicity of mixtures of individual substances have been
described and thoroughly investigated for the aquatic environment. Key substanceattributes appear to be:
 dosed concentration (acute to subchronic);
 the mode of action of each substance;
 whether these modes of action are interacting or not.
To address these issues, ECETOC formed a Task Force with the following Terms of
Reference:
 Review the data on acute and chronic mixture toxicity from the primary literature
as well as internal company databases;
 critically evaluate the available data concerning the potential for mixture toxicity in
chronic exposures for representative substance classes;
 if necessary, recommend a research programme to address outstanding issues in the
area of aquatic mixture toxicity.Similar joint action Dissimilar joint action
Non-interactive A. Simple similar B. Independent
(concentration addition) (response addition)
(simple addition)
Interactive C. Complex similar D. Dependent
(more than additive [synergistic]) (more than additive [synergistic])or or
(less than additive [antagonistic]) (less than additive [antagonistic])
Where:
interactive = one substance influences biological activity of the other 
substances
non-interactive = no one substance influences the biological activity of the 
other substances
similar joint action = same site of primary toxic actiondissimilar joint action = different site of primary toxic action synergistic = toxic effect more than additive for two or more substancesantagonistic = less toxicity observed than for the sum of the individual 
toxicities
Note
Different authors have used different criteria to determine whether the experimentally-derived results meet the criteria of additivity. Some criteria are based on complex statistical
3Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.802. BACKGROUND 
Consideration of the toxic effects of mixtures of substances is not new. Developmentof a terminology and definition of different potential outcomes, dependent on theproperties of a binary mixture, occurred prior to 1960. However, relatively fewexperimental data have been generated on the toxicity of mixtures, compared to thewealth of data on individual substances. This is due primarily to the complexity ofexperimental designs and the large number of tests required for exhaustive examinationof even fairly simple mixtures. Given these and other practical constraints, the field ofenvironmental risk assessment has evolved to deal primarily with single substances,with occasional consideration of interactions with other factors that may alter theirbioavailability, such as humic acids or suspended solids. However, the potential impactof mixtures of individual substances in the environment is recognised as an unresolvedissue.
2.1 Mixture Toxicity: Terminology and Classification
The development of terminology and classification of the toxicity of mixtures by Bliss(1939) has been elaborated by Plackett and Hewlett (1952). The different models of jointaction are briefly described below, with a comparison of the terms applied in Table 1. 
Table 1: The four types of joint action for mixturesmanipulations, others are a priori determinations (e.g. if values are within + 50% of
the calculated endpoint). For further discussion of the statistical treatment and itsimplications, the reader is referred to Christensen and Chen (1985), Nirmalakhandan et
al(1994), and Pounds and Kodell (1991). The Task Force refers to the various authors'
statistical or decision making framework in all sections throughout the report, not onlythose in the discussions in this section. 
2.1.1 Types of joint actions
Four types of joint action with respect to quantal responses (A,B,C and D) have beendefined for binary mixtures (i.e. by classifying each member of a group of organismssimilarly treated as having responded or not) (Plackett and Hewlett, 1952). 
 When the substances in a mixture have similar joint action and when interaction
between them is absent, the toxicities of the substances in the mixture are consideredsimple similar (type A in Table 1). 
 When interaction between the substances is absent, but the substances have dissimilar
sites of action, the toxicity is considered independent, also termed response addition(type B in Table 1).
 The joint action of the two above can be either complex similar (type C in Table 1) or
dependent (type D in Table 1). 
 If any aspect of the toxicity observed is less than the sum of that of the two individual
substances, this is termed antagonism.
 Where only one of a pair of substances is toxic and the other enhances its toxicity
this is termed potentiation.
Plackett and Hewlett (1952) have developed mathematical models to describe the resulting
dose-response curves for mixtures. Christensen and Chen (1985) updated and contrastedseveral mathematical approaches.
When two compounds are interactive (one influences the biological activity of the other),
as in types C and D, numerous outcomes are possible which may be difficult to predict.For example, one substance may modify the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and/orelimination of another substance(s). Thus, induction of detoxification enzymes or otherchanges brought about by the presence of one substance may result in the more rapidor complete biotransformation of another substance, leading to reduced levels in theorganism and therefore reduced toxicity due to that substance. On the other hand,one substance may increase the penetration of another to the target receptor (organ/tissue)within the organism, leading to an apparent increase in toxicity. Furthermore, a mixturemay result in physical or chemical interactions which alter the identity of one or moreinitial substances, such that their individual toxicities are not expressed or are neutralised,e.g. HCl and NaOH, which react to form NaCl and H
2O.
As an additional confounding factor, some researchers consider bioavailability to be an
interactive factor. Bioavailability is considered in more detail in Section 5.2.
Because of the difficulty in predicting and modelling substance interactions, most of the
theoretical and experimental research carried out in this area has focused on concentration
4Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.805Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80addition (type A), and to a lesser extent on response addition (type B) - the two types
of joint action which are non-interactive. As the review of the literature shows (Sections3 and 4), this focus turns out to be appropriate for the vast majority of cases and for bothacute and chronic laboratory exposures.
In the following discussion and throughout the rest of this report, we will use the concept
"additivity" (= concentration addition) as a reference point. For multiple chemicalmixtures (n > 2), the terms "less than additive" and "more than additive" will be usedif the mixture is not simply additive. Within a complex mixture, the mechanism(s) bywhich less or more than additivity is elicited is often not known, such that the strictdefinitions of synergism or antagonism would not hold. We will also refer primarilyto the Toxic Units (TU) approach as described below.
2.1.2 Models of mixture toxicity, with emphasis on TU approach
In the literature, several different theoretical models describing mixture toxicity basedon concentration addition can be found. For example, the toxicity of a mixture can beexpressed by:
 Toxic Unit (TU) (Brown, 1968; Sprague, 1970), 
 Additivity Index (AI) (Marking, 1977), 
 Mixture Toxicity Index (MTI) (Könemann, 1981). 
Other models take response addition into account (e.g. Finney, 1971). 
The toxic unit (TU) concept is based on the endpoint of an acute or chronic toxicity test.
For acute toxicity the L(E)C
501is commonly used, for chronic toxicity the NOEC, LOEC,
EC10or EC20of the substances in a mixture is used. The concentration of a substance
is expressed as a proportion of the response. For example, the concentration of eachindividual component of a mixture is divided by its LC
50to derive the TU of that
component (Brown, 1968, for an example of TU using 48-h LC50to rainbow trout).
The TUs of the mixture are summed (Brown, 1968) however there is no statistical ortheoretical basis for arriving at the value at which a significant deviation from theexpected toxicity occurs.
 If the sum of toxic units equals 1.0, and the response is what would be expected when
TU equals 1.0 for any single compound the toxicity is assumed to be simple additive(equals concentration addition). 
 A more-than-additive toxicity is indicated if the sum of toxic units is less than 1.0
but the response is close to that expected at TU equals 1.0. 
 If the sum of the TUs in a mixture that produces a response expected at TU equals 1.0
exceeds 1.0, the toxicity of the mixture is indicated as less-than-additivity or antagonisticif less than half of the organisms respond, depending on the strength of the effect seen. 
1Some investigators have included information from the dose response curve (DRC) into account
rather than replying solely on point-based joint action assessments. An example from the field ofdrug interaction is Poch, 1993.6Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Since the assessment of whether on not a mixture of chemicals acts by concentration
addition is likely to require some empirical measurement, it is prone to experimentalerror. Such errors are associated with the measurement or prediction of the individualchemicals in the mixture as well as with the determination of the toxicity of the mixtureitself. The uncertainty associated with these errors can make it difficult to determine ifone or more chemicals in a mixture makes an additive contribution to the overall toxicityor not. 
The maximum signal to noise ratio is achieved by measuring the toxicity of binary
mixtures with each chemical at an equitoxic concentration, i.e. where each chemical ispresent at the same fraction of a TU, and with the toxicity of the mixture expected tobe equal to 1 TU, assuming concentration addition. This simplest mixture test avoidsthe problem associated with some complex mixtures where a small number of chemicalsmay account for the major portion of the overall toxicity and where consequently theability to measure the contribution from the rest of the chemicals in the mixture is lostdue to experimental noise. Clearly, as the number of chemicals in the mixture increasesit becomes more difficult to determine whether or not a chemical is acting additively.Therefore when assessing complex mixtures, it may be valuable to use knowledge aboutthe expected mode of action of the chemicals to make selected additional studies to assessif specific sub-mixtures act as predicted. 
In practice, it is valuable to run a number of studies either to obtain several results for
one replicate test mixture or to generate data on a series of specifically-designed mixtureswhere the ratio of the chemicals is varied. In the first case replicate tests enable the useof suitable hypothesis tests to be applied to the differences between the mean of thepopulations of the measured and predicted (assuming additivity or independent action)TU values of the mixture. Comparison of a series of such paired values can provide astatistical basis on which to conclude if the chemicals in the mixture act additively ornot. For example, if the measured and predicted TU values are not statistically differentat the 95% level of significance, then it is reasonable to conclude that the assumptionabout additivity is correct. In the second case the data are more likely to provide a weightof evidence approach. Application of statistics to determine additivity is likely to becomplex and an assessment may be more dependent on subjective judgement.
The decision on whether the toxicity observed is to be expressed as more than additive
or less than additive can therefore be based on a statistical approach or on simplejudgement, for example a deviation of >30% from the expected additivity indicatesantagonism or synergism. 
Marking (1977) noted that the TU approach is not linearly distributed around 1.0. A
modified system was developed to normalise concentration addition as a reference point(zero). Negative values (to -1.0) represent less-than-additivity, positive values representmore-than-additivity (to +1.0). Note that this Additivity Index (AI) model is still basedfundamentally on the TU approach.Könemann (1981) modified the scale to a mixture toxicity index (MTI) to include both
non-interactive types of joint action (concentration and response addition) in a logarithmicform and to account for any number of substances in the mixture.
2.2 Modes of Toxic Action of Organic Substances
Because the mode of toxic action of an organic substance is crucial to its classificationwithin a mixture (e.g. whether it has similar or dissimilar joint action) a summary oftypes of modes of action is presented below.
2.2.1 Non-specific modes of action: "Non-polar Narcosis", "Baseline Toxicity"
The concepts of baseline toxicity (Deneer et al, 1988; van Wezel and Opperhuizen, 1995;
Verhaar et al, 1995; Van Loon et al, 1997) and critical body residue (CBR) (McCarty et
al, 1992; McCarty and MacKay, 1993) state that chemicals present in tissues at
concentrations below levels that are associated with specific modes of action may imparta narcotic mode of action despite any specific mode of action identified at higherconcentrations (Figure 1). For example, an organochlorine insecticide present in tissuesat 1/100
th the LC50may not be at a sufficient concentration to illicit a neurotoxic effect
on fish, yet its presence in the fish may contribute to a generalised, narcotic mode ofaction. Hence, classifications of substances into specific modes of action are typicallybased on studies in which acute and/or chronic toxicity thresholds have been exceeded.
Figure 1: Illustration of the relationship of baseline toxicity from a chemical identified
as having a specific mode of action
7Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Concentration% ControlThe CBR for non-polar narcosis is approximately 2-8 mmol/kg. Non-polar narcosis
(Narcosis I), is considered reversible and due to general membrane perturbation (e.g.Veith and Broderius, 1990). McKim et al(1987) linked the apparent differences in different
chemical "classes" to separate acute toxicity syndromes. Compounds eliciting a slightlymore toxic response, such as phenols and anilines, were characterised as polar narcotics(Narcosis II) in the Fish Acute Toxicity Syndrome (FATS) scheme, with slightly lowerCBRs of 0.5 to 1 mmol/kg. The mechanism was viewed as membrane depolarisation,leading to a more toxic response (Veith and Broderius, 1990).
2.2.2 Specific modes of action
Some substances have more "specific" modes of action, indicating more specific interactionwith a target receptor (tissue, cell or molecular receptor) which leads to a toxic response.Examples of specific modes of action, again using the FATS classification, includeacetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors, oxidative phosphorylation uncouplers andsubstances causing respiratory irritancy.
2.2.3 QSARs
Aquatic toxicity data are not available for all substances. However, relationships betweenkey physical-chemical parameters and toxicity have been established empirically forseveral series of substances, within and between chemical classes. Such QuantitativeStructure-Activity Relationships (QSARs) have been derived for non-polar narcotics,polar narcotics, and for several specific modes of action (V eith et al, 1980). QSARs are
accepted as a preliminary indication of toxicity in some national regulatory systems (e.g.US EPA, 1994). The European Union (EU) recently evaluated the use of QSARs forregulatory purposes and concluded that models for chemicals acting by non-polar andpolar narcosis are valid in the log K
owrange of 1-6. (EEC, 1996). A separate ECETOC
Task Force has examined the advantages and limitations of QSARs used in environmentalrisk assessment (ECETOC, 1998).
In the absence of experimental data, appropriate QSARs for individual substances, if
available, can be used to estimate the aquatic toxicity of mixtures when basic physical-chemical properties are known or can be estimated. These data can be used to calculatethe theoretical TU of the mixture (see also Section 6). The choice of the appropriate QSARis critical to obtaining meaningful results. 
2.3 Implications for the Toxic Effects of Mixtures
Within the above models, the following implications for the toxic effects of mixtures areapparent:
 all substances should contribute to "baseline" toxicity regardless of their individual
concentrations;
 if a substance is below its own threshold for its specific activity, it is assumed not to
contribute to this specific mode, but still to contribute to the "baseline" toxicity; 
8Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80 specific modes of action are not additive across different modes of action (but are
additive within their own class).
In summary, the consequences of these various hypotheses are as follows:
 for baseline toxicity (concentration addition) in the mixture (Table 1, A) no threshold
exists, a proportional contribution can be summed even if individual concentrationsare below the individual NOECs;
 for independent action of the individual substances in the mixture (Table 1, B), a
threshold exists. No effects due to independent action are observed if the concentrationof each individual substance in the mixture is below its own NOEC. However, thesesubstances can still contribute to "baseline toxicity".
The review of the aquatic toxicology literature which follows (Sections 3 to 5) considers
the theoretical actions of the different chemical types, and the consequences outlinedabove, and indicates that they are in fact observed under experimental conditions.
9Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8010Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.803. ACUTE TOXICITY IN THE LABORATORY
3.1 Acute Toxicity of Mixtures
There is a large body of literature addressing the acute toxicity of mixtures of substances
to a wide range of aquatic invertebrates and fish (short-term tests with algae and bacteriaare regarded as multi-generation, chronic tests and are dealt with in Section 4). Substancestested have included metals, surfactants, pesticides (herbicides, fungicides andinsecticides) and “general chemicals”. This grouping of substances is somewhat arbitrarybut reflects the grouping that appears in the literature. 
Testing of mixtures has ranged from the use of simple binary combinations of “related”
substances to studies with complex mixtures of up to 50 substances from widely differentgroups.
This brief review is not intended to be an exhaustive analysis of the information available
but is an examination of those publications with significant amounts of data consideredto be useful in establishing an overview of the acute toxicities of mixtures. 
The European Inland Fisheries Advisory Committee of FAO produced a report (EIFAC,
1987), reviewing the literature on “The toxic potential of several chemical substances incombination at low level” (some 192 publications were cited). This review concludedthat “ ...there is no evidence that mixtures of the common reactive substances, or ofnonreactive substances, have markedly more than a concentration additive lethal jointtoxic action, and for equitoxic mixtures of more than five substances the joint action isusually slightly less than additive. For all practical purposes, therefore, the possibilityof supraaddition or synergism can be discounted for complex mixtures.” 
The bulk of the data on toxicity of mixtures is addressed in this extensive review (EIFAC,
1987) and the information collated below focuses primarily on papers published since1986, although, where it was useful, older papers have been considered.
The data from the literature reviewed in this section are considered firstly for chemicals
that fall within each of the following groups, metals, surfactants, pesticides and generalchemicals and thereafter for complex mixtures of substances from these various groups. 
3.2 Acute Toxicity of Metals
Wang (1987) reviewed the factors affecting the toxicity of metals to aquatic organisms,including the effects of mixtures of metals. He concluded that “interactions betweenheavy metals appear to be without pattern”, although not all the data referred to werefrom acute toxicity tests. This lack of predictability of effects of mixtures of metalswas true for binary and multiple mixtures. Despite this lack of predictability, in 21 outof 37 interactions analysed the effects were additive or less than additive. 
Spehar and Fiandt (1986), in studies with six metals in fathead minnows ( Pimephales
promelas ) and Ceriodaphnia dubia , concluded that for acute toxicity on fathead minnows,
the effects were more than additive, but for C. dubia the effects were additive.Long-term acute tests of cobalt and copper toxicity to rainbow trout indicated joint
toxicity was time dependent. Cobalt-copper mixtures were antagonistic up to 96-h, butadditive to “slightly synergistic” up to 14-d exposure (Marr et al, 1998).
Survival-time modelling of aluminium and zinc joint toxicity to Atlantic salmon ( Salmo
salar ) indicated additivity (Roy and Campbell, 1995). Less than additivity was observed
in the filtration rate of zebra mussels exposed to equitoxic mixtures of five metals(Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn) (Kraak et al, 1999).
In the light of the above it is clear that prediction of the acute toxicity of mixtures of
metals is presently not possible with any degree of accuracy. Where prediction of acutetoxicity of metal mixtures is necessary, the assumption of additivity is probably the mostbalanced choice, unless there is clear evidence in the literature that mixtures of the metalsunder examination behave differently. 
3.3 Acute Toxicity of Pesticides
Macek (1975) conducted a series of experiments on the acute toxic effects of binarymixtures of insecticide active ingredients on the bluegill sunfish ( Lepomis macrochirus ).
Out of a total of 27 binary pairs tested, 10 showed greater than additive toxicity and17 showed additivity; pairs were considered to show greater than additive toxicity ifthe effect was more than 1.5 times the toxicity expected from additivity. Only three pairsof insecticides showed effects more than three times the toxicity expected from additivity.
The acute toxicity of mixtures of formulated insecticides, fungicides and herbicides,
to rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) was examined by Matthiessen et al(1988). They
found that of 11 combinations tested in binary mixtures, all demonstrated additivetoxicity (i.e. were from 0.5 to 1.4 times the toxicity expected on the basis of additivity).Mixture toxicity of binary combinations of three herbicides and a surfactant to channelcatfish, bluegill and crayfish (Procambarus spp.) ranged from additivity to less thanadditive responses (Abdelghani et al, 1997).
Deneer (2000) assessed the usefulness of the concept of “concentration addition” for
describing the joint effect of pesticides on aquatic organisms, based on literature datafrom 1972 to 1998. For more than 90% of 202 mixtures in 26 studies, concentration additionwas found to predict effect concentrations correctly within a factor of two. Deviationsfrom additivity were most frequently found to be in mixtures with an organophosphorusester, or a carbamate, with either another organophosphorus ester or a syntheticpyrethroid. Most of the surveyed studies dealt with acute toxicity.
Greater than additive responses for Chironomus tentans exposed to mixtures of atrazine
and several organophosphate insecticides (trichlorfon, malathion, chlorpyrifos, methyl-parathion, and mevinphos) was observed by Pape-Lindstrom and Lydy (1997).
From the above it can be concluded that in acute toxicity tests, binary mixtures of
herbicides, fungicides and insecticides tend to demonstrate additive toxicity, and thatinstances of significant synergistic effects are few.
11Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.803.4 Acute Toxicity of Surfactants
Acute toxicity tests with homologous series of surfactants used in commercial surfactants
give a strong indication that additive toxicity applies. For example, the toxicity of acommercial alcohol ethoxylate can be calculated, assuming concentration addition, froma knowledge of the toxicity of each homologue and its content in the commercial mixture.This finding also applies to other types of nonionic and anionic surfactants includinglinear alkylbenzene sulphonates (LAS), alkyl ether sulphates and alkyl sulphates (Robertsand Marshall, 1995).
Lewis (1992) reviewed the information available on the toxicity of mixtures of surfactants
and of mixtures of which surfactants were one component. Lewis concluded that thetoxicity trends for mixtures containing a surfactant and either a pesticide or a metal weremixture-specific and therefore it is difficult to generalise or predict the toxicity of suchmixtures. For example, combinations of copper and anionic surfactants were synergisticto trout but not copper and nonionic surfactant mixtures (Calamari and Marchetti, 1973).Some pesticide and LAS combinations were synergistic while others were not (Solonand Nair, 1970). In contrast to these rather unpredictable results the effects of mixturescontaining oil and surfactants were consistently synergistic (Hokanson and Smith, 1971;Rehwoldt et al, 1974; Lavie et al, 1984) though it must be recognised that in these tests
components were present in excess of their water solubilities and therefore the surfactantmay have been acting in part as a potentiation agent.
Pantani et al (1990) examined the toxicity of an anionic surfactant and two nonionic
surfactants in combination with copper and cadmium and the pesticides methyl parathionand methyl azinphos in tests with Gammarus italicus . They tested each metal and each
pesticide with each surfactant in binary pairs and found additivity or less for allcombinations tested.
Lewis and Perry (1981) examined the effects of four mixtures containing anionic, nonionic
and cationic surfactants on bluegill ( Lepomis macrochirus ) and Daphnia magna . These acute
toxicity tests indicated that the effects were in general antagonistic (72%) or additive(24%), depending on the combinations tested. Only a mixture of anionic and cationicsurfactants showed greater than additive effects, and then only in tests with bluegills.
In summary, there is convincing evidence that surfactants, either in combination with
each other, or in combination with metals or pesticides, rarely show more than additivetoxicity, with regard to acute toxic effects. The exception to this is in tests with oils wherecomponents of the mixture were present in excess of their water solubility.
3.5 Acute Toxicity of General Chemicals and of Complex Mixtures
According to Warne and Hawker (1995), as the number of equitoxic components in amixture increases, there is an increased tendency to observe additivity. The term describingthis observation is the “funnel hypothesis”. Importantly, this thought process transcendsmodes of action. For example, a mixture with 10 components each dosed at 1/10
thLC50
(a sublethal concentration, below acute mode of action), will be likely to show additivity .However, as the number of components decreases (toward binary mixtures) there is
12Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80increased variance in the observations. Some mixtures may show synergism, some may
show antagonism. The literature is quite large that supports this hypothesis. For a“general chemical”, where a narcotic mode of action can be assumed, then additivity isstrongly supported. Complex mixtures that contain several components also illustrateadditivity. Below, are a few of the more prominent publications and observations ofmixture toxicity with general chemicals and complex mixtures.
Hermens et al (1984b) tested the toxicity to Daphnia magna of mixtures of 550 organic
chemicals expected to have the same mode of action. The results clearly indicatedadditivity, as predicted. In 1982 Hermens and Leeuwangh reported on a series of acutetoxicity tests with guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) in which groups of 8 and 24 toxicants with
diverse modes of action were used. They concluded that the results indicated additivity,despite the wide range of modes of action. This work was followed by another study ,again determining acute toxicity to the guppy , but this time using 4 groups of chemicals,11 chloroanilines, 11 chlorophenols, 9 reactive organic halides and 11 non-reactive,nonionised organic substances (Hermens et al, 1985a). In this study the toxicity of
individual representatives of the groups showed a high variance but the joint toxicitytended to be additive or less. Experiments with mixtures of representatives of each ofthe groups gave less variable results and again the effects were additive, even when themixture contained 33 chemicals. 
Van der Geest et al(2000), using mortality of the mayfly ( Ephoron virgo ) as the endpoint,
demonstrated that copper and diazinon act in a less than concentration additive mannerand this finding was independent of the effect level on which the mixture was judged.
One of the few studies of the effects of mixtures of inorganic chemicals is that of Alabaster
et al(1983) who reported on the toxicity of mixtures of cyanide and ammonia to Atlantic
salmon ( Salmo salar ). It was concluded that mixtures of cyanide and ammonia were
0.6 to 1.25 times more toxic than expected, if additivity was assumed. 
Hermens et al (1984a) determined the acute toxic effects of a series of 14 anilines in 3
different mixtures on the guppy ( Poecilia reticulata ). They concluded that in all 3 cases
toxicity was additive. 
Concentration addition and less than additive effects were observed in acute tests with
Daphnia magna exposed to heterocyclic nitrogen containing compounds (Chen et al, 1996)
Using the fathead minnow ( Pimephales promelas ) Broderius and Kahl (1985) examined
the effects of binary and multiple equitoxic mixtures of 7 groups of chemicals (7 alcohols,4 ketones, 4 ethers, 3 alkyl halides, 3 benzenes, 3 nitriles, and 3 tertiary aromatics) onacute toxicity. They demonstrated additive joint action for the chemicals from the 7different classes and for mixtures containing up to 21 chemicals.
Broderius et al (1995) in a further series of experiments examined the toxicity of binary
mixtures to juvenile fathead minnows in 96h acute tests. They examined concentrationand response addition and concluded that a chemical with a similar primary mode ofaction to that of a reference toxicant would display a concentration addition type of
13Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80action over the entire mixture range. Chemicals with different modes of action with
steep concentration-response curves were generally less than concentration-additivebut consistently more toxic than predicted by the response addition model. More thanconcentration-additive responses, indicative of interactive toxicity, were uncommon intheir experiments. Forget et al(1999) studied the joint action of binary mixtures of metals
and pesticides on the marine microcrustacean Tigriopus brevicornis . Their results indicate
synergistic lethal effects in all cases and at the sublethal level, the presence of the threemetals tested seemed to enhance the inhibitory effects of certain pesticides. The testswere however conducted with chemical concentrations one or two orders of magnitudehigher than those found typically in the aquatic environment. 
The acute toxic effects on the larvae of the clawed toad ( Xenopus laevis ) of mixtures of
heavy metals (3), alcohols (13), amines (6), hydrocarbons (6) and halogenatedhydrocarbons (5) alone and in combination were examined by de Zwart and Sloof (1987).When the groups of substances were tested individually the toxicity of the aminesand heavy metals was more than additive. The halogenated hydrocarbons were additiveand the alcohols and hydrocarbons less than additive. When various mixtures of thegroups were tested they mostly acted in an additive fashion, and where this was not thecase and synergism was seen, it was the result of the presence of an amine group. 
Binary and complex mixtures of aromatics, halogenated aliphatics, alkanes, alcohols,
ketones and esters exposed to two bacterial preparations indicated additivity (Xu andNirmalakhandan, 1998). Whereas, the mixture toxicity of binary mixtures of non-polarand reactive (aldehydes) toxicants yielded additive to greater than additive effects inthe Microtox assay (Chen and Chiou, 1995).
Additive or less than additivity was observed in 21 of 23 compounds found in detergent
products. Up to 67% of the toxicity of the complex mixture was attributed to 2 components– sodium silica and surfactants (Warne and Schifko, 1999).
The phytoxic action of diuron in combination with copper or folpet on the duckweed
(Lemna minor ) resulted in additive to less than additive responses (Teisseire et al, 1999).
Antagonism was observed in acute toxicity of phenanthrene and zinc to the sheepsheadminnow ( Cyprinodon variegatus ) (Moreau et al, 1999).
The position with regard to the toxicity of complex mixtures was summarised by
Broderius (1991) as follows: “it can be concluded from published work that, for mostcomplex organic mixtures, the joint acute action of toxicants is either strictly additiveor slightly less than strictly additive and that antagonistic or more than additive effectsare not prevalent”. More recently Broderius et al (1995), following further studies with
fathead minnows, reinforced this conclusion, by stating “because our data set representsdiverse chemicals from the inventory of discrete US industrial chemicals, it is concludedfrom previous research and results presented that, when numerous industrial chemicalsof a similar mode of action are present in a mixture, one would expect them to be strictlyadditive in their joint toxicity”. These conclusions are supported by the present review.
14Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.803.6 Summary
For substances which are chemically related, or are known to have the same mode of
action, additivity of acute toxic effects is general and well substantiated. However, some“groups” of substances when tested in relatively simple mixtures do not behave in areadily predictable manner (e.g. metals and some pesticides) but this is not surprisingas these are not groups of substances assembled on the basis of their structural, chemicalor physical properties. 
There are only a few examples in the literature of synergism where the results are more
than three times that predicted from additivity of acute toxic effects. 
When large numbers of substances are present in mixtures at low concentrations relative
to their individual acute toxicities, additivity of acute toxic effects is closely followed.This holds good even when the substances are not related chemically, or exhibit differentmodes of action when acting as acute toxicants alone. 
15Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8016Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.804. CHRONIC TOXICITY IN THE LABORATORY
This section presents an overview of representative studies that have been reported
on the chronic toxicity of mixtures. Rather than providing an exhaustive review, theintention is to discuss the key findings from a consideration of different types of mixtures.
4.1 Chronic Toxicity of Metals
The chronic toxicity of mixtures of metals to aquatic plants has been reviewed by EIFAC(1987). The report concludes that responses are inconsistent but all of the papers reviewedindicated toxicity in the range 0.2 to 2.3 times the toxicity predicted by concentrationaddition. A wider review of the chronic toxicity of metals to aquatic organisms by Wang(1987) concludes that there is no pattern in the toxicity of mixtures of different metalsor metals and organic chemicals. This unpredictability not only appears to be dependenton the specific metals themselves but also on the test conditions and organisms tested.For example, a binary mixture of copper and zinc was synergistic to some species ofmarine algae but antagonistic to others (Braek et al, 1976). 
Some additional examples of the range of antagonistic, additive and synergistic chronic
toxicity of mixtures containing metals are given below.
Accumulation of some metals can be influenced by exposure to other metals. Doherty
et al(1987) exposed the freshwater bivalve, Corbicula fluminea , to different concentrations
of cadmium and then assessed biochemical changes and uptake of copper and zinc. Theauthors suggest that an intermediate concentration of cadmium (0.1 mg/l) could havestimulated the production of heavy metal binding proteins resulting in the observedlower accumulation of copper. Similar antagonistic interactions between other metalcombinations and with other species have been reported (e.g. Speyer, 1980; Thomas et
al, 1982, 1983a, b, 1985; Kay et al, 1986; Brown et al, 1986; Cuvin and Furness, 1988).
Synergistic toxic interactions of mixtures of metals to freshwater copepods and submerged
aquatic plants have also been reported by Borgmann (1980) and Jana and Choudhuri(1984), respectively. 
Eaton (1973) observed both greater than and less than concentration addition in the
effects of mixtures of copper, zinc and cadmium on various endpoints in the reproductionand development of fathead minnows. It is difficult to draw any conclusions aboutadditivity from these results since zinc was found to dominate the toxicity. 
Spehar et al (1978) exposed the early life stages of flagfish to mixtures of zinc and
cadmium. As with the findings of Eaton (1973) they concluded that zinc was much moretoxic to larval fish than cadmium. This prevented an accurate assessment of whetherboth metals were acting by concentration addition. 
Abram, cited in EIFAC, 1987, demonstrated that a mixture of nickel and chromium was
13 to 21 times more toxic than anticipated on the basis of additivity in 10-week LC
50tests with rainbow trout. However, the concentrations used were very high and probably
not relevant to the environment. 
Stebbing and Santiago-Fandino (1983) demonstrated that the toxicity (11-d inhibition
of colony growth) of mixtures of copper and cadmium were more or less concentrationadditive to the colonial marine hydroid, Campanularia flexuosa . However, this was the
case at relatively low levels of growth inhibition. Mixtures causing high growth inhibitionwere associated with both antagonistic and synergistic action. These responses wereattributed to differences in biological response (the response of a colony may reachsteady state more quickly when exposed to low metal concentrations than when exposedto higher concentrations) rather than to interaction between the two metals. Similarvariable responses of organisms may have been observed in tests of the effects of mixturesof zinc, mercury and lead on the growth of ciliates (Gray, 1974). Pre-exposure of themarine ciliate, Uronema marinum , to low concentrations of these three metals was observed
by Parker (1979) to result in the loss of synergistic toxicity previously observed duringa test without pre-exposure. These experiments on hydroids and ciliates suggest thatthere may be a delay before a steady-state response to a mixture of metals is achieved.
Dual combination toxicity of three metals (tributyltin chloride, dibutyltin dichloride
and tin chloride) to bioluminescence to the marine bacterium Vibrio harveyi indicated
additive to greater than additive responses (Thomulka and Lange, 1996). 
Detoxification mechanisms such as metallothionein production, which can be induced
on exposure to the relevant metal, may also cause different responses depending on theduration of exposure. A chronic test may be of sufficient duration for the toxic responseto reflect the organism’s ability to detoxify the metal. The duration of an acute test maybe inadequate for acclimation to occur if there has not been any previous exposure.
Bioavailability is an important consideration in the toxicity of mixtures containing metals
and organic substances that can form complexes with metals. Wang (1987) gives severalexamples of metal chelating chemicals (of low but measurable toxicity) greatly reducingthe toxicity of various metals. It is questionable whether these are examples of antagonistictoxicity since the organism is exposed to a different metal species in the test medium tothat in a test where the metal is the single toxicant. Although the general trend is forchemicals that can complex with metals to reduce metal toxicity, there are a small numberof examples of synergistic toxicity.
In summary, it is not possible to make generalisations about the chronic toxicity of
mixtures containing metals. Such mixtures can give responses across the entire rangeof interactions from antagonism to synergism. This may be largely due to different modesof action and differences in metal speciation in mixtures compared to single toxicanttests.
4.2 Chronic Toxicity of Pesticides
Hermanutz et al (1985) determined the chronic toxicity of two insecticides, malathion
and endrin, to flagfish. Effects after 140 days on both survival and growth were additive
17Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80despite the likelihood that the insecticides had different modes of action (malathion is
an AChE inhibitor; endrin stimulates the release of neural transmitters in the pre-synapse)(Matsumura, 1985). 
Assuming additivity when the 95% confidence intervals of experimental and predicted
toxicities overlapped, Faust et al (1994) found additivity in 66% of tests of the toxicity
(24-h EC
50) of a variety of binary mixtures of pesticides with different modes of action
to the green alga Chlorella fusca . The results showed that 24% were less than additive
and 10% more than additive. Only two tests (5%, out of a group of 40 binary mixtures)did not fall within a factor of 2 of the predicted toxicity based on the assumption ofadditivity. Higher conformity with additivity (85%) was found in the toxicity to algaeof 29 binary mixtures of herbicides.
Shabana and Abou-Waly (1995) investigated the toxicity (1 to 10-d EC
50) of two triazine
herbicides on the growth of the cyanobacterium Nostoc muscorum . They found that three
of the five mixtures tested were antagonistic but two mixtures, which caused the greatestgrowth inhibition, were considered to be additive. This variability in the type of mixturetoxicity may be due in part to experimental difficulties encountered in maintainingconstant exposure in algal toxicity tests. Additivity of 14 pesticides and 5 surfactants,via 137 binary mixtures, was found as the best overall fit of acute toxicity data with alga(Altenberger et al, 1996).
In summary, it appears that mixtures containing different pesticides mostly act additively
even though they can have different modes of toxic action.
4.3 Chronic Toxicity of Surfactants
Lewis (1992) prepared a comprehensive review of the effects of mixtures containingsurfactants and other substances, including metals, pesticides, other surfactants andmunicipal effluents, on freshwater and marine organisms. He reported that there weredata indicating antagonistic, additive and synergistic effects from chronic exposure butthe responses were not predictable.
Dyer et al(2000a) observed additive acute and chronic toxicity responses in Ceriodaphnia
dubia exposed to four alcohol sulphate and alcohol ether sulphate surfactants.
4.4 Chronic Toxicity of General Chemicals
De Wolf et al (1988) observed concentration addition for mixtures of 10 and 25 alcohols
and chlorohydrocarbons in chronic toxicity tests with Daphnia magna in which NOECs
for growth and reproduction were determined. The chemicals in these mixtures werenon-reactive, non-ionised organics with a baseline narcotic mode of action.
Herman et al (1990) found that the toxicity (8-d EC
50) of mixtures of six aromatic
hydrocarbons to the green alga Selenastrum capricornutum was concentration additive.
Some responses appeared synergistic but were considered to have been caused byunusual increases in sensitivity of the alga to high concentrations of some hydrocarbons.
18Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Nirmalakhandan et al (1994) found the toxicity to a mixed bacterial culture (6-h EC50)
of a mixture of 50 diverse chemicals (aromatics, halogenated aliphatics, alkanes, ketones,esters and amines) to be additive. 
The prediction of combined effects, based on the effects of the individual components
of mixtures by using the pharmacological concepts of concentration addition andindependent action, of a multiple mixture was determined in a bioluminescence assaywith Vibrio fischeri (Altenburger et al, 2000; Backhaus et al, 2000). With 16 similar and
specifically acting chemicals, Altenburger concluded that concentration addition is wellpredicted with both concepts. With dissimilarly acting chemicals Backhaus et al (2000),
report that the independent action approach gives excellent results but concentrationaddition underestimates the EC
50of the mixture by only a factor of less than three. Thus
the precise prediction of mixture toxicities depends upon a valid assessment of thesimilarity/dissimilarity of the mixture components. They concluded however thatconcentration addition may give a realistic worst case estimation of mixture toxicitiesfor risk assessment procedures.
Additivity was found to apply to three different mixtures of i) non-reactive, non-ionised
organic compounds ii) anilines and iii) reactive organic halogen compounds when testedin 14-d LC
50tests with guppies (Hermens et al, 1985b). 
Hermens et al(1984b) also tested the chronic (16-d LC50) toxicity of mixtures of chemicals
considered to act by non-polar narcosis to Daphnia magna . They found that the toxicity
of the mixtures was additive or close to additive. In another set of tests with a differentmixture of chemicals (alcohols and chlorohydrocarbons) Hermens et al (1985a) found
that the chronic toxicity to Daphnia magna was also additive.
Deneer et al(1988) tested mixtures of nine chemicals considered to act through different
modes of action in Daphnia magna chronic toxicity tests. They found that for all the
mixtures the 16-d EC
10for growth was less than additive. Earlier work by Hermens et
al(1984b) with a similar mixture found that the degree of additivity was dependent
on the sensitivity of the endpoint. Lethal effects were close to additive but inhibitionof reproduction was much less than additive. 
Deneer et al (1988) considered inhibition of the growth of Daphnia magna to be more
sensitive than reproduction and found a lower degree of additivity for growth. Theysuggest that the differences in toxic action of the mixtures at different concentrationswere due to the chemicals causing toxicity by different, multiple modes of action.Individual components of a mixture may have different primary (specific) modes ofaction but may also cause common secondary effects by one or more different mechanismse.g. non-polar narcosis. At high concentrations more of the chemicals in the mix mayexert these secondary effects in addition to their more specific mode of action. At lowerindividual concentrations of the chemicals and using more sensitive endpoints for thespecific modes of action, the mixture is less likely to be additive, since the commonsecondary effects are expected to make a lower contribution to overall toxicity. Supportingthis hypothesis are data from Niederlehner et al (1998), where reproductive responses
19Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80of Ceriodaphnia dubia were found to be more sensitive than mortality for three non-polar
organic chemicals (benzene, tricholoroethylene, toluene) used in a tertiary mixture. Lessthan additivity was observed.
At even lower concentrations, i.e. below the concentration threshold for effects caused
by a specific mode of action, chemicals may still contribute to the baseline narcotictoxicity of a mixture (McCarty and Mackay, 1993). However, in this case an effect wouldonly be observed if a large enough number of chemicals was present, each adding asmall contribution to an overall narcotic effect. 
It follows that the larger the number of chemicals in the mixture and the smaller their
individual contribution to the overall non-polar narcotic effect, the more likely it is thatthey will act additively. Such mixtures could contain many chemicals at very lowconcentrations, perhaps representative of environmental concentrations. In these casesextrapolation to effects of complex mixtures in the environment should be made withcare since bioavailability may be significantly lower than when tested in laboratorymedia.
4.5 Discussion 
Toxicokinetic modelling of mixtures of organic substances may help to explain thevariability in the toxic action of mixtures, i.e. why some mixtures appear additive,synergistic or antagonistic at different times or in different tests. The key advantage ofthis approach is that the kinetics of toxicant uptake are taken into account (McCarty et
al, 1992). A highly hydrophobic substance is less likely to partition rapidly into an
organism compared to a substance of lower hydrophobicity (and higher solubility). Anorganism exposed to such a mixture may show an initial response dominated by theeffects of the most rapidly accumulated substance, since this substance is likely to reacha toxic body-residue concentration faster (if the two substances are equally toxic). Suchdifferential rates of uptake may be less influential in the longer time course of a chronictoxicity test since steady-state body concentrations are more likely to be achieved forsubstances with a wider range of hydrophobicities. Verhaar et al (1995) propose an
approach that integrates QSAR with toxicokinetic modelling to understand potentialeffects from mixtures of chemicals with diverse physical/chemical properties and/ormodes of action. 
Differences in the time taken to reach some critical body residue may be less important
if none of the substances in the mixture are at a sufficiently high concentration tocause an effect by themselves. 
Considering the range of chemical mixtures described in the previous sections, it seems
possible that all organic substances can act by baseline narcosis (i.e. general membraneperturbation which has been shown to be strongly dependant on the hydrophobicity ofthe substance) (Hermens et al, 1985a,b) even though some act by more toxic modes of
action at low concentrations (e.g. Könemann, 1981). This might suggest that a mixtureof many substances, each at a concentration below its threshold for causing toxicity
20Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80by a non-baseline mode of action, could act additively and cause a toxic effect by non-
polar narcosis. This is because non-polar narcosis probably depends on the total quantityof non-polar substances present in the membrane but not on any specific chemicalreaction with biological material (van Wezel and Opperhuizen, 1995; van Wezel et al,
1996).
It seems reasonable to assume that a mixture of substances with the same mode of toxic
action will demonstrate concentration addition. In this case we can consider the substancesin the domain of a specific QSAR for chronic toxicity as also acting additively , if theparameters in the relationship represent a specific mode of action. For example, a QSARbased on only one parameter such as log K
ow(as a surrogate for hydrophobicity) should
be a reliable QSAR for baseline narcosis. 
Of course, chronic toxicity tests are used to generate many different endpoints and for
a given mixture a complete set of identical endpoints may not be available for eachsubstance. As demonstrated by Deneer et al(1988) different endpoints are not necessarily
additive which, in theory, creates a problem in estimating the toxicity of the mixturewhen additivity is assumed. In practice, however, the pragmatic use of the most sensitiveendpoint for individual substances is reasonable, since the differences in toxicity betweensubstances would usually be greater than the differences between endpoints.
4.6 Prediction of the Chronic Toxicity of Mixtures Based on Acute Toxicity 
Consideration of toxicokinetics and modes of toxic action of mixtures gives an indicationof whether it is possible to predict the effects of a mixture after long-term (chronic)exposure if the effects of short-term (acute) exposure are known. 
The most straightforward case should be for a mixture of homologous substances witha non-specific mode of action. It seems likely that this type of mixture will act additivelyin both acute and chronic tests and therefore it may be possible to predict one from theother if the ratios between the sensitivity of the individual acute and chronic endpointsare known. The factors used in current risk assessment schemes could be applied tomake conservative predictions. This is supported by Niederlehner et al(1998), who found
that mixture toxicity predictions based on QSARs (K
ow-based) overpredicted both acute
and chronic mixture effects of non-polar narcotic chemicals to Ceriodaphnia dubia .
It is more difficult to predict from the acute toxicity of the individual substances the
chronic toxicity of a mixture containing substances with different modes of action, sincethese mixtures are more likely to act in a non-additive way and contain substances withdifferent acute to chronic ratios, although, as reported here, such mixtures seem mostlyto be close to additive. The chronic toxicity of mixtures of diverse substances is unlikelyto be greater than predicted by additivity unless a single, relatively toxic substance,acting by a specific mode of action, is present at a much higher concentration than theothers. Apart from this specific case, an assumption of additivity together with use ofconventional “acute-to-chronic” application factors should give a conservative predictionof the chronic toxicity of mixtures.
21Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8022Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.805. BEYOND ROUTINE LABORATORY TESTS: MORE REALISTIC EXPOSURES
5.1 Introduction 
The toxic effects of mixtures are of practical concern in the environment due to the
exposure of aquatic communities to mixtures of substances from a variety of sources.The effects of such mixtures on environments have been investigated directly in fieldstudies and in model ecosystems (microcosms and mesocosms) intended to simulatesuch environments. Complex effluents have also been studied with regard to thecontributions of specific components to toxic effects. It may be expected that the resultsof such studies would provide further information regarding mixture toxicity.
Investigation of the toxicity of single substances in acute and chronic, single-species,
laboratory test systems is sufficient to understand their inherent toxicity. In such controlledsituations, exposure to the substance may be maintained at a constant concentration.Other factors that modify the toxic effects of a substance may also be controlled. Thesame principle is true for understanding the combined toxic effects of mixtures ofsubstances under controlled laboratory conditions. In these studies it is important todetermine the exact concentration of each component and to relate toxicity to thesubstances with no other interferences or contributions present. Studies of the toxiceffects of mixtures of substances or complex effluents under more "environmentallyrealistic" conditions leads to a better understanding of the influence of modifying factors,changing concentrations and non-standard exposure durations. In principle, such studiesdo not add to the fundamental understanding of the toxicity of mixtures. They dohowever, add information as to the influence of exposure conditions on the combinedtoxic effects. The influence of factors which modify the exposure to substances in theenvironment is discussed in Section 5.2. This section also summarises the types ofinformation from model ecosystems, field studies and effluent studies regarding mixturetoxicity. A more detailed review of this topic is presented in Appendix 1. Analysis ofthese study results confirms that departure from additivity of toxic effects in theenvironment is due mainly to changes in availability or exposure concentration of thesubstance.
5.2 Factors Modifying the Toxic Effects of Mixtures
For substances discharged to receiving environments, it is rare that they react in thereceiving environment thereby resulting in either increased or decreased toxicity. Anyreactive substances in an effluent would be expected to have reacted before reaching theaquatic environment (an exception is where an effluent carrying one toxicant enters ariver carrying another toxicant). For example, the addition of free chlorine to effluentcontaining ammonia results in the rapid formation of chloramines. The release to aquaticsystems of readily hydrolysable substances results in the rapid conversion to thehydrolysis products; for example, acid anhydrides are rapidly transformed to thecorresponding free acids. 
A large number of physical and chemical factors can modify the exposure and availability
of substances in the environment. Such factors are known to mitigate the uptake ofthe toxic chemical species by the receptor organism. As with single substances, the
presence of organic or inorganic complexing agents in a mixture can result in decreasedtoxic effects. Suspended solids, carbon dioxide content, redox potential, pH, dissolvedoxygen, and temperature can affect speciation and/or bioavailability. For example,the presence of suspended solids and naturally-occurring dissolved substances decreasesthe bioavailability of cationic surfactants, thereby decreasing their toxic effects but notthose of anionic and nonionic surfactants (Lewis, 1992). Consequently, mixtureassessments based on total concentrations in media overestimate adverse effects toreceiving water biology.
For example, Wildhaber and Schmitt (1996) conducted an analysis of the total TUs in
Great Lakes sediments to laboratory-derived sediment toxicity tests from several taxa,including fish, zooplankters, benthic invertebrates, phytoplankters, macrophytes andbacteria. Approximately 1000 TUs in sediment pore water were required to illicit a >25%increase in adverse effects compared to control sediments. Many of the effects could beattributed to the toxicity of ammonia and iron, not the organochlorine, polycyclic aromatichydrocarbons (PAHs), phthalate esters, or organo-metals.
The importance of the partitioning of PAHs to organic carbon in water and sediments
was addressed by Di Toro et al (2000) and Di Toro and McGrath (2000), respectively.
The influence of modifying factors on observations of the toxic effects of pollutant
mixtures or effluents is illustrated in the results of many of the field studies, modelecosystem studies and effluent studies presented in Appendix 1.
5.3 Model Ecosystems, Field Studies and Effluent Studies 
Model ecosystems have often been employed to study the complexities of higher ordereffects on ecosystem functioning or of the integrated fate pathways of single substances.In single substance studies, the complexities of chemical behaviour and populationinteractions generally preclude the attribution of a single effect to a single chemicalspecies. In such systems it is almost impossible to evaluate the relative contributions ofcomponents of mixtures to overall toxic effects. The information provided by thesestudies on the relative contribution of individual components of either complex or simplemixtures to overall effects is scant.
Even so, a recent study by Jak et al (1996) showed that metal mixtures acted additively
toward freshwater zooplankton and plankton communities in enclosures. Importantly,they conclude "no large safety factors for extrapolation from laboratory toxicity data towater quality standards, concerning difference in conditions, are needed, and that simplerules can adequately cover the additional toxicity of a mixture of metals." 
Generally no unexpected ecosystem effects or synergies are described in model ecosystem
studies on mixtures and effluents. From the limited data available it appears that toxicitiesof mixtures are additive to less than additive in these systems and this outcome isconsidered more likely to be due to reduced exposure/bioavailability rather than any
23Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80violation of the principle of additivity (see Appendix 1 for a more detailed description
of model ecosystem studies of mixtures).
A comparison of TUs from contaminated sediments from several locations in the Great
Lakes to benthic community tolerance metrics was conducted by Wildhaber and Schmitt(1998). Bioavailable TUs as well as bulk sediment TUs were calculated based on waterquality criterion and equilibrium partitioning models. Benthic community tolerancevalues per taxon were taken from two different sources (Hilsenhoff, 1987; Lenat, 1993).Highly significant correlations were observed between the tolerance values and TUsfrom both bioavailable and bulk values. Tolerance metrics for communities sampledfrom artificial substrates were also highly significantly correlated with ambient toxicity. 
Dyer et al (2000b) assessed the relationship of fish tissue burdens of contaminants
with fish community integrity (Karr's Index of Biotic Integrity, IBI) collected from1010 sites throughout the state of Ohio, USA. Toxic units of 12 organic and 11 metalcontaminants were based on regulatory-based protective limits (TU = USEPA waterquality criterion bioconcentration factor). Summation of metals and organic TUsoverpredicted adverse effects to individual fish and fish communities. However, additionof organic chemical molar units did not overpredict adverse effects, thus supporting theconcept of baseline toxicity. The authors conclude that addition of molar units isappropriate, provided they are at concentrations below levels deemed protective of mostspecies (e.g. 95%). 
Biomimetic methods such as the use of solid phase microextraction (SPME) and/or
semipermeable membrane devices (SPMD) for simulating body residues of complexorganic mixtures has been advocated by many researchers (Verbruggen et al, 1999;
Parkerton et al, 2000; Petty et al, 2000). These methods show promise with acute toxicity,
however additional research is needed with chronic endpoints and field assessments. 
The study of effluents and sites down-stream from effluents would be expected to provide
information on mixture toxicity, since the effluents are complex mixtures. Furthermore,a considerable amount of work is being done in the USA to manipulate (for example,aerate, acidify, add EDTA) and fractionate toxic effluents to identify the toxic component("Toxicity Identification Evaluation" or TIE). Effluent studies are considered in moredetail in Appendix 1.
These studies display many of the modifying factors described in Section 5.2 and also
present additional complications. A major problem is the temporal variability in theidentity and concentration of the toxicant species in the effluents. Also, the manipulationprocess itself may give rise to changes in substance bioavailability.
Frequently effluents contain a single substance whose toxicity and concentration are
sufficient to account for all of the observed toxic effects. However, a review of the literaturedid identify 18 studies where more than a single substance was believed to be the causeof the toxic effects. Of these, 13 were said to show additivity of toxic effects of the
24Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80components. Of the remaining 5 studies, 4 were explained by the authors as deviating
from additivity due to either matrix interference with toxicity or the presence of additionalunidentified substances. Only in one instance, concerning metal toxicity, were the resultsless than additive. 
Field studies on the observed effects of effluent discharges on native organisms comprise
too many unknowns or variables to assess quantitatively the relative contributions ofparticular substances. Effluent discharges are almost always as mixtures but the temporaland spatial variability of the release patterns and of the background contamination makeexposure and effects difficult to relate. Nevertheless, there are no data from these typesof studies that would indicate the toxicity of mixtures to be synergistic in the field.
Some of the studies on the source of toxicity in effluents demonstrate again that decreased
exposure due to modifying factors complicates interpretation of results. However, theTIE studies in particular tend to support the conclusion that toxicity is additive. 
Whilst these data are often limited and difficult to interpret from the standpoint of
mixture toxicity, the evidence tends to support the concept of additivity, particularlytaking into account the role played by bioavailability in many of the studies.
25Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8026Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.806. ASSESSING THE TOXIC EFFECTS OF MIXTURES OF SUBSTANCES IN THE
ENVIRONMENT
6.1 Introduction
Previous sections have reviewed and summarised the literature concerning the toxic
effects of mixtures during acute and chronic laboratory tests and under moreenvironmentally realistic conditions. In general, acute and chronic toxic effects in mixtureshave been found to be additive, though this is less true for mixtures containing metals.
Substances intentionally released to the environment can be regulated to be below their
individual PNECs such that each should be present at levels which will not elicit evenlong-term toxic effects in the receiving environment. This procedure forms the basisof the EC environmental risk assessment procedure (EEC, 1996). However, manysubstances may be present in the environment at the same time, each substance beingbelow its individual PNEC, but with the potential that as a mixture there may be arisk of toxic effects arising from additive toxicity. 
Some practical methods are needed to determine if this potential for impact is expressed.
This section outlines some approaches for assessing the risk of effects of mixtures ofsubstances in the environment and discusses the advantages and disadvantages of eachapproach. On the regional level, the potential number of individual substances is greaterdue to multiple inputs, but potential concentrations are significantly lower, as each isregulated at the local level. In the following approaches, unless otherwise stated, eachsubstance is considered to contribute proportionally to aquatic toxicity via a non-specificor "baseline" mode of action. Support for this approach is given in Section 5. 
The approaches considered include the summation of individual risk quotients, the use
of arbitrary "correction factors", and the use of environmental monitoring techniques.
6.2 PEC/PNEC Summations
In an ideal world, actual environmental concentrations ("ECs") and actual no effectconcentrations ("NECs") would be available for every substance, and EC/NEC valuescould be summed and compared to the ratio of 1. In practice, availability of actual ECand NEC values is unlikely and estimation methods are needed. Some potentialsummation approaches are outlined below. 
Approach 1: Toxic unit (TU) summation using actual environmental concentrations
Individual substances present in the environment would be identified and quantified.A QSAR-based toxicity value would be derived for each substance (NOEC or LC
50)
based on the appropriate QSAR for that substance. The TU of each substance would becalculated based on its toxicity and its concentration and should incorporate what isto be protected. For example, if the chronic effects of a substance are to be modelled, but
only acute data or a QSAR is available, then an appropriate assessment factor needsto be employed to address chronic toxicity. Once the criteria are established, all TUswould be summed, and if greater than one, further evaluation would be considered(Section 6.4). The concept of using baseline toxicity as the foundation for additivityworks best when PNECs are based on ecosystem protection, not acute or chronic toxicityendpoints where mode of action is quite relevant.
This approach has some distinct advantages, including: the number of substances to be included in the assessment is limited to those actually
present;
 a relevant QSAR (acute or chronic) can be chosen, with use of appropriate application
factors
1.
This approach may be practical in limited local situations, where the number of individual
substances is likely to be low and their concentrations are quantifiable.
Some practical disadvantages limit the applicability of this approach. These include: identification and quantification of each of the substances present is required (time
and cost intensive); 
 for many substances, no (or an inadequate) analytical methodology may be available;
 reduced field exposure due to bioavailability factors would not be taken into account;
 if a substance's limit of quantification is higher than its toxicity value or if there are
many substances present at low concentrations, a different approach may be needed.This may occur especially for assessments at the regional level;
 the toxicity of some compounds which are more rapidly metabolised than those used
to derive the QSAR may be overestimated. 
SUMMARY
Based on the TU concept, this approach is rigorous in theory, but often likely to beimpractical to implement, due to difficulties in accurate measurement of theenvironmental concentrations of all substances present. Thus, in practice it may beresource intensive, costly and may provide limited additional knowledge on actualenvironmental risks. Nevertheless it has been used to a limited extent and for the specificpurpose of identifying, empirically, the water quality required to characterise differenttypes of fishery in an entire river basin (Alabaster et al, 1972).
27Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.801 If both the acute and chronic toxicity of mixtures can be considered to be additive, the application
factor(s) necessary to predict the chronic toxicity of mixtures from their acute toxicity should bethe same as those for individual substances. It also follows, in the absence of field data on the toxiceffects of a mixture, that the application factors used to obtain a PNEC from acute or chronic toxicitydata on a mixture should be the same for the mixture as for the individual substances.Approach 2: PEC/PNEC summation with use of available risk assessment data
A related approach would employ available PEC and PNEC values to develop a risk
assessment for a mixture of substances in the environment. Briefly, existing riskassessments - which should include substances of highest priority - would be reviewed.The calculated PEC and calculated PNEC for each substance, in the location or regionto be assessed, would be used. All PEC/PNEC ratios would be summed, and if greaterthan one, further evaluation would be considered (Section 6.4).
This approach has some distinct advantages, including: makes use of available data; data on prioritised substances (those of most concern)
would be available first;
 could develop various versions, using PEC
regional or PEClocal;
 at least initially, does not require environmental measurements;
 can selectively refine PEC and/or PNEC of individual substances;
 if individual PECs and PNECs are accurate, this method may work.
Some practical disadvantages limit the applicability of this approach. These include:
 assumes reliable risk assessments are available for each (important) substance; 
 risk assessments may be available for high production volume substances only. On
the other hand, this approach may overestimate the importance of some substances.It could be limited to the subset of substances actually present, but this would introducemany of the disadvantages of Approach 1;
 the calculated sum PEC/PNEC of a large group of substances is likely to be far worse
than a realistic worst case, because individual risk assessments are not carried throughto the determination of accurate PEC and PNEC values, but only until the PEC/PNEC< 1. Thus, available PEC and PNEC values will probably be overly conservative whensummed;
 if based on a specific mode of action, individual PNECs may overestimate the
contribution of each substance to the overall toxicity (which in this case is probablydue only to their "baseline" toxicity contribution alone);
 reduced bioavailability in the field can significantly reduce field exposure and thus
observed effects. This would rarely be taken into account if only laboratory-basedPNECs are available.
SUMMARY
Although less rigorous in theory than Approach 1, this approach should include thehighest profile substances, and should include more substances as databases expand.However, individual risk assessments will generally not be refined enough to providerealistic answers, but may result in very conservative estimates which do not indicatewhere the greatest uncertainties lie. In practice, this may be resource intensive and costlyand provide minimal additional knowledge of actual environmental risks.
28Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.806.3 Use of a Correction Factor
Approach 3: Modification of individual substance assessments.
The potential impacts of mixtures of substances on the environment could be taken into
account by modifying the current risk assessment procedure. As a basis for this approach,it can be assumed that each substance contributes to the overall toxicity. Rather thansumming all inputs, however, a correction factor could be applied to each individualrisk assessment. 
Conventional risk assessment procedures would be employed to derive a PEC and aPNEC for each substance. For each substance, PEC/(PNEC times X), with X representingthe number of substances expected to be present in the environment under consideration,would equal a "mixture toxicity PEC/PNEC" value. If this calculated "mixture toxicityPEC/PNEC" is greater than one, further evaluation would be considered (Section6.4).
This approach has some distinct advantages, including:
 it can be applied to individual substances on a case-by-case basis, but taking into
account all other compounds (if "X" is correct);
 its ease of use.
Some disadvantages limit the applicability of this approach. These include:
 X is unknown and will probably fluctuate greatly from site to site; 
 not easily applicable at a local level;
 substances may be present well below their calculated PEC (not refined to realistic
values once PEC/ PNEC < 1). Confirmation of accurate PECs would require all theresources listed for Approach 1;
 it is not likely that each substance will be present at a constant proportion to the
total concentration. "Important" substances would be weighted the same as othersubstances;
 if based on a specific mode of action, individual PNECs may overestimate the
contribution of each substance to the overall toxicity (which in this case is probablydue only to their baseline toxicity);
 reduced bioavailability in the field can significantly reduce field exposure and thus
observed effects. This is unlikely to be taken into account if only laboratory-basedPNECs are available. 
SUMMARY
The issues identified in Approach 3 also apply here. Adherence to this approach isdependent on satisfactorily defining the "X" correction factor per substance - so as toaccount for additivity from other substances. Defining an appropriate correction factor
29Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80would require evidence that a factor is needed i.e. greater than additivity based on
baseline concepts is observed in the environment. Hence, correction factors may beapplicable where mixture effects exceed baseline toxicity. 
6.4 Environmental Monitoring
A different approach to assess the effects of mixtures of substances in the environmentis to employ environmental monitoring. Various methods exist for biological or chemicalmonitoring of the aquatic environment for adverse effects. 
Approach 4: Chemical monitoring to estimate "available" substance concentrations
Extraction techniques can be employed in the field to simulate uptake of substances bybiota. These may include, but are not limited to, selective solvent extraction techniques,Empore
TMdisk, Semi-Permeable Membrane Devices, and solid phase extraction. (For
further detail, the reader is referred to van Loon and Hermens, 1996; ECETOC 1999).The results may provide a surrogate measure of the amount of bioavailable substancesin the environment (Verbruggen et al, 1999; Parkerton et al, 2000; Petty et al, 2000). A
summed value, as a surrogate for the body burden of the mixture in an organism, canbe compared to a toxic threshold level (critical body burden) which would be expectedto elicit an effect. 
This approach has some distinct advantages, including: identification of substances and specific analytical methods are not required;
 derivation of a "bulk" parameter (which, if appropriately calibrated, could provide
information on reductions in water quality prior to the occurrence of any biologicaleffects (early warning));
 ease of execution; 
 "biomimetic" techniques should reflect biological uptake and thus take into account
the bioavailability of substances.
Some disadvantages limit the applicability of the chemical summing approach. These
include:
 practical implementation in the field (e.g. potential interferences, fouling);
 not fully validated (e.g. assumptions concerning bioconcentration, correlation to toxic
effect levels);
 does not reflect metabolic capacity of exposed organisms, so may overestimate internal
dosages at target sites and thus toxic response. 
SUMMARY
Chemical monitoring methods may be attractive in terms of practical implementation(although interferences may need to be overcome). Whilst they are promising newapproaches, they are not yet fully validated in terms of biological relevance.
30Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Approach 5: Biological field monitoring to evaluate current environmental status
Biological field monitoring (e.g. of benthic fauna, fish communities) can be carried
out at target sites, or spatial and/or temporal trends can be evaluated. Results can becompared across sites, with matching of habitat types; adverse effects are then identifiedbased on comparison with characteristics of communities present at non-impacted sitesor these may be predicted using RIVPACS (Wright et al, 1993). Where effects are observed,
additional studies are needed to determine cause and effect relationships.
This approach has some distinct advantages, including: provides an integrated biological picture: ecologically relevant endpoints can be directly
assessed;
 requires the identification of substances and the application of specific analytical
methodology only if effects are observed;
 field monitoring is well-established;
 all modes of biological uptake are incorporated, including the ones not examined in
laboratory studies or with chemical extraction techniques. Thus, true bioavailabilityis represented;
 results are not specific to chemical toxicity per se. While this can be viewed as a
limitation, it ensures that the integrated impact of multiple stressors (habitatdegradation, direct chemical toxicity, pH or ammonia shifts) are observed.
Some practical disadvantages limit the applicability of biological field monitoring. These
include:
 if impacts are observed, it may be difficult to determine cause and effect;
 not specific to chemical toxicity (see also under advantages!);
 biological variability across sites may be high, obscuring impacts;
 once impacts are observed, they may be irreversible.
SUMMARY
Biological monitoring directly identifies affected locations, but is not predictive and
additional investigations are needed to determine causes of any effects observed. Whilebiological monitoring can be resource intensive, extensive databases already exist forsome locations. Importantly, the integration of biological responses with physical andchemical factors, including habitat, is essential for the validation of mixture riskassessment methods.
6.5 Discussion on Application of Approaches 1-5
In the approaches listed in Sections 6.2 to 6.4, attainment of a certain value would triggerconsideration of further action. The most efficient action would be determined on a case-by-case basis. For PEC/PNEC ratio approaches, action may include deployment of
31Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80chemical or biological monitoring methods to determine whether any effects are observed
(biological) or expected (chemical "summing"). Specific chemical monitoring may beemployed to ascertain whether important individual substances are present at expectedlevels. Additional research may be needed to investigate and confirm plausible causeand effect relationships. All of these actions would take place within a defined frameworkat the local level.
Certain classes of substances (e.g. aquatic herbicides) may be regulated specifically with
regard to their use which may influence their occurrence at a local level.
Metals appear to act differently from organics. Given the available information, it is not
recommended that the above approaches be used for mixtures of metals. The readeris referred to the EU Technical Guidance Document for risk assessment (EEC, 1996)for further details.
This report focuses on toxicity due to non-polar narcosis (Narcosis I). This appears to
be an appropriate starting point, as most individual substances should be found at verylow levels in the environment (baseline toxicity). Because the concentrations of substancesshould be well below their individual toxic thresholds they will contribute to thecombined toxicity only via non-specific modes of toxicity (c.f. Section 2). An exception,i.e. mixtures acting by a specific mode of action, may be closely-related substances actingthrough the same receptor as target, which may sum to an amount greater than individualthreshold values. Examples include Ah-receptor binding materials, uncouplers andAChE inhibitors. However, it should be noted that for receptor-mediated toxicity, thepresence of compounds with varying affinities and activities may reduce the toxicity ofsome of the components present (due to receptor being occupied by less potent agonistsor antagonists). For closely-related substances with a highly specific mode of action,combined effects should be examined more thoroughly.
A major concern is the potential for large, unexpected synergistic effects between low
levels of biologically-active substances. Thus, the report of up to 1000-fold enhancedresponses of binary mixtures of organochlorines for oestrogen receptor binding (Arnoldet al, 1996) was closely monitored. In the interim, other laboratories and the original
research group were unable to replicate these findings, resulting in retraction of theScience article (McLachlan, 1997). This area will receive continued, careful study, but todate there is little evidence available to indicate that significant synergism even rarelyoccurs. In contrast it has been observed that additivity is even a conservative assessment(Dyer et al, 2000b).
6.6 Conclusions
While Approaches 1 and 2 are currently unwieldy and somewhat impractical, the
correction factor(s) to employ in Approach 3 is difficult to determine and drives the datageneration portion of each individual risk assessment beyond a practical level. A moreattractive solution might be to monitor the environment to obtain a first indication ofwhether the environment is degrading or that a problem does exist e.g. as proposedin the draft Directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field ofwater policy (EC, 1999). Approaches 4 and 5 outline several monitoring techniques
32Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80which might identify areas of degradation or decline in water quality, with subsequent
action to identify and resolve potential problems. Extensive databases on historicaltrends in benthic and fish communities and water quality are increasingly becomingavailable at some regions and sites, whereas at others use of a chemical summingparameter method would be an excellent first step in pinpointing potential local problems.Biological monitoring provides the advantage of encompassing the impacts of ammonia,oxygen levels, and pH, which would not be captured by the chemical specific or bulkparameter approaches, but have proved to be some of the most severe environmentalproblems. 
In effect, this section raises the question of whether the presence of mixtures in the
environment should be considered a "chemicals regulation" issue in the first instance,or whether potential concerns should be identified via monitoring activities, withsubsequent action at a local level to address any identified concerns. Ultimately , thefinal decision must be based on the practical ability to implement a reasonable, non-arbitrary, and data-based approach which can result in meaningful environmentalimprovements.
33Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8034Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.807. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1 Laboratory Exposures
In laboratory studies, the acute toxic effects associated with a mixture can in general be
considered to be additive with respect to the acute toxicities of the individual components,particularly for large numbers of compounds dosed at equitoxic concentrations. 
Additivity of toxic effects is also generally observed for the chronic toxicity of mixtures
in laboratory exposures, particularly for large numbers of compounds. However, formixtures of metals mixture toxicity appears to be more variable (e.g. ranging fromantagonistic to greater than additive), depending on the organisms and the metalsinvolved.
7.2 More Realistic Exposures: Model Ecosystems, Field and Effluent
Studies 
Data from model ecosystems, field studies and effluent studies are generally limitedand difficult to interpret from the standpoint of the toxic effects of mixtures of substances.However, the evidence tends to support the basic concept of additivity, particularlywhen the role bioavailability can play in reducing toxic effects under environmentalconditions is taken into account. Predicted mixture effects based on body residues fromorganisms exposed in the field indicate that additivity of substances below their PNECs(baseline toxicity approach) is sufficiently conservative for protection of aquatic resources.
7.3 Approaches to Assessing the Toxic Effects of Mixtures
Potential approaches to assessing the toxic effects of mixtures are outlined in Section 6. Three general approaches considered are:
 summation of (more or less) realistic PEC/PNEC values for each individual component
in an environmental mixture; 
 use of an additional "correction" factor on each individual risk assessment to account
for the effect of mixtures;
 monitoring of environmental status to identify concerns prior to extensive refinement
of assessments to incorporate effects of mixtures.
While future research may make the first type of approach more feasible, and the second
less arbitrary, currently only the third is judged to be a viable option and is necessaryfor appropriate development of the first two approaches.7.4 Recommendations
Based on a review of the literature and existing methodologies, this report outlines
several potential approaches to the assessment of the impact of mixtures of substancesin the aquatic environment: 
 each potential approach has advantages and limitations. The practicalities and cost-
effectiveness of each approach should be further evaluated;
 the need for development of additional alternatives should be evaluated;
 catchment and other integrated approaches should incorporate understanding gained
in laboratory and mesocosm studies about the behaviour and effects of chemicals inthe environment;
 in order to improve communication and understanding of research into the toxicity
of mixtures, consensus should be reached on the terminology, statistical approachesand interpretation of different experimental designs. 
35Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8036Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80GLOSSARY
Acute Toxicity
The harmful properties of a substance which are demonstrated within a short period(hours for e.g. algae to days for e.g. crustaceans and fish) of exposure.
Antagonism
Antagonism arises when the combined effect of two or more substances is smaller thanthe combined solitary effects of the substances.
Bioavailability
The ability of a substance to interact with the biosystem of an organism. Systemicbioavailability will depend on the chemical or physical reactivity of the substance andits ability to be absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract, respiratory surface or skin.It may be locally bioavailable at all these sites.
Chronic Toxicity
The harmful properties of a substance which are demonstrated only after long-termexposure in relation to the life of the test organism.
Critical Body Burden
The concentration of a substance in an organism at the time of death (or any otherbiological endpoint).
EC
50Value (median lethal concentration)
A statistically derived concentration which, over a defined period of exposure, is expectedto cause a specified toxic effect in 50% of the test population.
Exposure
1) Concentration, amount or intensity of a particular physical or chemical agent orenvironmental agent that reaches the target population, organism, organ, tissue or cell,usually expressed in (numerical) terms of substance concentration, duration, andfrequency (for chemical agents and microorganisms) or intensity (for physical agentssuch as radiation), and 2) process by which a substance becomes available for absorption by the targetpopulation, organism, organ, tissue or cell by any given route. 
Hazard
The set of inherent properties of a substance or mixture which makes it capable of causingadverse effects in man or to the environment when a particular level of exposure occurs.c.f. risk. 
LC
50Value (median lethal concentration)
A statistically derived concentration which, over a defined period of exposure, is expectedto cause 50% mortality in the test population. LOEC (lowest observed effect concentration) 
The lowest test concentration at which the substance is observed to have a "statisticallysignificant" and unequivocal effect on the test species.
NOEC (no observed effect concentration)
The highest tested concentration below the LOEC where the stated effect was notobserved. The NOEC is usually connected with chronic effects. 
Speciation
Determination of the exact chemical form or compound in which an element occursin a sample, for example whether arsenic occurs in the form of trivalent or pentavalentions or as part of an organic molecule, and the quantitative distribution of the differentchemical forms that may coexist. 
Synergism
Toxicological interaction in which the combined effect of two or more substances isgreater than the simple sum of the effects of each substance. 
37Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8038Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80ABBREVIATIONS
AChE Acetylcholine esterase
Ah Aryl hydrocarbonAI Additivity IndexCBR Critical Body ResidueEC (actual) Environmental ConcentrationEC
50 Effect Concentration showing effects in 50% of a population
EIFAC European Inland Fisheries Advisory CommissionFATS Fish Acute Toxicity SyndromeLAS Linear Alkylbenzene SulphonateLC
50 Lethal Effect concentration in 50% of a population
LOEC Lowest Observed Effect ConcentrationMTI Mixture Toxicity IndexNEC (actual) No Effect ConcentrationNOEC (highest) No Observed Effect ConcentrationQSAR Quantitative Structure Activity RelationshipPEC Predicted Environmental ConcentrationPNEC Predicted No Effect ConcentrationTIE Toxicity Identification EvaluationTRE Toxicity Reduction EvaluationTU Toxic Unit39Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80APPENDIX 1. ENVIRONMENTALLY REALISTIC STUDIES
Model Ecosystems
There are few studies of model ecosystem responses to mixtures of chemicals and many
of these provide no information on the joint toxic action of components, since the mixtureis treated as a single substance. In a symposium on aquatic mesocosms, a single paperon mixtures (Crossland et al, 1992) studied the effects of a complex organic effluent,
mainly chlorophenols, from a chemical plant on a model stream. The effluent was notevaluated as to its component chemicals but treated as a single toxic substance. Thisis a common approach to the application of mesocosms to such complex mixtures.
A similar approach, treating oil as a single substance rather than a mixture, is reported
by Horvath et al (1980). He described subtle ecosystem effects but did not relate these
to concentrations of specific component chemicals. In another mesocosm study on anoil derived from coal, Geddings et al (1984) found that at a low dose, the initial effects
on zooplankton and metabolism of the ecosystem disappeared with time. Higherconcentrations showed chronic effects which did not disappear until dosing stopped.The authors ascribed all of the time-dependent toxic effects to the phenol concentrationsin the ecosystems.
In these types of studies of complex mixture toxicity in model ecosystems, separation
and analysis of all component chemicals is needed to address the relative contributionto toxic effects of the particular components. (Effluent fractionation, which uses thisapproach of analysis for the toxic components is discussed below). Model ecosystemsare ideal for investigating the effects of such complex mixtures, since they simulate aparticular environment and model changes with time of the component chemicals inthat environment without the need to measure individual concentrations. For this reasonsuch detailed analyses are rarely made.
Some mesocosm studies have, however, provided evidence for the contribution of
individual components to overall toxic effects of mixtures. These studies arepredominantly of pesticide interactions. One such piece of evidence was publishedby Hoaglund et al (1993). They used a large tank mesocosm containing plankton and
fish to investigate the combined effects of the pesticides atrazine and bifenthrin. Theobserved population impacts gave little evidence for interaction. When either pesticidewas increased to high levels, its effects masked the effects of the other. The observedinteraction effects at low levels also did not act synergistically. The authors discussedthe published literature on pesticide mixture interactions and although a number ofpapers on single species tests of pesticide mixtures are available, found no other reportson ecosystem effects of combinations of pesticides.
Fairchild et al(1994) investigated the toxicity of a mixture of an herbicide, atrazine, and
a pyrethroid insecticide, esenvalerate, in large mesocosms. They considered that theherbicide could effect the producer levels of an ecosystem whilst the insecticide couldeffect the consumer levels. It was supposed that these specific effects could lead toincreased effects beyond those normally expected if the insecticide availability wasinfluenced by adsorption on to the macrophytes. Atrazine did affect species compositionof the macrophytes but did not influence the overall availability of the insecticide tohigher organisms. The absence of reduced atrazine concentrations was attributed to
functional redundancy of the macrophyte community, so that overall biomass wasnot reduced, and to the rapid aqueous disappearance of the pyrethroid insecticideregardless of atrazine concentration. In a similar study of the effect of one toxicant onthe soluble concentration of another, Robinson-Wilson et al (1983) demonstrated an
increased availability of pentachlorophenol to fish in the presence of the herbicidesimazine. Simazine effectively reduced dominant macrophyte species resulting in areduction of the sorption of pentachlorophenol to biomass which in turn decreasedsurvival of bluegill sunfish and largemouth bass.
These latter two studies point out another complexity of using model ecosystems to
relate quantitatively the effects of a mixture on an ecosystem to the individual componentsof the mixture. There may be complex interactions within the ecosystem which affectthe concentration of individual components. In order to understand the relativecontribution of each component to mixture toxicity, the bioavailable concentration ofeach component must be known throughout the duration of the study. As describedin Section 5.2 environmental factors may greatly influence availability. Reductions intoxicant availability due to toxicant interactions with each other or with the biomass aremitigating factors, rather than effects which are intended to be covered when evaluatingjoint toxic action of mixtures.
Model ecosystems could be useful in evaluation of the toxic effects of mixtures of
chemicals upon ecosystem structure and function. A major use of such systems is toinvestigate the possibility of higher order ecosystem effects which would not be evidentin single species tests. They are particularly useful in this regard since, in contrast tofield studies, they are closed systems and environmental conditions can be controlled(National Research Council, 1981a,b). However, instability, inherent species interactionsand cycling, responses to changes in environmental conditions, and many other factors,make interpretation of ecosystem effects difficult even for single chemicals. There arenumerous examples of studies where single chemicals give rise to apparently conflictingresults in ecosystem structure and function such as interactions between populationsof organisms, energy transfer and productivity, diversity, (Taub et al, 1987; Kindig et
al, 1983; Woltering, 1983; Burnett and Liss, 1990). In the light of these subtle and complex
influences of only a single toxicant on higher ecosystem processes, where the effectsmay be in opposition at the same concentration for the same toxicant, it is unlikelythat much evidence for the combined toxic effect of multiple chemicals may beinvestigated quantitatively in such systems. 
Field Studies
There are more published reports of field studies dealing with mixture toxicity thanthere are from model ecosystem tests. Field observations and on-site testing studieshave been carried out to address the concern that water quality standards for singlechemicals may overlook the possibility that in the environment, a large number ofpollutants individually may be below concern concentrations but still cause toxicitythrough joint action.
40Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Lloyd (1986) summarised the results of 25 years of European research into the toxicity
of effluents to fish. One of the main objectives of this work was to determine the extentto which water quality standards set for single chemicals are valid when other toxicsubstances are present. In nearly all instances the toxicity of complex effluents could beaccounted for by their concentrations of five common pollutants (ammonia, phenol,copper, zinc and cyanide). In the few instances where toxicity was greater than the sumof the TUs of these pollutants, it was assumed that other toxic pollutants were present.Field studies on polluted rivers also showed that in general, the combined TUs forrainbow trout 48h LC
50was predictive of the presence of fish in the river at < 0.28 TU
(Alabaster et al, 1972; Solbé, 1973).
Attempts to correlate the presence of fish with NOEC based TUs were less successful.
Two complications were the confounding influence of low dissolved oxygen values inpolluted rivers and the observation that fish populations are more affected by highlevel episodic discharges rather than continuous low level exposures. Lloyd (1986)observed that more-than-additive effects do not occur and, when considering waterquality standards for mixtures of common pollutants, allowance need not be made forsynergistic effects. Also, acute to chronic ratios are expected to be less for mixtures ofcommon pollutants than for single pollutants if additivity between them is less than0.3 TU. However, the pollutants being considered were unlikely to be acting throughnon-polar narcosis.
The toxicity of mixtures of metals has been addressed in numerous additional field
studies. Hall et al (1988) attempted to correlate observed toxicities in striped bass pro-
larval tests, both in the field and in water samples brought back to the laboratory ( in
situ) with analyses for priority pollutants. Toxicity in both types of tests could potentially
be accounted for solely by the metals present. However, other toxicants may havecontributed to the toxicity if the metal toxicity was less than expected based upon singlemetal laboratory studies. The authors state that the metal toxicity may have been reducedthrough a large variety of physical, chemical and biological factors influencingbioavailability.
More recently, Logan and Wilson (1995) analysed the data from the extensive studies
by Hall et al (1988, 1992). They used a TU approach and statistical methods to evaluate
contributions to toxicity from the individual pollutants measured. They found thatthe field results were in general agreement with the in situ toxicity measurements reported
by Hall. Furthermore, the toxicity of all samples was adequately explained by justfive metals (Al, Cd, Cr, Cu, and Zn) and the results were consistent with additive toxicity.This result was not considered to prove that the metals caused the toxicity, since theireffects could be diminished by lower bioavailability and other unmeasured toxicantscould be covariant and contributing to the toxicity.
A TU approach was also used by Kemble et al (1994) to investigate the toxicity of metal
contaminated sediments. They performed chronic toxicity tests with a large numberof test organisms on pore water and whole sediment samples from numerous samplingstations. The same samples were also analysed for 12 metals. Numerous samples witha total TU for chronic toxicity of greater than 1.0 showed no toxicity. A likely explanationof this lack of toxic effects is a lack of bioavailability. Some samples with total TUs less
41Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80than 1.0 did show toxicity, due to the presence of ammonia and hydrogen sulphide in
the sediments. Organic toxicants could also have contributed.
Clements and Kiffrey (1994) investigated the effects of heavy metals in field experiments.
They used on-site, rather than in situ testing to account for possible temporal changes
in water quality. They found that the river showed strong spatial and temporal changesin metal contamination. They found no good correlation between laboratory toxicitytests and impacts on the benthic community and it was concluded that both types oftests were necessary. They also concluded that the spatial and temporal variability inwater quality limits the usefulness of the sampling approach, while the field observationapproach was limited by the variability in metal accumulation and metal toxicity to thevarious taxa. In another investigation of the toxicity of heavy metals to a pollutedenvironment, Klerks and Levington (1989) found that organisms from the impactedareas showed resistance to metal toxicity. They concluded that such acclimation totoxicants "strongly alters the perception of the answers which typical laboratory toxicitystudies give". The issues relating to bioavailability of metals and adaptation to metaltoxicity severely limits the likelihood that field studies will provide definitive evidencefor the additivity of their effects.
The major difficulty in relating toxicity to pollutant concentration in field studies is
the analytical limitation that all toxicants can never be anticipated and analysed for. Forexample, Brunstrom et al (1992) found that the toxicity of the PAH fraction of sediment
extract was too high to be explained by the toxicities of the 15 PAH compounds analysed.Further analysis indicated that PCBs and PCDD in the PAH fraction were primarilyresponsible for the toxicity. This result emphasises the problem in field studies that, ifgreater that additive toxicity is observed, there is always the possibility that someunknown substance caused added toxicity, rather than that the observation could bethe result of synergy.
Effluent Studies and TIE Approaches
In studies in the USA it has been found that whole effluent toxicity correlates well withsurface water impact. In one study, 43 comparisons between chronic toxicity toCeriodaphnia dubia in effluents and standardised qualitative sampling of benthic
macroinvertebrates downstream found 88% agreement (Eagleson et al, 1990). However,
as discussed previously, modifying factors may greatly alter the toxic effects observed.
The US EPA's Technical Support Document (TSD) for Water Quality-based Toxics Control
addresses the toxicity of complex effluents (US EPA, 1991a) and makes the followingcomments:
 the available information tends to indicate that the combined effects of individual
acutely toxic agents are somewhat less than strictly additive;
 field studies of effluent toxicity and laboratory experiments with specific chemicals
imply that synergism would be an extremely rare phenomenon which has not beenobserved during on-site effluent toxicity studies, and is not considered an importantfactor in the toxicological assessment of effluents;
42Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80 cases in which one effluent or pollutant parameter (such as total dissolved solids)
ameliorated the toxicity of another effluent pollutant, antagonism, have been observed. 
In the case of US EPA's Technical Support Document however, it was not made clear
whether the toxicity observed was due to physical/chemical interactions between thechemicals in the effluent and/or receiving water or to true toxicological antagonism.
In summary, recommendations are made in EPA's implementation guidance that toxicity
from complex effluents should be considered to be additive when performing a wasteload allocation (Di Toro et al, 1991). 
Toxicity Identification Evaluations (TIEs) are a part of the Toxicity Reduction Evaluation
(TRE) associated with effluent evaluations for the US EPA's National Pollutant DischargeElimination System (US EPA, 1991b,c, 1992, 1993a,b). Typically in a TIE, an effluent issubjected to a variety of physical and chemical treatments and aquatic toxicity tests areconducted with each manipulated sample. Phase I of this procedure contains methodsto characterise, Phase II to identify and Phase III to confirm the suspected toxicants inthe effluent.
Because effluents, surface waters and sediments are complex mixtures, an examination
of published TIE results may offer insight on how some substances affect aquaticorganisms when combined. However, the following must be considered as they cancomplicate the interpretation of a TIE: 
 toxicity caused by substances which cannot easily be identified analytically;
 toxicity caused by identified compounds for which there are no published toxicity
data;
 concentration/bioavailability of toxicants is affected by TIE manipulations (Hendriks
et al, 1994; Munoz et al, 1994; Schubauer-Berigan and Ankley, 1991);
 characteristics of test organisms used (e.g. species, age, size, sex, health) may be different
from those in the literature, creating an artificial difference between the calculated TU(using literature values) and observed TU (Wang, 1987; Lankford, 1990; Reece andBurks, 1985); 
 differences in hardness in dilutions of the effluent during toxicity testing can alter
toxicity (Di Toro et al, 1991).
In the literature surveyed, the chemical(s) causing toxicity are often determined by
correlation of chemical concentrations, evaluation of symptoms, examination of matrixeffects and comparison of species' sensitivity ("weight of the evidence" approach). Spikinga fractionated effluent alone often does not yield enough definitive information to identifythe toxic agent(s).
Several of the TIE studies examined concluded that toxicity seen in an effluent was due
to a single pollutant (Amato et al, 1992; Schubauer-Berigan et al, 1993; Munoz et al, 1994;
Wells et al, 1994; Kszos et al, 1992). These studies will not be discussed as they do not
43Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80aid in assessing mixture toxicity. Because toxicity limitations on effluents is a permit
driven process, the permittee stops examining effluent toxicity when the toxicity is lowenough to "pass". It is difficult to say if only one component of the effluent is reallyresponsible for all the toxicity in those instances. 
A chemical plant effluent acutely toxic to Daphnia pulex was evaluated by Jop et al(1991).
Approximately 70% of the toxicity was due to non-ionised ammonia. The remainderwas thought to be due to 2-(4-morpholinyl)-benzothiazole with possible contributionfrom an unidentified benzothiazole derivative. However, when pure 2-(4-morpholinyl)-benzothiazole was tested in laboratory water, toxicity was much lower than when 2-(4-morpholinyl)-benzothiazole was spiked into the effluent. It is thought that a matrixinteraction (possibly the unidentified benzothiazole derivative) in the effluent causedthe discrepancy between spiked effluent and laboratory water toxicity.
Schubauer-Berigan and Ankley (1991) tested sediment interstitial water from a highly
contaminated river for acute toxicity to Ceriodaphnia dubia . In Phase II, metals (Zn, Ni,
Pb, and Cu) accounted for approximately 3 TU, ammonia for 3 TU, and non-polar organicsfor 5 TU. Whole pore water only had 6 TU. It is likely toxicity was not additive. Enoughmetals were present for toxicity, yet all toxicity could be accounted for by the ammoniapresent. Bioavailability and test matrices inherent to TIE procedures may have been afactor.
Reece and Burks (1985) examined a petroleum refinery wastewater. The most toxic
fraction was steam volatile, base-neutral and aromatic organic in nature. Those peaksidentified had a combined concentration of 1100 mg/l. The authors concluded thatalthough the identified compounds were individually not considered acutely toxic toDaphnia magna at the mg/l level, they and the unidentified compounds could be acting
in an additive or synergistic fashion to produce acute toxicity.
Drain water from rice fields was evaluated for acute toxicity to Ceriodaphnia dubia by
Norberg-King et al (1991). Carbofuran and methyl parathion were identified as the
toxicants. Add-back tests showed the toxicity to be additive.
Di Toro et al (1988) tested the assumption that toxicity is a measurable and additive
property of various effluents. They selected 8 discharges into the Naugatuck River inConnecticut and tested for effects on Ceriodaphnia fecundity. The data indicated that the
toxicities of the various outfalls were not additive. Possible reasons for the lack ofadditivity were that toxicity was not conserved (degrades) or that there were antagonisticeffects. In a follow-up study, Di Toro et al(1991) identified copper as the primary toxicant.
A strictly additive model failed to address the toxicity seen. A complicating factor wasthe interaction of copper toxicity with the changing hardness in the river and in thetoxicity assays themselves.
Extensive toxicity and analytical testing was done on sediments and pore water from
13 sites in a contaminated river (Hoke et al, 1993). Potential toxicants determined by
analytical means were non-ionised ammonia, bicarbonate, copper, zinc, naphthalene
44Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80and phenanthrene. Calculated acute TUs and measured TUs for Daphnia magna and
Ceriodaphnia dubia were generally in good agreement for 12 of the 13 sites. In one site,
the measured TU was much higher than calculated; one or more chemicals not measuredwas probably the cause.
The variability of toxicity in effluents is a very real problem (Weiss et al, 1992). An extreme
example of variability was reported by Lewis et al(1988). In the middle of a study of the
toxic fractions of an effluent, they found an increase in the toxicity in all samples includingup-stream control water and dilution water. The toxicity was due to an episodic eventup-stream from the effluent. Even disregarding that problem, they were not able toidentify a specific toxic fraction and concluded that it is generally difficult to attributetoxicity of an effluent to a specific compound, either due to the presence of an unidentifiedcompound or to a mixture effect. 
Di Toro (1986) has addressed the difficult problem of temporal and spatial variability
of toxicity in effluent streams and suggests a probabilistic approach towards exposureassessments in such situations. Spacie (1986) described an additional complication inthat the biota affected by the pollutants also show spatial and temporal distribution.Such uncertainties certainly limit the possibility that strong quantitative data on thequestion of contribution of individual chemicals to mixture toxicity will be availablefrom field studies. Also, even though such variability may be handled statistically , afrequent observation is that field studies are marred by large episodic events as describedby Lewis.
Discussion
To summarise, in 19 of the TIE studies reviewed, more than one chemical was identifiedas responsible for aquatic toxicity. Among these 19 studies, 14 demonstrated additivity.In two, unidentified toxicants were used to explain the discrepancy, and in another twomatrix effects interfered with a definitive answer. One study did not demonstrateadditivity. The studies which found metals at toxic levels did not always find additivity.Metals should probably be considered as a special case when analysing the toxicity ofa mixture. It should be noted that due to spatial and temporal variation in effluents, itis difficult, in the absence of extensive chemical analyses, to determine the toxiccomponents of an effluent without collecting and fractionating a large number of samples.
Successful toxicant identification requires a complete understanding of the sensitivities
of the test species used, dose-response curve for the toxicants, the influences of theeffluent matrix on the toxicants and interactions among toxicants (Burkhard and Ankley,1989). Nearly all of the studies discussed above demonstrated additivity. However,the majority of TIEs conducted in the USA are not available in the published literature.TIEs conducted at the Duluth EPA Research Laboratory have shown that toxic effectsare often not additive and that toxicants are present in ratios such that the toxicitycontribution of one might be diluted out in the range of the effluent effect concentration.
45Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8046Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abdelghani AA, Tchounwou PB, Anderson AC, Sujono H, Heyer LR, Monkiedje A. 1997.
Toxicity evaluation of single and chemical mixtures of Roundup, Garlon-3A, 2,4-D, andSyndets surfactant to channel catfish ( Ictalurus punctatus ), bluegill sunfish ( Lepomis macrochirus ),
and crawfish (Procambarus, sp.). Environ Toxicol Wat Qual 12:237-243.
Alabaster JS, Garland JHN, Hart IC, Solbé JF de LG. 1972. An approach to the problem of
pollution and fisheries. Symp Zool Soc London 29:87-114. 
Alabaster JS, Shurben DG, Mallett MJ. 1983. The acute lethal toxicity of mixtures of cyanide
and ammonia to smolts of salmon, Salmo salar at low concentrations of dissolved oxygen.
J Fish Biol 22:215-222.
Altenberger R, Boedeker W, Faust M, Grimme LH. 1996. Regulations for combined effects
of pollutants: consequences from risk assessment in aquatic toxicology. Food Chem Toxicol
34:1155-1157.
Altenburger R, Backhaus T, Boedeker W, Faust M, Scholze M. 2000. Predictability of the
toxicity of multiple chemical mixtures to Vibrio fischeri : mixtures composed of similarly acting
chemicals. Environ Toxicol Chem 19:2341-2347.
Amato JR, Mount DI, Durhan EJ, Lukasewycz MT, Ankley GT, Roberts ED. 1992. An example
of the identification of diazinon as a primary toxicant in an effluent. Environ Toxicol Chem
11:209-216.
Arnold SF, Klotz DM, Collins BM, Vonier PM, Guillette LJ, McLachlan JA. 1996. Synergistic
activation of estrogen receptor with combinations of environmental chemicals. Science 272:489-
492.
Backhaus T, Altenburger R, Boedeker W, Faust M, Scholze M. 2000. Predictability of the
toxicity of a multiple mixture of dissimilarly acting chemicals to Vibrio fischeri . Environ Toxicol
Chem 19:2348-2356.
Bliss CI. 1939. The toxicity of poisons applied jointly. Ann Appl Biol 26:585-615.
Borgmann U. 1980. Interactive effects of metals in mixtures on biomass production kinetics
of freshwater copepods. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 37:1295-1302.
Braek GS, Jensen A, Mohus A. 1976. Heavy metal tolerance of marine phytoplankton. III
Combined effects of copper and zinc on culture of four common species. J Exp Marine Biol
Ecol 25:37-50.
Broderius SJ, Kahl M. 1985. Acute toxicity of organic chemical mixtures to the fathead minnow.
Aquat Toxicol 6:307-322.
Broderius SJ, Kahl MD, Hoglund MD. 1995. Use of joint toxic response to define the primary
mode of toxic action for diverse industrial organic chemicals. Environ Toxicol Chem 14:1591-
1605.Broderius SJ. 1991. Modelling the joint toxicity of xenobiotics to aquatic organisms: Basic
concepts and approaches. In Mayes MA, Barron MG, eds, Aquatic toxicology and risk assessment ,
14th ed. American Society for Testing and materials, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp 107-127.
Brown MW, Thomas DG, Shurben D, Solbé JF de LG, Kay J, Cryer A. 1986. A comparison
of the differential accumulation of cadmium in the tissues of three species of freshwater fish,Salmo gairdneri , Rutilus rutilus and Noemacheilus barbatulus . Comp Biochem Physiol 84C:213-
217.
Brown VM. 1968. The calculation of the acute toxicity of mixtures of poisons to rainbow
trout. Wat Res 2:723-733.
Brunstrom B, Brown D, Dencker L, Naf C, Vejlens E, Zebuhr Y. 1992. Extracts from settling
particulate matter collected in the Stockholm Archipelago waters: embryolethality,imunotoxicity and EROD-inducing potency of fractions containing aliphatics/monoaromatics,diaromatics or polyaromatics. Environ Toxicol Chem 11:1441-1449.
Burkhard LP , Ankley GT. 1989. Identifying toxicants: NETAC's toxicity-based approach.
Environ Sci Technol 23:1438-1443.
Burnett KM, Liss WJ. 1990. Multi-steady-state toxician fate and effects in laboratory aquatic
ecosystems. Environ Toxicol Chem 9:637-647. 
Calamari D, Marchetti R. 1973. The toxicity of mixtures of metals and surfactants to rainbow
trout ( Salmo gairdneri Rich. ). Wat Res 7:1453-1464.
Chen C-Y, Chiou Y-S. 1995. Toxicity of binary mixtures of organic chemicals. Environ Toxicol
Water Qual 10:97-106.
Chen J, Liao Y, Zhao Y, Wang L, Lu G, Zhao T. 1996. Quantitative structure-activity
relationships and mixture toxicity studies of heterocyclic nitrogen compounds. Bull Environ 
Contam Toxicol 57:77-83.
Christensen ER, Chen C-Y. 1985. A unified theory for microbial growth under multiple
nutrient limitation. Wat Res 19:791-798.
Clements WH, Kiffrey PM. 1994. Integrated laboratory and field approach for assessing the
impact of heavy metals at the Arkansas River Colorado. Environ Toxicol Chem 13:397-404.
Crossland NO, Mitchell GC, Dorn PB. 1992. Use of outdoor artifical streams to determine
threshold toxicity concentrations for a petrochemical effluent. Environ Toxicol Chem 11:49-59.
Cuvin MLA, Furness RW. 1988. Uptake and elimination of inorganic mercury and selenium
by minnows ( Phoxinus phoxinus ). Aquat Toxicol 13:205-216.
De Wolf W, Canton JH, Deneer JW, Wegman WCC, Hermans JLM. 1988. Quantitative structure
activity relationships and mixture toxicity studies of alcohols and hydrocarbons:reproducibility of effects on growth and reproduction of Daphnia magna . Aquat Toxicol 12:39-
49.
47Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80De Zwart D, Sloof W. 1987. Toxicity of heavy metals and petrochemicals to Xenopus laevis .
Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 38:345-351.
Deneer JW. 2000. Toxicity of mixtures of pesticides in aquatic systems. Pest Manag Sci 56:516-
520.
Deneer JW, Seinen W, Hermens JLM. 1988. Growth of Daphnia magna exposed to mixtures
of chemicals with diverse modes of action. Ecotox Environ Saf 15:72-77.
Di Toro TM. 1986. Exposure asessment for complex effluents: principles and possibilities. In
Bergman HL, Kimerle RA, Maki AW, eds, Environmental hazard assessment of effluents . SETAC
Special Publication Series, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 135-151.
Di Toro DM, McGrath JA. 2000. Technical basis for narcotic chemicals and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon criteria. II. Mixtures and sediments. Environ Toxicol Chem 19:1971-1982.
Di Toro TM, Hallden JA, Plafkin JL. 1988. Modelling Ceriodaphnia toxicity in the Naugatuck
river using additivity and independent action. In Evans MS, ed, Toxic Contaminants and
Ecosystem Health: A Great Lakes Focus . John Wiley and Sons, New York, USA.
Di Toro DM, Hallden JA, Plafkin JL. 1991. Modelling Ceriodaphnia toxicity in the Naugatuck
River II. Copper, hardness and effluent interactions. Environ Toxicol Chem 10:261-274.
Di Toro DM, McGrath JA, Hansen DJ. 2000. Technical basis for narcotic chemicals and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon criteria. I. Water and tissue. Environ Toxicol Chem 19:1951-
1970.
Doherty FG, Cherry DS, Cairns J. 1987. Valve closure responses of the Asiatic clam Corbicula
fluminea exposed to cadmium and zinc. Hydrobiologia 153:159-168.
Dyer SD, Stanton DT, Lauth JR, Cherry DS. 2000a. Acute and chronic structure activity
relationships for alcohol ethersulfates. Environ Toxicol Chem 19:608-616.
Dyer SD, White-Hull CE, Shephard BK. 2000b. Assessments of chemical mixtures via toxicity
reference values overpredict hazard to Ohio fish communities. Environ Sci Technol 34:2518-
2524.
Eagleson KW, Lenat DL, Ausley LW, Winborne FB. 1990. Comparison of measured instream
biological responses with responses predicted using the Ceriodaphnia dubia chronic toxicity
test. Environ Toxicol Chem 9:1019-1028.
Eaton JG. 1973. Chronic toxicity of a copper, cadmium and zinc mixture to the fathead minnow
(Pimephales promelas , Rafinesque). Wat Res 7:1723-1736.
EC. 1999. Council Common Position (EC) No 41/1999 of the European Parliament and
Council Directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.OJC343, 30.11.99, p1 
48Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80ECETOC. 1998. QSARs in the assessment of the environmental fate and effects of chemicals.
Technical Report No 74. European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals,Brussels, Belgium.
ECETOC. 1999. Monitoring and modelling of industrial organic chemicals with particular
reference to aquatic risk assessment. Technical Report No 76. European Centre forEcotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals, Brussels, Belgium.
EEC. 1996. Technical Guidance Document in support of Commission Directive 93/67/EEC
on risk assessment for new notified substances and Commission Regulation (EEC) No.1488/94 on risk assessment for existing substances, Parts I-IV , Luxembourg.
EIFAC (European Inland Fisheries Advisory Committee). 1987. Technical Paper 37: Water
quality criteria for European freshwater fish FAO 1987. ISBN 92-5-102556-8.
Fairchild JF, LaPoint TW, Schwartz TR. 1994. Effects of an herbicide and insecticide mixture
in aquatic mesocosms. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 27:527-533 
Faust M, Altenberger R, Boedeker W, Grimme LH. 1994. Algal toxicity of binary combinations
of pesticides. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 53:134-141.
Finney DJ. 1971. Probit Analysis. 3rd ed. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, MA, 
USA. 
Forget J, Pavillon J-F, Beliaeff B, Bocquené G. 1999. Joint action of pollutant combinations
(pesticides and metals) on survival (LC
50values) and acetylcholinesterase activity of Tigriopus
brevicornis (copepoda, harpacticoida). Environ Toxicol Chem 18:912-918.
Geddings JM, Franco PJ, Cushman RM, Hook LA, Southworth GR, Stewart AJ. 1984. Effects
of chronic exposure to coal-derived oil on freshwater ecosystems: II. Experimental ponds.Environ Toxicol Chem 3:465-488.
Gray JS. 1974. Synergistic effects of three heavy metals on growth rates of a marine ciliate
protozoan. In Vernberg FJ, Vernberg WB, eds, Pollution and physiology of marine organisms.
Academic Press, New York, USA.
Hall LW, Bushong SL, Zeigenfuss MC, Hall WS, Herman RL. 1988. Concurrent mobile on-
site and in situ striped bass contaminant and water quality studies in the Choptank River
and Upper Chesapeake Bay. Environ Toxicol Chem 7:815-830.
Hall LW, Ziegenfuss MC, Fischer SA. 1992. Ambient toxicity testing in the Chesapeake
Bay watershed using freshwater and esturine water column tests. Environ Toxicol Chem
11:1409-1425.
Hendriks AJ, Maas-Diepenveen JL, Noordsij A, Van der Gaag MA. 1994. Monitoring response
of XAD-concentrated water in the Rhine Delta: A major part of the toxic compounds remainsunidentified. Wat Res 28:581-598. 
49Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Herman DC, Inniss WE, Mayfield CI. 1990. Impact of volatile aromatic hydrocarbons, alone
and in combination, on growth of the freshwater alga Selenastrum capricornutum . Aquat Toxicol
18:87-100.
Hermanutz RO, Eaton JG, Mueller LH. 1985. Toxicity of endrin and malathion mixtures to
flagfish ( Jordanella floridae ). Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 14:307-314.
Hermens JLM, Leeuwangh P . 1982. Joint toxicity of 8 and 24 chemicals to the guppy ( Poecillia
reticulata ). Ecotox Environ Saf 6:302-310.
Hermens JLM, Canton H, Steyger N, Wegman R. 1984a. Quantitative structure activity
relationships and toxicity studies of mixtures of chemicals with anaesthetic potency: acutelethal and sublethal toxicity to Daphnia magna . Aquat Toxicol 5:143-154.
Hermens JLM, Canton H, Janssen P , de Jong R. 1984b. Joint effects of a mixture of 14 chemicals
on mortality and inhibition of reproduction of Daphnia magna . Aquat Toxicol 5:315-322.
Hermens JLM, Broekhuyzen E, Canton H, Wegman R. 1985a. Quantitative structure activity
relationships and mixture toxicity studies of alcohols and chlorohydrocarbons: effects ongrowth of Daphnia magna . Aquat Toxicol 6:209-217.
Hermens JLM, Konemann H, Leeuwangh P, Musch A. 1985b. Quantitative structure activity
relationships in aquatic toxicity studies of chemicals and complex mixtures of chemicals.Environ Toxicol Chem 4:273-279.
Hilsenhoff WL. 1987. An improved biotic index of organic stream pollution. The Great
Lakes Entomologist 20:31-39.
Hoaglund KD, Drenner RW, Smith JD, Cross DR. 1993. Freshwater community responses to
mixtures of agricultural pesticides: Effects of atrazine and bifenthrin. Environ Toxicol Chem
12:627-637.
Hokanson KEF, Smith LL. 1971. Some factors influencing the toxicity of linear alkylate
sulphonate (LAS) to bluegill. Trans Am Fish Soc 100:1-12.
Hoke RA, Giesy JP, Zabik M, Unger M. 1993. Toxicity of sediments and sediment pore waters
from the Grand Calumet River-Indiana Harbor, Indiana area of concern. Ecotox Environ
Saf 26:86-112.
Horvath MM, Kiss J, Balogh I. 1980. Effect of 2,4-D and oil-polluted water on the growth and
the metabolic processes of Cucurbitaceae ( Cucurbita pepo ) seedlings. Acta Univ Szeged Acta
Biol26:123-128.
Jak RG, Maas JL, Scholten MCTh. 1996. Evaluation of laboratory derived toxic effect
concentrations of a mixture of metals by testing fresh water plankton communities inenclosures. Wat Res 30:1215-1227.
Jana S, Choudhuri MA. 1984. Synergistic effects of heavy metal pollutants on senescence
in submerged aquatic plants. Water Air Soil Pollut 21:351-357.
50Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Jop KM, Kendall TZ, Askew AM, Foster RB. 1991. Use of fractionation procedures and
extensive chemical analysis for toxicity identification of a chemical plant effluent. Environ
Toxicol Chem 10:981-990.
Kay J, Thomas DG, Brown MW, Cryer A, Shurben DG, Solbé JF de LG, Garvey JS. 1986.
Cadmium accumulation and protein binding patterns in tissues of the rainbow trout, Salmo
gairdneri . Environ Health Persp 65:133-139.
Kemble NE, Brumbaugh WC, Brunson EL, Dwyer FJ, Ingersoll CG, Monda DP , Woodward
DF. 1994. Toxicity of metal-contaminated sediments from the Upper Clark Fork River,Montana, to aquatic invertebrates and fish in laboratory exposures. Environ Toxicol Chem
13:1985-1997.
Kindig AC, Conquest LL, Taub FB. 1983. Differential Sensitivity of New Versus Mature
Synthetic Microcosms to Streptomycin sulfate treatment. In Bishop WE, Cardwell RD,Heidolph BB, eds, Aquatic Toxicology and Hazard Assessment: Sixth Symposium. American
Society of Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, USA, ASTM STP 802, pp 192-203.
Klerks PL, Levinton JS. 1989. Responses of Ecosystems to Chemical Stress. In Levine SA,
Harwell MA, Kelly JR, Kimball KD, eds, Ecotoxicology: Problems and approaches , Springer-
Verlag, New York, USA.
Könemann H. 1981. Quantitative structure activity relationships in fish toxicity studies. 
Part I: Relationship for 50 industrial pollutants. Toxicology 19:209-221.
Kraak MHS, Stuijfznd SC, Admiraal W. 1999. Short-term ecotoxicity of a mixture of five
metals to the zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 63:805-812.
Kszos LA, Stewart AJ, Taylor PA. 1992. An evaluation of nickel toxicity to Ceriodaphnia dubia
and Daphnia magna in a contaminated stream and in laboratory tests. Environ Toxicol Chem
11:1001-1012.
Lankford PW. 1990. Removal of metals to nontoxic levels. In Lankford PW, Eckenfelder WW,
eds, Toxicity reduction in industrial effluents . Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, USA, pp 98-124.
Lavie B, Nevo E, Zoller U. 1984. Differential viability of phosphoglucose isomerase allozymic
genotypes of marine snails in nonionic detergent and crude oil-surfactant mixtures. Environ
Res35:270-276.
Lenat DR. 1993. A biotic index for the southeastern United States: derivation and list of
tolerance values, with criteria for assigning water-quality ratings. J N Am Benthol 12:279-290.
Lewis MA. 1992. The effects of mixtures and other environmental modifying factors on
the toxicities of surfactants to freshwater and marine life. Wat Res 26:1013-1023.
Lewis MA, Eickhoff WS, Cooney JD. 1988. Impact of an episodic event in toxicity evaluation
of a treated municipal effluent. Wat Res 26:1013-1023. 
Lloyd R. 1986. The toxicity of mixtures of chemicals to fish: an overview of european laboratory
and field experience. In Bergman HL, Kimerle RA, Maki AW, eds, Environmental hazard
assessment of effluents. SETAC Special Publication Series, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, pp42-53.
51Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Logan DT, Wilson HT. 1995. An ecological risk assessment method for species exposed to
contaminant mixtures. Environ Toxicol Chem 14:351-359.
McCarty LS, MacKay D. 1993. Enhancing ecological modelling and assessment. Environ
Sci Technol 27:1719-1728.
McCarty LS, Osburn GW, Smith AD, Dixon DG. 1992. Toxicokinetic modelling of mixtures
of organic chemicals. Environ Toxicol Chem 11:1037-1047.
McKim KM, Bradbury SP , Nimi GJ. 1987. Fish acute toxicity syndromes and their use in
the QSAR approach to hazard assessment. Environ Health Persp 71:171-186. 
McLachlan JA. 1997. Retraction of [Arnold SF, Klotz DM, Collins BM, Vonier PM, Guillette
LJ, McLachlan JA. 1996. Synergistic activation of estrogen receptor with combinations ofenvironmental chemicals. Science 272:489-492]. Science 277:462-463.
Macek KJ. 1975. Acute toxicity of pesticide mixture to bluegills. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol
14:648-652. 
Marking LL. 1977. Method for assessing additive toxicity of chemical mixtures. In Mayer
FL, Hamelink JL, eds, Aquatic toxicology and hazard evaluation . ASTM STP 634, American
Society for Testing and Materials, pp 99-108. 
Marr JCA, Hansen JA, Meyer JS, Cacela D, Podrabsky T, Lipton J, Bergman HL. 1998. Toxicity
of cobalt and copper to rainbow trout: application of a mechanistic model for predictingsurvival. Aquat Toxicol 43:225-238.
Matsumura F. 1985. Toxicology of insecticides, 2nd ed, Plenum Press, New York, USA. Matthiesen P , Whale GF, Rycroft RJ, Sheahan DA. 1988. The joint toxicity of pesticide tank-
mixes to rainbow trout. Aquat Toxicol 13:61-76.
Moreau CJ, Klerks PL, Haas CN. 1999. Interaction between phenanthrene and zinc in their
toxicity to the sheepshead minnow ( Cyprinodon variegatus ). Arch Environ Contam Toxicol
37:251-257.
Munoz MJ, Castano A, Blazquez T, Vega M, Carbonell G, Ortiz JA, Carballo M, Tarazona JV.
1994. Toxicity identification evaluations for the investigation of fish kills: A case study.Chemosphere 29:55-61.
National Research Council. 1981a. Commission on National Resources, Factors Influencing
the Fate of Chemicals. In Testing for Effects of Chemicals on Ecosystems , National Academy
Press, Washington, DC, USA, pp 16-30.
National Research Council. 1981b, Commission on National Resources, Suitable Test Systems.
In Testing for effects of chemicals on ecosystems , National Academy Press, Washington DC, USA,
pp. 16-30.
Niederlehner BR, Cairns J, Smith EP . 1998. Modeling acute and chronic toxicity of nonpolar
narcotic chemicals and mixtures to Ceriodaphnia dubia . Ecotox Environ Saf 39:136-146.
52Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Nirmalakhandan N, Arulgnanendran V , Mohsin M, Sun B, Cadena F. 1994. Toxicity of mixtures
of organic chemicals to microorganisms. Wat Res 28:543-551.
Norberg-King TJ, Durhan EJ, Ankley GT, Robert ED. 1991. Application of toxicity identification
evaluation procedures to the ambient waters of the Colusa Basin drain, California. Environ
Toxicol Chem 10:891-900.
Pantani C, Ghetti PF, Cavacini A, Muccioni P . 1990. Acute toxicity of equitoxic binary mixtures
of some metals, surfactants and pesticides to the freshwater amphipod Gammarus italicus
goedm. Environ Technol 11, 1143-1146.
Pape-Lindstrom PA, Lydy MJ. 1997. Synergistic toxicity of atrazine and organophosphate
insecticides contravenes the response addition mixture model. Environ Toxicol Chem 16:2415-
2420.
Parker JG. 1979. Toxic effects of heavy metals upon cultures of Uronema marinum (Ciliophora:
Uronematidae). Mar Biol 54:17-24.
Parkerton TF, Stone MA, Letinski DJ. 2000. Assessing the aquatic toxicity of complex
hydrocarbon mixtures using solid phase microextraction. Toxicol Lett 112/113:273-282.
Petty JD, Jones SB, Huckins JN, Cranor WL, Parris JT, McTague TB, Boyle TP . 2000. An
approach for assessment of water quality using semipermeable membrane devices (SPMD)and bioindicator tests. Chemosphere 41:311-321.
Plackett RL, Hewlett PS. 1952. Quantal responses to mixtures of poisons. J Royal Stat Soc B
14:141.
Poch G. 1993. Combined effects of drugs and toxic agents. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY,
USA.
Pounds JG, Kodell RL. 1985. Statistical analysis for the characterisation of the joint action of
two chemicals in an in-vitro test system. In Goldberg AM, ed, Alternative methods in toxicology ,
Vol 3 - In vitro toxicology: a progress report from the Johns Hopkins Center for Alternativesto Animal Testing. Third Symposium. XVIII. Mary Ann Liebert, Inc, New York, NY, USA.
Ramamoorthy K, Wang F, Chen IC, Safe S, Norris JD, McDonnell DP, Gaido KW, Bocchinfuso
WP , Korach KS. 1997. Potency of combined estrogenic pesticides [letter; comment]. Science
275:405-406.
Reece CH, Burks SL. 1985. Isolation and chemical characterization of petroleum refinery
wastewater fractions acutely lethal to Daphnia magna . In Cardwell RD, Purdy R, Bahner RC,
eds, Aquatic toxicology and hazard assessment: seventh symposium . ASTM STP 854., American
Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 319-332.
Rehwoldt R, Lasko L, Shaw C, Wirhowski E. 1974. Toxicity of two spill reagents towards
Hudson River fish species. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 11:159-162.
Roberts DW, Marshall SJ. 1995. Application of hydrophobicity parameters to prediction of
the acute aquatic toxicity of commercial surfactant mixtures. SAR and QSAR. Environ Res
4:167-176.
53Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Robinson-Wilson EF, Boyle TP , Petty JD. 1983. Effects of increasing levels of primary production
on pentachlorophenol residues in experimental pond ecosystems. In Bishop WE et al, eds,
Aquatic toxicology and hazard assessment: sixth symposium . ASTM STP 802 ASTM, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, pp 239-251.
Roy R, Campbell PGC. 1995. Survival time modeling of exposure of juvenile Atlantic salmon
(Salmo salar ) to mixtures of aluminum and zinc in soft water at low pH. Aquat Toxicol 33:155-
176.
Schubauer-Berigan MK, Ankley GT. 1991. The contribution of ammonia, metals and non-
polar organic compounds to the toxicity of sediment interstitial water from an Illinoisriver tributary. Environ Toxicol Chem 10:925-939.
Schubauer-Berigan MK, Amato JR, Ankley GT, Baker SE, Berkhard LP , Dierkes JR, Jensen JJ,
Lukasewycz MT, Norberg-King TJ. 1993. The behaviour and identification of toxic metalsin complex mixtures: examples from effluent and sediment pore water toxicity identificationevaluations. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 24:298-306.
Shabana EF, Abou-Waly H. 1995. Growth and some physiological aspects of Nostoc muscorum
in response to mixtures of two triazine herbicides. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 54:273-280.
Solbé JF de LG. 1973. The relation between water quality and the status of fish population
in Willow Brook. Wat Treat Exam 22:41-61. 
Solon JM, Nair JH III. 1970. The effect of a sublethal concentration of LAS on the acute toxicity
of various phosphate pesticides to the fathead minnow ( Pimephales promelas , Rafinesque).
Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 5:408-413.
Spacie A. 1986. Spatial and temporal distribution of biota and its role in exposure assessment.
In Bergman HL, Kimerle RA, Maki AW, eds, Environmental hazard assessment of effluents .
SETAC Special Publication Series, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, pp 152-162.
Spehar RL, Leonard EN, DeFoe DL. 1978. Chronic effects of cadmium and zinc mixtures
on flagfish ( Jordanella floridae ). Trans Am Fish Soc 107:354-360.
Spehar RL, Fiandt JT. 1986. Acute and chronic effects of water quality criteria based metal
mixtures on three aquatic species. Environ Toxicol Chem 5:917-931.
Speyer MR. 1980. Mercury and selenium concentrations in fish, sediments, and water of two
northwestern Quebec lakes. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 24:427-432.
Sprague JB. 1970. Measurement of pollutant toxicity to fish. Wat Res 4:3-32.
Sprague JB, Ramsay BA. 1965. Lethal levels of mixed copper-zinc solutions for juvenile
salmon. J Fish Res Bd Can 22:425-432.
Stebbing ARD, Santiago-Fandino VJR. 1983. The combined and separate effects of copper
and cadmium on the growth of Campanularia flexuosa (hydrozoa) colonies. Aquat Toxicol 3:183-
193.
54Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Taub FB, Kindig AC, Conquest LL. 1983. Interlaboratory testing of a standardized aquatic
microcosm. In Bishop WE, Cardwell RD, Heidolph BB, eds, Aquatic Toxicology and Hazard
Assessment: Sixth Symposium , American Society of Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, PA,
USA, ASTM STP 802, pp 384-405.
Teisseire H, Couderchet M, Vernet G. 1999. Phytotoxicity of diuron alone and in combination
with copper or folpet on duckweed ( Lemna minor ). Environ Poll 106:39-45.
Thomas DG, Kay J, Solbé JF de LG, Cryer A. 1982. Hepatic cadmium-binding proteins from
rainbow trout ( Salmo gairdneri Richardson). Biochem. Soc. Trans., 601st Meeting , Aberdeen,
460-1.
Thomas DG, Cryer A, Solbé JF de LG, Kay J. 1983a. A comparison of the accumulation and
protein binding of environmental cadmium in the gills, kidney and liver of rainbow trout(Salmo gairdneri Richardson). Comp Biochem Physiol 76C:241-246.
Thomas DG, Solbé, JF de LG, Kay J, Cryer A. 1983b. Environmental cadmium is not
sequestered by metallothionein in rainbow trout. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 110:584-
592.
Thomas DG, Brown MW, Shurben DG, Solbé JF de LG, Cryer A, Kay J. 1985. A comparison
of the sequestration of cadmium and zinc in the tissues of rainbow trout ( Salmo gairdneri )
following exposure to the metals singly or in combination. Comp Biochem Physiol 82C:55-
62.
Thomkulka KW, Lange JH. 1996. A mixture toxicity study employing combinations of
tributyltin chloride, dibutyltin dichloride, and tin chloride using the marine bacterium Vibrio
harveyi as the test organism. Ecotox Environ Saf 34:76-84.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1991a. Technical Support Document for Water-Quality-
based Toxics Control. EPA/505/2-90/001. Office of Water, Washington, DC, USA.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1991b. Methods for aquatic toxicity identification
evaluations: Phase I Toxicity characterisation procedures, 2nd ed. EPA/600/6-91/003.Environmental Research Laboratory, Duluth, MN, USA.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1991c. Sediment toxicity identification evaluation:
Phase I (Characterization), Phase II (Identification) and Phase III (Confirmation) Modificationsof effluent procedures. EPA/600/6-91/007. Environmental Research Laboratory, Duluth,MN, USA.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1992. Toxicity Identification evaluation: characterisation
of chronically toxic effluents, Phase I. EPA/600/6-91/005F. Environmental ResearchLaboratory, Duluth, MN, USA.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1993a. Methods for aquatic toxicity identification
evaluations: Phase II Toxicity identification procedures for samples exhibiting acute andchronic toxicity. EPA/600/R-92/080. Environmental Research Laboratory, Duluth, MN, USA.
55Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80US Environmental Protection Agency, 1993b. Methods for aquatic toxicity identification
evaluations: Phase III Toxicity Confirmation procedures for samples exhibiting acute andchronic toxicity. EPA/600/R-92/081. Environmental Research Laboratory, Duluth, MN.
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1994. ECOSAR - a computer program for estimating
the ecotoxicity of industrial chemicals based on structure activity relationships. USEPA reportno 748-R-93-002, US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, USA.
Van der Geest HG, Greve GD, Boivin M-E, Kraak MHS, van Gestel CAM. 2000. Mixture
toxicity of copper and diazinon to larvae of the mayfly ( Ephoron virgo ) judging additivity
at different effect levels. Environ Toxicol Chem 19:2900-2905.
Van Leeuwen CJ, Hermens J. 1996. Risk Assessment of chemicals. Research Institute Toxicology
University Utrecht, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Van Loon WMGM, Hermens JLM. 1996. Monitoring water quality in the future. Vol 2. Mixture
toxicity parameters. Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, The Hague(Netherlands). Dept. for Information and International Relations. Utrecht Rijksuniversiteit(Netherlands). Research Inst. of Toxicology. Source: Govt Reports Announcements and Index(GRA and I), Issue 15. 
Van Loon WMGM, Verwoerd ME, Wijnker FG, Van Leeuwen CJ, Van Duyn P, Van Deguchte
C, Hermens JLM. 1997. Estimating total body residues and baseline toxicity of complexorganic mixtures in effluents and surface waters. Environ Toxicol Chem 16:1358-1365.
Van Wezel AP , Opperhuizen A. 1995. Narcosis due to environmental pollutants in aquatic
organisms: residue-based toxicity, mechanisms, and membrane burdens. Crit Rev Toxicol
25:255-279.
Van Wezel AP , deVries DAM, Sijm DTHM, Opperhuizen A. 1996. Use of the lethal body
burden in the evaluation of mixture toxicity. Ecotox Environ Saf 35:236-241.
Veith GD, Broderius SJ. 1990. Rules for distinguishing toxicants that cause Type I and Type
II narcosis syndromes. Environ Health Persp 87:207-211.
Veith GD, Macek KJ, Petrocelli R, Carrol J. 1980. An evaluation of using partition coefficients
and water solubility to estimate bioconcentration factors for organic chemicals in fish. InEaton JG, Parrish PR, Hendricks AC, eds, Aquatic toxicology . ASTM STP 707, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, pp 116-129.
Verbruggen EMJ, Vaes WHJ, Pakerton TF, Hermens JLM. 2000. Polyacrylate-coated SPME
fibers as a tool to simulate body residues and target concentrations of complex organicmixtures for estimation of baseline toxicity. Environ Sci Technol 34:324-331.
Verhaar HJM, Busser FJM, Hermans JLM. 1995. Surrogate parameter for the baseline toxicity
content of contaminated water: Simulating the bioconcentration of mixtures of pollutantsand counting molecules. Environ Sci Technol 29:726-734.
Wang W. 1987. Factors affecting metal toxicity to (and accumulation by) aquatic organisms
- overview. Environment International 13:437-457.
56Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80Warne MStJ, Hawker DW. 1995. The number of components in a mixture determines whether
synergistic and antagonistic or additive toxicity predominate: The funnel hypothesis. Ecotox
Environ Saf 31:23-28.
Warne MStJ, Schifko AD. 1999. Toxicity of laundry detergent components to a freshwater
cladoceran and their contribution to detergent toxicity. Ecotox Environ Saf 44:196-206.
Weiss P , Weiss JKS, Chen CM, Greengurg A. 1992. Treated municipal wastewater, effects
of organic fraction on development and growth of fishes. Environ Toxicol Chem 11:1451-1459.
Wells MJM, Rossano AJ, Roberts EC. 1994. Textile wastewater effluent toxicity identification
evaluation. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 27:555-560.
Wildhaber ML, Schmitt CJ. 1996. Estimating aquatic toxicity as determined through laboratory
tests of Great Lakes sediments containing complex mixtures of environmental contaminants.Environ Monitor Assess 41:255-289.
Wildhaber ML, Schmitt CJ. 1998. Indices of benthic community tolerance in contaminated
Great Lakes sediments: relations with sediment contaminant concentrations, sediment toxicity,and the sediment quality triad. Environ Monitor Assess 49:23-49.
Woltering DM. 1983. Environmental influence on the response of aquatic laboratory
ecosystems to a toxicant. In Bishop WE, Cardwell RD, Heidolph BB, eds, Aquatic toxicology
and hazard assessment: Sixth Symposium , American Society of Testing and Materials,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, ASTM STP 802, pp 153-170.
Wright JF, Furse MT, Armitage PD. 1993. RIVPACS - a technique for evaluating the biological
quality of rivers in the U.K. Euro. Wat Poll Control 3, 15-25.
Xu S, Nirmalakhandan N. 1998. Use of QSAR models in predicting joint effects in multi-
component mixtures of organic chemicals. Wat Res 32:2391-2399.
57Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.8058Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80MEMBERS OF THE TASK FORCE
P . Kloepper-Sams (Chairman) Procter & Gamble
USA - Cincinnati
S. Beach 3M
USA - St-Paul
S. Dyer Procter & Gamble
USA - Cincinnati
W. Guhl Henkel
D - Düsseldorf
P . McCahon Aventis
USA - Research Triangle Park
S. Marshall Unilever
UK - Bebington
D. Peterson Exxon Mobil
USA - East Millstone
R. Stephenson Shell
UK - London
M. Holt ECETOC
B - Brussels59Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80MEMBERS OF THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE (Peer Review Committee)
N. Carmichael (Co-chairman) Aventis
Head, Toxicology F - Sophia Antipolis
G. Randall (Co-chairman) AstraZeneca
Director, Environmental Laboratory UK - Brixham
C. Braun Akzo Nobel
Occupational Toxicologist NL - Arnhem
E. Bomhard Bayer
Head, Industrial Toxicology D - Wuppertal
C. d'Hondta Syngenta
Head, Environmental Safety Department CH - Basel
T. Feijtel Procter & Gamble
Manager, Professional and Regulatory Services B - Brussels
B. Hildebrand BASF 
Vice President, Experimental Toxicology and Ecology D - Ludwigshafen
J. Jackson Monsanto
Senior Associate, Medical Adviser B - Brussels
E. Löser Bayer
Institute of Industrial Toxicology D - Wuppertal
R. Millischer Atofina
Head, Industrial Toxicology Department F - Paris 
A. Sarrif DuPont
Director, Toxicology Affairs, Europe D - Bad Homburg
J. Solbéa Unilever
Head, SEAC Environment UK - Bebington
L. Smith Syngenta
Director, Central Toxicology Laboratory UK - Macclesfield
B. van Ravenzwaay BASF
Director, Experimental Toxicology and Ecotoxicology D - Ludwigshafen 
H-J. Wiegand Degussa.
Head, Product Safety Department D - Marl
aStewards responsible for primary peer reviewECETOC PUBLISHED REPORTS
Monographs
No. Title
No. 1 Good Laboratory Practice
No. 2 A Contribution to Strategy for Identification and Control of Occupational CarcinogensNo. 3 Risk Assessment of Occupational Chemical CarcinogensNo. 4 Hepatocarcinogenesis in Laboratory Rodents: Relevance for ManNo. 5 Identification and Assessment of the Effects of Chemicals on Reproduction and Development
(Reproductive Toxicology)
No. 6 Acute Toxicity Tests, LD50 (LC50) Determinations and AlternativesNo. 7 Recommendations for the Harmonisation of International Guidelines for Toxicity StudiesNo. 8 Str ucture-Activity Relationships in Toxicology and Ecotoxicology: An Assessment (Summary)
No. 9 Assessment of Mutagenicity of Industrial and Plant Protection ChemicalsNo. 10 Identification of Immunotoxic Effects of Chemicals and Assessment of their Relevance to
Man
No. 11 Eye Irritation TestingNo. 12 Alternative Approaches for the Assessment of Reproductive Toxicity (with emphasis on
embryotoxicity/teratogenicity)
No. 13 DNA and Protein Adducts: Evaluation of their Use in Exposure Monitoring and Risk
Assessment
No. 14 Skin Sensitisation TestingNo. 15 Skin IrritationNo. 16 Early Indicators of Non-Genotoxic CarcinogenesisNo. 17 Hepatic Peroxisome ProliferationNo. 18 Evaluation of the Neurotoxic Potential of ChemicalsNo. 19 Respiratory AllergyNo. 20 Percutaneous AbsorptionNo. 21 Immunotoxicity: Hazard Identification and Risk CharacterisationNo. 22 Evaluation of Chemicals for OculotoxicityNo. 23 Receptor Mediated Mechanisms in Chemical CarcinogenesisNo. 24 Risk Assessment for CarcinogensNo. 25 Practical Concepts for Dose Selection in Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Studies in
Rodents
No. 26 Aquatic Toxicity Testing of Sparingly Soluble Volatile and Unstable SubstancesNo. 27 AneuploidyNo. 28 Threshold-Mediated Mutagens - Mutation Research Special IssueNo. 29 Skin Sensitisation Testing for the Purpose of Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment
Technical Reports
No. Title
No. 1 Assessment of Data on the Effects of Formaldehyde on HumansNo. 2 The Mutagenic and Carcinogenic Potential of FormaldehydeNo. 3 Assessment of Test Methods for Photodegradation of Chemicals in the EnvironmentNo. 4 The Toxicology of Ethylene Glycol Monoalkyl Ethers and its Relevance to ManNo. 5 Toxicity of Ethylene Oxide and its Relevance to ManNo. 6 Formaldehyde Toxicology: An Up-Dating of ECETOC Technical Reports 1 and 2No. 7 Experimental Assessment of the Phototransformation of Chemicals in the Atmosphere
60Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80No. 8 Biodegradation Testing: An Assessment of the Present Status
No. 9 Assessment of Reverse-Phase Chromatographic Methods for Determining Partition Coefficients
No. 10 Considerations Regarding the Extrapolation of Biological Data in Deriving Occupational
Exposure Limits
No. 11 Ethylene Oxide Toxicology and its Relevance to Man: An Up-Dating of ECETOC Technical
Report No. 5
No. 12 The Phototransformation of Chemicals in Water: Results of a Ring-Test No. 13 The EEC 6th Amendment: A Guide to Risk Evaluation for Effects on the EnvironmentNo. 14 The EEC 6th Amendment: A Guide to Risk Evaluation for Effects on Human HealthNo. 15 The Use of Physical-Chemical Properties in the 6th Amendment and their Required Precision,
Accuracy and Limiting Values
No. 16 A Review of Recent Literature on the Toxicology of BenzeneNo. 17 The Toxicology of Glycol Ethers and its Relevance to Man: An Up-Dating of ECETOC Technical
Report No. 4
No. 18 Harmonisation of Ready Biodegradability TestsNo. 19 An Assessment of Occurrence and Effects of Dialkyl-o-Phthalates in the EnvironmentNo. 20 Biodegradation Tests for Poorly-Soluble CompoundsNo. 21 Guide to the Classification of Carcinogens, Mutagens, and Teratogens under the 6th
Amendment
No. 22 Classification of Dangerous Substances and Pesticides in the EEC Directives.  A Proposed
Revision of Criteria for Inhalational Toxicity
No. 23 Evaluation of the Toxicity of Substances to be Assessed for BiodegradabilityNo. 24 The EEC 6th Amendment: Prolonged Fish Toxicity TestsNo. 25 Evaluation of Fish TaintingNo. 26 The Assessment of Carcinogenic Hazard for Human Beings exposed to Methylene ChlorideNo. 27 Nitrate and Drinking WaterNo. 28 Evaluation of Anaerobic BiodegradationNo. 29 Concentrations of Industrial Organic Chemicals Measured in the Environment: The Influence
of Physico-Chemical Properties, Tonnage and Use Patterns
No. 30 Existing Chemicals: Literature Reviews and Evaluations (Fifth Edition) (No longer available)No. 31 The Mutagenicity and Carcinogenicity of Vinyl Chloride: A Historical Review and Assessment
No. 32 Methylene Chloride (Dichloromethane): Human Risk Assessment Using Experimental Animal
Data
No. 33 Ni ckel and Nickel Compounds: Review of Toxicology and Epidemiology with Special
Reference to Carcinogenesis
No. 34 Methylene Chloride (Dichloromethane): An Overview of Experimental Work Investigating
Species Differences in Carcinogenicity and their Relevance to Man
No. 35 Fate, Behaviour and Toxicity of Organic Chemicals Associated with SedimentsNo. 36 Biomonitoring of Industrial EffluentsNo. 37 Tetrachlorethylene: Assessment of Human Carcinogenic HazardNo. 38 A Guide to the Classification of Preparations Containing Carcinogens, Mutagens and
Teratogens
No. 39 Hazard Assessment of Floating Chemicals After an Accidental Spill at SeaNo. 40 Hazard Assessment of Chemical Contaminants in SoilNo. 41 Human Exposure to N-Nitrosamines, their Effects and a Risk Assessment for
N-Nitrosodiethanolamine in Personal Care Products
No. 42 Critical Evaluation of Methods for the Determination of N-Nitrosamines in Personal Care
and Household Products
No. 43 Emergency Exposure Indices for Industrial ChemicalsNo. 44 Biodegradation KineticsNo. 45 Nickel, Cobalt and Chromium in Consumer Products: Allergic Contact DermatitisNo. 46 EC 7th Amendment: Role of Mammalian Toxicokinetic and Metabolic Studies in the
Toxicological Assessment of Industrial Chemicals
61Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80No. 47 EC 7th Amendment "Toxic to Reproduction": Guidance on Classification
No. 48 Eye Irritation: Reference Chemicals Data Bank (Second Edition)No. 49 Exposure of Man to Dioxins: A Perspective on Industrial Waste IncinerationNo. 50 Estimating Environmental Concentrations of Chemicals using Fate and Exposure ModelsNo. 51 Environmental Hazard Assessment of SubstancesNo. 52 Styrene Toxicology Investigation on the Potential for CarcinogenicityNo. 53 DHTDMAC: Aquatic and Terrestrial Hazard Assessment (CAS No. 61789-80-8)No. 54 Assessment of the Biodegradation of Chemicals in the Marine EnvironmentNo. 55 Pulmonary Toxicity of Polyalkylene GlycolsNo. 56 Aquatic Toxicity Data EvaluationNo. 57 Polypropylene Production and Colorectal CancerNo. 58 Assessment of Non-Occupational Exposure to ChemicalsNo. 59 Testing for Worker ProtectionNo. 60 Trichloroethylene: Assessment of Human Carcinogenic HazardNo. 61 Environmental Exposure AssessmentNo. 62 Ammonia Emissions to Air in Western EuropeNo. 63 Reproductive and General Toxicology of some Inorganic Borates and Risk Assessment for
Human Beings
No. 64 The Toxicology of Glycol Ethers and its Relevance to ManNo. 65 Formaldehyde and Human Cancer RisksNo. 66 Skin Irritation and Corrosion: Reference Chemicals Data BankNo. 67 The Role of Bioaccumulation in Environmental Risk Assessment: The Aquatic Environment
and Related Food Webs
No. 68 Assessment Factors in Human Health Risk AssessmentNo. 69 Toxicology of Man-Made Organic FibresNo. 70 Chronic Neurotoxicity of SolventsNo. 71 Inventory of Critical Reviews on Chemicals (Only available to ECETOC members)No. 72 Methyl tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE) Health Risk CharacterisationNo. 73 The Value of Aquatic Model Ecosystem Studies in EcotoxicologyNo. 74 QSARs in the Assessment of the Environmental Fate and Effects of ChemicalsNo. 75 Organophosphorus Pesticides and Long-term Effects on the Nervous SystemNo. 76 Monitoring and Modelling of Industrial Organic Chemicals, with Particular Reference to
Aquatic Risk Assessment
No. 77 Skin and Respiratory Sensitisers: Reference Chemicals Data BankNo. 78 Skin Sensitisation Testing: Methodological ConsiderationsNo. 79 Exposure Factors Sourcebook for European Populations (with Focus on UK Data)No. 80 Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
Joint Assessment of Commodity Chemicals (JACC) Reports
No. Title
No. 1 MelamineNo. 2 1,4-DioxaneNo. 3 Methyl Ethyl KetoneNo. 4 Methylene ChlorideNo. 5 Vinylidene ChlorideNo. 6 XylenesNo. 7 EthylbenzeneNo. 8 Methyl Isobutyl KetoneNo. 9 ChlorodifluoromethaneNo. 10 Isophorone
62Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80No. 11 1,2-Dichloro-1,1-Difluoroethane (HFA-132b)
No. 12 1-Chloro-1,2,2,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFA-124)No. 13 1,1-Dichloro-2,2,2-Trifluoroethane (HFA-123)No. 14 1-Chloro-2,2,2-Trifluoromethane (HFA-133a)No. 15 1-Fluoro 1,1-Dichloroethane (HFA-141B)No. 16 Dichlorofluoromethane (HCFC-21)No. 17 1-Chloro-1,1-Difluoroethane (HFA-142b)No. 18 Vinyl AcetateNo. 19 Dicyclopentadiene (CAS: 77-73-6)No. 20 Tris-/Bis-/Mono-(2 ethylhexyl) Phosphate No. 21 Tris-(2-Butoxyethyl)-Phosphate (CAS:78-51-3)No. 22 Hydrogen Peroxide (CAS: 7722-84-1)No. 23 Polycarboxylate Polymers as Used in DetergentsNo. 24 Pentafluoroethane (HFC-125) (CAS: 354-33-6)No. 25 1-Chloro-1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethane (HCFC 124) (CAS No. 2837-89-0)No. 26 Linear Polydimethylsiloxanes (CAS No. 63148-62-9)No. 27 n-Butyl Acrylate (CAS No. 141-32-2)No. 28 Ethyl Acrylate (CAS No. 140-88-5)No. 29 1,1-Dichloro-1-Fluoroethane (HCFC-141b) (CAS No. 1717-00-6)No. 30 Methyl Methacrylate (CAS No. 80-62-6)No. 31 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) (CAS No. 811-97-2)No. 32 Difluoromethane (HFC-32) (CAS No. 75-10-5)No. 33 1,1-Dichloro-2,2,2-Trifluoroethane (HCFC-123) (CAS No. 306-83-2)No. 34 Acrylic Acid (CAS No. 79-10-7)No. 35 Methacrylic Acid (CAS No. 79-41-4)No. 36 n-Butyl Methacrylate; Isobutyl Methacrylate (CAS No. 97-88-1) (CAS No. 97-86-9)No. 37 Methyl Acrylate (CAS No. 96-33-3)No. 38 Monochloroacetic Acid (CAS No. 79-11-8) and its Sodium Salt (CAS No. 3926-62-3)No. 39 Tetrachloroethylene (CAS No. 127-18-4)No. 40 Peracetic Acid (CAS No. 79-21-0) and its Equilibrium Solutions
Special Reports
No. Title
No. 8 HAZCHEM; A Mathematical Model for Use in Risk Assessment of SubstancesNo. 9 Styrene Criteria DocumentNo. 10 Hydrogen Peroxide OEL Criteria Document (CAS No. 7722-84-1)No. 11 Ecotoxicology of some Inorganic BoratesNo. 12 1,3-Butadiene OEL Criteria Document (Second Edition) (CAS No. 106-99-0)No. 13 Occupational Exposure Limits for Hydrocarbon SolventsNo. 14 n-Butyl Methacrylate and Isobutyl Methacrylate OEL Criteria DocumentNo. 15 Examination of a Proposed Skin Notation StrategyNo. 16 GREAT-ER User Manual
Documents
No. Title
No. 32 Environmental Oestrogens: Male Reproduction and Reproductive DevelopmentNo. 33 Environmental Oestrogens: A Compendium of Test MethodsNo. 34 The Challenge Posed by Endocrine-disrupting Chemicals
63Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80No. 35 Exposure Assessment in the Context of the EU Technical Guidance Documents on Risk
Assessment of Substances
No. 36 Comments on OECD Draft Detailed Review Paper: Appraisal of Test Methods for Sex-
Hormone Disrupting Chemicals
No. 37 EC Classification of Eye IrritancyNo. 38 Wildlife and Endocrine Disrupters: Requirements for Hazard IdentificationNo. 39 Scr eening and Testing Methods for Ecotoxicological Effects of Potential Endocrine Disrupters:
Response to the EDSTAC Recommendations and a Proposed Alternative Approach
No. 40 Comments on Recommendation from Scientific Committee on Occupational Exposure Limits
for 1,3-Butadiene
No. 41 Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) Response to UNEP/INC/CEG-I Annex 1No. 42 Genomics, Transcript Profiling, Proteomics and Metabonomics (GTPM). An Introduction
64Aquatic Toxicity of Mixtures
ECETOC TR No.80