G96-2  page 1
TITLE: Biological Renovation and
Project Number: G96-2
Investigators: Spyros G. Pavlostathis and
Graduate Students: Daniel Yeh, Inan BeydilliReuse of Spent Reactive Dyebaths
Wayne C. Tincher  (Georgia Tech)
Project Goal: To evaluate the feasibility of using an anaerobic bioreactor system for the
color removal and reuse of spent reactive dyebaths
ABSTRACT
The objective of this project is to biologically renovate reactive dyebaths  and reuse the
high-salt containing mixture in the dyeing process. An anaerobic, fixed-film bioreactor to
achieve reducing conditions leading to the azo bond cleavage of reactive dyes will be developed.
This approach will accomplish two goals: (a) destruction of the dye azo bond and therefore
elimination of the color from the plant effluent; and (b) reuse of the renovated process water and
salts which in turn will lead to wastewater volume reduction and water as well as salt
conservation. The results of the proposed study will demonstrate the effectiveness and
applicability of anaerobic biological processes as a low-cost decolorization  and reuse technology
for spent reactive dyebaths. Nine commercial reactive dyes have been chosen and represent the
range of chemical structures in reactive dyes. The following tasks will be completed during the
first project year: a) Development of anaerobic, suspended-growth stock cultures to be used in
subsequent batch experiments; b) Batch anaerobic toxicity tests using a wide range of dye
concentrations; and c) Batch experiments to determine the kinetics of color removal by the stock
anaerobic cultures.
INTRODUCTION
The single most pressing environmental problem facing the textile industry is related to
reactive dyes. The increased use of cotton has led to substantial growth in the usage of reactive
dyes.As a result, the management of the spent reactive dyebaths  has become a challenging and
National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996G96-2  page 2
pressing problem. The textile industry is confronted with the problem of color removal and
effluent salt content reduction. As regulations becoming ever more stringent, the need for more
technically and economically efficient means of both color and salt reduction from the plant
effluent grows more acute. At the present time, there are no economically attractive means to
achieve the reduction of these two parameters.
The key question addressed by this project is whether an effective (both technically and
economically) means can be found to reuse spent reactive dyebaths. In addition to the dye, these
streams have very high salt and heavy metal concentrations. Existing physical/chemical
technologies for color removal are very expensive and commercially unattractive. Although it is
extremely difficult to oxidize reactive dyes, their reduction can be achieved relatively easily.
Microbial anaerobic processes are capable of producing and maintaining low oxidation-reduction
potential conditions. Under such conditions, the dye azo bond undergoes cleavage, therefore
permanently destroying color (Brown and Laboureur, 1983a; Chung and Stevens, 1993). Fast
oxidation of aromatic amines produced as a result of dye reduction is expected based on literature
data on the fate of these compounds in oxic environments (Brown and Laboureur, 1983b; Brown
and Hamburger, 1987; Pagga and Brown, 1986; Shaul et al., 1991).
OVERALL RESEARCH APPROACH
Anaerobic, batch and fixed-film bioreactors will be used in this study. All anaerobic tests
will be performed at 23 and 35OC and selected experiments conducted at a higher temperature.
The following reactive dyes have been chosen: Black 5; Red 2 and 120; Blue 4,7, and 19;
Yellow 3, 15, and 17. These dyes were selected as representative of the range of chemical
structures in reactive dyes.
This study will be conducted in three phases. In Phase I, anaerobic, methanogenic
processes will be tested for their efficacy in color removal. The suitability of other organic
constituents of the spent reactive dyebaths  (e.g., sequestering agents) as potential carbon
source(s) for these processes will be assessed and glucose will also be used either as the primary
154 National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996G96-2 page 3
or auxiliary carbon source. Batch anaerobic toxicity tests as well as assays for the evaluation of
the kinetics of color removal will be performed with the selected dyes. In Phase II, the effect of
high salt concentration on the anaerobic processes and the acceptability of the renovated water
for reuse in the dyeing baths will be assessed. The effect of salts will be tested in batch assays at
varying salt levels as well as by gradually increasing the salt concentration of the bioreactors
influent. In the event of very low degree of decolorization products destruction under anaerobic
conditions, continuous reuse of the renovated spent dyebaths  will lead to a build-up of these
substances, requiring periodic disposal. In order to test the biodegradability as well as toxicity
potential of these products, aerobic assays simulating the activated sludge process will also be
conducted. During Phase III, the effect of heavy metals (e.g., Cu) on the anaerobic processes
with regard to decolorization of metallo-dyes [e.g., phthalocyamine monochlorotriazinyl (Blue
7)] and the suitability of the treated spent dyebath  for reuse will be investigated. In summary,
two end-points will be used for the assessment of the spent dyebath  decolorization and reuse:
stability of the anaerobic bioreactors and suitability of the renovated solution for reuse.
FIRST YEAR RESEARCH
The following tasks will be completed during the first project year:
Task 1: Development of anaerobic, suspended-growth stock cultures to be used in
subsequent batch experiments.
Task 2: Batch anaerobic toxicity tests using a wide range of dye concentrations.
Task 3: Batch experiments to determine the kinetics of color removal by the stock
anaerobic cultures.
The remaining of this report outlines activities under way as well as future activities
during the first project year.
National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996 155G96-2  page 4
Selection and Characterization of Dyes
Table 1 summarizes the dyes selected for this study and their manufacturers. All dyes are
of commercial quality. Spectrophotometric scanning of dilute dye solutions has been performed
to identify absorption maxima for each dye. Detection and quantification of the dyes will be
achieved by high performance liquid chromatography. Since commercial dyes contain other
admixtures, dye purification will be achieved by adsorption of aqueous dye solutions to a
synthetic resin followed by dye extraction with solvent. Efforts are under way to optimize this
purification technique. Based on the results of the purification step, the purity of each dye will
be assessed. However, for all biological tests, the commercial dyes without any purification will
be used.
Table 1. Selected reactive dyes
Color Index Commercial Name
Black 5 Remazol Black B
Red 2 Procion Red MX-5B
Red 120 Procion Red HE-3B
Blue 4 Procion Blue MX-R
Blue 7 Cibacron Turquoise G-E
Blue 19 Remazol Brilliant Blue R
Yellow 3 Cibacron Yellow R
Yellow 15 Remazol Yellow GR 110
Yellow 17 Conazol Golden Yellow GSupplier
DyStar LP
BASF Corp.
BASF Corp.
BASF Corp.
Ciba-Geigy Corp.
DyStar LP
Ciba-Geigy Corp.
DyStar LP
General Colors & Industries
Anaerobic Stock Cultures
An anaerobic, methanogenic culture enriched from estuarine sediments and used in our
laboratory for dechlorination studies will be used in order to assess the specificity (or lack of) of
156 National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996G96-2  page 5
the culture for the cleavage of the dye azo bonds. This culture is fed with glucose as the main
carbon and electron source and is maintained at 23OC. In addition, another anaerobic suspended
culture is under development with inoculum obtained from a mesophilic, municipal anaerobic
digester. This culture is fed with a mixture of organic compounds (dextrin and peptone),
maintained at 35OC and batch-fed once a day with a retention time of 20 days. Both cultures will
serve as stock for subsequent batch experiments.
Anaerobic Toxicity Assay
A batch assay is underway using the dechlorinating stock culture maintained at 23OC to
evaluate any potential toxicity of the selected dyes to the anaerobic microorganisms as well as to
determine the anaerobic biodegradability of these dyes. Two concentration levels of each dye are
used, 100 and 1000 mg/L, and two sets of serum bottles have been prepared with and without
glucose addition, respectively. Biodegradation of the selected dyes under anaerobic,
methanogenic conditions will be assessed by the production of methane either in the absence of
glucose or in the presence of glucose as excess gas produced over and above that in the glucose-
amended controls. A similar batch assay will also be performed with the methanogenic culture
maintained at 35OC when this culture has reached steady state.
Kinetics of Color Removal
Batch experiments will be performed to determine the kinetics of color removal for each
dye under methanogenic conditions by using the above described stock, anaerobic cultures.
Parameters to be evaluated include: initial dye concentration, biomass concentration, temperature
(23 versus 35OC), addition of a degradable carbon source (glucose versus a mixture of organic
compounds used as a feed to the mesophilic stock culture). Because of analytical difficulties,
each of the reactive dyes will be tested separately using a high performance liquid
chromatography technique.
National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996 157G96-2 page 6
REFERENCES
Brown, D. and P. Laboureur. 1983a. The degradation of dyestuffs: Part I - Primary
biodegradation under anaerobic conditions. Chemosphere 12:397-404.
Brown, D. and P. Laboureur. 1983b. The aerobic biodegradability of primary aromatic amines.
Chemosphere 12:405-414.
Brown, D. and B. Hamburger. 1987. The degradation of dyestuffs: Part III - Investigations of
their ultimate degradability. Chemosphere 16: 1539-l 553.
Chung, K-T., and S. E. Stevens, Jr. 1993. Degradation of azo dyes by environmental
microorganisms and helminths. Environ. Toxicol.  Chem. 12:2 12 l-2 132.
Pagga, U. and D. Brown. 1986. The degradation of dyestuffs: Part II - Behaviour of dystuffs in
aerobic biodegradation tests. Chemosphere 15:479-491.
Shaul, G. M., T. J. Holdsworth, C. R. Dempsey, and K. A. Dostal. 1991. Fate of water soluble
azo dyes in the activated sludge process. Chemosphere 22: 107-l 19.
158 National Textile Center Annual Report: November 1996