Rapid Communication
The use of low-cost adsorbent (Canola residues) for the adsorption of
methylene blue from aqueous solution: Isotherm, kinetic andthermodynamic studies
Davoud Balaraka, Jalil Jaafarib, Ghasem Hassanic,d,Y o u s e fM a h d a v ie,⁎, Inderjeet Tyagif,
Shilpi Agarwalf,g, Vinod Kumar Guptaf,g,⁎⁎
aHealth Promotion Research Center, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran
bDepartment of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran
cDepartment of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Yasuj University of Medical Sciences, Yasuj, Iran
dSocial Determinants of Health Research Center, Yasuj University of Medical Sciences, Yasuj, Iran
eDepartment of Environmental Health Engineering, Health Sciences Research Center, Faculty of Health, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, S ari, Iran
fDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India
gDepartment of Applied Chemistry, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 6 October 2015Accepted 28 November 2015Available online 9 January 2016The batch adsorption was carried out to study and investigate pH, initial concentration of MB, adsorbent dosage
and contact time. The best ef ﬁciency of MB removal by Canola residues were obtained at pH alkaline, dose adsor-
bent of 3.5 g/L, initial concentration of MB of 25 mg/L and contact time of 75 min. The maximum dye removal was
obtained to be 97.5%. As the Canola concentration was increased from 0.5 to 5 g/L, the equilibrium adsorption ca-
pacity of Canola (q e) decreased from 16.7 to 4.87 mg/g, whereas, the MB removal ef ﬁciency increased from 33.4%
to 97.5%. The adsorption kinetics and equilibrium data were in good agreement with the pseudo-second-order
kinetic model and Sips adsorption isotherm respectively. Thermodynamic parameters suggest that the adsorp-
tion is a typical physical process, which is spontaneous and endothermic. The study demonstrated that biomassis effective to remove MB under a wide range of experimental conditions.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Keywords:
Canola residue
Methylene blueAdsorption isothermKineticsThermodynamics
In recent decades, water pollution has become one of the major
environmental problems due to the releasing of toxic and hazardous
chemicals from various industrial activities [1–3]. The dye-contained
efﬂuents are supposed to be a signi ﬁcant concern due to the adverse ef-
fects of dye in various parts of the life cycle [4–6]. The toxicological and
aesthetical problems associated with releasing of dyes into the environ-
ment are the main reasons of these worries [7,8]. Methylene blue (MB)
is one of the widespread materials in dye which is used for cotton and
silk painting [9,10] . Eye burn is one of the most harmful effects of MB be-
cause it is considered as a permanent injury of the eyes [6,11] .I tc a na l s o
create breathing problems, nausea, vomiting, profuse sweating, mental
confusion and methemoglobinemia [8,12] .
Canola stalk is considered as easily-available lignocellulosic wastes
all over the world because the production and use of vegetable oil areincreasing and Canola is extensively used for this purpose; therefore,
Canola stalk can be easily founddue to its characteristics and it has
been used in several studies to remove pollutants [13–15].
In addition to the abovementioned properties, several other adsor-
bents such as combination of nanoparticles (loaded on AC) help the re-
searchers to remove the high quantity of various dyes in a short time
[16–20].
The aim of the present work was: (i) to determine maximum remov-
al of MB in different conditions such as pH, contact time, adsorbent dose
and initial concentration of MB, (ii) to estimate linear and nonlinear
methods of the isotherm and kinetic model parameters, and (iii) to
study the thermodynamic of the process.
The Canola residues were collected in agricultural ﬁelds during the
harvesting season, which was later followed by washing with distilled
water to remove dust impurities, and then dried completely in naturalsunlight. The dried materials were crushed into ﬁne particles with the
help of an electric mill. In order to eliminate the color and contaminants,
theﬁne particles were then mixed with distilled water in a ratio of 1 to 5
and then heated at 100 °C for 5 h. The prepared particles were treated
with 0.1 M HCl for 5 h and then washed with distilled water and wereColloids and Interface Science Communications 7 (2015) 16 –19
⁎Corresponding author.
⁎⁎Correspondence to: V.K. Gupta, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of
Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India.
E-mail addresses: mahdaviyusef@yahoo.com (Y. Mahdavi), vinodfcy@gmail.com ,
vinodfcy@iitr.ac.in (V.K. Gupta).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.colcom.2015.11.004
2215-0382/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Colloids and Interface Science Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/colcomdried in a shed. After drying, the adsorbent was milled again to smaller
particles with an electric mill [21].
Methylene blue (MB, basic blue 9, C.I.52015; chemical formula
(C16H18N3ClS; MW, 373.90 g mol−1) was used as the model impurity
in the present study. The obtained chemical formula is shown in Fig. S1.
The speci ﬁc surface area of dried Canola was determined by the BET-
N2method using an ASAP 2000 apparatus based nitrogen adsorption –
desorption isotherms at 77 K. (Fig. S2a and b).
The pH value of the solution was an important in ﬂuential parameter
that plays a key role during the adsorption process and it was found that
the initial pH value of the solution has more in ﬂuence than the ﬁnal pH.
The percentage sorption of MB at every concentration was minimum at
the initial pH 3, then increased and became almost constant over the ini-
tial pH ranges of 3 –11 (Fig. 1 ). The reason for such type of behavior is
due to the fact that MB is a cation dye, and this can also be attributed
to the fact that at higher pH value the surface charges of the adsorbent
have become more negatively charged, which led to higher electrostatic
interaction between negatively charged adsorbent and positively
charged MB. The percentage sorption of methylene blue was not signif-
icantly altered (P N0.05) when the initial pH was increased from 3 to 11.
So pH 7 was chosen for the study on the effect of contact time.
Fig. S3 depicts the effect of contact time on the removal ef ﬁciency of
MB at various initial concentrations (25 –200 mg/L). The saturation
curves increase sharply in the initial stages, indicating that there are
plenty of readily accessible sites. Eventually, a plateau is reached in all
curves indicating that the adsorbent is saturated at this level. However,
for MB solutions with higher initial concentrations, larger equilibrium
times were required. It was also seen that an increase in initial MB con-
centration resulted in increased MB uptake. The adsorption capacity at
equilibrium (q e) increased from 6.09 to 32.2 mg/g with an increase in
the initial MB concentrations from 25 to 200 mg/L. Three consecutive
mass transport steps are associated with the adsorption of solute from
the solution by porous adsorbent.
The effects of Canola biomass concentration on the removal of MB
from aqueous solutions were investigated by using ten different Canola
concentrations in the range of 0.5 –5 g/L and initial MB concentration of
25 mg/L at pH 7. As the Canola concentration was increased from 0.5 to
5 g/L, the equilibrium adsorption capacity of Canola (q e)d e c r e a s e df r o m
16.7 to 4.87 mg/g, whereas, the MB removal ef ﬁciency increased from
33.4% to 97.5% ( Fig. 2 ). The increase in adsorption percentage of MB
was probably due to the increased more availability of active adsorption
sites with the increase in Canola concentration.
According to the kinetic data obtained from the experimentation,
the pseudo- ﬁrst-order and pseudo-second-order and intraparticle dif-
fusion mechanisms have been used to elucidate the mechanisms of ad-
sorption and potential rate controlling steps [22,23] .Three kinetic models, pseudo- ﬁrst order, pseudo-second order and
intraparticle diffusion, were used to ﬁt the experimental data to exam-
ine the adsorption kinetics. The kinetic parameters of MB under differ-
ent conditions were calculated and are given in Table 1 . It is seen that
the pseudo-second order model well represented the experimental
data (R2N0.995).
The Langmuir adsorption isotherm has been the most widely used in
many pollutant adsorption processes and is a successfully applied sorp-
tion isotherm for the sorption of a solute from a liquid solution. The sat-
urated monolayer isotherm can be expressed as [24]:
The Freundlich isotherm can be represented as [25]: The derivation
of the Temkin isotherm assumes that the fall in the heat of adsorption
is linear rather than logarithmic, as implied in the Freundlich equation.
The Temkin isotherm can be represented as [26]:.
The Sips isotherm is derived from the limiting behavior of the Lang-
muir and Freundlich isotherms. The model is valid for localized adsorp-
tion without adsorbate –adsorbate interactions. When C eapproaches a
low value, the Sips isotherm effectively reduces to Freundlich, while at
high C e, it predicts the Langmuir monolayer sorption characteristic.
The Sips linear equation model is expressed as [27]:
1
qe¼1
qmax ks1
Ce/C18/C191=n
þ1
qmaxð1Þ
where K s(1/mg) and q max(mg/g) are the Sips equilibrium constant and
maximum adsorption capacity values respectively, The Sips isotherm
equation is characterized by the dimensionless heterogeneity factor, n,
which can also be employed to describe the system's heterogeneity
when n is between 0 and 1. When n = 1, the Sips equation reduces to
the Langmuir equation and it implies a homogeneous adsorption
process.
Table 2 summarized the coef ﬁcients of the isotherms at different
doses. It can be seen from this table that most R2values exceed 0.9
and ARE values are smaller than 22% for all isotherm models, suggesting
that all models closely ﬁtted the experimental results. However, the re-
gression results show that the Sips isotherm ﬁtted the experimental
data better than the others. Based on the coef ﬁcients of the Langmuir
isotherm model, R Lvalues, for methylene blue adsorption onto Canola
biomass, were less than 1 and greater than zero indicating favorable
adsorption.
Table S1 lists some of the low cost materials used as adsorbents for
the removal of MB and their sorption capacity values.
The effect of temperature on MB dye adsorption was investigated at
(293 –328 K). The thermodynamic parameters of Gibb's free energy
change, ΔG°, enthalpy change, ΔH°, and entropy change, ΔS°, for the ad-
sorption processes are calculated.
Fig. 1. Effect of pH on MB removal ef ﬁciency (C 0= 25 mg/L, adsorbent dose of 3.5 g/L, con-
tact time = 75 min).
Fig. 2. Effect of adsorbent dose (C 0= 25 mg/L, pH: 7, time: 75 min, temp: 25 °C).17 D. Balarak et al. / Colloids and Interface Science Communications 7 (2015) 16 –19Download English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/591389
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/591389
Daneshyari.com