aThe History of the NIST/EPAAIIH Mass Spectral Database
Today's Chemist at Work
February 1999
Today's Chemist at Work, 1999, 8(2), 45-46, 49-50.
Copyright O 1999 by the American Chemical Society.http ://pubs. acs.org,&rotartcl ltcaw I 9 9 I feb lhistory.html
system has become the
identification methods.The History of the NIST/EPA/NlH Mass
Spectral Database
Stephen R. Heller
Developed in the 1970s, this
backbone of today's GC/MS
Today, seemingly every
analytical instrument comes with
an attached personal computer
(PC) to collect and process data.
This occurrence may seem to be
such a given that some people
think it was always so. However,
those of us who came of age in
the 1960s know it was not.
Today, we think little of
extracting a wastewater or
sludge environmental sample or
a blood, urine, or other biological
sample; injecting the solvent in a
gas chromatog raph/mass
spectrometer or liquid
chromatograph/mass
spectrometer; and having an
attached data system tell us
what analytes are present in the
extract and the degree to which
we can trust the identification.
Pretty printouts come without
bidding from laboratory printers,
and data can be transferred to a
central laboratory information
data system. Computers are
everywhere in the modern
laboratory, and with regard to
the mass spectrometer -
arguably the most
information-rich source of
analytical data - laboratories
could not produce the information needed for environmental and
biological analyses without computers. lt was not always this way.
Although MS has been around for nearly a century, before 1970 such
instruments generated data of only the most rudimentary type. Most
laboratories used mass spectrometers as one part of a complex
identification process to determine the chemical structure of natural
products, such as alkaloid drug candidates, or to determine whether
an organic synthesis had been carried out properly to generate a
I of7 31511999 3:44 PMThe Flistory of the NIST/EPAA{IH Mass Spectral Database http ://pubs. acs. orglhotartcVt caw / 99 I feb lhistory.htrnl
compound of the correct molecular weight. MS data often were
combined with NMR, lR, and UV spectroscopic data to give insight
into the overall structure of a complex molecule. There were no data
systems, and, actually, none was needed. For structural analysis, it
was necessary only to introduce the sample directly to the mass
spectrometer and generate a single representative spectrum to be
manually deciphered. First, one had to identify the m/z value of each
peak by manual counting (28 for nitrogen, 32for oxygen, 149 for a
phthalate ester impurity coming from plastic tubing, and so on). After
the m/z values for each peak had been labeled, the analyst - typically,
a Ph.D. chemist - then identified the molecular ion and each daughter
ion. Knowledge of how the chemical bonds rearranged on ionization
hopefully allowed the original structure to be written out.
However, when a gas chromatograph was combined with a mass
spectrometer (Figure 1), analytical chemists were faced with
exponentially increasing amounts of data. lt was cumbersome, if not
impossible, to generate a representative spectrum from each
chromatographic peak, much less manually count each m/z peak to
identify the chemical species. Fortunately, the introduction of
laboratory computers effectively coincided with the development of
GC/MS. Computerized GC/MS quickly revolutionized the field of trace
organic analysis and made very significant contributions to research
in medicine, biochemistry, flavors, fragrances, and organic
geochemistry. Thirty years later, GC/MS is still the major analytical
tool for environmental analysis. However, it is not only the automation
of individual m/z mass spectral peak identification that makes the
computer so necessary today; it is also the computer's ability to
routinely identify compounds on the basis of their mass spectrum.
{nti1trkr{i,}S lk* tl4s tss{,
fier rhremrt*8raFb#d*d *l}f(ls$qrr4n
Figure 1
A 1966 advertisement from
Analytical Chemistry showing
a gas chromatograph/mass
spectrometer from LKB
I nstruments (Rockville, MD;
Stockholm, Sweden).
The main advantage of the analytical technique and the database is
that they have substantially increased the capac.ity of.staff to handle
many .e nvi ro n menta I s.amp les and to.accu ratelf identify specific
organic compounds without the need for a Ph.D.'s training in mass
spectral structure elucidation. Back in the 1960s, few chemists knew
MS. When the demand for GC/MS analysis arose, many chemists
with other backgrounds - such as chromatography - were pressed
into service to do environmental analysis. The mass spectral
database, along with various search algorithms, became a crucial tool
in meeting the demand for trained staff, which was much greater than
the supply. In a sense, one could say that the mass spectralThis ability to decipher identity depends
on the existence of a database mass
spectra from a wide range of
compounds; the most universal
database is that maintained by the
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). Since the
development of this database in the
1970s. underthe National Institutes of
Health (NlH) and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), the NIST mass spectral
database has become an essential tool
in environmental monitoring for
regulatory compliance.
2 of7 31511999 3:44 PMaThe History of the NIST/EPAAIIH Mass Spechal Database http ://pubs. acs.orglhotartcVt caw I 99 I feb lhistory.htnl
database and search system has taken the chemist out of analytical
chemistry.
A World-Class Product
It would be nice to look back now and see how a careful study was
done on what needed to be done and was followed bv a
well-implemented plan. Certainly, the success of the database and
the many problems it has solved would support such a story.
Unfortunately, the true history is not so clean and neat. However, it is
a nice story about many people in different organizations who worked
together to produce a world-class product used today in thousands of
analytical chemistry labs around the world.
In the 1960s, Scotty Pratt, the NIH Division of Computer Research
and Technology (DCRT) director, was looking for projects to prove to
NIH scientists that computers were more than calculators. He realized
early on that for any such project to be a success, it needed a
computer group willing to provide the necessary hardware and
software support, an NIH lab willing to explore something new, and a
scientist willing to work full-time as a computer chemist. Having tired
of synthesizing nitrogen and sulfur compounds, I was fortunate to
have the opportunity to work at DCRT as a senior staff fellow (the
U.S. government title for a postdoc at that time) and to work with
Henry Fales at NIH's National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Fales
was (and is) an eminent organic chemist and mass spectrogcopist,
and he realized the potential benefit of automating the mass spectral
data analysis process. He was willing to test any computer-based
analysis tool developed. He asked one of his lab chemists, Bill Milne
(now editor of the American Chemical Society's Journal of Chemical
Information and Computer Sciences), to work with us in testing the
system.
The first task was to find a database. Fales convinced Klaus Biemann
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to let NIH use his
tape-based database of some 8000 spectra that he had been
collecting as part of his research during the past decade. Biemann
and students (Harry Hertz, now at NIST, and Ron Hites, now at
Indiana University) had been developing batch-search software as a
mass spec data analysis tool. The user manually input the m/z
values, and the closely matching compounds were printed out.
ln 1970-71, with the assistance of Richard Feldmann, a very talented
DCRT programmer, we wrote a time-sharing program in the
FORTRAN programming language on a Digital Equipment
Corporation PDP-10 minicomputer to search the database provided
by Biemann. The first of several papers to describe the database and
search system was published in Analytical Chemistry in 1972, but
that was only the beginning.
When Fales traveled, lectured, or welcomed chemists from all over
the world to NlH, he would take a few minutes during his lecture or
lab tour to show off the software, called the NIH Mass Spectral
Search System (MSSS). One day, Fales called to tell me that a few of
his scientific friends and colleagues (more like a few dozen) liked the
MSSS. He asked whether it was possible to find a way to let them
use it from their home laboratories. Accomplishing such a task was
not as easy then as it is now. There was no Internet, no computer
3 of1 315/1999 3:44PMThe History of the NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Database
and a microfiche device.networks - only 1 10-baud modems connecting an ASR teletype
printer to a single mainframe computer. Nonetheless, the MSSS was
opened to the public as an experimental project via a time-share
arrangement with the NIH computer center. Originally, I wrote a
simple manual, but as users of the search system and database
asked for more features - which eventually grew to some two dozen
options - | wrote a formal 59-page manual that NIH printed in
November 1972.
Graphics on Microfiche
In the early 1970s, disk space was expensive, and few computer
graphics were available. Thus, among the options added to the
MSSS search program was one that linked search results to a
computer-driven microfiche reader that contained the identified
compound's full spectrum, with all the peaks nicely plotted. Figure 2
shows the author with an old teletype, a telephone 1 10-baud acoustic
coupler, and a microfiche device.http ://pubs. acs. org/hotartcl I tcaw I 9 9 I feb lltistory.htrnl
As the popularity of the system
increased and more people
dialed into the DCRT PDP-10.
NIH administrators decided
that the DCRT could not
continue to provide MSSS
computer support. In"stead, a
collaboration was established
with the Mass Spectrometry
Data Centre (MSDC) in
Aldermaston, England. The
MSDC also had a mass
spectral database, and the two
systems were combined.
Subsequently, the MSDC
transferred its system to a commercial (General Electric) time-sharing
system that was available throughout Europe and the United States.
Soon, hundreds of chemists worldwide were using the database and
the search system. The MSSS later moved to the Automatic Data
Processing (ADP)-Cyphernet system and became part of a larger
NIH-EPA Chemical lnformation Systems (ClS) database.
In 1973, ljoined EPA at its headquarters in Washington, DC. Shortly
before then, EPA had been given a congressional mandate to
develop routine monitoring methods for environmental analysis.
Working primarily with EPA scientists Bill Budde in Cincinnati, OH,
and John McGuire in Athens, GA, we developed the MSSS and its
attendant mass spectral database as a mainstay of EPA's
environmental analysis program, much of which was based on
GC/MS analysis.
Because EPA had a large and practical need for mass spectral
search and analysis, considerable funds were provided to increase
the size and quality of the database. The primary EPA database and
software work was contracted to Fein-Marquart Associates. Their
chief technologist, Dave Martinsen, began evaluating the quality of
the spectra, and added Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) Registry
Numbers to each chemical in the MS database.
4 ofj 3/511999 3:44PMThe History of the NIST/EPAA{IH Mass Spectral Database http ://pubs. acs. org/hotartcVt caw I 99 I feb history.html
ln addition, Cornell University professor Fred Mclafferty, under
contract to EPA, developed a Quality Index computer program for the
database, thereby permitting an analyst to judge how well unknownqpectra matched those in the MSSS database. Through the work of
Fein-Marquart, McLafferty, and others, by 1975 morelhan 30,000
spectra were in the database. In 1978, the National Bureau of
Standards (NBS) agreed to print a five-volume collection of some
25,500 different mass spectra, along with the chemical names,
synonyms, and chemical structures. More than 1500 copies of these
books were sold.
NIST Given Responsibility
Although the driving force behind the rapid expansion and use of the
database was EPA, the information was finding other research uses,
including assisting in organic chemistry structure elucidation problems
and toxicology research. For this reason, in 1980, EPA transferred
responsibility for database maintenance to NBS (which later became
NIST). NBS had recently been authorized, through a unique
congressional authority to copyright databases, to disseminate
information such as that in the MSSS. Under the leadership of Dave
Lide and Lew Gevantman of NIST's Office of Standard Reference
Data (OSRD), the database was expanded.
By the late 1980s, EPA's Budde had turned over all further
environmental database development activities to Sharon Lias and
Steve Stein at NIST. Using income from the lease of the database
(more than 25,000 copies have been distributed since 19BB), NIST
enlarged the database and improved its quality by manually
examining each mass spectrum. ln addition, Stein developed a
PC-based search algorithm. Contracts to obtain complete mass
spectra for each compound, as opposed to spectra from the scientific
literature which often contained only a few peaks because of journal
space limitations were undertaken by NIST. Many spectra of "useful"
compounds, such as those commercially available and those of
medicinal chemical interest, were added to the database. These
compounds came from such sources as the Toxic Substances
ControlAct (TSCA) Inventory, EPA Monitoring Methods Index
(EMMI), the U.S. Pharmacopoeia/United States Adopted Names
(USP/U.S.A.N.), the Chemical Rubber Company's Handbook of Data
of Organic Compounds (HODOC), and the European Index of
lndustrial Chemical Substances (El N ECS).
ln the area of database searching, the original Biemann search
algorithm using the two largest peaks in every 14 m/z interval also
has evolved. Incos, a 1970s software company, had developed a
search system that was incorporated into the Finnigan data systems
at the beginning of that decade. The 1990s Stein/NIST system has
taken the Incos approach and expanded it. In the middle to late
1970s, Cornell's Mclafferty developed the Probability Based
Matching (PBM) program, which improved on searching for
compounds in mixtures. PBM is still used today by several mass
spectrometer manufacturers. Mclafferty also developed the
Self-Training and Interpretation System (STIRS) program, which
attempted to elucidate chemical structures for compounds not found
in the NIST database. Today, the Stein software does substructure
analysis and is able to perform a highly evolved library search
algorithm with sophisticated probability calculations to show that a
)oI/ 31511999 3:44 PMThe-History of the NIST/EPAA{IH Mass Spectral Database
given library identification is correct. An example of the Stein/NIST
mass spectrum interpreter program is presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3 o
An example of the Stein/NIST mass spectrum interpreter program
The main effort in the database work in the 1990s has been to build a
large high-quality database. Some areas of current and future work
on the database and associated search software being undertaken at
NIST include acquiring additional spectra of useful compounds,
adding retention index information, developing fragmentation
software to identify peaks that are consistent with fragmentation
rules, improving chemical nomenclature, adding CAS Registry
Numbers to database entries that currently lack this information, and
improving the internal administrative evaluation and editing program.
The latest release of the database, NlST98, stands at 107,886
compounds - almost 100,000 more than the original database
provided by Biemann almost 30 years ago. Today's NIST software
allows a user to display and print not only a compound's mass
spectra but also its chemical structure. The effort to create this
database took a team of mass spectrometrists about 10 years to
evaluate the entire database by hand. Including additional spectra for
some compounds, there are a total of 129,136 spectra (out of a
master database of 175,510 spectra, which include some duplicates
and some low-quality spectra), all of which have been critically
evaluated. Information about how to obtain the current version of this
database is available at the NIST home page ( www.nist.gov/srd/).
An Ongoing Endeavor
ln summary, throughout three decades, the NIST-EPA-NlH mass
spectral database has been a very useful tool for problem solving,
almost anywhere mass spectrometers are used, and it will become
even more so in the future. The Bieman database has become an
ongoing, not a static, endeavor. lt gives the ordinary chemist,
untrained in spectral problem solving, the ability to solve today'shttp ://pubs. acs. org/hotarlcVt caw I 9 9 I feb lhistory.html
6 of7 31511999 3:44 PM- The rlistory of the NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Database http ://pubs. acs.orglhotartcl ltcaw I 99 I feb lltistory.html
questions - whether they involve environmental analysis or the
analysis of compounds from combinatorial chemistry studies.
Stephen R. Heller is past chair of the IUPAC Committee on
Chemical Databases and the software review editor for ACS's Journal
of Chemical lnformation and Computer Sciences. He is a consultant
at Pool, Heller & Milne and can be reached by e-mail at
steve@phm.com
plvamFu*
Mtt'
tor/ 31511999 3:44PM