	 Interruption of treatment with an anti -
depressant medication is sometimes 
associated with an antidepressant dis -
continuation syndrome; in early reports 
it was referred to as a “withdrawal reaction.”1 
Symptoms of antidepressant discontinuation 
syndrome can include flu-like symptoms, 
insomnia, nausea, imbalance, sensory distur -
bances, and hyperarousal. All approved anti -
depressant agents have had case reports or 
warnings from their manufacturers of such 
reactions occurring in response to either 
abrupt discontinuation or medication taper -
ing.2 These medications include selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),3 tri-
cyclic antidepressants,4 monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs),5 and atypical agents 
such as venlafaxine (Effexor),6 mirtazap -
ine (Remeron),7 trazodone (Desyrel),8 and 
duloxetine (Cymbalta).9
The importance of understanding and rec -
ognizing antidepressant discontinuation syn -
drome is threefold: (1) though typically mild, 
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
symptoms are associated with significant dis -
comfort, work absenteeism, other psychoso -
cial problems, and may on rare occasions be severe enough to require hospitalization10-12; 
(2) failure to recognize antidepressant dis -
continuation syndrome may result in medi -
cal and psychiatric misdiagnosis, potentially 
exposing patients to unnecessary diagnostic 
investigations or potentially risky medical 
interventions; (3) patients may be unwilling 
to use psychotropic medications in the future, 
thereby increasing their vulnerability to future 
relapses of depressive or anxiety disorders.
Pathophysiology
Although several hypotheses exist, the defini -
tive pathophysiologic explanation for antide -
pressant discontinuation syndrome remains 
unknown. Early reports of antidepressant 
discontinuation syndrome made heavy use 
of the term “withdrawal” to describe discon -
tinuation symptoms; however, antidepressant 
medications are not believed to be habit form -
ing and are not associated with drug-seeking 
behavior.13 Long-term use of SSRIs increases 
synaptic levels of serotonin through blockade 
of the serotonin reuptake pump, resulting in 
down-regulation of postsynaptic receptors.14 
There is speculation concerning the pos -
sibility of a temporary deficiency of synaptic Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome occurs in approximately 20 percent of patients after 
abrupt discontinuation of an antidepressant medication that was taken for at least six weeks. 
Typical symptoms of antidepressant discontinuation syndrome include flu-like symptoms, 
insomnia, nausea, imbalance, sensory disturbances, and hyperarousal. These symptoms usu -
ally are mild, last one to two weeks, and are rapidly extinguished with reinstitution of antide -
pressant medication. Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is more likely with a longer 
duration of treatment and a shorter half-life of the treatment drug. A high index of suspicion 
should be maintained for the emergence of discontinuation symptoms, which should prompt 
close questioning regarding accidental or purposeful self-discontinuation of medication. 
Before antidepressants are prescribed, patient education should include warnings about the 
potential problems associated with abrupt discontinuation. Education about this common and 
likely underrecognized clinical phenomenon will help prevent future episodes and minimize 
the risk of misdiagnosis. (Am Fam Physician 2006;74:449-56, 457. Copyright © 2006 American 
Academy of Family Physicians.)
 Patient information:  
A handout on antidepres -
sant discontinuation 
syndrome, written by the 
authors of this article, is 
provided on page 457.Antidepressant Discontinuation Syndrome
CHRISTOPHER H. WARNER, MAJ, MC, USA, Winn Army Community Hospital, Fort Stewart, Georgia
WILLIAM BOBO, LCDR, MC, USN,  Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
CAROLYNN WARNER, MAJ, MC, USA, Winn Army Community Hospital, Fort Stewart, Georgia
SARA REID, CPT, USAF, MC, Bolling Air Force Base, Washington, D.C.
JAMES RACHAL, MAJ, USAF, MC, Ehrling Berquist Air Force Hospital, Offutt Air Force Base, Omaha, Nebraska
Downloaded from the American Family Physician Web site at www.aafp.org/afp. Copyright © 2006 American Academy of Family Physicians. For the private, noncommercial 
use of one individual user of the Web site. All other rights reserved. Contact copyrights@aafp.org for copyright questions and/or permission requests.450  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 74, Number 3  ◆ August 1, 2006 	Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
serotonin with abrupt withdrawal of an 
SSRI.15 This deficiency is compounded by 
the fact that down-regulated receptors will 
remain in their relatively hypoactive state 
for days to weeks.15 This is believed to result 
in antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
directly or indirectly via downstream effects 
on other neurotransmitter systems (e.g., 
norepinephrine, dopamine, and g-amino -
butyric acid) implicated in depressive and 
anxiety disorders.15
Because tricyclic antidepressants and 
MAOIs also are serotonergically active, the 
same mechanism is implicated for their 
respective antidepressant discontinuation 
syndromes; however, tricyclic antidepres -
sants also affect the cholinergic system, 
so rapid discontinuation may cause signs 
of parkinsonism and problems with bal -
ance. Because MAOIs cause changes in the 
alpha 2-adrenergic and dopaminergic recep -
tors, their discontinuation may cause agita -
tion and psychosis.
Epidemiology  and Risk Factors
Because of the varied clinical presentation, 
transient nature, and lack of pathognomonic 
clinical features, there are relatively few data 
on incidence, prevalence, and other estimates 
of burden associated with antidepressant 
discontinuation syndrome. One observa -
tional study16 found that four of 45 patients  (9 percent) given fluoxetine (Prozac) and 26 
of 52 patients (50 percent) given paroxetine 
(Paxil) reported discontinuation symptoms, 
with a mean onset of two days and mean dura -
tion of five days. A randomized controlled 
trial17 (RCT) comparing three SSRIs found a 
lower incidence of antidepressant discontinu -
ation syndrome with fluoxetine (14 percent) 
than with paroxetine (66 percent) or sertraline 
(Zoloft) (60 percent). This study was limited 
by its open-label design and was sponsored by 
the manufacturer of fluoxetine. In addition, 
a retrospective chart review13 of 350 patients 
using SSRIs showed no significant added risk 
associated with age, sex, or diagnosis.
Perhaps the best evidence comes from 
an RCT18 that found mild to moderate anti -
depressant discontinuation symptoms in 
35 percent of patients given paroxetine and 14 percent given placebo who were abruptly 
withdrawn from treatment after 12 weeks. 
The difference of approximately 20 percent 
between active treatment and placebo for 
one of the drugs most commonly associated 
with antidepressant discontinuation syn -
drome may provide an upper boundary for 
the probability of the condition.18
DuRA tion  oF tREA tmEnt
Although unconfirmed by prospective clini -
cal trials, case reports of antidepressant dis -
continuation syndrome reactions are rare SoRt: KEy  REcommEnDA tionS FoR  PRActicE
Clinical recommendationEvidence 
rating References 
Maintain a high index of suspicion for antidepressant 
discontinuation syndrome.C 19
Be alert to times when patients may need guidance on 
discontinuing an antidepressant or when they are likely to 
discontinue an antidepressant on their own. C 27,32
Be sure to differentiate antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
from relapse of depression and other psychiatric and medical 
conditions.C 19,27,28
Gradually discontinue medication using one of the suggested 
tapering regimens (Table 5).C 16,17,21,22,27,28  
A = consistent, good-quality patient-oriented evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evi -
dence; C = consensus, disease-oriented evidence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information 
about the SORT evidence rating system, see page 363 or http://www.aafp.org/afpsort.xml.August 1, 2006  ◆ Volume 74, Number 3 	 www.aafp.org/afp 	 American Family Physician   451Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
among individuals who have received less 
than six to eight weeks of antidepressant 
treatment.19 This generalization applies to 
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
that occurs in the settings of both abrupt and 
gradual antidepressant discontinuation. Such 
a time frame may be required to allow the 
synaptic changes that occur during long-term 
pharmacologic antidepressant treatment. 
PhARmAcologic PRoFilE 
For SSRIs, a relatively homogenous drug 
class, differences among the pharmacokinetic 
properties such as elimination half-life and 
metabolism may be the most clinically rele -
vant (Table 1).20,21 Specifically, antidepressant 
discontinuation syndrome is more common 
in patients discontinuing agents with rela -
tively short half-lives, such as paroxetine, 
than in those with longer half-lives, such as 
fluoxetine.13,16,17,19,22 In recent years, slow-, 
extended-, or controlled-release formulations 
of venlafaxine (Effexor XR), paroxetine (Paxil 
CR), and fluoxetine (Prozac Weekly) have 
become available. Although there are limited 
data concerning weekly fluoxetine, antidepres -
sant discontinuation syndrome reactions have 
been reported with controlled-release parox -
etine and extended-release venlafaxine.14,23
clinical  manifestations   
and Pathophysiology
clinicAl  mAniFESt AtionS 
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
involves a large number of psychological 
and physiological signs and symptoms. Case 
reports, audits of adverse drug reaction 
databases, and clinical trials report certain 
characteristic symptoms. These symptoms 
depend on the class of antidepressant used  
(Table 2).2,13,16,17,19,22,24,25 In a recent retro -
spective chart review13 of patients on anti-
depressants and two small, prospective, 
randomized controlled trials,16,24 patients’ 
SSRIs were replaced with placebo for five 
days or their antidepressant medication was 
abruptly discontinued. All noted that the 
most common symptoms of SSRI withdrawal 
were dizziness, gastrointestinal upset, leth -
argy or anxiety/hyperarousal, dysphoria, 
sleep problems, and headache.13,16,24 Antidepressant discontinuation syn -
drome is most often seen in the primary 
care office in association with SSRI discon -
tinuation, because SSRIs are the most com -
monly prescribed class of antidepressant 
medications. In 2000, a systematic review25 
of 46 case reports of SSRI discontinuation 
proposed the diagnostic criteria listed in 
Table 3.25 The FINISH mnemonic (Flu-
like symptoms, Insomnia, Nausea, Imbal -
ance, Sensory disturbances, Hyperarousal) 
was created to facilitate rapid recognition 
table 1
Pharmacologic  Properties  of Selected  Antidepressants
DrugDosage range 
(mg per day)Half-life 
(hours)Active 
metabolite?
Selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitor
Citalopram (Celexa) 10 to 60 35 No
Escitalopram (Lexapro) 10 to 30 27 to 32 No
Fluoxetine (Prozac) 20 to 80 84 to 144 Yes
Paroxetine (Paxil) 10 to 60 21 No
Paroxetine CR (Paxil CR) 12.5 to 62.5 15 to 20 No
Sertraline (Zoloft) 50 to 200 26 Yes
Atypical  antidepressant
Bupropion (Wellbutrin) 75 to 450 12 to 30 Yes
Buproprion SR 
(Wellbutrin SR)100 to 400 12 to 30 Yes
Buproprion XL 
(Wellbutrin XL)150 to 450 12 to 30 Yes
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)* 40 to 60 11 to 16 Yes
Mirtazapine (Remeron) 15 to 45 20 to 40 No
Trazodone (Desyrel) 50 to 400 7.1 Yes
Venlafaxine (Effexor) 75 to 450 3 to 13 Yes
Venlafaxine XR  
(Effexor XR) 75 to 450 3 to 13 Yes
monoamine  oxidase  inhibitors
Phenelzine (Nardil) 15 to 90 1.2 Yes
tricyclic  antidepressant*
Amitriptyline 25 to 300 9 to 25 Yes
Clomipramine (Anafranil) 25 to 250 22 to 84 No
Desipramine (Norpramin) 25 to 300 14.3 to 24.7 No
Doxepin (Sinequan) 25 to 300 11 to 23 No
Imipramine (Tofranil) 25 to 300 10 to 16 Yes
Nortriptyline (Pamelor) 25 to 150 18.2 to 35 No
*Dosages listed are for treatment of depression.
Information from references 20 and 21. 452  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 74, Number 3  ◆ August 1, 2006 	Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
(Table  4).26 However, neither set of crite -
ria25,26 has been formally validated.
Multiple case reports demonstrate that 
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
associated with tricyclic antidepressants 
closely mimics that of the SSRIs.3,4 However, 
signs of parkinsonism and profound prob -
lems with balance appear to be especially 
characteristic of antidepressant discontinu -
ation syndrome caused by tricyclic anti -
depressant discontinuation.3,4 Additionally, 
case reports have noted that the antidepres -
sant discontinuation syndrome associated 
with MAOIs may involve more serious symp -
tomatology such as aggressiveness, agitation, 
catatonia, severe cognitive impairment, or 
myoclonus and psychotic symptoms and 
may require more intensive management.4,5 
onSEt AnD  couRSE
Discontinuation symptoms typically appear 
within three days of stopping antidepres -
sant medication or initiating a medication 
taper, though it has been reported that reac -
tions may occur within hours of the first 
missed dose.9 Untreated symptoms are usu -
ally mild and resolve spontaneously in one 
to two weeks.19 In rare but more serious 
cases involving psychosis, catatonia, or severe 
cognitive impairment, immediate psychiatric 
consultation may be required.
Diagnostic  considerations
mAint Ain A  high  inDEx  oF SuSPicion 
Any uncomfortable symptoms reported by 
patients receiving antidepressants should 
prompt close questioning for missed doses, 
unreported downward adjustments in dos -
age, or outright medication discontinuation. 
DiFFEREntiA tion FRom RElAPSE 
The symptoms of antidepressant discontinu -
ation syndrome that are associated with most 
antidepressants share features of major depres -
sion, including dysphoria, appetite changes, 
sleep problems, cognitive problems, and 
fatigue. By focusing on symptoms that dis -
tinguish antidepressant discontinuation syn -
drome from depressive illness relapse (e.g., 
dizziness, “electric shock” sensations, “rush -
ing” sensations in the head, headache, and table 2
Signs  and Symptoms  of Antidepressant   
Discontinuation  Syndrome
 SSRIAtypical 
antidepressantTricyclic 
antidepressant MAOI
general
Flu-like symptoms + + + —
Headache + + + +
Lethargy + + + —
gastrointestinal
Abdominal cramping + — + —
Abdominal pain + — + —
Appetite disturbance + + + —
Diarrhea + + —
Nausea/vomiting + + + —
Sleep
Insomnia + + + +
Nightmares + + + +
Balance
Ataxia + — + —
Dizziness + + + —
Lightheadedness + — + —
Vertigo + + + —
Sensory
Blurred vision + — — —
“Electric shock” 
sensations+ + — —
Numbness + — — —
Paresthesia + + — —
movement
Akathisia + + + —
Myoclonic jerks — — — +
Parkinsonism + — + —
Tremor + — + —
Affective
Aggression/irritability + — — +
Agitation + — + +
Anxiety + + + —
Low mood + + + +
Psychosis
Catatonia — — — +
Delirium — — — +
Delusions — — — +
Hallucinations — — — +
NOTE: Symptom categories listed by rate of incidence.
SSRI = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; MAOI = monoamine oxidase inhibitor; 
+ = occur in withdrawal from this medication; — = do not occur in withdrawal from 
this medication.
Information from references 2, 13, 16, 17, 19, 22, 24, and 25.August 1, 2006  ◆ Volume 74, Number 3 	 www.aafp.org/afp 	 American Family Physician   453Antidepressant   Discontinuation   Syndrome
nausea) and observing for rapid (i.e., within a 
few days) reversal of symptoms after restarting 
the antidepressant or complete resolution of 
symptoms in one to two weeks (highly unchar -
acteristic of a depressive relapse), a definitive 
diagnosis is fairly easy to make.19,27 Depressive 
relapses or recurrences typically occur after at 
least two to three weeks or longer after cessa -
tion of medication and are most often marked 
by gradual worsening of depression, insomnia, 
and psychomotor symptoms.28 
DiFFERE nti A tion  FR om   oth ER  con D ition S
Irritability, sleeplessness, and anxiety or agi -
tation in a patient taking antidepressants 
may appropriately raise suspicion of an anti -
depressant-associated bipolar manic episode 
that must be distinguished from antidepres -
sant discontinuation syndrome. The devel -
opment of these symptoms should prompt 
close questioning about medication adher -
ence, as previously mentioned. If such symp -
toms appear shortly after discontinuation 
or during dose reduction, rapid symptom 
resolution after restoring the antidepressant 
medication will lead to the correct diagnosis. 
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
also may be misdiagnosed as severe con -
ditions including stroke, other neurologic 
conditions, infectious diseases, and adverse 
effects of other medications the patient is 
taking.29 Antidepressant discontinuation 
syndrome has been reported when switching 
from one antidepressant agent to another.30 
When the new agent has different pharma -
cologic mechanism reactions than the first 
agent, antidepressant discontinuation syn -
drome may be misinterpreted as intolerable 
side effects from the new medication.29 
Prevention
 
and
 m
anagement
uSE  o F A nti DEPRESSA nt S 
For optimal treatment of most psychiat -
ric conditions, and especially anxiety and 
depressive disorders, psychosocial interven -
tions should be recommended along with or 
considered as alternatives to pharmacologic 
therapies. The all-too-common practice of 
“short-term” prescriptions for off-label, 
non–mental health reasons (e.g., irritable 
bowel syndrome, weight loss, headaches, table 3
Proposed   Diagnostic  c riteria   for   SSR i  
Discontinuation
 
Syndrome
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
table 4
FiniS h m nemonic   for   Recognition   
of
 
Antidepressant
 
Discontinuation
 
Syndrome
Flu-like   symptoms  
Fatigue  
Lethargy  
General malaise  
Muscle aches/headaches  
Diarrhea
i
nsomnia
n
ausea
i
mbalance  
Gait instability  
Dizziness/lightheadedness  
Vertigo
Sensory
 
disturbances  
Paresthesia  
“Electric shock” sensations  
Visual disturbance
hyperarousal  
Anxiety  
Agitation
Information from reference 26.The rightsholder did not 
grant rights to reproduce this item in electronic media. For the missing item, see the original print version  of this publication.454  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 74, Number 3  ◆ August 1, 2006 	Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
insomnia) has been associated with early 
antidepressant discontinuation and may 
increase the risk of antidepressant discon -
tinuation syndrome.31
PAtiEntS A t RiSK oF DiScontinuA tion 
Patients may be tempted to discontinue their 
antidepressant medication after they begin 
to feel better, a practice that invites both 
early relapse of illness and antidepressant 
discontinuation syndrome. Women may dis -
continue antidepressant use after discover -
ing that they are pregnant. Ideally, patients 
should be counseled regarding the risks of 
illness relapse, the importance of treating 
symptoms to remission, the need for contin -
uation and (where appropriate) maintenance 
pharmacotherapy, and the need for gradual 
discontinuation of medications before dis -
continuing care.27,32DiScontinuing  mEDicA tion 
Although there are no clinical trials com -
paring abrupt discontinuation with tapered 
discontinuation of antidepressants, tapering 
is recommended by experts, based on the 
suspected pathophysiology of antidepres -
sant discontinuation syndrome.33 Patients 
should be forewarned of the possibility of 
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome if 
antidepressants are discontinued, and that 
supervised tapering of medication over six 
to eight weeks may be required to minimize 
discontinuation symptoms. Several RCTs 
have shown that with abrupt cessation of 
antidepressants, symptoms can begin within 
days.16,17,22 It may be possible to discon -
tinue medication more quickly if doses are 
low; discontinuation may take longer (three 
months or more) after maintenance therapy. 
It may be possible to stop fluoxetine therapy 
without tapering. There are no clear, vali -
dated tapering recommendations. However, 
Table 527 offers one expert’s recommenda -
tions for tapering rates.
mAnAgEmEnt
If antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
occurs and other serious causes of these 
symptoms have been ruled out, the physi -
cian should begin by providing reassurance 
to the patient that the condition is reversible, 
is not serious or life threatening, and will 
run its course within one to two weeks. The 
physician should then consider restarting the 
antidepressant medication with a slow dose 
taper or providing support if the patient 
desires not to restart the antidepressant. 
Severe symptoms should resolve in fewer 
than three days, and often within 24 hours. If 
the antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
occurs during a tapering of the antidepres -
sant, consider restarting at the original dose 
and then taper at a slower rate. In cases where 
slow tapering is poorly tolerated, a medicine 
with a longer half-life such as fluoxetine may 
be substituted for the shorter half-life agent. 
gEnERic DRugS AnD SuBStitutionS 
Not all formulations of the same drug are 
bioequivalent. Generic drugs are allowed up 
to a 20 percent difference. This may result table 5
gradual  taper  Rates  for Antidepressants
Drug Recommended taper rate
monoamine  oxidase  inhibitor
Phenelzine (Nardil) Reduction of 15 mg per day every two 
weeks or 10 percent per week
tricyclic  antidepressant Gradually, up to three months
Selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitor
Fluoxetine (Prozac) Gradual taper generally unnecessary
Paroxetine (Paxil) Reduction of 10 mg per day every five to 
seven days with a final dosage of 5 to  
10 mg per day before discontinuation*
Sertraline (Zoloft) Reduction of 50 mg per day every five to 
seven days with a final dosage of 25 to 
50 mg per day before discontinuation
Atypical  antidepressant
Venlafaxine (Effexor) Reduction of 25 mg day every five to 
seven days with a final dosage of 25 to 
50 mg per day before discontinuation*
Venlafaxine XR (Effexor XR)  
 Reduction of 37.5 to 75 mg per day every 
week with a final dosage of 37.5 mg per 
day before discontinuation*
NOTE: These recommendations are expert opinion only.
*—Slower taper may be needed.
Adapted with permission from Shelton RC. Steps following attainment of remission: 
discontinuation of antidepressant therapy. Primary Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry 
2001;3:172.August 1, 2006  ◆ Volume 74, Number 3 	 www.aafp.org/afp 	 American Family Physician   455Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
in an unintended sudden reduction in drug 
concentration if a patient’s medication is 
switched to a generic or alternative brand. 
tRicyclic AntiDEPRESSAntS
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome 
symptoms caused by tricyclic antidepressants 
that suggest cholinergic rebound (e.g., parkin -
sonism and other problems with movement) 
may respond to short-term use of anticholin -
ergic agents such as atropine (Atropisol) or 
benztropine (Cogentin). This should be con -
sidered especially for patients who are opposed 
to restarting their tricyclic antidepressant.34
The opinions and assertions contained herein are the pri -
vate views of the authors and are not to be construed as 
official or as reflecting the views of the U.S. Department 
of Defense, the U.S. Army Medical Department, or the 
U.S. Army or U.S. Air Force Services at large.
the Authors
CHRISTOPHER H. WARNER, MAJ, MC, USA, is the division 
psychiatrist for the 3rd Infantry Division in the U.S. Army 
and a staff family physician at Winn Army Community 
Hospital at Fort Stewart, Ga. Dr. Warner is a graduate of 
the National Capital Consortium Family Practice-Psychiatry 
Residency Program at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, 
Washington, D.C., and Malcolm Grow Air Force Medical 
Center, Andrews Air Force Base, Md. He received his medi -
cal degree from the Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Md.
WILLIAM BOBO, LCDR, MC, USN, is assistant professor in 
the department of psychiatry at the Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Md. He is 
also the assistant program director of the National Capital 
Consortium Family Practice-Psychiatry Residency Program 
at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C. Dr. 
Bobo received his medical degree from the University of 
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine and completed his 
psychiatry residency training at Walter Reed Army Medical 
Center. He is currently serving in the U.S. Navy.
CAROLYNN WARNER, MAJ, MC, USA, is a staff fam -
ily physician at Winn Army Community Hospital, Fort 
Stewart. Dr. Warner is a graduate of the National Capital 
Consortium Family Practice Residency Program at Malcolm 
Grow Air Force Medical Center, Andrews Air Force Base, 
and received her medical degree from the University of 
Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore. She is currently 
serving in the U.S. Army.
SARA REID, CPT, USAF, MC, is a family physician at Bolling 
Air Force Base in Washington, D.C. Dr. Reid received her 
medical degree from the Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences and completed her family practice res -
idency at the National Capital Consortium Family Practice 
Residency Program at Malcolm Grow Air Force Medical 
Center. She is currently serving in the U.S. Air Force.JAMES RACHAL, MAJ, USAF, MC, is the chief of psychiatry 
at Ehrling Berquist Air Force Hospital at Offutt Air Force 
Base in Omaha, Neb. Dr. Rachal received his medical 
degree from the University of Cincinnati (Ohio) and is 
a graduate of the National Capital Consortium Family 
Practice-Psychiatry Residency Program at Walter Reed 
Army Medical Center and Malcolm Grow Air Force Medical 
Center. He is currently serving in the U.S. Air Force.
Address correspondence to Christopher Warner, M.D., 
373 Steeple Chase Lane, Richmond Hill, GA 31324 (e-
mail: Christopher.h.warner@us.army.mil). Reprints are 
not available from the authors.
Author disclosure: Nothing to disclose.
REFEREncES
 1. Rothschild AJ. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor-
induced sexual dysfunction: efficacy of a drug holiday. 
Am J Psychiatry 1995;152:1514-6.
 2. Dilsaver SC, Greden FJ. Antidepressant withdrawal 
phenomena. Biol Psychiatry 1984;19:237-56.
 3. Thompson C. Discontinuation of antidepressant ther -
apy: emerging complications and their relevance. J Clin 
Psychiatry 1998;59:541-8.
 4. Garner EM, Kelly MW, Thompson DF. Tricyclic anti -
depressant withdrawal syndrome. Ann Pharmacother 
1993;27:1068-72.
 5. Curtin F, Berney P, Kaufmann C. Moclobemide dis -
continuation syndrome predominantly presenting 
with influenza-like symptoms. J Psychopharmacol 
2002;16:271-2.
 6. Agelink MW, Zitzelsberger A, Klisser E. Withdrawal 
syndrome after discontinuation of venlafaxine. Am J 
Psychiatry 1997;154:1473-4.
 7. Berigan TR. Mirtazapine-associated withdrawal symp -
toms: a case report. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psy -
chiatry 2001;3:143.
 8. Peabody CA. Trazodone withdrawal and formication. J 
Clin Psychiatry 1987;48:385.
 9. Cymbalta [package insert]. Indianapolis, Ind.: Eli Lilly 
Pharmaceuticals; 2004. Accessed online October 19, 
2005, at: http://pi.lilly.com/us/cymbalta-pi.pdf.
10. Barr LC, Goodman WK, Price LH. Physical symptoms 
associated with paroxetine discontinuation. Am J Psy -
chiatry 1994;151:289.
 11. Koopowitz LF, Berk M. Paroxetine induced withdrawal 
effects. Hum Psychophramacol 1995;10:147-8.
12. Lejoyeux M, Rodiere-Rein C, Ades J. Withdrawal syn -
drome from antidepressive drugs. Report of 5 cases [in 
French]. Encephale 1992;18:251-5.
13. Coupland NJ, Bell CJ, Potokar JP. Serotonin reup -
take inhibitor withdrawal. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
1996;16:356-62.
14. Paxil CR [product monograph]. GlaxoSmithKline; 2005. 
Accessed online October 19, 2005, at: http://us.gsk.
com/products/assets/us_paxilcr.pdf.
15. Lane RM. Withdrawal symptoms after discontinuation 
of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). J Sero -
tonin Res 1996; 3/2:75-83.
16. Bogetto F, Bellino S, Revello RB, Patria L. Discontinua -
tion syndrome in dysthymic patients treated with selec -456  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 74, Number 3  ◆ August 1, 2006 	Antidepressant  Discontinuation  Syndrome
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors: a clinical investiga -
tion. CNS Drugs 2002;16:273-83.
 17. Rosenbaum JF, Fava M, Hoog SL, Ascroft RC, Krebs WB. 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor discontinuation 
syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. Biol Psychiatry 
1998;44:77-87.
18. Oehrberg S, Christiansen PE, Behnke K, Borup AL, Sev -
erin B, Soegaard J, et al. Paroxetine in the treatment of 
panic disorder. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Br J Psychiatry 1995;167:374-9.
19. Haddad P. Newer antidepressants and the discontinua -
tion syndrome. J Clin Psychiatry 1997;58(suppl 7):17-21.
20. Gury C, Cousin F. Pharmacokinetics of SSRI antidepres -
sants: half-life and clinical applicability. Encephale 
1999;25:470-6.
21. Physicians’ Desk Reference. 59th ed. Montvale, N.J.: 
Thomson PDR, 2005: 731, 1269, 1282, 1585, 1592, 
1655, 1659, 1663, 1873, 1925-6, 2213, 2458, 2578, 
2681, 3220, 3296, 3321, 3326, 3430. 
22. Judge R, Parry MG, Quail D, Jacobson JG. Discon -
tinuation symptoms: comparison of brief interruption 
in fluoxetine and paroxetine treatment. Int Clin Psycho -
pharmacol 2002;17:217-25.
23. Gutierrez MA, Stimmel GL, Aiso JY. Venlafaxine: a 2003 
update. Clin Ther 2003;25:2138-54.
24. Michelson D, Fava M, Amsterdam J, Apter J, Londborg 
P, Tamura R, et al. Interruption of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor treatment. Double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2000;176:363-8.
25. Black K, Shea C, Dursun S, Kutcher S. Selective sero -
tonin reuptake inhibitor discontinuation syndrome: 
proposed diagnostic criteria. J Psychiatry Neurosci 
2000;25:255-61.26. Berber MJ. FINISH: remembering the discontinuation 
syndrome. Flu-like symptoms, Insomnia, Nausea, Imbal -
ance, Sensory disturbances, and Hyperarousal (anxiety/
agitation). J Clin Psychiatry 1998;59:255.
27. Shelton RC. Steps following attainment of remission: 
discontinuation of antidepressant therapy. Primary Care 
Companion J Clin Psychiatry 2001;3:168-74.
28 . Rosenbaum JF, Zajecka J. Clinical management of 
antidepressant discontinuation. J Clin Psychiatry 
1997;58(suppl 7):37-40.
29. Haddad PM, Qureshi M. Misdiagnosis of antidepres -
sant discontinuation symptoms. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
2000;102:466-7.
30. Phillips SD. A possible paroxetine withdrawal syndrome 
[letter]. Am J Psychiatry 1995;152:645-6.
31. Pomerantz JM, Finkelstein SN, Berndt ER, Poret AW, 
Walker LE, Alber RC, et al. Prescriber intent, off-label 
usage, and early discontinuation of antidepressants: a 
retrospective physician survey and data analysis. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2004;65:395-404.
32. Bull SA, Hu XH, Hunkeler EM, Lee JY, Ming EE, Mark -
son LE, et al. Discontinuation of use and switching of 
antidepressants: influence of patient-physician com -
munication. JAMA 2002;288:1403-9.
33. British National Formulary. Antidepressant drugs. 
Accessed January 31, 2006, at: http://www.bnf.org/
bnf/bnf/50/noframes/3294.htm (password required).
34. Wolfe RM. Antidepressant withdrawal reactions 
[published correction appears in Am Fam Physician 
1998;57:646]. Am Fam Physician 1997;56: 455-62.