Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
The Ames Salmonella /microsome mutagenicity assay
Kristien Mortelmansa;, Errol Zeigerb;1
aMolecular and Genetic Toxicology Program, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493, USA
bEnvironmental Toxicology Program, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2233, USA
Abstract
TheAmes Salmonella /microsomemutagenicityassay( Salmonella test;Amestest)isashort-termbacterialreversemutation
assayspeciﬁcallydesignedtodetectawiderangeofchemicalsubstancesthatcanproducegeneticdamagethatleadstogenemutations.Thetestemploysseveralhistidinedependent Salmonella strainseachcarryingdifferentmutationsinvariousgenes
in the histidine operon. These mutations act as hot spots for mutagens that cause DNA damage via different mechanisms.Whenthe Salmonella testerstrainsaregrownonaminimalmediaagarplatecontainingatraceofhistidine,onlythosebacteria
thatreverttohistidineindependence( his
C)areabletoformcolonies.Thenumberofspontaneouslyinducedrevertantcolonies
per plate is relatively constant. However, when a mutagen is added to the plate, the number of revertant colonies per plate isincreased, usually in a dose-related manner.
The Ames test is used world-wide as an initial screen to determine the mutagenic potential of new chemicals and drugs.
Thetestisalsousedforsubmissionofdatatoregulatoryagenciesforregistrationoracceptanceofmanychemicals,includingdrugs and biocides. International guidelines have been developed for use by corporations and testing laboratories to ensureuniformity of testing procedures.
This review provides historical aspects of how the Ames was developed and detailed procedures for performing the test,
including the design and interpretation of results. © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: AmesSalmonella /microsome mutagenicity assay; Salmonella strains; Gene mutation
1. Introduction
The identiﬁcation of substances capable of induc-
ing mutations has become an important procedure insafety assessment. Chemicals that can induce muta-tions can potentially damage the germ line leading tofertility problems and to mutations in future genera-tions. Mutagenic chemicals are also capable of induc-ing cancer, and this concern has driven most of themutagenicity testing programs. Mutations can occur
Corresponding author. Tel.: C1-650-859-4312; fax: C1-650-
859-2889.E-mail addresses: kristien@unix.sri.com (K. Mortelmans),
zeiger@niehs.nih.gov (E. Zeiger).
1Tel.:C1-919-541-4482; fax: C1-919-541-0947.as gene (point) mutations, where only a single base
is modiﬁed, or one or a relatively few bases are in-serted or deleted, as large deletions or rearrangementsofDNA,aschromosomebreaksorrearrangements,oras gain or loss of whole chromosomes.
Genemutationsarereadilymeasuredinbacteriaand
other cell systems when they cause a change in thegrowthrequirementsofthecell,whereaschromosomedamage in mammalian cells is typically measured byobserving the cell’s chromosomes under magniﬁca-tion for breaks or rearrangements. The Salmonella ty-
phimurium /microsome assay ( Salmonella test; Ames
test) is a widely accepted short-term bacterial assayfor identifying substances that can produce geneticdamage that leads to gene mutations. The test uses anumber of Salmonella strains with preexisting muta-
0027-5107/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII:S0027-5107(00)00064-630 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
tions that leave the bacteria unable to synthesize the
requiredaminoacid,histidine,andthereforeunabletogrowandformcoloniesinitsabsence.Newmutationsat the site of these preexisting mutations, or nearby inthe genes, can restore the gene’s function and allowthe cells to synthesize histidine. These newly mutatedcells can grow in the absence of histidine and formcolonies. For this reason, the test is often referred toas a “reversion assay.”
TheSalmonella strains used in the test have differ-
entmutationsinvariousgenesinthehistidineoperon;each of these mutations is designed to be responsiveto mutagens that act via different mechanisms. Ad-ditional mutations were engineered into these strainsto make them more sensitive to a wide variety ofsubstances.
TheSalmonella mutagenicity test was speciﬁcally
designed to detect chemically induced mutagenesis[7]. Over the years its value as such has been recog-nizedbythescientiﬁccommunity,andbygovernmentagenciesandcorporations.Thetestisusedworld-wideas an initial screen to determine the mutagenic po-tential of new chemicals and drugs because there is ahigh predictive value for rodent carcinogenicity whena mutagenic response is obtained [49,71,85,92]. In-ternational guidelines have also been developed (e.g.,Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-opment (OECD); International Commission on Har-monization (ICH)) for use by corporations and testinglaboratoriestoensureuniformityoftestingproceduresprior to submission of data to regulatory agencies forregistration or acceptance of many chemicals, includ-ing drugs and biocides.
2. Historical aspects
The Ames Salmonella /microsome mutagenicity as-
sayevolvedovertheyearsfromtheinitialscreeningofa number of histidine mutants which led to the selec-tion of mutants that were highly sensitive to reversionby a variety of chemical mutagens [2,5,39,40,47].Because bacteria are unable to metabolize chemicalsvia cytochromes P450, as in mammals and othervertebrates, a key component for making the bacte-rial mutagenicity test useful was the inclusion of anexogenous mammalian metabolic activation system[6,43]. At the same time, the development of the plateincorporation assay protocol to replace spot test or
liquid suspension procedures was a major contribut-ing factor to the success of the Ames test becauseit made the test easier to perform and reduced itscost.
2.1. Screening of histidine mutants and development
of the plate incorporation assay
Studies performed to identify and map the genes
responsible for histidine biosynthesis produceda large number of spontaneous, radiation-, andchemical-induced histidine mutants of Salmonella
typhimurium LT-2 [27,82]. Some of the mutants con-
tained single base changes (base-pair substitutionmutants), and others contained additions or dele-tions of one or more bases (frameshift mutants). Itwas later realized that some of these mutant strainscould be used to identify and characterize muta-genic chemicals by their ability to revert to wild-type(histidine-independence)inthepresenceofmutagens.In 1966, Ames and Whitﬁeld [4] proposed a set ofhistidine mutant strains for screening chemicals formutagens using a spot test procedure that was previ-ously used by Szybalski [72] and Iyer and Szybalski[34] for mutagen screening with an E. colistrain. The
spot test consists of applying a small amount of thetest chemical directly to the center of a selective agarmedium plate seeded with the test organism. As thechemical diffuses into the agar a concentration gradi-entisformed.Amutagenicchemicalwillgiverisetoaring of revertant colonies surrounding the area wherethe chemical was applied. If the chemical is toxic,a zone of growth inhibition will also be observed[2]. Fig. 1 depicts a spot test with methylmethanesulfonate and strain Salmonella strain TA100.
In1973,Amesetal.[5,6]developedtheplateincor-
poration assay procedure which is more sensitive andquantitative than the spot test. The procedure consistsof adding the buffer or S-9 mix, the histidine depen-dent bacteria (about 10
8) and test chemical to 2 ml
of top agar containing biotin and a trace amount ofhistidine (0.05 mM each). The mixture is then gen-tly mixed and poured on glucose minimal (GM) agarplates. When the top agar has solidiﬁed the plates areincubated in an inverted position in a 37
C incubator
for 48 h at which time the histidine revertant coloniesarecounted.TheassayprocedureisdepictedinFig.2.K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 31
Fig. 1. Spot test with strain TA100 and methyl methanesulfonate
(10 ml).
Fig. 2. Diagram depicting the steps involved in the plate incorporation assay.When the histidine dependent bacteria are grown
on a glucose minimal (GM) agar plate containing atrace amount of histidine, only those cells that re-vert to histidine independence (His
C) are able to form
colonies. The small amount of histidine allows all theplatedbacteriatoundergoafewcelldivisions;inmanycases, this growth is essential for mutagenesis to oc-cur. The His
Crevertants are easily scored as colonies
against the slight background growth. The number ofspontaneously induced revertant colonies is relativelyconstant for each strain. However, when a mutagen isadded to the plate, the number of revertant coloniesperplateisincreased,usuallyinadoserelatedmanneras depicted in Fig. 3.
Theplateincorporationtestdoesnotpermittheenu-
merationofthetotalnumberofsurvivingcellsbecauseof bacterial growth on the plate and competing toxi-city due to the chemical treatment. Also, because ofthe extra cell divisions that take place after adding the32 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
Fig. 3. Mutagenic dose response with strain TA100 and sodium azide. Control: spontaneous revertants; dose 1:2.5 mg/plate;
dose 2:5 mg/plate.
bacteria to the plate, it is not possible to estimate the
numberofcellsatriskformutation.Therefore,themu-tation values obtained can only be expressed as num-ber of mutants/plate, or number of mutants/amount ofchemical added.
A plate test that can provide quantitative toxicity
information is the “treat-and-plate” suspension proce-dure but takes longer to perform than the plate incor-poration assay. In this procedure, the bacteria are
washed free of growth medium, resuspended innon-nutrient growth medium and treated with thetest substance for various time intervals. Separatesamples of the bacteria are then plated on selectivemedium for mutant determination and on completemedium for survival determination. The results estab-lishthemutationfrequencybycalculatingthenumberK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 33
of mutants per surviving fraction of bacteria [26].
However, the plate incorporation assay offers the ad-vantages that limited steps are required to expose thebacteria to the test chemical with no need for washingor resuspending the bacteria prior to or after treat-ment. In addition, the bacteria are allowed to undergoa few cell divisions in the presence of the test sub-stance, which increases their sensitivity to mutationinduction.
2.2. Metabolic activation systems2.2.1. Oxidative metabolism
Some carcinogenic chemicals, such aromatic
amines or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arebiologically inactive unless they are metabolizedto active forms. In humans and lower animals, thecytochrome-based P450 metabolic oxidation sys-tem, which is present mainly in the liver and to alesser extent in the lung and kidneys, is capable ofmetabolizing a large number of these chemicals toDNA-reactive, electrophilic forms. Some of the in-termediate metabolites are potent mutagens in theAmesSalmonella assay. Since bacteria do not have
this metabolic capability, an exogenous mammalianorgan activation system needs to be added to the petriplate together with the test chemical and the bacteria.For this purpose, a rodent metabolic activation systemwas introduced into the test system [5,22,43,51,69].The metabolic activation system usually consistsof a 9000 gsupernatant fraction of a rat liver ho-
mogenate (S-9 microsomal fraction), which is deli-vered to the test system in the presence of NADP andcofactors for NADPH-supported oxidation (S-9 mix)[47]. To increase the level of metabolizing enzymes,the animals are pretreated with the mixed-functionoxidase inducer Aroclor 1254. Other inducers, suchas phenobarbital and b-naphthoﬂavone, can also be
used.
The mixed function oxidase enzymes (S-9 fraction)
can also be obtained from animal species other thanrat such as mouse, hamster, guinea-pig and monkeyand organs other than liver such as kidney [1,31,48]and from human liver [66]. In comparative studiesin which coded compounds were tested, induced anduninduced Syrian hamster or mouse liver S-9 offeredno overall advantage over Aroclor-1254 induced ratliver S-9 for the induction of mutagenesis [17,18,29].However, there are chemicals that may be more efﬁ-
ciently detected as mutagens with rat, mouse, or ham-ster liver S-9 [17,18,90].
2.2.2. Reductive metabolism
The metabolic activation system can also consist
of a reductive enzyme system for classes of chem-icals containing azo and diazo bonds. Reductionof chemical substances can occur in mammals, in-cluding humans, by anaerobic intestinal microﬂora,and very likely by mammalian reductases in the in-testinal wall or in the liver. Two types of reductivein vitro metabolic activation systems have gener-ally been used, those based on a liver homogenatesupplemented with FMN [58,59], and those thatare based on rat intestinal microﬂora preparations[62–64].
2.3. The Salmonella tester strains
2.3.1. Genotypes
The genotypes of the commonly used Salmonella
tester strains are listed in Table 1. All strains are histi-
Table 1
Genotype of the most commonly used Salmonella tester strains
Mutation
(strain)bio chlD uvrB gal LPS
defectPlasmid
hisG46
TA1535 Deletion mutation rfa No plasmid
TA100 Deletion mutation rfa pKM101
hisD3052
TA1538 Deletion mutation rfa No plasmid
TA98 Deletion mutation rfa pKM101
hisC3076
TA1537 Deletion mutation rfa No plasmid
hisD6610 Deletion mutation rfa pKM101
hisO1242
TA97
hisG428
TA104 Deletion mutation rfa No plasmid
TA102 Wild type rfa pKM101, pAQ134 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
dinedependentbyvirtueofamutationinthehistidine
operon. Additional mutations/genetic alterations thathave made the tester strains more sensitive to chemi-cal mutagens are listed below.
A deletion mutation through the uvrB-bio genes
in all strains, except TA102. The uvrBdeletion mu-
tation eliminates the accurate excision repair mecha-nism, thereby allowing more DNA lesions to be re-pairedbytheerror-proneDNArepairmechanism.Thedeletion through the biotin gene makes the bacteriabiotin dependent [5].
A mutation ( rfa) in all strains that leads to a de-
fectivelipolysaccharide(LPS)layerthatcoatsthebac-terial surface, making the bacteria more permeable tobulky chemicals [5].
Introduction of plasmid pKM101 in strains
TA1535 and TA1538 resulting in the correspond-ing isogenic strains TA100 and TA98 [7] and instrains TA97 [39] and TA102 and TA104 [40]. Plas-mid pKM101 enhances chemical and UV-inducedmutagenesis via an increase in the error-prone re-combinational DNA repair pathway [50,65,80]. Theplasmid confers ampicillin resistance, which is a con-venient marker to detect the presence of the plasmid[53].
Table 2
DNA sequence speciﬁcity on the Salmonella tester strains
Allele/strain(s) DNA target Reversion event Reference
hisG46 –G–G–G– Base-pair substitution [11]
TA100TA1535
hisD3052 –C–G–C–G–C–G–C–G– Frameshifts [33]
TA98TA1538
hisC3076 C1 frameshift Frameshifts [5]
TA1537 (near –C–C–C– run)
hisD6610 –C–C–C–C–C–C– Frameshifts [39]
TA97 ( C1 cytosine at run of C’s)
hisG428 TAA (ochre) Transitions/transversions [40]
TA102TA104Insertion of the mutation hisG428on the multi-
copy plasmid pAQ1 which was introduced in strainTA102 with the aim of amplifying the number of tar-get sites. To enhance the ability of this strain to detectDNAcross-linkingagents,the uvrBgenewasretained
making the bacterium DNA repair proﬁcient [40].
2.3.2. Speciﬁc target DNA sequence
Table 2 lists the DNA sequences of the target
mutations in the commonly used Salmonella tester
strains. The hisG46marker in strains TA1535 and
TA100 results from the substitution of a leucine(GAG/CTC) by a proline (GGG/CCC) [11]. Thismutation is reverted to the wild-type state by mu-tagens that cause base-pair substitution mutationsprimarily at one of the GC pairs. The hisD3052 mu-
tation carried by strains TA1538 and TA98 is a -1frameshift mutation which affects the reading frameof a nearby repetitive –C–G–C–G–C–G–C–G– se-quence [33]. Reversion of the hisD3052 mutation
back to the wild-type state is induced by variousframeshift mutagens such as 2-nitroﬂuorene andvarious aromatic nitroso derivatives of amine car-cinogens. Strain TA1537 which carries the hisC3076
mutation appears to have a C1 frameshift mutationK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 35
near the site of a repetitive –C–C–C– sequence and
is reverted to the wild-type level by frameshift mu-tagens that are not readily detected by the hisD3052
marker, such as 9-aminoacridine [5]. The hisD6610
mutation in strain TA97 also carries a C1 frameshift
mutation (cytosine) resulting in a run of 6 cytosines(–C–C–C–C–C–C–). This strain is believed to bemore sensitive than TA1537 to frameshift mutagens,and, unlike strain TA1537, is sensitive to some ofthe mutagens that revert strains TA1538 and TA98[39].
It should be noted that the DNA target sites of
the above described tester strains contain GC basepairs. In contrast, two additional strains TA102 andTA104 were developed that contain AT base pairs atthehisG428 mutant site. The mutation is carried on
the multi-copy plasmid pAQ1 in strain TA102 andon the chromosome in strain TA104. The plasmidconfers tetracycline resistance, which is a convenientmarker to detect the presence of the plasmid. ThehisG428mutation is an ochre mutation, TAA, in the
hisGgene which can be reverted by all six possible
base-pair changes; both transitions and transversions.This mutation is also reverted by mutagens that causeoxidative damage. In addition, the DNA repair pro-ﬁcient strain TA102 detects cross-linking agents suchas bleomycin and mitomycin C [40].
2.4. Construction of base-speciﬁc Salmonella tester
strains
Asetof6base-speciﬁc Salmonella testerstrainswas
developedbyGeeetal.[24],withtheuniquepropertythat each strain can be reverted by a unique transitionor transversion event thereby enabling the identiﬁca-tion of speciﬁc base-pair substitutions. In addition tothehismutation all strains carry the following genetic
markers:therfamutation that affects the permeability of the
cell wall
theuvrB-bio deletion that affects the accurate DNA
repair pathway and which makes the cells biotindependent
the mutagenesis-enhancing plasmid pKM101.
Each strain carries a unique missense mutation
with the base change indicated below in the histidinebiosynthetic operon:Strain Operon Mutation
TA7001 hisG1775 AT to GC
TA7002 hisC9138 TA to AT
TA7003 hisG9074 TA to GC
TA7004 hisG9133 GC to AT
TA7005 hisG9130 CG to AT
TA7006 hisC9070 CG to GC
The results of a validation study were published by
Gee et al. [25].
2.4.1. Modiﬁcations of the standard plate
incorporation assay
Over the years, modiﬁcations to the standard plate
incorporation assay (Fig. 2) have been developed bydifferent researchers that enhanced the sensitivity ofthe test and allowed the testing of a wider range ofchemicals, including gases and volatile chemicals.Themostcommonlyusedmodiﬁcationsaredescribedbelow.
2.4.2. The preincubation assay
In the preincubation assay, the tester strains are ex-
posed to the chemical for a short period (20 to 30min)inasmallvolume(0.5ml)ofeitherbufferorS-9mix,priortoplatingonglucoseagarminimalmedium(GM agar) supplemented with a trace amount of his-tidine. With few exceptions it is believed that this as-say is more sensitive than the plate incorporation as-say, because short-lived mutagenic metabolites mayhave a better chance reacting with the tester strainsin the small volume of preincubation mixture, andthe effective concentration of S-9 mix in the preincu-bation volume is higher than on the plate [29,55,84,89,90].
2.4.3. The desiccator assay for volatile liquids and
gases
The use of a closed chamber is recommended
for testing highly volatile chemicals and gases[8,30,67,91].
2.4.4. The Kado Salmonella microsuspension assay
for testing small sample volumes
This procedure was designed to detect mutagenic
metabolites in urine samples obtained from animalstreated with test chemicals [35] because of the rela-tively small sample volumes obtained in these stud-36 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
ies. In this procedure, the overnight cultures are cen-
trifuged to obtain a 10-fold higher than normal celldensity(i.e.,about1to2 10
10bacteriaperml,which
results in about 1 to 2 109bacteria per tube when
delivered in a 0.1 ml inoculum) for use in the prein-cubation assay. The exposure of a higher number ofbacteria to the urine samples is believed to enhancethedetectionofmutagenicmetabolitespresentinurinesamples. This procedure is also well suited for testingsmall quantities (about 20 mg) of samples where thesample quantities are limited, and for testing complexmixtures other than urine samples.
2.4.5. Testing of chemicals in a reduced oxygen
atmosphere
Anaerobic environments, such as anaerobic cham-
bers, have been used to study mutagenicity of chem-icals and fecal samples under reduced oxygen levels[14,28,41,54,74,75]. Highly reduced oxygen levelsmay lead to a reduction in both spontaneous and in-duced revertant colonies and may interfere with theinterpretation of the results. A complete absence ofrevertant colonies is observed when a strict anaer-obic environment and prereduced and anaerobicallysterilized (PRAS) media are used [54]. It is there-fore important to perform preliminary experiments todetermine whether the spontaneous reversion rate isaffected by the intended reduced oxygen level.
2.5. Validation studies
Over the years, many validation studies have
been performed to determine the reproducibility oftest results on an intra- and inter-laboratory level[17,18,45,57,61,77,85]. In addition, many studieshave been performed to determine the sensitivity andcorrelation of the Ames test with animal carcino-genicity studies. It has indeed been established thatthere is a high predictivity of a positive mutagenicresponse in the Ames test for rodent carcinogenicity[3,49,71,73,88], ranging from 90% [49] to 77% [88],the primary differences being the chemical compo-sition of the compiled databases. The test thereforeis in many instances used as a ﬁrst screen to deter-mine the mutagenic potential of new chemicals anddrugs. In addition, data from the test is submittedto regulatory agencies in support of registration oracceptance of many chemicals, including drugs andbiocides [9,21,38,68]. International guidelines have
been developed for use by corporations and testinglaboratoriestoensureuniformityoftestingprocedures[32,56].
3. Long term storage and propagation of the
tester strains
3.1. Preparation of frozen permanent cultures
For long-term preservation, the Salmonella tester
strains should be kept frozen at −80
C (freezer or
liquid nitrogen). Upon receipt of the new strains, upto ﬁve frozen permanent cultures should be preparedfrom one single colony isolate that has been puriﬁedand checked for its genotypic characteristics ( his,rfa,
uvrB-bio) and for the presence of plasmids pKM101
and pAQ1, when appropriate. These cultures shouldbeconsideredthefrozenpermanentstrainsandshouldbe accessed only for the preparation of new frozenworking cultures or master agar plates.
If the new strain is received on a small sterile ﬁlter
disk embedded in nutrient agar, ﬁrst wipe the diskacross the surface of a nutrient agar plate, and thentransfer the disk to 5 ml of nutrient broth. If the straincomesasalyophilizedculture,asepticallyadd1mlofnutrientbrothtorehydratetheculture(aprocesswhichshould take up to 2 min), then transfer the rehydratedculture to 4 ml of nutrient broth. Keep a drop of therehydrated culture for transfer to a nutrient agar plateandstreaktheinoculumforindividualcoloniesacrossthe surface of the plate. The broth culture serves asa back-up in case no growth is observed on the agarplate.
Afterovernightincubationat37
C,inspecttheagar
platesforgrowth.Ifsinglecoloniesareobserved,pickone healthy looking colony and restreak it for indi-vidual colonies on GM agar plate supplemented withan excess of biotin and histidine, and with ampicillinand tetracycline (for the strain(s) carrying plasmidpKM101and pAQ1, respectively). This puriﬁcationstep should be repeated. At least two puriﬁcationsteps are recommended to ensure that a pure culturewill be used for propagation of the frozen permanentcultures.
Note: For puriﬁcation purposes nutrient agar plates
may be used instead of appropriately supplementedK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 37
GM agar plates; however, the use of minimal de-
ﬁned medium reduces the risk of contamination. Ittakes 2 days of incubation at 37
C to obtain good
growth on GM agar plates. The supplemental nu-trients and antibiotics can be applied directly tothe surface of the GM plates by delivering two tothree drops of the appropriate solutions (see theSection 15: Recipes for reagents and media) whichare then evenly distributed over the agar surface bya sterile glass spreader. These solutions can alsobe incorporated in the agar when the plates areprepared.Pick up to ﬁve single colonies from the second (or
later) puriﬁcation plate and transfer to a preassignedlocation on a GM agar plate supplemented with theappropriate nutrient/antibiotics which will serve asthe master plates during the process of preparing thepermanent frozen cultures. For convenience, label thelocations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, on the backs of the plates.Incubate the master plates for 2 days at 37
C. When
good growth is observed, inoculate 5 ml of nutrientbroth with a small inoculum from each of the singleisolated colonies on the master plate. After overnightincubation at 37
C conﬁrm the genotypes (strain
check) of the tester strains (see the section: Geneticanalysis).
Upon completion of the strain check, select the
colony from the master plate that has given the bestoverall results in terms of phenotypic characteris-tics, including the best overall spontaneous mutationinduction. Transfer a small inoculum in 4.5 ml ofnutrient broth and incubate overnight at 37
C with
shaking till the cells reach a density of 1 to 2 109
CFU/ml (O.D. 540between 0.1 and 0.2). Add 0.5
ml of a sterile cryopreservative such as glycerolor DMSO to the culture (ﬁnal concentration, 10%,v/v), mix thoroughly and dispense 1 ml aliquotsin sterile cryogenic tubes prelabelled “PERMA-NENT CULTURES” with strain number and dateof preparation. Quick freeze on dry ice and store at−80
C.
Note: If permanent frozen cultures are prepared of
several tester strain, up to 25 clones can be placedonthemasterplate.Replicaplatingcanthenbeper-formedfordeterminationofhistidineandbiotinde-pendence and for the presence of plasmid pKM101(ampicillin resistance) and plasmid pAQ1 (tetracy-cline resistance).3.2. Preparation of frozen working cultures
New frozen working cultures should be prepared at
leastevery12monthswithanexpirationdateof1yearfrom the time the frozen working cultures were pre-pared. For preparation of the working cultures, scrapethesurfaceofonefrozenpermanentculturewithaster-ile wooden applicator stick or inoculation loop. Thisprocedureshouldbedonequicklytopreventthefrozenpermanent culture from thawing which might resultin decreased viability and loss of plasmid(s). Inoc-ulate 5 ml of nutrient broth with the small inocu-lum. After overnight incubation at 37
C with shaking
(100–120rpm),streakaloopfulofthecultureforindi-vidual colonies on GM agar plates supplemented withan excess of biotin and histidine, and as needed withampicillin and tetracycline, for the strain(s) carryingplasmid pKM101and pAQ1, respectively. Purify onehealthy looking colony at least twice.
Pick up to ﬁve single colonies from the second pu-
riﬁcation plate and transfer to a preassigned locationonaGMagarplatesupplementedwiththeappropriatenutrient/antibiotics; this will be considered the mas-ter plate. All subsequent steps are identical to thosedescribed above for the preparation of the frozenpermanent cultures except for the following. Thecryogenic tubes should be prelabelled: WORKINGCULTURES, with strain number, date of preparationand expiration date and more than 5 frozen culturesshould be prepared (see Note below).
Note: It is recommended that one frozen working
culture(onecryogenictube)beusedforeachexper-imentandthattheunusedportionbediscarded.Fre-quent rethawing and refreezing of the tester strainsmay result in reduced viability and loss of the plas-mid(s). It is therefore important to prepare sufﬁ-cient frozen working cultures for 1 year. However,if needed, frozen working cultures can be preparedseveral times a year. It is important that the ﬁnalconcentration of the cryopreservative, glycerol orDMSO, is at least 10%, v/v.
3.3. Preparation of working stock agar plates
In case there is a problem maintaining frozen
working cultures, working stock agar plates can beprepared by streaking appropriately supplementedGM agar plates with the tester strains after a strain38 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
check. These plates should be stored in the refrige-
rator wrapped in paraﬁlm to prevent dehydration ofthe agar. For inoculation purposes, a small inoculum,preferably from an area of conﬂuent growth insteadof a single colony, should be used to inoculate the nu-trient broth. The plates can be stored up to 2 months,except for the plate containing strain TA102 whichcan only be stored for 2 weeks because the number ofspontaneous revertant colonies increases over time.This may be due to the generation of a higher copynumber of plasmid pAQ1 and does not appear to bean indication of tetracycline mutagenicity [40,47].Therefore, it is recommended that frozen workingcultures, rather than working agar plates, be preparedfor strain TA102.
3.4. Growing overnight cultures
For each experiment, the tester strain cultures are
grown overnight in Oxoid nutrient broth No. 2 to adensity of 1–2 10
9colony forming units (CFU)/ml.
The volume of the cultures will depend on the size ofthe experiment but is usually between 10 and 50 ml.Care should be taken that the size of the culture ﬂaskbeatleastthreetoﬁvetimesthevolumeoftheculturemedium to ensure adequate aeration.
Individual culture ﬂasks are inoculated with each
strain. When using frozen stock cultures, allow theculturetothawatroomtemperature.Aliquotsbetween0.1 and 0.5 ml are then transferred into nutrient brothwith volumes between 10 and 50 ml, respectively,which gives an initial cell density between 10
6and
107CFU/ml (1:100 dilution). The remainder of the
workingcultureshouldbediscarded,becausefrequentthawing and refreezing of the frozen cultures resultsinpermanentinjurytothebacteria.Overnightculturesmay also be inoculated with a small inoculum takenfrom a working stock agar plate.
The freshly inoculated cultures are placed on a
shakerinthedarkatroomtemperaturefo r4hwithout
shaking, then gently shaken (100 rpm) for 11–14 h at37
C. The use of a timer is convenient for following
this procedure. The next morning the cultures areremoved from the incubator and kept at room tempe-rature away from direct ﬂuorescent light by wrappingthem in aluminum foil. This precautionary procedureis not required if the laboratories are equipped withyelloworredoverheadlights.Someinvestigatorskeepthe cultures on ice to prevent loss of viability of the
rfastrains which will occur if they are maintained for
an extended period of time at room temperature in thenutrient broth. However, to prevent thermal shock tothe bacteria when they are added to the 43
Ct o4 8C
top agar, it is best to leave the cultures at room tem-peratureduringthecourseofthemutagenicitytesting.
4. Genetic analysis
It is recommended that the tester strains be an-
alyzed for their genetic integrity and spontaneousmutation rate when frozen cultures are prepared. Astrain check should also be performed whenever anexperiment is performed. The strain check is usuallyperformed with the nutrient broth overnight culturesin the following way.
The following steps should be followed for a com-
plete strain check.
Histidine dependence ( hishishis):streak a loopful of
the culture across a GM agar plate supplemented withanexcessofbiotin.Becauseallthe Salmonella strains
are histidine dependent, there should be no growth onthe plates.
Biotin dependence ( biobiobio):streak a loopful of the
culture across a GM agar plate supplemented with anexcess of histidine. There should be no growth on theplateexceptforstrainTA102whichisbiotinindepen-dent.
Biotin and histidine dependence ( bio; hisbio; hisbio; his):
streak a loopful of the culture across a GM agar platesupplemented with an excess of biotin and histidine.Growth should be observed with all strains.
rf arf arf amarker: streakaloopfulofthecultureacross
aGMagarplatesupplementedwithanexcessofbiotinand histidine. Place a sterile ﬁlter paper disk in thecenter of the streak and apply 10 ml of a sterile 0.1%
crystal violet solution. All Salmonella strains should
showazoneofgrowthinhibitionsurroundingthedisk.
Note:Thecrystalvioletdiskscanbepreparedinad-
vanceandstoredatroomtemperature.Nutrientagarplates can be substituted for the GM agar plates.
uvrBuvrBuvrBdeletion: because the deletion mutation
stretches across the bio-uvrB region of the chromo-
some and cannot revert to wild-type, it is sufﬁcient toshow that the tester strains are biotin dependent (seeK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 39
above) to infer that they are also defective in the ac-
curate DNA repair pathway due to the uvrBdeletion.
Presence of plasmid pKM101 (ampicillin re-
sistance): streak a loopful of the pKM101-carrying
Salmonella culture across a GM agar plate supple-
mented with an excess of histidine and biotin and24 mg/ml ampicillin. Alternatively, a sterile 6-mm ﬁl-
ter paper disk containing 10 mg/ml ampicillin can be
placed on a streak of the strain on the GM agar platesupplemented with histidine and biotin. As a control,a strain should be included that does not carry plas-mid pKM101. Growth should be observed only withstrains carrying pKM101.
Note: The ampicillin disks can be prepared in ad-
vance and stored in the refrigerator.
Presence of plasmid pAQ1 (Tetracycline resis-
tance): streak a loopful of a TA102 overnight culture
across a GM agar plate supplemented with an excessof histidine and biotin, and 2 mg/ml tetracycline. Al-
ternatively, a sterile 6-mm ﬁlter paper disk containing2mg/ml tetracycline can be placed on a streak of the
strain on the GM agar plate supplemented with his-tidine (biotin is not required for growth of TA102).However, there is no problem using GM agar platessupplementedwithbothhistidineandbiotin.Asacon-trol, a strain should be included that does not carryplasmid pAQ1 plasmid. Growth should be observedwith strain TA102 which is the only strain that carriesplasmid pAQ1.
Note: The tetracycline disks can be prepared in ad-
vance and stored in the refrigerator.
Spontaneous mutant frequency: use the stan-
dard plate incorporation assay procedure (see below)without the inclusion of a solvent for determining thespontaneous mutant frequency (negative control) ofeach of the tester strains. When the spontaneous con-trol values fall outside an acceptable historical range(see Table 3) the genetic integrity of the strain(s) isconsideredcompromised,andanewcultureshouldbeisolated. There may be non-strain related reasons fora spontaneous value that is too high or too low (seeTroubleshooting, below). These should be consideredbefore a new culture is isolated.
If one or more of the above strain checks fails, the
culture is considered unacceptable for use. If such aculture was used for performing an experiment, theresults should be considered invalid and the experi-
ment should be repeated. In case the strain check wasperformed when the strains were frozen (permanentorworkingcultures)andyieldedunacceptableresults,the strain(s) should be reisolated following the proce-dures outlined above.
Note: For routine genetic analysis when experi-
ments are performed, the modiﬁed procedure de-scribed by Zeiger et al. [94] may be used insteadof the more lengthy procedure described above.
5. Spontaneous control values
Each tester strain has a characteristic spontaneous
mutant frequency. There is usually some day-to-dayand laboratory-to-laboratory variation in the numberof spontaneous revertant colonies. Choice of solventmay also affect the spontaneous mutant frequency[46]. Each laboratory has a characteristic range ofrevertant colonies for each strain which is referredto as “historical control values”. The spontaneousmutant frequency obtained when the strain check isperformed should be compared to the laboratory’shistorical control values. Table 3 presents a rangeof spontaneous histidine revertant (negative solvent)control values per plate with and without metabolicactivation considered valid in the authors’ labora-tories. The values obtained in the presence of ametabolic activation system includes both rat andhamster liver S-9. The spontaneous values presentedfor S-9 were from 10% S-9 in the S-9 mix. Some ofthe strains (e.g., TA97, TA102, TA104) are highlysensitive to S-9 concentrations and their spontaneousreversion values will increase with the S-9 concentra-
Table 3
Spontaneous revertant control values
Strain Number of revertantsa
Without S-9 With S-9
TA97 75–200 100–200TA98 20–50 20–50TA100 75–200 75–200TA102 100–300 200–400TA104 200–300 300–400TA1535 5–20 5–20TA1537 5–20 5–20TA1538 5–20 5–20
aRange considered valid in the authors’ laboratories.40 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
tion. Other acceptable ranges of background revertant
counts have been published [7,37,47].
6. Toxicity determination
Toxicity determination in the Ames Salmonella test
requires the evaluation of characteristics of the ﬁnalpopulation on the GM agar plate after the 48-h incu-bationinsteadofaquantitativesurvivaldetermination.These characteristics are:thinning of the background lawn which may be ac-
companiedbyadecreaseinthenumberofrevertantcolonies
absenceofbackgroundlawn(i.e.,completeabsence
of growth)
presence of pinpoint non-revertant colonies (gener-
ally in conjunction with an absence of backgroundlawn)The overnight Salmonella nutrient broth cultures
largely consist of histidine-dependent bacteria withjust a few pre-existing histidine-independent (His
C)
bacteria that arose during the overnight incubation.The addition of a small amount of histidine to thetop agar allows all the plated bacteria (approximately110
8cells)toundergobetweensixandeightcelldi-
vision before the histidine is depleted. In many cases,this limited growth is essential for mutagenesis to oc-curbyallowingﬁxationofthemutationallesions.Thepre-existing His
Cbacteria as well as the HisCrever-
tantsthataroseontheplate(platerevertants)willcon-tinue to grow in the absence of histidine and will giverise to visible colonies. These His
Ccolonies are eas-
ily scored against a slightly hazy looking backgroundlawn which is made up of the microcolonies of thehistidine-dependent bacteria.
Microscopic (40 ) examination of the background
lawn in the absence of toxicity will reveal the pre-sence of densely packed microcolonies which form auniform, though somewhat granular thin ﬁlm. In suchcases, all the plated histidine-dependent bacteria wereable to undergo six to eight cell divisions. However,when a chemical is toxic there may be “thinning” orcomplete absence of the background lawn comparedto the negative or solvent control. Partial toxicity ofthechemicalwillgiverisetothinningsincenotalltheplated bacteria were killed or had their growth inhi-bited. In this case, the surviving bacteria still formmicrocolonies but they are not densely packed and
may appear as single sparsely spaced microcolonieswhich results in the “thinning” effect; these colonieswill not be visible to the naked eye. A decrease in thenumberofrevertantcoloniestolevelsbelowthespon-taneous reversion level may on occasion be seen withthinning. A complete absence of background lawn in-dicatesahighleveloftoxicitywiththeinabilityofthebacteria to grow and form a lawn. Such a toxic doseshould not be used.
Occasionally numerous small non-revertant
colonies are present on the plate. The colonies arereferred to as “pinpoint colonies” and consist ofhistidine-dependentbacteriathatsurvivedhighchemi-cal toxicity. These colonies are readily visible by thenakedeyeandmaybemistakenforrevertantcolonies.Microscopic inspection of the plates will, however,reveal that there is a total absence of backgroundlawn. The pinpoint colonies arise due to the fact thatthe high level of toxicity resulted in more histidinebeingavailabletothesurvivingHis
−bacteriaonaper
cell basis. Therefore, these bacteria can undergo addi-tionalcelldivisionsuntilthedepletionofthehistidine.The histidine dependency can be readily checked bystreaking a few pinpoint colonies on GM agar platessupplemented with biotin but without histidine in theabsence of the test chemical. A preliminary toxicityexperiment is usually performed to determine the topdose that can be tested (see Dose selection, below).
It is important that the same number of bacteria be
used in the preliminary toxicity assay as well as inthedeﬁnitivemutagenicityassay.Dilutionofthetesterstraintoplate <1000cellstoenableaquantitativetox-
icity determination could lead to an erroneous result.On a per cell basis, more chemical would be availabletoeachbacteriumthanwouldbeavailableif1–2 10
8
bacteria are exposed to the substance, as happens in
the deﬁnitive mutagenicity test procedure [79].
7. Minimal deﬁned agar medium
7.1. Top agar
The top agar, consisting of 0.6% agar and 0.6%
NaCl, is one of the most critical medium componentsintheAmestestbecauseitcontainsthetraceamountofhistidine(0.05mM)forlimitedgrowth.ItalsocontainsK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 41
biotin at a concentration of 0.05 mM which is in ex-
cessofwhatisneededforthegrowthofthe Salmonella
strains. Because the His−bacteria stop growing when
the histidine is depleted, the ﬁnal population of His−
bacteria is dependent on the histidine concentration.Inturn,theﬁnalpopulationontheplatewillaffectthenumber of spontaneous revertant colonies. It is there-fore important that utmost care is taken to accuratelysupplement the top agar with 0.05 mM histidine. Toolittlehistidinemayresultinthebackgroundlawnlook-ingsparse,whichmightbetakenasevidencethattoxi-city is present even on the solvent negative controlplates. Too much histidine will cause heavy growththat may obscure the revertant colonies. For the samereason, it is also important to ensure that consistenttechniques are used to deliver 2 ml of the top agar tothe GM agar plates.
7.2. GM agar plates
The Ames test uses minimal deﬁned agar medium
consisting of Vogel-Bonner E medium (V/B salts)[78], supplemented with glucose (between 0.5% and2%, w/v) and agar (1.5%, w/v). This medium is gen-erally referred to as glucose minimal agar medium(GM agar). Plates usually contain between 20 and30 ml of the medium and may be stored for severalmonths in the refrigerator in sealed plastic bags toprevent dehydration. Ideally, each laboratory shouldwork with plates that have a constant volume of agarmedium. The plates should be used fairly soon afterthey have been poured before excessive dehydrationof the agar medium occurs. Dehydration of the agarmedium will increase the concentrations of the V/Bsalts, glucose and agar which may affect the sponta-neous and induced mutagenesis process. As describedabove for the top agar, small variations in the mediumcomposition may increase variability in test results.
8. Assay procedures
8.1. Standard plate incorporation assay
Concept: The standard plate incorporation assay
consists of exposing the tester strain(s) to the testchemical directly on a minimal glucose agar plate(GM plate) usually in the presence and absence of ametabolicactivationsystem(seeFig.2).Thedifferent
components are ﬁrst added to sterile test tubes con-taining 2 ml of molten top agar supplemented withlimited histidine and biotin. It is important to main-tain the top agar at a temperature between 43
C and
48C and to minimize prolonged exposure to avoid
killing of the tester strains. The contents of the tubesaremixedandpouredonglucoseminimalagarplates.After the top agar has hardened the plates are in-verted and incubated at 37
C for 48 h, at which time
histidine-revertant colonies are counted on all plates.The number of colonies on the test plates are com-paredtothoseonthe(negative)solventcontrolplates.
8.2. Experimental procedure
1. Steps taken prior to performing the experiment
Inoculate Salmonella cultures 15–18 h prior to
performing the experiment.
Label an appropriate number of GM agar plates
and sterile test tubes for each test chemical
Preparemetabolicactivationsystemandkeepon
ice until use
Prepare chemical dilutions
Melt top agar supplemented with 0.05 mM his-
tidine and biotin and maintain at 43
Ct o4 8C.
2. To the 13 100 mm sterile glass tubes maintained
at 43C, add in the following order with mixing
(e.g., vortexing) after each addition.2 ml of molten top agar
0.50 ml of metabolic activation (S-9) mix or
buffer
0.05 ml of the test chemical dilution
0.05–0.10mlovernightcultureofthe Salmonella
strain (about 1–2 10
8bacteria per tube).
3. The contents of the test tubes are then mixed and
poured onto the surface of GM agar plates.
4. When the top agar has hardened (2–3 min), the
plates are inverted and placed in a 37C incubator
for 48 h.
5. The colonies are then counted and the results are
expressed as the number of revertant colonies perplate.
8.3. Preincubation assay
Concept:Thepreincubationassayisamodiﬁcation
of the standard plate incorporation assay and involves42 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
exposing the tester strains for a short period (usually
20 min) in a small volume (usually 0.50 ml) contain-ing the test agent with buffer or S-9 mix prior to plat-ingonGMagarmedium.Itisbelievedthatshort-livedmutagenic metabolites have a better chance of react-ing with the tester strains in the small volume of thepreincubation mixture compared to when the incuba-tionmixtureisplatedimmediatelyonminimaldeﬁnedagar plates [29,55,84,89–91]. In addition, the smallerpreincubationvolumeresultsinahighereffectivecon-centration of the S-9 and cofactors.
8.4. Experimental procedure
The steps taken prior to performing the experiment
are the same as those for the standard incorporationassaydescribedabove.Thepreincubationassayisper-formed as follows:1. To the 13 100 mm sterile glass tubes maintained
atroomtemperatureaddinthefollowingorderwithmild mixing after each addition0.50 ml of metabolic activation (S-9) mix or
buffer
0.05 ml of the test chemical dilution
0.05 to 0.10 ml overnight culture of the
Salmonella strain (about 1–2 10
8bacteria per
tube).
2. Incubate the mixture at 37C for 20 min.
3. To each tube add 2 ml of molten top agar main-
tained at 43Ct o4 8C. The contents of test tubes
are then mixed and poured onto the surface of GMagar plates.
4. When the top agar has hardened (2–3 min), the
plates are inverted and placed in a 37
C incubator
for 48 h.
5. The colonies are then counted and the results are
expressed as the number of revertant colonies perplate.
Note: If the test chemical is known or suspected to
be volatile the tubes should be capped prior to thepreincubation step.
8.5. Desiccator assay for volatile liquids
Concept: Neither the standard plate incorporation
assay nor the preincubation assay is suitable for test-ing highly volatile substances. The use of a closed
Fig. 4. Diagram depicting the desiccator assay set-up.
chamber is recommended for testing such chemicalsin a vapor phase, as well as for gases [67,91]. Pro-cedures using plastic bags in lieu of desiccators havealso been described [8,30]. Fig. 4 depicts a desiccatorassay procedure for volatile liquids. This procedureshould be used only if it is known that the test chemi-cal will volatilize at 37
C and disperse throughout the
desiccator. A 9-l desiccator is recommended becauseup to 18 plates can be placed inside one desiccator.
8.6. Experimental procedure
The steps taken prior to performing the experiment
are the same as those for the standard incorporationassay described above with the exception that thechemical is omitted from the test tubes.
(1)Tothe13 100mmsterileglasstubesaddinthe
following order with mild mixing after each addition:2 ml of molten top agar
0.5 ml of metabolic activation (S-9) mix or buffer
0.05 to 0.1 ml overnight culture of the Salmonella
strain (about 1–2 10
8bacteria per tube).
(2) The contents of the test tubes are then mixed
and poured onto the surface of GM agar plates.
(3) While the top agar is hardening, tape a sterile
half of a glass petri dish, or a watchglass, to the bot-tom center of the perforated ceramic shelf of the des-iccator. Place a magnetic stir bar in the bottom of thedesiccator prior to replacing the ceramic shelf in thedesiccator.K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 43
(4)Removethelidsofthepetriplatescontainingthe
Salmonella bacteriaandS-9mixorbufferandloosely
stacktheplatesintheinvertedpositionontheceramicshelf.
(5) Add a predetermined volume of the liquid test
chemical to the glass dish taped to the bottom of theceramic shelf.
Note: for highly toxic liquid chemicals, a suitable
solvent is needed for diluting the test chemical. Insuchacase,thecontroldesiccator(notestchemical)should contain the highest volume of solvent used.(6) Seal each desiccator and place on a magnetic
stirrer in a 37
C incubator or warm room for 24 h.
(7)Thedesiccatorsarethenremovedfromtheincu-
batorandplacedinachemicalsafetyhoodandopenedwith caution; the plates are removed, their lids are putback on, and they are transferred to a 37
C incubator
for an additional 24 h.
(8)Thecoloniesarethencountedandtheresultsare
expressed as number of revertant colonies per plateper volume of test chemical per desiccator.
8.7. Desiccator assay for gases
Concept: Like volatile liquids, the testing of gases
requires the use of a closed chamber such as a 9-ldesiccator [67,91]. Procedures using plastic bags inlieu of desiccators have also been described [8,30].
8.8. Experimental procedure
The steps taken prior to performing the experiment
arethesameasthosedescribedforthedesiccatorassayfor liquid chemicals with the exception that the gasis introduced into the desiccator after the lid of thedesiccator is replaced.
Note: It is essential that each desiccator lid has an
inletthatcanbeconnectedtoastopcockfortransferof the gas.
The assay is performed as follows.
(1) To the 13 100 mm sterile glass tubes main-
tained at 43
C, add in the following order with mild
mixing after each addition:2 ml of molten top agar
0.5 ml of metabolic activation (S-9) mix or buffer
0.05 to 0.10 ml of overnight culture of the
Salmonella strain (about 1–2 10
8bacteria per
tube).(2) The contents of test tubes are then poured onto
the surface of GM agar plates.
(3) While the top agar is hardening, remove the ce-
ramicshelffroma9-ldesiccatorandplaceamagneticstir bar in the bottom of the desiccator; replace theceramic shelf in the desiccator.
(4)Removethelidsofthepetriplatescontainingthe
Salmonella bacteriaandS-9mixorbufferandloosely
stacktheplatesintheinvertedpositionontheceramicshelf.
(5)Sealthedesiccatorandevacuateapredetermined
volume of air by using a pressure gauge.
(6)Introducethetestgasuntilatmosphericpressure
is reached.
(7) Place each desiccator on a magnetic stirrer in a
37
C incubator or 37C warm room for 24 h.
(8)Thedesiccatorsarethenremovedfromtheincu-
batorandplacedinachemicalsafetyhoodandopenedwith caution; the plates are removed, their lids are putback on, and they are transferred to a 37
C incubator
for an additional 24 h.
(9)Thecoloniesarethencountedandtheresultsare
expressed as number of revertant colonies per platebased on moles of gas added to each desiccator. Tocalculate the moles of gas the following formula isused:
nDPV
RT
wherenis the number of moles, Pis 1 atm, Vis
volumeinliters, Ristheuniversalgasconstant(0.0921
latm/molK)and TistemperatureexpressedinKelvin.
8.9. Reductive metabolism assay
Concept: The procedure is a modiﬁcation of the
preincubation assay and employs a modiﬁed cofactormix and the incubation mixture is shaken at 180 rpmfor90min[58,59,62–64].Thisassayisrecommendedfor testing chemicals that contain azo bonds and othersubstances that may require enzymatic reduction.
8.10. Experimental procedure
The steps taken prior to performing the experiment
are the same as those for the preincubation assay withtheexceptionthatareductivemetabolicactivationsys-tem is used (see the section: Recipes for reagents andmedia). The assay is performed as follows:44 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
1. To the 13 100 mm sterile glass tubes add in the
following order with mild mixing after each addi-tion0.5 ml of reductive metabolic activation (S-9)
mix or buffer
0.05 ml of each dilution of the test chemical
0.05 to 0.10 ml of overnight culture of the
Salmonella strain (about 1–2 10
8bacteria per
tube).
2. Themixtureisincubatedat37Cwithshaking(180
rpm) for 20 min.
3. The top agar (2 ml) is then added to the incubation
mixture. After mixing, the contents of the tubesare mixed and poured onto the surface of GM agarplates
4. When the top agar has hardened (2–3 min), the
plates are inverted and placed in a 37
C incubator
for 48 h.
5. The colonies are then counted and the test results
are expressed as the number of revertant coloniesper plate.
8.11. Modiﬁed (Kado) Salmonella microsuspension
assay
Concept: This is a highly sensitive assay for test-
ing the mutagenicity of biological samples, such asurine, and pure chemicals that are available only insmall amounts [35]. The procedure is a modiﬁcationof the preincubation assay and involves using smallertest tubes (10 70 mm) and shaking of the incuba-
tion mixture for 90 min. When urine samples aretested, a deconjugating enzyme system is usually in-cluded to detect substances that are excreted as inac-tive b-glucuronides [19].
8.12. Experimental procedure
The steps taken prior to performing the experiment
are the same as those for the preincubation assaywith the exception that the overnight cultures of theSalmonella strains are washed two times in sodium
phosphate buffer, 0.1 M, pH 7.4 and concentrated10-fold. The assay is performed as follows:1. To the 10 70 mm test tubes placed in an ice bath,
add in the following order with mild mixing aftereach addition:0.1 ml of the 10-fold concentrated overnight
Salmonella culture (about 1 to 2 10
9bacteria
per tube)
0.1 ml of the metabolic activation system or
buffer
0.001, 0.0025, 0.005, or 0.01 ml of test article
(delivered with micropipettes)
0.1 ml of a deconjugating enzyme system (e.g.,
b-glucuronidase; when testing urine samples)
Additionalsolventtoadjustﬁnalvolumeto0.25
ml or 0.35 ml when b-glucuronidase is used.
2. The mixture is allowed to incubate for 90 min at
37C with shaking (120 rpm).
3. The top agar (2 ml) is then added to the incubation
mixture.Aftermixing,thecontentsofthetubesarepoured onto the surface of GM agar plates.
4. When the top agar has hardened (1–2 min), the
plates are inverted and placed in a 37
C incubator
for 48 h.
5. The colonies are then counted and the results are
expressed as the number of revertant colonies perplate.
9. Important steps to follow for all assay
procedures
The cofactors for preparing the S-9 mix are the
same for each of the assay protocols, with the excep-tion of the reductive metabolism assay. The prepa-ration of the cofactors is described in the section:Recipes for reagents and media.
It is important to quickly swirl the plates after
addition of the top agar to the surface of the GM agarplates to ensure an even distribution of the top agarwhichcontainsthebacteria,testchemicalandS-9mixor buffer.
When the plates are inspected after 48 h of incu-
bation and growth retardation is seen as evidenced bysmallerthananticipatedcolonysizes,theplatesshouldbeincubatedforanadditional12–24h.Allplatesfromanexperimentshouldbeincubatedforthesamelengthof time in the same incubator, so that all plates froman experiment that show retarded growth at only thehigher test chemical concentrations are incubated forthe additional time.
If colonies cannot be counted immediately after
the 48-h incubation, the plates can be stored in a re-K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 45
frigeratorforupto2days.Allplatesmustberemoved
from the incubator, and be counted, at the same time.
Hand-countingmaybeneededifapotentmutagen
is being tested or when strains TA102 and TA104 areused because the automatic colony counter may notbe effective if the colony density on each plate is toohigh. In this case, quadrants of the agar plates maybe hand counted with appropriate adjustment of thecounts, provided the colonies are evenly distributedover the entire surface of the agar plate.
If precipitate or lack of contrast between the
colonies is observed on some plates, especially at thehigher dose levels, hand-counting is required of allplates (including the control plates).
Acheckforgeneticintegrityshouldbeperformed
with every experiment. For this strain check, it issufﬁcient to monitor the rfamutation and ampicillin
and tetracycline resistance using disks impregnatedwiththeappropriateconcentrationofeachcomponent[94].
10. Experimental design
The Ames Salmonella test is a versatile assay as
evidenced by the different procedural variations thatareavailable,inadditiontothenumbersofstrainsandtypesofmetabolicactivationsystemsthatcanbeused.Before initiating an Ames test, a number of criticalparameters will need to be evaluated.
10.1. Assay procedure
Forliquidchemicalstheassayofchoiceistheprein-
cubation assay because many of these chemicals maybe volatile. For most other chemicals the standardplate incorporation assay or the pre-incubation assaymay be used. However, some researchers believe thepre-incubation assay to be somewhat more selectivein detecting mutagens compared to the plate incor-poration assay. The reason may be that short-livedmutagenic metabolites have a better chance of react-ing with the tester strains in the small volume of thepreincubationmixture.Forgeneralscreeningpurposesthe laboratory should adopt one testing procedure thatwill help in developing a historical database for thenegative control, and the solvent and positive controlchemicals.The modiﬁed (Kado) Salmonella microsuspension
assay is recommended for testing samples that areavailable in only small (i.e., mg) amounts or complexmixtures such as urine. The reductive metabolismassay is recommended for chemicals that require re-duction for their activation such as azo dyes. The des-iccator assays are recommended for volatile liquidsand for gaseous substances.
10.2. Solvents
The solvent of choice is sterile distilled water.
Chemicals that do not dissolve in water should bedissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Other sol-vents that may be considered are: acetone, ethylalcohol (95%), tetrahydrofuran, dimethylformamideand methyl ethyl ketone (MEK). These other solventsmay be toxic to the bacteria at higher concentrations.Therefore, a toxicity assay with these solvents shouldbe determined in a preliminary assay to determinethe maximum concentration that can be used withoutinterfering with bacterial growth and survival. Someof the solvents may also interfere with the metabolicactivation system. In such case, the concentrationof the S-9 fraction may have to be adjusted. For acomprehensive study on the compatibility of solventswith the Ames Salmonella test see Maron et al. [46].
10.3. Positive and negative (solvent) controls
Each experiment should include solvent controls
and diagnostic positive control chemicals speciﬁc foreach strain and for the metabolic activation systemTable 4 lists the representative positive controls.
10.4. Dose selection
10.4.1. Preliminary toxicity determination
It is recommended that a preliminary toxic dose
range experiment be performed to determine an ap-propriate dose range for the mutagenicity assay. Ifmore than one tester strain will be used in the muta-genicity assay, it is sufﬁcient to perform the toxicityassay with strain TA100 with and without metabolicactivation. Otherwise, the toxicity assay should beperformed with the strain that will be used in thedeﬁnitive assay. The toxicity determination can also46 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
Table 4
Representative positive control chemicals
Strain Control chemical ( mg/plate)a
Without activation With activation
TA97 9-Aminoacridine (50) 2-Aminoanthracene (1–5)
TA98 4-Nitro- o-phenylenediamine (2.5) 2-Aminoanthracene (1–5)
TA100 Sodium azide (5) 2-Aminoanthracene (1–5)TA102 Mitomycin C (0.5) 2-Aminoanthracene (5–10)TA104 Methyl methane sulfonate (250) 2-Aminoanthracene (5–10)TA1535 Sodium azide (5) 2-Aminoanthracene (2–10)TA1537 9-aminoacridine (50) 2-Aminoanthracene (2–10)TA1538 4-Nitro- o-phenylenediamine (2.5) 2-Aminoanthracene (2–10)
aConcentration based on 100 15-mm petri plate containing 20 to 25 ml of GM agar.
be performed using an alternate toxicity assay devel-
oped by Waleh et al. [79].
The chemical should be tested for toxicity over a
widerangeofconcentrationswithatotalofeightcon-centrations,spacedinhalf-logintervals,withthehigh-est dose limited by solubility, or by an arbitrary value(usually5000or10,000 mg/plate).Forvolatileliquids
that are tested in desiccators, 0.5 and 5 ml should beused as the low and high dose, respectively. For gasestested in desiccators, the low and high dose should be0.5 and 4.5 l, respectively.
Thepreliminarytoxicityassayshouldbeperformed
in the absence and in the presence of the metabolicactivationsystemthatistobeusedinthedeﬁnitivemu-tagenicity assay. Positive and solvent control chemi-cals need to be included in the assay; one plate perdose level should be sufﬁcient. As mentioned in theToxicity determination section, it is important that thesame number of bacteria be used in the preliminarytoxicity assay as well as in the deﬁnitive mutagenic-ity assay. Exposing a diluted culture to the chemicalcould result in an erroneous higher toxicity level [79].
10.4.2. Doses for deﬁnitive assay
A minimum of ﬁve dose levels covering a range of
at least three logs should be selected for the deﬁni-tive test. Two or three plates should be used for eachdose level and for the controls. For toxic chemicals,only the highest dose used should exhibit toxicity. Fornon-toxic chemicals, a high dose of 5000 or 10,000mg/plateisacceptable.Non-solublechemicalsmaybe
tested as a suspension up to a dose level that does notinterfere with handling of the suspension with pipetsor pipet tips. For non-toxic volatile liquids that aretested in desiccators, 5 ml should be used as the high
dose. For non-toxic gases tested in desiccators, thehigh dose should be 4.5 l.
Note: Each test should be performed using a sin-
gle batch of reagents, media, and agar. The use ofdifferent batches of bottom agar plates, top agar,buffer, solvents, cofactors, or S-9 batches within anexperiment can lead to excess variation in the re-sults, or clear demarcations of results between thedifferent batches.
10.5. Strain selection and testing strategies
Therehasbeennoevidencetoshowthatthespeciﬁc
tester strains, or the number of tester strains mutatedby a chemical, is related to the chemical’s potencyin other test systems, or the predictivity of the testresult for cancer induction or other effects. Therefore,it may not be necessary to test all chemicals with thefull complement of strains. Although a single strain issufﬁcient to demonstrate a mutagenic response, it isgenerallyacceptedthatanegativeresultcanbedeﬁnedusing 4–5 tester strains. Strains TA98, TA100, andTA97orTA1537arealwaysconsiderednecessary.Theother strains usually used are TA1535 and/or TA102.
When planning to test a large number of chemi-
cals, it may be most time and cost efﬁcient to per-form the testing in stages. For example, it has beenshownthattestingwithstrainsTA98andTA100with-out metabolic activation and with S-9 from rats orhamsterswassufﬁcienttoidentifyapproximately90%ofthemutagensinapopulationcontainingabout35%mutagenic chemicals [95]. Using such a strategy, thechemicals not mutagenic or equivocal in these twoK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 47
strains can be tested in additional strains. The higher
the anticipated number of mutagens among the chem-icals to be tested, the more cost effective the stagedtesting strategy will be.
If there is prior information about the chemical or
class of chemicals to be tested that indicates the needfor speciﬁc treatment conditions, or that the chemicalis likely to induce a certain type of DNA damage,the testing strategy should be directed appropriately.For example, if the chemicals are of a structure thatis known to require metabolic activation, the initialscreencouldbeperformedonlywithS-9mix,orifthechemicals are structurally related to a class known toproduceonlybase-pairsubstitutions,theinitialtestingcould use only the appropriate target strains.
10.5.1. Tier approach
Unless required by speciﬁc guidelines, it is recom-
mended that for general screening purposes a tier ap-proach be used using strains TA98 and TA100 withand without metabolic activation
If a positive response is obtained the assay is re-
peated only using the condition(s) and strain(s) thatelicited the positive response. If needed, the doserange may be adjusted to better clarify a dose re-sponse. If equivocal or weak positive responses areobtained, the corresponding plasmid-free strains,TA1538 and TA1535, respectively, should be used.Justiﬁcation for the use of TA1535 comes from anumber of reports about unique positive results inTA1535 [12,16,29,52,60,86]. Demonstration of aunique response in strain TA1538 is more challengingbecause few databases have data available comparedto databases that have strain TA1535 included. How-ever, speciﬁc examples of strain TA1538 giving aunique response exist.
If negative results are obtained in the initial muta-
genicitytestwithstrainTA98andTA100,otherstrainssuch as TA1535 and TA97 are used with and with-outmetabolicactivation.Aconﬁrmationexperimentisperformedifapositiveresponseisobtainedusingonlythe condition(s) and strain(s) in which the mutagenicresponse was observed. If equivocal results or a weakresponse are obtained in strain TA97, strain TA1537can be used in an attempt to clarify the results.
Strains TA102 and TA104 may be used if it is
suspected that the chemical may induce oxidativedamage (i.e., free radical production), or be a DNAcross-linking agent. Strain TA102 is especially sensi-
tive for detecting DNA cross-linking damage becauseit has an intact (wild-type) DNA excision repairmechanism which is required for the repair of suchdamage. Fig. 5 depicts the tier approach experimen-tal design described above which is based on theprocedure described by Zeiger et al. [89].
If prior to testing information is available about the
potential mutagenicity of the chemical or chemicalclass, the initial testing is performed with the strain(s)most likely to yield a positive response.
10.5.2. Battery approach
A battery approach employs a ﬁxed set of tester
strains for testing a chemical in the presence and ab-sence of a metabolic activation system. For generalmutagenicity testing it is recommended that strainsTA97, TA98, TA100 and TA102 be used. However,some laboratories use strain TA1535 instead of strainTA102 when a tier approach is used in the selectionof tester strains [91]. As in the tier approach, strainsTA1538 and TA1535 are used when equivocal resultsare obtained with their respective pKM101-carryingstrains, TA98 and TA100. Strain TA1537 can detectmutagens not detected by strain TA97. Strain TA104,though in some laboratories tested in parallel withTA102,isrecommendedwhennegativeresultsareob-tainedinstrainTA102especiallyifitissuspectedthata chemical may cause oxidative DNA damage.
10.6. Metabolic activation
Prior to performing an experiment, the S-9 fraction
is added to the enzymic cofactors containing NADPto make up the S-9 mix to be used in the assay. TheS-9 fraction concentration is usually expressed as “%v/v”.ItisimportanttonotethatboththecofactorsandS-9 fraction should be stored frozen. They should bethawed at room temperature and quickly transferredto ice. Once the S-9 mix is prepared it should be kepton ice for the duration of the experiment. Because themetabolic conversion of different chemicals to theirmutagenic form may require different optimum levelsof S-9 fraction, the amount of S-9 fraction used isvariable;itcanrangefrom4%to30%(v/v)intheS-9mix [7,47].
Aroclor 1254-induced rat liver is the most widely
used source of activating enzymes [7]. In the ab-48 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
Fig. 5. Diagram of tier approach testing strategy.
sence of speciﬁc information about the optimizing
S-9 concentration, it is recommended that between5% and 30% (v/v in the cofactor mix) of the S-9fraction be used. Some laboratories use a low S-9concentration (e.g., 5% or 10%) in the ﬁrst muta-genicity assay. If negative results are obtained, asubsequent test with a high S-9 level (30%) is per-formed. Other laboratories use the higher level ofS-9 ﬁrst, and use the low level in the second experi-ment if negative results are obtained in the initial
experiment.
Procedures for preparing the S-9 fraction have
been described in detail [7,47,93]. If the S-9 fractionis prepared in the testing laboratory, it is recom-mended that more than one animal be used and thetissue homogenate be pooled in order to minimizeanimal-to-animal variation among batches. Somelaboratories standardize the S-9 concentration basedK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 49
on measured protein content while other laboratories
standardize the S-9 fraction on the assumption that1 ml of the S-9 fraction contains microsomes fromabout 250 mg of wet livers with a protein concentra-tion of 40 mg/ml. S-9 fractions may be stored frozenin small aliquots for up to 1 year at −80
C.
Note:Whenusingliveanimals,itisrequiredthatall
protocolsbereviewedandapprovedﬁrstbyanInsti-tutionalAnimalCareandUseCommittee(IACUC).Ofﬁciallyapprovedproceduresmustbefollowedforthe care and use of the animals.
A number of commercial vendors are now pro-
viding S-9 preparations. This has the advantage thatinformation is provided about enzyme activities andeffectiveness against standard mutagens, and it maybe more cost-effective than purchasing and maintain-ing animals for this purpose. In the United States,a supplier for rodent post mitochondrial supernatant(S-9) is Molecular Toxicology, 157 Industrial ParkDrive, Boone, NC 28607, Phone: C1-828-264-9099.
10.7. Positive control chemicals
Diagnostic mutagens (positive control chemicals)
mustbeincludedineachexperimenttoconﬁrmthere-version properties and speciﬁcity of each tester strain,and the efﬁcacy of the metabolic activation system.Table 4 lists the positive control chemicals with theirrespective concentrations/plate that have been rou-tinely used in the authors’ laboratories. Other chem-icals can be selected as positive controls [7,37,47].Where the test chemicals are members of a speciﬁcchemical class, a positive control chemical with asimilar structure, or requiring similar metabolism,should be used. The optimum positive control con-centration should be determined for each new batchof metabolic activation (S-9). Some researchers havesuggested that 2-aminoanthracene should not be rec-ommended as the only positive control to evaluatethe metabolizing activity of the S-9 fraction [23], be-cause it has been shown that 2-aminoanthracene maybe activated by enzymes other than the microsomalcytochrome P450 family [10].
10.8. Number of replicates and repeat experiments
Itisrecommendedthatatleastthreeplatesperdose
level are used with at least ﬁve dose levels and a sol-vent control. When positive results are obtained, the
test should be repeated using the identical conditionsthat yielded the positive response in order to conﬁrmtheresponse.Itisrecommendedthatonlythestrain(s)and condition(s) that yielded the mutagenic responseareusedfortheconﬁrmingassay.Thedoselevelsmaybe changed to better establish the dose response. Ifnegative results are obtained, a repeat assay is recom-mended in both the tier and battery approach whichmay include a slight modiﬁcation of the procedure byusing a different concentration of the S-9 fraction, ora different procedure (e.g., preincubation instead ofplate incorporation).
11. Interpretation and reporting
11.1. Counting of histidine revertant colonies
After the plates are removed from the incubator,
the colonies are counted and the results are expressedas revertant colonies per plate. For this purpose, anelectronic counter is a convenient way to count thecolonies,especiallyforstrainsTA100andTA97whichusually have a spontaneous background above 100colonies/plate. However, hand-counting is requiredwhen strains TA102 and TA104 are used because ofthe high number of spontaneous revertant colonies,usually above 200 colonies/plate. Hand-counting isalso required when precipitate is present on the plate,when there is poor contrast between the colony andthe agar, or when a test chemical discolors the agarwhich prevents sufﬁcient light from passing throughthe agar. If precipitate is present on the plates atthe higher dose levels, all plates, including the sol-vent control plates, should be hand-counted. Also,all plates from a single experiment, including posi-tive and negative control plates, should be countedusing the same method at the same time, becausethe cells on the plate will continue dividing and pro-duce more mutant colonies with increased storagetime.
At the time the plates are scored, their background
lawns should be examined by eye and by using a 40 
dissecting microscope for thinning, which indicatestoxicity,andforthepresenceofprecipitate.Slighttoxi-city or precipitate will not invalidate the experiment,or the doses at which they were found, but they may50 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
affect the interpretation of the results and the design
of follow-up experiments.
11.2. Data reporting
The results are generally reported as mean rever-
tant colonies per plate the S.D. or S.E.M. for the
test chemical and the controls. The concentration ofthe test chemical is expressed as mg or mg/plate,
or milliliter or mole in the desiccator procedure forvolatile liquids and gases, respectively. Informationregarding toxicity and/or precipitation of the testchemical should also be included. The results canalsobeexpressedasthefold-increaseoverthesolventcontrol value, but this must be done in addition to themean plate count. Fold-increase, alone, may not besufﬁcient to allow an objective evaluation of the data,or of the effectiveness of the experiment.
11.3. Data evaluation
11.3.1. Statistical procedures
A number of statistical programs have been de-
veloped for analyzing Salmonella mutagenicity
data, and all have their strengths and weaknesses[13,20,36,44,70,76,81]. Another approach that hasbeen widely used is to set a minimum fold increase,usually 2–3 fold, in revertants (over the solvent con-trol) as the cut-off between a mutagenic and non-mutagenic response [42]. This approach also has itsweaknesses, for example, if a two-fold increase isrequired, a change in the average plate count by onerevertant out of one or a few hundred can be thedifference between calling a chemical mutagenic ornonmutagenic. Also, it has been shown [15] that thetwo-fold rule may be too insensitive for Salmonella
strains with relatively high reversion frequencies,such as TA100, TA97, and TA102, and too sensitivefor chemicals with low reversion frequencies, such asTA1535 and TA1537.
11.3.2. Non-statistical procedure
A non-statistical procedure has been established to
evaluate the results of Salmonella experiments [91].
Using this procedure the following criteria are used tointerpret results.
PositivePositivePositive :Acompoundisconsideredamutagenif
itproducesareproducible,dose-relatedincreaseinthenumberofrevertantcoloniesinoneormorestrains.A
compoundisconsideredaweakmutagenifitproducesa reproducible, dose-related increase in the numberof revertant colonies in one or more strains but thenumber of revertants is not double the backgroundnumber of colonies.
NegativeNegativeNegative : A compound is considered a nonmu-
tagen if no dose-related increase in the number ofrevertant colonies is observed in at least two indepen-dent experiments. The maximum dose level tested fornontoxic compounds is 5 or 10 mg/plate (unless oth-erwise dictated by solubility). For volatile liquids andgases, the maximum dose level tested in desiccatorsis 5 ml and 4.5 l, respectively. For toxic compounds,ideally only the highest dose level should exhibit evi-dence of toxicity (e.g., thinning or complete absenceof background lawn with or without the presence ofpinpoint colonies.
InconclusiveInconclusiveInconclusive :Ifacompoundcannotbeidentiﬁed
clearly as a mutagen or a nonmutagen, the results areclassiﬁed as inconclusive (e.g., if there is a scatteringof slightly elevated revertant counts or one elevatedcount).
Regardless of whether a statistical or non-statistical
approach is used for data evaluation, it should be ade-quatelydescribedandconsistentacrossstrainsandac-tivation procedures. Responses that are judged to beweakly positive or equivocal should be considered foradditional testing, using a modiﬁcation of the expo-sure protocol, or a change in the dose range tested orS-9 mix concentration used.
Because control ranges vary among laboratories,
each laboratory should establish its own solvent andpositive control ranges for each tester strain, with andwithout S-9. This range should be used to develop ac-ceptance criteria for individual experiments, and ex-periments should be rejected if solvent controls areoutside the acceptable range, or if positive controlchemicals do not respond appropriately.
12. Safety considerations
12.1. Aseptic technique
It is important that basic bacteriological labora-
tory procedures be used to minimize exposure totheSalmonella tester strains. Surface areas must beK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 51
properly disinfected before and after use. Though
wild-type S. typhimurium can cause diarrhea and
food poisoning, the galandrfa(deep rough) mu-
tations that are present in all the Salmonella tester
strains described here eliminate to different levels,the polysaccharide side chain of the LPS layer thatcoats the bacterial surface which makes the bacte-ria non-pathogenic [5,83]. It is nevertheless prudentto use caution at all times and to practice standardlaboratory safety procedures such as using pluggedpipettes and autoclaving all contaminated material.Mouth-pipetting as a general rule should never bepracticed.Aseptictechniques,beingpartofbasicbac-teriologicallaboratoryprocedures,arealsoessentialtoprevent contamination of the overnight cultures, GMagar plates, and the solutions and reagents. Contami-nated frozen permanent and working cultures of theSalmonella testerstrainswillbeuselessandshouldbe
discarded.
12.2. Safety procedures
Asageneralrule,itisprudenttoconsiderallchemi-
cals as if they were mutagens and carcinogens. Allhandlingofchemicals,aswellasthetestitself,shouldbe performed in a chemical safety cabinet. Workersshould protect themselves from chemical exposure bywearing gowns, eye glasses and gloves. Wearers ofcontact lenses should wear regular eye glasses sincesome volatile chemicals might react with the contactlens.Allcontaminatedmaterial(e.g.,testtubes,pipetsand pipet tips, gowns and gloves) should be properlydisposed of as well as the unused chemical dilutionsand stock solutions of the test chemical, and positivecontrol chemicals.
13. Mutagenicity information
13.1. Available databases
There are a couple of databases publicly available
through the internet. The Environmental Mutagen In-formationCenter(EMIC)databasecanbeenteredthr-oughhttp://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/servlets/simple-search?1.25.0.3876. In this database, information can beretrieved regarding the test organisms used and end-points examined.TheotherdatabaseisthatoftheU.S.NationalToxi-
cology Program’s genetic toxicology testing program.Resultshavebeenpublishedonmorethan1500chemi-cals, which are summarized and referenced in Zeiger[87]. The summary test results for speciﬁc chemi-cals, published and unpublished, can be retrievedfrom http://ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov/cgi/iH
Indexes/
ResStat/iHResStatFrames.html.
14. Troubleshooting
Following are some problems that are frequently
encountered and a brief description of their probablecauses and suggested solutions.
PROBLEM : The spontaneous revertant count
is too low
Cause: (1) Toxicity is associated with a new
batch of agar(2) The wrong tester strain may havebeen used(3)Toolittlehistidinewasaddedtothetop agar
Solution: (1) Each new batch of agar should be
checkedfortoxicitypriortousingitona routine basis(2) Double check the identity of thestrain,andifneeded,reisolatethestrainselecting a clone that gives rise toa spontaneous reversion rate in theproper range(3) Prepare new top agar ensuring thatthe proper concentration of histidine isused
PROBLEM : The spontaneous revertant count is too
high
Cause: (1) Too much histidine was added to
the top agar(2) The initial inoculum, from thefrozen working culture, contained anunusually high number of His
Cbacte-
ria (jack-pot effect)(3)Petriplatesmayhavebeensterilizedwithethyleneoxidewithresiduallevels52 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
inducing mutations in strains TA1535
and TA100(4) Contamination may be present
Solutions : (1) Inspect the background lawn. A
heavier than normal background lawnindicates that too much histidine waspresent in the top agar. Prepare newtop agar ensuring that the proper con-centration of histidine is used. It isalso possible that the test sample maycontain histidine. This is often thecase when biological ﬂuids such asurine, or food-related items, such asproteins and meat extracts, have beentested(2) Check a few frozen working stockampoules for spontaneous reversion.If the problem persists, reisolate thestrain selecting a clone that gives riseto a spontaneous reversion rate in theproper range(3) Use radiation-sterilized plates, orallow plates to off-gas for one day in achemical or biological fume hood(4) Reisolate strain
PROBLEM : The positive control does not work
Cause: (1) The wrong positive control chemi-
cal may have been used(2)Thechemicalmayhavedeterioratedduring storage(3) The metabolic activation systemmay have been omitted(4)Themetabolicactivationsystemhaslost its activity(5) The wrong tester strain was used
Solution: (1) Double check the positive control
chemical ensuring that it is tested withthe proper strain(2) Prepare a new batch of the positivecontrol chemical(3) Retest the positive control ensur-ing that the metabolic activation sys-temisincluded.Iftheproblempersists,prepare a fresh solution of the posi-tive control and retest. If the problempersists, it is possible that the S-9 frac-
tion or cofactors may have lost activity(4) Prepare a new batch of cofactorsand test with the S-9 fraction againstthepositivecontrol.Iftheproblemper-sistsobtainafreshbatchofS-9fraction(5) Conﬁrm the identity of the strain
PROBLEM :There are few if any revertant colonies
on the plate
Cause: (1) The chemical is highly toxic
(2)Thetemperatureofthetopagarwastoo high(3) The solvent is toxic
Solution: (1) When a chemical is highly toxic,
most if not all of the plated bacteria willbe killed and not enough survivors willbe present to revert to histidine indepen-dence.Ifthisisthecase,aninspectionoftheplateunder40 magniﬁcationshould
reveal thinning or an absence of back-ground lawn. A lower dose range of thechemical should be used(2) Care should be taken that the tem-perature of the top agar does not ex-ceed 48
C. Ideally the top agar should
be maintained at 43C
(3)Ifthesolventistoxicandtheprein-cubation assay was used, repeat the as-sayusingtheplateincorporationassay.If the problem persists, try another sol-vent,ordilutethesolventwithonethatis less toxic
PROBLEM :Most of the colonies are concentrated
on one half of the plate
Cause: The bottom and/or top agar were al-
lowed to solidify on a slant
Solution: The petri plates should be level when-
evertheplatesarepouredandwhenthetop agar is added to the plates
PROBLEM :Thetopagardoesnotsolidifyproperly
Cause: (1) The top agar concentration was too
lowK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 53
(2) Gelling of the agar is retarded by
acid pH
Solution: (1)Therecommendedconcentrationof
the agar is 0.6% (w/v)(2) Additional buffering capacityshould be added to the agar, or the pHof the chemical should be adjusted
PROBLEM : The top agar slips out of place
Cause: Thesurfaceofthebottomagarwastoo
wet
Solution: Prior to use, inspect the surface of
the bottom agar plate. If moisture ispresent,donotusetheplate.Ifthereisarecurringproblemwithtoomuchmois-ture being present on the GM plates,place the plates in a 37
C incubator
overnight prior to use
PROBLEM : The bottom agar slips out of the plate
Cause: Insufﬁcient agar was used when the
GM plates were prepared
Solution: The recommended concentration for
the bottom agar is 1.5%, w/v
15. Recipes for reagents and media
15.1. Vogel–Bonner (VB salts) medium E (50 )
Use: salts for the GM agar plates
Ingredients Per liter
Warm distilled water (about 50C) 650 ml
Magnesium sulfate (MgSO 4H2O) 10 g
Citric acid monohydrate 100 gPotassium phosphate, dibasic,anhydrous (K
2HPO4)500 g
Sodium ammonium phos-
phate (Na 2NH2PO44H2O)175 g
Add the above ingredients in the order indicated to
warm water in a 2-l ﬂask making sure that each salt isdissolved thoroughly by stirring on a magnetic stirrerbefore adding the next salt. It takes abou t1ht odis-solve all ingredients. Adjust volume to 1 l. Distribute
in20-mlaliquotsandautoclave,looselycapped,for30minat121
C.Whenthesolutionshavecooled,tighten
the caps and store at room temperature in the dark.
15.2. Glucose solution (10% v/v)
Use: as carbon source for the GM agar plates
Ingredients Per liter
Distilled water 700 ml
Dextrose 100 g
Addthedextrosetothewaterina3-lﬂask.Stirona
magnetic stirrer until mixture is clear. Add additionalwater to bring the ﬁnal volume to 1000 ml. Dispense50-mlaliquotsinto250mlscrew-capbottles.Labelas10% glucose with date. Autoclave 121
C for 20 min
making sure the caps are on loosely. When cooled,tighten the caps and store at 4
C.
15.3. GM agar plates
Use: bottom agar for mutagenicity assay
Ingredients Per liter
Distilled water 900 ml
Agar 15 gVB salt solution (50 )2 0 m l
Glucose solution (10% v/v) 50 ml
Add the agar to the water in a 3-l ﬂask. Autoclave
for 30 min at 121
C. Let cool for about 45 min to
about 65C. Add 20-ml of sterile VB salts and mix
thoroughly, then add the 50 ml of a sterile glucose(10% v/v) solution; again swirl thoroughly. Dispensetheagarmediumin100 15mmpetridishes(approxi-
mately 25 ml/plate). When solidiﬁed, the plates canbe stored at 4
C for several weeks when placed in
sealed plastic bags. Before use, the plates should bewarmeduptoroomtemperatureandexaminedforex-cess moisture. If too much moisture is present, incu-bate the plates overnight at 37
C prior to use. It takes
about12lofagarmediumtoprepareonecaseofpetriplates (500 plates).
Note: A precipitate may form when the VB salts
are added. However, thorough mixing will solubi-54 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
lize the salts. The agar should never be autoclaved
together with the VB salts and glucose. The GMplates prepared this way will not fully support thegrowth of the Salmonella tester strains.
15.4. Histidine/biotin solution (0.5 mM)
Use: to supplement top agar with excess biotin and
a trace amount of histidine
Ingredients Per liter
Distilled water 1000 ml
d-biotin (F.W. 247.) 124 mg
l-Histidine HCl (F.W. 191.7) 96 mg
Bring water to a boil and add the biotin and histi-
dine.Itmaytakethebiotinalittlewhiletocompletelydissolve;histidineisreadilydissolved.Ifusedimmedi-ately, follow the procedure for making top agar. If notusedimmediatelysterilizethesolutioneitherbyﬁltra-tionthrougha0.45 mmmembraneﬁlterorbyautoclav-
ingfor20minat121
C.Storeat4Cinaglassbottle.
15.5. Top agar supplemented with histidine/biotin
Use: to deliver the bacteria, chemical and buffer or
S-9 mix to the bottom agar
Ingredients Per liter
Distilled water 900 ml
Agar 6 gSodium chloride 6 gHistidine/biotin solution (0.5 mM) 100 ml
Addtheagarandsodiumchloridetoa3-lﬂaskcon-
taining 900 ml of distilled water. Heat for 10 min inan autoclave, liquid cycle, to melt the agar. Then, add100 ml of limited histidine and biotion solution (0.5mM). Dispense 200-ml aliquots in 500-ml screw-capbottles. Label as TA with date with the date of prepa-ration.Autoclavefor30
Candstoreatroomtempera-
ture in the dark. When ready to use, melt the top agarin a microwave oven or in boiling water.
15.6. Nutrient broth
Use: to grow the tester strains overnightIngredients Per liter
Distilled water 1000 ml
Oxoid nutrient broth #2 25 g
Add the nutrient broth powder to the water and stir
to dissolve. Dispense 50 ml in 125 ml Erlenmeyerﬂasks or 5 ml in 100 16 mm test tubes. Autoclave
for 20 min. When cooled, store in the dark at roomtemperature.
Note: Difco nutrient broth can also be used but the
overnight cultures are usually less dense comparedto when Oxoid nutrient broth is used. Follow themanufacturer’s directions for preparing the Difconutrient broth.
15.7. Sodium phosphate buffer, 0.1 mM, pH 7.4
Use: for testing chemicals in the absence of
metabolic activation
Ingredients Per liter
Sodium phosphate, monobasic (0.1 M) 120 ml
T oa1lw ater add 13.8 g NaH 2PO4.H2O
Sodium phosphate, dibasic (0.1 M) 880 ml
T oa1lw ater add 14.2 g Na 2HPO4.H2O
After mixing the two ingredients, mix well. Adjust
pH to 7.4 using 0.1 M dibasic sodium phosphate so-lution. Dispense 100 ml aliquots in 250 ml screw-capbottlesandlabelas“Buffer,0.1M,pH7.4”withdate.Autoclave for 30 min at 121
C. Make sure the caps
ﬁt loosely during autoclaving. When cooled, tightenthe caps and store the bottles at room temperature inthe dark.
15.8. Co-factors for S-9 mix
Use: to provide the NADH regenerating system
Ingredients Per liter
Distilled water 900 ml
d-Glucose-6-phosphate 1.6 g
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotidephosphate (NADP)3.5 g
Magnesium chloride (MgCl) 1.8 g
Potassium chloride (KCl) 2.7 gSodium phosphate, dibasic (Na
2HPO4H2O) 12.8 g
Sodium phosphate, monobasic(NaH
2PO4H2O)2.8 gK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 55
To900mlofwater,addeachingredientsequentially
making sure that each ingredient is dissolved beforeadding the next one. This process may take up to 1h. When all ingredients are dissolved, ﬁlter sterilizethecofactors(0.45 mmﬁlter).Dispenseinsterileglass
bottles in aliquots of 7, 9 and 9.5 ml, or multiples ofthese volumes, for convenient use when in need of30%, 10% or 5% S-9, respectively, in the ﬁnal S-9mix(10mlvolumes).Label“Cofactors”withdateandstore at −20
C.
Note: Prior to each experiment thaw sufﬁcient
co-factors and S-9 fraction and keep on ice as soonas the S-9 mix is prepared. A volume of 0.5 ml ofthe S-9 mix is usually added per plate.
15.9. Co-factors for reductive metabolism
Use: to provide a reductive environment for the
metabolic activation system
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Standard co-factors for S-9 mix 63 ml
d-glucose-6-phosphate 423 mg
Nicotine adenine dinucleotide(NADH) disodium salt(Reduced form)142 mg
Glucose-5-phosphate
dehydrogenase280 U (2.8
U/ml ﬁnal)
Liver S-9 fraction (preferablyhamster liver)30 ml
Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) 96 mg in 7 ml
of water (ﬁltersterilized andkept on ice)
To a 250 ml sterile Erlenmeyer ﬂask, add the
co-factors that have been allowed to thaw at roomtemperature. Add the d-glucose-6-phosphate and
NADH.Whendissolved,ﬁltersterilizethrougha0.45mm ﬁlter. Aseptically add the glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase to the co-factor mix followed by 30ml of liver S-9 fraction. Just prior to performingthe experiment add the FMN solution. The ﬁnal S-9mix should be kept on ice for the duration of theexperiment.15.10. Enriched GM agar plates
Use: to provide medium supplemented with essen-
tial nutrients and antibiotics for the strain check orpropagationofthestrainsandpreparationofstockcul-ture master plates.
Priortopreparingthe1-lGMagarplates(seerecipe
above) add the following item(s) as required to theﬂasks containing the GM agar medium; mix well be-fore dispensing.Biotin (B) plates: 8 ml of 0.01% solution.
Histidine(H)plates(excesshistidine):8mlof0.5%
solution.
Biotin/Histidine (BH) plates: 8 ml of 0.01% biotin
and 0.5% histidine solution.
Biotin/Histidine/Ampicillin (BHA) plates: same as
BH plates but add 3 ml of ampicillin solution (8mg/ml) to give a ﬁnal concentration of ampicillinof 24 mg/ml.
Biotin/Histidine/Tetracycline(BHT)plates:sameas
BH plates but add 0.25 ml of tetracycline solution(8 mg/ml) which will give a ﬁnal concentration of2mg/ml.
Biotin/Histidine/Ampicillin/Tetracycline (BHAT)
plates:sameasBHplatesbutadd3mlofampicillinsolution (8 mg/ml) and 0.25 ml of tetracycline (8mg/ml), to give a ﬁnal concentration of 24 and 2mg/ml, respectively.
15.11. Biotin solution (0.01%, w/v)
Use: to enrich GM agar plates for strain check,
reisolation of strain and stock culture master plate.
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
d-biotin 10 mg
Heat water to a boil and add the biotin; stir until
dissolved. Filter sterilize using a 0.45 mm ﬁlter. Store
at 4C.
15.12. Histidine solution (0.5%, w/v)
Use: to enrich GM agar plates for strain check,
reisolation of strain and stock culture master plate56 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
l-histidine 500 mg
Dissolve the histidine in the water. Autoclave for
15 min at 121C. Store at 4C.
15.13. Ampicillin solution (0.8%, w/v)
Use:toconﬁrmthepresenceofplasmidpKM101in
strainTA97,TA98,TA100andTA102andpreparationof master plates for plasmid-carrying strains.
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
Ampicillin 8 mg
Dissolvetheampicillininwarm(65C)water.Filter
sterilize using a 0.45 mm ﬁlter. Store at 4C.
15.14. Tetracycline solution (0.8%, w/v)
Use: to conﬁrm the presence of plasmid pAQ1 in
strain TA102 and preparing master plate for strainTA102.
Note:thestockculturemasterplateforstrainTA102
should contain both ampicillin and tetracycline.
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Hydrochloric acid (0.02 N) 100 ml
Tetracycline 8 mg
Dissolve the tetracycline in the 0.02 N HCl. Fil-
ter sterilize using a 0.45 mm ﬁlter. Dispense in 10
ml aliquots in sterile test tubes. Store at 4C in the
dark to protect against light (tetracycline is lightsensitive).
15.15. Crystal violet solution (0.1%, w/v)
Use: to conﬁrm the presence of the rfamutation in
all the tester strainsIngredients Per 100 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
Crystal violet 100 mg
Dissolve the crystal violet in the 100 ml of water.
Mix well and store at 4C in a brown glass bottle to
protect against light.
15.16. Nutrient agar plates
Use:(1)tostreaknewlyreceivedculturesforsingle
colonies, (2) to test for crystal violet sensitivity ( rfa)
in lieu of using GM agar plates supplemented withexcess histidine and biotin, (3) to test for viability ofbacteria
Ingredients Per 100 ml
Distilled water 1000 ml
Agar 15 gOxoid Nutrient Broth #2 25 g
Add the agar to the water in a 3-l ﬂask and heat to
dissolve. Add the nutrient broth powder and stir untildissolved.Autoclavefor20minat121
C.Lettheagar
cool to about 65C. Dispense 20 to 25 ml in sterile
petri plates. Store upside down in sealed plastic bagsat 4
C.
16. Equipment and supplies
The following items are needed for performing the
mutagenicity protocols.
16.1. Supplies
Petri plates (100 15-mm)
Sterile glass tubes (100 13-mm and 150 16-mm)
Test tube racks
General laboratory glassware (ﬂasks, bottles, grad-
uated cylinders)
Pipets (1, 2, 5 and 10 ml)
Pipettors(adjustablevolumesupto200and500 ml)
Pipet tips
Dispensers for delivering top agar, buffer and S-9
mix to the test tubesK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 57
Cryogenic tubes for freezing down permanent and
working cultures
Sterile glycerol
Magnetic stir bars
Reagents and media (as described in section 15)
Mammalian tissue homogenate (S-9 fraction)
Dimethylsulfoxide and other solvents
Positive control chemicals
Gloves
Gowns
Goggles or protective eye wear
Biohazard bags
Protective covers for work space
16.2. Equipment
Colony counter (manual or electronic)
Autoclave
Shaking incubator set at 120 rpm and 37C for
growing the overnight cultures
Incubator for incubating the GM agar plates
equippedwithelectricaloutletforDesiccatorassays
Oven, heating or water bath set at 43Ct o4 8Ct o
maintain temperature of top agar
Gas line for keeping aseptic techniques while inoc-
ulating cultures
Boiling water bath or microwave oven for melting
top agar
Desiccator (9 l)
Magnetic stirrers
Balances
Waterpuriﬁcationsystemtogeneratedistilledwater
Spectrophotometer
Centrifuge (up to 8000 rpm)
Revco freezer or liquid nitrogen tank
Refrigerator/freezer
Chemical/biological safety hood
Liquid waste disposal
Vacuum pump
Solid waste disposal
References
[1] A.J. Alldrick, I.R. Rowland, Activation of the food mutagens
IQ and MeIQ by hepatic S-9 fractions derived from variousspecies, Mutat. Res. 144 (1985) 59–62.
[2] B.N. Ames, The detection of chemical mutagens with
enteric bacteria, in: A. Hollaender (Ed.), Chemical Mutagens,Principles and Methods for Their Detection vol. 1 Plenum,
New York, 1971, pp. 267–282.
[3] B.N.Ames,J.McCann,Detectionofcarcinogensasmutagens
in theSalmonella /microsome test: assay of 300 chemicals,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73 (1976) 950–954, Discussion.
[4] B.N. Ames, H.J. Whitﬁeld Jr., Frameshift mutagenesis in
Salmonella ,ColdSpringHarborSymp.Quant.Biol.23(1966)
221–225.
[5] B.N. Ames, F.D. Lee, W.E. Durston, An improved bacterial
test system for the detection and classiﬁcation of mutagensand carcinogens, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 70 (1973)782–786.
[6] B.N. Ames, W.E. Durston, E. Yamasaki, F.D. Lee,
Carcinogens are mutagens: a simple test system combiningliver homogenates for activation and bacteria for detection,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 70 (1973) 2281–2285.
[7] B.N. Ames, J. McCann, E. Yamasaki, Methods
for detecting carcinogens and mutagens with theSalmonella /mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test, Mutat.
Res. 31 (1975) 347–364.
[8] A. Araki, T. Noguchi, F. Kato, T. Matsushima, Improved
method for mutagenicity testing of gaseous compounds byusing a gas sampling bag, Mutat. Res. 307 (1994) 335–344.
[9] A.E. Auletta, K.L. Dearﬁeld, M.C. Cimino, Mutagenicity
test schemes and guidelines: U.S. EPA Ofﬁce of PollutionPrevention and Toxics and Ofﬁce of Pesticide Programs,Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 21 (1993) 38–45.
[10] A. Ayrton, S. Neville, C. Ioannides, Cytosolic activation of
2-aminoanthracene: implications in its use as a diagnosticmutagen in the Ames test, Mutat. Res. 265 (1992) 1–8.
[11] W. Barnes, E. Tuley, E. Eisenstadt, Base-sequence analysis of
His
Crevertants of the hiG46missense mutation in Salmonella
typhimurium , Environ. Mutagen. 4 (1982) 297(abstr. Aa-1).
[12] B.A. Bridges, E. Zeiger, D.B. McGregor, Summary report
on the performance of bacterial mutation assays, in: F.J. deSerres, J. Ashby (Eds.), Evaluation of Short-Term Tests forCarcinogens, Progress in Mutation Research vol. 1 Elsevier,New York, 1981, 49–67.
[13] L.S.Bernstein,J.Kaldor,J.McCann,M.C.Pike,Anempirical
approach to the statistical analysis of mutagenesis data fromtheSalmonella test, Mutat. Res. 97 (1982) 267–281.
[14] W.J. Bruyninckx, H.S. Mason, S.A. Morse, Are physiological
oxygen concentrations mutagenic? Nature 274 (1978) 606–607.
[15] N.F. Cariello, W.W. Piegorsch, The Ames test: the two-fold
rule revisited, Mutat. Res. 369 (1996) 23–31.
[16] S. DeFlora, P. Zanacchi, S. Camoirano, B. Bennicelli, G.S.
Badolati, Genotoxic activity and potency of 135 compoundsin the Ames reversion test and in a bacterial DNA-repair test,Mutat. Res. 133 (1984) 161–198.
[17] V.C. Dunkel, E. Zeiger, D. Brusick, E. McCoy, D.
McGregor, K. Mortelmans, H.S. Rosenkranz, V.F. Simmon,Reproducibility of microbial mutagenicity assay: 1. TestwithSalmonella typhimurium andEscherichia coli using a
standardized protocol, Environ. Mutagen. 6 (Suppl. 2) (1984)1–254.
[18] V.C. Dunkel, E. Zeiger, D. Brusick, E. McCoy, D.
McGregor, K. Mortelmans, H.S. Rosenkranz, V.F. Simmon,58 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
Reproducibility of microbial mutagenicity assays: II.
Testing of carcinogens and noncarcinogens in Salmonella
typhimurium andEscherichia coli , Environ. Mutagen.
7 (Suppl. 5) (1985) 1–248.
[19] W.E. Durston, B.N. Ames, A simple method for the
detection of mutagens in urine: studies with the carcinogen2-acetylaminoﬂuorene, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 71(1974) 737–741.
[20] L. Edler, Statistical methods for short-term tests in genetic
toxicology: the ﬁrst ﬁfteen years, Mutat. Res. 277 (1992)11–33.
[21] FDA, Toxicological Principles for the Safety Assessment of
Direct Food Additives and Color Additives Used in Food“Redbook II” [Draft]. FDA, Center for Food Safety andApplied Nutrition, Washington D.C., 1993.
[22] R.C. Garner, E.C. Miller, J.A. Miller, Liver microsomal
metabolism of aﬂatoxin B1 to a reactive derivative toxictoSalmonella typhimurium TA1530, Cancer Res. 32 (1972)
2058–2066.
[23] D. Gatehouse, S. Haworth, T. Cebula, E. Gocke, L. Kier, T.
Matsushima, C. Melcion, T. Nohmi, T. Ohta, S. Venitt, E.Zeiger, Recommendations for the performance of bacterialmutation assays, Mutat. Res. 312 (1994) 217–233.
[24] P. Gee, D.M. Maron, B.N. Ames, Detection and classiﬁcation
of mutagens: a set of base-speciﬁc Salmonella tester strains,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91 (1994) 11606–11610.
[25] P. Gee, C.H. Sommers, A.S. Melick, X.M. Gidrol, M.D.
Todd, R.B. Burris, M.E. Nelson, R.C. Klemm, E. Zeiger,Comparison of responses of base-speciﬁc Salmonella tester
strains with the traditional strains for identifying mutagens:the results of a validation study, Mutat. Res. 412 (1998) 115–130.
[26] M.H.L. Green, W.J. Muriel, Mutagen testing using Trp
C
reversion in E. coli, Mutat. Res. 38 (1976) 3–32.
[27] P.E. Hartman, Z. Hartman, R.C. Stahl, B.N. Ames,
Classiﬁcation and mapping of spontaneous and inducedmutations in the histidine operon of Salmonella , Adv. Genet.
16 (1971) 1–34.
[28] Z. Hartman, P.E. Hartman, W.M. Barnes, E. Tuley,
Spontaneous mutation frequencies in Salmonella : enhance-
ment of G/C to A/T transitions and depression of deletionand frameshift mutation frequencies afforded by anoxicincubation, Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 6 (1984) 633–650.
[29] S. Haworth, T. Lawlor, K. Mortelmans, W. Speck, E. Zeiger,
Salmonella mutagenicity results for 250 chemicals, Environ.
Mutagen. 5 (1983) 3–142(Suppl.).
[30] T.J. Hughes, D.M. Simmons, L.G. Monteith, L.D. Claxton,
Vaporization technique to measure mutagenic activity ofvolatile organic chemicals in the Ames/ Salmonella assay,
Environ. Mutagen. 9 (1987) 421–441.
[31] Y. Ishida, C. Negishi, A. Umemoto, Y. Fujita, S. Sato, T.
Sugimura, S.S. Thorgeirsson, R.H. Adamson, Activation ofmutagenic and carcinogenic heterocyclic amines by S-9 fromtheliverofarhesusmonkey,Toxicol.inVitro1(1987)45–48.
[32] ICH (International Commission on Harmonization),
Guidance on Speciﬁc Aspects of Regulatory GenotoxicityTests for Pharmaceuticals, International Commission onHarmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use, 1995.
[33] K. Isono, J. Yourno, Chemical carcinogens as frameshift
mutagens: Salmonella DNAsequencesensitivetomutagenesis
by polycyclic carcinogens, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 71(1974) 1612–1617.
[34] V.N.Iyer,W.Szybalski,Twosimplemethodsforthedetection
of chemical mutagens, Appl. Microbiol. 6 (1958) 23–29.
[35] N.Y. Kado, D. Langley, E. Eisenstadt, A simple modiﬁcation
of the Salmonella liquid incubation assay: increased
sensitivity for detecting mutagens in human urine, Mutat.Res. 122 (1983) 25–32.
[36] A.J. Katz, Design and analysis of experiments on
mutagenicity: II. Assays involving microorganisms, Mutat.Res. 64 (1979) 61–77.
[37] L.E. Kier, D.J. Brusick, A.E. Auletta, E.S. Von Halle,
M.M. Brown, V.F. Simmon, V. Dunkel, J. McCann, K.Mortelmans, M. Prival, T.K. Rao, V. Ray, The Salmonella
typhimurium /mammalian microsomal assay. A report to the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Gene-Tox Program,Mutat. Res. 168 (1986) 69–240.
[38] D.J. Kirkland, Genetic toxicology testing requirements:
ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial views from Europe, Environ. Mol.Mutagen. 21 (1993) 8–14.
[39] D.E. Levin, E. Yamasaki, B.N. Ames, A new Salmonella
tester strain for the detection of frameshift mutagens: a runof cytosines as a mutational hot-spot, Mutat. Res. 94 (1982)315–330.
[40] D.E. Levin, M.C. Hollstein, M.F. Christman, E.A. Schwiers,
B.N. Ames, A new Salmonella tester strain (TA102) with A:T
base pairs at the site of mutation detects oxidative mutagens,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79 (1982) 7445–7449.
[41] D.G. MacPhee, L.D. Jolly, Mutagenesis of anaerobic cultures
ofSalmonella typhimurium by nitrosoguanidine, diethyl
sulfate and 9-aminoacridine, Mutat. Res. 143 (1985) 181–186.
[42] G.A.T. Mahon, M.H.L. Green, B. Middleton, I. de G.
Mitchell, W.D. Robinson, D.J. Tweats, Analysis of data frommicrobial colony assays, in: D.J. Kirkland (Ed.), UKEMSSub-committee on Guidelines for Mutagenicity Testing.Report: Part III. Statistical Evaluation of Mutagenicity TestData, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1989, pp. 28–65.
[43] H.V. Malling, Dimethylnitrosamine: formation of mutagenic
compounds by interaction with mouse liver microsomes,Mutat. Res. 13 (1971) 425–429.
[44] B.H. Margolin, N. Kaplan, E. Zeiger, Statistical analysis of
the Ames Salmonella /microsome test, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 78 (1981) 3779–3783.
[45] B.H. Margolin, K.J. Risko, M.D. Shelby, E. Zeiger, Sources
of variability in Ames’ Salmonella typhimurium tester strains:
analysis of the International Collaborative Study on “GeneticDrift”, Mutat. Res. 130 (1984) 11–25.
[46] D. Maron, J. Katzenellenbogen, B.N. Ames, Compatibility of
organic solvents with the Salmonella /microsome test, Mutat.
Res. 88 (1981) 343–350.
[47] D. Maron, B.N. Ames, Revised methods for the Salmonella
mutagenicity test, Mutat. Res. 113 (1983) 173–215.
[48] T. Matsushima, T. Yahagi, Y. Takamoto, M. Nagao, T.
Sugimura, Species differences in microsomal activation ofK. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60 59
mutagens and carcinogens, with special reference to new
potentmutagensfrompyrolysatesofaminoacidsandproteins,M.J. Coon, A.H. Cooney, R.W. Estabrook, H. Gelboin, J.R.Gillette, P.J. O’Brien (Eds.), Microsomes, Drug Oxidationsand Chemical Carcinogenesis, Academic Press, New York,1980, pp. 1093–1102.
[49] J. McCann, E. Choi, E. Yamasaki, B.N. Ames, Detection of
carcinogens in the Salmonella /microsome test. Assay of 300
chemicals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72 (1975) 5135–5139.
[50] J. McCann, N.E. Spingarn, J. Kobori, B.N. Ames, Detection
of carcinogens as mutagens: bacterial tester strains with Rfactor plasmids, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72 (1975) 979–983.
[51] E.C. Miller, J.A. Miller, The mutagenicity of chemical
carcinogens: correlations, problems and interpretations, in: A.Hollaender (Ed.), Chem. Mutagens vol. 1 Plenum, New York,1971, pp. 83–119.
[52] M. Moriya, T. Ohta, K. Watanabe, T. Miyazawa, K. Kato, Y.
Shirasu,Furthermutagenicitystudiesonpesticidesinbacterialreversion assay systems, Mutat. Res. 116 (1983) 185–216.
[53] K. Mortelmans, B.A.D. Stocker, Segregation of the mutator
property of plasmid R46 from its ultraviolet-protectionproperties, Mol. Gen. Genet. 167 (1979) 317–327.
[54] K. Mortelmans, M. Cox, Evidence that inhibitor(s) are formed
which may interfere with the growth of revertant coloniesin the Ames Salmonella and theE. colitryptophan reverse
mutation assays when strict anaerobic conditions are used,Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 20 (1992) 44–52.
[55] K. Mortelmans, S. Haworth, T. Lawlor, W. Speck, B. Tainer,
E. Zeiger, Salmonella mutagenicity tests: II. Results from
the testing of 270 chemicals, Environ. Mutagen. 8 (Suppl. 7)(1986) 1–119.
[56] OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development) Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, TestGuideline471:BacterialReverseMutationTest,OECD,Paris,France, 1997.
[57] W.W. Piegorsch, E. Zeiger, Measuring intra-assay agreement
for the Ames Salmonella assay, in: L. Hothorn (Ed.),
Statistical Methods in Toxicology, Lect. Notes Med.Informatics vol. 43 Springer, Heidelberg, 1991, pp. 35–41.
[58] M.J. Prival, S.J. Bell, V.D. Mitchell, M.D. Peiperl, V.L.
Vaughan, Mutagenicity of benzidine and benzidine-congenordyes and selected monoazo dyes in a modiﬁed Salmonella
assay, Mutat. Res. 136 (1984) 33–47.
[59] M.J. Prival, V.D. Mitchell, Analysis of a method for testing
azo dyes for mutagenic activity in Salmonella typhimurium
in the presence of ﬂavin mononucleotide and hamster liverS9, Mutat. Res. 97 (1982) 103–116.
[60] M.J. Prival, E. Zeiger, Chemicals mutagenic in Salmonella
typhimurium strain TA1535 but not in TA100, Mutat. Res.
412 (1988) 251–260.
[61] I.F.H. Purchase, E. Longstaff, J. Ashby, J.A. Styles, D.
Anderson, P.A. Lefevre, F.R. Westwood, An evaluation of 6short-term tests for detecting organic chemical carcinogens,Br. J. Cancer 37 (1978) 873–959.
[62] T.M. Reid, C.Y. Wang, C.M. King, K.C. Morton, Conversion
of congo red and 2-azoxyﬂuorene to mutagens following invitro reduction by whole-cell rat cecal bacteria, Mutat. Res.
117 (1983) 105–112.
[63] T.M. Reid, K.C. Morton, C.Y. Wang, C.M. King,
Mutagenesis of azo dyes following metabolism by differentreductive/oxidative systems, Environ. Mutagen. 6 (1984)247–259.
[64] T.M. Reid, C.Y. Wang, C.M. King, K.C. Morton,
Mutagenicity of some benzidine congeners and theirN-acetylated and N,N
0-diacetylated derivatives in different
strains of Salmonella typhimurium , Environ. Mutagen. 6
(1984) 145–151.
[65] W.G. Shanabruch, G.C. Walker, Localization of the plasmid
(pKM101) gene(s) involved in recAClexAC-dependent
mutagenesis, Mol. Gen. Genet. 179 (1980) 289–297.
[66] T. Shimada, Y. Okuda, Metabolic activation of environmental
carcinogens and mutagens by human liver microsomes,Biochem. Pharmacol. 37 (1988) 459–465.
[67] V.F.Simmon,K.Kauhanen,R.G.Tardiff,Mutagenicactivities
of chemicals identiﬁed in drinking water, in: D. Scott, B.A.Bridges, F.H. Sobels (Eds.), Progress in Genetic Toxicology,Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977, pp. 249–258.
[68] T. Sofuni, Japanese guidelines for mutagenicity testing,
Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 21 (1993) 2–7.
[69] D.W.E. Smith, Mutagenicity of cycasin aglycone (methy-
lazoxymethanol) a naturally occurring carcinogen, Science192 (1966) 1273–1274.
[70] A.G. Stead, J.P. Hasselblad, L. Claxton, Modeling the Ames
test, Mutat. Res. 85 (1981) 13–27.
[71] T. Sugimura, S. Sato, M. Nagao, T. Yahagi, T. Matsushima, Y.
Seino, M. Takeuchi, T. Kawachi, Overlapping of carcinogensand mutagens, in: P.N. Magee, S. Takayama, T. Sugimura,T. Matsushima (Eds.), Fundamental of Cancer Prevention,University Park Press, Baltimore, 1976, pp. 191–215.
[72] W. Szybalski, Special microbiological systems: 2.
Observations on chemical mutagenesis in microorganisms,Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 76 (1958) 475–489.
[73] R.W. Tennant, B.H. Margolin, M.D. Shelby, E. Zeiger,
J.K. Haseman, J. Spalding, W. Resnick, M. Stasiewicz, B.Anderson, R. Minor, Prediction of chemical carcinogenicityin rodents from in vitro genetic toxicity assays, Science 236(1987) 933–941.
[74] S. Venitt, D. Bosworth, The development of anaerobic
methods for bacterial mutation assays: aerobic and anaerobicﬂuctuations tests of human faecal extracts and referencemutagens, Carcinogenesis 4 (1983) 339–345.
[75] S. Venitt, D. Bosworth, The bacterial mutagenicity of
synthetic all-trans fecapentaene-12 changes when assayed
under anaerobic conditions, Mutagenesis 3 (1988) 169–173.
[76] S. Venitt, C. Crofton-Sleigh, Bacterial mutagenicity tests of
phenazine methosulfate and three tetrazolium salts, Mutat.Res. 68 (1979) 107–116.
[77] S. Venitt, C. Crofton-Sleigh, Mutagenicity of 42 coded
compounds in a bacterial assay using Escherichia coli and
Salmonella typhimurium , in: F.J. deSerres, J. Ashby (Eds.),
Evaluation of Short-Term Tests for Carcinogens. Report ofthe International Collaborative Program, Progress in MutationResearch vol. 1 Elsevier, New York, 1981, pp. 351–360.60 K. Mortelmans, E. Zeiger/Mutation Research 455 (2000) 29–60
[78] H.J. Vogel, D.M. Bonner, Acetylornithinase of E. coli: partial
puriﬁcation and some properties, J. Biol. Chem. 218 (1956)97–106.
[79] N.S. Waleh, S.J. Rapport, K.E. Mortelmans, Development of
a toxicity test to be coupled to the Ames Salmonella assay
and the method of construction of the required strains, Mutat.Res. 97 (1982) 247–256.
[80] G.C.Walker,P.P.Dobson,Mutagenesisandrepairdeﬁciencies
ofEscherichia coli umuC mutants are suppressed by the
plasmid pKM101, Mol. Gen. Genet. 172 (1979) 17–24.
[81] D. Weinstein, T.M. Lewinson, A statistical treatment of the
Ames mutagenicity assay, Mutat. Res. 51 (1978) 433–434.
[82] H.J. Whitﬁeld Jr., R.G. Martin, B.N. Ames, Classiﬁcation of
aminotransferase (C gene) mutants in the histidine operon, J.Mol. Biol. 21 (1966) 335–355.
[83] R.G. Wilkinson, P. Gemski Jr., B.A.D. Stocker, Non-smooth
mutants of Salmonella typhimurium : differentiation by phage
sensitivity and genetic mapping, J. Gen. Microbiol. 70 (1972)527–554.
[84] T. Yahagi, W. Degawa, Y. Seino, T. Matsushima, M. Nagao,
T. Sugimura, Y. Hashimoto, Mutagenicity of carcinogenic azodyes and their derivatives, Cancer Lett. 1 (1975) 91–97.
[85] E. Zeiger, The Salmonella mutagenicity assay for
identiﬁcation of presumptive carcinogens, in: H.A. Milman,E.K. Weisburger (Eds.), Handbook of Carcinogen Testing,Noyes Publishers, Park Ridge, NJ, 1985, pp. 83–99.
[86] E. Zeiger, Carcinogenicity of mutagens: predictive
capability of the Salmonella mutagenesis assay for rodent
carcinogenicity, Cancer Res. 47 (1987) 1287–1296.
[87] E. Zeiger, Genotoxicity data base, in: L.S. Gold, E. Zeiger
(Eds.), Handbook of Carcinogenic Potency and GenotoxicityDatabases, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997, pp. 687–729.[88] E. Zeiger, Identiﬁcation of rodent carcinogens and
noncarcinogens using genetic toxicity tests: premises,promises, and performance, Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 28(1998) 85–95.
[89] E. Zeiger, B. Anderson, S. Haworth, T. Lawlor, K.
Mortelmans, W. Speck, Salmonella mutagenicity tests: III.
Results from the testing of 255 chemicals, Environ. Mutagen.Suppl. 9 (9) (1987) 1–110.
[90] E. Zeiger, B. Anderson, S. Haworth, T. Lawlor, K.
Mortelmans, Salmonella mutagenicity tests: IV. Results from
the testing of 300 chemicals, Environ. Mutagen. 9 (Suppl.12) (1988) 1–158.
[91] E. Zeiger, B. Anderson, S. Haworth, T. Lawlor, K.
Mortelmans, Salmonella mutagenicity tests: V. Results from
the testing of 311 chemicals, Environ. Mol. Mutagen.19 (Suppl. 21) (1992) 1–141.
[92] E. Zeiger, J.K. Haseman, M.D. Shelby, B.H. Margolin, R.W.
Tennant, Evaluation of four in vitro genetic toxicity testsfor predicting rodent carcinogenicity: conﬁrmation of earlierresults with 41 additional chemicals, Environ. Mol. Mutagen.16 (Suppl. 18) (1990) 1–14.
[93] E. Zeiger, K. Mortelmans, The Salmonella (Ames) test for
mutagenicity, D. Mahin E.D. Maines L.G. Costa D.J. ReedS. Sassa I.G. Sipes (Eds.), Current Protocols in Toxicology(1999) 3.1.1–3.1.29WileyNew York.
[94] E. Zeiger, D.A. Pagano, I.G.C. Robertson, A rapid and
simple scheme for conﬁrmation of Salmonella tester strain
phenotype, Environ. Mutagen. 3 (1981) 205–209.
[95] E. Zeiger, K.J. Risko, B.H. Margolin, Strategies to
reduce the cost of mutagenicity screening using theSalmonella /microsome assay, Environ. Mutagen. 7 (1985)
901–911.