THE HUMAN MICROBIOME:
 
Emerging Themes at the Horizon 
of the 21st Century 
August 16-18, 2017 • Natcher Conference Center, NIH
 PROGRAM BOOK
 *The workshop organizers would like to thank Ms. Maria G. Paez Segala 
(amapollito17@gmail.com ) for invoking the spirit of Giuseppe Arcimboldo 
(http://www.giuseppe-arcimboldo.org /) to create ‘microbiome family’ for the 
Emerging Themes workshop program.  
- i - TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
Purpose and Goals and Acknowledgements  ................................ ................................ ........................  1 
Agenda  
Social Media and Rules  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  3 
Agenda  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  5 
Speaker Abstracts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  15 
Speaker Biosketches  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  39 
Joint Agency Panel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  57 
Posters  
Social Media and Rules  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  59 
Poster Titles and Numbers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  61 
Poster Abstracts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 69 
Parti cipants  
Speakers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  127 
Poster Presenters  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  129 
General Participants  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  135 
Joint Agency Panel/A gency Representatives  ................................ ................................ .....................  151 
Workshop Planning Committee  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 153 
Notes  
   
- ii -   
     
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
    
   
   
   
    
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
 
 
  PURPOSE AND GOALS
 
This 2017 NIH-wide microbiome workshop was organized by a planning committee of the trans-NIH Microbiome Working Group (TMWG, https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/related_activities), which includes program staff from the 19 NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices that support human microbiome 
research through their extramural portfolios. The TMWG is interested in taking stock of where the 
microbiome field stands after NIH’s 10-year investment in the Human Microbiome Project 
(https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp ) and evaluating what is needed for this field to advance over the 
next decade . This meeting will strive to cover advances that reveal the specific ways in which the 
microbiota influences the physiology of the host, in both a healthy and a diseased sta te, and how the 
microbiota may be manipulated, at either the community, population, organismal, or molecular level, to 
maintain and/or improve the health of the host. The goal of this workshop is to seek input from a trans-disciplinary group of scientists to identify (1) knowledge gaps, (2) technical hurdles, (3) new approaches, and (4) research opportunities which will inform the development of novel prevention and treatment 
strategies based on host/microbiome interactions over the next 10 years. The workshop closes with an 
Joint Agency Panel that includes the seven other government agencies which support human 
microbiome research activities human microbiome research activities to discuss areas of common 
interest and possible collaboration . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The trans- NIH Microbiome Working Group 2017 “Emerging Themes” workshop planning committee 
would like to acknowledge the generous support of the following NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices for this workshop: NCI, NHLBI, NIDCR, NIDDK, NIEHS, NIGMS, NINR, NCCIH, OAR/OD, ODS/OD, and 
ORWH/OD. In particular, we would like to thank the Office of Strategic Coordination, fondly known as 
The Common Fund, for providing generous monetary support, but also for hosting the workshop 
website and always expressing encouragement and enthusiasm for this workshop’s purpose and goals. 
- 1- 
    
- 2- 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
  SOCIAL MEDIA
 
#ETmicrobiome 
Please ask the Presenter if their talk or poster can be live tweeted. 
Presenters, please let the audience know your choice. 
PHOTOGRAPHY/VIDEOCASTING 
Please ask the Presenter if their talk or poster can be photographed. 
Presenters, please let the audience know your choice. 
Presenters, please email the workshop organizers at emerging_themes_workshop@nih.gov if you do 
not want your talk webcast.  
WORKSHOP URL 
https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/meetings/emerging 
Participants, monitor this website for updates to the program. 
WORKSHOP EMAIL 
etmicrobiome@gmail.com 
Participants, use this email to submit questions for the daily Round Tables and the Joint Agency Panel. 
- 3- 
    
- 4- 
    
 
    
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
      
   
 
 
    
   
   
 
    
      
 
    
   
 
 
    
 
  
    
 
 
   
    
  
    
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 AGENDA
 
This conference is being recorded and will be available via live webcast at: 
The Human Microbiome: Emerging Themes at the Horizon of the 21st Century (Day 1) 
https://videocast.nih.gov/live.asp?live=24940 
The Human Microbiome: Emerging Themes at the Horizon of the 21st Century (Day 2) 
https://videocast.nih.gov/live.asp?live=24944 
The Human Microbiome: Emerging Themes at the Horizon of the 21st Century (Day 3) 
https://videocast.nih.gov/live.asp?live=24948 
Day One: Wednesday, August 16, 2017 
Theme of the Day: Overview and Approaches 
9:00 a.m. Opening S ession I. 
9:00 a.m. – 9:15 a.m. Call to Order and Charge to the 
Meeting Participants Moderator: 
Lita Proctor 
National Human Genome 
Research Institute, NIH 
9:15 a.m. – 10:00 a.m. Keynote I : What the Great Ape 
Microbiome Can Tell Us About 
the Human Microbiome Howard Ochman 
University of Texas at 
Austin 
10:05 a.m. Theme Session I. The NIH Human Microbiome Project: Catalyst for an Emerging Field 
Session P urpose: Reflect on the resources, outcomes , and legacy of the 10-year HMP 
program. 
10:05 a.m. – 10:10 a.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Lita Proctor 
National Human Genome 
Research Institute, NIH 
10:10 a.m. – 10:25 a.m. The NIH Human Microbiome 
Project: Overview of HMP 
Program Goals and 
Accomplishments Mary Ellen Perry 
Office of the Director, 
NIH 
10:2 5 a.m. – 10:40 a.m. The Impact of the Microbiome 
of the Female Reproductive 
Tract on Health and Pregnancy Greg ory A. Buck 
Virginia Commonwealth 
University 
10:40 a.m. – 10:55 a.m. Integrative Personal Omics 
Profiling During Periods of 
Environmental Stress Michael P. Snyder 
Stanford University 
10:5 5 a.m. – 11:10 a.m. Characterizing the Gut 
Microbial Ecosystem for 
Diagnosis and T herapy in 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Curtis Huttenhower 
T.H. Chan Harvard School 
of Public Health and 
Broad Institute 
- 5- 
    
     
    
  
    
     
   
  
   
  
  
     
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
    
   
  
    
  
  
     
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
  
 Day One: Wednesday, August 16, 2017 
11:10 a.m. – 11:25 a.m. Management a nd Integration 
of the iHMP Data Owen R. White 
University of Maryland 
11:2 5 a.m. – 11:40 a.m. Joint QA S ession 
11:40 p.m. 11:40 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. Lunch and Poster Session 
1:00 p.m. Theme Session II. State of the Art Microbiome Tools, Technologies , and Approaches 
#1: Beyond Sequencing 
Session P urpose: Highlight new tools/technologies for human microbiome research, 
what is appearing on the horizon, what other tools/technologies are needed , and what 
is needed to make progress in tool development for human microbiome research. 
1:00 p.m. – 1:05 p.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Lisa Chadwick 
National Institute of 
Environmental Health 
Sciences , NIH 
1:05 p.m. – 1:20 p.m. Metagenotyping Reveals 
Cryptic Functional Variation in 
the Human Microbiome Katherine S. Pollard 
University of California, 
San Francisco 
1:20 p.m. – 1:35 p.m. Moving Microbiome Studies 
Toward Causality With 
Temporal and Spatial 
Visualizations Rob Knight 
University of California, 
San Diego 
1:35 p.m. – 1:50 p.m. The Need for Reproducib le 
Global Chemical Analysis of t he 
Microbiome by Mass 
Spectrometry Pieter Dorrestein 
University of California, 
San Diego 
1:50 p.m. – 2:05 p.m. Systems Biology and Model -
Based Analysis of the Human 
Microbiome Elhanan Borenstein 
University of Washington 
2:05 p.m. – 2:20 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
2:25 p.m. Theme Session III. State of the Art Microbiome Tools, Technologies , and Approaches 
#2: Alternate Models 
Session P urpose: Highlight new and novel animal and nonanimal models for human 
microbiome research, what other kinds of models are needed , and what is needed to 
make progress in model development. 
2:25 p.m. – 2:30 p.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Dwayne Lunsford 
National Institute of 
Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, NIH 
2:30 p.m. – 2:45 p.m. Minib ioreactor Arrays to Probe 
the Functions o f Complex 
Microbial Communities Robert A. Britton 
Baylor College of 
Medicine 
2:45 p.m. – 3:00 p.m. The Drosophila Model for Gut 
Microbiome Research Angela Douglas 
Cornell University 
- 6- 
    
  
   
  
    
 
   
  
   
  
 
     
      
   
    
 
     
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
     
  
 Day One: Wednesday, August 16, 2017 
3:00 p.m. – 3:15 p.m. Zebrafish as a Tractable Model 
for Host -Microbiome 
Interactions John F. Rawls 
Duke University 
3:15 p.m. – 3:30 p.m. Swine as a Preclinical Model for 
Human Gut Microbiome 
Research Sharon M. Donovan 
University of Illinois 
3:30 p.m. – 3:45 p.m. Spatiotemporal Metagenomics 
of the Mammalian Gut Harris H. Wang 
Columbia University 
3:45 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
4:00 p.m. 4:00 p.m. – 4:30 p.m. Break 
4:30 p.m. Theme Session IV. Issues for Microbiome Research Progress 
Session P urpose: Highlight general issues that impact human microbiome research 
progress and ideas on how to address them for future of the field. 
4:30 p.m. – 4:35 p.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Chris Lynch 
National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, NIH 
4:35 p.m. – 4:50 p.m. Functional Roles of the 
Microbiome in Animal Model 
Experimentation Thaddeus Stappenbeck 
Washington University , 
St. Louis 
4:50 p.m. – 5:05 p.m. Ethical Issues in Human 
Microbiome Research: Beyond 
the Usual Suspects Mildred Cho 
Stanford University 
5:05 p.m. – 5:20 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
5:25 p.m. Round Table Discussion I 
Moderator: 
Mike Reddy, National Institute for General Medical Sciences, NIH 
5:25 p.m. – 5:55 p.m. All Speakers From Day One 
5:55 p.m. Day One Ends 
- 7- 
      
 
   
   
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
   
  
     
   
 
 
  
  
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
    
  
 
    
    Day Two: Thursday, August 17, 2017 
Theme of the Day: Interactions of the Host -Microbiome System 
8:15 a.m. Opening Session II. 
Moderator: 
Bob Karp, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH 
8:15 a.m. – 9:00 a.m. Keynote II : The Gut Microbiota 
and Childhood Undernutrition : 
Looking at Human 
Development f rom a Microbial 
Perspective Jeffrey I. Gordon 
Washington University , 
St. Louis 
9:05 a.m. Theme Session V. Host -Microbiota Interactions 
Session P urpose: Highlight mechanistic or speci fic functional examples of host -microbe 
interactions, what is still not well understood about these interactions , and what is 
needed to make progress in understanding interactions. 
9:05 a.m. – 9:10 a.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Gabriela Riscuta 
National Cancer Institute, 
NIH 
9:10 a.m. – 9:25 a.m. Gut Microbiota, Diet, Chronic 
Inflammation, and Metabolic 
Syndrome Andrew Gewirtz 
Georgia State University 
9:25 a.m. – 9:40 a.m. NLRP6: Current Challenges on 
Studying the Impact of the 
Microbiome on Host Responses Dana Philpott 
Univ ersity of Toronto 
9:40 a.m. – 9:55 a.m. Antimicrobial Peptides Shape 
Intestinal Bacterial Niche 
Creation and Competition Nita H. Salzman 
Medical College of 
Wisconsin 
9:55 a.m. – 10:10 a.m. Microbes, Molecules , and 
Mucosal Immunity Ramnik Xavier 
Harvard University 
10:10 a.m. – 10:25 a.m. Joint QA S ession 
10:25 a.m. 10:25 a.m. – 10:55 a.m. Break 
- 8- 
      
   
    
 
 
  
 
     
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
     
     
     
   
   
     
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
    
  
 Day Two: Thursday, August 17, 2017 
10:55 a.m. Theme Session VI. Microbe -Microbe Interactions within the Human Microbiome 
Session Purpose: Highlight concrete examples of microbe -microbe and interkingdom 
interactions in the microbiome and how these interactions affect/regulate human 
health and disease, what is still not understood about the role of microbe -microbe 
interactions in hum an health and disease , and what is needed to make progress in this 
area. 
10:55 a.m. – 11:00 a.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Roberto Flores 
National Cancer Institute, 
NIH 
11:00 a.m. – 11:15 a.m. Understanding and Predicting 
the Impact of Antibiotic 
Therapy on the Developing 
Pediatric Microbiota and 
Resistome Gautam Dantas 
Wash ington University , 
St. Louis 
11:15 a.m. – 11:30 a.m. Bacteriome a nd Mycobiome 
Polymicrobial Interactions 
Define Health and Disease: A 
New Paradigm Mahmoud Ghannoum 
Case Western Reserve 
University 
11:30 a.m. – 11:45 a.m. Decoding Nutritional 
Interactions i n Microbial 
Communities Michiko E. Taga 
University of California, 
Berkeley 
11:45 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. How Phage s Create an Immune 
System: BAM Immunity and 
Transcytosis Forest Rohwer 
San Diego State 
University 
12:00 p.m. – 12:15 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
12:15 p.m. 12:15 p.m. – 1:45 p.m. Lunch and Poster Session 
1:45 p.m. Theme Session VII. The Intimate Relationship Between Diet and the Microbiome 
Session P urpose: Highlight current knowledge on the bidirectional influence of diet 
and dietary components on microbial and host metabolism and how the metabolites 
influence host physiology, what is still not understood about diet -microbe interactions 
in human health and disease , and what is needed to make progress in this area. 
1:45 p.m. – 1:50 p.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Cindy Davis 
Office of Dietary 
Supplements, NIH 
1:50 p.m. – 2:05 p.m. Leaving Limbo: Stepping Back 
to Build a Strong Foundation of 
Mechanism and Stepping 
Forward to Dietary 
Interventions i n Humans Justin Sonnenburg 
Stanford University 
2:05 p.m. – 2:20 p.m. Intestinal Epithelial Cell 
Receptors as Modulators of 
Host -Microbiota 
Communicatio n Andrew D. Patterson 
Penn sylvania State 
University 
- 9- 
      
    
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
   
    
   
  
    
  
   
  
     
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
    
  
   
   
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
 
    
  
 Day Two: Thursday, August 17, 2017 
2:20 p.m. – 2:35 p.m. Diet, the Gut Microbiome, and 
Its Metabolome as a 
Therapeutic Probe in IBD Gary D. Wu 
University of 
Penn sylvania 
2:35 p.m. – 2:50 p.m. How Gut Bacteria Eat Your 
Veggies: Molecular Details of 
Glycan Scavenging at the Cell 
Surface Nicole Koropatkin 
University of Michigan 
2:50 p.m. – 3:05 p.m. Testing Diet -Gut Microbiome 
Interactions: Use of Controlled 
Feeding Studies in Humans Johanna W. Lampe 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Resear ch Center 
3:05 p.m. – 3:20 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
3:20 p.m. 3:20 p.m. – 3:50 p.m. Break 
3:50 p.m. Theme Session VIII. Role of the Microbiome in Disease Initiation or Exacerbation: 
Moving Beyond Associations 
Session Purpose: Highlight concrete “cause and effect ” mechanistic examples of the 
microbiome role in disease initiation or exacerbation, what is not yet understood 
about how the microbiome initiates or exacerbates disease , and what is needed to 
make progress in this area. 
3:50 p.m. – 3:55 p.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Lis Caler 
National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, NIH 
3:55 p.m. – 4:10 p.m. Efforts to Understand 
Causation in Microbiota -Host 
Interaction: Two Examples Andrew Goodman 
Yale University 
4:10 p.m. – 4:25 p.m. Bile Acid -Microbiota Cross -Talk 
and Its Effects o n Liver Cancer Wei Jia 
Univ ersity of Hawaii 
4:25 p.m. – 4:40 p.m. Biofilms as a Risk Factor for 
Human Colon Cancer Cynthia L. Sears 
Johns Hopkins University 
4:40 p.m. – 4:55 p.m. Role of the Lung Microbiome in 
Respiratory Health and Disease Gary B. Huffnagle 
Univ ersity of Michigan 
4:55 p.m. – 5:10 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
5:15 p.m. Round Table Discussion II 
Moderator: 
Ryan Ranallo, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH 
5:15 p.m. – 5:45 p.m. Speakers From Day Two 
5:45 p.m. Day Two Ends 
-10- 
    
  
 
   
   
 
    
 
  
 
 
    
 
    
  
   
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
    Day Three: Friday, August 18, 2017 
Theme of the Day: Microbiome Interventions for 
Maintaining Health and Treating Disease 
8:15 a.m. Opening Session III. 
Moderator: 
Ryan Ranallo, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH 
8:15 a.m. – 9:00 a.m. Keynote III : Microbiome 
Interventions: From Fecal 
Transplants to Synthetic 
Microbial Therapeutics Eric Alm 
Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology 
9:05 a.m. Theme Session IX . Translation of the Microbiome #1 : Role of the Microbiome in 
Disease Prevention and Treatment 
Session P urpose: Highlight concrete examples of the role of the microbiome at the 
community, population, cellular , or molecular level in disease prevention and health 
maintenance ; what is still not understood about the properties of the microbiome that 
can be exploited for disease prevention and health maintenance ; and what is needed 
for progress in this area. 
9:05 a.m. – 9:10 a.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Padma Maruvada 
National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, NIH 
9:10 a.m. – 9:25 a.m. Toward a Metagenomic Basis 
of Therapeutics Peter J. Turnbaugh 
University of California, 
San Francisco 
9:25 a.m. – 9:40 a.m. Gut Microbial Metabolites and 
Cancer Prevention Scott J. Bultman 
The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill 
9:40 a.m. – 9:55 a.m. Microbiomes and P henotypes: 
Impact, Restoration , and 
Transfer Maria Gloria Dominguez -
Bello 
New York University 
9:55 a.m. – 10:10 a.m. Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem 
Cell Transplantation: Clinical 
Outcomes, Intestinal Bacteria, 
and Potential Mechanisms Robert Jenq 
The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer 
Center 
10:10 a.m. – 10:25 a.m. Joint QA S ession 
10:25 a.m. 10:25 a.m. – 10:55 a.m. Break 
-11- 
    
   
 
   
 
 
     
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
   
    
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 Day Three: Friday, August 18, 2017 
10:55 a.m. Theme Session X. Translation of the Microbiome #2. Role of the Microbiome in 
Disease Prevention and Treatment 
Session Purpose: Highlight concrete examples of microbiome -based treatments for 
specific diseases, their outcomes , and new and novel microbiome -based interventions 
or treatments. 
10:55 a.m. – 11:00 a.m. Introduction to Session 
Purpose Moderator: 
Dan Xi 
National Cancer Institute, 
NIH 
11:00 a.m. – 11:15 a.m. Microbiota -Mediated Defense 
Against Antibiotic -Resistant 
Infections Eric G. Pamer 
Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center 
11:15 a.m. – 11:30 a.m. Engineering Biological 
Computers for Human Health 
Applications Timothy Lu 
Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology 
11:30 a.m. – 11:45 a.m. Connecting the Gut 
Microbiome and Cancer 
Through Circadian Rhythms Eugene B. Chang 
Univ ersity of Chicago 
11:45 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. Joint QA S ession 
12:00 p.m. 12:00 p.m. – 1:30 p.m. Lunch and Poster Session 
1:30 p.m. Joint Agency Panel 
Moderator: 
Lita Proctor, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
1:30 p.m. – 3:15 p.m. Agency Representatives : 
Rajeev Agarwal 
Office of Research on Women’s Health, NIH 
Paul Carlson 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
Stacy Carrington -Lawrence 
Office of AIDS Research, NIH 
Linda Chrisey 
Office of Naval Research, U.S. Department of Defense 
Zafar Iq bal 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affair s 
Scott Jackson 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Cliff McDonald 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Jack Okamuro 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
-12- 
    
 
 
 
   
 
  
      
  
 
  Day Three: Friday, August 18, 2017 
Jim Olds 
National Science Foundation 
Michael Sayre 
National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities, NIH 
3:15 p.m. Workshop Wrap -Up 
3:15 p.m. – 3:30 p.m. All workshop organizing members join stage 
3:30 p.m. Day Three and Workshop End 
-13- 
    
-14- 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
    
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
   
  
  SPEAKER ABSTRACTS
 
Keynote I: What the Great Ape Microbiome Can Tell Us about the Human Microbiome 
Howard Ochman 
Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin Despite the large body of work concerning the human microbiome and its role in human health, there is 
relatively little information about how the microbiome has evolved or the factors causing differentiation 
of microbial communities among species. Analysis of the gut microbiomes of great apes, including 
humans, revealed that the phylogeny based on microbiome compositions was congruent with the 
known relationships of the hosts. Investigations of the microbiomes of great apes have informed numerous features of the human microbiome, including the effects of social behavior, diet and disease 
state on microbiome contents, and the assortment of the gut microbial communities into enterotypes, 
which we have found to have preceded the split among great ape species. By comparing the gut 
microbiomes in a phylogenetic context, we reconstructed how the human microbiome has evolved accelerated rates and became depleted during great ape diversification. Furthermore, we show that certain bacterial lineages have co-diversified with great ape hosts over the past 15 million years. The next major challenge is to determine if these co-diversified lineages confer functional roles that are 
beneficial to certain host species and to specific subpopulations of humans. 
The NIH Human Microbiome Project: Overview of HMP Program Goals and 
Accomplishments 
Mary Ellen Perry 
Office of Strategic Coordination, Office of the Director, NIH 
From 2007 through 2016, the NIH provided almost $200M to the Human Microbiome Project (HMP). 
Inspired by advances in DNA sequencing technologies and bioinformatics tools, the HMP supported over 50 research teams to catalog and characterize the collection of microbes that live on and in us. The HMP 
set out to determine whether there was a core “healthy” microbiome and whether changes in the 
microbiome correlated with disease status, questions that could be answered for the first time using 
advanced bioinformatic approaches allowing identification and quantification of individual microbes from complex mixtures of DNA. HMP teams found that each healthy human tissue has a distinctive microbial community, and that, within each tissue, the specific microbes differ from person to person. 
They also found that the human microbiome is altered in multiple disorders from cancer to psoriasis, 
with the mixture of microbes being more diverse in some conditions and less diverse in others. More 
recently, HMP-supported investigators have been working to identify specific features of the 
microbiome that predict changes in health status through in-depth, longitudinal studies of hundreds of people who are pregnant, prediabetic or suffering from inflammatory bowel disease. Their new insights will be presented at this meeting and shared with the public through publications and on the Data 
Coordinating Center so that other researchers can continue to build on these discoveries. HMP-
generated data and resources have helped to stimulate a rapidly growing field of research into the role of the microbiome in human health. 
-15­ 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
       
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
        
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
   The Impact of the Microbiome of the Female Reproductive Tract on Health and Pregnancy 
Gregory A. Buck 
Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia 
Commonwealth University 
The microbiome of the female reproductive tract is thought to have a major impact on women’s 
reproductive health and well-being, including but not limited to health during pregnancy and its adverse 
outcomes including preterm birth and still birth. Bacterial vaginosis, with its still poorly defined etiology, 
has a point prevalence of up to 30%, and carries a higher risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes. Over 
10% of pregancies terminate prematurely and some demographic groups (e.g., African Americans), experience a significantly higher incidence. The annual costs associated with preterm birth in the US exceed $25 billion. The Vaginal Microbiome Consortium at VCU and its collaborators, including the 
Global Alliance to Prevent Prematurity and Stillbirth, has collected cross-sectional samples from over 
6,000 women, over 1,000 of whom were pregnant, and longitudinal samples from over 1,500 pregnant 
women. Samples include cervical, vaginal, buccal, rectal and skin swabs, and blood, plasma and urine, 
from pregnant women, placenta, cord and cord blood taken at birth, and buccal, meconium, skin and first stool samples from neonates. Approximately 10% of these women delivered prematurely. 
We have analyzed selected panels of longitudinal samples from women who experienced term or 
preterm birth by taxonomic, metagenomic, metatranscriptomic, and cytokine profiling. Preliminary 
results confirm a uniquely complex microbiome in the female reproductive tract that shows racial biases, is altered during pregnancy, and is impacted by environmental and clinical factors. Multi-omic 
analyses of these data are identifying correlations between multi-omic profiles and clinical observations, 
and are suggestive of the impact of strain differences on pregancy outcome. The results are altering the 
traditional view of wome n’s vaginal and reproductive health and promise earlier prediction of adverse 
reproductive events. 
This work is supported by grants from the NIH Common Fund Human Microbiome Project program 
(1UH2/UH3AI08326 and 8U54HD080784 to G. Buck, K. Jefferson and J. Strauss). We thank all the members of the Vaginal Microbiome Consortium at VCU (vmc.vcu.edu) for their contributions to this project, and the Global Alliance for the Prevention of Prematurity and Stillbirth (gapps.org) for their participation and suppor t. 
Integrative Personal Omics Profiling During Periods of Environmental Stress 
Michael P. Snyder 
Department of Genetics and Center of Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford University 
School of Medicine 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) is a significant health problem facing our nation, it's showed that early 
lifestyle or medical intervention in prediabetics can prevent conversion to T2D nearly by half, however, 
overall our ability to predict which individuals will develop T2D and when this will occur by which 
mechanism is strikingly inadequate. To better understand these factors for more effective early 
intervention, in particular to understand changes in response to various physiological stresses in 
prediabetes and whether those are associated with the risk to convert to T2D, we profiled 105 subjects 
-16­ 
     
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
    
  
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
 
    with more than 1000 longitudinal visits total that span over three years. Stresses we sampled included 
respiratory viral infection, antibiotics intakes and others that are linked to the development of diabetes 
previously. We measured millions of molecular analytes in host blood by multi-omics profiling, 
including on transcriptome, metabolome and proteome, and also tracked microbial taxonomic and gene changes of four body sites (nares, skin, tongue and gut) over those visits, to fully understand the 
complex molecular dynamics and regulations in the host-microbiome interactions. A subset of 
participants were then placed on a short-term high caloric diet, followed by additional multi-omic profiling. The dietary perturbation was associated with a wealth of biomolecular expression changes concomitant with weight gain and spanning multiple ‘omes including the microbiome, and the omic 
response to weight gain differed between prediabetics and healthy controls. For another subset of 
participants who went through respiratory viral infections, their multi-omic profiling, including the 
microbiome, responded distinctly to different illness stages during the infection. Overall, the multi­omic profiles of individuals are unique compared to others regardless diet or illness perturbations. In total, these large-scale longitudinal data offer a novel and comprehensive view of the dysfunction in cellular networks associated with the progression to T2D and may offer new strategies for predicting 
and preventing the disease at a personalized level. In order to implement this integrative personalized 
omic approach into healthcare in a cost efficient and highly effective manner, future research is much 
needed in various areas, especially in improving the accuracy of omics measurement and bioinformatics prediction. 
Characterizing the Gut Microbial Ecosystem for Diagnosis and Therapy in Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease 
Curtis Huttenhower 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and Broad Institute 
The inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are a model for complex microbiome-linked disease, and they 
include both Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) and affect several million individuals 
worldwide. As part of the Integrative Human Microbiome Project, the IBDMDB (Inflamatory Bowel 
Disease Multi'omics Database) followed 100 CD patients, UC patients, and control subjects for one year each to generate integrated molecular profiles of host and microbial activity during disease. This includes 1,400 stool metagenomes, 700 metatranscriptomes, approximately 400 16S rRNA gene amplicon, RNA-seq, and epigenetic profiling of intestinal biopsies, and genetics and serology from all 
participants. Integration of microbial profiling with metabolomics has identified microbially-processed 
small molecules implicated in inflammation and disease severity. Likewise, combining metagenomics with metatranscriptomics has pinpointed microbes and pathways expressed uniquely within a subset of active disease patients. These data thus represent a substantial community resource for future 
multi’omics studies in IBD, and have also served to provide the first integrated molecular profile of 
immune activity and clinical response during disease progression. 
-17­ 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
  Management and Integration of the iHMP Data 
Owen R. White 
Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine 
The Human Microbiome Project Data Coordination Center (HMP-DCC) played an important role in the 
success of the mission of the original HMP by providing a centralized location for researchers (both within and outside the HMP Research Network) to access HMP resources. The second phase of the HMP project known as the integrated Human Microbiome Project (iHMP), is focused on the interface 
between the microbiome and the host. The project has produced integrate multi-omic datasets from 
both the host and the microbiome. These datasets will allow the research community to gain insight into which properties of the host and microbiome, in combination, are key to human health and disease. As the types, size, and scope of the datasets produced under the iHMP have expanded, so has the need for effective organization and integration of the data as can be provided by the DCC. Previously the DCC 
web portal has met with great success and has been heavily used by the research community. All HMP 
phase 1 and iHMP primary data, derived data, protocols and other resources are now also available 
through our web resource. The web portal is a collection of data and associated services which provide users with multiple types of information and a diverse set of tools with which to do analysis. We will report on the data production, analysis systems, web portal capability and deposition into public 
archives in our presentation. 
Metagenotyping Reveals Cryptic Functional Variation in the Human Microbiome 
Katherine S. Pollard 
Gladstone Institutes and University of California, San Francisco 
Metagenotyping is the identification of microbial genetic variation from shotgun metagenomics data. 
Capturing genetic variants is important, because strains of the same species can differ significantly in 
gene content and gene sequence, which in turn affects the functional capabilities of microbial communities from one host to another. We developed high-throughput computational methods to 
identify single nucleotide variants and gene copy number variants within the specific microbial strains present in a shotgun metagenome, as well as phylogenetic models to test for associations between 
genetic variants and microbial or host traits. Using these methods, we tracked microbial transmissions 
from mothers to infants, discovered bacterial genes associated with colonization of the human gut, and 
quantified population genetic evidence for selection in prevalent gut microbes. 
-18­ 
       
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 Moving Microbiome Studies Towards Causality With Temporal and Spatial Visualizations 
Rob Knight 
Departments of Pediatrics, Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego 
Advances in DNA sequencing and metabolomics enable studies of hundreds to thousands of samples. 
Understanding these highly multivariate datasets poses considerable challenges due to the massive scale of the data and to features such as sparsity and compositionality that complicate interpretation. In moving from observational studies to identifying causal linkages, integration of multi-omics data in 
spatially and/or temporally resolved study designs provides insight that cannot be gained otherwise. In 
this talk, I demonstrate these principles with vignettes showing the utility of these techniques in interpreting the developing infant microbiome, the human skin microbiome, inflammatory bowel disease, a mouse model of cardiovascular disease, and the cystic fibrosis lung. Highlighting the repositories Qiita (http://qiita.ucsd.edu/) and GNPS (http://gnps.ucsd.edu/), the largest repositories of 
publicly available annotated microbiome and metabolome data respectively, I present a vision for 
deploying these techniqes broadly across studies of both human and model animal microbiomes to 
obtain fundamentally new ways of understanding host-microbiome interactions. 
The Need for Reproducible Global Chemical Analysis of The Microbiome by Mass 
Spectrometry 
Pieter Dorrestein 
Departments of Pharmacology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego 
Mass Spectrometry is starting to play a critical role in the elucidating the functional role of the 
microbiome and in our understanding how chemical environments drive niche colonization. In the past 
fifteen years, the cost of mass spectrometry has come down by two orders of magnitude per volume of 
data that is collected (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41570-017-0054). As the sensitivity of 
instrumentation increases by an order of magnitude, the number of unknowns doubles. One of the key limitations of untargeted mass spectrometry is the lack of data analysis reproducibility. If the same data is provided to different people, we have different outcomes. The second limitation is our ability to annotate molecules that can be observed. Currently in untargeted metabolomics, on average, only 2% 
of the data that is collected can be annotated, and there are very few mass spectral references for 
microbial molecules. To begin addressing some of these shortcomings, we launched a global data driven knowledge sharing and analysis infrastructure called global natural product social molecular networking or GNPS (http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v34/n8/full/nbt.3597.html). The GNPS community now 
counts 26,000 users from 136 countries. One of the key features of GNPS is that is allows public sharing 
of raw data. This is critical for scientific reproducibility and argue that only sharing of tables with m/z, 
features and annotations is not appropriate. When the raw data is not available, the results tables 
cannot be updated with the most advanced analysis tools and knowledge of the future. This is important as new algorithms are rapidly advancing. In this 15 min discussion talk I will discuss (1) the continued need for the development reproducible data workflows. (2) The need for curated reference data sets. (3) Improve the reference libraries for microbial molecules – in silico methods play a key role in this. (4) 
The need for microbiome specific workflows – some may replace sequencing in certain circumstances if 
done correctly perhaps one day realizing near real time analysis of the microbiome. This will only be possible with the informatics platform running in the background. 
-19­ 
     
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
     
 
  
 
 Systems Biology and Model-Based Analysis of the Human Microbiome 
Elhanan Borenstein 
University of Washington and Santa Fe Institute 
The human microbiome – the diverse ensemble of microorganisms that populate the human body – 
represents a vastly complex ecosystem that is tightly linked to our health. Multiple molecular assays 
now enable high-throughput profiling of this system, providing large-scale and comprehensive characterization of its ecology, functional capacity, and metabolic activity. To date, however, analyses of 
such multi-omic data typically focus on statistical associations, often ignoring extensive prior knowledge 
of the mechanisms, dependencies, and regularities linking these various facets of the microbiome. In 
this talk, I will highlight the pressing need for the development of predictive systems-level models of the microbiome and of model-based methods for integrating and analyzing microbiome multi-omic data. I will further introduce several novel computational frameworks for linking taxonomic, genomic, 
metagenomic, and metabolomic information about the microbiome. Combined, such frameworks lead 
to an improved comprehensive, multi-scale, and mechanistic understanding of the microbiome in health 
and disease, informing efforts for personalized microbiome-based therapy. 
Mini-Bioreactor Arrays to Probe the Functions of Complex Microbial Communities 
Robert A. Britton 
Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome 
Research, Baylor College of Medicine 
Over the past decade there has been a concerted effort to catalog the microbes that are associated with 
the human body. These studies have demonstrated the enormous complexity of these communities and 
have shown clear associations with health and disease. However, our understanding of the functional 
contributions of microbial communities and the underlying mechanisms is a critical knowledge gap that 
exists in our field. To address this gap, we have created minibioreactor arrays (MBRAs) to facilitate the cultivation and functional analysis of complex microbial communities. Seeded with human fecal samples, MBRAs support the growth of diverse communities that establish functions associated with intestinal communities including resistance to pathogen invasion and transformation of dietary 
metabolites. Individual fecal samples exhibit unique functions, demonstrating that communities 
established from different individuals retain functional capabilities. Antibiotic treatment of MBRA communities alters their functions including allowing for the invasion of the pathogen Clostridium 
difficile. The establishment of technologies that allow for the cultivation of complex microbial communities that not only retain key functions but also provide opportunities for the manipulation of 
community function will be critical for elucidating mechanisms by which the microbiota impacts human 
health. 
-20­ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
   
  
   
   
  
 
     
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
  
    
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
    The Drosophila Model for Gut Microbiome Research 
Angela Douglas 
Department of Entomology and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University 
There is now strong evidence that the gut microbiome plays a central role in the metabolic health of 
Drosophila fruit flies, protecting the fly against hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia, as well as contributing to the nitrogen nutrition and B vitamin requirements of the insect. The Drosophila microbiome is very tractable to study the fundamental processes underlying the impact of the gut 
microbiome on human metabolic health and disease. In particular, the gut microbiota is of low diversity 
and mostly culturable, with key bacterial taxa amenable to genetic manipulation. It is cheap a nd 
technically straightforward to generate and maintain germ-free Drosophila; and to construct flies with a standardized microbiota for experimental study. The suitability of Drosophila for large and complex experimental designs is illustrated by GWAS experiments enabling identification of candidate host and 
microbial genes determining microbial colonization and microbiota-mediated effects on metabolism. 
Interpreting results from these experiments is facilitated by a suite of genetic and metabolic 
approaches, including metabolic modeling, to interrogate the underlying mechanisms. These studies reveal the central role of microbial fermentation products in shaping host metabolic function, mediated at least in part through microbial promotion of mobilization of lipid reserves. They also highlight 
interactions between the impacts of the microbiota on metabolism and the function of both the 
immune system and nervous system, providing the opportunity for integrated analysis of microbiome 
impacts on metabolism, protection against pathogens, and behavior. 
Zebrafish as a Tractable Model for Host-Microbiome Interactions 
John F. Rawls 
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for the Genomics of Microbial Systems, 
Duke University School of Medicine 
The field of microbiome science has revealed remarkable diversity of microbial life associated with 
humans and other animals, and has uncovered associations between specific microbiome configurations and human health. By comparison, we understand relatively little of the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms utilized by specific microbial and host cells to mediate these host-microbiome interactions. 
These gaps in knowledge can be addressed using experimental systems that permit high-throughput identification of host and microbial mechanisms along a range of temporal and spatial scales. The zebrafish has emerged as a powerful vertebrate model system for addressing these challenges. The 
small size and optical transparency of the zebrafish facilitate high-resolution in vivo imaging as well as 
high-throughput gnotobiotic manipulations that complement the technical and biological limitations of 
other model systems. Extensive anatomic, physiologic, and genomic homologies between zebrafish and 
mammals permit translation of insights gained in zebrafish into advances in human medicine. Studies using the zebrafish have revealed novel molecular, nutritional, and ecological processes underlying host­
microbiome interactions. For example, we recently used the zebrafish to discover a critical and 
evolutionarily conserved role for the host transcription factor Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha 
(HNF4A) in maintaining intestinal homeostasis in response to the microbiome. We also recently 
developed a method for genetic analysis in bacteria that are otherwise intractable to molecular genetic 
manipulation, and demonstrated its utility in a representative Firmicutes bacterium from the zebrafish intestine. Future goals for the zebrafish model include building new tools for visualizing and measuring 
-21­ 
    
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 microbial and host physiologies in live animals with improved spatial and temporal resolution, advancing 
gnotobiotic zebrafish husbandry methods to empower high-throughput and long-term studies, and 
expanding and improving the available zebrafish models of human microbiome-related diseases. 
Swine as a Preclinical Model for Human Gut Microbiome Research 
Sharon M. Donovan 
Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Defining the mechanistic underpinnings whereby the intestinal microbiota influences human health and 
disease has been hampered in part by variation in genetics, physiology and microbiota between humans and rodent models. Swine are an important agricultural species as well as excellent models for human physiology, nutrition, pathologies and infectious diseases. For that reason, research using swine is said 
to serve dual purpose and dual benefit. Both species are omnivorous, the size and composition of the 
porcine genome are comparable to those of humans and the swine immune system is 80% homologous 
to the human. Additionally, organ systems generally share common functional features between the species, particularly the gastrointestinal and neural systems. The swine gut microbial community is influenced by age, sex and genetics and markedly influences animal health and growth performance. In 
adult swine, the gut microbiota 16S rRNA sequences are similar to humans at the level of the pyla and 
major taxa. Additionally, deep metagenome sequencing of swine fecal DNA identified 7.7 million non-
redundant genes representing 719 metagenomic species. Importantly, 96% of the functional pathways in the human metagenome catalogue are present in the pig catalogue, supporting the potential use of pigs for biomedical research. Our lab has extensively utilized the piglet as a model for neonatal human 
gut, immune and cognitive development and nutritional modulation of gut microbiome composition and 
metagenome. However, the microbiome of the developing piglet is lactobacillus-predominant, with a low abundance of bifidobacteria. To overcome this limitation, germ-free and gnotobiotic piglets 
colonized with bifidobacteria or human microbiota have been established and are providing a malleable 
model system in which to probe microbiome-modulation of neonatal development. 
Spatiotemporal Metagenomics of the Mammalian Gut 
Harris H. Wang 
Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University 
A key knowledge gap in the gut microbiome is the detailed delineation of the spatial and temporal 
organization of microbiota at a single-cell level. A variety of environmental and host factors such as diet, 
drugs, genetics may influence the microbial spatiotemporal distribution to maintain healthy homeostatic 
states or cause dysbiotic pathologies. We describe new metagenomic approaches to map the spatial 
biogeography of the gut microbiome at a micron-scale resolution and temporal functional metagenomic selection in the mammalian gut. Understanding the natural spatiotemporal associations between 
microbiota, and with the host, will enhance the mechanistic dissection mediating their interactions at 
the community, cellular, and genetic level. Furthermore, disruptions to the natural biogeography could 
serve as a new clinical biomarker for microbial dysbiosis beyond species composition or abundance 
signatures. These understandings could lead to development of complex synthetic gut communities that 
recapitulate the various physiological contributions of a natural microbiota to host gut health and function. 
-22­ 
       
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
     
 
 
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
  
 
 Functional Roles of the Microbiome in Animal Model Experimentation 
Thaddeus Stappenbeck 
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Mammals are defined by their metagenome, a combination of host and microbiome genes. It is 
increasingly clear that the metagenome plays a role in a wide range of human diseases. When modeling features of human diseases in animal models such as mice, it is important to design experiments that take this principle into account. Implementation of strategies to account for the metagenome and 
develop methods to accurately communicate this information is critical to our work as a community in 
decipher in the pathogenesis of a variety of disease states. I will highlight a disease state, acute influenza infection that in mouse models is well known to be influenced by the microbiome component of the metagenome. We found that there are specific microbes and microbial products that impact the outcome of this pathogen on the host. This work highlights an example whereby attention to the 
metagenome in mouse models can lead to new insights into disease pathogenesis. 
Ethical Issues in Human Microbiome Research: Beyond the Usual Suspects 
Mildred Cho 
Center for Biomedical Ethics and Professor, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Stanford University 
Study of the human microbiome is upending fundamental ways of thinking about human health and 
disease. In addition, products meant to manipulate the human microbiome often defy categories on 
which our regulatory system is based. For example, how should clinicians, patients, product developers and regulators think about and proceed with the use of fecal microbiota transplants for serious 
emergent conditions such as Clostridium difficile infections, or for less urgent conditions such as 
obesity? At the same time, human microbiome research is being conducted during what could be a 
radical restructuring of science, enabled by broad access to information and materials, with broad 
participation of patients, customers and the interested public. This “ citizen scientist, ” crowd sourcing 
and crowd funding movements, in combination with large scale efforts such as the All of Us / Precision Medicine Initiative, raise ethical issues that could pose challenges to the ability to the progress and translation of human microbiome research. 
Keynote II: The Gut Microbiota and Childhood Undernutrition: Looking at Human 
Development from a Microbial Perspective 
Jeffrey I. Gordon 
Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, and Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition 
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Human postnatal development is typically viewed from the persp ective of our “human ” organs. As we 
come to appreciate how our microbial communities are assembled following birth, there is an 
opportunity to determine how this microbial facet of our developmental biology is related to healthy 
growth as well as to the risk for and manifestations of disorders that produce abnormal growth. We are testing the hypothesis that perturbations in the normal development of the gut microbiota are causally 
-23­ 
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
   
  
 
   
 
    
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 related to childhood undernutrition, a devastating global health problem whose long-term sequelae, including stunting, neurodevelopmental abnormalities and immune dysfunction, remain largely 
refractory to current therapeutic interventions. The journey to preclinical proof- of-concept, and the 
path forward to clinical proof- of-concept emphasize the opportunities and challenges for developing 
microbiota-directed therapeutics, including products positioned at the intersection of food and 
medicine. 
One critical gap: Define the metabolic underpinnings of microbial succession. 
Gut Microbiota, Diet, Chronic Inflammation, and Metabolic Syndrome 
Andrew Gewirtz 
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Georgia State University 
The intestinal tract is inhabited by a large diverse community of bacteria collectively referred to as the 
gut microbiota. Alterations in gut microbiota composition are associated with a variety of disease states including obesity, diabetes, and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Transplant of microbiota from diseased persons (or mice) to germfree mice transfers some aspects of disease phenotype, indicating 
that altered microbiota plays a role in disease manifestation. There are myriad potential mechanisms by 
which alterations in gut microbiota might promote disease including increasing energy harvest, 
production of toxic metabolites, and molecular mimicry of host proteins. However, our research indicates that an overarching mechanism by which an aberrant microbiota negatively impacts health is by driving chronic inflammation. More specifically, we hypothesize that the histopathologically-evident 
gut inflammation that defines IBD is a severe but relatively rare outcome of an altered host-microbiota 
relationship while a much more common consequence of such disturbances is “low-grade ” 
inflammation, characterized by elevated proinflammatory gene expression, that associates with, and 
may promote, metabolic syndrome. In this context, a variety of chronic inflammatory diseases may 
stem from inability of the mucosal immune system to properly manage a stable healthy relationship 
with the gut microbiota. Diet in general and food additives in particular, play an essential role in shaping 
microbiota composition and its functional activities. Thus, such additives can influence development of metabolic diseases. 
NLRP6: Current Challenges on Studying the Impact of the Microbiome on Host 
Responses 
Dana Philpott 
Department of Immunology, University of Toronto 
As we have come to appreciate the influence of gut bacteria on various diseases, we are presented with 
new challenges in determining how experimental results and the reproducibility of in vivo animal models are impacted by the combined effects of the genetics of the host and the host-associated microorganisms, from bacteria, viruses, fungi and beyond (i.e., the metagenome). The use of littermate­
controlled animals from heterozygous breeding pairs is the gold-standard for normalizing genetic and 
environmental variability. The NOD-like receptor, NLRP6, was previously shown to strongly influence gut 
microbial communities and impact intestinal inflammation, however, none of these studies were 
obtained using littermate animals, opening up the possibility that the pro-colitogenic microbiota 
-24­ 
    
   
   
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
  
 
 phenotype associated with knockout mice was stochastically acquired and genotype-independent. We 
decided to revisit the role of NLRP6 by analyzing the microbiota in littermate animals. WT and Nlrp6-/­
male and female littermate mice from a heterozygote cross, either co-caged or individually caged after 
weaning showed no significant differences in their microbiomes. However, our results confirm a previously reported sex-biased microbial community structure, which was evident in both WT and 
Nlrp6-/- mice. Furthermore, we surprisingly observed that while WT and Nlrp6-/- males displayed similar 
sensitivity to DSS-induced colitis, female Nlrp6-/- mice were more susceptible than female WT animals. 
Therefore, our results clarify the role of NLRP6 in microbiota and colitis control, and highlight the 
current challenge in microbiome research and studying its effect on host responses. Indeed, researchers need to analyze littermate mice as well as account for sex differences for these studies to be meaningful. 
Antimicrobial Peptides Shape Intestinal Bacterial Niche Creation and Competition 
Nita H. Salzman 
Departments of Pediatrics, Microbiology, and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin 
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are among the most ubiquitous, conserved and evolutionarily ancient 
mediators of host-microbe interaction, found throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. While there 
has been considerable attention to the importance of AMPs in host defense against pathogens, their essential homeostatic role has recently become evident more recently. We and others have shown that 
mammalian intestinal mucosal AMPs are essential for both defending against enteric pathogens and 
mediating homeostasis with the intestinal microbiota. Conversely, bacteria have developed AMP resistance mechanisms to allow their survival in the intestinal milieu, a trait that facilitates both commensal colonization and pathogenic invasion. Composition of the intestinal antimicrobial environment is not limited to host-derived AMPs. Intestinal microbes also produce and secrete 
antimicrobial factors. Most recently, we have investigated the role of bacterial AMPs, bacteriocins, in 
intestinal colonization by Enterococcus faecalis (EF), an intestinal commensal and opportunistic 
pathogen of humans. Bacteriocins are plasmid encoded AMPs that facilitate intra-genus communication and niche-competition. Using a mouse model of stable enterococcal GI tract colonization, we found that 
enterococcal bacteriocin production resulted in enhanced colonization and niche-competition without 
profound disruption of the gut microbiome, suggesting the potential utility of GI niche-targeting for manipulation of the intestinal microbiota. Conversely, differential host response to EF bacteriocin production suggests that bacteriocins may have a role in microbe-host signaling and communication. 
Our ability to manipulate the intestinal microbiome to benefit human health and to eliminate 
pathogenic colonization or invasion requires a more sophisticated understanding of microbe-microbe and microbe-host interaction within the GI tract. Incomplete understanding of commensal physiology 
and interspecies communication are limiting our ability to make optimal sense of the massive multi­
omics data sets generated from animal and human microbiome studies. Detailed understanding of the 
biology of specific commensal populations that comprise the microbiota will enhance sequence 
databases through improved gene annotation, and allow the focused manipulation of microbia l 
populations to benefit health while reducing collateral damage to the host. 
-25­ 
     
 
 
 
   
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 Microbes, Molecules, and Mucosal Immunity 
Ramnik Xavier 
Harvard Medical School and Broad Institute, Harvard University 
Taxonomic and functional changes to the composition of the gut microbiome have been implicated in 
multiple human diseases. Recent microbiome genome-wide association studies reveal that variants in many human genes involved in immunity and gut architecture are associated with an altered composition of the gut microbiome. Although many factors can affect the microbial organisms residing 
in the gut, a number of recent findings support the hypothesis that certain host genetic variants 
predispose an individual towards microbiome dysbiosis. Presentation will focus on how the microbiota 
drives intestinal disease based on host genetics, disruption of microbial community architecture and pathways that disrupt mucosal homeostasis. 
Understanding and Predicting the Impact of Antibiotic Therapy on the Developing 
Pediatric Microbiota and Resistome 
Gautam Dantas 
Departments of Pathology and Immunology, Biomedical Engineering and Molecular Microbiology, Center 
for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washingto n University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Early life is a critical developmental window for the gut microbiota, and perturbations that occur during this period are likely to have long lasting effects on host physiology and health. It is thus important to 
understand and predict the specific effects of perturbations, such as antibiotic treatment, on this 
dynamic and developing microbial ecosystem. We are using a multipronged metagenomic and culture-
based approach to characterize the acute and persistent effects of antibiotic treatment on the 
developing infant gut microbiota. We found that during the first few months of life, the preterm infant 
gut microbiota is significantly lower in diversity than the microbiota of age-matched term infants, and is 
dominated by multi-drug resistant facultative anaerobes. Functional metagenomic interrogation revealed that the preterm infant gut microbiota encodes an extensive and diverse resistome that is enriched in a drug-specific manner following antibiotic treatment. We also observed that while most antibiotics are associated with significant decreases in species richness in the preterm microbiota, 
vancomycin and gentamicin have variable but predictable species richness responses. Our ongoing 
tandem sequencing and culture-based analysis of samples collected following discharge from the neonatal intensive care unit indicate that while overall phylogenetic composition of the preterm infant gut microbiota recovers by 20 months of age, these infants may harbor high-risk, multidrug resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae strains which are enriched for during hospitalization. Finally, we have used machine-
learning approaches to accurately predict infant microbiome responses to specific antibiotics based on 
key taxonomic and functional microbiome features. Such predictive algorithms could enable future 
microbiome-based personalized medicine approaches to tailor antibiotic treatments to treat infections while reducing collateral microbiota damage. However, a key knowledge gap that currently hampers our 
ability to achieve this goal is a quantitative understanding of the level of resolution (e.g., family, species, gene, nucleotide) required to appropriately inform clinically-actionable microbiome-based predictions. 
Determining the ideal molecular resolution required for predicting various phenotypic or clinical 
outcomes has clear technological and cost considerations (e.g., the need for deep shotgun metagenomic 
sequencing versus PCR of a specific informative locus). There is also the immense basic science value in 
bettering our understanding of phenotype-genotype relationships at different molecular resolutions. 
-26­ 
       
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
  Experimental and computational methods to address this “predictive microbiome resolution ” gap will 
accelerate translation of existing predictive models and guide development of future therapeutics and 
diagnostics. 
Bacteriome and Mycobiome Polymicrobial Interactions Defines Health and Disease: A 
New Paradigm 
Mahmoud Ghannoum 
Case Western Reserve University and University Hospital Cleveland Medical Center 
Recent studies revealed that microbial communities (bacteriome and mycobiome) have adopted inter-
kingdom cooperative evolutionary strategies that culminate in biofilm formation. In microbial dysbiosis, 
biofilms are beneficial to both bacterial and fungal communities but detrimental to the host. This inter-
kingdom interaction is best exemplified in Crohn's disease (CD). We used Ion Torrent sequencing to 
characterize the gut bacterial microbiota (bacteriome) and fungal community (mycobiome) in patients with CD and their non-diseased first-degree relatives (NCDR) in familial clusters and in healthy individuals from families living in the same area (non-CD unrelated, NCDU). Principal components analysis, diversity, and abundance analyses were conducted and CD-associated inter- and intra-kingdom 
microbial correlations determined. Significant microbial interactions were identified and validated using 
single- and mixed-species biofilms. CD and NCDR groups clustered together in the mycobiome, but not in bacteriome. Microbiota of familial (CD, NCDR) samples were distinct from that of non-familial (NCDU) samples. Abundance of Serratia marcescens (SM), Escherichia coli (EC) was elevated in CD patients, while that of beneficial bacteria was decreased. Abundance of the fungus Candida tropicalis (CT) was 
significantly higher in CD compared to NCDR (P = 0.003), and positively correlated with levels of anti – 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody (ASCA). Abundance of CT was positively correlated with SM and EC, 
suggesting these organisms interact in the gut. The mass and thickness of Triple species (CT+SM+EC) 
biofilm were significantly higher than single and double species biofilm. CT biofilms comprised of 
blastospores, while double and triple species biofilms were enriched in hyphae. SM used fimbriae to co-aggregate or attach with CT/EC, while EC closely apposed with CT. Specific inter-kingdom microbial interactions may be key determinants in CD. The ability fungi to form inter-kingdom biofilms with bacterial species emphasize, not only their paramount importance, but also the complexity of studying 
whole microbial communities, and their interspecies interactions. Investigations into mechanisms 
underlying these polymicrobial interactions are critical, warranted, and will lead to novel translational 
approaches that will impact chronic diseases. 
-27­ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
    
 
 
  
  Decoding Nutritional Interactions in Microbial Communities 
Michiko E. Taga 
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
Nutritional interactions among microbes are major drivers of microbial community structure and 
metabolism. The majority of nutritional interactions in microbes are poorly understood, and methods to predict interactions based on sequence analysis are limited. A critical challenge in the effort to gain a deeper understanding of microbiomes is to make better use of the increasingly abundant (meta)genome 
sequencing data to predict nutritional interactions, i.e., to “decode” microbial interactions. Corrinoid 
(vitamin B12-like) cofactors are shared among bacteria: corrinoids are required by an estimated 80% of 
bacteria, yet they are produced by less than 40%. In the human gut, corrinoids are essential cofactors for diverse metabolic processes including methionine synthesis, deoxynucleotide synthesis, and the catabolism of various carbon sources that are present in the gut. Because corrinoids play critical roles in 
bacterial metabolism but half of bacteria do not synthesize corrinoids, understanding how corrinoids are 
shared among bacteria is necessary to achieve a more complete understanding of bacterial metabolism 
and community structure. Using genome analysis to predict corrinoid sharing is further complicated by the fact that corrinoids produced by different microbes have variations in their structure, and these structural variants are not functionally equivalent for corrinoid-dependent enzymes. We are 
investigating corrinoid biosynthesis pathways and the requirements for particular corrinoid structures in 
an effort to understand and predict corrinoid-based metabolism in microbial communities. By 
identifying new genes and characterizing protein sequence and function, we have begun to improve genomic predictions of corrinoid biosynthesis and corrinoid requirements. A greater understanding of corrinoid metabolism and structural specificity may lead to improved strategies for manipulating the 
metabolism or composition of microbiomes. 
How Phage Create an Immune System: BAM Immunity and Transcytosis 
Forest Rohwer 
Department of Biology, San Diego State University Viruses, and particularly phage that infect bacteria, are the most abundance and diversity life forms on 
the planet. Given their success throughout the biosphere, it is expected that phage are essential 
members of the animal and plant holobionts. We have shown that phage form a bacterial selective, adaptive immune system that helps protect the mucosal surfaces of animals and establish the microbiome. Additionally, phage are actively transported across epithelial layers and may provide a 
systemic protection against bacteria. These two findings strongly suggest that phage formed the first 
acquired immune system and they remain important in extant animal immunology. The biggest 
knowledge gap in my field is the overly cell-centric nature of most researchers, editors and funders. 
-28­ 
       
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 Leaving Limbo: Stepping Back to Build a Strong Foundation of Mechanism and Stepping 
Forward to Dietary Interventions in Humans 
Justin Sonnenburg 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine 
The trillions of microbes that live within the gut of each human represent a critical, yet dynamic 
component of our biology. The links between our gut microbiome and our health, combined with the malleability of this community, suggests that if we learn the rules for how to manipulate our gut 
microbes, we may be able to treat and prevent disease. Diet has emerged as one of the most powerful 
levers available to shape the composition and functionality of the gut microbiome. However, a primary challenge is to understand how to use diet to provide desired and predictable outcomes in the face of tremendous complexity and individuality of the gut community. The Sonnenburg lab is currently focused on understanding basic principles that govern diet-gut microbiome dynamics, and how interactions 
between nutrients and microbes within the gut can cascade into physiological changes to human 
biology. To pursue these aims, we apply systems approaches and use genetic tools for the model mouse 
host and microbes to gain mechanistic insight into emergent properties of the host-microbial super-organism. We are currently working to fill a critical gap in enabling the manipulation and tracking of single strains and cells within complex communities. We also use a variety of tools and technologies to manipulate and measure microbiota and host biology in humans undergoing dietary intervention. 
Development of humans as an experimental model to study the microbiome-immune-metabolism axis, 
and how this axis can be manipulated by diet for improved human health remains a major challenge in the field. 
Intestinal Epithelial Cell Receptors as Modulators of Host-Microbiota Communication 
Andrew D. Patterson 
Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, 
Pennsylvania State University 
A complex network of host receptors and microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract work in concert to 
process and absorb dietary nutrients, detoxify xenobiotics, and establish a homeostatic system that 
regulates metabolism and inflammation. Emerging evidence suggests ligand-activated transcription 
factors of the nuclear receptor superfamily and the basic helix-loop-helix/per-arnt-sim (PAS) family not only receive and process chemical signals derived from microbial-dependent metabolic activity, but also transmit these signals to distant organs, including the liver. For example, small intestine signaling of the 
farnesoid X receptor (FXR), an essential regulator of bile acid, lipid, and glucose metabolism, is 
modulated through gut microbiome-dependent metabolism of bile acid metabolites produced in the 
liver. Additionally, studies of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a xenobiotic sensor, have revealed 
microbial metabolites derived from dietary nutrients including tryptophan as critical regulators of both intestinal and hepatic inflammation. Dissection of the host-metabolite-microbiome interaction was facilitated by use of transgenic mouse models, host and microbiome sequencing, and mass spectrometry- and NMR-based metabolomics. Identification and characterization of microbial 
metabolites and their relationship with host receptors will provide new avenues for studying host­
microbiota communication networks and identifying new therapeutics to modulate this interaction in 
human disease. 
-29­ 
       
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
   
 
   
     
 
 Gap: Understanding of the full repertoire of metabolites produced and/or modified by the microbiota is 
limited. Identification of microbial products by mass spectrometry- and NMR-based analytical chemistry 
and functional characterizati on—for example, ligand binding assays —could illuminate the host­
microbiome chemical dark matter. 
Diet, the Gut Microbiome, and its Metabolome as a Therapeutic Probe in IBD 
Gary D. Wu 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine' 
Despite its importance in maintaining the health of the host, growing evidence suggests the gut 
microbiota may also be an important factor in the pathogenesis of various diseases, a number of which have shown a rapid increase in incidence over the past few decades. In some of these diseases, such as 
IBD, the microbiota is “dysbiotic” with an altered community structure and decrease in diversity. If the 
dysbiotic microbiota plays a role in disease pathogenesis, interventions that modify its composition 
might be a strategy to treat certain disease processes. There is epidemiologic data associating diet with 
the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) as well as evidence that diet can influence both 
the form and function of the microbiome in a manner that impacts upon the development of intestinal 
inflammation. Based on this evidence, studies are now underway to examine the effect of defined 
formula diets (DFDs), an effective therapeutic modality in Crohn’s disease, on both the gut microbiome and its metabolome as a therapeutic probe with the hope of better defining the “healthy” diet in 
patients with IBD. Data will be presented from two human intervention studies, Pediatric Longitudinal 
Study of Elemental Diet and Stool Microbiota Composition (PLEASE) as well as Food And Resulting 
Microbial Metabolites (FARMM) designed with the intent of developing a systematic and integrated 
approach to alter the environment of the gut via diet and the gut microbiota to develop non­immunosuppressive modalities to treat IBD by engineering the environment of the gut. 
How Gut Bacteria Eat Your Veggies: Molecular Details of Glycan Scavenging at the Cell 
Surface 
Nicole Koropatkin 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan 
Mammalian gut-associated bacteria have a profound capacity for glycan degradation that greatly 
exceeds our own. While the human genome encodes 17 enzymes for the digestion of dietary 
carbohydrates, intestinal bacteria encode anywhere from several dozen to several hundreds of these 
glycoside hydrolases. The glycolytic potential of an individual species influences its adaptation to the 
intestinal tract and its responsiveness to dietary change. Beyond fiber processing, these bacteria need to 
recognize and import the liberated monosaccharides and oligosaccharides from the collective 
catabolism of the community. Glycan recognition occurs at the cell surface, and the fit between protein 
and carbohydrate structure is highly specific. Many gut bacteria encode a large suite of cell-surface proteins and transporters in order to successfully compete for carbohydrate nutrition within the 
constantly changing glycan landscape. This critical selection event dictates the ability of these organisms 
to eat and thrive in their environment, yet we know little about the molecular details of this process. A 
mechanistic understanding of how cell surface proteins facilitate carbohydrate acquisition can lead to 
novel strategies for specifically targeting individual gut bacteria in order change the community to 
-30­ 
     
 
     
   
   
 
   
    
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
   
  
    
 
 improve human health. The long-term goal of the Koropatkin lab is to understand the molecular events 
that support glycan utilization within the different major Phyla of bacteria in the human gut. We have 
spent the past several years elucidating the unique carbohydrate uptake systems used by the 
Bacteroidetes. The broad glycolytic potential of these organisms is packaged into discrete polysaccharide utilization loci (PUL) that encode the necessary machinery for the degradation and 
import of a distinct glycan structure. PUL-encoded protein complexes are referred to as starch utilization 
(Sus)-like systems and all are comprised of a putative TonB-dependent transporter and two classes of carbohydrate-binding proteins: the SusD-like proteins and the surface glycan-binding lipoproteins (SGBPs). Much of our work with the complexes for the acquisition of starch and xyloglucan has revealed that the interactions of the glycan-binding proteins with the TonB-dependent transporter are more 
important than their ability to bind glycan. Moreover, single-molecule imaging of individual Sus-like 
proteins suggests that these proteins dynamically assemble at the cell surface during the catabolism of large polysaccharides. Beyond the Bacteroidetes, we are also working towards a molecular understanding of how specific Gram-positive members of the community are capable of degrading resistant starch, a highly beneficial dietary fiber that elicits enhanced butyrate which suppresses 
inflammation and tumorigenesis. Moving forward with our work, a critical need will be improved 
methodology for the detection and isolation of carbohydrate structures within the gut environment. The 
complexity of carbohydrate structures and their unique chemistries is a barrier for the development of high-throughput and user-friendly technologies such as those that ha ve allowed the ‘omics revolution to 
flourish. With enhanced glycobiology tools, we will be better equipped to not only track the carbohydrate landscape of the gut, but also study the specific protein-carbohydrate interactions that 
allow our gut symbionts to thrive in the intestine. 
Testing Diet-Gut Microbiome Interactions: Use of Controlled Feeding Studies in Humans 
Johanna W. Lampe 
Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
Diet is a complex environmental exposure. Increasingly, the importance of diet-gut microbiome 
interactions in relation to health are being recognized. Diet can influence the relative abundance and activity of microbes present in the gut, and gut microbial metabolism of dietary constituents produce s 
compounds that may have positive or adverse effects on risk for disease. The human gut microbiome 
responds rapidly to changes in diet composition, which provides the opportunity to use experimental 
studies in humans to examine the effects of diet on gut microbial community structure and activity and downstream effects on biomarkers of health and disease. Controlled feeding studies can be designed to evaluate the effects of a single nutrient or bioactive, individual foods, or dietary patterns on biomarkers or end-points of interest. Using a controlled feeding study to test a single dietary constituent or food 
against a standardized background diet helps to reduce variability. Feeding studies are usually 
conducted using parallel-arm or randomized crossover designs. Given the high degree of interindividual 
variation in gut microbial structure and functional capacity, a crossover design —where each individual 
serves as their own control —lends itself well to studying diet-gut microbiome interactions because the 
measured effect of the intervention is the difference in an individual participant’s response to 
intervention and control. A crossover design is also useful in controlling for variability associated with 
responders and non-responders; differences in gut microbial metabolism of dietary constituents can 
contribute to substantial differences in circulating levels of bioactive metabolites and ultimately biologic 
response across individuals. Examples of application of controlled feeding study designs to research on 
diet-gut microbiome interactions will be presented. 
-31­ 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
  
  
 
   
   Needs: Comprehensive, well-annotated metabolomics platforms that capture endogenous and 
exogenous compounds and their bacterial metabolites will facilitate interpretation of experimental 
studies of diet and the gut microbiome in humans. 
Supported by R01 CA192222, U01 CA162077, U01 CA161809, and P01 CA168530. 
Efforts to Understand Causation in Microbiota-Host Interaction: Two Examples 
Andrew Goodman 
Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale University 
I will review our recent efforts to understand the consequences of microbiome variation. We are 
developing new approaches to control commensal gene expression inside the gut of living animals, 
which may present new opportunities to explore how dose-response and timing impact host-microbiota 
interactions. I will also describe our collaborative projects to understand how products of microbial 
metabolism impact host physiology. 
Bile Acid-Microbiota Cross-Talk and Its Effects on Liver Cancer 
Wei Jia 
Cancer Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii Cancer Center 
Emerging evidence points to a strong association between the gut microbiota and the risk, development 
and progression of gastrointestinal cancers such as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Bile acids are 
produced in the liver and metabolized by enzymes derived from intestinal bacteria, and are critically 
important for maintenance of a healthy gut microbiota, balanced lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, 
insulin sensitivity and innate immunity. Given the complexity of bile acid signaling and the direct 
biochemical interactions between the gut microbiota and the host, a systems biology perspective is required to understand the liver –bile acid–microbiota axis and its role in gastrointestinal carcinogenesis 
in order to reverse the microbiota-mediated alterations in bile acid metabolism that occur in disease states. Here we demonstrated that bile acids can activate proliferation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), 
which is a critical step in the liver fibrogenetic process, which in turn, may further lead to liver 
carcinogenesis. Our results showed that liver fibrosis was in direct association with significantly increased reabsorbed, hydrophobic bile acids in blood serum of 725 biopsy-confirm liver fibrosis patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection and in liver and serum of a streptozotocin-high fat diet 
(STZ-HFD) induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis-hepatocellular carcinoma (NASH-HCC) model mice. The 
gut microbiota alterations were closely correlated with altered bile acid levels in liver and feces in NASH­
HCC mice. HFD-induced inflammation inhibited key bile acid transporters, resulting in sustained 
increases in intrahepatic bile acid concentrations. Reabsorbed, hydrophobic bile acids, especially DCA, TDCA and GDCA treatment significantly increased the human normal HSCs (LX-2) proliferation and the 
expression of fibrosis- related markers including α -smooth muscle actin (α -SMA), transforming growth 
factor-beta (TGF-ß), collagen type I (COL-I) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) as well as TGR5. 
Enhancing intestinal excretion of hydrophobic bile acids in the NASH-HCC model mice by a 2% 
cholestyramine feeding prevented liver fibrogenesis as well as HCC development with significantly 
decreased expression of a-SMA, TGF-ß, COL-I , PDGF, TGR5 as well as the decreased activation of p38 MAPK, ERK1/2 signaling pathway within HSCs. Taken together, our results demonstrated that gut 
-32­ 
       
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
     
  
 
   
   
  
  
  
    microbiota-mediated intrahepatic accumulation of bile acids induces and sustains hepatocellular injury by HSC activation via a TGR5-dependent mechanism, leading to the development of liver fibrosis and 
HCC. Our study also highlights such novel strategy to target the gut microbiota-dependent alterations in 
bile acid metabolism in the context of the liver cancer prevention and therapy. 
Biofilms as a Risk Factor for Human Colon Cancer 
Cynthia L. Sears 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Biofilms form in humans at sites of chronic infection and inflammation. However, if and how they 
contribute to, and possibly augment, the clinical impact of chronic infections is unknown. In contrast, in healthy tissues including the gut, biofilms have been infrequently identified. In the gut, biofilms are 
characterized as dense (>10
9 bacteria/mm3) clusters of bacteria that invade the inner mucus layer of the 
colon, such that bacteria are in contact with the colonic epithelial cells. Recently, colon biofilms have 
been found in association with ~50% of colon tumors with a notable preponderance among tumors 
proximal to the hepatic flexure. Further, biofilm formation is not limited to tumors but rather, when 
present, biofilms appear to most likely be a feature of the entire colon, suggesting that biofilm 
formation on normal colonic tissue occurs before tumor initiation. In contrast, individuals undergoing 
screening colonoscopy display biofilms in ~10-15%. Preliminary data suggest biofilm formation is enhanced in prior or active smokers, known to have an increased risk of proximal colon cancer. Herein, 
the data supporting colon biofilm formation as a risk factor for colon cancer will be reviewed as will a 
vision of how biofilm detection may contribute to enhancing the success of screening colonoscopy as a colon cancer prevention tool. 
Role of the Lung Microbiome in Respiratory Health and Disease 
Gary B. Huffnagle 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Molecular Cell Dev Biology, Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center, University of Michigan 
Chronic bacterial colonization in respiratory diseases has been traditionally evaluated by cultivation-
based methods using sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, with the magnitude and type of 
organisms varying widely. It is now appreciated that the lung harbors viable bacteria during health ( “the 
lung microbiome ”) and the lung microbiome during disease is distinct from that observed in healthy 
individuals. Notably, the magnitude of these changes is not captured by standard culture techniques. A 
major challenge for the study of the lung microbiome has been (and will likely always be) the fact that 
lower airway sampling is highly invasive and not amenable to serial sampling over time. Unlike studies of the gastrointestinal tract, culture-independent analyses of the airways have not identified significant 
numbers of routinely unculturable bacteria. Rather, these studies implicate the existence of culturable 
bacterial species, such as Pseudomonas spp. This raises the first question : do these microbes go through 
cycles of culturability and “unculturability ” during disease? If so, this would reflect (1) a change in the 
nutritional environment of the lungs, (2) adaptation to host defenses and (3) a change in the metabolic 
activity of the bacteria. Thus, the second question is “what are these changes in the lung nutrient 
environment? ” More recently, studies have begun to support the concept that host-derived factors 
during inflammation may be a driving force for adaptation and metabolic shifts in bacteria within the 
-33­ 
     
  
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  microbiome of many body sites; the end result being the emergence of pathogenic strains from 
otherwise non-pathogenic bacterial-epithelial biofilms. The major question for this line of investigation 
is “are changes in the lung microbiome the cause of airway inflammation, the effect of inflammatory 
processes or both ?” In cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, interstitial pulmonary 
fibrosis and asthma, questions remain about the mechanism(s) underlying the persistent 
inflammatory/immune response, with several theories advanced, including a role for low-grade 
microbial infection in perpetuating inflammation. For example, bacterial products/metabolites are 
implicated in airway mucus hypersecretion, the major characteristic of chronic bronchitis. Our over­
arching hypothesis is that inflammation changes the lung environment, which in turn, changes the lung bacterial microbiome (favoring the growth of specific species of Gammaproteobacteria), thereby creating a self-reinforcing cycle of inflammation. 
Keynote III: Microbiome Interventions: From Fecal Transplants to Synthetic Microbial 
Therapeutics 
Eric Alm 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Fecal transplantation is already in widespread use for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, and 
numerous research studies are underway for many other diseases. I will explore the mechanism of fecal transplantation using genomic assays, and discuss efforts to create a next-generation of microbial 
therapeutics based on synthetic microbial cultures. 
Towards a Metagenomic Basis of Therapeutics 
Peter Turnbaugh 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco 
Although the importance of human genetic polymorphisms in therapeutic outcomes is well established, 
the role of our “ second genome ” (the microbiome) has been largely overlooked. I will briefly highlight 
notable studies conducted over the past 5-10 years that have shed light on the mechanisms that link the human gut microbiome to the efficacy and toxicity of xenobiotics, including drugs, dietary compounds and environmental toxins. The challenges are immense, requiring inter-disciplinary scientific teams 
working at the interface of chemistry and microbiome research, and a consideration of far more 
variables than traditionally included in pharmacological models. However, the potential benefits are 
inspiring. Continued progress in this area could enable more precise tools for predicting patient 
responses and for the development of a new generation of therapeutics based on, or targeted at, the 
gut microbiome. Indeed, the admirable goal of precision medicine may require us to first understand the 
microbial pharmacists within. 
-34­ 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
    
 
   
   
  
   
    
  
    
    
  
 
 
 
  Gut Microbial Metabolites and Cancer Prevention 
Scott J. Bultman 
Department of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Gut microbiota have a prodigious metabolic capacity and convert dietary factors and digestive 
components into oncometabolites and tumor-suppressive metabolites that influence cancer risk. Our lab is particularly interested in butyrate, which is a short-chain fatty acid produced by bacterial 
fermentation of dietary fiber. Butyrate is noteworthy because it has energetic and epigenetic functions 
in colonocytes and tumor-suppressive properties in colorectal cancer cell lines. We utilized gnotobiotic mouse models of colorectal cancer colonized with wild-type or mutant strains of a butyrate-producing bacterium to demonstrate that fiber does have a tumor-suppressive effect but in a microbiota- and butyrate-dependent manner. Furthermore, due to the Warburg effect, butyrate was metabolized less in 
tumors where it accumulated and functioned as an HDAC inhibitor to stimulate histone acetylation and 
affect cell proliferation and apoptosis. To support the relevance of this mechanism in human cancer, we 
demonstrated that butyrate and histone acetylation levels are elevated in colorectal adenocarcinomas compared to normal colonic tissues. These studies highlight several challenges and opportunities for microbiome research in general:  
	 More non-targeted metabolomics: Dysbiosis is often associated with different microbiota that have 
equivalent functions due, in part, to the production of common metabolites associated with a 
disease state. 
	 Pleiotropic metabolites and multiple mechanisms: Understanding the mode of action will b e 
challenging for some metabolites. For example, butyrate is an energy source, epigenetic regulator, and signaling factor that exerts cell autonomous effects within cancer cells while also regulating gut 
barrier function and the induction of Treg cells. 
	 Organotypic tissue constructs co-cultured with microbiota: Due to limitations of gnotobiotic mouse 
models, there is a need for improved human organoid platforms that can be efficiently co-cultured 
with microbiota. To probe relevant host-microbe interactions in the gut, it will be necessary to deliver a sharp oxygen gradient to maintain a normoxic intestinal crypt juxtaposed with obligate anaerobes. 
	 Combinatorial human studies: Human prospective-cohort studies that evaluate diet could 
potentially be made more reproducible by integrating them with microbiome and GWAS or exome 
sequencing. For example, a high-fiber diet may protect against a subset of individuals who share a 
certain combination of microbiota and genetic variants. Dietary interventions are expected to be mutually beneficial for microbiome and genetic research. 
-35­ 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
   
 
  
   
 Microbiomes and Phenotypes: Impact, Restoration and Transfer 
Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello 
Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine 
Microbiont bacteria have coevolved with their hosts, and are tolerated by the host immune system, 
playing a role in healthy development. Humans are experiencing increasing urbanization with increasing incidences of immune and metabolic disorders (asthma, T1D, allergies, obesity) with a concomitant reduction in their gut microbiota diversity. 
C-sections and early antibiotic exposure increase the risk of these urban associated diseases and the 
challenge remains to restore after microbiota-impacting interventions to rescue normal phenotypes and prevent disease. A rational use of medical practices that disturb the microbiota, together with restoration are urgently needed to arrest and prevent the current disease trend. 
Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation: Clinical Outcomes, Intestinal 
Bacteria, and Potential Mechanisms 
Robert Jenq 
Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Common complications of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation have long been known to 
be linked with intestinal commensal bacteria and use of antibiotics, in particular outcomes including 
neutropenic fever and intestinal graft-versus-host disease. Characterization of the intestinal microbiome 
in patients and animal models has revealed new insights into this relationship. Developing approaches 
to target the microbiome in the allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant population represents a 
new opportunity to improve patient outcomes for this important treatment modality. 
Microbiota-Mediated Defense Against Antibiotic- Resistant Infections 
Eric G. Pamer 
Division of Subspeciality Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
Infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria generally begin with colonization of mucosal surfaces, 
in particular the intestinal epithelium. The intestinal microbiota provides resistance to infection with 
highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria, including Vancomycin Resistant Enterococcus (VRE), Klebsiella 
pneumoniae and Clostridium difficile , the major cause of hospitalization-associated diarrhea. 
Metagenomic sequencing of the murine and human microbiota following treatment with different 
antibiotics is beginning to identify bacterial taxa that are associated with resistance to Vancomycin 
resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE) and Clostridium difficile infection. By treating mice with different 
antibiotics that result in distinct microbiota changes and lead to varied susceptibility to C. difficile, we 
correlated loss of specific bacterial taxa with development of infection. Using a workflow involving 
mouse models, clinical studies, metagenomic analyses and mathematical modeling, we identified a 
probiotic candidate that corrects the microbiome deficiency responsible for susceptibility to C. difficile 
infection. Using a similar strategy, we demonstrated that oxygen-tolerant members of the microbiota 
-36­ 
     
 
    
  
  
   
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
    
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
   
 
   
  
 
   are ineffective at eliminating VRE while administration of obligate anaerobic commensal bacteria to 
mice results in a billion-fold reduction in the density of intestinal VRE colonization. We have identified 
specific bacterial species, including Blautia producta and Clostridium bolteae, that prevent intestinal 
colonization with VRE and lead to its clearance from the gut. Our studies indicate that obligate 
anaerobic bacteria that can be retrieved from the commensal microbiota enable clearance of intestinal 
VRE colonization and provide resistance to C. difficile infection. These bacterial species may provide 
novel approaches to prevent the spread of highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria. A critical gap for this field 
is the incomplete representation and characterization of human-microbiota-derived commensal bacterial species in publically accessible bio-repositories. 
Engineering Biological Computers for Human Health Applications 
Timothy Lu 
Synthetic Biology Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Department of 
Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Over the last 50 years, exponential increases in our ability to manipulate electrons and engineer 
electronic systems spawned the information technology revolution. Similarly rapid improvements in 
technologies for reading and writing DNA are now transforming our capacity to engineer biological 
systems. Leveraging these technologies, synthetic biology is an emerging discipline for designing 
biological systems with novel functionalities. This field has opened up new strategies for interrogating and understanding biology, as well as for diagnosing and treating human diseases. I will discuss several relevant examples where we have created digital and analog synthetic gene circuits for sophisticated 
sense-and-respond behaviors, as well as genomically encoded memory devices. We are advancing 
synthetic gene circuits into multiple microbial chassis for the ultimate goal of microbiome engineering. 
Connecting the Gut Microbiome and Cancer Through Circadian Rhythms 
Eugene B. Chang 
Department of Medicine and Microbiome Medicine Program of the University of Chicago 
Circadian rhythms (CR) are essential for most life forms, regulating behavioral, physiological, genetic, 
and metabolic functions. Disruption of CR by western type diets, sleep disruption, and lifestyle changes that are often associated with the development of obesity and type II diabetes can dramatically alter tissue homeostasis by perturbing energy balance, DNA repair mechanisms, and cell growth and 
differentiation to promote cancer initiation and progression. Recently, several reports have shown a 
potential role of the gut microbiome in cancer development, although there is a large gap in our 
understanding of mechanisms and mediators underlying these actions. The need and challenge is to 
develop better experimental systems to study the gut microbiome in a more physiological and disease context. Traditionally, the belief has been that circadian clocks and downstream targets are primarily 
driven by light and dark visual cues received by the suprachiasmatic nucleus. However, we showed an 
additional key element involved in maintaining host circadian rhythms, the gut microbiome, which 
potentially links cancer, diet-induced obesity, and the gut microbiome. Despite persistence of light-dark 
signals, germ-free mice fed low or high-fat diets exhibit markedly impaired central and hepatic circadian 
clock gene expression and do not gain weight compared to conventionally raised counterparts. Examination of gut microbiota in conventionally raised mice showed differential diurnal variation in 
-37­ 
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 microbial structure and function dependent upon dietary composition. Additionally, specific microbial 
metabolites induced under low- or high-fat feeding, particularly short-chain fatty acids, but not 
hydrogen sulfide, directly modulate circadian clock gene expression within hepatocytes. These results 
underscore the ability of microbial-derived metabolites to regulate or modify central and hepatic circadian rhythm and host metabolic function. These findings therefore provide additional insights into 
how western diets that cause gut dysbiosis, loss of microbial drivers and signals, and disruption of host 
circadian rhythms can potentially contribute to the cancer initiation and progression. They also suggest that microbiome-derived interventions to restore host circadian rhythms can be used to decrease risk of obesity and cancer. 
-38­ 
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
    
    
      
    
   
 
  SPEAKER BIOSKETCHES
 
Eric Alm, Ph.D. 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Dr. Alm earned his b ̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ͇͋ͽι͋͋ ͕ιΪ΢ χ·͋ ΕΣΊϭ͋ινΊχϴ Ϊ͕ ͜ΜΜΊΣΪΊν at Urbana-Champaign, his m ̯νχ͋ι͛ν 
degree from the University of California, Riverside, and his Ph.D. degree from the University of 
Washington, Seattle. He held a postdoctoral appointment at the University of California, Berkeley, and 
the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory before joining the faculty at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. Dι΅ !Μ΢͛ s research group is an interdisciplinary team of computer scientists, computational 
biologists, molecular biologists, and microbial ecologists. 
Elhanan Borenstein, Ph.D. 
University of Washington and Santa Fe Institute 
Dr. Borenstein is an Associate Professor in the Department of Genome Sciences and an Adjunct 
Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of 
Washington and an External Professor at the Santa Fe Institute. His research takes a systems-level 
approach to developing computational models and tools to gain a better understanding of the structure and function of the microbiome. Dr. Borenstein received a ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in physics and computer 
science and a doctoral degree in computer science from Tel-Aviv University, Israel, and conducted 
postdoctoral work at Stanford University. 
Robert A. Britton, Ph.D. 
Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome 
Research, Baylor College of Medicine 
Dr. Britton is a Professor in the Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology and a member of 
the Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research at Baylor University ͛ν College of 
Medicine. He directs the Therapeutic Microbiology Laboratory that is focused on the use of microbes to 
prevent and treat human disease. Currently funded research projects in the laboratory range from the study of how traditional probiotic strains can ameliorate osteoporosis to how intestinal microbial communities resist invasion by the diarrheal pathogen Clostridium difficile . Dι΅ ιΊχχΪΣ͛ s laboratory has 
made several advances in the development of genetic and microbial growth platforms to aid in the understanding of how microbes promote health and disease. These include the development of 
precision genome engineering technologies for lactic acid bacteria and the development of human fecal 
minibioreactor arrays to study the function of microbial communities in a high-throughput manner. He received a ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ͇͋ͽι͋͋ in biology from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and a doctoral degree in 
cell and molecular biology from Baylor University College of Medicine. After performing postdoctoral 
training at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Britton started his own laboratory at Michigan 
State University. After rising to the rank of professor in 2014, he moved to his current position at the Baylor University College of Medicine. 
-39- 
      
 
  
 
 
  
    
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
       
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
   
   
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  Gregory A. Buck, Ph.D. 
Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia 
Commonwealth University 
Dr. Buck is a Professor of Microbiology and Immunology at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). He 
obtained his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in genetics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and his ΢̯νχ͋ι͛ν 
and doctoral degrees in microbiology and immunology from the University of Washington-Seattle 
studying the toxinogenic bacteriophages of Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Dr. Buck did postdoctoral 
research at the Institut Pasteur in Paris studying the genetics of antigenic variation in African 
trypanosomes and subsequently joined the faculty in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology 
at VCU. He founded and directs ΠΕ͛ν ͲϢ̽Μ͋Ί̽ !̽Ί͇ν ·͋ν̯͋ι̽· F̯̽ΊΜΊχΊ͋ν , Ϯ·Ί̽· ΢̯ΊΣχ̯ΊΣν ΠΕ͛ν Ͳ͋ϳχ 
Generation Sequencing infrastructure, and the Center for High Performance Computing, which provides ι͋ν̯͋ι̽· ̽Ϊ΢ζϢχΊΣͽ ̯̽ζ̯̽Ίχϴ χΪ ΠΕ͛ν ΊΣϭ͋νχΊͽ̯χΪιν΅ Dr. Buck founded the Center for the Study of 
Biological Complexity in 2000 under the umbrella of VCU Life Sciences and directed that unit until 2017. 
His recent work focuses on high-throughput microbial genomics and metagenomics, with a focus on 
ϮΪ΢͋Σ͛ν ·̯͋Μχ·΅ 
Scott J. Bultman, Ph.D. 
Department of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Dr. Bultman is interested in investigating the role of SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes in 
mammalian development and disease and the roles of dietary fiber, gut microflora, and epigenetic 
events that protect against colorectal cancer. 
Eugene B. Chang, M.D. 
Department of Medicine and Microbiome Medicine Program of the University of Chicago 
Dr. Chang is the Martin Boyer Chaired Professor in the Department of Medicine and Director of the 
Microbiome Medicine Program at the University of Chicago. His research focuses on host-microbe 
interactions that relate to states of health and disease. These studies fall into two primary areas: 
metabolic diseases (diet-induced obesity) and complex immune disorders (e.g., inflammatory bowel ͇Ίν̯͋ν͋ν)΅ ΕνΊΣͽ ̯ ̽Ϊ΢̼ΊΣ̯χΊΪΣ Ϊ͕ ·Ϊ΢Ί̽ χ͋̽·ΣΪΜΪͽΊ͋ν΂ Σ͋Ϯ ͇̯χ̯ ν̽Ί͋Σ̽͋ ̯ζζιΪ̯̽·͋ν΂ ̯Σ͇ ͽΣΪχΪ̼ΊΪχΊ̽ mouse models, Dr. Chang has been examining the role and effects of dietary and environmental factors 
χ·̯χ ζιΪ΢Ϊχ͋ ιΊνΙ ͕Ϊι ͞ W͋νχ͋ιΣ͟ ̽ϢΜχϢι͋ -related diseases (i.e., disorders that were uncommon or rare a 
century ago but are now occurring with alarming frequency) . He received his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree from the 
Johns Hopkins University and his M.D. degree from the University of Chicago where he also completed 
his training in internal medicine and gastroenterology. 
-40- 
    
 
    
 
    
  
  
  
    
   
  
 
   
 
 
    
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
      
 
 
   
  
   
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
  
 
    Mildred Cho, Ph.D.  
Center for Biomedical Ethics and Professor, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Stanford University 
Dr. Cho is a Professor in the Division of Genetics of ΋χ̯Σ͕Ϊι͇͛ν Department of Pediatrics. For the past 10 
years she has been the Principal Investigator of an NIH-funded Center for Excellence in Ethical, Legal, 
and Social Implications Research and established the Center for Integration of Research on Genetics and 
Ethics. As Director of this Center, Dr. Cho has led a number of research groups that are conducting studies to identify the ethical issues associated with the translation of biomedical research to clinical application. Th is research aims to inform research policy and public health policy on the translation of 
biomedical research into clinical practice and training. She also has conducted interdisciplinary normative and empirical work on research ethics topics, including ethical issues arising from new biomedical technologies, the impact of intellectual property policy and financial conflicts of interest on biomedical research (in particular on genetic testing and research), ethical issues in genetic and genomic research and clinical application, and patient and professional attitudes toward comparative 
effectiveness research. A major portion of Dι΅ ·Ϊ͛ν recent work has focused on the ethical issues raised 
by biobanking, precision health research, and the use of clinically derived data and biosamples in racially 
and ethnically diverse populations. 
Gautam Dantas, Ph.D. 
Departments of Pathology and Immunology, Biomedical Engineering and Molecular Microbiology, Center 
for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Dr. Dantas is an Associate Professor in the Department of Pathology and Immunology, the Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, and the Department of Molecular Microbiology in the School of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis. His research interests are at the interface of microbial genomics, 
biochemistry, systems biology, and computational biology to understand, harness, and engineer the 
biochemical processing potential of microbial communities. Dr. Dantas ͛ group current ly focuses on 
(1) understanding the evolution and exchange of antibiotic resistance amongst diverse microbial 
communities, (2) systems-guided design of novel antibiotic and probiotic therapies, and (3) engineering microbial catalysts to produce value chemicals such as biofuels. He received a ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in 
biology and chemistry from Macalester College , his doctoral degree in biochemistry from the University 
of Washington under the mentorship of David Baker, and postdoctoral training in microbial genomics 
from Harvard Medical School under the mentorship of George Church. In 2009 Dr. Dantas joined the 
Department of Pathology and Immunology at the Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis as 
Assistant Professor. 
Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello, Ph.D. 
Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine 
Dr. Dominguez- ͋ΜΜΪ͛ν research has focused for the past years on the microbiota function in vertebrate 
animals and human beings; microbiota development and the impact of modern practices; and 
integrating data from microbiology, genomics/metagenomics, ecology, physiology, anthropology, 
architecture, environmental engineering, and biostatistics to address broad questions on host-microbial 
interactions in different environments. The focus is on how these interactions drive microbial evolution, 
diversity, and symbiosis. She studies the bacterial microbiota in vertebrates, including birds and 
-41- 
     
   
     
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
     
  
   
   
 
 
   
    
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  mammals and has led studies usi ng Nextgen sequencing of the human microbiome in people with 
different levels of integration into Western lifestyles in the Amazon region and southern Africa. Dr. 
Dominguez- ͋ΜΜΪ͛ν ͽιΪϢζ is a strong team of collaborators that include, among others, Rob Knight 
(University of Colorado), Jeff Gordon (Washington University), Martin Blaser (New York University), 
Suzanne Tringe (U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute), Gary Andersen (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), Monica Contreras (Venezuelan Inst Sci Research-IVIC), Magda Magris (Amazonic 
Center for Research In Tropical Diseases , CAICET, Venezuela), Jean Hernandez (INS Loreto, Iquitos, Peru), 
and Henrique Pereira (University Federal Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil). 
Sharon M. Donovan, Ph.D., R.D. 
Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Dr. Donovan is the Melissa M. Noel Endowed Professor of Nutrition and Health in the Department of 
Food Science and Human Nutrition, Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. Her research focuses on how dietary intake influences neonatal development in human 
infants. For over 20 years, her laboratory has utilized the piglet model to study how early-life nutrition 
shapes immune, gut, cognitive, and microbiome development. Dr. Donovan also uses the piglet to model diarrhea diseases, total parenteral nutrition-induced gut atrophy, and colitis to evaluate 
nutritional and probiotic strategies to prevent and ameliorate detrimental effects of early-life insults. Dr. 
Donovan is now evaluating how human milk oligosaccharides and other dietary prebiotics regulate the 
intestinal microbiome and metagenome. She received her ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ͇͋ͽι͋͋ in nutrition science and her 
doctoral degree in nutrition from the University of California, Davis, followed by postdoctoral work in 
pediatric endocrinology at the Stanford University School of Medicine. 
Pieter Dorrestein, Ph.D. 
Departments of Pharmacology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego 
Dr. Dorrestein is a Professor at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) . He is trained as a chemist 
with a focus on understanding how microbes make amino acids, vitamins, and other small molecules 
such as virulence factors, quorum sensors, and therapeutically valuable natural products. Dr. Dorrestein is Director of the Collaborative Mass Spectrometry Innovation Center and a Co-Director of the Institute 
for Metabolomics Medicine in the Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Department of Pharmacology and Pediatrics. Since his arrival at UCSD in 2006, he has been pioneering 
the development of mass spectrometry methods to study the chemical/ecological crosstalk between 
populations of microorganisms, including host interactions, for agricultural, diagnostic, clinical, and therapeutic applications. For a more detailed biography see http://www.nature.com/news/the-man -
who-can-map-the-chemicals-all-over-your-body-1.20035. 
-42- 
    
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
   
    
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
    
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
   
  Angela Douglas, Ph.D. 
Department of Entomology and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University 
Dr. Douglas is the Daljit S. and Elaine Sarkaria Professor of Insect Physiology and Toxicology, Department 
of Entomology, Cornell University, where her research goal is to understand how resident microorganisms shape host nutritional health. Her research combines genetic and genomic approaches with physiological analyses to investigate the host-microbial interactions that promote (and occasionally impair) nutritional health at the level of the GI tract and whole animal. Dr. Douglas studies the 
Drosophila -gut microbiota model and associations involving bacteria that are subject to genomic 
deterioration. Her laboratory combines genome- and metagenome-based strategies (whole-genome 
sequencing, genotyping- by-sequencing, GWAS, and metagenome shotgun sequencing), and metabolic 
approaches to understand nutritional interactions with the host. She received her ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ͇͋ͽι͋͋ in 
zoology from Oxford University (UK) and her doctoral degree in microbiology from Aberdeen University 
(UK), followed by postdoctoral work in biological sciences at both Oxford and the University of East 
Anglia (UK). 
Andrew Gewirtz Ph.D. 
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Georgia State University 
Dr. Gewirtz received his doctoral degree in biochemistry from the Boston University School of Medicine 
in 1996. He is now a professor at Georgia State University. Dr. Gewirtz specialized in research on innate 
immunity, microbiome, intestinal inflammation, and obesity/diabetes. Inflammation plays a central role 
in many disease states, and his goal is to understand the normal mechanisms by which proinflammatory 
signals protect against microbes and discern how they go awry in disease states. The primary area of focus is the intestinal epithelium, one of human beings͛ major interfaces with the outside world. This 
interface is very heavily colonized with g ram-negative bacteria and yet permits absorption of life-
sustaining nutrients while protecting the tissues below from microbial onslaught. In addition to serving as a highly selective barrier, the intestinal epithelium regulates the microbial and immunological communities in its midst. Specifically, the epithelia shape the composition and locale of intestinal bacteria by producing antimicrobial substances and recruiting immune cells to efficiently clear bacteria 
that disturb equilibrium in the intestine. These pathways can go awry and result in chronic inflammation 
Ί͕ χ·͋ ΊΣχ͋νχΊΣ͋ ͞ΊΣ·͋ιΊχν͟ ̯Σ ̯̼͋ιι̯Σχ ΢Ί̽ιΪ̼Ί̯ l community and/or immune dysfunction. 
Mahmoud Ghannoum, Ph.D., M.B.A. 
Case Western Reserve University and University Hospital Cleveland Medical Center 
Dr. Ghannoum received his master of science degree in medicinal chemistry and his doctoral degree in 
microbial physiology from the University of Technology in England and his master of business administration degree from the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) . He is a tenured Professor and Director of the Ρ·Ε͛ν Center for Medical Mycology 
and University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, where he established a multidisciplinary Center of Excellence that combines basic and translational research investigating microbes from the test tube to 
the bedside. Dr. Ghannoum is also a fellow of the Infectious Diseases Society of America and past 
President of the Medical Mycological Society of the Americas (MMSA). In 2016 he received the R hoda 
Benham Award for his continuous outstanding and meritorious contributions to medical mycology from 
-43- 
        
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
  
     
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
    
  
 
      MMSA and the Freedom to Discover Award from Bristol-Myers Squibb for his work on microbial 
biofilms. In 2017 Dr. Ghannoum was inducted as a fellow of the American Academy of Microbiology. 
Andrew Goodman, Ph.D.  
Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale University 
Dr. Goodman is an Associate Professor in the Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Microbial 
Sciences Institute at Yale University. His laboratory works to understand the mechanisms of cooperation 
and competition in the gut microbiome and how gut microbiome variation impacts drug metabolism. 
Jeffrey I. Gordon, M.D. 
Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, and Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition 
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Dr. Gordon is the Dr. Robert J. Glaser Distinguished University Professor and Director of both the Center 
for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology1 and the Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition Research at the Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis. He is one of the founding figures of human 
microbiome research, whose lab has made many pivotal contributions to our understanding of the role 
of the microbiome in obesity and malnutrition over the past 20 years. Dι΅ GΪι͇ΪΣ͛ s lab has pioneered 
the use of gnotobiotic animals for demonstrating causal roles for the microbiome in obesity and malnutrition and for studying nutrient-microbe-host interactions, opening the possibility of 
microbiologically informed dietary interventions to treat these disorders. His lab has developed many 
methods for manipulating the microbiome and analyzing its activities, which have been widely adopted throughout the human microbiome research community. Dr. Gordon received his A.B. degree from 
Oberlin College, his M.D. degree from the University of Chicago, and postdoctoral training in the 
Laboratory of Biochemistry at the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH). He 
completed a fellowship in gastroenterology at the Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
and has subsequently spent his entire academic career there. 
Gary B. Huffnagle, Ph.D. 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Molecular Cell Dev Biology, Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center, University of Michigan 
The overall goals of Dr. HϢ͕͕Σ̯ͽΜ͋͛ν current research are to identify and delineate the interactions 
between the microbiome (lung and gut) and the immune system. Using animal models, clinical samples, 
and in vitro assays, his group is investigating host-microbiome interactions in the control of pulmonary 
inflammation, allergic responses, and infectious disease. This requires an interdisciplinary approach that combines research in pathophysiology, immunology, microbiology, microbial ecology, and computational biology. The first two decades of Dι΅ HϢ͕͕Σ̯ͽΜ͋͛ν research career were dedicated to 
understanding the mechanisms underlying how the immune system eliminates microbes from the lungs 
and other mucosal sites. In the past 10 years, his laboratory brought in new technologies and 
approaches to address the biology of the microbiome and its interplay with the immune system. He is 
also the Chair of the intercollege, interdepartmental undergraduate microbiology program at the 
University of Michigan and teaches courses in microbial pathogenesis, bacteriology, and microbial 
-44- 
     
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
  
 genomics. Dι΅ HϢ͕͕Σ̯ͽΜ͋͛ν Μ̯̼͛ν ̽ urrent projects include studies of host-microbiome interactions in both 
mouse models of inflammation/disease and in human disease. 
Curtis Huttenhower, Ph.D. 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and Broad Institute 
Dr. Huttenhower is an Associate Professor of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics at the T.H. Chan 
Harvard School of Public Health and an Associate Member at the Broad Institute. He was an analysis 
lead in the NIH Human Microbiome Project and currently co-leads the ͞HMP2͟ Center for Characterizing 
the Gut Microbial Ecosystem in Inflammatory Bowel Disease and directs the T.H. Chan Harvard School of 
Public Health ͛ν Microbiome Analysis Core. Dι΅ HϢχχ͋Σ·ΪϮ͋ι͛ s lab focuses on computational methods for 
functional analysis of microbial communities, as well as microbiome epidemiology to link microbial community function to public health. This includes systems biology reconstructions integrating 
metagenomic, metatranscriptomic, and other microbial community 'omics; the human microbiome in 
autoimmune disease such as inflammatory bowel disease; and its potential as a diagnostic tool and 
point of therapeutic intervention. 
Robert Jenq, M.D. 
Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Dr. Jenq received his M.D. degree from Oregon Health & Science University and completed his clinical 
training in internal medicine and medical oncology at Duke University and Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center. He is an Assistant Professor at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in the Departments of Genomic Medicine and Stem Cell Transplantation. Dι΅ ͧ͋Σθ͛ s research aims to 
improve outcomes for patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplantation, with a particular focus on the intestinal microbiota and how changes in the composition of intestinal bacterial commensals can 
impact on clinical outcomes. He has published more than 20 manuscripts on this topic since 2010, 
including 5 first/last-author primary manuscripts. 
Wei Jia, Ph.D. 
Cancer Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii Cancer Center 
Dr. Jia is a Professor and member in the Cancer Epidemiology Program at the University of Hawaii 
Cancer Center (UHCC) . His research interest involves carbon source metabolism and its regulation in 
cancer cells as well as the molecular mechanisms that link metabolic disruptions in gut microbial-host 
co-metabolism to metabolic disorders and gastrointestinal cancer. Several research projects are being 
conducted in Dr. Jia's group to decipher the complex metabolic interactions in gut-liver-brain axis and 
regulation of cancer cell metabolism. In addition, he directs a well-recognized metabolomics laboratory 
(currently as one of the UHCC shared resources). Over the past 13 years, Dι΅ ͧΊ̯͛ s lab has developed 
many metabolomics technologies and protocols, focusing on the quantitative analysis of endogenous 
small-molecule metabolites and trace elements from biological specimens including blood, urine, saliva, 
and tissues of experimental animals and human subjects. Many of these technologies have been applied 
in clinical and translational research, involving (1) unbiased metabolic profiling and data mining, 
metabolite annotation and biological interpretation using combined high-sensitivity, high-throughput 
-45- 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
    
  
    
  
   
   
  
 
 
   
    
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
  
   
 
    
   
 
 
  LC-MS-MS and GC-MS platforms; (2) targeted and quantitative analysis of metabolic rates and pathways 
using isotope-labeled common substrates such as glucose and cholate; (3) classification and prediction 
of disease phenotypes based on their unique metabolic signatures and biomarkers for patient 
stratification and personalized treatment; and (4) novel methodologies to delineate the host-gut microbe co-metabolism of diets and multicomponent herbal medicines, such as polypharmacokinetics 
and gut microbial metabolomics. 
Rob Knight, Ph.D. 
Departments of Pediatrics, Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego 
Dr. Knight is the founding Director of the Center for Microbiome Innovation and Professor of Pediatrics 
and Computer Science and Engineering at University of California, San Diego. Before that, he was Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Computer Science in the BioFrontiers Institute of the 
University of Colorado Boulder, and an Howard Hughes Medical Institute Early Career Scientist. Dr. 
Knight is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and of the American 
Academy of Microbiology. In 2015 he received the Vilceck Prize in Creative Promise for the Life Sciences. Dr. Knight Ίν χ·͋ ̯Ϣχ·Ϊι Ϊ͕ ͞FΪΜΜΪϮ ΧΪϢι GϢχ΄ Α·͋ EΣΪι΢ΪϢν ͜΢ζ̯̽χ Ϊ͕ ΑΊΣϴ ͱΊ̽ιΪ̼͋ν͟ (΋Ί΢ΪΣ & ΋̽·Ϣνχ͋ι΂ 
2015) and ̽Ϊ̯Ϣχ·Ϊι Ϊ͕ ͞DΊιχ Ίν GΪΪ͇΄ Α·͋ !͇ϭ̯Σχ̯ͽ͋ Ϊ͕ G͋ι΢ν ͕Ϊι ΧΪϢι ·ΊΜ͇͛ν D͋ϭ͋ΜΪζΊΣͽ ͜΢΢ϢΣ͋ 
΋ϴνχ͋΢ (΋χ΅ ͱ̯ιχΊΣ͛ν ΄ι͋νν΂ 2017) . He spoke at TED in 2014. Dι΅ ͩΣΊͽ·χ͛ s lab has produced many of the 
software tools and laboratory techniques that enabled high-throughput microbiome science, including the QIIME pipeline (cited some 8,000 times as of this writing) and UniFrac (cited around 5,000 times). He is cofounder of the Earth Microbiome Project, the American Gut Project, and the company Biota, Inc., which uses DNA from microbes in the subsurface to guide oilfield decisions. Dι΅ ͩΣΊͽ·χ͛ s work has linked 
microbes to a range of health conditions including obesity and inflammatory bowel disease, has enhanced our understanding of microbes in environments ranging from the oceans to the tundra, and has made high-throughput sequencing techniques accessible to thousands of researchers around the 
world. He can be followed on Twitter (@knightlabnews) or on his website http://knightlab.ucsd.edu/. 
Nicole Koropatkin, Ph.D. 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan 
Dr. Koropatkin received her doctoral degree in biochemistry from the University of Wisconsin in 2004. 
Trained in structural enzymology in the lab of Hazel Holden, her graduate work focused on the enzymes involved in O -antigen deoxysugar biosynthesis in Salmonella typhi . After finishing her training, Dr. 
Koropatkin moved to the laboratory of Thomas Smith at the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center in St. 
Louis. She received a National Research Service Award to determine the structural basis for nitrate and 
bicarbonate discrimination within the ABC transport systems of Synechocystis PCC 6803 . After 
completing this study, Dr. Koropatkin teamed up with Eric Martens from the Jeffrey Gordon lab at Washington University, St. Louis to investigate the structures of the novel proteins encoded within Bacteroidetes polysaccharide utilization loci. In 2009 she moved to the University of Michigan Medical 
School to continue this work as a Research Assistant Professor. In January 2014 she moved into a 
tenure-track position as an Assistant Professor in the Microbiology and Immunology Department. The 
Koropatkin lab studies the structural biology of glycan capture by a variety of human gut bacteria. 
-46- 
       
 
  
 
   
    
  
    
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
        
    
  
    
 
     
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
   
   
  
    
   
   Johanna W. Lampe, Ph.D., R.D. 
Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
Dr. Lampe is a Full Member and Associate Director of the Public Health Sciences Division at Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCRC) and a Research Professor in the Department of 
Epidemiology at the University of Washington in Seattle. She received her doctoral degree in nutritional 
sciences, with a minor in biochemistry, from the University of Minnesota and trained as a postdoctoral fellow in epidemiology at the University of Minnesota before joining the faculty at FHCRC . Dι΅ ̯ͫ΢ζ͋͛ν 
research focuses on the effect of diet constituents on cancer susceptibility in humans and the effects of 
human and gut microbial genetic variation on response to diet. Her lab studies the modifying effects of 
the gut microbiome on phytochemical metabolism and disease risk. In 2014 Dr. Lampe received the American Society for Nutrition Mary Swartz Rose Senior Investigator Award for research on the safety and efficacy of bioactive compounds for human health. 
Timothy Lu, M.D., Ph.D. 
Synthetic Biology Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Department of 
Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Dr. Lu is an Associate Professor leading the Synthetic Biology Group in the Department of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Science and the Department of Biological Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) . He received his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ̯Σ d ΢̯νχ͋ι͛ν degrees in engineering from MIT , 
and his M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from the Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology Program. Dr. Lu is 
a core member of the MIT Synthetic Biology Center and a cofounder of multiple biotechnology companies innovating new diagnostic and therapeutic technologies for human health, including Sample6, Senti Biosciences, Synlogic, Eligo Bioscience, MBcure, and Engine Biosciences. His researc h 
focuses on engineering platforms for computing and memory in living cells and applying these to create adaptive medicines as next-generation cell and gene therapies for important human diseases. Dι΅ ͫϢ͛ s 
work also includes developing novel technology platforms to interrogate and correct diseased cell states. He is a recipient of the American Chemical S Ϊ̽Ί͋χϴ͛ν Synthetic Biology Young Investigator Award, 
the Biochemical Engineering Journal Young Investigator Award, the NIH New Innovator Award, the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers, and the Ellison Medical Foundation New Scholar in Aging Award, among others. 
Howard Ochman, Ph.D. 
Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin 
Dr. Ochman is a Professor in the Department of Integrative Biology at the University of Texas at Austin 
(UTA). Originally trained as a population geneticist at the University of Rochester, where he received his doctoral degree in 1984, technical advances in molecular biology prompted his switch to studying the organization and evolution of bacterial genomes, and for the past three decades, he has been investigating molecular evolution and the diversity of interactions among microbes. After a postdoctoral 
stint in the Department of Biochemistry at the University of California, Berkeley, Dr. Ochman worked as 
a research scientist on the Human Genome Project and in 1987 moved to Washington University, St. 
Louis to study the evolution of bacterial pathogenesis. Prior to joining the faculty at UTA, he held faculty 
-47- 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
     
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
      
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
      
 
   
 
  
  appointments at the University of Rochester (1991-1998), University of Arizona (1998-2010), and Yale University (2010-2013). 
Eric G. Pamer, M.D. 
Division of Subspeciality Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
Dr. Pamer received his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in biology in 1977 from Case Western Reserve University in 
Ohio. He later received his M.D. degree in 1982 from Case Western Reserve Medical School. Dr. Pamer 
heads the Division of Subspecialty Medicine at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center MSKCC), and his 
Μ̯̼Ϊι̯χΪιϴ͛ν ι͋ν̯͋ι̽· ͕͕͋Ϊιχν ·̯ϭ͋ ͕Ϊ̽Ϣν͇͋ on infections associated with cancer therapy. In particular, he 
has investigated the intestinal microbiota and its role in defense against infections caused by antibiotic-resistant pathogens such as Clostridium difficile , Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, and Klebsiella 
pneumonia. Dι΅ ΄̯΢͋ι͛ s group was the first to demonstrate that patients undergoing allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation experience dramatic changes in the composition of the 
intestinal microbiota, generally with drastic losses of a wide range of bacterial taxa associated with 
health, leaving the patient vulnerable to a wide range of pathogens. Recent studies from his group have demonstrated a marked increase in posttransplant mortality associated with loss of intestinal microbiota diversity. Dr. Pamer has established collaborations with the Computational Biology Program 
at MSKCC that enables his team to analyze 16S and metagenomic sequences obtained from murine 
intestinal samples and from human fecal samples. His team also collaborates with the Bone Marrow 
Transplant Service at Memorial Hospital and has obtained fecal samples from patients undergoing allo-HSCT. The Lucille Castori Center Molecular Microbiology Core Laboratory, of which he is a director, has developed an efficient and systematic approach to cataloging and extracting clinical and experimental 
samples, purifying and sequencing DNA, and performing analyses to compare the microbiota in different 
ν̯΢ζΜ͋ν ̯Σ͇ χΪ θϢ̯ΣχΊ͕ϴ ͇Ί͕͕͋ι͋Σ̽͋ν ΊΣ ΢Ί̽ιΪ̼ΊΪχ̯ ̽Ϊ΢ζΪνΊχΊΪΣ΅ ͱ΋ͩ͛ν ̽Ϊι e laboratories, clinical 
facilities, and clinical research infrastructure have enabled his team to develop an Institutional Review 
Board and a U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved randomized clinical trial to test the 
effectiveness of autologous fecal microbiota transplantation in preventing C. difficile colitis in patients 
following allo-HSCT. Dr. Pamer has mentored more than 30 postdoctoral fellows and 10 graduate students over the past 20 years and has extensive experience participating in graduate and clinical training programs. 
Andrew D. Patterson, Ph.D. 
Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, 
Pennsylvania State University 
Dr. Patterson is an Associate Professor of Molecular Toxicology at the Pennsylvania State University and 
is the Scientific Director of Metabolomics. He graduated from the joint NIH and George Washington 
University graduate partnerships program in 2006 and completed a postdoctoral fellowship as a 
Pharmacology Research Associate in the Laboratory of Metabolism under Dr. Frank Gonzalez at the 
National Cancer Institute in 2011. Dr. Patterson joined the Center for Molecular Toxicology and 
Carcinogenesis at Pennsylvania State University in 2011. He and his students, postdocs, and 
collaborators focus on understanding the host-metabolite-microbiota communication network , 
specifically how the manipulation of gut microbiota by diet and/or xenobiotics impacts host metabolites (e.g., bile acids, short-chain fatty acids), their metabolism, and how these co-metabolites interact with host nuclear/soluble receptors (e.g., farnesoid X receptor, aryl hydrocarbon receptor). The lab employs a 
-48- 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
   
    
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
      
     
  
   
   
 
     
 
  
   
    
   
 
 
 
  variety of tools, including nuclear magnetic resonance- and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics, genomics, and conventional and gnotobiotic transgenic mice, to facilitate its study of these pathways 
and understand their impact on human health and disease. 
Mary Ellen Perry, Ph.D. 
Office of Strategic Coordination, Office of the Director, NIH 
Dr. Perry is a Program Leader in the Office of Strategic Coordination (OSC) in the Office of the NIH 
Director. OSC is the home of the Common Fund, which supports trans-NIH programs that foster the 
missions of multiple Institutes and Centers by changing important paradigms, making critical discoveries, developing needed technologies, and disseminating the resulting products and knowledge. Dr. Perry provides guidance and oversight to Common Fund programs, which are managed directly by NIH Institute and Center staff members. She has been the Program Leader for the Human Microbiome 
Project since its inception in 2007. In addition, she helps lead the Science of Behavior Change Program, 
the Regulatory Science Program, and the Undiagnosed Disease Network. Dr. Perry received a ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν 
degree in animal science from the University of New Hampshire after which she pursued doctoral 
studies at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Following postdoctoral stints at the Imperial 
Cancer Research Fund (now part of Cancer Research, UK) and Princeton University, she established a 
cancer research program at the University of Wisconsin, reaching the rank of Associate Professor before 
moving to NIH, where for several years, she continued her research into the regulation of the p53 tumor 
suppressor while acting first as Program Director in the Division of Cancer Biology, National Cancer Institute, and later as Program Leader, OSC. 
Dana Philpott, Ph.D. 
Department of Immunology, University of Toronto 
Dr. Philpott is an Associate Professor in the Department of Immunology at the University of Toronto and 
co-director of the Host-Microbiome Research Network with the support of the Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation. She obtained her doctoral degree from the University of Toronto, where she studied host-
pathogen interactions, focusing on enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infection of epithelial cells. Dr. 
Philpott then completed postdoctoral work at the Institut Pasteur in Paris under the direction of Dr. 
Philippe Sansonetti and later became a group leader at t he Institut. She was recruited to Toronto in 
2006. The research focus in Dr. ΄·ΊΜζΪχχ͛ν Μ̯̼Ϊι̯χΪιϴ Ίν χΪ ϢΣ͇͋ινχ̯Σ͇ ·ΪϮ ͲΪ͇ -like receptors influence 
gut homeostasis and how this might impact infection and disease pathogenesis. A particular interest in 
χ·͋ Μ̯̼Ϊι̯χΪιϴ Ίν ϢΣ͇͋ινχ̯Σ͇ΊΣͽ ιΪ·Σ͛ν ͇Ίν̯͋ν͋ ζ̯χ·Ϊͽ͋Σ͋νΊν ̼ϴ νχϢ͇ϴΊΣͽ χ·͋ ͕ϢΣ̽ tion of genes that 
have been linked to the development of this disease, including NOD2 and ATG16L1, as well as their 
interplay with the gut microbiota. Dr. Philpott has over 150 publications, a number of them in high-
profile journals. Her discoveries include identification of the peptidoglycan ligands for NOD1 and NOD2 
(along with Dr. Gabriel Nunez), uncovering a role for NOD2 and ATG16L1 in bacterial autophagy, and regulation of NOD-driven inflammatory responses by ATG16L1. Dr. Philpott has received a number of 
awards for research, including the EMBO Young Investigator Award, a Howard Hughes International 
Scholar award, and the Canadian Association for Gastroenterology Young Investigator Award. Research 
in the Philpott laboratory is funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Natural Sciences and 
EΣͽΊΣ͋͋ιΊΣͽ ·͋ν̯͋ι̽· ΪϢΣ̽ΊΜ Ϊ͕ ̯Σ̯͇̯ ̯Σ͇ ̯ ͽι̯Σχ ͕ιΪ΢ ιΪ·Σ͛ν ̯Σ͇ ΪΜΊχΊν ̯Σ̯͇̯/Π͋ιχ͋ϳ 
Pharmaceuticals. 
-49- 
      
 
   
 
  
     
        
 
     
     
       
     
         
  
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
   
 
      
 
 
  
  Katherine S. Pollard, Ph.D. 
Gladstone Institutes and University of California, San Francisco 
Dr. Pollard is a Director and Senior Investigator at the Gladstone Institutes/University of California, San 
Francisco (UCSF). She received ͇Ϊ̽χΪι̯Μ ̯Σ͇ ΢̯νχ͋ι͛ν degrees from the University of California, Berkeley 
(UCB), Division of Biostatistics under the supervision of Mark van der Laan. Her research at UCB included 
developing computationally intensive statistical methods for the analysis of microarray data with applications in cancer biology. Dr. Pollard conducted postdoctoral research at UCB with Sandrine Dudoit, 
followed by a comparative genomics NIH Postdoctoral Fellowship in the labs of David Haussler and Todd 
Lowe in the Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering at the University of California, Santa Cruz. 
She was part of the Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium that published the sequence of the Chimp Genome, and she used this sequence to identify the fastest evolving regions in the human genome. In 2005 Dr. Pollard joined the faculty at the University of California, Davis, Genome Center and Department of Statistics. She moved to Gladstone/UCSF in fall 2008, where she directs an innovation 
hub that focuses on emerging technologies and informatics. 
John F. Rawls, Ph.D. 
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for the Genomics of Microbial Systems, 
Duke University School of Medicine 
Dr. Rawls is Associate Professor in the Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke 
University, where he uses multiple complementary approaches to understand how host-microbe 
interactions in the intestine regulate digestive physiology and energy balance. Using gnotobiotic, 
genetic, genomic, and in vivo imaging approaches, he examines how commensal microorganisms interact with vertebrate hosts to regulate their nutrition and immunity as well as the mechanisms 
underlying assembly of intestinal microbial communities. Dr. Rawls pioneered the use of gnotobiotic 
zebrafish to investigate the role of microorganisms in vertebrate biology and uses zebrafish and mice to 
investigate the bacterial signals and responsive host pathways that regulate host immunity, nutrition, 
and gene expression. He also uses the zebrafish system to investigate mechanisms underlying the formation and function of adipose tissues having established methods for in vivo imaging of zebrafish adipose tissues to explore the developmental and environmental processes regulating their growth and physiology. Dι΅ ·̯ϮΜν͛ complementary use of zebrafish and mice models key aspects of human 
physiology and pathophysiology to gain new insights into underlying mechanisms. He received his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν ͇͋ͽι͋͋ in biology from Emory University and his doctoral degree in developmental biology 
from Washington University, St. Louis followed there by postdoctoral work in gastroenterology and microbiology. 
-50- 
    
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
     
     
    
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
  
   
   
    
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
    
    
    
 
   
     
  
 
 Forest Rohwer, Ph.D. 
Department of Biology, San Diego State University 
Dr. Rohwer is a Professor in the Department of Biology at San Diego State University. He pioneered the 
use of metagenomics to characterize microbial ecology in coral reefs to investigate the role of microbes 
and viruses in coral reef health and disease. In addition, Dι΅ ·Ϊ·Ϯ͋ι͛ν lab is investigating the dynamics of 
bacteria, phage, and eukaryotic viruses using microbial transcriptomics and viral metagenomics in the 
respiratory tracts of individuals with and without cystic fibrosis. For his scientific contributions, he has received numerous awards, including the prestigious Young Investigators Award of the International 
Society of Microbial Ecology and the Marine Microbiology Initiative Investigator Award from the Gordon 
and Betty Moore Foundation. Dr. Rohwer received ·Ίν ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in biology, chemistry, and 
history from the College of Idaho and his doctoral degree in molecular biology from the Joint Doctoral Program at the University of California, San Diego, and San Diego State University. After performing postdoctoral training with Dr. Farooq Azam at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, he became 
Adjunct Assistant Professor at San Diego State University, rising to the rank of professor there. 
Nita H. Salzman, M.D., Ph.D. 
Departments of Pediatrics, Microbiology, and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin 
Dr. Salzman is a Professor of Pediatrics, Microbiology, and Immunology at the Medical College of 
Wisconsin (MCW). She is also Director of the MCW Center for Microbiome Research, Associate Director of the Medical Scientist Training Program, the CRI Research Unit Leader for the Infection, Inflammation, 
and Immunology Research Unit; and Director of the GI Clinical Laborato ry. Dr. Salzman received her 
M.D. and doctoral degrees from the New York University School of Medicine. Her pharmacology 
research focuses on antimicrobial peptides, host-microbe interactions in the GI tract, and microbiota in 
health and disease . The Salzman laboratory studies innate host defense at mucosal surfaces, focusing on 
interactions between the mucosal innate immune system, enteric pathogens, and the microbiome, with 
a dual focus on both basic and translational research. 
Cynthia L. Sears, Ph.D. 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Dr. Sears is a Professor of Medicine at John Hopkins University School of Medicine (JHU-SOM). She also 
has a joint appointment in oncology in the Molecular Microbiology and Immunology Department 
(Bloomberg School of Public Health) and is a member of the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer 
Center. Her laboratory focuses on studies to determine how the microbiota contributes to colorectal 
cancer and studies in detail the carcinogenic bacterium and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF), 
which the lab uses as a model for inducing colon inflammation and carcinogenesis. Dι΅ ΋̯͋ιν͛ lab 
pioneered in establishing the importance of Th17/IL-17 mechanisms in many cancers, including human 
colon cancer. More recently her work has focused on identifying bacterial contributions to human colon 
cancer, hypothesizing that biofilm-associated colon mucosal procarcinogenesis marks an early event in 
the biology of colonic epithelial cell transformation in a subset of colon cancers, and is testing this 
hypothesis in both human (2000-person prospective colonoscopy study) and germ-free experimental 
studies. Recently, the Sears laboratory has initiated work to study the relationship of the microbiome 
and cardiovascular disease in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected populations. 
-51- 
    
 
        
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
 
   
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
   
 
 
    
 
  
  Michael P. Snyder, Ph.D. 
Department of Genetics and Center of Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford University 
School of Medicine 
Dr. Snyder is the Stanford Ascherman Professor and Chair of Genetics and the Director of the Center of Genomics and Personalized Medicine. Dr. Snyder received his doctoral degree at the California Institute of Technology and carried out postdoctoral training at Stanford University. He is a leader in 
the field of functional genomics and proteomics and one of the major participants of the ENCODE 
project. Dι΅ ΋Σϴ͇͋ι͛ s laboratory was the first to perform a large-scale functional genomics project in 
any organism and has developed many technologies in genomics and proteomics. These include the development of proteome chips, high-resolution tiling arrays for the entire human genome, methods 
for global mapping of transcription factor binding sites (ChIP-chip now replaced by ChIP-seq), paired 
end sequencing for mapping of structural variation in eukaryotes, and de novo genome sequencing of genomes using high-throughput technologies and RNA-Seq. These technologies have been used for 
characterizing genomes, proteomes, and regulatory networks. Seminal findings from Dr. Snyder ͛ν 
laboratory include the discovery that much more of the human genome is transcribed and contains 
more regulatory information than was previously appreciated and that a high diversity of transcription factor binding occurs both between and within species. He has also combined various state- of-the- art 
͞'Ϊ΢Ί̽ν͟ χ͋̽·ΣΪΜΪͽΊ͋ν χΪ ζ͋ι͕Ϊι΢ χ·͋ ͕Ίινχ ΜΪΣͽΊχϢ͇ΊΣ̯Μ ͇͋χ̯ΊΜ͇͋ ΊΣχ͋ͽι̯χΊϭ͋ ζ͋ινΪΣ̯Μ 'omics profile 
(iPOP) of a person and used this to assess disease risk and monitor disease states for personalized 
medicine. He is a cofounder of several biotechnology companies, including Protometrix (now part of Life Technologies), Affomix (now part of Illumina), Excelix, and Personalis, and he serves on the board s 
of directors of severalcompanies. 
Justin Sonnenburg, Ph.D. 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine 
Dr. Sonnenburg is an Associate Professor in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the 
Stanford University School of Medicine, where he studies the gut microbiota in health and disease and 
co-directs the Center for Human Microbiome Studies. His laboratory at Stanford focuses on 
understanding basic principles that govern interactions within the intestinal microbiota and between the 
microbiota and the host. An ongoing objective of the research program is to devise and implement 
strategies to prevent and treat disease in humans via the gut microbiota. Dr. Sonnenburg and his wife 
Erica wrote the book The Good Gut: Taking Control of Your Weight, Your Mood, and Your Long-Term 
Health . 
-52- 
       
 
   
 
    
    
  
  
   
    
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
    
  
    
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
  Thaddeus Stappenbeck, M.D., Ph.D. 
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Dr. Stappenbeck is the Conan Professor of Pathology and Immunology at the School of Medicine at 
Washington University, St. Louis (WUSL). He also serves as Co- ·Ί͕͋ Ϊ͕ ·Ίν D͋ζ̯ιχ΢͋Σχ͛ν DΊϭΊνΊΪΣ Ϊ͕ 
Laboratory and Genomic Medicine and directs the WUSL Histology and Microscopy Core in the Department of D͋ϭ͋ΜΪζ΢͋Σχ̯Μ ΊΪΜΪͽϴ΅ ! ΢̯ΖΪι ͕Ϊ̽Ϣν Ϊ͕ Dι΅ ΋χ̯ζζ͋Σ̼͋̽Ι͛ν ι͋ν̯͋ι̽· ·̯ν ̼͋͋Σ ·Ϊνχ -
microbial interactions. Notably, his laboratory has collaborated with others to develop and characterize novel mouse models that have mutations in genes that lead to inflammatory phenotypes. They also 
have determined how host mutations influence interactions with the environment (i.e., specific 
microbes) to alter function and inflammation. Dι΅ ΋χ̯ζζ͋Σ̼͋̽Ι͛ν lab has extensive expertise in the 
analysis of inflammatory intestinal phenotypes in mice and has also developed novel in vitro systems of intestinal epithelial culture that used by other investigators to address novel microbiome questions. Some of his key contributions have been (1) defining a role for autophagy proteins in the GI epithelium, 
(2) defining the role of lamina propria cells in injury repair, (3) minimal reporting of best practices for 
animal husbandry fin microbiome studies, and (4) defining novel roles of bacterial and viral infection in 
injury generation and repair. 
Michiko E. Taga, Ph.D. 
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
Dr. Taga is an Associate Professor in the Department of Plant and Microbial Biology at the University of 
California, Berkeley. Her research interests focus on understanding how microorganisms that reside in 
complex communities interact through the sharing of nutrients and how these interactions shape the composition and function of microbial communities. He r major research focus is on the vitamin B12 
family of molecules (corrinoids), nutrients that are synthesized only by a fraction of the bacteria that use them. Dι΅ Α̯ͽ̯͛ν lab uses molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, and analytical chemistry to 
investigate how these cofactors are synthesized, used, and acquired by bacteria. She received her 
̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in biology from Carleton College and he r doctoral degree in molecular biology from 
Princeton University, where she investigated the function of the quor um-sensing autoinducer AI-2 in the 
laboratory of Bonnie Bassler. Dr. Taga performed postdoctoral research on bacteria-host interactions and vitamin B12 biosynthesis in the laboratory of Graham Walker at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and has been an Assistant Professor at the University of California, Berkeley, since 2009. 
Peter J. Turnbaugh, Ph.D. 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco 
You are not alone: Each human being is home to trillions of microbes that have a widespread impact on 
human physiology and predisposition to disease. Dι΅ ΑϢιΣ̼̯Ϣͽ·͛ν laboratory studies the role of these 
microbes in two major areas, pharmacology and nutrition, with a current focus on the role of gut microbial metabolism in influencing the predisposition to and treatment of heart disease, cancer, and 
autoimmune disease. Α·͋ Μ̯̼͛ν main two experimental approaches are gnotobiotics (germ-free and 
colonized mice) and metagenomics (culture-independent methods for studying microbial communities). 
The lab members collaborate closely with other members of the rich University of California, San 
Francisco, microbiome community, including Michael Fischbach, Susan Lynch, and Katie Pollard. The 
-53- 
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
  
  
   
    
     
        
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
     
   
    
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 ΑϢιΣ̼̯Ϣͽ· Μ̯̼͛ν primary thematic area is virology and microbial pathogenesis. Its secondary thematic 
area is immunology. Both areas focus on the impact of the human gut microbiome on pharmacology and 
nutrition. 
Harris H. Wang, Ph.D. 
Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University 
Dr. Wang is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Systems Biology at Columbia University , where 
his long-term goal is to delineate and understand the genetic, metabolic, and host factors that enable 
the spatiotemporal microbial colonization of the gastrointestinal tract during healthy and dysbiotic states. He has developed advanced strategies to manipulate the gut microbiota in situ using synthetic biology approaches. Building on previous work where Dr. Wang developed high-efficiency genome engineering tools for both bacteria and eukaryotic systems, he examines metabolic cross-feeding 
dynamics in complex microbial consortia. He is using a new technique to identify carbohydrate 
utilization genes that are key to sustained survival in the gut. He received his ̼̯̽·͋ΜΪι͛ν degree in 
physics and mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and his doctoral degree 
in medical engineering and medical physics through a joint MIT-Harvard University program. Notable honors include the 2017 PECASE award, 2017 Burroughs Wellcome Fund PATH, award and an NIH 
DΊι͋̽χΪι͛ν E̯ιΜϴ ͜Σ͇͋ζ͋Σ͇͋Σ̽͋ !Ϯ̯ι͇΅ 
Owen R. White, Ph.D. 
Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine 
Dr. White is a Professor of Epidemiology and Public Health and Associate Director of Informatics at the 
Institute for Genome Sciences (IGS) at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. He is also Co-
Director of the Center for Health-Related Informatics and Bioimaging (CHIB). Dr. White and the IGS 
Bioinformatics Department are involved in large-scale annotation, ontology development, and data 
sharing. He has overseen the annotation of hundreds of genomes sequenced using computer analyses in combination with systematic manual evaluation. Dι΅ Ρ·Ίχ͋͛ s group currently runs the integrated Human 
ͱΊ̽ιΪ̼ΊΪ΢͋ ΄ιΪΖ͋̽χ͛ν D̯χ̯ ΪΪι͇ΊΣ̯χΊΪΣ ͋Σχ͋ι . He has been awarded the Benjamin Franklin Award for 
Open Access in the Life Sciences from The Bioinformatics Organization. 
Gary D. Wu, M.D. 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine' 
Dr. Wu is the Ferdinand G. Weisbrod Professor of Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, where he is Associate Chief for Research in the Division of Gastroenterology, Associate Director of the Center for Molecular Studies in Digestive and Liver Disease, and Co-Director of the PennCHOP Microbiome Program. He was the inaugural Director and Chair of the Scientific Advisory Board for the American Gastroenterological Association Center for Gut Microbiome Research and 
Education and is an elected member of both the American Society for Clinical Investigation and the 
American Association of Physicians. Research programs in the Wu laboratory focus on the mutualistic 
interactions between the gut microbiota and its host with a particular emphasis on metabolism, 
including nitrogen balance, intestinal oxygen regulation, and epithelial intermediary metabolism. Of 
-54- 
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
     
    
    
 
    
  
  
  
   
    
  
  
   
  
    
  
   
 
 
  particular interest is the effect of diet on the gut microbiome and its relationship to therapeutic 
responses associated with the use of defined formula diets ΊΣ χ·͋ χι̯͋χ΢͋Σχ Ϊ͕ ιΪ·Σ͛ν ͇Ίν̯͋ν͋΅ ͜ΣνΊͽ·χν 
gained from these projects will hopefully lead to the development of better diets for patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. 
Ramnik Xavier, M.D. 
Harvard Medical School and Broad Institute, Harvard University 
Dr. Xavier received his M.B. and Ch.B. degrees from the University of Zimbabwe and completed his 
residency and fellowship at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). He is a member of the Broad 
Institute and Chief of Gastroenterology at MGH, Kurt Isselbacher Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, and D Ίι͋̽χΪι Ϊ͕ ͱGH͛ν ͋Σχ͋ι ͕Ϊι χ·͋ ΋χϢ͇ϴ Ϊ͕ inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Dr. 
Φ̯ϭΊ͋ι͛s laboratory uses genetic, structural, computational, and animal models, as well as clinical 
research to define the mechanisms controlling inflammation and immunity in vivo. Recent findings in 
the lab have helped elucidate the role of autophagy —a cellular process that digests and recycles 
proteins—ΊΣ χ·͋ ͇͋ϭ͋ΜΪζ΢͋Σχ Ϊ͕ ιΪ·Σ͛ν ͇Ίν̯͋ν͋΅ HΊν χ̯͋΢ ·̯ν ̯ΜνΪ ͇Ίν̽Ϊϭ͋ι͇͋ ΣΪϭ͋Μ Ί΢΢ϢΣ͋ 
regulatory genes involved in innate and adaptive immunity; identified innate immune pathways that 
sense microbial invaders (danger signals); and pinpointed metabolic stress programs in immunity. In 
addition, Dr. Xavier and his team are part of the Human Microbiome Project (HMP2) funded by the NIH 
Common Fund and the ιΪ·Σ͛ν ̯Σ͇ ΪΜΊχΊν FΪϢΣ͇̯χΊΪΣ ̯Σ͇ ̯ι͋ ζϢινϢΊΣͽ Σ͋Ϯ ΢͋χ·Ϊ͇ν χΪ ϢΣ͇͋ινχ̯Σ͇ χ·͋ 
relationship between microbes living in the human gut and IBD and to connect these patterns back to 
human genetics. He also co-directs the Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics at MIT and 
leads a program to look for connections between the microbiome and type 1 diabetes. In his role as 
Chief of Gastroenterology at MGH, which he assumed in 2010, Dr. Xavier oversees one of the only 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary programs in New England dedicated to diagnosing, treating, and ΢̯Σ̯ͽΊΣͽ ζ̯χΊ͋Σχν ϮΊχ· ιΪ·Σ͛ν ͇Ίν̯͋ν͋ ̯Σ͇ ϢΜ̽͋ι̯χΊϭ͋ ̽ olitis. U.S. News & World Report has ranked the 
center third in the country for digestive care (number 1 in New England). He was elected to the 
American Association of Physicians in 2011 and is also a fellow of the American College of Physicians and 
the American College of Gastroenterology. 
-55- 
    
-56- 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOINT AGENCY PANEL
 
Moderator 
Lita M. Proctor 
Program Coordinator 
Human Microbiome Project 
National Human Genome Research Institute National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
lita.proctor@nih.gov 
Agency Representatives 
Rajeev Agarwal 
Senior Research Program Officer 
Office of Research on Women ’s Health 
National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services agarwalraj@mail.nih.gov 
Paul Carlson 
Principal Investigator Laboratory of Mucosal Pathogens and Cellular 
Immunology 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
paul.carlson@fda.hhs.gov 
Stacy Carrington-Lawrence 
Program Director Etiology and Pathogenesis and Racial and Ethnic 
Populations 
Office of AIDS Research National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
carringtons@od.nih.gov 
Linda Chrisey 
Program Officer 
Warfighter Protection and Application Office of Naval Research U.S. Department of Defense linda.chrisey@navy.mil Zafar Iq bal 
Scientific Program Manager 
Biomedical Laboratory Research and Development 
and Clinical Science Research and Development 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
zafar.iqbal@va.gov 
Scott Jackson 
Group Leader Complex Microbial Systems Group Biosystems and Biomaterials Division 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
scott.jackson@nist.gov 
L. Clifford McDonald 
Senior Advisor for Science and Integrity 
Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion Centers for Disease Control and Prevention U.S. Department of Health and Human Services cmcdonald1@cdc.gov 
Jack Okamuro 
National Program Leader 
Crop Production and Protection Agricultural Research Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
jack.okamuro@ars.usda.gov 
Jim Olds 
Assistant Director Directorate for Biological Sciences 
National Science Foundation 
jolds@nsf.gov 
-57- 
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 Michael Sayre 
Program Director 
Integrative Biological and Behavioral Sciences 
Division of Scientific Programs National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities 
National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
sayrem@mail.nih.gov 
-58- 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
  SOCIAL MEDIA
 
#ETmicrobiome 
Please ask the Presenter if their talk or poster can be live tweeted. 
Presenters, please let the audience know your choice. 
PHOTOGRAPHY/VIDEOCASTING 
Please ask the Presenter if their talk or poster can be photographed. 
Presenters, please let the audience know your choice. 
Presenters, please email the workshop organizers at emerging_themes_workshop@nih.gov if you do 
not want your talk webcast. 
WORKSHOP URL 
https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/meetings/emerging 
Participants, monitor this website for updates to the program. 
WORKSHOP EMAIL 
etmicrobiome@gmail.com 
Participants, use this email to submit questions for the daily Round Tables and the Joint Agency Panel. 
-59- 
    
-60-    
 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
    
  
  
   
  
   
  
    
   
    
     
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
 
    
  
    
   
   
 
   
   
    
   
   
 
   POSTER TITLES AND NUMBERS
 
DAY 1 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
1 Host Immune Response Supports Fecal Microbiota 
Transplant -Mediated Clearance of Clostridium 
Difficile Infection Michael C. Abt 69 
2 Discovering Differences Between Patient Groups 
From Metagenomic and Metatranscriptomic Data Tom Arodz 69 
3 Translating Metagenomics by Developing Methods 
to Measure, Model, and Intervene on the Human 
Microbiome Ami S. Bhatt 70 
4 Host Genomic Control of the Microbiome in 
Colorectal Cancer Ran B lekhman 71 
5 ! Functional Screen of Crohn’s Disease -Associated 
Microbial Metabolites Identifies Unprecedented 
Molecules Modifying Mucosal Cell Biology Yu-Ling Chang 76 
6 HuMiX – A New Biomimetic Tool for Organ -on-Chip 
Models Carla Brooks 72 
8 The Human Virome in Health and Disease Frederic D. Bushman 72 
9 Intranasal Lactobacillus Rhamnosus Attenuates 
Influenza Infection in the Neonatal Mouse Alison J. Carey 73 
10 Comparisons of the Gut Microbiota of Generally 
Healthy Black and White Women in the Southern 
United States Tiffany L. Carson 74 
11 Transcriptomic Profile of the Caenorhabditis 
Elegans Intestinal Bacteria Regina Lamendella 100 
12 Microbial Modification of Colonic Mucosal Gene 
Expression Response to a Flaxseed Lignan Extract 
Intervention in Humans Robert S. Chapkin 76 
13 A Simple Bacterial Consortium Protects Against the 
Development of Colon Tumors Grace Y. Chen 77 
14 Modeling the Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer: 
Emerging Approaches to Hypothesis Testing Nicholas Chia 77 
15 Gene -Microbiota Interactions Contribute to the 
Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease Hiutung Chu 78 
16 Early Life Stress/Pain Experience Imprints Gut 
Microbiome in Preterm Infants Xiaomei Cong 78 
18 The Gut -Microbiome -Brain Axis in 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders Mauro Costa -Mattioli 79 
19 Butyrate Protects Gut -Liver Axis During Chronic -
Binge Ethanol Exposure Gail A.M. Cresci 81 
-61­    
    
 
 
   
  
    
  
   
 
    
  
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
      
  
    
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
    
  
   
  
  
 
 
   
     DAY 1 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
20 Commensal Composition and Efficacy of 
Microbiota -Based Treatments Are Influenced by 
Innate Immunity R. William DePaolo 81 
21 Exploring Bacteriophage Community Composition 
During Intestinal Colitis Breck A. Duerkop 82 
23 Distinct Microbiota in the Cervicovaginal Space Are 
Associated With Spontaneous Preterm Birth Michal A. Elovitz 82 
24 Predictors of Preterm Birth in a Longitudinal, Multi -
Omic Study of the Vaginal Microbiome Jennifer M. Fettweis 83 
26 Characterizing the Role of Vaginal Veillonellaceae 
Species in Women’s Reproductive Health and 
Pregnancy Abigail Glascock 85 
27 Changes in the Gut Microbiota by Prenylated 
Flavonoid Supplementation Are Associated With 
Improvements in Dysfunctional Glucose and Lipid 
Metabolism in Mice Fed a High -Fat Diet Adrian F. Gombart 85 
28 The Preterm Infant Microbiome: Growth, Health, 
and Development at 2 and 4 Years of Age Maureen Groer 86 
29 Associations Between Vaginal Microbiota and 
Genitourinary Symptoms of Menopause David N. Fredricks 84 
30 Omega -3 Fatty Acids Protect Murine Fetuses From 
Bacteria -Induced Placental Inflammation 
Originating From Maternal Endothelial Cells Yiping W. Han 86 
31 Early Life Colonization of the Nasopharyngeal 
Microbiome: A Longitudinal Study in The Gambia Blake M. Hanson 87 
32 Development of New Genetic Tools to Determine 
the Role of Siderophores in Clostridium Difficile 
Pathogenesis Jessica L. Hastie 87 
33 Fecal Bile Acids and Steroids Correlate With 
Abdominal Pain in Children With Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome Emily B. Hollister 90 
34 Functional Dynamics of the Gut Microbiome in 
Healthy Subjects During and After 6 Months of 
Consumption of Probiotic Lactobacillus Rhamnosus 
GG ATCC 53103 vs. Placebo Patricia L. Hibberd 88 
35 Modulation of Neointimal Hyperplasia Severity in 
Rats by Commensal Microbial Transfer Karen J. Ho 88 
36 Metabolomic Profiling of the Infant Stool 
Microb iota: Associations With Delivery Mode and 
Diet in the New Hampshire Birth Cohort Study 
Metabolomic Profiling of the Infant Stool 
Microbiota Anne G. Hoen 89 
37 Host -Bacteria Genome Interactions in Tumors Julie C. Dunning Hotopp 91 
-62­    
    
 
   
   
 
  
  
 
    
  
    
 DAY 1 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
38 Analysis of the Vaginal Microbiome in Health and 
Disease Bernice Huang 91 
39 Synergy Between Genes and the Environment: The 
Effect of the Microbiome and Host Genetic 
Variation on Exposures to Enterolignans and 
Steroid Hormones in Post -Menopausal European 
American and African American Women Meredith A.J. Hullar 92 
40 Commensal Mucin Degradation Stimulates 
Respiratory Pathogen Growth in Chronic Lower 
Airway Disease Ryan Hunter 92 
-63­    
    
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
   
    
   
 
   
   
   
 
 
   
 
    
 
    
 
    
  
    
   
   
   
   
 
   DAY 2 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
1 Gut Microbiome Metagenome and 
Metatranscriptome in the Context of Colorectal 
Carcinogenesis Studies Andrew T. Chan 75 
2 Intestinal Microbiota Influence Thymic 
Development in Neonates Nitya Jain 93 
3 HIV Exposure and Gut Microbiota in South African 
Infants Heather Jaspan 93 
4 Analysi s of Niche -Specific Adaptations of Vaginal 
Bifidobacterium spp. Leveraged by Longitudinal 
Datasets Nicole R. Jimenez 94 
5 Human Derived Gut Microbiota Modulates Colonic 
Secretion in Mice by Regulating 5 -HT3 Receptor 
Expression via Production of Acetate Purna C. Kashyap 94 
6 Airway Colonization Induces Th17 Responses in the 
Lungs and Modulates Allergic Airway Sensitization 
in Mouse Model of Asthma Andrew Kau 95 
7 Microbial Delivery of Antimicrobial Peptides for 
Protection Against Multidrug -Resistant Pathogens Yiannis Kaznessis 95 
8 Nasal Microbiome Features of Staphylococcus 
Aureus Colonization and Infection During Critical 
Illness Brendan J. Kelly 96 
9 Gut Microbial Metabolites Fuel Host Antibody 
Responses Chang Kim 96 
10 Probiotic Use of Women Followed for Gut 
Microbial Composition in Relation to Perinatal 
Mood and Anxiety Disorders Mary Kimmel 97 
11 Vaginal Bacteria Modify HIV Tenofovir Microbicide 
Efficacy in African Women Nichole R. Klatt 97 
12 Exposure to Luminal Antigens in Early Life Is 
Controlled for the Promotion of Tolerance to the 
Microbiota Kathryn A. Knoop 98 
13 Roux -en-Y Gastric Bypass Surgery Shifts Gut 
Microbial Communities and Associated Metabolites Rosa Krajmalnik -Brown 99 
14 Lactobacillus -Deficient Cervicovaginal Bacterial 
Communities Are Associated With Increased HIV 
Acquisition in Young South African Women Douglas Kwon 99 
15 Gut Microbial Dysbiosis and Post -Transplant 
Complications in Kidney Transplant Recipients John Lee 100 
17 Dissecting the Human Skin Microbiome in Health 
and Disease – From Strain -Level Composition to 
Transcriptional and Metabolic Activities in the Host 
Environment Huiying Li 101 
-64­    
    
 
  
   
 
 
   
   
   
 
    
    
    
  
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
 
  
   
    
  
   
   
   
 
 
    
 
   
  
   
 
   
    
   DAY 2 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
18 Role of the Human Virome in Kidney Transplant 
Disease Efrem Lim 102 
19 Resetting Gut Microbiota by Lactobacillus Reuteri 
DSM 17938 Inhibits Treg -Deficiency -Induced 
Autoimmunity (IPEX Syndrome) Via Adenosine 2A 
Receptors Yuying Liu 102 
20 Niche -Association and Retention Dynamics in the 
Human Microbiome Jason Lloyd -Price 103 
21 The Critical Window in Neonatal Microbiome 
Development: Exposures and Outcomes Juliette C. Madan 104 
22 Composition of Vaginal Microbiota During Labor 
and the Effect of Lubricant Use Katie G. McElroy 104 
23 Gut Microbiota and Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) 
Risk Factors: Early Results from the CARDIA 
(Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young 
Adults) Microbiome Study Katie A. Meyer 105 
24 Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Children Does 
not Significantly Alter Body Mass Index Sonia Michail 106 
25 Maternal High -Fat Diet Results in Microbiota -
Dependent Expansion of Type 3 Innate Lymphoid 
Cells (ILC3s) and Susceptibility to Inflammation in 
Neonatal Mice Julie Mirpuri 106 
26 Effects of Infant Diet on the Developing Gut 
Resistome Aimee Moore 107 
27 High Pulmonary Arterial Pressures Ar e Associated 
With Decreased Oral Microbial Nitrate Metabolism 
in the Mouth Alison Morris 107 
28 Control of Epithelial Homeostasis by the Microbiota Andrew Neish 108 
29 Control of Pathogen Colonization by Host Immunity 
and the Microbiota in the Gut Gabriel Nuñez 108 
30 Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor 2 Restricts 
Dysbiosis in Colitis D. Brent Polk 109 
31 Circulating Microbiome and Functional 
Metagenomic Signature Is Associated With Heavy 
Alcohol Use and Severity of Alcoholic Hepatitis Puneet Puri 109 
32 The Role of Gut Microbiota in Chemotherapy -
Induced Behavioral Comorbidities Leah M. Pyter 110 
33 Gut Microbiota, Tryptophan Catabolism, and 
Atherosclerosis in HIV Infection Qibin Qi 110 
34 TAS2R38 Genotype -Associated Alterations in Sinus 
Microbiota Vijay R. Ramakrishnan 111 
35 New Insights to the Role of Lactic Acid on the 
Vaginal Host -Microbe Interaction Jacques Ravel 111 
-65­    
    
 
     
 
  
   
 
   
  
   
   
   
      
 DAY 2 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
36 Therapeutic Targeting of the Gut Microbiota Matthew R. Redinbo 112 
37 Longitudinal Dynamics of the Vaginal and Fecal 
Microb iota During Pregnancy and Gestation at the 
Onset of Labor Mary Regan 112 
38 Bile Acid C12 -hydroxy Epimerization by Human Gut 
Microbiota Jason M. Ridlon 113 
39 Grape Proanthocyanidin -Induced Bloom of Gut 
Microbe Akkermansia Muciniphila Precedes 
Intestinal Gene Expression Changes Associated 
With Metabolic Resilience Diana E. Roopchand 114 
40 The Microbial Metabolome: The Missing Link 
Between Diet and Human Health Wendy Russell 114 
-66­    
    
 
   
 
   
 
 
     
 
   
  
   
  
    
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
  
    
  
   
  
    
  
    
  
    
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
  
   DAY 3 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
1 Characterization of Fecal Microbiota in Response to 
Heterologous Versus Autologous Fecal Microbial 
Transplantation Michael J. Sadowsky 115 
2 Dynamic Longitudinal Transcriptome Differences 
Across Healthy and Respiratory Viral Infections and 
Between Pre -Diabetic and Non -Diabetic States M. Reza Sailani 115 
3 Early Microbial Antigen Priming Sets the Course for 
Host Immune Tolerance vs. Immunity Tiffany C. Scharschmidt 116 
4 Temporal Dynamics of Metatranscription in 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Melanie Schirmer 116 
5 The Effects of Phage Therapy Against Vancomycin -
Resistant Enterococci and the Gut Microbiota Paul E. Carlson , Jr. 73 
6 Unraveling the Microbiome of Primary Immune -
Deficient Patients Julia A. Segre 117 
7 Multi -Omic Microbiome Study -Pregnancy Initiative 
(MOMS -PI) Myrna G. Serrano 117 
8 A Protective Major Histocompatibility Complex -
Class II Allele Prevents Autoimmune Diabetes by 
Shaping the Intestinal Microbiome Early in 
Ontogeny Michael A. Silverman 118 
9 The Impact of Sex, Age, and Diet on the 
Microbiome and Metabolome Carolyn Slupsky 118 
10 MAIT Cells: Shaping the Microbiome and 
Contributing to Clostridium Difficile Infection Paul E. Carlson, Jr. 74 
11 Regulation of Host -Microbiota Relationships in 
Human Health and Disease Gregory F. Sonnenberg 119 
12 Akkermansia Muciniphila May Be Permissive to 
Arthritis in the K/BxN Mouse Model of Arthritis Matthew Stoll 119 
13 A Disease -Protective Human Commensal 
Discovered Using Microbial Pedigree Analysis Neeraj K. Surana 120 
14 The Interplay Between Gut Microbiota -Derived 
Secondary Bile Acids and C. Difficile Pathogen 
Dynamics Casey M. Theriot 121 
15 Clostridiales Correlate With Intestinal Barrier 
Maturation in Preterm Infants Bing Ma 103 
16 Strain -Level Identification of Mother -to-Child 
Bacterial Transmission During the First Few Months 
of Life Hera Vlamakis 121 
17 The Human Gut Microbiome Protects Against 
Arsenic Toxicity Seth T. Walk 122 
18 The Importance of Colonization History in Gut 
Microbiota Assembly Jens Walter 122 
-67­    
    
 
  
   
  
   
 
    
  
   
  
    
 
    
 
 
    
  
    
 
 
   
    
    
  
   
    
     
  
    
 
 DAY 3 
Poster 
Number Title Presenter Page 
Number 
19 Microbe -Mitochondria Interaction in Host 
Longevity Regulation Meng Wang 123 
20 Vibrio Cholerae Infection and the Duodenal 
Microbiome Ana Weil 123 
21 Antibiotic -Induced Microbiome Depletion Alters 
Glucose Homeostasis by Affecting Intestinal 
Signaling and Colonic Energy Metabolism Amir Zarrinpar 124 
22 Antibiotics Disrupt Gastrointestinal Microbiota and 
Mucosal Immunity in Rhesus Macaques Alexander S. Zevin 124 
23 Integrative Personal Omics Profiles During Periods 
of Weight Gain and Loss Wenyu Zhou 125 
24 Effects of Intermittent Fasting on the Gut 
Microbiome in Multiple Sclerosis Yanjiao Zhou 125 
25 Dynamics of the Oral, Vaginal, and Gut Microbiome 
of African American Women With Full -Term 
Pregnancies Elizabeth J. Corwin 79 
26 Impact of Resistant Starch on the Human Gut 
Microbiome Colin J. Brislawn 71 
27 Commensal Corynebacterium Shifts Staphylococcus 
Aureus Toward Commensalism by Quenching 
Quorum Sensing Katherine P. Lemon 101 
28 Open Science Data Framework Victor Felix 83 
29 Characterization of the Stool Metabolome to Study 
Associations with the Gut Microbiome and 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) Julian Avila -Pacheco 70 
30 Human Microbiome Project Data Resources Heather Huot Creasy 80 
31 HMP DACC Data Portal Jonathan Crabtree 80 
32 Metabolic Modeling of the Vaginal Microbiome: 
Methods and Progress Updates Eunsoo Hong 90 
-68­    
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  POSTER ABSTRACTS 
(Listed alphabetically by presenter.) 
Host Immune Response Supports Fecal Microbiota Transplant-Mediated Clearance of 
Clostridium Difficile Infection 
Michael C. Abt , Rebecca A. Carter, Eric R. Littmann, Boj Susac, Lilian Lang, Eric G. Pamer 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
Clostridium difficile is an opportunistic pathogen that infects the large intestine following perturbation 
of the intestinal microbiota causing epithelial damage and debilitating, potentially fatal, colitis. Current 
antibiotic treatment options result in high recurrence rates, highlighting the need to identify alternative approaches to control this disease. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is clinically proven to 
efficiently clear recurrent C. difficile infection. Despite remarkable efficacy, implementation of FMT 
therapy is limited due to inadequate understanding of FMT mechanism of action. Here, we use a murine 
model of chronic . difficile infection to demonstrate a critical role for the host’s immune system in 
determining efficacy of FMT. C57BL/6 and T & B cell deficient Rag1-/- mice were infected with C. difficile 
and exhibited comparable establishment of chronic infection with no difference in bacterial burden or toxin levels in the colon. Following FMT, chronically infected C57BL/6 mice resolved C. difficile infection within two weeks while cohoused Rag1-/- mice failed to clear the infection. FMT in chronically C. difficile 
infected mice that lack B cells, CD8+ T cells or CD4+ T cells revealed a necessary role for CD4+ T cells, but 
not B cells or CD8+ T cells, in resolution of C. difficile following FMT. Analysis of intestinal bacterial communities following FMT demonstrate the microbiota of C57BL/6 mice assimilated toward the composition of the FMT donor, while the intestinal microbiota of Rag1-/- and CD4+ T cell deficient mice did not acquire the bacterial composition of the FMT donor. These data suggest that FMT engraftment 
and efficacy is dependent on an intact CD4+ T cell compartment. 
Discoverin g Differences Between Patient Groups From Metagenomic and 
Metatranscriptomic Data 
Yahya Bokhari, Tom Arodz 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
We present a pipeline for machine learning-based discriminative modeling between patient groups 
using annotated metagenomic and metatranscriptomic patient data. Currently, the approaches for discovering differences between clinically or demographically-defined patient groups rely either on bacterial composition obtained from 16S sequencing, or on annotation of individual genes or pre­
defined pathways in their metagenomic or metatrascriptomic data. The proposed pipeline uses 
discriminative linear classification model expanded to include a graph regularization term, which allows 
for using existing knowledge of interactions among genes as a biological-based regularizer that improves 
the robustness of the model. As a validation, we have used the proposed technique on vaginal microbiome samples, but the method is applicable to other microbiome datasets. 
-69­       
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
     
  
     
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
  
 
   
  
 Characterization of the Stool Metabolome to Study Associations with the Gut Microbiome and Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) 
Julian Avila-Pacheco , Curtis Huttenhower, Clary B. Clish, Ramnik Xavier, Clary B. Clish, Courtney Dennis, 
Amy Deik, Kevin Bullock, Kerry Pierce, Hera Vlamakis, Tiffany Poon 
Broad Institute, Harvard University 
A number of factors contribute to the complex array of small molecules that occur in stool; including 
diet, gut flora, and gut function. Comprehensive profiling of the stool metabolome therefore can 
provide detailed phenotypic information on health status, metabolic interactions between the host and 
the microbiome, and interactions among gut microbes. Here, we applied metabolomics on stool samples collected longitudinally from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients and non-IBD controls who participated in the Integrative Human Microbiome Project (iHMP). A total of 546 samples were analyzed using a platform comprised of four complementary liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS) methods designed to measure polar metabolites and lipids. Each method used high 
resolution/accurate mass (HRAM) profiling to measure both metabolites of confirmed identity and yet 
to be identified metabolite peaks. 81,867 de-isotoped LC-MS peaks were measured, out of which 597 
were annotated based on confirmation with authentic reference standards. Pooled stool extracts inserted and analyzed throughout the analysis queues to evaluate analytical reproducibility showed a median coefficient of variation of 5.1% among known metabolites and 24.2% across all 81,867 features. 
Owing to differences in water content and heterogeneity among stool samples, we evaluated different 
scaling methods to standardize the metabolomics data. Finally, a series of univariate and multivariate statistical analyses were conducted to detect features that discriminate IBD from controls in adults and children. These metabolomics data will be incorporated into a multi’omic database that will enable the 
study of associations between the gut microbiome and IBD. 
Translating Metagenomics by Developing Methods to Measure, Model, and Intervene 
on the Human Microbiome 
Ami S. Bhatt 
Stanford University 
Our group hopes to understand how microbes and microbial products impact host cell biology and 
subsequently host disease phenotypes. We iteratively develop and apply tools to measure relevant features of the microbes (beyond taxonomy) and the host response, model these interactions/relationships, and then intervene to directly target the microbiome or its products with the intention of improving host health. We focus on two study populations: (1) heavily 
immunocompromised patients, and (2) rural and urban underserved African patients either with or at 
high risk of developing noncommunicable diseases. Specifically, we are measuring the impact of 
antibiotic and chemotherapeutic exposure on the host microbiome, and in particular, are interested in modeling microbial genomic plasticity that may be induced by drug exposure. In order to test the 
hypothesis that these exposures drive genomic instability in microbial populations, perhaps through the 
activation of transposable sequences, we have used a series of patient stool samples taken from 
patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplantation. By applying the 10X read cloud sequencing 
technology and a custom bioinformatic pipeline, we have identified that the microbe in which 
transposition appears to be most active is also the one that ends up dominating the gut microbiome of this individual. This finding suggests that transposition may be an adaptive stress-response mechanism. 
-70­    
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
  
    
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
   Lastly, we are also investigating a novel prebiotic approach (phase I clinical trial) to intervene and modify 
the microbiome in an attempt to improve outcomes in HCT patients. 
Host Genomic Control of the Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer 
Ran Blekhman , Michael Burns, Emmanuel Montassier, Juan Abrahante, Timothy Starr, Dan Knights 
University of Minnesota 
Variation in the gut microbiome has been linked to colorectal cancer (CRC), as well as to host genetic 
variation. However, we do not know whether, in addition to baseline host genetics, specific somatic 
mutations in CRC tumors interact with the surrounding tumor microbiome, and if so, whether these 
changes can be used to understand microbe-gene/pathway interactions with potential functional biological relevance. Here, we characterized the association between CRC microbial communities and 
tumor mutations using microbiome profiling and whole-exome sequencing in tumors and matched 
normal tissues. We found statistically significant associations between mutations in tumor genes and shifts in the abundances of specific sets of bacterial taxa, suggestive of potential functional interaction. 
This correlation allows us to statistically predict the existence of loss- of-function tumor mutations in 
cancer-related genes, such as APC, as well as in relevant pathways, including MAPK signaling pathway, 
Wnt signaling pathway, and direct P53 effectors, solely based on the composition of the microbiome. 
These results can serve as a starting point for fine-grained exploration of the functional interactions between discrete alterations in the tumor and proximal microbial communities in CRC. In addition, this 
work has the potential to lead to the development of microbiome-based CRC screening methods, as well 
as individualized microbiota-targeting therapies. 
Impact of Resistant Starch on the Human Gut Microbiome 
Tanja V. Maier
1, Marianna Lucio1, Lang Ho Lee2, Nathan VerBerkmoes3, Colin J. Brislawn4, Jörg 
Bernhardt5, Regina Lamendella6, Jason E. McDermott4,7, Nathalie Bergeron8,9, Silke S. Heinzmann1, James 
T. Morton10, Antonio González Peña10, Gail Ackermann10, Rob Knight10, Katharina Riedel5, Ronald M. 
Krauss8, Philippe Schmitt-Kopplin1,11, Janet K. Jansson4 
1Research Unit Analytical BioGeoChemistry, Helmholtz Zentrum München; 2Department of Genome 
Science and Technology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville; 3The University of Texas; 4Earth and 
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; 5Institute of Microbiology, Greifswald 
University; 6Juniata College; 7Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunity, Oregon Health & 
Science University; 8Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute-9College of Pharmacy, Touro 
University; 10University of California, San Diego; 11Technische Universität München 
Diet can influence the composition of the human microbiome, yet relatively few dietary ingredients 
have been systematically investigated with respect to their impact on the functional potential of the microbiome. Dietary resistant starch (RS) has been shown to have health benefits, but we lack a 
mechanistic understanding of the metabolic processes that occur in the gut during digestion of RS. Here 
we collected samples during a dietary crossover study with diets containing high or low amounts of RS. We determined the impact of RS on the gut microbiome and metabolic pathways in the gut, using a 
combination of 'omics' approaches, including sequencing, metaproteomics and metabolomics. This 
multi-omics approach captured changes in the abundance of specific bacterial species, proteins and 
metabolites after a diet high in resistant starch (HRS), providing key insights into the influence of dietary 
interventions on the gut microbiome. The combined data showed that a high RS diet caused an increase 
-71­     
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
   
    
   
 
  
 
  
  in the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, including increases in relative abundances of several 
members of the Firmicutes, and concurrent increases in enzymatic pathways and metabolites involved 
in lipid metabolism in the gut. 
HuMiX – A New Biomimetic Tool for Organ- on-Chip Models 
Carla Brooks , J. Yang, M. Barrett, B. Thomas, B. Duane, F. Zenhausern 
Center for Applied Nanobioscience and Medicine, College of Medicine , Phoenix, The University of Arizona 
The etiology of certain idiopathic medical conditions, e.g., cardiovascular diseases, diabetes or 
Parkinson’s disease, has recently been li nked to human gastrointestinal microbiota. However, the 
underlying molecular and ecological processes/mechanisms that determine microbial and human 
cellular transitions between both health and disease states are still unclear. At present causative links 
are difficult to ascertain due to a distinct lack of in vitro human-microbial co-culture systems in which 
emergent hypotheses can be tested. 
Here, our team will present the design, fabrication and development of a microfluidic-based in vitro co-
culture device (HuMiX), allowing co-cultivation of human and microbial cells. The modular device 
architecture provides access to individual co-cultured contingents following targeted perturbations, 
which facilitate high-resolution systemic investigations into the hypothesized role of the complex host-microbial molecular interactions in the pathogenesis of idiopathic medical conditions and insight into 
the functional attributes of microbiomes in the broader context of microbial systems ecology. 
We will also report data on the characterization of this co-culture system with module- by-module 
approach, focusing on evaluation of the optimal conditions for human intestinal epithelial cell culture in 
the device and anaerobic conditions in the gut microbial culture compartment. We will present work on 
the design and prototyping of the system and discuss a future configuration of the HuMiX platform for 
exploring the microbiome gut-brain axis model. 
The Human Virome in Health and Disease 
Frederic D. Bushman
1, Gary Wu1, James Lewis1, Robert Baldassano2 
1University of Pennsylvania ; 2Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 
Humans harbor enormous communities of viruses that are important in health and disease. Transient 
viral infections are well known to most people, but this is just the tip of the iceberg. The human genome 
is composed of some 8% viral sequences, and the gut microbiome contains viruses in enormous 
numbers, comparable to bacteria. Viruses can cause disease directly, but they also modulate the 
composition of the microbiome in health. Many viral groups are poorly represented in genome databases, so that specialized methods must be used to study them. Metagenomic methods, however, 
allow these viral communities to be tracked, permitting longitudinal quantification, analysis of variation 
over time, and tracking transfer of viral communities during transplantation between human individuals. 
Results from recent experiments on the human virome will be presented. 
-72­    
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
   
   
     
  
  
   
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 Intranasal Lactobacillus Rhamnosus Attenuates Influenza Infection in the Neonatal 
Mouse 
Alison J. Carey, Ogan K. Kumova, Adam J. Fike, Jillian L. Thayer, Judith Pascasio, Jennifer L. Hope, Linda 
Nguyen, Christopher Stairiker, Peter D. Katsikis 
Drexel University College of Medicine 
Investigations into the use of probiotics for respiratory infections in infants are lacking. Intranasal 
administration of Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LGG) to adult mice significantly reduced symptoms and 
increased survival rates in Influenza-infected mice. Therefore, we sought to determine if intranasal 
administration of a probiotic prior to influenza infection would protect neonatal mice. We developed a model where three-day old neonatal C57Bl/6 mice were infected intranasally with PR8 influenza virus. Neonatal mice were given 1x106 live colony forming units of LGG or sham intranasally on days 1 and 2 of life. All mice were infected on day of life 3 with PR8 influenza. Animals were harvested at Day 3 and 6 
post-infection and lungs and spleens were analyzed for lymphocyte sub-populations by flow cytometry. 
Viral loads and cytokines were determined by real time PCR. Cell counts and viral loads were normalized 
per 100 mg of lung tissue. LGG pretreated mice had a much improved survival rate as compared to the 
neonates given sham (60% versus 10%, p<0.001). The infection is attenuated, as shown by a reduction in viral loads on day 3 post-infection in the LGG pre-treated group as compared to control neonates (p<0.03). In addition, IFN gamma expression is reduced 3 fold in those animals pretreated with LGG 
(p<0.03), as compared to control neonates. Viral loads by day 6 are similar between the 2 groups. At day 
3 post-infection, there is an influx of CD8+ T cells in the lungs of LGG pretreated mice (12.6% ± 1.0 versus 3.8% ± 0.4, p=0.01). These studies indicate that the use of probiotics can attenuate the morbidity and mortality associated with respiratory infections in a neonatal animal model. 
The Effects of Phage Therapy Against Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and the Gut 
Microbiota 
Alyxandria M. Schubert, Paul E. Carlson, Jr. 
Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Office of Vaccines Research and Review, Center 
for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
Antibiotics have saved millions of people from diseases such as pneumonias, healthcare associated 
infections, and foodborne illnesses. However, the continued use of antibiotics has led to several unintended consequences, including disruption of the indigenous gut bacteria and a rise in antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), which have been classified as a serious threat by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, are responsible for 20,000 U.S. infections 
annually. The inability to treat these infections with common antibiotics necessitates the development 
of alternative methods of intervention. The objective of my investigation is to develop and characterize 
an effective bacteriophage therapy against VRE. To that end, several naturally occurring phage isolates with activity against a range of VRE strains were isolated from sewage. I have administered antibiotics in 
mice to disrupt the normal gut microbiota and allow VRE to colonize and persist. Using virulent phages, I 
designed a cocktail with high activity against the E. faecalis strain used to infect mice. This cocktail and 
an individual phage were administered to VRE colonized mice to study their efficacy. Preliminary data 
suggests that phage could be successfully utilized to decolonize VRE infected mice. These treatments are 
being compared to a standard antibiotic intervention, ampicillin, for differences in efficacy as well as their effects on the microbiota. We hypothesize that bacteriophage therapy will have minimal effects on the microbiota compared with antibiotic treatment. These bacteriophage therapy investigations will 
-73­    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  have a significant impact on a largely understudied field and contribute to solving the antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria problem. 
MAIT Cells: Shaping the Microbiome and Contributing to Clostridium Difficile Infection 
Ashley D. Smith, Irma Zhang, Paul E. Carlson, Jr. 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Office of Vaccines Research and Review, U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration 
Clostridium difficile (Cd) is a leading cause of nosocomial infection. Cd infection (CDI) typically occurs 
following antibiotic usage, which perturbs the gut microbiota leaving the host susceptible to Cd 
colonization. Mucosa-associated invariant T cells (MAIT) cells recognize intermediates of riboflavin biosynthesis presented on MR1, an MHC-I like related molecule. MAIT cell development is dependent on 
the host microbiome. MAIT cells are found in high numbers at mucosal sites and are beneficial in 
combatting various pulmonary infections; however their role in gut infections is unknown. We hypothesized that MAIT cells would play a role in controlling CDI. To test this hypothesis, WT and MR1-/­
(lacking MAIT cells) mice were treated with antibiotics and then infected with Cd spores. Stool was 
collected for 16S rRNA sequencing and plated to determine Cd colonization levels for several days post-
infection. Contrary to our hypothesis, MR1-/- mice showed no signs of disease or detectable levels of Cd 
colonization. A more pathogenic strain of Cd was also tested and MR1-/- mice remained resistant. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) was conducted to determine the role of the microbiota in this 
resistance phenotype. Susceptible WT mice given FMT from MR1-/- mice experienced dramatically 
lower colonization levels by day 7 and cleared detectable Cd by day 14, while WT mice given control FMT continued to exhibit high colonization levels. 16S rRNA sequencing of fecal samples from each strain revealed inherent phylum level differences in relative abundance of Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Verrucomicrobia after antibiotics and FMT. Our data suggest the MR1-/- gut microbiome is resistant 
to Cd colonization, and this resistance is transferrable via FMT. 
Comparisons of the Gut Microbiota of Generally Healthy Black and White Women in the 
Southern United States 
Tiffany L. Carson
1,2, Fuchenchu Wang3, Xiangqin Cui3, Bradford E. Jackson4,5, William J. Van Der Pol6, Elliot 
Leftkowitz6,7, Casey Morrow8, Monica L. Baskin1,2 
1Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham; 2Comprehensive Cancer Center, 3Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
6Center for Clinical and Translational Sciences, 7Department of Microbiology, 8Department of Cell, 
Developmental, and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham; 4Center for Outcomes 
Research, JPS Health Network; 5Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology; University of North Texas 
Health Science Center, School of Public Health 
Racial health disparities persist among black and white women for many chronic health conditions. The 
purpose of this study was to compare the gut microbiota of generally healthy black and white women and to explore whether perceived psychological stress contributed to any observed differences. 
Generally healthy volunteers > 19 years old and self-identified as non-Hispanic black or white were 
recruited. Exclusion criteria were (1) current tobacco use, (2) current pregnancy, (3) prior cancer 
diagnosis, or 4) use of antibiotics in the previous 90 days. Participants provided demographics, 
anthropometric, and survey data. Stool samples were also collected using a standardized protocol. Fecal 
-74­       
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
     
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  DNA was isolated and PCR was used to amplify the V4 region of the 16SrRNA gene and sequenced using 
the MiSeq platform. Microbiome data was analyzed using QIIME package. Summary statistics were 
calculated for demographic and survey data. Fecal samples were analyzed for 80 females (47 black, 33 
white) with a mean age and BMI of 39.9 years and 30.9 kg/m2, respectively. Blacks had a higher average BMI than whites (33.3 vs. 27.5 kg/m2; p=0.003) and larger waist circumference (98.3 vs. 86.6 cm; 
p<0.01). Measures of alpha diversity indicated similar within-sample gut microbial diversity for black and 
white women. Beta diversity indicated racial differences using the Bray Curtis (p=0.04) and Unweighted 
Unifrac (p=0.003) methods, but not Weighted Unifrac (p=0.13). Chronic stress was inversely associated 
with Bifidobacterium. Adjusted models revealed that black race was associated with a greater abundance of Bacteroides. Further study of the complex relationships between race, behavior, environment and the gut microbiota are warranted. 
Gut Microbiome Metagenome and Metatranscriptome in the Context of Colorectal 
Carcinogenesis Studies 
Galeb S. Abu-Ali
1,2, Raaj S. Mehta3, Jason Lloyd-Price1,2, Himel Mallick1,2, Tobyn Branck1, Kerry L. Ivey1, 
David A. Drew3, Casey DuLong1, Hamed Khalili1,3, Gordon T. Brown1,3, Mingyang Song1,3, Long H. 
Nguyen1,3, Yan Yan1,2 , Eric Rimm1,4, Arnold Markowitz2, Wendy S. Garrett1, Zsofia K. Stadler4, Jacques 
Izard6, Andrew T. Chan2,3, Curtis Huttenhower1,2 
1T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health; 2Broad Institute; 3Massachusetts General Hospital; 4Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital- 5Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; 6University of Nebraska 
We report the first population-level investigation of 372 human gut metatranscriptomes and 929 
metagenomes from 308 men enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study who provided 
detailed short-term and long-term data on diet. From stool collected up to four times/participant over six months, we contrasted microbial taxonomic, metagenomic, and metatranscriptomic functional 
ecology. We identified a metatranscriptomic “core” of 81 pathways, universally transcribed over time 
and across participants, often by different microbes. Across time points, within-person taxonomic and functional profile variation was consistently lower than between-person variation over time. Metatranscriptomic profiles were comparably variable within and between subjects, due to higher within-subject longitudinal variation. In exploring the determinants of taxonomic and functional 
stability, we found prevalence and relative abundance of a taxonomic or metagenomic feature were 
both correlated with the stability of that feature. Metagenomic instability accounted for ~70% of 
corresponding metatranscriptomic instability, the rest likely attributable to sources such as regulation. 
Congruently, among the subset of pathways that were significantly differential among metatranscriptomes, 79% were over- or under-represented consistently across time points. These 
results provide an initial characterization of gut microbial ecology into core, subject-specific, microbe-
specific, and temporally-variable transcription, and they differentiate metagenomically versus metatranscriptomically informative aspects of the human gut microbiome. 
-75­       
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
   
      
  
   
 
   
  
     
   
  A Functional Screen of Crohn’s Disease -Associated Microbial Metabolites Identifies 
Unprecedented Molecules Modifying Mucosal Cell Biology 
Yu-Ling Chang1, Hera Vlamakis2, Jonathan Braun1, Kenneth Simpson3, R. Balfour Sartor4, Gary D. Wu5, 
James Lewis5, Frederic Bushman5, Dermot McGovern6, Nita Salzman7, James Borneman8, Ramnik Xavier2, 
Curtis Huttenhower9, Thaddeus Stappenbeck10 
1UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine; 2Broad Institute ; 3Cornell University; 4The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill; 5University of Pennsylvania; 6Cedars Sinai Medical Center; 7Medical College of 
Wisconsin; 8University of California, Riverside; 9T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health; 10Washington 
University, St. Louis 
Microbial metabolites are an emerging class of modifiers in intestinal mucosal biology. To advance the 
understanding of direct causal microbial factors contributing to rohn’s disease (D), we used metagenomic and metabolomic analyses to identify CD-associated microbial metabolites. We evaluated 
139 commercial available analytes for their bioactivity using in vitro platforms of epithelial, CD4+ T cell, 
dendritic and macrophage differentiation and function. We observed a high frequency (~20%) of bioactivity, typically targeting multiple mucosal cell types and functions. Most bioactive metabolites 
were unprecedented in the literature, and mechanistic analyses uncovered targets in lipid, amino acid, 
and energy metabolism. 
Microbial Modification of Colonic Mucosal Gene Expression Response to a Flaxseed 
Lignan Extract Intervention in Humans 
Robert S. Chapkin
1, Eunji Kim1, Lisa Levy2, Laurie A. Davidson1, Jennifer S. Goldsby1, Fayth L. Miles2, Sandi 
L. Navarro2, Timothy W. Randolph2, Ivan Ivanov1, Andrew M. Kaz2, Christopher Damman2, David 
Hockenbery2, Meredith A.J. Hullar2, Johanna W. Lampe2 
1Texas A&M University ; 2Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
Diet is an important risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC) and dietary constituents are metabolized by 
gut microbiota. For example, microbial metabolism of plant lignans in high-fiber foods produces 
bioactive endproducts, such as the enterolignans, enterolactone (ENL) and enterodiol (END). 
Enterolignan exposure has been associated with lower CRC in recent epidemiologic studies. Lignans 
have been shown to reduce colon tumorigenesis in animal models, and END and ENL influence cellular 
pathways important to cancer risk in vitro. Thus, we conducted a 2-period randomized, cross-over 
intervention in 42 healthy men and women (ages 20-45) to test the effect of a flaxseed lignan supplement (50 mg/d secoisolariciresinol diglucoside) as compared to placebo on: (1) host gene expression in epithelium and stroma from colon biopsies and exfoliated colonocyte RNA extracted from feces; (2) gut microbial community composition, and (3) the interaction of the gut microbiome, 
enterolignan exposure, and colonic gene expression in high- and low-ENL excreters. Specimens were 
collected at the end of each of the two 60-d intervention periods. RNA-seq was used to measure 
differential gene expression in colonic mucosa and fecal exfoliated cells using edgeR and functional 
analysis with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Fecal homogenate 16S rRNA gene (V1-V3) an d 
metagenomics from in vitro incubations were used to characterize the microbiome along with END and 
ENL in 24-h urines by GC-MS. In order to elucidate the complex interactions between microbiome, host 
and diet, master-slave regulatory modeling and LDA classification were used with a mixture of host and 
microbial features. 
-76­     
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 A Simple Bacterial Consortium Protects Against the Development of Colon Tumors 
Grace Y. Chen1, Sergey S. Seregin1, Jiachen Chen2, Nicholas A. Pudlo2, Jing Wu3, Mingrui An3, Jianhui Zhu3, 
Lili Zhao4, David M. Lubman3, Eric C. Martens2 
1Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 2Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, 3Department of Surgery, 4Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of 
Michigan 
The gut microbiome has emerged as a significant factor in the maintenance of intestinal health and the 
pathogenesis of disease. The gut microbiota is critical for the development and stimulation of the 
immune system, facilitating dietary metabolism, and resisting pathogen colonization. On the other hand, pathogenic alterations in the composition of the gut microbiome have been associated with increased 
susceptibility to intestinal infection, inflammatory bowel disease, and colorectal cancer. We have 
previously demonstrated that germfree mice have increased susceptibility to epithelial injury-induced 
colon tumorigenesis compared to conventionally-raised mice. We have subsequently identified a simple 
defined bacterial community consisting of 11 human gut isolates that can completely suppress the development of tumors in germfree mice. Our data further suggests that the protective effects of this simple community does not require either innate or adaptive immunity, but some activity provided only by live bacteria. Metabolomic and metaportoemic studies are currently ongoing to define bacterial 
activities associated with tumor suppression. 
Modeling the Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer: Emerging Approaches to Hypothesis 
Testing 
Nicholas Chia 
Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic 
The research and understanding of colorectal cancer (CRC) is being transformed by the findings in the 
field of the human gut microbiome. Modern sequencing has enabled high-throughput hypothesis generation, rapidly adding new possibilities for cures. And yet, despite the wealth of hypotheses 
available, having too many paths to follow has also paradoxically slowed progress. The necessity of in 
silico modeling for hypothesis testing in the microbiome sciences is a product of the diversity of species, functions, and genes —a diversity that outstrips our current experimental capacities. In order to 
overcome these limitations, we must combine our relatively sparse observations with mechanistically-based predictive modeling coupled with classic approaches to experimental validation. 
Here, we present our work on the role of microbially-produced hydrogen sulfide on the etiology of CRC. 
In our approach, we show how high-throughput sequencing and metabolomics technologies enable in 
silico modeling of hydrogen sulfide production within the GI tract and how this can be linked with the 
known genetic categories of CRC. Special focus is given to the multi-scale nature of the modeling 
approach, which steps from the use of deep metagenomic sequencing for assembling over 80 novel genomes to community metabolic models of the GI microbiome. The latter can then be linked to both 
metabolomics profiling for validation and dietary interventions for in silico hypothesis testing. Finally, 
we describe the role of hydrogen sulfide producing microbes in a specific genetic subset of CRC and describe how this work can be used as a template for future discovery and hypothesis testing in other 
variants of CRC. 
-77­    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
  
 
    
   
 
  
 
  Gene-Microbiota Interactions Contribute to the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease 
Hiutung Chu , Arya Khosravi, Indah Kusumawardhani, Alice H.K. Kwon, Anilton C. Vasconcelos, Larissa D. 
Cunha, Anne E. Mayer, Yue She, Wei-Li Wu, Amal Kambal, Stephan R. Targan, Ramnik J. Xavier, Peter B. 
Ernst, Douglas R. Green, Dermot P.B. McGovern, Herbert W. Virgin, Sarkis K. Mazmanian 
Caltech 
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is associated with risk variants in the human genome and dysbiosis of 
the gut microbiome, though unifying principles for these findings remain largely undescribed. The 
human commensal Bacteroides fragilis delivers immunomodulatory molecules to immune cells via secretion of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). We reveal that OMVs require IBD-associated genes, ATG16L1 and NOD2, to activate a non-canonical autophagy pathway during protection from colitis. ATG16L1-deficient dendritic cells do not induce regulatory T cells (Treg) to suppress mucosal 
inflammation. Immune cells from human subjects with a major risk variant in ATG16L1 are defective in 
Treg responses to OMVs. We propose that polymorphisms in susceptibility genes promote disease 
through defects in ‘sensing’ protective signals from the microbiome, defining a potentially critical gene -
environment etiology for IBD. 
Early Life Stress/Pain Experience Imprints Gut Microbiome in Preterm Infants 
Xiaomei Cong
1,2, Wanli Xu1, Joerg Graf3, Wendy A. Henderson4 
1University of Connecticut School of Nursing; 2UConn Institute for Systems Genomics; 3Department of 
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut; 4Digestive Disorders Unit, Biobehavioral Branch, 
National Institute of Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health 
Purpose: The study purpose was to investigate linkages between early life stress including accumulated 
painful experience and infant neurobehavioral outcomes modulated by the brain- gut-microbiota axis. 
We hypothesized that that premature infants subjected to stressful early life experiences develop an 
altered gut microbiome increasing risk for neurodevelopmental morbidity. Methods: Fifty preterm 
infants were recruited at birth and followed-up for 3-4 weeks during neonatal intensive care hospitalization. Outcome measurements were gut microbiota (16S rRNA sequencing), early life stress, and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Stool samples and stress levels were measured daily and neurodevelopmental outcomes were examined at 35-36 weeks post-menstrual age. Exploratory data analysis was conducted with a focus on the evolution in each variable’s distribution over time and 
linkages among variables. Predictions for neurodevelopmental outcomes were also analyzed using 
multiple regressions models. Results: Preterm infants experienced large amount of painful/stressful 
event in their early life during the NICU stay. Acute and chronic pain/stressors and contacts were 
significant predictors for neurodevelopmental responses. Preterm infants’ gut microbiome patterns 
were diverse among individual infants. Pain/stressor scores accounted for greater than 10% of the variability seen in the microbiome community and there was an association between the gut 
microbiome diversity and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Understanding mechanisms by which early 
life experience alters neurodevelopment via the brain-g ut-microbiota axis will help clinicians to develop 
neuroprotective strategies to better predict outcomes and to provide interventions. 
-78­     
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
     
    
 
 
  
    
   
   
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
  
 Dynamics of the Oral, Vaginal, and Gut Microbiome of African American Women With 
Full-Term Pregnancies 
Elizabeth J. Corwin , Anne L. Dunlop 
Emory University 
Purpose: African American (AA) women have increased risk for preterm birth (PTB). The oral, vaginal, 
and gut microbiome are posited to influence risk, but existing research has not adequately characterized 
the structure and dynamics of the microbiome of AA women whose pregnancies end in full term vs. 
preterm birth – a first step in understanding how variation in the microbiome may contribute to inter-
race disparities. Methods: Our 5-year study, Biobehavioral Determinants of the Microbiome and 
Preterm Birth in Black Women, enrolls pregnant AA women at 8-14 weeks. Participants complete 
questionnaires and provide oral, vaginal, and gut microbiome samples at enrollment and 24-30 weeks. Chart review identifies pregnancy outcomes. For the first 184 women completing the study, DNA was 
extracted and sequencing of the V3 and V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene was conducted. Processing and 
mapping were completed with QIIME and OTUs mapped to Greengenes version 13_8. Data were rarified 
to 14,900 reads. Community state types (CSTs) and diversity measures at each site and time were 
identified. Results: Microbiome analyses are described for the first 32 women delivering full term 
infants; remaining analyses are underway. Shannon Diversity was highest in oral and gut microbiome, with little change over pregnancy. Only 22% of women whose pregnancy resulted in full-term birth had 
vaginal microbiome at the first prenatal visit dominated by protective lactobacilli. Conclusions: By 
studying within race variation in the microbiome throughout pregnancy, progress is made in discerning 
the role of the microbiome in contributing to inter-race disparities in birth outcomes. 
The Gut-Microbiome-Brain Axis in Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
Shelly Buffington
1, Mauro Costa-Mattioli1, Joseph Petrosino2 
1Department of Neuroscience, Memory and Brain Research Center, 2Alkek Center for Metagenomics and 
Microbiome Research, Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine 
The concept that commensal bacteria in the gut could have a profound influence on brain function was 
unthinkable just a few years ago. The idea that a single bacterial species could be used as a treatment for developmental disorders is unthinkable today. One of the first links between the microbiome and brain processes was reported in the field of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), where patients with ASD co-present behavioral abnormalities and gastrointestinal symptoms. This led to the speculation that 
changes in gut microbiome could increase the risk of neuropsychiatric disorders such as ASD. However, 
how changes in bacteria that inhabit in our intestine could influence brain development and function 
remains unknown. Our findings link these two axes of dysfunction. We found that maternal high fat diet 
(MHFD), which is known to elevate the risk of ASD, induces a shift in microbial ecology that has a direct 
negative impact on offspring’s social behavior. These social deficits and changes in gut microbiome are prevented by co-housing MHFD offspring with mice born of mothers receiving regular diet and 
transferable to germ-free mice upon fecal-transplantation. Notably, we also found that MHFD-induced 
changes in the microbiome block long-lasting neural adaptation in the dopamine reward system. More importantly, using metagenomics and selective microbiota reconstitution, we identified a bacterial 
strain that restores both synaptic function and social behaviors by correcting the levels of oxytocin, the 
“social” hormone, in the brain. Our results causally link maternal diet, g ut microbiota dysbiosis, changes 
in synaptic plasticity and abnormal social behavior and identify a potential probiotic therapy for ASD-like 
symptoms. 
-79­     
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
  HMP DACC Data Portal 
Jonathan Crabtree , James Matsumura, Victor Felix, Owen White, Heather Huot Creasy, Justin Wagner, 
Michelle Giglio, Anup Mahurkar 
Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore School of Medicine 
The HMP DACC Data Portal (http://portal.hmpdacc.org) provides a unified view of microbiome data 
produced by the NIH Human Microbiome Project (HMP) and subsequent NIH Integrative Human Microbiome Project (HMP2). These data comprise a variety of data types (e.g., 16S, whole metagenomic 
shotgun, host and microbial transcriptome, lipidome, metabolome, proteome, and cytokine), file 
formats, and rich subject metadata coming from multiple studies, several of which feature both large 
cohorts and longitudinal data. The HMP D! Data Portal is based on the NI’s open source GD Portal UI (https://github.com/NCI-GDC/portal-ui), but modified to serve metagenomic rather than cancer data and to interoperate with the D!’s Open Science Data Framework (OSDF) data storage backend. Users 
can rapidly identify datasets of interest with either the facet search facility or an advanced query 
interface and selected datasets may be added to a shopping cart. From there a manifest file can be 
downloaded and passed to a standalone client program to download bulk data en masse. The 
standalone client is capable of resuming batch downloads and can optionally take advantage of the Amazon/S3-hosted HMP data when running in the cloud on Amazon EC2. 
Human Microbiome Project Data Resources 
Heather Huot Creasy , Victor Felix, James Matsumura, Owen White, Jonathan Crabtree, Arjun Kumar, 
Justin Wagner, Michelle Giglio, Anup Mahurkar 
Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore School of Medicine 
As the Data Coordination Center (DCC) for the Integrative Human Microbiome Project (iHMP), we 
provide a central repository for querying and accessing all HMP and iHMP data. To this end, we have 
worked closely with data managers from each of the four iHMP institutions to develop a comprehensive data storage schema based upon the Open Science Data Framework (OSDF). This serves as the backbone for our HMP Data Portal, which allows intuitive and interactive searching as well as the ability to build custom cohorts/data sets for download or direct incorporation into analysis tools such as MetaViz. 
Schemas and associated API and submission tools are publicly available at https://github.com/ihmpdcc. 
The HMP data portal, as well as project details, SOPs and tools, is available at the comprehensive HMP/iHMP DCC website, www.hmpdacc.org. 
-80­     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
  Butyrate Protects Gut-Liver Axis During Chronic-Binge Ethanol Exposure 
Gail A.M. Cresci , Bryan Glueck, Laura Nagy 
Cleveland Clinic 
Ethanol-induced gut dysbiosis is associated with altered gut permeability and endotoxemia. Gut 
dysbiosis is associated with alterations in metabolic byproducts, inflammation and immune suppression. Butyrate, a fermentation byproduct of the gut microbiota, is essential for gut health. Chronic ethanol exposure is associated with depleted butyrate levels. This study investigated whether prophylactic 
butyrate could mitigate intestinal and liver injury induced by chronic-binge ethanol feeding. 
Methods: Ethanol feeding with chronic-binge (10 d, 5% vol/vol)-binge (5 g/kg) exposure was conducted 
to gain understanding of tributyrin’s effect in a mouse model more clinically reflective of early stages of 
alcoholic hepatitis. Glycerol (control) or tributyrin was provided via a liquid diet (5mM) and oral gavage 
(2.5 mM). Intestine, plasma and liver were analyzed for markers of injury and inflammation. Caco- 2 
monolayers exposed to ethanol (40 mM) ± sodium butyrate (5 mM) tested butyrate’s direct effects on 
intestinal epithelial cells. Results: Ethanol induced hepatic mRNA expression of toll-like receptors, 
protein expression of TNFα and losses in intestinal barrier function in vitro and in vivo- however, 
butyrate co-treatment reduced this response. Ethanol feeding also blunted intestinal immune responses 
which were maintained with tributyrin co-treatment. Variances in hepatic localization of leukocytes and 
apoptotic hepatocytes between ethanol-fed treatment groups were identified. Summary: Prophylactic 
tributyrin can mitigate intestinal barrier disruption, intestinal immune suppression and liver injury 
induced by chronic-binge ethanol exposure and may provide a novel strategy to prevent early-stage alcohol hepatitis. 
Commensal Composition and Efficacy of Microbiota-Based Treatments Are Influenced 
by Innate Immunity 
Jee-Hyun Kim, Denise Chac, R. William DePaolo , Satoshi Okazakiandand, Heinz-Josef Lenz 
University of Washington 
The effect of chronic inflammation on the composition of the colonic microbiota is not well understood, 
making the development of microbiota-associated therapies difficult. Using a model of inflammation-
associated colorectal cancer (CRC) we show that restoration of specific probiotic commensals lost during tumorigenesis profoundly reduced tumor burden by preventing changes in Proteobacteria and suppressing inflammation through a TLR6-dependent induction of IL-10. Attenuated TLR6 signaling was 
associated with worse cancer outcomes in a subset of CRC patients and an increase in proximal tumors 
in our mouse model. Analysis of the proximal colon from TLR6-deficient mice revealed significant 
differences in the composition of the microbiota. This tissue was also unresponsive to treatment with 
recombinant IL-10 or by restoring probiotic commensals. Altogether, these results suggest that while 
microbiota-associated biotherapies are more effective if tailored to an individual, genetic and immunologic factors must be taken into account as they can influence the treatment efficacy. 
-81­      
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
  
    
 
  
  
 Exploring Bacteriophage Community Composition During Intestinal Colitis 
Breck A. Duerkop1, Manuel Kleiner2, Lora V. Hooper3 
1Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine; 2Department 
of Geoscience, Energy Bioengineering and Geomicrobiology Research Group, University of Calgary; 
3Department of Immunology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
The dysregulation of intestinal bacterial communities can lead to inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). In 
addition to bacteria, the intestine harbors eukaryotic and prokaryotic viruses and viruses that infect 
bacteria called bacteriophages (phages), dominate. Phage numbers are elevated at the intestinal 
mucosal surface and specific phage species increase in abundance in IBD patients. This suggests that phages play an unidentified role in IBD and may be relevant biomarkers for the disease. We have 
developed a method to identify phages within metagenomes of the intestinal microbiota. Our method 
relies on the quantitative comparison of contig abundances between metagenomes from the complete 
microbiota and virus enrichments of that same microbiota. We have applied this method to study phage 
communities in a mouse model of immune cell induced intestinal colitis. We discovered that colitis alters the intestinal phage population at the height of disease. Using phage contig annotation and analysis of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) spacer sequences to match 
phage contigs to bacterial hosts, we observed a decrease in phages associated with beneficial 
commensal bacteria, whereas the phages of overt intestinal pathogenic bacteria became more 
abundant during colitis. These results are consistent with phage communities recovered from human IBD patients. Our data suggest that the immune system imposes pressure on the microbiota altering phage community composition. A deeper understanding of how the immune system shapes phage 
communities during intestinal health and disease will illuminate strategies for the use of phages as 
therapeutic tools to manipulate the microbiota and improve human health. 
Distinct Microbiota in the Cervicovaginal Space Are Associated With Spontaneous 
Preterm Birth 
Michal A. Elovitz
1, Katheryne Downes1, Jacques Ravel2, Pawel Gajer2 
1University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; 2University of Maryland 
Objective: Changes in microbial communities have been implicated in both health and disease. 
Investigations into the association between the cervicovaginal (CV) microbiota and spontaneous 
preterm birth (sPTB) have been limited in scope and sample size. Study Design: A prospective cohort of 
singleton pregnancies were enrolled ( n=2000). Biospecimens were collected at 3 time points in 
pregnancy (16-20, 20-24, 24- 28 weeks). All cases of PTB were adjudicated by the PI. From the larger 
cohort, a nested case-control was performed with 80 SPTB cases and 320 term controls that were 
frequency matched by race to the cases. 16S rRNA gene analyses were performed to characterize the 
composition and structure of the CV microbiota. Phylotype analyses were performed for the relative and 
absolute abundance in association with sPTB. Results: 127 phylotypes were detected in all samples. 
Significant associations were demonstrated between specific bacteria, in both a positive and negative manner, with sPTB. Racial differences in these associations were evident. Bifidobacterium species were noted to be significantly protective against SPTB at all gestational time points while BVAB2, BVAB3 and 
Mobiluncus were associated with a dramatic increase risk of SPTB (all q-values <0.0001). Conclusion: CV 
microbiota are significantly associated with SPTB. Targeting the bacteria that are associated with an 
increased risk of SPTB and/or enhancing the presence of the protective bacteria may serve as new 
-82­     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  therapies to reduce the rate of PTB. With this new evidence, these types of studies should become a 
research priority. (R01NR014784) 
Open Science Data Framework 
Victor Felix , Jonathan Crabtree, Anup Mahurkar, Owen White 
Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore School of Medicine 
The Open Science Data Framework (OSDF) provides a software framework and RESTful API for storing 
and retrieving project metadata and conducting bioinformatics analyses across several research 
organizations in a standard way. OSDF supports a diverse set of users, including (1) sequence 
generators store and process raw data (2) tool and pipeline developers that need access to reference 
data sets, and (3) web-based resources that need real-time querying of reference data. Genomics 
communities and projects such as the HMP (Human Microbiome Project) and the iHMP (Integrative 
Human Microbiome Project) have used OSDF to store and track transcriptomic data, metagenomic data. 
OSDF also enables users to conduct analyses that include human variation detection, transcriptome 
analysis, epigenetic analysis, and microbiome analysis. 
Predictors of Preterm Birth in a Longitudinal, Multi-Omic Study of the Vaginal 
Microbiome 
Jennifer M. Fettweis , Vaginal Microbiome Consortium 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Preterm births occurring at less than 37 weeks gestation account for approximately 1 in 10 births in the 
United States. The incidence has not decreased despite significant efforts. It is clear that the etiologies 
of preterm birth are multifactorial; however, the processes leading to complications in pregnancy are 
still poorly defined. Ascension of microorganisms from the vagina is the most common pathway for 
intrauterine infection, which can cause preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), fetal compromise, preterm labor and other complications. As part of the integrative Human Microbiome Project (iHMP), we performed a longitudinal, multi-omic study of ~1,500 women through the Multi-Omic Microbiome Study-Pregnancy Initiative (MOMS-PI). Technologies include whole metagenome 
shotgun sequencing, whole metatranscriptomic sequence analysis, cytokine profiling and 16S rRNA gene 
surveys. We analyzed vaginal, multi-omic data from a subset of 47 singleton pregnancies that resulted in preterm delivery and matched term controls. We also assayed the vaginal microbiome composition of 
an additional ~100 preterm births and controls from the Vaginal Human Microbiome Project (VaHMP) 
and the Global Alliance to Prevent Prematurity and Stillbirth MOMS-PI cohorts. Our analyses led to the 
identification of candidate signatures for adverse pregnancy outcomes, which provide insights into the pathways implicated in pregnancy complications. 
-83­       
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
    
   
  
 
      
  
  
 
 
    
     
  
    
 
    
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 Associations Between Vaginal Microbiota and Genitourinary Symptoms of Menopause 
Caroline M. Mitchell1, Sujatha Srinivasan2, Anna Plantinga3, Xiang Zhan2, Michael C. Wu2, Susan D. 
Reed2,4, Katherine A. Guthrie2, Andrea Z. LaCroix5, Tina Fiedler2, Matthew Munch2, Congzhou Liu2, Noah 
G. Hoffman6, Ian A. Blair7, Katherine Newton8, Ellen W. Freeman9, Hadine Joffe10, Lee Cohen11, David N. 
Fredricks2 
1Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology and 11Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General 
Hospital; 2Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; 3Departments of Biostatistics, 4Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and 6Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle ; 5Department of Family 
Medicine and Public Health, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, 7Departments of 
Pharmacology, 9Obstetrics and Gynecology and Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania; 8Group Health 
Research Institute; 10Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Center 
Objective: We conducted both cross-sectional and longitudinal evaluation of associations between the 
composition of the vaginal microbiota and genitourinary symptoms, serum estrogen, and vaginal 
glycogen in post-menopausal women enrolled in a trial of treatment for hot flashes. Methods: A total of 
88 women ages 40-62 enrolled in a randomized trial of oral estradiol or oral venlafaxine vs. placebo for hot flashes consented to provide vaginal swabs and a blood sample at enrollment. Of those, 30 (34%) both reported vulvovaginal symptoms at enrollment and provided longitudinal samples at 4 and 8 
weeks. Bacterial communities were characterized using 16S rRNA PCR and deep sequencing targeting 
the V3-V4 region. Quantities of Lactobacillus crispatus and L. iners were measured using qPCR. Self-
reported genitourinary symptoms included: 1) presence and severity of individual symptoms and 2) 
identification of most bothersome symptom.  Glycogen was measured fluorometrically from swab eluate. Serum estradiol (E2) and estrone (E1) were measured by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Associations between bacteria, symptoms, glycogen, and serum estrogens were tested by 
linear regression or Wilcoxon signed-rank test, adjusted for multiple comparisons.  Comparisons 
between groups used Kruskall- Wallis or Fisher’s exact test, and between timepoints using signrank or 
McNemars tests. Results: At baseline, 33 (38%) women had a vaginal microbiota dominated by 
Lactobacillus species, 25 (28%) had Lactobacillus present as a minority population and 30 (34%) had no 
Lactobacillus species detected by 16S rRN! sequencing. Over half (53%) reported ≥ 1 vulvovaginal 
symptom (most commonly dryness), but symptoms were not associated with the presence of Lactobacillus species. Women with Lactobacillus dominant communities had higher unconjugated serum 
estrone, but no difference in vaginal glycogen levels, compared to those with non- Lactobacillus 
dominant communities. Higher serum E2 and E1 were not significantly associated with higher vaginal glycogen, nor detection of individual genera. Of the 30 women included in the longitudinal analysis, 21 (70%) had improvement in their most bothersome symptom (MBS) over the course of the study, and 9 (30%) had no improvement or worsening of the MBS.  There was no significant variation in Lactobacillus 
dominance, detection of or quantity of L. crispatus or L. iners at enrollment or 8-week follow- up 
between women who did and did not have improvement in MBS.  A higher level of bacterial community 
diversity was observed in women whose symptoms did not improve relative to those with improvement, 
but this difference did not reach statistical significance.  Vaginal glycogen, serum estradiol 
(unconjugated and total) and unconjugated estriol all increased significantly in women whose MBS improved compared to women without improvement.  Greater MBS improvement was seen in women receiving active treatment (82%) [estradiol (7/8) or venlafaxine (7/9)] vs. placebo (7/13; 54%), but this 
difference was not statistically significant, likely due to small sample size. Lactobacillus detection and 
dominance showed little association with receipt of active treatment. Conclusions : Presence of 
Lactobacillus -dominant vaginal microbiota was not significantly associated with fewer vulvovaginal 
symptoms. In women with vulvovaginal symptoms, Lactobacillus -dominance of vaginal microbiota was 
not significantly associated with improvement in genitourinary symptoms of menopause, regardless of 
treatment assignment. 
-84­    
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
     
   
 
   
    Characterizing the Role of Vaginal Veillonellaceae Species in Women’s Reproductive Health and Pregnancy 
Abigail Glascock , Vaginal Microbiome Consortium, Jennifer Fettweis 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Two vaginal phylotypes provisionally assigned to the genus Megasphaera have been repeatedly 
associated with bacterial vaginosis (BV) and negative reproductive health outcomes including preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) and spontaneous preterm labor. We cultivated three vaginal ‘Megasphaera’ clones and in combination with publicly deposited genomes, performed a comparative genomic and phylogenetic analysis of three ‘Megasphaera’ phylotype 1 and three ‘Megasphaera’ phylot ype 2 genomes. Using bioinformatics and biological measures, we determined that 
the phylotypes represent two distinct species with differential genomic structure, predicted functional potential, and clinical associations that may be best classified as a novel vaginal-specific genus belonging 
to the family Veillonellaceae. Herein, we propose the designation Veillonellaceae phylotype 1 (VLN1) 
and Veillonellaceae phylotype 2 (VLN2). Both phylotypes were associated with vaginal symptoms and diagnosis of BV, while VLN1 exhibited a stronger association with the condition. We also observed intriguing associations with pregnancy in a cohort of 842 case matched pregnant and non-pregnant women. Given the repeated association of VLN1 with negative pregnancy outcomes and a single paper reporting that this organism is capable of invading the upper genital tract, VLN1 is of great interest in elucidating bacterial contributions to negative pregnancy outcomes. To validate our findings, we analyzed the prevalence of both phylotypes in the MOMS-PI cohort, a group of over 1,000 women sampled throughout pregnancy, to assess the prevalence of the two organisms, their dynamics throughout pregnancy and associations with clinical data and pregnancy outcome. 
Changes in the Gut Microbiota by Prenylated Flavonoid Supplementation Are 
Associated With Improvements in Dysfunctional Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in Mice 
Fed a High-Fat Diet 
Adrian F. Gombart
1, Yang Zhang2, Thomas J. Sharpton3, Johanna Revel4, Claudia S. Maier4, Paul 
Blakemore4, Andriy Morgun5, Natalia Shulzhenko6, Gerd Bobe7, Cristobal Miranda8, Jan F. Stevens8 
1Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2Nutrition Graduate Program, 3Department of 
Microbiology, Department of Statistics, 4Department of Chemistry, 5College of Pharmacy, 6College of 
Veterinary Medicine, 7Department of Animal Sciences, 8College of Pharmacy, Linus Pauling Institute, 
Oregon State University 
The prenylated flavonoid xanthohumol (XN) found in hops and beer improves dysfunctional glucose and 
lipid metabolism in preclinical animal models of diet-induced obesity (DIO) and metabolic syndrome 
(MetS). XN binds to the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and regulates host genes involved in metabolism of 
cholesterol into bile acids. XN also induces cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide (CAMP) gene expression via the FXR. We hypothesize that consumption of XN by mice feed a high-fat diet induces CAMP and shapes the composition of the gut microbiota. Furthermore, the gut microbiota metabolizes XN into 8­prenylnarin 
-dihydro-XN (DXN) that may function as FXR ligands. This diet-microbe-host 
interaction may explain, in part, how XN in ameliorates obesity and MetS. We compared DXN and a related XN metabolite tetrahydro-XN (TXN) with XN by feeding C57BL/6J mice a high-fat diet containing these compounds for 14 weeks. Mice administered XN, DXN or TXN showed similar improvements of 
impaired glucose tolerance compared to the control; however, the derivatives decreased plasma insulin 
and leptin better than XN. We sequenced the 16 rRNA genes of the microbes present in the feces of 
-85­     
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
 
  
  each animal. We observed statistically significant shifts in the structure and membership of the 
microbiota. The compounds significantly decreased the percentages of Bacteroidetes and Tenernicutes. 
In contrast, they significantly increased Firmicutes, Proteobacteria (DXN and TXN), and Verrucomicrobia 
(DXN and TXN). We are currently identifying specific genera that correlate with weight gain, fasting glucose and levels of leptin, cholesterol and insulin. Our data support a role for the microbiota in 
conferring the benefits of XN consumption on DIO. 
The Preterm Infant Microbiome: Growth, Health, and Development at 2 and 4 Years of 
Age 
Maureen Groer , Larry Dishaw, Kathleen Armstrong, Elizabeth Miller, Jack Gilbert, Alyson Yee 
University of South Florida 
Preterm infants have abnormal microbial colonization in early life. They are often delivered via 
Caesarean section, and have high rates of formula feeding, invasive procedures, antibiotics, and medications that alter gastrointestinal pH, which all contribute to the assembly of the microbiome. We 
hypothesized that microbial community structure would be predicted by many of these factors. We 
enrolled 78 preterm infants and characterized the stool microbiome from admission through 6 weeks of age. We analyzed the samples by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. We found that the preterm infants’ 
gut microbiome developed a striking dominance of Proteobacteria and increased diversity over time. The distribution of bacterial taxa was predictive of the incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis and the use 
of antibiotics. 
We then demonstrated that these infants had significantly greater bacterial diversity and less 
interindividual variability as toddlers, suggesting the microbiome normalized despite the abnormal founding microbiome. Oligotype analysis suggested that strains of Enterobacteriaceae and 
Bifidobacterium that colonized the infants during their NICU stay were still associated with stool at age 
3. Twenty one toddlers are being followed through early childhood until 5 years of age with measures of 
stool microbiome, maternal microbiome, growth, health and development. About half of these children have some developmental delay or behavioral issues. They display an obesogenic phenotype We are 
currently analyzing these characteristics in relationship to both the NICU microbiome and the childhood and maternal microbiome. 
Omega-3 Fatty Acids Protect Murine Fetuses From Bacteria-Induced Placenta l 
Inflammation Originating From Maternal Endothelial Cells 
Jeewon So
1, Xiaohua Yang2, Xinwen Zhang2, Mara Guichon Rubinstein1, Jan Kitajewski3, Kang Liu1, Yiping 
W. Han1 
1Columbia University Medical Center; 2Case Western Reserve University; 3University of Illinois, Chicago 
Intrauterine infection is a leading cause of adverse pregnancy outcomes (APOs) such as preterm 
delivery, stillbirth, and neonatal sepsis . Omega-3 fatty acids and their metabolites have been found to 
be beneficial in a wide spectrum of infectious diseases including periodontal disease, respiratory tract 
infections and sepsis . We have previously shown that Fusobacterium nucleatum, a Gram-negative oral 
commensal bacterium frequently detected in intrauterine infection, colonizes the murine placenta through hematogenous transmission and causes intrauterine inflammation and fetal demise . However, the detailed mechanisms of pathogenesis were not known. Using mouse genetics, we now demonstrate 
-86­     
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 that F. nucleatum triggers placental inflammation through TLR4-medaited signaling in maternal endothelial cells. We further demonstrate that omega-3 fatty acids suppress bacteria-induced 
inflammatory responses in endothelial cells, and protect murine fetuses against infection. Our study 
reveals a novel mechanism by which microbial infections affect pregnancy and establishes a potential use of omega-3 fatty acids to protect against intrauterine infection and APO. 
Early Life Colonization of the Nasopharyngeal Microbiome: A Longitudinal Study in The 
Gamb ia 
Blake M. Hanson
1, G. Weinstock1, W. Shannon2, B. Kwambana3, E. Deych2, M. Betts3, A. Worwui3, S. 
Carter2, J.S. Brown1, F. Ceesay3, P.E. Tientcheu3, D. Phillips1, E. Sambou3, E. Sodergren1, M. Antonio3 
1The Jackson Laboratory; 2BioRankings ; 3MRC Unit – The Gambia 
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of pneumonia in children under 5 worldwide, 
resulting in an estimated 1 million deaths each year with the majority in developing countries. To 
mitigate the morbidity and mortality of this disease, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) is 
administered. Most validation and investigative studies of these PCVs were performed in developed countries, and now national vaccine programs are being implemented throughout the world. In The Gambia, such a national program began several years ago with the implementation of the 7-valent PCV, moving to the 13-valent PCV to cover additional serotypes relevant within The Gambia. This study 
enrolled infants within The Gambia to 1) assess the patterns of pneumococcal carriage in the first two 
years of life with widespread use of PCV13, 2) characterize the normal development of the nasopharyngeal microbiome in the first two years of life, and 3) study the greater environmental context 
for the child, including the microbes on the mother and household contacts, to reveal routes of 
colonization. 
We conducted a longitudinal study, enrolling 120 newborns in The Gambia between March and 
September 2013 and followed them for the first two years of life. Risk factor data and nasopharyngeal 
samples (NPS) were collected each month in the first year and every three months in the second year, 
including the three visits when the infants received the PCV13. 
With this rich dataset, we have described the characteristics of the nasopharyngeal microbiome among 
our cohort, as well as the variability of the microbiome during the first two years of life. Dirichlet 
Multinomial mixture models are being used to assess demographic and risk factors for colonization. 
Development of New Genetic Tools to Determine the Role of Siderophores in Clostridium 
Difficile Pathogenesis 
Jessica L. Hastie , Paul E. Carlson, Jr. 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
Clostridium difficile (Cd) is the leading cause of hospital acquired infectious diarrhea. Antibiotic 
treatment leads to reduced microbial diversity in the gut, allowing colonization by Cd. Iron is an essential 
nutrient used by host cells and most bacterial species. As a result of numerous mammalian storage 
proteins, very little free iron is present in a mammalian host. Bacteria have evolved numerous 
mechanisms for acquiring this iron, including small molecules with a very high affinity for iron called siderophores. The genomes of many Cd strains encode genes with annotated roles in siderophores 
-87­    
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
    
   
    
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  import, but lack known siderophore biosynthetic genes. Analysis of sequenced Cd genomes identified 
genes for biosynthesis of the siderophore yersiniabactin (Yb) in a subset of strains. We identified 
orthologs of the genes for Yb biosynthesis in 28/166 tested strains. We hypothesize that Yb plays a role 
in Cd pathogenesis and may contribute to increased disease severity observed for some isolates. To test this hypothesis, we will make isogenic mutants lacking the Yb biosynthesis pathway and examine its role 
in pathogenesis. Making mutants in clinical isolates of Cd has proven difficult. Current methods, 
including ClosTron and codA based allelic exchange, allow for genetic manipulation of one or two 
strains, but are not broadly applicable to all clinical isolates and have not worked to date in strains 
harboring the genes for Yb biosynthesis. We are currently developing a method to create clean deletions in these strains, including the highly virulent laboratory strain VPI 10463, which encodes for Yb biosynthesis. Development of this method will be crucial to examine differences between Cd clinical isolates, including the role of Yb. We predict such differences will provide insight into the pathogenesis 
of Cd strains leading to improved treatment options. 
Functional Dynamics of the Gut Microbiome in Healthy Subjects During and After 6 
Months of Consumption of Probiotic Lactobacillus Rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103 vs . 
Placebo 
Patricia L. Hibberd
1, Yang Song2, Claire M. Fraser2 
1Boston University School of Public Health; 2Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine 
Probiotics are believed to have health benefits but little is known about the mechanisms by which these 
purported effects occur. We conducted a phase I, double-blinded, placebo controlled randomized trial under an Investigational New Drug (IND) application to evaluate the safety of a single-organism probiotic, Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103 (LGG), and its effects the structure and functional 
dynamics of the gut microbiota. The study was conducted in 50 healthy adults aged 18-50, 39 of whom 
received LGG (2×1010 colony forming units daily) for 6 months and 11 received matching placebo. All 
were followed for an additional 6 months off study drug. Stool samples were obtained prior to the start 
of study drug, at month 1, 3 and 6 while taking study drug and at month 7 and 12 after completing study drug. There were no serious adverse events. The mechanistic studies were conducted in the most 
compliant subjects (based on pill counts and LGG culture) – 6 receiving LGG and 6 receiving placebo. The 
relative abundance of Lactobacillus rhamnosus transcripts was significantly greater after consuming LGG 
for 28 days and 3 months, compared to baseline levels in LGG the group. LGG was also associated with an increase in the expression of fatty acid biosynthesis genes that contribute to butyrate biosynthesis. In LGG group, there was an increase in the expression of PTS genes in Roseburia and a decrease in the 
expression of chemotaxis genes. 
Modulation of Neointimal Hyperplasia Severity in Rats by Commensal Microbial Transfer 
Karen J. Ho
1, Cori A. Cason1, Thomas M. Kuntz2, Neil Gottel2, Liqun Xiong1, Qun Jiang1, Eugene B. Chang2, 
Jack A. Gilbert2 
1Northwestern University; 2University of Chicago 
Background: Neointimal hyperplasia is a major contributor to restenosis after arterial interventions. The 
genetic and environmental mechanisms underlying the variable propensity for neointimal hyperplasia 
between individuals are not well understood. One possible modulator could be commensal gut 
-88­     
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
    
  
  microbes. Methods: We cohoused genetically different rats (Lewis [LE] and Sprague Dawley [SD]) which 
harbor different commensal microbes and compared neointimal hyperplasia after carotid angioplasty in 
the cohoused and non-cohoused cohorts. 16S sequencing was used to monitor fecal samples. Results: 
We observed that differences in neointimal hyperplasia between non-cohoused LE and SD rats (median 
intima+media [I+M] area 0.12 mm2 LE vs. 0.26 mm2 SD, P<.0001) were mitigated when rats are 
cohoused, suggesting an environmental effect that outweighs the genetic influence. Specifically, I+M 
area decreased by 23% in SD rats that were cohoused with LE rats (P<.0001), and there was a trend 
towards a 10% increase in I+M area in cohoused LE rats. Principal component analysis revealed that 
fecal samples from cohoused rats diverged from non-cohoused rats in both strains (P<.001 SD, P=.008 LE). The greatest change was cohoused SD samples becoming similar to non-cohoused LE samples over time, which correlates with the carotid morphometric data. Comparative analysis showed that abundance of the bacterial genera Peptococcus and Blautia negatively correlated with I+M area in both 
strains (P<.001- Spearman’s ρ -0.8). Ongoing studies will delineate the potential causative relationship 
between these microbes and neointimal hyperplasia. Conclusions: Gut microbes potentially regulate the 
severity of arterial remodeling after vascular interventions. 
Metabolomic Profiling of the Infant Stool Microbiota: Associations With Delivery Mode 
and Diet in the New Hampshire Birth Cohort Study Metabolomic Profiling of the Infant 
Stool Microbiota 
Anne G. Hoen
1, Kelly Mercier2, Susan McRitchie3, Juliette C. Madan1, Susan Sumner3, Margaret R. 
Karagas1 
1Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth College; 2RTI International; 3The University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 
The intestinal microbiota plays a critical role in infant development, with important functions for 
nutrient metabolism and immune maturation. Using 1H NMR metabolomic profiling, we characterized 
100 stool samples collected from six week old infants enrolled in the New Hampshire Birth Cohort Study 
to identify functional relationships between the stool microbiota and delivery mode and feeding 
method. We abstracted delivery mode from the delivery medical record and ascertained feeding practices with a telephone survey. We used multivariate analysis methods to reduce the dimensionality of metabolomics profiles and enable their visualization by study groups defined by delivery mode (vaginal vs. Cesarean) and feeding during the first six weeks (exclusively breast fed vs. exclusively 
formula fed/combination fed). Statistical tests were conducted using a two-sided t-test with correction 
for unequal variances. Library-matched metabolites that were important to differentiating the study groups were analyzed for metabolite set enrichment analysis using MetaboAnalyst. Our analyses indicated discrimination by both delivery mode and diet. We identified 37 metabolites that were 
important for differentiating delivery mode groups and 54 metabolites that were important for 
differentiating feeding groups, including 29 that differentiated both. We conclude that the microbial 
communities colonizing the gastrointestinal tracts of infants are functionally distinct when compared 
according to delivery mode and feeding groups. Furthermore, different but overlapping sets of metabolites and metabolic pathways define delivery mode and diet metabotypes. 
-89­      
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  Fecal Bile Acids and Steroids Correlate With Abdominal Pain in Children With Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome 
Numan Oezguen, Emily B. Hollister , Robert Shulman 
Baylor College of Medicine 
Purpose: Childhood irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) affects up to 20% of children worldwide. Altered gut 
microbial and biochemical composition are reported to correlate with symptoms of IBS. Our study 
explored the role of microbial-metabolite interactions by determining whether the fecal metabolome: 
(1) differed between healthy control (HC) and IBS children; (2) correlated with abdominal pain and/or 
microbial community composition and biochemical capacity. Methods: Children (7-12 years) with IBS 
(n=36; Rome III criteria) and HC (n=34) were enrolled. All completed questionnaires and a 2-week diary 
which captured pain frequency/severity and stooling frequency/form. A fecal specimen collected during diary completion was processed for 16S rRNA and shotgun metagenomic sequencing, unbiased global 
metabolomics and quantitative MS. Group differences were assessed by Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon 
testing, correcting for false discovery rates. Multi-omic analysis was performed (Spearman rank sum 
correlations). Results: Fecal microbiome and metabolite composition were similar in HC and IBS. 
Significant correlations were recorded between abdominal pain and secondary bile acids (r>0.34; 
p<0.02) and steroids (r>0.31; p<0.04). These pathways correlated significantly with abdominal pain and relative abundances of genera Oscilibacter, Eggerthella, Haemophilus, Ruminococcus, and Lactobacillus. 
Abdominal pain correlated significantly with the genus Alistipes. Conclusion: We identified a previously 
unappreciated relationship between a common cholesterol-based biochemical pathway and abdominal 
pain in a well-characterized pediatric IBS cohort. We link this new disease-associated biochemical pathway with shifts in microbial community composition. 
Metabolic Modeling of the Vaginal Microbiome: Methods and Progress Updates 
Eunsoo Hong , Qiang Yan, Stephen S. Fong 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
The composition and collective function of the human vaginal microbiome has potential health 
implications including bacterial vaginosis and preterm birth during pregnancy. The vaginal microbiome is a community of numerous microorganisms and changes in composition over short time periods that can 
include several major shifts in composition during pregnancy. To study the interplay of discrete 
microbes within the microbiome and how they affect the composition of the consortium and female 
health, a computational pipeline has been developed to model the vaginal microbiome using 
metagenomics data and includes the ability to integrate disparate experimental data (e. g., 
metatranscriptomic data). This poster will provide information on the components of the computational 
pipeline and provide an update on progress on implementing the pipeline to construct and analyze 
clinical vaginal microbiome data. 
-90­    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  Host-Bacteria Genome Interactions in Tumors 
Julie C. Dunning Hotopp , Kelly Robinson, Karsten Sieber, Nikhil Kumar, David Riley, John Mattick 
University of Maryland, Baltimore 
Bacteria and animals are known to share DNA through horizontal or lateral gene transfer as seen with 
LINE element integrations in N. gonorrheae and ubiquitous Wolbachia integrations in their diverse arthropod and nematode hosts. Through a secondary analysis of public cancer genome sequencing data, we have measured the extent to which bacterial DNA integrations (BDIs) occur into the somatic human 
genome, and concomitantly measured the microbial diversity within cancer samples. Specific tumor 
samples are enriched for BDIs and have a corresponding enrichment of that microbe in the genom e 
sequencing data. Modeling of the integrations suggests they occur in the 5’ -UTR of transcripts that have 
been associated with oncogenesis and that they may form secondary structures that have the potential 
to alter the transcript structure. Laboratory- based reconstructions of those integrations suggest that 
they lead to dysregulation of the gene in a strand-specific manner, meaning inversions of the integrations do not alter transcription. Several bacterial enrichments in the sequencing data had 
associations that led to them being deemed contamination, usually at the sequencing center or the 
tissue source site, but the ones associated with BDIs did not have those attributes, although contamination cannot be ruled out. BDIs that meet our criteria were not identified in the samples with 
contamination. To understand the provenance of reads supporting BDIs better, we have sequenced 
bacteria-infected human cells to measure the rate of chimera artifact formation that would mimic BDIs. 
These results will be highlighted and the context for these results will be discussed. 
Analysis of the Vaginal Microbiome in Health and Disease 
Bernice Huang , Myrna Serrano, Gregory Buck, Jennifer Fettweis, Hardik Parikh, Sophonie Jean, Vaginal 
Microbiome Consortium 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Dysbiosis of the vaginal microbiome has been implicated in several pregnancy complications and 
adverse health outcomes. Vaginal complaints are one of the most common reasons for women seeking medical attention worldwide and clinical symptoms are often misdiagnosed. As part of the Vaginal 
Human Microbiome Project at Virginia Commonwealth University (VaHMP), we sampled close to 5,000 
women from the clinical setting to explore the relationship of the vaginal microbiome with various physiological and infectious conditions. In this unparalleled study characterizing the vaginal microbiome, we analyzed samples using 16S rRNA taxonomic profiles and performed deep whole metagenomics sequencing on a subset of women with symptomatic BV. Species-level analysis of vaginal microbiome 
profiles reveals how the samples further clustered into distinct ‘vagitypes’, driven by the predominant 
bacterial species in the sample. These vagitypes include several Lactobacillus types (L. crispatus, L. iners, 
L. gasseri, L. jensenii), a Gardnerella vaginalis type, a type dominated by bacterial vaginosis-associated bacterium (BVAB1), and many more rare vagitypes dominated by minor vaginal taxa. A complete 
species-level analysis also reveals that vagitypes are correlated with clinical features such as vaginal pH, 
clinical diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis, pregnancy outcomes, age, diabetes status, STI status, diet, sexual 
history and contraceptive use. Overall, this study reveals insights into the diversity of the vaginal 
microbiome and has important implications for future studies exploring how urogenital health is defined 
particularly among women of diverse ethnicities. 
-91­     
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
    
   
   
  
  
  
      
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
   
  
  
 
 
  Synergy Between Genes and the Environment: The Effect of the Microbiome and Host Genetic Variation on Exposures to Enterolignans and Steroid Hormones in Post-
Menopausal European American and African American Women 
Meredith A.J. Hullar
1, S. Yao2, D. Tritchler2, T. O’Connor2, J.W. Lampe1, S. McCann2 
1Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; 2Roswell Park Cancer Institute 
Lignans are phytoestrogens implicated as dietary factors in breast cancer etiology due to structural and 
functional similarities to endogenous estrogens. Breast cancer risk has been positively associated with 
serum and urinary steroid hormones, and may be modified by race. Importantly, steroid hormone 
metabolism and excretion can be modified by diet. Central to this is the conversion of dietary lignans by the gut microbiome to enterolignans: enterodiol (END) and enterolactone (ENL). Our study objectives are (1) to determine how variation in gut microbial community composition, and steroid hormone and 
xenobiotic metabolizing genes affects the metabolism of lignans and steroid hormones, and (2) how 
these associations differ for African American and European American women. We conducted a 
randomized cross-over design 6-week intervention in healthy, postmenopausal women (79 African American and 113 European American) to test the effect of 10g/d of ground flaxseed on (1) production of END and ENL, (2) circulating sex steroid hormones, and (3) the gut microbiome. Specimens were collected at baseline and the end of each intervention period. We measured the microbiome by 
sequencing (MiSeq) the V1-V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene and imputed functional genes, SNP analysis 
by Sequenom MassArray for variation in steroid hormone metabolism, and GC/MS to measure 24 hour urinary END and ENL. Direct and indirect effects of study variables on these measures will be modeled by traceable regressions to gain insight into functional mechanisms that may influence racial disparities in breast cancer outcomes. Supported by U01 CA161809. 
Commensal Mucin Degradation Stimulates Respiratory Pathogen Growth in Chronic 
Lower Airway Disease 
Jeffrey Flynn, Jordan Dunitz, Ryan Hunter , Sarah Lucas, Clayton Evert 
University of Minnesota 
The CF lung microbiota plays a critical role in the progression of airway disease. While interactions 
between canonical pathogens (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphyloccocus aureus) have been described in detail, the role of commensal bacteria (notably, oral-associated anaerobes) in disease progression is unknown. To address these interactions, we used purified airway mucins as a sole carbon 
source to assess the ability of P. aeruginosa to directly utilize respiratory secretions as nutrients in the 
presence and absence of mucin-degrading anaerobes. P. aeruginosa was unable to grow unless co-
cultured in the presence of an oral-derived anaerobic consortium. 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
demonstrated that four genera – Fusobacterium, Veillonella, Prevotella, Streptococcus – were key 
mucin degraders that facilitated Pseudomonas growth. Targeted metabolomics and mutant analyses 
identified propionate and acetate as the central mucin-derived metabolites involved in this cross-feeding relationship. RNAseq was then used to demonstrate that P. aeruginosa directly utilizes these 
metabolites in vivo, providing evidence for mucin-based cross-feeding in the progression of lung disease. 
Finally, a mucin-overproducing cell line was used to assess whether P. aeruginosa colonization of the 
epithelium was facilitated by mucin degradation. P. aeruginosa showed increased colonization and a 
heightened immune response (IL-8) when co-seeded with mucin degraders. Together, these data 
implicate a central role for commensal anaerobes in the colonization of the airways by P. aeruginosa, 
-92­     
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 and motivate future studies targeting bacterial mucin fermentation as a potential therapeutic intervention for P. aeruginosa airway infections. 
Intestinal Microbiota Influence Thymic Development in Neonates 
Nitya Jain , Brian Seed, Maria Ennamorati, Kara Clerkin, Stefan Halvorsen, Kaitlin Berry, Caryn Porter, 
Huajun Wang, Vladimir Yeliseyev, Meredith Weglarz, Lynn Bry, Slim Sassi 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
Mammalian intestinal microbial communities harbor both an enormous source of commensals as well as 
potential pathogens. In the postnatal period, the immune system must rapidly develop a discrimination 
of microbial friend from foe akin to that of self-non-self recognition. Lymphocytes of the T cell lineage that participate in this mucosal process develop in the thymus. We show here that thymic development 
is influenced by the intestinal microbiota, and that plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) are one class of 
antigen presenting cell that transit from the intestine to the thymus during the postnatal period. Experimental perturbation of bacteria and PDCs produces changes in the thymic distribution and 
residency of PLZF+ innate-like cells. Thus, PDCs may act as sensors of intestinal microbial status that 
convey compartment information to the thymus to promote appropriate immune responses to the 
microbiota. 
HIV Exposure and Gut Microbiota in South African Infan ts 
Jerome Wendoh
1, Heather Jaspan2, Katie Lennard1, Alain Stintzi3, Ulas Karaoz5, James Butcher3, Eoin 
Brodie5, William Cameron4 
1University of Cape Town; 2Seattle Children’s Research Institute-3University of Ottawa; 4Ottawa Hospital 
Research Institute; 5Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
HIV-exposed uninfected infants (HEU) have higher morbidity and mortality and altered immunity 
compared to HIV unexposed (HU) infants. The gut microbiome is crucial for immune development. 
Infant microbiota is shaped by maternal factors and diet. HIV-infected mothers may have altered gut, vaginal, and breastmilk microbiota. HEU also initiate prophylactic antibiotics at 6 weeks of age. 
Term, vaginally delivered, South African HEU and HU infants were recruited at birth, and followed until 
36 weeks. Stool microbial DNA was extracted and the V6 region of the 16S rRNA gene was Illumina 
sequenced. Data was pre-processed using QIIME and UPARSE, and downstream analyses performed using Phyloseq and metagenomeSeq R packages. 
There were no significant difference in alpha diversity between HEU and HU at any time point. However, 
significant differences in beta diversity were evident at birth, before feeding practices were established 
(Adonis p=0.001). This difference was no longer evident at 1 week, after breastfeeding was introduced 
(Adonis p=0.383). At birth, HEU stool was enriched in the taxa Klebsiella and Blautia and deficient in 
Erysipelotrichaceae. 
Maternal HIV infection during gestation or delivery profoundly alters gut microbial makeup, before 
feeding is introduced. 
-93­    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
   
 
 
    
    
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
    
   
  
    
  
   
    
   Analysis of Niche-Specific Adaptations of Vaginal Bifidobacterium spp. Leveraged by Longitudinal Datasets 
Nicole R. Jimenez , The Vaginal Microbiome Consortium, Jennifer M. Fettweis 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Bifidobacterium species are key players in early infant gut development via transmission from maternal 
body sites and the environment. However, most of what is currently known about Bifidobacterium species comes from the studies of gut isolates. Thus, we sought to elucidate the role of Bifidobacterium 
species in the vaginal microbiome. Through a 16S rRNA study of ~6,000 samples from the women who 
participated in the Vaginal Human Microbiome Project (VaHMP) at VCU and ~185,000 samples through the Multi-Omic Microbiome Study-Pregnancy Initiative (MOMS-PI) pregnant cohort, we identified a rare vagitype dominated by Bifidobacterium species, which exhibited stability over time. The most common species observed were Bifidobacterium breve and Bifidobacterium longum subspecies infantis, which 
have been previously reported to be the most dominant taxa of the infant gut microbiome. Following 
this observation, we isolated 10 strains of Bifidobacterium breve from samples exhibiting that vagitype 
and performed bacterial whole genome sequencing. Comparative genomic analyses showed that while 
most genes were conserved across all B. breve niche strains, the vaginal isolates exhibited differences in predicted carbohydrate and sulfur metabolism, membrane transport and mobile elements compared to gut isolates. These differences may reflect mechanisms of adaptation to the vaginal environment and 
modulation of the microbiome. This work informs our ongoing investigations of Bifidobacterium strain 
variation among maternal vaginal, maternal rectal and infant stool samples. 
Human Derived Gut Microbiota Modulates Colonic Secretion in Mice by Regulating 
5-HT3 Receptor Expression via Production of Acetate 
Yogesh Bhattarai, Bradley A. Schmidt, Purna C. Kashyap, David R. Linden, John Rainey, Eric Larson, 
Madhusudan Grover, Arthur Beyder, Gianrico Farrugia 
Enteric Neuroscience Program, Mayo Clinic 
We have shown that human gut microbiota increases biosynthesis of host serotonin (5-HT), an 
important neurotransmitter that increases intestinal secretion. In this study we investigated whether 
gut microbiota modulates 5-HT3R expression and host secretory response to 5-HT. 
Methods: We used proximal colon mucosa-submucosa preparations from germ free (GF) and 
humanized (ex-GF colonized with human bacteria for 4 weeks; HM) mice for Ussing chamber studies and 
determined change in short circuit current (ΔIsc) in response to 5 -HT (0.003-300µM) with or without 
ondansetron. Receptor expression was quantified using rt-PCR (normalized to L32) and western blot 
(normalized to GAPDH). Differences between groups were tested using either t-test or ANOVA with P-
value lower than 0.05 considered significant. Results: 5-HT induced ΔIsc was significantly higher in GF 
than HM mice. To determine if this was due to an alteration in 5-HTR, we quantified receptor expression 
and found significantly higher 5-HT3R mRNA and protein expression in GF tissues compared to HM 
tissues. To determine the microbial mediators that affect expression of 5HT3R, we developed organoids 
from GF mouse colon and found a significant decrease in 5-HT3R mRNA after application of 10mM 
acetate. Ondansetron (blocks epithelial and neuronal 5HT3R) significantly blocked 5-HT induced 
maximum ΔIsc in GF mice but not HM mice. TTX (500 nM; blocks neuronal transmission) had no effect of 
ondansetron inhibition of 5- HT-induced ΔIsc, suggesting a primary effect on epithelial 5HT3R. 
-94­        
  
 
 
     
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Conclusion: Gut microbial colonization modulate intestinal secretion by downregulating epithelial 5­
HT3R expression via acetate production and decreasing host secretory response to 5-HT. 
Airway Colonization Induces Th17 Responses in the Lungs and Modulates Allergic 
Airway Sensitization in Mouse Model of Asthma 
Natalia Jaeger, Ryan McDonough, Andrew Kau , Jiani Chai, Chyi Hsieh 
Washington University, St. Louis 
Asthma is a common immune disorder caused by allergic sensitization leading to airway inflammation 
and obstruction. Previous work has demonstrated that individuals with asthma harbor an altered 
consortium of microbes within their lungs that is thought to contribute to allergic airway pathogenesis. While investigating the role of airway microbes in a mouse model of asthma, we found that many 
animals were colonized with Bordetella pseudohinzii, a newly described non-classical bordetella species. 
We found that inoculation of B. pseudohinzii into mice resulted in long-term colonization of the lungs and upper respiratory tract but did not cause weight loss, pneumonia or other apparent symptoms. 
Immunologic phenotyping of colonized mice showed that B. pseudohinzii induced the differentiation of 
antigen specific Th17 cells. This response was primarily detected in the lungs but also the spleens of colonized animals. Inducing allergic airway inflammation in colonized mice resulted in an altered allergic response characterized by decreased eosinophilic inflammation. Together, these results imply an important role for bacterial airway colonization in modulating immune responses in the lung. 
Microbial Delivery of Antimicrobial Peptides for Protection Against Multidrug-Resistant 
Pathogens 
Yiannis Kaznessis , Kathryn Geldart, Brittany Forkus, Gary Dunny, Sushma Kommineni, Nita Salzman 
University of Minnesota 
Numerous probiotic bacterial species are known to produce antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) targeting 
different pathogens of interest, but native peptide expression is often low or induced under 
uncontrollable conditions, making these probiotics therapeutically unreliable. 
We harness this natural defense mechanism for the treatment of intestinal infections by engineering 
probiotic bacteria that can be orally administered and will reliably express and secrete AMPs targeting 
the pathogen of interest in the intestines. We develop libraries of probiotic species, promoters, secretion systems, and AMPs to enable rapid development of new probiotics targeting a wide array of pathogens. 
In this presentation, we will discuss probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917 (EcN) engineered to deliver AMPs 
targeting vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE), an opportunistic pathogen that causes thousands of 
hospital-acquired infections and deaths each year. 
We first demonstrate the ability of the probiotic to reduce VRE counts in laboratory cultures. Modified 
EcN eliminates over 99% of VR E. faecium after one hour of co-culture. 
-95­    
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
      
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 We then test the efficacy of our probiotics in reducing intestinal pathogen counts in mice colonized with VRE via oral administration. Mice administered EcN producing AMPs on average exhibited a 10x 
reduction in E. faecium counts compared to mice administered unmodified probiotic. 
We demonstrate that this EcN probiotic platform can be readily modified to express alternative peptides 
targeting a variety of pathogens. Additionally, unlike broad-spectrum antibiotics, the AMPs expressed by 
these microbes offer species-specific activity. This specificity reduces pressure for resistance 
development. 
Nasal Microbiome Features of Staphylococcus Aureus Colonization and Infection 
During Critical Illness 
Brendan J. Kelly , Frederic D. Bushman, Ebbing Lautenbach, Ronald G. Collman 
University of Pennsylvania 
Background: Intranasal colonization with Staphylococcus aureus (SA) is a risk factor for nosocomial SA 
infection. We evaluated the bacterial community features associated with SA colonization and infection 
in a cohort of critically ill subjects at high risk for nosocomial SA infection. Methods: We enrolled a 
discovery cohort (15 intubated subjects) and a validation cohort (65 intubated subjects) from a medical intensive care unit at an academic medical center. Flocked swab samples from the anterior nares were collected at 24-48 hour intervals for the duration of intubation. We performed Illumina MiSeq 
sequencing of the amplified V1-V2 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene, clustered operational 
taxonomic units (OTUs) at 97% sequence similarity, and assigned taxonomy using BLAST against the 
Living Tree Project database. Results: 42 specimens were collected from the discovery cohort; 157 
specimens were collected from the validation cohort. The most commonly observed species were 
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum, Corynebacterium propinquum, 
Propionibacterium acnes, and SA. Principal coordinate analysis of pairwise unweighted Jaccard distances 
revealed clustering of SA-positive samples. Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum was most strongly associated with the absence of SA infection (p < 0.001). Conclusions: The presence of Corynebacterium 
tuberculostearicum in the anterior nares bacterial community is associated with lower risk of SA 
infection. 
Gut Microbial Metabolites Fuel Host Antibody Responses 
Myung Kim, Yaqing Qie, Chang Kim 
Purdue University 
Antibody production is a metabolically demanding process that is regulated by gut microbiota, but the 
microbial products supporting B cell responses remain incompletely identified. We report that short-
chain fatty acids (SCFAs), produced by gut microbiota as fermentation products of dietary fiber, support 
host antibody responses. In B cells, SCFAs increase acetyl-CoA and regulate metabolic sensors to increase oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, and fatty acid synthesis, which produce energy and building blocks supporting antibody production. In parallel, SCFAs control gene expression to express 
molecules necessary for plasma B cell differentiation. Mice with low SCFA production due to reduced 
dietary fiber consumption or microbial insufficiency are defective in homeostatic and pathogen-specific 
antibody responses, resulting in greater pathogen susceptibility. However, SCFA or dietary fiber intake 
-96­     
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
   
     
   
  
  
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
   
 
 
   
 restores this immune deficiency. This B cell-helping function of SCFAs is detected from the intestines to 
systemic tissues and conserved among mouse and human B cells, highlighting its importance. 
Probiotic Use of Women Followed for Gut Microbial Composition in Relation to Perinatal 
Mood and Anxiety Disorders 
Mary Kimmel1, Hannah Rackers1, Megan Barry1, Rebecca Santelli1, Ian Carroll2, Samantha Meltzer-Brody1 
1Department of Psychiatry, The University of North Carolina School of Public Health; 2Department of 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Objective: While gut microbial composition changes over pregnancy and microbial composition has 
been linked to depression and anxiety, the microbiota- gut-brain axis has not been studied in relation to 
Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders (PMAD). Women desire dietary interventions such probiotics to 
prevent development of PMAD, but there is limited data. Methods: Thirty women, recruited in the 1st 
or 2nd trimester through flyers, the web and word of mouth, were given the SCID-IV to determine 
current and past psychiatric disorder s. Women with bipolar or psychotic disorders were excluded. 
Subjects were asked about consumption of probiotic containing foods and pills. Results: Almost half had 
a current psychiatric diagnosis (majority with an anxiety disorder). 24 had a past psychiatric diagnosis including 40% with a history of Major Depression and 23% with a history of PTSD. Half of the subjects were classified as high consumers of probiotics (i.e., consume yogurt daily and/or consume kefir, kombucha, sauerkraut or miso on a regular basis and/or take a probiotic pill). 7 in the high consumers 
had a current diagnosis and 8 in the low consumers had a current diagnosis. When the last person 
delivers in July, fecal samples from two points in pregnancy and one postpartum for all subjects will be 
analyzed for microbial composition. Conclusions: There was no significant difference whether the 
subject was a high consumer of probiotics or not and whether she had a current psychiatric diagnosis. 
This study provided information for more systematically assessing probiotic consumption in future 
studies. However this may indicate other factors will be more important for understanding the 
microbiota- gut-brain axis and PMAD. 
Vaginal Bacteria Modify HIV Tenofovir Microbicide Efficacy in African Women 
Nichole R. Klatt
1, Ryan Cheu1, Kenzie Birse2,3, Alexander S. Zevin1, Michelle Perner2,3, Laura Noël-Romas2,3 , 
Anneke Grobler4, Garrett Westmacott5, Irene Y. Xie2,3, Jennifer Butler2,3, Leila Mansoor4, Lyle R. 
McKinnon3,4, Jo-Ann S. Passmore6,4, Quarraisha Abdool Karim4,7, Salim S. Abdool Karim4,7, Adam D. 
Burgener2,3,8 
1Department of Pharmaceutics, Washington National Primate Research Center, University of 
Washington; 2National HIV and Retrovirology Laboratories, JC Wilt Center for Infectious Diseases, Public 
Health Agency of Canada; 3Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba; 4Centre for the AIDS Program of Research in South Africa, University of KwaZulu-Natal; 5Mass 
Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of 
Canada; 6Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town and National 
Health Laboratory Service; 7Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University 
Microbicide-based pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV infection has shown inconsistent 
results in women. We investigated whether the vaginal microbiome modulated topical microbicide 
efficacy in the CAPRISA 004 tenofovir gel trial. Two major bacterial community state-types were 
-97­    
 
  
   
  
    
 
  
    
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  identified in the 688 women profiled; one of low diversity where Lactobacillus iners and crispatus were 
the most common (Lactobacillus-dominant (LD), 59.2%), and the other with high ecological diversity 
where Gardnerella vaginalis predominated, co-dominant with Prevotella, Mobiluncus, and other 
anaerobic bacteria (non-Lactobacillus-dominant (non-LD), 40.8%). Women with LD had three-fold higher protection than women with non-LD; HIV incidence rates in the tenofovir and placebo gel arms were 2.7 
and 6.9 per 100 women-years in LD women (Incidence rate ratio (IRR)=0.39 (95% Confidence Interval) 
(CI) 0.16, 0.89, P=0.013), compared to 6.4 and 7.8 per 100 women-years in non-LD women, respectively 
(IRR=0.82 ; CI: 0.37,1.77; P=0.644). Detectible mucosal tenofovir was considerably lower in non-LD 
women (P=0.008), despite similar adherence, and negatively correlated with G. vaginalis abundance and 
other anaerobic bacteria. Bacterial cultures demonstrated that tenofovir is rapidly metabolized and depleted by G. vaginalis, and other anaerobic bacteria. Our study provides new evidence linking vaginal bacteria to microbicide efficacy in women, and proposes a putative mechanism of tenofovir depletion 
via metabolism by bacteria, which may be a factor contributing to the variable effectiveness of topical 
tenofovir-containing microbicides. 
Exposure to Luminal Antigens in Early Life Is Controlled for the Promotion of Tolerance to 
the Microbiota 
Kathryn A. Knoop , Phillip I. Tarr, Rodney D. Newberry, Charles O. Elson, Keely G. McDonald 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
It has been observed early life is an important time for the development of tolerogenic responses. This 
time is also correlated to the establishment of the intestinal microbiota, which is also necessary for the 
development of tolerance. However, it is unclear why tolerance is established best during early life and 
how the microbiota confers an effect on the immune system. We identified a pre-weaning interval in which gut luminal antigens, including those from the microbiota, are shunted to the colonic immune 
system to induce the developme nt of RORγt+ inducible regulatory T cells (iTregs) and enhanced 
tolerance towards both dietary antigens and the commensal microbiota. Luminal antigen delivery in 
early life was mediated by the formation of goblet cell-associated antigen passages (GAPs), which were regulated by goblet cell intrinsic sensing of breast milk derived epidermal growth factor and the 
blooming gut microbiota. Disruption of the gut microbiota or GAP formation and antigen delivery during 
early life resulted in abrogation of tolerance to dietary antigens encountered during this time, a long-lived decrease in RORγt+ iTregs, and skewing of the immune system toward systemic allergic Th2 
responses. We propose the microbiota, along with maternal factors, control both antigen delivery and 
the induction of RORγt+ iTregs during early life facilitating enhanced tolerance to dietary and microbial 
antigens encountered during this time and allowing development of a balanced and durable immune system necessary to suppress inappropriate responses. 
-98­     
 
  
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
  Roux- en-Y Gastric Bypass Surgery Shifts Gut Microbial Communities and Associated 
Metabolites 
Rosa Krajmalnik-Brown1, Zehra Esra Ilhan1, John K. DiBaise2, Nancy Isern3, David W. Hoyt3, Andrew K. 
Marcus1, Dae-Wook Kang1, Michael D. Crowell2, Bruce E. Rittmann1 
1Biodesign Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology, Arizona State University; 2Mayo Clinic ; 
3Pacific Northwestern National Laboratory 
Drastic physiological changes happen after bariatric surgeries, specifically Roux- en-Y Gastric Bypass 
(RYGB), these changes lead to environmental changes that craft the gut microbiome. Changes in gut 
microbiome after RYGB have been associated with weight loss and diabetes remission in humans. Microorganisms produce a variety of metabolites that enhance host-microbe communication; these molecules vary from fermentation end products such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) to secondary bile acids. SCFAs, butyrate, and propionate, increase in concentrations after RYGB surgery and are known to 
induce satiety in animals due to their affinity to free fatty acid receptors. RYGB surgery also increases 
the abundance of amino acid degradation genes, although the metabolic products have not been 
identified or quantified in humans yet. In a longitudinal study, my research group is investigating microbial and metabolic changes after RYGB surgery and comparing findings with cross-sectional studies. Microbiome and metabolic changes seem long lasting and associated with weight-loss after RYGB. Careful analysis of our wide range of genomic and metabolic data will help uncover possible 
mechanisms for the hypothesized role of the gut microbiome and successful weight loss after RYGB, this 
ultimately can lead to microbiome targeted non-surgical therapies. 
Lactobacillus-Deficient Cervicovaginal Bacterial Communities Are Associated With 
Increased HIV Acquisition in Young South African Women 
Christina Gosmann, Melis Anahtar, Douglas Kwon , Scott A. Handley, Mara Farcasanu, Galeb Abu-Ali, 
Curtis Huttenhower, Bruce D. Walker, Herbert W. Virgin 
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard 
The female genital tract (FGT) plays a critical role in the acquisition of HIV infection in women. Although 
the majority of new infections globally occur in women following HIV passage across the FGT, we do not 
fully understand the mucosal factors that affect susceptibility. Elevated inflammation in the FGT is associated with increased HIV risk. Cervicovaginal bacteria modulate genital inflammation, however their role in HIV susceptibility has not been elucidated. In a prospective cohort of young, healthy South African women, we found that individuals with diverse genital bacterial communities dominated by 
anaerobes other than Gardnerella were at over 4-fold higher risk of acquiring HIV and had increased 
numbers of activated mucosal CD4+ T cells compared to those with Lactobacillus crispatus-dominant 
communities. We identified specific bacterial taxa linked with reduced (L. crispatus) or elevated 
(Prevotella, Sneathia, and other anaerobes) inflammation and HIV infection and found that high-risk bacteria increased numbers of activated genital CD4+ T cells in a murine model. We used single cell 
RNAseq to identify specific host responses involved in the generation of genital inflammation by high 
risk bacterial communities. Our results suggest that highly prevalent genital bacteria increase HIV risk by 
inducing mucosal HIV target cells. These findings may be leveraged to reduce HIV acquisition in women 
living in sub-Saharan Africa. 
-99­      
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
     
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 Transcriptomic Profile of the Caenorhabditis Elegans Intestinal Bacteria 
Jason Chan, Jamey Brumbaugh, Anastasia Ardesheva, Christopher McLimans, Justin Wright, Regina 
Lamendella 
Juniata College 
Gut bacteria impact many essential functions in any host organisms, ranging from the regulation of 
nutrient resources and mobilization, animal development, and immune responses amongst others. Recently, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has become an advantageous model organism to better 
understand how bacteria, and its metabolic and gene regulatory networks, regulate host physiology. In 
particular, metabolites from bacteria alter development, lifespan, and pathogen resistance in worms. 
The ability to use high-throughput sequencing to identify different bacterial communities in varying host genotypes has increased our knowledge of host-bacteria interspecies interactions. However, less is known regarding the transcriptional profile of the bacteria in the worm; specifically, how does the 
transcriptional profile change with host genotype? To better examine this, we developed an RNAseq 
protocol and bioinformatics pipeline to elucidate bacterial gene expression differences in known models 
of aging. Briefly, RNA extracts (n=18) were subject to ribosomal RNA subtraction, cDNA synthesis, 
Nextera library preparation and sequencing using the Illumina Hiseq platform. Our bioinformatics pipeline utilizes the most robust programs for quality filtering, assembly, annotation, differential gene 
analysis. Preliminary bacterial transcriptome data indicate differences in bacterial expression of several 
biosynthetic pathways and virulence mechanisms which may contribute to the aging phenotypes of the 
long-lived daf-2/InsR mutant and the short-lived daf-16/FOXO transcription factor mutant. These studies will help further identify interspecies interactions that modify host physiology. 
Gut Microbial Dysbiosis and Post-Transplant Complications in Kidney Transp lant 
Recipients 
John Lee
1, Matthew Magruder1, Lisa Zhang1, Thangamani Muthukumar1, Darshana Dadhania1, Lilan 
Ling2, Ying Taur2, Lars Westblade1, Michael Satlin1, Amy Robertson3, Eric Pamer2, Manikkam 
Suthanthiran1 
1Weill Cornell Medicine; 2Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; 3New York Presbyterian Hospital ­
Weill Cornell Medical Center 
Gut microbial dysbiosis has been linked to infectious and immunological complications in recipients of 
stem cell or organ transplantation. We investigated the relationship between the gut microbiota and post-transplant complications: (1) diarrhea; and (2) urinary tract infections (UTI). We prospectively 
recruited 71 kidney transplant recipients for serial fecal specimens and profiled their gut microbiota 
using 16S rRNA deep sequencing of the V4-V5 region. Twenty-four subjects developed post-transplant 
diarrhea with 18 subjects providing 29 fecal samples at the time of diarrhea (N=29, Diarrheal Specimens) 
while 47 subjects did not develop diarrhea in the first 3 months of transplantation and provided 119 
fecal samples (N=119, No Diarrheal Specimens). Compared to No Diarrheal Specimens, the Diarrheal Specimens had a lower Shannon diversity index (P<0.001) and had lower abundances of 13 commensal bacterial genera ( FDR<0.15). Within the Diarrheal Specimens, 93% were negative for bacterial, parasitic, 
and viral diarrheal-associated pathogens when evaluated using the FilmArray GI Panel PCR assay. Among 
the 71 subjects, 13 developed Gram-negative UTIs with 9 subjects providing 11 fecal samples at the time 
of UTI (N=11, UTI-associated Specimens) while 58 subjects did not develop UTI in the first 3 months of 
transplantation and provided 135 fecal samples (N=135, No UTI-associated Specimens). The UTI-
associated Specimens had significantly higher fecal Proteobacteria abundance than the No UTI­
- 100 ­    
   
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   associated Specimens (P<0.05). Our identification that post-transplant diarrhea and UTI are associated with gut dysbioses suggests targeting the gut microbiota may be of value in preventing and/or treating 
these complications. 
Commensal Corynebacterium Shifts Staphylococcus Aureus Toward Commensalism by 
Quenching Quorum Sensing 
Matthew M. Ramsey
1, Marcelo O. Friere2, Rebecca A Gabrilska1, Kendra P. Rumbaugh2, Katherine P. 
Lemon1,3 
1The Forsyth Institute Cambridge; 2Department of Surgery, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center; 
3Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School 
The interactions between humans and their microbiota range along the continuum from commensalism 
to pathogenesis. In some cases, the same bacterial species that colonize humans asymptomatically also 
cause severe infections. Key factors in modulating these interactions appear to include host and 
bacterial genetics and the microbiota composition, but precise relationships remain unclear. We have evidence that virulence of Staphylococcus aureus, a clinically significant human pathogen, is limited by coresidency with commensal Corynebacterium species. S. aureus resides in the nostril and skin microbiota of up to 25% of humans, often with Corynebacterium, e.g., the common human skin 
commensal Corynebacterium striatum. S. aureus virulence can be triggered by its quorum sensing 
accessory gene regulator (agr) system, allowing transition between commensal and pathogenic states. We found that S. aureus responds to coculture with C. striatum with decreased expression of agr­induced virulence genes and increased expression of agr-repressed genes encoding surface-associated 
proteins. Among the S. aureus genes exhibiting increased expression in the presence of C. striatum are a 
number of genes reportedly expressed during nasal colonization. Consistent with this, exposure to cell-free conditioned medium from C. striatum, S. aureus exhibited decreased hemolysin activity and 
increased epithelial cell adhesion. Finally, in a murine subcutaneous abscess infection model, S. aureus 
populations were reduced by coinfection with C. striatum, whereas C. striatum numbers expanded. 
These data are consistent with a model in which S. aureus responds to commensal Corynebacterium species by limiting virulence and shifting toward a commensal state. 
Dissecting the Human Skin Microbiome in Health and Disease – From Strain-Level 
Composition to Transcriptional and Metabolic Activities in the Host Environment 
Huiying Li , Dezhi Kang, Sorel Fitz-Gibbon, Shuta Tomida, Baochen Shi, Noah Craft, George Weinstock 
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles 
The human skin microbiome plays important roles in skin health and disease. However, bacterial 
population structure and diversity at the strain level, as well as the underlying molecular mechanisms of 
the microbiome in health and disease pathogenesis are often poorly understood. Using acne as a 
disease model, we aim to understand the skin microbiome at the strain level and at the transcriptional 
and metabolic levels in response to host metabolism. Our metagenomic analysis demonstrated that the 
strain population structures of Propionibacterium acnes, a major skin commensal, were significantly 
different between acne and healthy individuals. Certain strains were highly associated with acne while other strains were enriched in healthy skin. By metatranscriptomic analysis, we found that the transcriptional profiles of the skin microbiota of acne patients were distinct from healthy individuals. 
- 101 ­    
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
     
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 The vitamin B12 biosynthesis pathway in P. acnes was significantly down-regulated in acne patients. We further revealed that vitamin B12 level modulates the production of porphyrins, a group of 
proinflammatory metabolites, in P. acnes in a strain-specific manner. Acne-associated type IA-2 strains 
inherently produce significantly higher levels of porphyrins, which were further enhanced by vitamin B12 supplementation. On the other hand, health-associated type II strains produced low levels of 
porphyrins and did not respond to vitamin B12. Our studies demonstrated a new paradigm of the strain 
composition and metabolic activities of the skin microbiome that could explain disease pathogenesis 
and provided evidence that metabolite-mediated interactions between the host and the skin microbiota 
play essential roles in disease development. 
Role of the Human Virome in Kidney Transplant Disease 
Efrem Lim
1,2, Daniel Brennan1, David Wang1 
1Arizona State University; 2Washington University, St. Louis 
The tenuous balance between health and disease is influenced by the interplay between the human 
virome and host immune functions. This is particularly important in the setting of vulnerable host 
immune states such as immunosuppression in solid organ transplant recipients. We found that 
alterations in the circulatory (plasma) virome in kidney transplant recipients were associated wit h 
progression towards BK polyomavirus-associated nephropathy (BKVAN) in a manner that reversed when 
immunosuppression was reduced. We demonstrate that the urinary virome harbors a distinct 
community of viruses that undergoes significant disease-specific contractions. We show that healthy 
individuals also harbor a complex urinary virome, indicating that it is not a transplant-limited artifact. Together, our data has two broad implications. First, immunosuppression-mediated virome alterations may contribute to transplant disease. Second, host functional immunocompetence can be defined by virome/microbiome terms. 
Resetting Gut Microbiota by Lactobacillus Reuteri DSM 17938 Inhibits Treg-Deficiency-
Induced Autoimmunity (IPEX Syndrome ) Via Adenosine 2A Receptors 
Yuying Liu , Baokun He, Thomas K. Hoang, Michael Ferris, Christopher M. Taylor, Xiangjun Tian, Meng 
Luo, Dat Q. Tran, Jain Zhou, Nina Tatevian, Fayong Luo, Jose G. Molina, Michael R. Blackburn, Thomas H. 
Gomez, Stefan Roos, J. Marc Rhoads 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston McGovern Medical School 
Regulatory T-cell (Treg) deficiency causes lethal, CD4+T cell-driven autoimmune diseases. Stem cell 
transplantation is used to treat these diseases, but this procedure is limited by the availability of a 
suitable donor. The intestinal microbiota drives host immune homeostasis by regulating the 
development of Treg, TH1 and TH2 cells. It is currently unclear if Treg-deficiency autoimmune disorders 
can be treated by targeting the enteric microbiota. Our aims are to determine the autoimmunity, gut 
microbiota, and plasma metabolomics affected by probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 17938 (LR), and to further identify the mechanism of modulated metabolite(s) in suppressing autoimmunity in Treg­deficient scurfy (SF) mice. We demonstrated that Foxp3+Treg deficiency results in gut microbial 
dysbiosis and autoimmunity over the lifespan of SF mouse. Remodeling microbiota with LR prolonged 
survival and reduced multi-organ inflammation in SF mice. LR changed the metabolomics profile 
disrupted by Treg-deficiency with a major effect of restoring levels of the purine metabolite inosine. 
Feeding inosine itself prolonged life and inhibited multi-organ inflammation by reducing TH1/TH2 cells 
- 102 ­      
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 and their associated cytokines. Mechanistically, the inhibition of inosine on the differentiation of TH1 and TH2 cells in vitro depended on adenosine A2A receptors. Both A2A receptor specific antagonist or 
genetically knockout A2A to SF mice reversed the anti-inflammatory effects of both inosine and LR in 
vivo. In conclusions, A2A receptors mediate a substantial protective effect of inosine and LR. The LR­modulated-microbiota-inosine-A2A axis might represent a potential avenue for combatting autoimmune 
diseases mediated by Treg dysfunction. 
Niche-Association and Retention Dynamics in the Human Microbiome 
Jason Lloyd-Price
1,2, Anup Mahurkar3, Gholamali Rahnavard1,2, Jonathan Crabtree3, Joshua Orvis3, A. 
Brantley Hall2, Arthur Brady3, Heather H. Creasy3, Carrie McCracken3, Michelle G. Giglio3, Daniel 
McDonald4, Eric A. Franzosa1,2, Rob Knight4,5, Owen White3, Curtis Huttenhower1,2 
1Biostatistics Department, T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health; 2Broad Institute; 3Institute for 
Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine ; 4Department of Pediatrics, 5Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego 
The NIH Human Microbiome Project (HMP) has provided one of the broadest characterizations of the 
baseline human microbiome, and it has served as a reference in studies of disease, microbial population 
diversity, biogeography, and molecular function. Here, we present new findings and a dramatic 
expansion of shotgun metagenomes (now ~2,400 samples) from the HMP, termed HMP1-II, with three new characterizations of microbial health: functional specialization, strain distributions, and temporal 
dynamics. Species-level functional characterization showed different taxa contributing common 
functions at different body sites, as well as newly defining niche- and human-specific microbial metabolism and signaling. Strain identification revealed distinct subspecies clades for some species, some of which showed evidence of strain-level specialization to specific body sites. Temporal analysis using Gaussian processes decomposed microbial and functional variation by their characteristic rates of 
change within and among individuals. Species dynamics in the gut were most individualized, for example, while pathway abundances rarely were. By identifying features which structurally and 
dynamically maintain differences between individuals, we have achieved an improved understanding of 
personalized human microbiome strain-level structure and function. 
Clostridiales Correlate With Intestinal Barrier Maturation in Preterm Infants 
Bing Ma
1, Jacques Ravel1, Rose M. Viscardi3, Elias McComb1, Pawel Gajer1,2, Hongqiu Yang1, Mike 
Humphrys1 
1Institute of Genome Sciences, 2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 3Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine 
Intestinal barrier immaturity, or “ leaky gut, ” is the proximate cause of susceptibility to necrotizing 
enterocolitis in preterm neonates. The impact of the intestinal microbiota development on intestinal 
mucosal barrier integrity has not yet been evaluated. In this study, we investigated a longitudinally 
sampled cohort of 38 preterm infants with gestational age <33 wk and birthweight <1501 gm during the first two weeks of life. We collected fecal samples to access intestinal microbiome at day 1, 8, and 15, 
and measured intestinal permeability (IP) by urinary detection of orally administered sugar probes 
lactulose and rhamnose. Rapid decrease in IP indicating intestinal barrier function maturation correlates 
with a significant increase in community diversity and alteration in community composition and 
structure. In particular, increasing abundance of Clostridiales was significantly associated with low IP at 
- 103 ­     
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
    
    
    
 
  
  
  
 
  
      
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
    
  
 
  all timepoints. Clostridiales were also associated with neonatal factors previously identified to promote infant intestinal barrier maturation, such as early introduction of breast milk feeding (< day 2), time to 
full breast milk feeding (<day 10), and shorter period of antibiotic exposure (<4 days). Metagenomic and 
metatranscriptomic analyses revealed that Clostridiales is highly transcriptionally active and is co-expressed with Bifidobacterium. The results suggest that neonatal factors favor the early colonization of 
the gut microbiota by members of the Clostridiales which altogether are associated with improved 
intestinal barrier in preterm infants. The translational aspect of the study could lead to a novel strategy 
to promote intestinal barrier maturation in preterm infants and potentially lower the risk to NEC. 
The Critical Window in Neonatal Microbiome Development: Exposures and Outcomes 
Juliette C. Madan , Margaret Karagas, Anne Hoen, Modupe Coker 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth 
The gut microbiome plays a critical role in nutrient metabolism and immune maturation, and there is 
emerging evidence of a critical window in neonatal life when the foundation of adaptive and innate 
immunity is initiated. Perturbation of colonization with keystone taxa during this neonatal window has 
been shown to increase disease risk, including allergy, atopy, and obesity. Conversely, health promoting 
microbes offer promise to reducing disease risk, such as type 1 diabetes and asthma. As part of a US 
prospective study of over 1600 mother-infant dyads, we en roll pregnant women at 24 weeks’ gestation, 
and collect risk factor data (e.g. diet, environmental toxicants) along with biological samples including 
maternal microbiome samples. At birth, we analyze cord blood (immune profiling, DNA methylation), 
placental tissue (metals, DNA methylation, gene expression), and serial microbiome and metabolomics samples in infants from birth, 6 weeks, and 1 year. Findings to date include vast differences in microbial succession and associated metabolomics in infants delivered operatively and fed formula in comparison to those delivered vaginally and breastfed. Common protocols of pre-, peri- and postnatal 
antimicrobials, which result in antibiotic exposure for nearly 30% of women for GBS, and 30% of women 
for operative prophylaxis, followed by 5-7% of newborns for suspected blood stream infection, result in 
perturbation of vertical transmission of vaginal and gut microbes to the newborn during this critical 
window. Our findings suggest that common exposures such as feeding method, mode of delivery, and 
antimicrobials play substantial roles in the acquisition of keystone taxa during this critical window of 
immune maturation. 
Composition of Vaginal Microbiota During Labor and the Effect of Lubricant Use 
Katie G. McElroy
1, Jacques Ravel2, Richard Cone3, Mary Regan1 
1University of Maryland School of Nursing ; 2Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine ; 3Johns Hopkins University 
Background: Maternal microbes transferred at birth form the basis of the neonate’s microbiome. 
Vaginal dysbiosis is linked with many biological and behavioral factors, including use of personal 
lubricants that can alter microbial composition and damage the integrity of vaginal epithelium. Similar lubricants are frequently used during labor, but, the effect of lubricant use on vaginal microbiota during 
labor has not been studied. Purpose: This study aimed to characterize the composition of vaginal 
microbiota during labor and to investigate the effect of lubricant use on its bacterial composition. 
Methods: Fifteen participants collected mid-vaginal specimens during pregnancy, labor, and in the 
postpartum period, and clinical labor data were extracted from medical records. 16S rRNA gene profiling 
- 104 ­      
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
   
  
    
  
  
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
  was used for bacterial composition and multiple linear regression was used to investigate the effect of 
intrapartum lubricant use. Results: The composition of vaginal microbiota varied among participants, 
with a notable high relative abundance of L. iners and G. vaginalis. A significant bivariate negative correlation between lubricant use and relative abundance of L. crispatus disappeared when controlling for time since ruptured membranes. A trend between lubricant use and changes in the composition of 
vaginal microbiota as measured by the Jensen-Shannon distance was noted but not significant. 
Conclusions: The study offers novel information about the effect of lubricant use on composition of 
vaginal microbiota. The potential relationship between lubricant use and L. crisptatus has important clinical significance and can be used to build evidence that supports a less invasive approach to perinatal practice. 
Gut Microbiota and Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) Risk Factors: Early Results from the 
CARDIA (Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults) Microbiome Study 
Katie A. Meyer
1, Kathryn Winglee2, Michael Sioda2, David R. Jacobs, Jr3, James M. Shikany4, Donald M. 
Lloyd-Jones5, Anthony A. Fodor2, Lenore J. Launer6 
1Department of Nutrition, Nutrition Research Institute, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; 
2Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina at Charlotte; 3Division of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota; 4Division of Preventive Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham; 5Division of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University; 
6National Institute on Aging, NIH 
Background: The gut microbiota has emerged as a novel risk factor for CVD, but there is a lack of 
population-based epidemiologic data with which to confirm biologic pathways and public health 
relevance. The CARDIA Microbiome Study was initiated to quantify associations between gut microbial measures and CVD in an ongoing U.S. cohort of black and white adults. Methods: Participants (n=612) 
were from CARDIA participants who attended the Year 30 follow-up examination (2015-16) and who completed a home stool collection. The 16S rRNA marker gene (V3-V4) was sequenced using Illumina MiSeq (2x300). Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) tools were used to classify and assign taxonomic groups. Diversity measures and Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) scores were derived from tables of taxonomic abundance. Regression was used to quantify associations between microbial measures and 
CVD risk factors with false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment. Results : In preliminary analysis, we 
observed significant differences in microbial composition by race, with significant dissimilarity based on 
principal coordinate analysis . The Framingham Risk Score (a summary measure of CVD risk) was 
positively associated with 4 genera, including Prevotella and Allisonella . Systolic blood pressure was 
significantly associated with 25 genera, including Akkermansia (inverse), Prevotella (positive), and 
Catenibacterium (positive). Conclusions: The CARDIA Microbiome Study provides a unique resource for 
understanding the role of gut microbiota with respect to CVD risk in a population-based biracial cohort. 
Early analysis reveals significant differences in gut microbial composition according to race and CVD risk 
factors. Future work will further define gut microbiota profiles that may contribute to CVD risk. 
- 105 ­       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
   
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
      
 
 
    
   
  Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Children Does not Significantly Alter Body Mass 
Index 
Sonia Michail , Dong Xi 
University of Southern California and Children's Hospital of Los Angeles 
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a promising therapy for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) and 
a potential treatment for ulcerative colitis (UC). Limited data confirm safety. However, it is still unclear whether the changes in intestinal microbiome will affect energy homeostasis or metabolism. Animal 
studies clearly demonstrate that obesity can be transmitted through the microbiome. FMT from 
nonideal donor was found to induce excessive weight gain in a case report. This brings an intriguing question whether FMT from healthy donors affects recipient’s body mass index (MI). In our randomized placebo-controlled pilot study children patients with CDI (n=8) or UC (n=12) were randomly divided into control and FMT groups. The BMI was recorded pre-FMT, 1, 3, 6, and 12 months post-
transplantation. The age range of Clostridium difficile infection cohort was 1-17 years (average 8.5 
years), while the range was 8-21 years for ulcerative colitis cohort (average 15.2 years). Though the 
sample size was limited for both groups in our study, we successfully found that the BMI percentile was 
changed by (-0.7), (-1.8), 1.3, 4.6 (%tile) in Clostridium difficile infection, while by 3.6, (-3.3), 3.7, 7.1 (%tile) in ulcerative colitis at 1, 3, 6, and12 months after FMT. The changes were not significant compared to control groups (p> 0.05). We conclude that FMT from healthy donors does not significantly 
alter body mass index in children with Clostridium difficile infection and ulcerative colitis over 12 
months. Future research will focus on enhancing the study by increasing the cohort size, and minimizing the effects of confounding variables including the medications or the severity of disease. 
Maternal High-Fat Diet Results in Microbiota-Dependent Expansion of Type 3 Innate 
Lymphoid Cells (ILC3s) and Susceptibility to Inflammation in Neonatal Mice 
Sarah Thomas, Lora Hooper, Julie Mirpuri , Rashmin Savani 
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
The average American diet is dominated by high-fat foods and over 50% of women of childbearing age 
are either obese or overweight. High fat diet (HFD) in adults is associated with an altered fecal 
microbiota. While perinatal complications have been described, long-term outcomes for offspring are 
unknown. 
Objective: To determine the effect of maternal HFD on acquisition of the microbiota and susceptibility 
to inflammation in offspring. Methods: qRT-PCR and ne xt-generation sequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA 
genes in colonic fecal contents from HFD and Regular diet (RD) pups. qRT-PCR and ELISA of whole 
intestine were used to profile cytokine expression and production. Flow-cytometry of lamina propria 
(LP) cells to characterize cell populations. Microbiologically sterile (GF) pups were colonized with HFD or RD microbiota and flow cytometry performed. Susceptibility to intestinal injury was examined using the 
LPS/PAF model. Results: 1-, 2- and 3- week-old pups of mothers on HFD had a unique microbiota that 
was dominant in Firmicutes. Cytokine profiling revealed increased production and expression of 
inflammatory cytokines, with markedly increased IL-17. Flow cytometry revealed a unique population of 
cells in the LP producing IL-17, which were identified as ILC3s. Colonization with HFD microbiota alone, 
in GF mice, resulted in recapitulation of the HFD WT phenotype. There was increased susceptibility to the LPS/PAF model of intestinal injury in HFD pups that was significantly reduced when IL-17 was blocked. Conclusion: HFD offspring have an altered microbiota marked by an increase in Firmicutes, 
- 106 ­      
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
   
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
     which promotes the expansion of IL-17 producing ILC3s. Blocking IL-17 rescues HFD pups from LPS/PAF induced intestinal injury. 
Effects of Infant Diet on the Developing Gut Resistome 
Aimee Moore , Gautam Dantas 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Introduction: Pediatric gut microbiota are a reservoir of antibiotic resistance genes. Our prior work 
shows that gut-associated resistance genes (resistome) in young infants differs from those of their 
mothers, even in without antibiotic exposure. We hypothesize that young infants' diet influences the 
development of the resistome in early life. Methods: We selected 60 healthy twins who had not been 
exposed to antibiotics in the first week of life, and whose stools had been collected at monthly intervals 
for a prior study. For each subject, we prepared every available stool sample from birth to 8 months of 
age for whole-metagenome shotgun sequencing (N=448 samples). Results/Discussion: Study infants 
were born at a median of 37 weeks completed gestation (IQR 1wk), median birthweight was 2735g (IQR 
535g). 56% of the infants were born via Caesarian section, and 44% were delivered vaginally. Three 
infants received feeds via nasogastric tube while in the nursery; the remainder were only fed by mouth. 
18% of the infants were exclusively breastfed in the hospital, 55% were fed both breastmilk and formula 
in the hospital, and 27% were exclusively formula fed. During the study period, these infants underwent 183 feeding transitions between birth and the age of 8 months (15 breastfeeding to mixed 
breast/formula, 10 breastfeeding to formula, 6 mixed breastfeeding/formula to breastfeeding, 57 mixed 
breastfeeding/formula to formula, 8 formula to breastfeeding, 22 formula to mixed breast/formula, 3 
formula to cow's milk, 2 cow’ s milk to formula, and 60 initiations of solid food). Analysis of short-read 
whole-metagenome sequence data using a mixed model to quantify the effects of feeding transitions on the resistome is ongoing. 
High Pulmonary Arterial Pressures Are Associated With Decreased Oral Microbial Nitrate 
Metabolism in the Mouth 
Carl D. Koch, Alison Morris , Marc A. Simon, Shulin S. Qin, Adam Fitch, Courtney E. Sparacino-Watkins, 
Mark T. Gladwin 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
Background: Impaired signaling and production of nitric oxide (NO) are hallmarks of pulmonary 
hypertension (PH). Dietary nitrate and nitrite serve as NO donors, but bioactivation of nitrate in 
mammals requires unique bacterial nitrate reductase enzymes (NRs) from commensal oral bacteria. We 
investigated the relationship of oral bacterial nitrate metabolism and PH. Methods: We performed 
bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and quantification using Illumina MiSeq in oral wash (OW) from 
patients undergoing right heart catheterization. Sequencing data were processed with Qiime and 
PICRUSt. Oral nitrate reductase enzyme activity was measured via an in vitro reaction with nitrate under anoxia and normalized to 16S content. Non-parametric p-values with FDR correction are presented. Results: 65 participants were included (43 with PH, 22 controls). We identified a ratio of bacterial taxa 
(NR Index) comprised of 3 bacteria most strongly (Rothia, Veillonella, Lactobacillus) and 3 most negatively (Fusobacterium, unidentified Neisseriaceae, Porphyromonas) associated with predicted 
nitrate reduction via PICRUSt. We verified that this ratio reflected actual nitrate reducing capacity by 
directly measuring oral wash nitrate reduction in vitro (p=0.004). Finally, we examined the relationship 
- 107 ­      
  
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
 between the NR Index and PH diagnosis and mean PA pressure (mPAP) as a measure of PH severity. The 
NR Index was reduced in individuals with PH (p=0.004), and there was an inverse relationship between 
mPAP and the NR Index (p=0.007). Conclusions: PH and PH severity are associated with a reduction in 
both predicted and measured oral microbial NR activity and a decrease in the ratio of high to low nitrate 
reducing oral bacteria. 
Control of Epithelial Homeostasis by the Microbiota 
Andrew Neish, Rheinallt Jones 
Emory University School of Medicine 
The resident prokaryotic microbiota of the intestine can influence normal gut proliferation, 
development and wound healing. We describe a common paradigm wherein contact of prokaryotic 
organisms stimulate the enzymatic generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the host epithelia. 
These events occur via the action of highly conserved NADPH oxidase enzymes (Nox1 in mammals and dNox in Drosophila). Interestingly, a subset of bacterial taxa, predominately Lactobacilli, potently 
stimulates Nox dependent ROS generation in both systems, and activates redox responsive 
transcriptional circuits, including the Nrf2/Keap pathway. Germ-free mice and flies exhibit reduced 
epithelial proliferation and increased sensitivity to injury. Consistently, epithelial-specific Nox1 and Nrf2 
null mice, and dNox and CnC (Nrf2 ortholog in flies) mutant Drosophila demonstrate aberrant intestinal stem cell dynamics and responses to injury. Conversely, commensal bacteria such as the Lactobacilli and 
Akkermansia accelerate epithelial cell movement and mucosal restitution mice and flies, and correct 
proliferative defects observed in germ-free animals, in a Nox1 and Nrf2 dependent fashion. At the tissue level, bacterially induced ROS generation is strikingly excluded from discrete stem cell niches, resulting in a redox gradient across stem cell compartments in both mice and flies that is absent in germ-free animals. Ectopic generation of ROS in enterocytes outside the stem cell niche phenocopied the effects of 
the natural microbiota. These data suggest how bacterial symbionts utilize spatially compartmentalized 
generation of ROS for controlling highly conserved signaling events that regulate intestinal development 
and homeostasis. 
Control of Pathogen Colonization by Host Immunity and the Microbiota in the Gut 
Yun-Gi Kim, Kei Sakamoto, Joseph Pickard, Gabriel Nuñ ez 
Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Ann Arbor 
The mechanisms that allow enteric pathogens to colonize the intestine in the presence of the microbiota 
and how host immunity and the indigenous microbiota inhibit pathogen colonization remain poorly 
understood. Our laboratory is using Citrobacter rodentium , a mouse pathogen that models human 
infections by enteropathogenic E. coli , to understand the mechanisms that regulate the colonization and 
clearance of the pathogen in the gut. These studies have shown how the pathogen colonizes and 
replicates successfully early during infection and how host immunity and the indigenous microbiota 
cooperate to eradicate the pathogen in the later stage of the infection. These studies have also revealed that Clostridia species protect the host from colonization by C. rodentium and Salmonella enterica in the 
intestine. The intestine of mice after birth lack protective Clostridia providing a mechanism to account for the increased susceptibility of mice and humans to enteric infection during the neonatal period. 
- 108 ­         
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
     
    
    
  
   
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
    
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
   
    
  
   
   
   
     Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor 2 Restricts Dysbiosis in Colitis 
Shivesh Punit, Cambrian Liu, D. Brent Polk 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles/University of Southern California 
Background: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) afflicts >1.6 million Americans. IBD results from the loss 
of homeostasis between host immune system and the gut microbiota, ultimately leading to chronic 
mucosal damage. Anti- tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapies are a mainstay therapeutic regimen for IBD and yet TNFR2 polymorphisms have been identified in both ulcerative colitis and rohn’s disease 
patients. We recently showed that TNFR2 restricts CD8+ T cell expansion and protects mice from colitis. 
Because CD8+ T cells regulate host-microbial interactions at environmental surfaces, we hypothesized 
that loss of TNFR2 induces dysbiosis. Methods: Tnfr2-/- mice were crossed with Il10-/- mice. 16S rRNA 
sequences were profiled from fecal samples collected from co-housed Il10-/- and Il10-/-Tnfr2-/­littermates at 4, 12, and 20 wks of age. Data were analyzed using QIIME and PICRUSt. The inflammatory 
potential of Il10-/-Tnfr2-/- gut microbiome was analyzed by transfer of cecal contents from donor mice 
to wildtype germfree recipients. Results: Loss of TNFR2 resulted in an altered colonic microbiome. 
Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) classified as Bacteroides were enriched (p=0.0041), and Lactobacillus were depleted (p<0.0001). Il10-/-Tnfr2-/ --associated cecal microbiome induced colitis and 
2-fold expansion of CD8+ T cells in WT recipients after 2 weeks. Conclusion: TNFR2 restricts the 
development of a pro-inflammatory gut microbiome. Il10-/-Tnfr2-/- gut microbiomes are transmissible 
in vivo. Understanding the specific role of TNFR2 in maintaining gut microbiome homeostasis could lead 
to refined therapeutic approaches, especially for IBD patients with CD8+ T cell dysfunction. 
Circulating Microbiome and Functional Metagenomic Signature Is Associated With 
Heavy Alcohol Use and Severity of Alcoholic Hepatitis 
Puneet Puri
1, Suthat Liangpunsakul2, Jeffrey E. Christensen3, Vijay H. Shah, Patrick Kamath, Gregory 
Gores, Susan Walker, Megan Comerford, Barry Katz, Andrew Borst, Andy Q. Yu, Faridoddin Mirshahi, 
Svetlana Radaeva, Naga Chalasani, David W. Crabb 
1Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University ; 2Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
Indiana University School of Medicine ; 3Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 
(INSERM), Toulouse, France, Institut des Maladies Métaboliques et Cardiovasculaires (I2MC) 
Background: Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is related to heavy drinking (>60 g/day in men and >40 g/day in 
women) and associated with intestinal microbial dysbiosis. However, the circulating microbiome 
signature in AH is unknown. Aims: To define (1) circulating microbiome in alcoholics [heavy drinking 
controls (HDC), moderate AH (MAH) and severe AH (SAH)] compared to nonalcoholic controls (NAC); (2) 
relationship between circulating microbiome and disease severity, and (3) functional relevance of 
circulating microbiome changes. Methods: Four groups (n=76) (1) NAC=20, (2) HDC=19, (3) MAH (MELD 
≤ 20, n=18) and (4) S!H (MELD score ≥ 21, n=19) were studied. 16S ta rgeted sequencing of bacterial 
DNA from whole blood was performed. The linear discriminant analysis (LDA) Effect Size (LEfSe) for across-group differences and PICRUSt for predictive functional metagenomics were used. Results: 
Bacterial DNA in MAH and SAH was significantly higher (p< 0.01). Circulating Microbiome: 21 taxa were 
enriched (LDA score >2) in alcohol groups. Fusobacteria, undetectable in NAC, was significantly enriched in alcohol groups (LDA scores 3.1-4.1) with increment in HDC>MAH>SAH. Bacteriodetes was decreased 
in HDC, MAH and SAH vs. NAC (p< 0.01). Relationship To Disease Severity: Gammaproteobacteria and 
etaproteobacteria were inversely related to MELD score (ρ= -0.47 to -0.67, p< 0.05). Functional 
- 109 ­        
   
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
     
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
 Metagenomics: SAH had activated type III secretion system and mevalonate pathway of isoprenoid 
synthesis, and enhanced anthranilate degradation pathway related to biofilm formation. Conclusions: 
Qualitative and quantitative changes in circulating microbiome with shift in metabolic and structural functions are associated with severity of AH. 
The Role of Gut Microbiota in Chemotherapy-Induced Behavioral Comorbidities 
Leah M. Pyter
1, Michael T. Bailey2 
1Ohio State University ; 2Nationwide Children's Hospital, Ohio State University 
Recent evidence indicates that the gut microbiome can influence brain and behavior, including 
cognition. Approximately one-third of cancer survivors report a cognitive decline after receiving 
chemotherapy. In addition, many cancer survivors who receive chemotherapy also experience adverse 
effects on their gut, including diarrhea and vomiting, along with a shift in diversity of their natural gut 
microbiota. However, very little is known about the potential role of the gut microbiome in the enduring and prevalent consequences of chemotherapy on the brain and behavior (e.g., cognitive impairments). The hypothesis for this study is that chemotherapy shifts diversity in the gut microbiota, which leads to 
neuroinflammation and cognitive impairments. To test this hypothesis, we injected murine mammary 
cancer cells into the fourth mammary fat pad in immunocompetent Balb/c female mice. After tumors 
developed, they were surgically resected. One week after tumor resection, half of the mice received 6 doses of paclitaxel chemotherapy (30 mg/kg; i.p.; every other day); the others received vehicle. After chemotherapy, cognition was tested in all mice using spontaneous alternation, contextual and cued fear 
conditioning, and novel object recognition tests. Circulating baseline concentrations of corticosterone 
and cytokines, neuroinflammation, and fecal microbiota were determined. Preliminary data suggest that paclitaxel treatment impaired cued conditioning and increased Gram-negative gut bacteria which were positively related to brain inflammation. By establishing the role of the gut microbiota in the behavioral 
consequences of cancer potential novel and non-invasive treatment targets may be determined. 
Gut Microbiota, Tryptophan Catabolism, and Atherosclerosis in HIV Infection 
Qibin Qi
1, Christine Zolnik2, Simin Hua1, David B. Hanna1, Clary B. Clish3, Sabina Haberle4, Sanjiv J. Shah4, 
Jason M. Lazar6, Wendy S. Post4, Kathryn Anastos1, Robert Burk2, Robert C. Kaplan1 
1Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, 2Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, 3Broad Institute; 4Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University; 5Northwestern 
University; 6Department of Medicine, SUNY-Downstate Medical Center 
Gut microbiota alteration and disturbed tryptophan catabolism have been observed in HIV infection. 
!mong 407 women from the Women’s Interagency HIV Study (WIHS) and 339 men from the Multicenter 
AIDS Cohort Study, we examined associations of plasma tryptophan, kynurenic acid, and kynurenic acid-
to-tryptophan (Kyn/Trp) ratio, with incident carotid plaque over 7 years. Bacterial community profiling 
was performed using 16S rRNA sequencing on stool samples in 150 WIHS women. After adjustment for 
demographic, behavioral, and traditional CVD factors, plasma tryptophan was significantly associated with decreased risk of incident carotid plaque (RR 0.75 [95% CI 0.64-0.88] per SD), while kynurenic acid 
(RR 1.34 [1.08-1.65] per SD) and Kyn/Trp ratio (RR 1.41 [1.22-1.64] per SD) were significantly associated 
with increased risk of incident carotid plaque (all P<0.001). Tryptophan and related metabolites were 
correlated with specific inflammation/immune activation markers (e.g., soluble CD14, a marker of gut microbial translocation) rather than conventional inflammation markers or CVD risk factors. We 
- 110 ­     
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
    
   
  
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
       
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
    
  
   identified that several gut microbes enriched in HIV infection were associated with decreased plasma tryptophan and increased Kyn/Trp ratio. Further bioinformatics analyses revealed bacterial genera that 
encode enzymes homologous to those involved in human tryptophan catabolism and kynurenine 
pathway. Our data suggest that disturbed tryptophan catabolism, correlating with specific inflammation and immune activation, might be partly due to HIV-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis, which then leads 
to increased risk of HIV-related CVD. Gut microbiota might be a modifiable target for the prevention 
CVD among people with HIV. 
TAS2R38 Genotype-Associated Alterations in Sinus Microbiota 
Vijay R. Ramakrishnan , Jen Kofonow, Daniel N. Frank, Charles E. Robertson 
University of Colorado 
Background: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is an inflammatory disorder of the airway in which bacteria 
appear to play a role. The human bitter taste receptor, T2R38, initiates innate mucosal defense systems 
through detection of bacterial quorum sensing molecules. T2R38 genetics are well-described, and it has 
been demonstrated that a common polymorphism is associated with the inability to clear Pseudomonas. 
linical study has demonstrated an increase of the “nontaster” haplotype (!VI) in the RS population, as 
well as an increase in culture positivity for Pseudomonas. The aim of the current study is to determine if 
TAS2R38 polymorphisms are associated with alterations in sinus microbiota. Methods: Ethmoid sinus 
samples from CRS patients undergoing surgery were analyzed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. TAS2R38 
genotype was assayed by RFLP. Phylum and genus-level comparisons were made using two-part 
statistic, ANOVA, and Fisher exact tests. Results: 52 patients were included in the study (PAV/PAV = 10, 
PAV/AVI = 23, AVI/AVI = 19). Phylum-level comparison showed decreased abundance of Proteobacteria (0.04) and increased Bacteroidetes (p=0.03) in PAV/PAV subjects when compared to AVI/AVI (p=0.03 
and 0.04, respectively). Genus-level analysis demonstrated increased abundance of B.prevotella 
(p=0.01) and F.veillonellaceae (p=0.04) in PAV/PAV patients. Pseudomonas was neither less prevalent 
nor less abundant in the PAV/PAV group. Conclusion: TAS2R38 polymorphisms are associated with 
microbiota alterations in CRS at the phylum and genus levels, however, Pseudomonas did not appear less prevalent or abundant in the PAV/PAV diplotype, suggesting there is a more complex interaction 
between bitter taste and microbial clearance. 
New Insights to the Role of Lactic Acid on the Vaginal Host-Microbe Interaction 
Jacques Ravel
1, Steve Smith1, Vonetta Edwards1, Larry Forney2 
1Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine; 2University of Idaho 
Human vaginal bacterial communities are often dominated by one of four species of Lactobacillus, 
namely L. crispatus, L. gasseri, L. jensenii or L. iners, which are thought to protect women from bacterial vaginosis, sexually transmitted infections and adverse obstetric outcomes. We have explored 
interactions between vaginal microbiota and their hosts using multiomics analyses to gain insight to how 
this is achieved. We have characterized host microRNA expression in vivo and demonstrated that vaginal epithelial cell proliferation is a process controlled by Lactobacillus spp. to maintain host cell homeostasis 
and provide resistance to Chlamydia trachromatis infections. These findings have been confirmed in 
vitro using a 3D model of the cervicovaginal epithelium. We have also shown that the D- and L- isomers 
of lactic acid not only serve to reduce vaginal pH but they also differentially affect the structure of 
cervicovaginal mucus in a way that prevents C. trachomatis infections, without directly affecting C. 
- 111 ­     
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
  
 
 
     
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 trachomatis. Further, we and collaborator have shown that D-lactic acid down-regulates the production of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-8, an enzyme capable of degrading collagen and affecting the 
integrity of cervicovaginal mucus and the cervical plug that prevents bacteria from entering the upper 
genital tract during pregnancy. These examples illustrate the power of multiomics analyses of the vaginal microbiome in research done to explore functional interactions between vaginal microbiota and 
the host with the goal of developing novel approaches to maintaining a healthy and protective vaginal 
microbiome. 
Therapeutic Targeting of the Gut Microbiota 
Matthew R. Redinbo 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
We seek to understand the molecular mechanisms by which the gut microbiota impact human health. 
Microbial beta-glucuronidase (GUS) enzymes remove the glucuronic acid sugar linked to a variety of drugs. Gut microbial GUS enzymes, however, cause the acute GI toxicities of many drugs, including 
cancer chemotherapeutics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). We have discovered 
and advanced potent, selective and non-lethal inhibitors of microbial GUS enzymes, and have used them 
to alleviate adverse drug reactions in vivo. Our GUS inhibitors prevent the chemotherapy-induced 
diarrhea (CID) that is dose-limiting for the anticancer drug irinotecan. CID is a significant unmet medical problem: 70% of chemotherapy patients require dose modification due to CID, 35% require i.v. fluids, 
and 10% are hospitalized. Using several mouse models of cancer, we show that microbial GUS inhibitors 
alleviate irinotecan toxicity and dramatically improve irinotecan efficacy. 24 anticancer drugs are known to be glucuronidated, and 21 of those drugs (89%) cause GI toxicity; thus, our approach is likely to find oncology applications well beyond irinotecan. GUS inhibitors also alleviate the small intestinal ulcers caused by NSAIDs. 70% of long-term NSAID users have increased gut permeability, and 30% progress to 
frank ulcers in the lower GI tract. We have pinpointed the GUS enzymes involved in NSAID and 
irinotecan reactivation in the Human Microbiome Project gut database. These studies usher in a new er a 
of understanding, and controlling, the actions of key non-mammalian enzymes that crucially affect human health and the treatment of disease. 
Longitudinal Dynamics of the Vaginal and Fecal Microbiota During Pregnancy and 
Gestation at the Onset of Labor 
Mary Regan
1, Pawel Gajer2, Jacques Ravel2, Soon Soon Chung3 
1School of Nursing, 2Institute for Genome Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Maryland; 3School of 
Nursing, Illinois State University 
Reducing preterm birth (PTB) is a global health priority. To meet that goal it is vital to build a clear 
understanding about the physiologic processes involved in the initiation of labor. Dysbiosis of vaginal 
microbiota, is a major contributor and ascending infection accounts for 20-40% PTBs. Similarly, the GI 
microbiota is associated with increased inflammatory signaling essential in labor onset. 
The purpose of this study was to examine longitudinal changes in composition and diversity of the 
vaginal and GI microbiota to establish if interactions between them lead to dysbiotic states that 
promote labor onset. 
- 112 ­     
      
  
  
   
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
    
 
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
  In the parent study, a prospective longitudinal design is used to recruit 400 nulliparous women, 12-16 
weeks pregnant, aged 18 to 34 with low risk for PTB who are followed to postpartum. Weekly vaginal 
swabs and monthly stool samples are self-collected. A broad 16S rRNA gene-based metataxonomic 
characterization of the vaginal and GI microbiota provided composition and taxa relative abundance and diversity was computed with Shannon divergence index. 
The PTB rate in the parent study is currently only 5.8% in a population where the rate is 12-16% 
suggesting that the study itself has become an intervention. This study provides essential data about the 
relationship between the composition and diversity of vaginal and GI microbiota and gestational length that when combined with changes in diet and behavior from the parent study, could provide insights into why the PTB rate is so low in this cohort. That knowledge is necessary to develop effective clinical interventions to reduce PTB. 
Bile Acid C12-hydroxy Epimerization by Human Gut Microbiota 
Jason M. Ridlon
1, Saravanan Devendran1, Greta Doden1, Heidi Doden1, Joao M.P. Alves2, Lina Sallam3 
1Department of Animal Sciences, Division of Nutritional Sciences, Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic 
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign ; 2Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of São Paulo; 3Eastern Illinois University 
The gastrointestinal microbiota harbor genes encoding numerous bile acid modifying enzymes. Among 
these enzymes are hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (HSDH) which catalyze the reversible NAD(P)(H)­
dependent oxidation/reduction of bile acid and steroid hydroxyl groups. While numerous 3α/3 -HSDH 
and 7α/7 -HSDH genes have been identified and characterized in numerous gut and soil bacteria, only a 
single 12α -HSDH has been identified and characterized from Clostridium sp. ATCC 29733. Production of ­
hydroxy bile acids is associated with decreased toxicity to the host. The 12α -HSDH from Clostridium sp. 
ATCC 29733 (ERJ00208.1) was searched against the non-redundant protein and nucleotide databases. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using ERJ00208.1, along with a comprehensive tree of known SDR 
family enzymes. Candidate genes sharing >60% amino acid sequence identity were chosen for cloning 
and expression, including but not limited to: Clostridium hylemonae TN271 (WP_006441568.1), 
Eggerthella lenta (CDD59474.1; CDD59473.1; ACV56470.1), Faecalibacterium prausnitzii L2- 6 
(CBK99423.1). We also identified and expressed genes from two human gut archaea, Methanosphaera stadtmanae DSM 3091 (ABC57112.1) and Methanobrevibacter smithii ATCC 35061 (ABQ87936.1), in E. coli. Clostridium paraputrificum has previously been shown to express 12-HSDH activity. We identified and cloned two SDR-family enzymes in C. paraputrificum encoding putative 12-HSDH. Enzyme kinetic 
constants and substrate-specificity were determined for the purified recombinant proteins. Reaction 
product identity was confirmed by UPLC- IT-TOF-MS. Identification of these genes may allow metabolic 
re-engineering of gut microbial bile acid metabolism as a therapeutic tool. 
- 113 ­       
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
   Grape Proanthocyanidin-Induced Bloom of Gut Microbe Akkermansia Muciniphila Precedes Intestinal Gene Expression Changes Associated With Metabolic Resilience 
Li Zhang
1, Rachel N. Carmody2, Hetal M. Kalariya1, Rocio M. Duran4, Kristin Moskal1, Alexander Poulev1, 
Peter Kuhn1, Peter J. Turnbaugh3, Ilya Raskin1, Diana E. Roopchand4 
1Department of Plant Biology, 4Department of Food Science, Institute for Food Nutrition and Health, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey; 2Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard 
University; 3Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco 
Poorly absorbed fruit polyphenols are associated with metabolic resilience raising questions about their 
mechanisms of action. We previously demonstrated that C57BL/6 mice fed high-fat diet supplemented 
with grape polyphenols (GP) for 12 weeks resulted in a bloom of Akkermansia muciniphila in association 
with changes in gut gene expression consistent with attenuated metabolic syndrome symptoms. Here 
we investigated the timing of GP-induced effects and identified the main class of GP responsible for the 
A.muciniphila bloom. In two 14-day time course studies mice were fed high- or low-fat diets (HFD, LFD) 
or isocaloric ingredient-matched formulations supplemented with 1% grape polyphenols (HFD-GP, LFD­
GP). Mice fed HFD-GP for two weeks showed significantly improved oral glucose tolerance (OGT) compared to control, while LFD and LFD-GP groups displayed similar OGT. A. muciniphila bloom was detected earlier in mice fed LFD-GP than HFD-GP; however, difference in timing of this GP-induced 
bloom was more dependent on baseline abundance of A. muciniphila in the two cohorts of mice than on 
dietary fat. Indeed, only mice with qPCR-detectable levels of A. muciniphila developed a GP-induced 
bloom within 3 days. The GP-induced bloom in A. muciniphila occurred before specific intestinal gene expression changes associated with metabolic resilience. Finally, compared to vehicle, mice dosed for 10 days with GP extract (GPE) or an equivalent dose of purified oligomeric grape proanthocyanidins (PAC) 
showed similar increases in fecal and cecal A. muciniphila. These data suggest that PAC-induced 
modification of the gut microbiota precedes changes in host gene expression and phenotypes associated with metabolic health. 
The Microbial Metabolome: The Missing Link Between Diet and Human Health 
Wendy Russell , Sylvia Duncan, Dinesh Thapa, Harry Flint 
University of Aberdeen; Rowett Institute 
The gut microbiota plays a role in the development of disorders such as T2DM, CVD and cancer. Despite 
tremendous advances characterizing microbial diversity, little is known about the functional role of even 
the most dominant species. It is widely accepted that microbial metabolites are likely to impact on 
human health, particularly regarding immune response and inflammation, but these are not characterised and their mechanism of action unknown. Dietary substrates (cereals/soft fruit/green leafy 
vegetables/soya) considered to contribute towards cancer prevention were characterized for their 
nutrient and phytochemical composition before and after in vitro digestion. Using sequenced microbial samples from volunteers taking part in the human intervention with these foods, the products of 
microbial metabolism were determined. Explicit transformations of the major phytochemicals were 
observed by fully targeted metabolomics, but inter-individual variation demonstrated key activities that 
highlighted the importance of certain species to shape the microbial metabolome. In particular, 
polyamine metabolism differed and similar differences were observed for aromatic amino acid and 
phytoestrogen transformations. Notable was phenolic metabolism, as the profiles produced are likely to impact on inflammation. Using an extensive library of model compounds and cultured bacteria, the 
mechanism and species responsible for many of these transformations were identified and are currently 
- 114 ­    
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
    
 
      
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
  being validated in human studies to ensure that the same results are observed in vivo. This data will help 
elucidate the complex interplay between diet, the gut microbiota and the role by which they contribute 
to maintenance of health and disease development. 
Characterization of Fecal Microbiota in Response to Heterologous Versus Autologous 
Fecal Microbial Transplantation 
Michael J. Sadowsky1, Chris Staley1, Alexander Khoruts2, Colleen R. Kelly3, Lawrence J. Brandt4 
1BioTechnology Institute, 2Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Center for Immunology 
University of Minnesota ; 3Department of Medicine, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University; 4Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Montefiore Medical Center 
Fecal microbial transplantation (FMT) has been increasingly used as an alternative treatment for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile infections (RDCI), with a success rate averaging 90%. The fecal microbial 
compositions of heterologous and autologous FMT recipients were characterized using Illumina next-generation sequencing of the V5+V6 hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene, 5 days prior to FMT, and at 2 and 8 weeks post-FMT. Bacterial communities prior to FMT were dysbiotic and characterized at the phylum level by drastic reduction or disappearance of Bacteroidetes and expansion of the 
Proteobacteria and/or Verrucomicrobia. Abundances of Verrucomicrobia and Bacteroidetes in pre-FMT 
samples were notably greater at the Bronx site, where greater autologous FMT success was observed. Heterologous FMT restored the bacterial community alpha diversity to resemble that of healthy donors, while the bacterial community composition in fecal samples of patients also shifted to one similar to 
donor samples. Community composition after autologous FMT was significantly different than that 
resulting from heterologous FMT at both sites (P ≤ 0.025), and the abundance of acteroidetes did not recover to the same extent as was observed in patients who received heterologous donor mate rial. 
These data reveal that autologous FMT results in different community composition than heterologous 
FMT, with the latter providing faster and more marked resolution of dysbiotic microbial signatures. 
Dynamic Longitudinal Transcriptome Differences Across Healthy and Respiratory Viral 
Infections and Between Pre-Diabetic and Non-Diabetic States 
M. Reza Sailani , Varsha Rao, Michael Snyder, Wenyu Zhou 
Department of Genetics, Stanford University 
To better understand how longitudinal omics information can be incorporated into health care and how 
physiology changes during periods of healthy and respiratory viral infections (RVI), we are performing a 
large scale integrated Personal Omics Profiling (iPOP) combining genomic and transcriptomic data in a 
cohort of 100 individuals (over 1000 time points in total) who experienced several RVI and immunization (flu shots) and are either insulin resistant (IR) or insulin sensitive (IS). Our data shows that there is a 
strong defense response upon RVI and activation of different immunological pathways over the course 
of infection and recovery times. It initially activates type I interferon signaling pathway, pattern 
recognition receptors and Toll-like receptors within 1-3 days upon RVI, while after seven days, 
granzymes and T-helper cells, and within 21 to 35 days Interleukins (IL6, IL10, IL17A, IL17F), MAPK3 and 
JAK2 in cytokine signaling get activated. However, immunizations, on the contrary, did not activate the immune system, but differentially expressed genes were enriched for GABA, Leptin, and GPCR signaling pathways. Moreover, the number of differentially expressed genes related to immune system upon RVI 
- 115 ­     
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
   
 
  
    
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   is significantly higher among insulin sensitive (IS) individuals compared to the insulin resistant (IR) ones that could potentially suggest a stronger immune defense response in IS individuals. Also, 25% of 
participants show a temporary dys-regulation in genes involved in neurodegenerative diseases upon 
RVI. Altogether, these results shed light on how immune system responses to RVI over time and how this response differs between IS and IR individuals. 
Early Microbial Antigen Priming Sets the Course for Host Immune Tolerance vs. Immunity 
John M. Leech
1, Kevin Chu1, Elizabeth G. Leitner1, James J. Moon2, A.D. Binh3; Tiffany C. Scharschmidt1 
1Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco; 2Center for Immunology and 
Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; 3Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Medicine, San Francisco General Hospital, University of California, San Francisco 
Life in a microbial world requires adaptive immune tolerance to commensal microbes and effective 
immune responses to infectious pathogens. However, mechanisms allowing the host to establish a 
privileged relationship with commensals while still defending against pathogens remain largely 
unknown. Using tetramers for a model bacterial antigen, 2w, we can track the antigen-specific CD4+ T cell response to S. epidermidis (SE-2W), a prominent skin commensal, and S. aureus USA300 (SA-2W), a 
prototypical skin pathogen. As previously shown, SE-2W skin colonization in neonatal life establishes 
2W-specific immune tolerance, which is mediated by regulatory T cells (Tregs) entering neonatal skin. In 
contrast, we find that neonatal SA-2W colonization does not protect against skin inflammation nor 
significantly enrich for 2W-specific Tregs upon subsequent SA-2W challenge. Following initial bacterial exposure, SA-colonized neonates had equivalent or higher total numbers of skin Tregs compared with SE-colonized counterparts, indicating that failure to establish tolerance to SA-2W was not due to 
attenuated skin Treg accumulation. SE-2W but not SA-2W colonization, however, enriched for 2W+Tregs following intradermal 2W peptide challenge, consistent with a model in which differential T cell priming 
upon initial microbial antigen exposure sets the course for tolerance or immunity. RNA sequencing of 
Tregs and FoxP3negCD4+ T cells from the skin of SE vs. SA-colonized neonates has revealed key 
upstream regulators that may direct this differential T cell response. Ongoing work to be presented will 
measure the contribution of these key host pathways as well as bacteri al molecules in the host’s 
“decision” for microbial tolerance vs. immunity. 
Temporal Dynamics of Metatranscription in Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
Melanie Schirmer , Eric A. Franzosa, Jason Lloyd-Price, Alexandra Sirota-Madi, Lauren McIver, Randall 
Schwager, The Inflammatory Bowel Disease Multi’omics Consortium, Hera Vlamakis, Ramnik J. Xavier, 
Curtis Huttenhower 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and Broad Institute 
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic diseases of the digestive tract with no effective 
long-term treatment options. One of the major breakthroughs in recent years was the elucidation of the 
human microbiome’s role in onset and exacerbation of ID. In pa rticular, the mechanisms associating 
gut microbial dysbioses and aberrant immune responses remain largely unknown. The integrative 
Human Microbiome Project (iHMP/HMP2) seeks to close these gaps by examining the dynamics of 
microbiome functionality in disea se. !s part of this effort, the ID Multi’omics Database (IDMD) 
profiled the gut microbiomes of 100 individuals using multiple high-throughput, functional genomic screens over the course of one year each. Here, we present the results based on the pilot data including 
- 116 ­     
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
 
    
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  300 stool metagenomes and 78 metatranscriptomes, spanning 117 individuals with up to 17 time points. While some microbial organisms exhibited similar expression patterns on DNA and RNA level, we also 
detected species-specific biases in metabolic activity. For example, while Faecalibacterium prausnitzii 
was in many cases not the most prevalent organisms in a sample, it was for many pathways the major transcriber. Further, certain disease characteristics were particularly detectable at the transcript level, 
such as pathways metagenomically uniform between IBD patients compared to non-IBD controls but 
metatranscriptomically contributed by distinct organisms (e.g. Alistipes putredinis). These IBDMDB pilot 
studies thus pave the way for analysis of the iHMP data incorporating metabolomics, host 
transcriptomics, epigenetics, and genetics as well as provide new opportunities for the discovery of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches in IBD. 
Unraveling the Microbiome of Primary Immune-Deficient Patients 
Osnat Tirosh
1, Heidi H. Kong2, Julia A. Segre1, NISC Comparative Sequencing Program 
1National Human Genome Research Institute, 2Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health 
Although landmark studies have shown that microbiota activate and educates host immunity, how the 
immune system shapes microbial communities and contributes to disease is less-well characterized. Studying primary immunodeficiency patients provides a unique perspective on the degree to which altered immunity may influence the human microbiome and how, in turn, microbiota may interact with the host to develop disease. DOCK8 (dedicator of cytokinesis 8) deficiency is an extremely rare 
autosomal recessive primary immunodeficiency disease manifesting with persistent viral infections of 
the skin, atopic dermatitis, allergies and skin and hematopoietic malignancies. 
To study the human virome, we applied shotgun metagenomics to multiple skin, oral and stool sample s 
from 20 DOCK8 patients. While the relative abundance of eukaryotic viruses on the skin of healthy 
volunteers is 0.1-10%, DOCK8 patients typically have >90% eukaryotic viruses forming the skin microbial community. Our analyses revealed that the skin DNA virus communities in these patients are dominated by multiple types of human papillomaviruses (HPVs), including hundreds of alpha, beta, gamma and mu HPVs. Using computational tools, such as de-novo assembly, we could also identify numerous possible 
novel HPVs that share less than 90% nucleotide sequence identity with the conserved L1 capsid protein 
of any other known HPV. With RNA-Seq, we identify even greater viral diversity, indicating a much 
greater potential of eukaryotic viruses to colonize the human body. 
Multi-Omic Microbiome Study-Pregnancy Initiative (MOMS-PI) 
Myrna G. Serrano
1, Gregory Buck2, Jennifer Fettweis1, Sophonie Jean2, Hardik I. Parikh2, Laahirie 
Edupuganti2, Bernice Huang2, Vaginal Microbiome Consortium 
1Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, 2Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth 
University 
The vaginal microbiome in pregnancy plays an important role in both maternal and neonatal health 
outcomes. Despite the critical role of the human microbiota in health, our understanding of microbiota 
compositional dynamics during pregnancy is incomplete. The Vaginal Microbiome Consortium at VCU 
and its collaborators, including the G!PPS based at Seattle hildren’s Hospital, has collected longitudinal 
samples from pregnant women in the MOMS-PI study. Samples were collected during prenatal visits at 
- 117 ­     
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
    
  
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  all trimesters (3-7 visits), Labor and Delivery, discharge and follow-up visit from >1,500 pregnant women and their neonates. We currently have >150,000 samples (buccal, vaginal, cervical, skin, blood, urine, 
cord, cord blood, placenta and membranes) from MOMS-PI in our RAMS registry biorepository. The 
cohort is ~50% African American, ~45% Caucasian, and ~25% Latina/Hispanic (split between African American and Caucasian). To date, we have analyzed >10,000 of these samples for microbiome profiling 
by 16S rRNA, and several thousand for cytokine, lipidome, metagenomics and metatranscriptomic 
analysis. Our results confirm a uniquely complex microbiome in the female reproductive tract that 
shows racial biases, is altered during pregnancy, and is impacted by environmental and clinical factors. 
Multi-omic analysis of our preliminary data shows correlations between taxonomic, cytokine, and lipidome profiles, and clinical observations. These results are altering the traditional view of women’s vaginal and reproductive health, leading to a functional understanding of the mechanisms leading to adverse health and pregnancy outcomes, permitting earlier prediction and potentially earlier 
intervention to prevent adverse reproductive events. 
A Protective Major Histocompatibility Complex-Class II Allele Prevents Autoimmune 
Diabetes by Shaping the Intestinal Microbiome Early in Ontogeny 
Michael A. Silverman
1, Christophe Benoist2, Diane Mathis2 
1Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania; 2Division of 
Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School 
Certain major histocompatibility complex-class II (MHC-II) or human leukocyte antigen-D (HLA-D) alleles 
dominantly protect from particular autoimmune diseases. For example, expression of the MHC-II E:E 
complex potently protects NOD mice, which normally lack it, from spontaneous development of type- 1 
diabetes (T1D). However, the underlying mechanisms remain debated. We investigated MHC-mediated 
protection from T1D using previously reported NOD mice expressing an E transgene and, thereby, the 
E:E complex. E16/NOD females vertically protected their NOD offspring from diabetes and insulitis, in an 
intestinal-microbiota-dependent fashion, and developed autoimmunity when treated with particular 
antibiotics or raised in a germ-free environment. Genomic analysis revealed NOD and E16/NOD mice to host distinct intestinal microbiotas during a critical early window of ontogeny, and transfer of cecal 
contents from the latter to the former suppressed insulitis. Thus, this protection from autoimmunity 
afforded by particular MHC/HLA alleles can operate via intestinal microbes, highlighting potentially important societal implications of treating infants, or even just their pregnant mothers, with antibiotics. 
These findings argue for a new model of HLA/MHC-mediated protection from autoimmunity, and raise 
the question of whether disease-protective alleles in other human autoimmune diseases or models 
thereof, e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or multiple sclerosis, might operate by a similar mechanism. 
The Impact of Sex, Age, and Diet on the Microbiome and Metabolome 
Carolyn Slupsky , Shin-Yu Chen, Karen Kalenetra, Lili Sheng, Prasant Kumar Jena, Yvonne Wan, David Mills 
University of California, Davis 
It is well known that diet profoundly affects the microbiome and metabolome. In particular, a western 
style diet high in fat and sugar has been associated with development of obesity, metabolic syndrome, 
and NAFLD. While approximately equal numbers of men and women are obese, it has been reported 
that NAFLD is more prevalent in males. In this study, we provided either a western or control diet to 
C57BL/6J mice starting at 3 weeks, sacrificed mice at 5, 10, and 15 months of age, and compared the 
- 118 ­     
 
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
    
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  urine and serum metabolomes, as well as fecal and cecal microbiomes. PCA of the urine metabolome revealed complete separation along PC2 based on sex, with some separation along PC1 based on diet. 
For the serum metabolome, age drove separation along PC2, with some separation along PC1 based on 
diet. Sex-based metabolome distinctions pointed to differences in several pathways regulated by estrogen, as well as TMA/TMAO. Diet-based metabolome distinctions pointed to differences in 
metabolites related to insulin sensitivity and production of TMA/TMAO, and age-based metabolome 
distinctions pointed primarily to differences in ketone production. Interestingly, 16S rRNA marker gene 
sequencing of fecal and cecal contents revealed similar results to the urine metabolome, with sex and 
diet driving separation. Remarkably, we observed a major shift in the microbiome of female mice at 15 months compared to 5 and 10 months, suggesting that estrogen may play a role in shaping the microbiome. Taken together, our results suggest that sex and age differences in the microbiome and metabolome may correlate with a protective effect of estrogen on health. 
Regulation of Host-Microbiota Relationships in Human Health and Disease 
Gregory F. Sonnenberg 
Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology; Jill Roberts Institute for Research in Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Weill 
Cornell Medicine 
The human immune system is critical to protect against infection with pathogenic microorganisms. 
However, inappropriate immune responses against our own tissues or non-harmful environmental 
triggers such as beneficial commensal bacteria that normally colonize the body’s barrier surfaces can promote autoimmune or chronic inflammatory diseases. Indeed, emerging studies in patient populations indicate that abnormal host immune responses to commensal bacteria are causally linked to the pathogenesis and progression of numerous chronic infectious, inflammatory and metabolic 
diseases, such as HIV, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and cancer. The focus and long-term research 
goals of the Sonnenberg Laboratory are to interrogate functional interactions between the mammalian 
immune system and intestinal commensal bacteria in the context of health and disease. The laboratory 
employs cutting-edge immunologic and microbiologic approaches to interrogate these interactions in 
both basic mouse models and translational patient-based studies. Recent studies in the laboratory have 
identified a critical role for innate lymphoid cells in orchestrating host relationships to defined subsets of commensal bacteria. Delineating these complex interactions will lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of multiple chronic inflammatory diseases, and direct the future development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting commensal bacteria-dependent chronic inflammation. 
Akkermansia Muciniphila May Be Permissive to Arthritis in the K/BxN Mouse Model of 
Arthritis 
Matthew Stoll
1, Casey Morrow1, Pamela Weiss2, Jennifer E. Weiss3, Craig L. Maynard1, Lennard W. Duck1, 
Charles O. Elson1, Randy Q. Cron1, Elliot J. Lefkowitz1, Ranjit Kumar1, Trenton R. Schoeb1 
1University of Alabama at Birmingham ; 2Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ; 3Hackensack University 
Medical Center 
Background: Studies have identified abnormalities in the microbiota of patients with arthritis. To 
evaluate the pathogenicity of human microbiota, we performed fecal microbial transplantation (FMT) 
from children with newly diagnosed enthesitis-related arthritis (ERA) and sex- and age-matched healthy 
- 119 ­    
   
    
      
  
    
  
 
    
   
  
        
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
    
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  controls (HC) to germ-free KRN/B6xNOD (K/BxN) mice, a spontaneous arthritis model dependent upon 
an intact microbiota. Methods: K/BxN mice were maintained under germ-free (GF) conditions and were 
gavaged with feces previously collected from children with ERA and HC. Results: 24 mice were gavaged 
with human microbiota (12 each of ERA and HC). Among transplanted mice, ankle swelling assessed 21 – 
24 days post transfer was equivalent in those that received ERA (4.7 ± 0.5) vs HC (4.4 ± 0.4) microbiota. 
There was incomplete uptake of the human microbiota, with over-representation of two genera 
(Bacteroides and Akkermansia) in the transplanted mice. The microbiota as a whole predicted the extent 
of ankle swelling (R2 = 0.185, p = 0.018, adonis test); the abundances of Bacteroides (r = -0.510, p = 
0.010) inversely and Akkermansia (r = 0.367, p = 0.078) directly correlated with ankle swelling. Although 
monocolonization of A. muciniphila did not impact ankle swelling, addition of A. muciniphila cultures to transplanted human microbiota resulted in increased ankle swelling as compared to mice that received transplanted human microbiota alone (median 4.5 mm, IQR 4.3 – 5.5 versus 4.1 mm, IQR 3.9 – 4.3, p = 
0.018). Conclusions: This study supports previous findings of a possible association between A. 
muciniphila and arthritis and opens up new avenues of research into the association between human microbiota and arthritis. 
A Disease-Protective Human Commensal Discovered Using Microbial Pedigree Analysis 
Neeraj K. Surana
1, Dennis L. Kasper2 
1Boston Children’ s Hospital/Harvard Medical School ; 2Harvard Medical School 
Microbiome-wide association studies have established that numerous diseases are associated with 
changes in the microbiota. These studies typically generate a long list of commensals implicated as 
biomarkers of disease, with no clear relevance to disease pathogenesis. In order to move the field beyond correlations and to begin to address causation, an effective system is needed for refining this catalog of differentially abundant microbes for subsequent mechanistic studies. Herein, we demonstrate 
that principles of family pedigree analysis used in genetics can be applied in microbiota studies to 
reduce the noise inherent in these experiments. We found that gnotobiotic mice harboring different 
microbial communities exhibited differential survival in a colitis model. Co-housing of these gnotobiotic 
mice generated “progeny” that had hybrid microbiotas reflective of both “parents” and displayed 
intermediate susceptibility to colitis. Mapping of microbe­phenotype relationships in parental mouse 
strains and in mice with hybrid microbiotas identified the bacterial family Lachnospiraceae as a correlate for protection from disease. Using directed microbial culture techniques, we discovered Clostridium immunis, a previously unknown bacterial species from this family, that —when administered to colitis-
prone mice —protected against colitis- associated death. Thus, we have used “microbial pedigree” 
analysis to move beyond the standard correlative microbiome study and found a hitherto unidentified 
commensal that causally protects from colitis. More broadly, identifying disease-modulating 
commensals by means of microbial pedigree analysis may also be applicable to human microbiome 
studies. 
- 120 ­     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
     
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
 The Interplay Between Gut Microbiota-Derived Secondary Bile Acids and C. Difficile 
Pathogen Dynamics 
Rajani Thanissery, Jenessa A. Winston, Casey M. Theriot 
Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State 
University 
The changing epidemiology of Clostridium difficile infection over the past decades presents a significant 
challenge in the management of C. difficile associated diseases. The gastrointestinal tract microbiota 
provides colonization resistance against C. difficile, and growing evidence suggests that gut microbial 
derived secondary bile acids (SBAs) play a role. We hypothesized that the C. difficile life cycle; spore germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin production, of strains that vary by age and ribotype will differ in their sensitivity to SBAs. C. difficile strains R20291 and CD196 (ribotype 027), M68 and CF5 (017), 630 (012), BI9 (001) and M120 (078) were used to define taurocholate (TCA) mediated spore 
germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin activity in the absence and presence of gut microbial 
derived SBAs (deoxycholate, isodeoxycho late, lithocholate, isolithocholate, ursodeoxycholate, ω ­
muricholate, and hyodeoxycholate) found in the human and mouse large intestine. C. difficile strains varied in their rates of germination, growth kinetics, and toxin activity without the addition of SBAs. C. difficile M120, a highly divergent strain, had robust germination, growth, but significantly lower toxin activity compared to other strains. Many SBAs were able to inhibit TCA mediated spore germination and 
outgrowth, growth, and toxin activity in a dose dependent manner, but the level of inhibition and 
resistance varied across all strains and ribotypes. This study illustrates how clinically relevant C. difficile strains can have different responses when exposed to SBAs present in the gastrointestinal tract. 
Strain-Level Identification of Mother- to-Child Bacterial Transmission During the First Few 
Months of Life 
Moran Yassour
1,2, Larson Hogstrom1, Eeva Jason3, Heli Siljander4, Jenni Selvenius3, Sami Oikarinen5, 
Heikki Hyöty5, Jorma Ilonen6, Suvi Virtanen7, Hera Vlamakis1,2, Eric S. Lander1, Mikael Knip4, Ramnik J. 
Xavier1,2 
1Broad Institute; 2Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital; 
3Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital; 4Children’s Hospi tal, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Central Hospital; 5Department of Virology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere; 
6Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital; 7Department of Health, 
National Institute for Health and Welfare 
The human gut microbiota is established during the first few years of life, yet we know remarkably little 
about the natural history of how the microbiome forms in children. Early events in microbial 
colonization have a profound effect on physiology and immune education in the gut, thereby impacting 
disease susceptibility (e.g., obesity, asthma, and other inflammatory disorders later in life). 
Using a newly established prospective birth cohort, we studied the gut microbiome of 24 infants and 
their mothers, sampled longitudinally in the first few months of the child’s life. We compared the 
microbial communities across and within families to identify bacterial transmission events. 
We found that newborn samples collected within two days of delivery exhibit low-complexity microbial 
communities, where often 1-4 species account for >85% of the community. Using species-level abundance profiles, we can identify communities dominated by either E. coli, Bifidobacterium, or 
- 121 ­    
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
  
   
   Staphylococcus species. We next used deep metagenomic sequencing to identify strains by comparing 
SNPs across the genomes of these highly abundant species. Despite the species-level similarity across 
unrelated children, strain-level analysis reveals unique shared strains that are transferred from mothers 
to their children. 
The Human Gut Microbiome Protects Against Arsenic Toxicity 
Seth T. Walk1, Michael Coryell1, Ping Li2, Yanxin Wang2, Mark McAlpine1, Timothy R. McDermott1 
1Montana State University ; 2China University of Geosciences 
Arsenic is a toxin and carcinogenic metalloid that poisons an estimated 200 million people around the 
world, primarily through contaminated food and drinking water. In humans and other mammals, the 
relative influence of different cell types capable of arsenic detoxification has been debated. Confusingly, 
the mammalian microbiome has been suggested to both mitigate and exacerbate arsenic toxicity. Here 
we show that the human gut microbiome protects from arsenic-induced mortality in vivo. We found that both antibiotic-treated and germ free mice excreted significantly less arsenic in stool and accumulated more arsenic in organs compared to untreated, conventional mice. We also found that 
mice lacking the primary arsenic detoxification pathway (arsenic 3+ methyltransferase, As3mt) were 
hypersensitive to arsenic after antibiotic treatment or when derived germ free compared to wild-type 
and/or conventional counterparts. We then found that human microbiome (stool) transplants protected As3mt-KO mice from arsenic-induced mortality, but that the level of protection correlated with microbiome stability and presence of the well-known human commensal, Faecalibacterium. Our results 
demonstrate that both a functional As3mt and a stable microbiome are required for protection against 
arsenic toxicity. We anticipate that the gut microbiome will become an important explanatory factor of disease (arsenicosis) penetrance in human populations, and a novel target for prevention and treatment strategies. 
The Importance of Colonization History in Gut Microbiota Assembly 
Jens Walters , Maria X. Maldonado-Gomez, Inés Martínez, Joao Carlos Gomes Neto, Hatem Kittana, Hua 
Ding, Robert Schmaltz, Payal Joglekar, Roberto Jiménez, Nathan L. Marsteller, Andrew K. Benson, Daniel 
A.Peterson, Amanda E. Ramer-Tait 
University of Alberta 
The ecological processes that govern assembly of the gut microbiota and contribute to the vast 
compositional variation among individuals are still insufficiently understood. Deterministic factors explain neither the entire magnitude of inter-individual variability nor the full range of characteristics of 
the microbiota across individuals. Here, we employed gnotobiotic mice to systematically examine the 
importance of colonization history in shaping the gut microbiota. Germ-free wild-type (WT) and Rag1-/­C57BL/6 mice were inoculated at two time points (weeks 1 and 6) with distinct mouse cecal 
microbiomes (A & B) in different succession (A/B or B/A) or together (AB/AB), and the microbiota was 
characterized at week 12. In additional experiments, four bacterial stains were introduced into mice at different time points to test how time of acquisition influences colonization success and the trajectory of 
community assembly. Measures of beta-diversity revealed that the assembled microbiota was 
statistically more similar to the donor community established first, indicating an importance of 
colonization order. In addition, persistence was enhanced for two of the four bacterial strains tested 
when introduced during the first week of life compared to later time points. The advantage of early 
- 122 ­    
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  colonization appears to result from ecological processes with little involvement of the adaptive immune 
system, as analogous results were observed in WT and Rag1-/- mice. In conclusion, this study 
established the importance of colonization history for gut microbiota assembly, providing basic 
information to both understand inter-individual variation of the gut microbiome and develop strategies to counteract aberrant patterns of colonization. 
Microbe-Mitochondria Interaction in Host Longevity Regulation 
Meng Wang 
Baylor College of Medicine 
Microbes residing in the host gut actively produce various metabolic molecules that exert crucial effects 
on host health. However, the exact molecular relationship between microbe-derived metabolites and 
host longevity remains largely unknown. Through high-throughput genetic screens, we have identified 
specific microbes and their-derived metabolites that specifically regulate host longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. We further delineated molecular pathways regulated by these microbial 
metabolites in the host, and discovered host mitochondrial dynamics as a converged cellular mechanism 
for these longevity regulations. Together, our work reveals microbe-host metabolic axes that control 
mitochondrial dynamics with critical consequences for host metabolic health and longevity. 
Vibrio Cholerae Infection and the Duodenal Microbiome 
Ana Weil
1, Fahima Chowdhury2, Ashraful Khan2, Stephen Calderwood1, Edward Ryan1, Regina LaRocque1, 
Firdausi Qadri2, Jason Harris1 
1Massachusetts General Hospital ; 2International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research 
Introduction: Studies of household contacts exposed to Vibrio cholerae have identified gut microbial 
factors that are associated with susceptibility to infection. To detect microbial species that may interact 
with V. cholerae during human infection, we prospectively examined the gut bacteria adherent to the duodenal mucosa, a site of V. cholerae replication in humans. Methods: We examined the duodenal and 
stool microbiome of 17 Bangladeshi patients with active cholera using 16S rRNA sequencing. Duodenal 
pinch biopsies (collected by esophagogastroduodenoscopy) and stool were collected on day 2 following 
onset of infection, and at two follow up timepoints. Results: During cholera, fewer bacteria were 
present in the duodenal mucosa compared to follow up timepoints (average of 2473 reads per sample, 
compared to 4749 reads per sample on follow up days, p=0.01, unpaired t test). Bacterial populations during cholera were phylogenetically distinct compared to follow up timepoints (p=0.002, unweighted 
Unifrac distances permutational multivariate analysis of variance). During cholera, the duodenal 
microbiota was also characterized by a decrease in anaerobes (such as phylum Proteobacteria, p=0.02, 
unpaired t test), and increases in specific Gram-negative genera, such as Halomonas and Shewanella (8% 
versus 3% at baseline, and 3% versus 0.1 % at baseline, respectively, linear discriminant analysis score 
>4.0). The duodenal and stool microbiome recovered to baseline by day 30. Conclusion: We studied 
mucosal bacteria from the active site of V. cholerae infection to identify species that may influence 
clinical outcomes. The biological interactions between the dominant bacterial groups during active V. 
cholerae warrant further study. 
- 123 ­       
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  Antibiotic-Induced Microbiome Depletion Alters Glucose Homeostasis by Affecting 
Intestinal Signaling and Colonic Energy Metabolism 
Amir Zarrinpar1,2,3,4, Amandine Chaix1, Zhenjiang Z. Xu3,5,6, Max W. Chang7, Clarisse A. Marotz8, Alan 
Saghatelian9, Rob Knight3,5,6, Satchidananda Panda1 
1Regulatory Biology Laboratory, 7Integrative Genomics and Bioinformatics Core, 9Protein Biology 
Laboratory, The Salk Institute; 2Division of Gastroenterology, 3Center for Microbiome Innovation, 
5Department of Pediatrics, 6Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 8Biomedical Sciences 
Program, University of California, San Diego; 4VA San Diego Health Systems 
Antibiotic-induced microbiome depletion (AIMD) can reveal the relationship of the gut microbiome and 
host glucose homeostasis by affecting luminal secondary metabolites and gut signaling. We investigated the effects of AIMD in normal-chow fed mice to understand its effects on gut homeostasis, luminal 
signaling, and metabolism. We show that AIMD decreases baseline serum glucose levels, reduces 
glucose surge in a tolerance test, and improves insulin sensitivity without altering food intake or body 
adiposity. These occur in the setting of decreased luminal SCFAs, especially butyrate, and secondary bile 
acid (BA) pool which affects whole-body BA metabolism. AIMD mice have altered cecal gene expression 
and gut signaling, particularly of GLP-1. Extensive tissue remodeling and decreased availability of SCFAs shift enterocyte metabolism toward glucose utilization. Hence, AIMD alters whole-body glucose 
homeostasis by potentially converting the gut into a glucose sink. 
Antibiotics Disrupt Gastrointestinal Microbiota and Mucosal Immunity in Rhesus 
Macaques 
Alexander S. Zevin , Jeremy Smedley, Nichole R. Klatt, Ryan K. Cheu, Jennifer A. Manuzak, Tiffany Hensley-
McBain, Charlene Miller, Jake Modesitt, Ernesto Coronado, Toni Gott 
Washington National Primate Research Center, University of Washington 
Antibiotics are widely used throughout the world to treat bacterial infections. However, mounting 
evidence suggests that antibiotic therapies can disrupt the composition of the gastrointestinal (GI) microbiome. GI-resident microbiota and their metabolites, such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are 
critical for maintaining host immune homeostasis and protecting against the expansion of pathobionts. 
We administered antibiotics to four groups of healthy female rhesus macaques and collected GI biopsies 
and with stool. We evaluated mucosal immunity before, during, and after the antibiotic treatments and 
tracked bacterial community composition using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Finally, we used GC-MS to 
evaluate stool concentrations of SCFAs. The antibiotic treatments were linked to shifts in bacterial 
communities in the stool, as well as dramatically decreased concentrations of all measured SCFAs. We demonstrated changes in mucosal immunity during the antibiotic treatment, including a significant 
increase in colonic and rectal mucosal neutrophils during the treatment, and altered frequencies of 
colonic activated CD4+ T-cells, and IL-17 producing CD4+ T-cells. Thus, antibiotic therapies can alter GI bacterial abundance, lead to a decrease in SCFAs, and are linked to a distinct signature of mucosal inflammation. These data demonstrate how altering the structure and function of GI bacterial 
communities can have a profound effect on mucosal immunity. 
- 124 ­     
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
  Integrative Personal Omics Profiles During Periods of Weight Gain and Loss 
Wenyu Zhou1, Brian Piening1, Kevin Contrepois1, Hannes Röst1, Gucci Gu1, Tejaswini Mishra1, Blake 
Hansen2, Eddy Bautista2, Shana Leopold2, Christine Yeh1, Daniel Spakowicz2, Kimberly Kukurba1, Dalia 
Perelman1, Erica Sodergren2, Tracey McLaughlin1, George Weinstock2, Michael Snyder1 
1Genetics Department, 2The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Genetics Department, Stanford 
University School of Medicine 
Obesity is a worldwide health epidemic and a major cause for cardiovascular disease and acquired 
insulin resistance leading to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The detrimental health effects of short-term excess weight gain are poorly understood. Here we performed a longitudinal study combining 
multiple omics strategies (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and microbiomics) to 
comprehensively characterize biomolecular changes in the blood and microbiomes of healthy and 
insulin resistant human subjects during periods of experimental weight gain and loss. Longitudinal multi­
omic profiling revealed a wealth of biomolecular changes concomitant with weight gain, including pathways associated with glucose regulation/metabolism, and the activation of strong inflammatory and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy signatures in the blood. In total, these large-scale longitudinal data offer a 
novel view of the rapidly-changing biomolecular landscape associated with weight gain/loss and may 
offer new strategies for predicting and preventing obesity-associated metabolic and/or cardiovascular 
disease. The data also serve as a unique resource for the scientific community. 
Effects of Intermittent Fasting on the Gut Microbiome in Multiple Sclerosis 
Yanjiao Zhou
1, Cignarella Francesca2, Claudia Cantoni2, Yair Dorsett1, George Weinstock1, Anne Cross2, 
Laura Piccio2 
1The Jackson Laboratory ; 2Washington University, St. Louis 
Background : Calorie restriction (CR) ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), 
the animal model of MS. However, the exact mechanism by which CR affects the EAE course is unknown. 
The gut microbiome is strongly influenced by diet. Gut microbiome also plays an important role in 
regulating host immunity. Here, we aim to test the effects of intermittent fasting (IF) on clinical course, immune responses and gut microbiome in EAE and MS patients. Methods: C57BL/6 mice were kept on a 
regimen of IF or ad libitum (controls) for a month prior to immunization with MOG35-55 and during EAE. 
Immune profiling in peripheral and gut associated lymphoid organs and stool microbiome were 
analyzed. Fecal transplant from IF to control group was performed. RRMS patients were randomized to IF group and control group. Stool and blood samples were analyzed before and after 15 days of IF. Results: The IF group displayed a less severe EAE clinical course. Production of IL17 by T cells in the 
draining lymph nodes of the site of immunization was attenuated in IF mice. IF increased the number of 
regulatory T cells in mesenteric lymph nodes. IF significantly altered the diversity and the composition of 
gut microbiome. Fecal transplant of the IF-altered gut microbiome ameliorated EAE severity. 
Microbiome in MS patients on IF indicated similar changes as mice undergoing IF. Conclusions: IF can 
ameliorate EAE clinical course by modulating immune response, affecting the composition of immune cells in gut associated lymphoid tissue and drastically changing the gut microbiome. 
- 125 ­    
- 126 ­ 
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 SPEAKERS
 
Eric Alm 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology ejalm@mit.edu 
Elhanan Borenstein 
University of Washington and Santa Fe Institute elbo@uw.edu 
Robert A. Britton 
Baylor College of Medicine robert.britton@bcm.edu 
Gregory A. Buck 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
gregory.buck@vcuhealth.org 
Scott J. Bultman 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
scott_bultman@med.unc.edu 
Eugene B. Chang 
University of Chicago echang@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu 
Mildred Cho 
Stanford University 
micho@stanford.edu 
Gautam Dantas 
Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis 
dantas@wustl.edu 
Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello 
New York University School of Medicine 
mariadominguezbello@gmail.com 
Sharon M. Donovan 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
sdonovan@illinois.edu 
Pieter Dorrestein 
University of California, San Diego 
pdorrestein@ucsd.edu Angela Douglas 
Cornell University aes326@cornell.edu 
Andrew Gewirtz 
George State University agewirtz@gsu.edu 
Mahmoud Ghannoum 
Case Western Reserve University and University 
Hospital Cleveland Medical Center 
mahmoud.ghannoum@uhhospitals.org 
Andrew Goodman 
Yale University 
andrew.goodman@yale.edu 
Jeffrey I. Gordon 
Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis 
jgordon@wustl.edu 
Gary B. Huffnagle 
University of Michigan 
ghuff@med.umich.edu 
Curtis Huttenhower 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and 
Broad Institute 
chuttenh@hsph.harvard.edu 
Robert Jenq 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center 
rrjenq@mdanderson.org 
Wei Jia 
University of Hawaii Cancer Center 
wjia@cc.hawaii.edu 
Rob Knight 
University of California, San Diego robknight@ucsd.edu 
Nicole Koropatkin 
University of Michigan 
nkoropat@umich.edu 
- 127 - 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Johanna W. Lampe 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
jlampe@fredhutch.org 
Timothy Lu 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
timlu@mit.edu 
Howard Ochman 
University of Texas at Austin 
howard.ochman@austin.utexas.edu 
Eric G. Pamer 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
pamere@mskcc.org 
Andrew D. Patterson 
Pennsylvania State University adp117@psu.edu 
Mary Ellen Perry 
Office of the Director, NIH 
mary.perry@nih.gov 
Dana Philpott 
University of Toronto 
dana.philpott@utoronto.ca 
Katherine S. Pollard 
Gladstone Institutes and University of California, 
San Francisco 
katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu 
John F. Rawls 
Duke University School of Medicine 
john.rawls@duke.edu 
Forest Rohwer 
San Diego State University 
frohwer@gmail.com 
Nita H. Salzman 
Medical College of Wisconsin nsalzman@mcw.edu 
Cynthia L. Sears 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
csears@jhmi.edu Michael P. Snyder 
Stanford University 
mpsnyder@stanford.edu 
Justin Sonnenburg 
Stanford University School of Medicine 
jsonnenburg@stanford.edu 
Thaddeus Stappenbeck 
Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis 
stappenb@wustl.edu 
Michiko E. Taga 
University of California, Berkeley 
taga@berkeley.edu 
Peter J. Turnbaugh 
University of California, San Francisco peter.turnbaugh@ucsf.edu 
Harris H. Wang 
Columbia University hw2429@cumc.columbia.edu 
Owen R. White 
University of Maryland School of Medicine 
owhite@som.umaryland.edu 
Gary D. Wu 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine 
gdwu@mail.med.upenn.edu 
Ramnik Xavier 
Harvard Medical School and Broad Institute, 
Harvard University 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu 
- 128 - 
    
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 POSTER PRESENTERS
 
Michael C. Abt 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center abtm@mskcc.org 
Tom Arodz 
Virginia Commonwealth University tarodz@vcu.edu 
Julian Avila-Pacheco 
Broad Institute, Harvard University jravilap@broadinstitute.org 
Ami S. Bhatt 
Stanford University 
asbhatt@stanford.edu 
Ran Blekhman 
University of Minnesota 
blekhman@umn.edu 
Colin J. Brislawn 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory colin.brislawn@pnnl.gov 
Carla Brooks 
The University of Arizona 
cbrooks1@email.arizona.edu 
Frederic D. Bushman 
University of Pennsylvania bushman@mail.med.upenn.edu 
Alison J. Carey 
Drexel University College of Medicine 
alison.carey@drexelmed.edu 
Paul E. Carlson, Jr. 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
paul.carlson@fda.hhs.gov 
Tiffany L. Carson 
University of Alabama at Birmingham tiffanycarson@uabmc.edu Andrew T. Chan Broad Institute and Massachusetts General 
Hospital 
achan@mgh.harvard.edu 
Yu-Ling Chang 
UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine 
jbraun@mednet.ucla.edu 
Robert S. Chapkin 
Texas A&M University r-chapkin@tamu.edu 
Grace Y. Chen 
University of Michigan 
gchenry@umich.edu 
Nicholas Chia 
Mayo Clinic 
chia.nicholas@mayo.edu 
Hiutung Chu 
Caltech 
hiuchu@caltech.edu 
Xiaomei Cong 
University of Connecticut 
xiaomei.cong@uconn.edu 
Elizabeth Corwin 
Emory University ejcorwi@emory.edu 
Mauro Costa-Mattioli 
Baylor College of Medicine 
costamat@bcm.edu 
Jonathan Crabtree 
University of Maryland Baltimore School of 
Medicine 
jcrabtree@som.umaryland.edu 
Heather Huot Creasy 
University of Maryland Baltimore School of 
Medicine 
hhuot@som.umaryland.edu 
- 129 - 
      
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
  
 
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 Gail A.M. Cresci 
Cleveland Clinic 
crescig@ccf.org 
R. William DePaolo 
University of Washington 
wdepaolo@medicine.washington.edu 
Breck A. Duerkop 
University of Colorado School of Medicine 
breck.duerkop@ucdenver.edu 
Michal A. Elovitz 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine melovitz@obgyn.upenn.edu 
Victor Felix 
University of Maryland Baltimore School of 
Medicine 
vfelix@som.umaryland.edu 
Jennifer M. Fettweis 
Virginia Commonwealth University fettweisjm@vcu.edu 
David N. Fredricks 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
dfredric@fredhutch.org 
Abigail Glascock 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
alglascock@mymail.vcu.edu 
Adrian F. Gombart 
Oregon State University 
adrian.gombart@oregonstate.edu 
Maureen Groer 
University of South Florida 
mgroer@health.usf.edu 
Yiping W. Han 
Columbia University Medical Center ywh2102@cumc.columbia.edu 
Blake M. Hanson 
The Jackson Laboratory 
blake.hanson@jax.org Jessica L. Hastie 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
jessica.hastie@fda.hhs.gov 
Patricia L. Hibberd 
Boston University School of Public Health 
plh0@bu.edu 
Karen J. Ho 
Northwestern University 
kho1@nm.org 
Anne G. Hoen 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth anne.g.hoen@dartmouth.edu 
Emily B. Hollister 
Baylor College of Medicine holliste@bcm.edu 
Eunsoo Hong 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
ssfong@vcu.edu 
Julie C. Dunning Hotopp 
University of Maryland, Baltimore 
jdhotopp@som.umaryland.edu 
Bernice Huang 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
huangb2@vcu.edu 
Meredith A.J. Hullar 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
mhullar@fhcrc.org 
Ryan Hunter 
University of Minnesota rchunter@umn.edu 
Nitya Jain 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
njain@ccib.mgh.harvard.edu 
Heather Jaspan 
Seattle Children's Research Institute 
hbjaspan@gmail.com 
- 130 - 
       
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Nicole R. Jimenez 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
jimeneznr@vcu.edu 
Purna C. Kashyap 
Mayo Clinic 
kashyap.purna@mayo.edu 
Andrew Kau 
Washington University, St. Louis 
akau@wustl.edu 
Yiannis Kaznessis 
University of Minnesota yiannis@umn.edu 
Brendan J. Kelly 
University of Pennsylvania brendank@mail.med.upenn.edu 
Chang Kim 
Purdue University 
chkim@purdue.edu 
Mary Kimmel 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
mary_kimmel@med.unc.edu 
Nichole R. Klatt 
University of Washington 
klattnr@uw.edu 
Kathryn A. Knoop 
Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis 
kknoop@wustl.edu 
Rosa Krajmalnik-Brown 
Arizona State University 
dr.rosy@asu.edu 
Douglas Kwon 
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard dkwon@mgh.harvard.edu 
Regina Lamendella 
Juniata College 
lamendella@juniata.edu John Lee 
Weill Cornell Medicine 
jrl2002@med.cornell.edu 
Katherine P. Lemon 
The Forsyth Institute 
klemon@forsyth.org 
Huiying Li 
University of California, Los Angeles 
huiying@ucla.edu 
Efrem Lim 
Washington University, St. Louis efremlim@wustl.edu 
Yuying Liu 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston McGovern Medical School 
yuying.liu@uth.tmc.edu 
Jason Lloyd-Price 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and 
Broad Institute 
jasonlp@broadinstitute.org 
Bing Ma 
University of Maryland School of Medicine 
bma@som.umaryland.edu 
Juliette C. Madan 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth 
juliette.c.madan@hitchcock.org 
Katie G. McElroy 
University of Maryland School of Nursing 
kmcel001@umaryland.edu 
Katie A. Meyer 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
ktmeyer@unc.edu 
Sonia Michail 
University of Southern California and Children's 
Hospital Los Angeles 
sonia.michail@hotmail.com 
- 131 - 
      
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
    
  
 
    
  
 
 
    
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 Julie Mirpuri 
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center 
juliemir@gmail.com 
Aimee Moore 
Washington University, St. Louis aimee.m.moore@gmail.com 
Alison Morris 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
morrisa@upmc.edu 
Andrew Neish 
Emory University School of Medicine 
aneish@emory.edu 
Gabriel Nuñez 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor gabriel_nunez@umich.edu 
D. Brent Polk 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles/University of 
Southern California 
dbpolk@chla.usc.edu 
Puneet Puri 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
ppuri2@vcu.edu 
Leah M. Pyter 
Ohio State University leah.pyter@osumc.edu 
Qibin Qi 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
qibin.qi@einstein.yu.edu 
Vijay R. Ramakrishnan 
University of Colorado 
vijay.ramakrishnan@ucdenver.edu 
Jacques Ravel 
University of Maryland School of Medicine jravel@som.umaryland.edu 
Matthew R. Redinbo 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
redinbo@unc.edu Mary Regan 
University of Maryland 
regan@som.umaryland.edu 
Jason M. Ridlon 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
jmridlon@illinois.edu 
Diana E. Roopchand 
Rutgers University 
roopchand@sebs.rutgers.edu 
Wendy Russell 
University of Aberdeen 
w.russell@abdn.ac.uk 
Michael J. Sadowsky 
University of Minnesota sadowsky@umn.edu 
M.Reza Sailani 
Stanford University 
sailani@stanford.edu 
Tiffany C. Scharschmidt 
University of California, San Francisco 
tiffany.scharschmidt@ucsf.edu 
Melanie Schirmer 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health and 
Broad Institute 
melanie@broadinstitute.org 
Julia A. Segre 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
jsegre@nhgri.nih.gov 
Myrna G. Serrano 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
mgserrano@vcu.edu 
Michael A. Silverman 
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania 
silvermam1@email.chop.edu 
Carolyn Slupsky 
University of California, Davis 
cslupsky@ucdavis.edu 
-132 - 
      
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  Gregory F. Sonnenberg 
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University 
gfsonnenberg@med.cornell.edu 
Matthew Stoll 
University of Alabama at Birmingham 
mstoll@peds.uab.edu 
Neeraj K. Surana 
Boston Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical 
School 
neeraj.surana@childrens.harvard.edu 
Casey M. Theriot 
North Carolina State University College of 
Veterinary Medicine 
cmtherio@ncsu.edu 
Hera Vlamakis 
Broad Institute hera@broadinstitute.org 
Seth T. Walk 
Montana State University 
seth.walk@montana.edu Jens Walters 
University of Alberta 
jwalter1@ualberta.ca 
Meng Wang 
Baylor College of Medicine 
wmeng@bcm.edu 
Ana Weil 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
aweil@partners.org 
Amir Zarrinpar 
University of California, San Diego azarrinp@ucsd.edu 
Alexander S. Zevin 
University of Washington alexander.zevin@wanprc.org 
Wenyu Zhou 
Stanford University 
wenyuz@stanford.edu 
Yanjiao Zhou 
The Jackson Laboratory 
yanjiao.zhou@jax.org 
- 133 - 
    
- 134 - 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 GENERAL PARTICIPANTS 
(As of press time.) 
Christian Abnet 
National Cancer Institute, NIH abnetc@mail.nih.gov 
Kristin Abraham 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
abrahamk@niddk.nih.gov 
Rajeev Agarwal 
Office of Research on Womens Health, NIH 
agarwalraj@mail.nih.gov 
Neil Aggarwal 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH neil.aggarwal@nih.gov 
Beena Akolkar 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
akolkarb@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Heather Allen 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
heather.allen@ars.usda.gov 
Emma Allen-Vercoe 
University of Guelph 
eav@uoguelph.ca 
Amy Alman 
University of South Florida 
aalman@health.usf.edu 
Tomer Altman 
Whole Biome, Inc. tomer.altman@wholebiome.com 
Jim Anderson 
Division of Program Coordination, Planning, and 
Strategic Initiatives, NIH 
james.anderson2@nih.gov Michael Bailey Nationwide Children's Hospital michael.bailey2@nationwidechildrens.org 
Jasmohan Bajaj 
Virginia Commonwealth University jasmohan@gmail.com 
Robert Baldassano 
University of Pennsylvania baldassano@email.chop.edu 
Michele Bennett 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
l.bennett@nih.gov 
Premysl Bercik 
McMaster University 
bercikp@mcmaster.ca 
Anne Birkett 
Kellogg Company anne.birkett@kellogg.com 
Linda Birnbaum 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
birnbaumls@niehs.nih.gov 
Martin Blaser 
New York University Langone Medical Center martin.blaser@nyumc.org 
Gary Borisy 
The Forsyth Institute gborisy@forsyth.org 
Jonathan Braun 
University of California, Los Angeles David Geffen 
School of Medicine 
jbraun@mednet.ucla.edu 
- 135 ­ 
     
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Andrew Breeden 
National Institute for Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, NIH 
andrew.breeden@nih.gov 
Andrew Bremer 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
andrew.bremer@nih.gov 
Lisa Brenner 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs lisa.brenner@va.gov 
Cynthia Brincat 
Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine 
cbrincat@lumc.edu 
Jonathan Bromberg 
University of Maryland School of Medicine jbromberg@som.umaryland.edu 
P.J. Brooks 
National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences, NIH 
pjbrooks@mail.nih.gov Marishka Brown 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
marishka.brown@nih.gov 
Yvonne Bryan 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH bryany@mail.nih.gov 
Bonnie Burgess-Beusse 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
bonnie.burgess-beusse@nih.gov 
Robert D. Burk 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
robert.burk@einstein.yu.edu 
Drusilla Burns 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
drusilla.burns@fda.hhs.gov David Butler 
National Academy of Sciences 
dbutler@nas.edu 
Kevin Cain 
University of Washington 
cain@uw.edu 
Lis Caler 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
lis.caler@nih.gov 
Paul Carlson 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration paul.carlson@fda.hhs.gov 
Stacy Carrington-Lawrence 
Office of AIDS Research, NIH carringtons@od.nih.gov 
Lisa Chadwick 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
chadwickl@niehs.nih.gov 
Jason Chan 
Juniata College 
chan@juniata.edu 
Theresa Chang 
Rutgers Medical School 
theresa.chang@rutgers.edu 
Stephen Channock 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
chanocks@mail.nih.gov 
Robert Chapkin 
Texas A&M University 
r-chapkin@tamu.edu 
Marc Charette 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH marc.charette@nih.gov 
Julia Charles 
Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical 
School 
jfcharles@bwh.harvard.edu 
- 136 ­ 
      
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Irene Chen 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
chen@chem.ucsb.edu 
Jue Chen 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
jue.chen@nih.gov 
Wen Chen 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
chenw@mail.nih.gov Yu Chen 
New York University School of Medicine 
yu.chen@nyumc.org 
Mashkoor Choudhry 
Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of 
Medicine 
mchoudhry@luc.edu 
Linda Chrisey 
U.S. Navy, Department of Defense linda.chrisey@navy.mil 
Ricardo Cibotti 
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases, NIH 
ricardo.cibotti@nih.gov 
Henry Ciolino 
National Cancer Institute, NIH henry.ciolino@nih.gov 
Jon Clardy 
Harvard Medical School 
jon_clardy@hms.harvard.edu 
Erika Claud 
The University of Chicago 
eclaud@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu 
Eleazar Cohen 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
ecohen@niaid.nih.gov Ronald Collman 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine 
collmanr@mail.med.upenn.edu 
Sandra Colombini-Hatch 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
hatchs@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Elizabeth Corwin 
Emory University 
ejcorwi@emory.edu 
Mauro Costa-Mattioli 
Baylor College of Medicine costamat@bcm.edu 
Siobhan Cowley 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration siobhan.cowley@fda.hhs.gov 
Matt Craig 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
matt.craig@nih.gov 
Michael Craig 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
bez7@cdc.gov 
Jimmy Crott 
Tufts University 
jimmy.crott@tufts.edu 
Robert Croyle 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
croyler@mail.nih.gov 
Erika Dagata 
Brown University edagata@lifespan.org 
Capt. Blair Dancy 
U.S. Army, Department of Defense 
blair.c.dancy.mil@mail.mil 
Que Dang 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
qdang@niaid.nih.gov 
- 137 ­ 
      
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Jayajit Das 
The Research Institute at Nationwide Children ’s 
Hospital and Ohio State University 
jayajit.das@nationwidechildrens.org 
Phil Daschner 
National Cancer Institute, NIH daschnep@mail.nih.g ov 
Sean S. Davies 
Vanderbilt University 
sean.davies@vanderbilt.edu 
Cindy Davis 
Office of Dietary Supplements, NIH 
davisci@od.nih.gov 
Margaret Dayhoff-Brannigan 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration margaret.dayhoff-brannigan@fda.hhs.gov 
Carolyn Deal 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
cdeal@niaid.nih.gov 
Ryan Demmer 
Columbia University 
rtd2106@cumc.columbia.edu 
Hitesh Deshmukh 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center hitesh.deshmukh@cchmc.org 
Nancy Desmond 
National Institute of Mental Health, NIH 
ndesmond@mail.nih.gov 
Floyd E. Dewhirst 
The Forsyth Institute 
fdewhirst@forsyth.org 
Valentina DiFrancesco 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH valentina.difrancesco@nih.gov 
Nancy DiFronzo 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
difronzon@nhlbi.nih.gov Thuy Doan 
University of California, San Francisco 
thuy.doan@ucsf.edu 
Claire M. Doerschuk 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
cmd@med.unc.edu 
Gang Dong 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
gdong@niaid.nih.gov 
Edward Doo 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
dooe@niddk.nih.gov 
James Doroshow 
National Cancer Institute, NIH doroshoj@mail.nih.gov 
Sheila Dreher-Lesnick 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration sheila.dreher-lesnick@fda.hhs.gov 
Linda Duffy 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
duffyl@mail.nih.gov 
Sylvia H. Duncan 
Rowett Institute, University of Aberdeen sylvia.duncan@abdn.ac.uk 
Johanna Dwyer 
Office of Dietary Supplements, NIH dwyerj1@od.nih.gov 
Janet Eary 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
janet.eary@nih.gov 
Emmeline Edwards 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
edwardse@mail.nih.gov 
- 138 ­ 
    
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 Chris Elkins 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
chris.elkins@fda.hhs.gov 
Alan Embry 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
embrya@niaid.nih.gov 
Nancy Emenaker 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
emenaken@mail.nih.gov 
Odile Engel 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
odile.engel@fda.hhs.gov 
Mary Evans 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
evansmary@niddk.nih.gov 
Veronika Fedirko 
Emory University vfedirk@emory.edu 
Wenke Feng 
University of Louisville 
wenke.feng@louisville.edu 
Cara Fiore 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration cara.fiore@fda.hhs.gov 
Roberto Flores 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
floresr2@mail.nih.gov 
Elissa Foss 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
edteran@email.meredith.edu 
David Fredricks 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center dfredric@fredhutch.org 
Rebecca Fuldner 
National Institute on Aging, NIH 
fuldnerr@nia.nih.gov Zorina Galis 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
zorina.galis@nih.gov 
Yong Gao 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
gaol2@niaid.nih.gov 
Rex Gaskins 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
hgaskins@illinois.edu 
Nara Gavini 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH 
nara.gavini@nih.gov 
Kathryn Geldart 
University of Minnesota gelda002@umn.edu 
Caroline Genco 
Tufts University School of Medicine caroline.genco@tufts.edu 
John A. Gerlt 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
j-gerlt@illinois.edu 
Dori Germolec 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
germolec@niehs.nih.gov 
Dirk Gevers 
Johnson and Johnson 
dgevers3@its.jnj.com 
Arunima Ghosh 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
arunima.ghosh@fda.hhs.gov 
Michelle Giglio 
University of Maryland School of Medicine mgiglio@som.umaryland.edu 
- 139 ­ 
      
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Maria Giovanni 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
mgiovanni@niaid.nih.gov 
Catherine (Katy) Godfrey 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
cgodfrey@niaid.nih.gov 
Andrew Gomez 
University of Minnesota agomez1008@yahoo.com 
Patricia Greenwel 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
patricia.greenwel@nih.gov 
Ann Griffen 
The Ohio State University 
griffen.1@osu.edu 
Max Guo 
National Institute on Aging, NIH 
qmguo@mail.nih.gov 
Katherine A. Guthrie 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 
kguthrie@fredhutch.org 
Daneila Gutierrez-Munoz 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration danielag2@email.arizona.edu 
Michelle Hamlet 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH michelle.hamlet@nih.gov 
Yiping W. Han 
Columbia University 
ywh2102@cumc.columbia.edu 
Howard Hang 
The Rockefeller University 
hhang@mail.rockefeller.edu Heather Harbottle 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
heather.harbottle@fda.hhs.gov 
Kweku Hayford 
Sinai Hospital of Baltimore 
hayfordmd@gmail.com 
Rohan Hazra 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
hazrar@mail.nih.gov 
Xuesong He 
University of California, Los Angeles School of 
Dentistry 
xhe@dentistry.ucla.edu Margaret Heitkemper 
University of Washington heit@uw.edu 
Lee Helman 
National Cancer Institute, NIH helmanl@mail.nih.gov 
Matthew Henn 
Seres Therapeutics 
mhenn@serestherapeutics.com 
Rosemary Higgins 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
higginsr@mail.nih.gov 
Sarah Highlander 
J. Craig Venter Institute sarah@skhighlander.us 
Susan Holmes 
Stanford University 
susan@stat.stanford.edu 
Craig Hopp 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
hoppdc@mail.nih.gov 
- 140 ­ 
      
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 Daniel Horton 
Rutgers University Robert Wood Johnson Medical 
School 
daniel.horton@rutgers.edu 
Elaine Hsiao 
University of California, Los Angeles ehsiao@ucla.edu 
Eric Chun-Ming Huang 
University of California, San Diego 
chunming@ucsd.edu 
Yvonne Huang 
University of Michigan 
yvjhuang@umich.edu 
Meredith A.J. Hullar 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center mhullar@fhcrc.org 
Ryan Hunter 
University of Minnesota rchunter@umn.edu 
Brandon Iker 
Amway 
brandon.iker@amway.com 
Zafar Iqbal 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
zafar.iqbal@va.gov 
Rustem Ismagilov 
Caltech 
rustem.admin@caltech.edu 
Jacques Izard 
University of Nebraska 
jizard@unl.edu 
William Ja 
The Scripps Research Institute 
wja@scripps.edu 
Scott Jackson 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
scott.jackson@nist.gov Rob Jaeger 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
robert.jaeger@va.gov 
Venkatakrishna R. Jala 
University of Louisville 
jvrao001@louisville.edu 
Stephen James 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
jamess@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Janet Jansson 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
janet.jansson@pnnl.gov 
Eldin Jasarevic 
University of Pennsylvania eldin@upenn.edu 
Arul Jayaraman 
Texas A&M University arulj@tamu.edu 
Nobuhiko Kamada 
University of Michigan 
nkamada@umich.edu 
Diane L. Kamen 
Medical University of South Carolina 
kamend@musc.edu 
Matt Kane 
National Science Foundation 
mkane@nsf.gov 
Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti 
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital 
thirumala-devi.kanneganti@stjude.org 
Bill Kapogiannis 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
kapogiannisb@mail.nih.gov 
- 141 ­ 
      
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Robert Karp 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
karpr@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Dennis Kasper 
Harvard Medical School dennis_kasper@hms.harvard.edu 
Arthur Katz 
American University 
Arthurmk@yahoo.com 
Marguerite Kearney 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH 
marguerite.kearney@nih.gov 
Tanika Kelly 
Tulane University tkelly@tulane.edu 
Mary Beth Kester 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
kesterm@mail.nih.gov 
Chris Ketchum 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
ketchumc@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Jag Khalsa 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH 
jkhalsa@nida.nih.gov 
Partap Khalsa 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
khalsap@mail.nih.gov 
Alexander Khoruts 
University of Minnesota 
khoru001@umn.edu 
Chang Kim 
Purdue University 
chkim@purdue.edu Young Kim 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
kimyoung@mail.nih.gov 
Charles Hadley King 
George Washington University 
hadley_king@gwmail.gwu.edu 
Gosia Klauzinska 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
malgorzata.klauzinska@nih.gov 
Karin Klingman 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectiou s 
Diseases, NIH 
kklingman@niaid.nih.gov 
David Klumpp 
Northwestern University d-klumpp@northwestern.edu 
Dan Knights 
University of Minnesota dknights@umn.edu 
Trina Knotts 
University of California, Davis 
taknotts@ucdavis.edu 
Carl Koch 
University of Pittsburgh 
kochcd@upmc.edu 
Ron Kohanski 
National Institute on Aging, NIH 
kohanskir@mail.nih.gov 
Barry Kramer 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
kramerb@mail.nih.gov 
Amit Kumar 
National Cancer Institute, NIH kumara@mail.nih.gov 
Purnima Kumar 
The Ohio State University 
kumar.83@osu.edu 
- 142 ­ 
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Doug Kwon 
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard 
dkwon@mgh.harvard.edu 
Regina Lamendella 
Juniata College 
lamendella@juniata.edu 
Alan Landay 
Rush University Medical Center 
alanday@rush.edu 
Chelsea Lane 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
lanemc@niaid.nih.gov 
Brenda Lange-Gustafson 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
bgustafson@niaid.nih.gov 
Alison Laufer 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention vif0@cdc.gov 
Maren Laughlin 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
laughlinm@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Marge Leahy 
International Life Sciences Institute North America mleahy@ilsi.org 
Christine Lee 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
christine.lee2@nih.gov 
Jessica Lee 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
jessica.lee3@nih.gov 
Ling Li 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
lil16@niaid.nih.gov Dan Littman 
New York University School of Medicine 
dan.littman@med.nyu.edu 
Yanhong Liu 
University of California, Davis 
yahliu@ucdavis.edu 
Jon LoTempio 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
jlotempiojr@gmail.com 
Kun Lu 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
kunlu@unc.edu 
Dwayne Lunsford 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, NIH 
lunsfordr@nidcr.nih.gov 
Renate Lux 
University of California, Los Angeles School of 
Dentistry 
rlux@dentistry.ucla.edu 
Christopher Lynch 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
christopher.lynch@nih.gov 
Francesca Macchiarini 
National Institute on Aging, NIH francesca.macchiarini@nih.gov 
Anup Mahurkar 
University of Maryland School of Medicine amahurkar@som.umaryland.edu 
John March 
Cornell University 
jcm224@cornell.edu 
Christine Maric-Bilkan 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
christine.maric-bilkan@nih.gov 
- 143 ­ 
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 Aron Marquitz 
Office of Strategic Coordination, NIH 
aron.marquitz@nih.gov 
Benjamin Marsland 
University Hospital of Lausanne 
benjamin.marsland@unil.ch 
Padma Maruvada 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
maruvadp@niddk.nih.gov 
Martha Matocha 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH 
martha.matocha@nih.gov 
Emeran A. Mayer 
University of California, Los Angeles emayer@ucla.edu 
Sarkis Mazmanian 
Caltech sarkis@caltech.edu 
Susan McCann 
Roswell Park Cancer Institute 
susan.mccann@roswellpark.org 
Cliff McDonald 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
ljm3@cdc.gov 
Jean McEwen 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
jean.mcewen@nih.gov 
Michele McGuirl 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
michele.mcguirl@nih.gov 
Jeffrey McLean 
University of Washington jsmclean@uw.edu 
Melody Mills 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
millsm@niaid.nih.gov Tejaswini Mishra 
Stanford University 
tejaswini.mishra@stanford.edu 
Tom Misteli 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
mistelit@mail.nih.gov 
Emmanuel F. Mongodin 
University of Maryland School of Medicine 
emongodin@som.umaryland.edu 
Nasrin Nabavi 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
nnabavi@niaid.nih.gov 
Faraz Nasseri 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
fnasseri@niaid.nih.gov 
Karen Nelson 
J. Craig Venter Institute knelson@jcvi.org 
Robert Nordstrom 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
nordstrr@mail.nih.gov 
Chad Novince 
Medical University of South Carolina novincec@musc.edu 
Youngsuk Oh 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
yoh@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Michelle Olive 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
olivem@mail.nih.gov 
Andras Oroscz 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, NIH 
orosza@mail.nih.gov 
- 144 ­ 
      
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Voula Osganian National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
voula.osganian@nih.gov 
Francis Ouellette 
Génome Québec francis.ouellette@gmail.com 
Youssef Oulhote 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health 
youlhote@hsph.harvard.edu 
Julie Parsonnet 
Stanford University 
parsonnt@stanford.edu 
Jen Patro 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration jennifer.patro@fda.hhs.gov 
Peter Perrin 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
perrinp@niddk.nih.gov 
Mary Perry 
Office of Strategic Coordination, NIH 
perryma@mail.nih.gov 
Joseph Petrosino 
Baylor College of Medicine jpetrosi@bcm.edu 
Christina Phelps 
Amway 
christina.phelps@amway.com 
Silvia Pineiro 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
silvia.pineiro@fda.hhs.gov 
Paul Planet 
University of Pennsylvania planetp@email.chop.edu 
Mircea Podar 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
podarm@ornl.gov Carol Pontzer 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
pontzerc@mail.nih.gov 
Lisa Postow 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH lisa.postow@nih.gov 
David Pride 
University of California, San Diego 
dpride@ucsd.edu 
Lita Proctor 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
lita.proctor@nih.gov 
Tony Punturieri 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH punturieria@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Dan Raiten 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
daniel.raiten@nih.gov 
Tonse Raju 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
rajut@mail.nih.gov 
Ryan Ranallo 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
ryan.ranallo@nih.gov 
Tracy Rankin 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
rankint@niddk.nih.gov 
Neelakanta Ravindranath 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
ravindrn@mail.nih.gov 
Mamta Rawat 
National Science Foundation 
mrawat@nsf.gov 
- 145 ­ 
      
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
    
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Helen Raybould 
University of California, Davis 
heraybould@ucdavs.edu 
Mike Reddy 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences, 
NIH 
michael.reddy@nih.gov 
Susan D. Reed 
University of Washington 
reeds@uw.edu 
David Relman 
Stanford University 
relman@stanford.edu 
Tiina Reponen 
University of Cincinnati tiina.reponen@uc.edu 
Marc Rhoads 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, McGovern Medical School 
j.marc.rhoads@uth.tmc.edu 
Gabriela Riscuta 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
gabriela.riscuta@nih.gov 
Sharon Ross 
National Cancer Institute, NIH rosssha@mail.nih.gov 
Sarah Rothenberg 
University of South Carolina 
rothenbs@mailbox.sc.edu 
Annette Rothermel 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
arothermel@niaid.nih.gov 
Wendy Russell 
University of Aberdeen 
w.russell@abdn.ac.uk Denise Russo 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
drusso1@mail.nih.gov 
Lynn Rust 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
lrust@niaid.nih.gov 
Gary Ruvkun 
Harvard University ruvkun@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu 
Michael J. Sadowsky 
University of Minnesota 
sadowsky@umn.edu 
Rebecca Knickmeyer Santelli 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill rebecca_knickmeyer@med.unc.edu 
Arun J. Sanyal 
Virginial Commonwealth University arun.sanyal@vcuhealth.org 
Michael Sayre 
National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities, NIH 
sayrem@mail.nih.gov 
Jose Scher 
New York University School of Medicine jose.scher@nyumc.org 
Martina Schmidt 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
schmidma@mail.nih.gov 
Alyxandria Schubert 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
alyxandria.schubert@fda.hhs.gov 
Shepherd Schurman 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
schurmansh@niehs.nih.gov 
- 146 ­ 
    
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Salvatore Sechi 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Disease, NIH 
sechi@nih.gov 
Harold Seifried 
National Cancer Institute, NIH seifrieh@mail.nih.gov 
Ashley Shade 
Michigan State University 
shade.ashley@gmail.com 
Victoria Shanmugam 
The George Washington University 
vshanmugam@mfa.gwu.edu 
Thomas Sharpton 
Oregon State University thomas.sharpton@oregonstate.edu 
Wenyuan Shi 
University of California, Los Angeles School of 
Dentistry 
wshi@dentistry.ucla.edu 
Rupak Shivakoti 
Johns Hopkins University 
rshivak1@jhmi.edu 
Stephanie Shore 
T.H. Chan Harvard School of Public Health sshore@hsph.harvard.edu 
Robert J. Shulman 
Baylor College of Medicine 
rshulman@bcm.edu 
Natalia Shulzhenko 
Oregon State University 
natalia.shulzhenko@oregonstate.edu 
David Shurtleff 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
dshurtle@mail.nih.gov Dinah Singer 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
singerd@mail.nih.gov 
Anne Marie Singh 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine 
anne-singh@northwestern.edu 
Rashmi Sinha 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
sinhar@exchange.nih.gov 
Darren Sledjeski 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences, 
NIH 
sledjeskid@nigms.nih.gov 
Ashley D. Smith 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration ashley.smith1@fda.hhs.gov 
Erica Sodergren 
The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine erica.sodergren@jax.org 
Martha Somerman 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, NIH 
martha.somerman@nih.gov 
Barbara Sorkin 
Office of Dietary Supplements, NIH sorkinb@ods.nih.gov 
Catherine Spong 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
spongc@dir49.nichd.nih.gov 
Sanya Springfield 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
springfs@mail.nih.gov 
Pothur Srinivas 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
srinivap@nhlbi.nih.gov 
- 147 ­ 
      
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 Vaurice Starks 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
starksv@mail.nih.gov 
Angela Starkweather 
University of Connecticut 
angela.starkweather@uconn.edu 
Nanette Steinle 
University of Maryland Baltimore 
nsteinle@medicine.umaryland.edu 
Scott Stibitz 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration earle.stibitz@fda.hhs.gov 
Jerry Strauss 
Virginia Commonwealth University jerome.strauss@vcuhealth.org 
Balarama Krishna Surapaneni 
Sinai Hospital 
balaram_s1990@yahoo.com 
Vicki Sutherland 
National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
vicki.sutherland@nih.gov 
Daniel Tadesse 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
daniel.tadesse@fda.hhs.gov 
Carmen Tartera 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
carmen.tartera@fda.hhs.gov 
Xenia Tigno 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
tignoxt@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Eser Tolunay 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH tolunaye@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Giorgio Trinchieri 
Center for Cancer Research, NIH 
trinchig@mail.nih.gov Hsinyi (Steve) Tsang 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
hsini.tsang@nih.gov 
Susan Tuddenham 
Johns Hopkins University 
studden1@jhmi.edu 
Lois Tully 
National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH 
lois.tully@nih.gov 
Delmyra Turpin 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
delmyra.turpin@nih.gov 
Jim Turpin 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH 
jturpin@niaid.nih.gov 
Michael Twery 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH twerym@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Aynur Unalp-Arida 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
aynur.unalp-arida@nih.gov 
David M. Underhill 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center david.underhill@csmc.edu 
Rose M. Viscardi 
University of Maryland School of Medicine rviscard@peds.umaryland.edu 
Emily Vogtmann 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
vogtmannej@nci.nih.gov 
Marina Walther-Antonio 
Mayo Clinic 
waltherantonio.marina@mayo.edu 
- 148 ­ 
      
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Yu-Jui Yvonne Wan 
University of California, Davis School of Medicine 
yjywan@ucdavis.edu 
Qun Wang 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
qun.wang@fda.hhs.gov 
Wendy Wang 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
wangw@mail.nih.gov 
Xujing Wang 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
xujing.wang@nih.gov 
Wendy Weber 
National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
weberwj@mail.nih.gov 
Ana Weil 
Massachusetts General Hospital aweil@partners.org 
Michael Weingarten 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
weingartenm@mail.nih.gov 
George Weinstock 
The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine george.weinstock@jax.org 
Lisbeth Welniak 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
welniakla@nhlbi.nih.gov 
Vicky Whittemore 
National Institute for Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, NIH 
vicky.whittemore@nih.gov 
Diana Wiesnoski 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center 
dhwiesnoski@mdanderson.org Jonathan Wiest 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
wiestj@mail.nih.gov 
Betsy Wilder 
Office of Strategic Coordination, NIH 
wildere@od.nih.gov 
Cara C. Wilson 
University of Colorado, Denver 
cara.wilson@ucdenver.edu 
Carolyn Wilson 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration wilsonc@cber.fda.gov 
Dennis Wolan 
The Scripps Research Institute wolan@scripps.edu 
Dan Xi 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
xida@nci.nih.gov 
Chengguo Xing 
University of Florida 
chengguoxing@cop.ufl.edu 
Ye Yan 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
ye.yan@nih.gov 
Robert Yarchoan 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
robert.yarchoan@nih.gov 
Howard Young 
National Cancer Institute, NIH younghow@mail.nih.gov 
Matt Young 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
youngma@mail.nih.gov 
Huifeng Yu 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
yuhuifeng12@gmail.com 
- 149 ­ 
      
  
 
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
      Edith T. Zemanick Frederic Zenhausern 
University of Colorado University of Arizona 
edith.zemanick@childrenscolorado.org fzenhaus@email.arizona.edu 
Karsten Zengler Liping Zhao 
University of California, San Diego Rutgers University 
kzengler@ucsd.edu liping.zhao@rutgers.edu 
- 150 ­ 
     
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
    
   
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  JOINT AGENCY PANEL/AGENCY REPRESENTATIVES
 
Rajeev Agarwal Office of Research on Women's Health, NIH agarwalraj@mail.nih.gov 
Paul Carlson 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration paul.carlson@fda.hhs.gov 
Stacy Carrington-Lawrence 
Office of AIDS Research, NIH carringtons@od.nih.gov 
Linda Chrisey 
U.S. Department of Defense 
linda.chrisey@navy.mil 
Zafar Iqbal 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
zafar.iqbal@va.gov 
Moderator 
Lita M. Proctor 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
lita.proctor@nih.gov Scott Jackson 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
scott.jackson@nist.gov 
L. Clifford McDonald 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
cmcdonald1@cdc.gov 
Jack Okamuro 
U.S. Department of Agriculture jack.okamuro@ars.usda.gov 
Jim Olds 
National Science Foundation 
jolds@nsf.gov 
Michael Sayre 
National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities, NIH 
sayrem@mail.nih.gov 
- 151 - 
    
- 152 - 
     
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
    
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 WORKSHOP PLANNING COMMITTEE
 
Lita Proctor 
Chair, Workshop Planning Committee Division of Genome Sciences 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
lita.proctor@nih.gov 
Beena Akolkar 
Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and 
Metabolic Diseases 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
akolkarb@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Lis Caler 
Division of Lung Disease 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH lis.caler@nih.gov 
Lisa Chadwick 
Division of Extramural Research National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH 
lisa.chadwick@nih.gov 
Phil Daschner 
Division of Cancer Biology 
National Cancer Institute, NIH 
daschnep@mail.nih.gov 
Cindy Davis 
Office of Dietary Supplements Office of the Director, NIH 
davisci@od.nih.gov 
Nancy Desmond 
Division of Neuroscience and Basic Behavioral 
Science 
National Institute of Mental Health, NIH 
ndesmond@mail.nih.gov 
Linda Duffy 
Division of Extramural Research National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health, NIH 
duffyl@mail.nih.gov Roberto Flores Division of Cancer Prevention National Cancer Institute, NIH 
floresr2@mail.nih.gov 
Gilman Grave (retired) 
Division of Extramural Research 
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH 
Bob Karp 
Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
karpr@extra.niddk.nih.gov 
Jag Khalsa 
Division of Therapeutics and Medical 
Consequences 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH jkhalsa@nida.nih.gov 
Malgorzata Klauzinska 
Division of Blood Diseases and Resources 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH 
malgorzata.klauzinska@nih.gov 
Jonathan LoTempio (analyst) 
InGenesis 
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH 
Dwayne Lunsford 
Division of Extramural Research 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, NIH 
lunsfordr@nidcr.nih.gov 
Christopher Lynch 
Office of Nutrition Research 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH 
christopher.lynch@nih.gov 
- 153 - 
    
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 Padma Maruvada Gabriela Riscuta 
Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition Division of Cancer Prevention 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and National Cancer Institute, NIH 
Kidney Diseases, NIH gabriela.riscuta@nih.gov 
maruvadp@niddk.nih.gov 
Sharon Ross 
Dan Raiten Division of Cancer Prevention 
Division of Extramural Research National Cancer Institute, NIH 
National Institute of Child Health and Human rosssha@mail.nih.gov 
Development, NIH 
raitend@mail.nih.gov Lois Tully 
Division of Extramural Science Programs 
Ryan Ranallo National Institute of Nursing Research, NIH 
Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases lois.tully@nih.gov 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH Dan Xi 
ryan.ranallo@nih.gov Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis National Cancer Institute, NIH 
Mike Reddy xida@mail.nih.gov 
Division of Genetics and Developmental Biology National Institute of General Medical Science s, 
NIH 
michael.reddy@nih.gov 
- 154 -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOTES
 National Institutes 
of Health 
