The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome
Minoru Kanehisa*, Susumu Goto, Shuichi Kawashima, Yasushi Okuno and
Masahiro Hattori
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan
Received September 15, 2003; Revised and Accepted September 25, 2003
ABSTRACT
A grand challenge in the post-genomic era is a com-
plete computer representation of the cell and theorganism, which will enable computational predic-tion of higher-level complexity of cellular processesand organism behavior from genomic information.Toward this end we have been developing aknowledge-based approach for network prediction,
which is to predict, given a complete set of genes in
the genome, the protein interaction networks thatare responsible for various cellular processes.KEGG at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ is thereference knowledge base that integrates currentknowledge on molecular interaction networks suchas pathways and complexes (PATHWAY database),information about genes and proteins generated by
genome projects (GENES/SSDB/KO databases) and
information about biochemical compounds andreactions (COMPOUND/GLYCAN/REACTION data-bases). These three types of database actuallyrepresent three graph objects, called the proteinnetwork, the gene universe and the chemical uni-verse. New efforts are being made to abstractknowledge, both computationally and manually,
about ortholog clusters in the KO (KEGG Orthology)
database, and to collect and analyze carbohydratestructures in the GLYCAN database.
INTRODUCTION
KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) is a
bioinformatics resource for understanding higher-order func-tional meanings and utilities of the cell or the organism from
its genome information. It is an integrated resource consisting
of three types of database for genomic, chemical and networkinformation, and associated software, which are all developed
by the Kanehisa Laboratory (now part of the Bioinformatics
Center) in the Institute for Chemical Research, KyotoUniversity. While KEGG has cross-references to numerous
outside databases, it is intended to be a self-suf®cient system
for linking genomes to life at the cellular level, containing acomplete set of building blocks (genes and molecules) and
wiring diagrams (interaction networks) for cellular functions.
Eventually, this self-suf®cient system will become a computerrepresentation of the cell and the organism, and perhaps the
biosphere as well, which will enable in silico analysis of
biological systems (1). Even at the current primitive stage,
KEGG is widely used for analysis of various types of
molecular biological data in order to obtain clues tohigher-order functions.
During the past 2 years we have worked to make the KEGG
resource (2,3) more accessible to automated analysis. Forexample, the XML representation of KEGG pathway dia-grams is useful for automatic drawing of potential networks
identi®ed by two-hybrid experiments as an extension to
known networks. Access to KEGG can now be made throughthe KEGG API (SOAP interface to KEGG), which means that
the user can write a program to analyze microarray gene
expression data or to annotate a newly sequenced genome byautomating KEGG queries. In addition, we have released two
new database components: KO for ortholog grouping and
hierarchical classi®cation of genes and GLYCAN for carbo-hydrate structures. Here we describe the current status and
future plans of the KEGG resource.
THE KEGG DATABASES
Graph representation
To understand the overall architecture, it is useful to know that
KEGG consists of three graph objects for representation and
manipulation of genomic, chemical and network data.
Mathematically, a graph is a set of nodes (building blocks)and edges (interactions or relations). As shown in Table 1 the
three graph objects are called the gene universe (GENES,
SSDB and KO databases), the chemical universe(COMPOUND, GLYCAN and REACTION databases), and
the protein network (PATHWAY database). The gene
universe is a conceptual graph object representing ortholog/paralog relations, operon information and other relationshipsbetween genes in all the completely sequenced genomes. The
chemical universe is another conceptual graph object repre-
senting chemical reactions and structural/functional relationsamong metabolites and other biochemical compounds. In
contrast, the protein network is based on biological phe-
nomena, representing known molecular interaction networksin various cellular processes (2).
Network hierarchy
Another important aspect in the overall architecture of KEGG
is network hierarchy. The protein network, which is the most
unique data object in KEGG, is stored as a collection of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 774 38 3270; Fax: +81 774 38 3269; Email: kanehisa@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jpNucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D277±D280
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh063
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ãOxford University Press 2004; all rights reservedpathway maps in the PATHWAY database, representing
wiring diagrams of proteins and other gene products respon-sible for various cellular functions. Re¯ecting the mapresolution and functional modules at different levels, these
pathway maps are hierarchically classi®ed. There are ®ve
categories in the top level (metabolism, genetic informationprocessing, environmental information processing, cellular
processes and human diseases) and 24 subcategories in the
second level. The third level in the hierarchy corresponds toindividual pathway maps. When the protein network is linked
to the gene universe, the fourth level corresponds to KO
(KEGG Orthology) entries. Thus the hierarchy of genefunctions in KEGG is based on the hierarchy of the protein
network as shown in Table 2.
GENE UNIVERSE
GENES database
The information about individual genes is stored in the
GENES database. As of September 12, 2003 the GENESdatabase contains 572 881 genes in 155 organisms. The
GENES entries are generated semi-automatically by selectingand combining various sources including authors' submissions
to GenBank (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/), the
NCBI RefSeq database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/),the EMBL database (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/embl/genomes/) and publicly available organism-speci®c databases.They are then subjected to internal re-annotation, in which wejust assign K numbers for the KO grouping of genes withoutupdating the description of the genes. Our KO assignmentappears in the ORTHOLOG line of the GENES entry.
SSDB database
SSDB was originally a sequence similarity database contain-
ing precomputed similarity scores by the SSEARCH program
with additional information about best hits and best-best hitsin pairwise genome comparisons (2). We have recentlyimplemented an automatic procedure, based on a graphanalytical method, to computationally generate orthologclusters (OCs) and paralog clusters (PCs) from the hugeTable 1. The three graph objects in KEGG
Graph Node Edge Main databases
Gene universe Gene Any association of genes (ortholog/paralog
relation, sequence/structural similarity,adjacency on chromosome, expressionsimilarity)GENES, SSDB, KO
Chemical universe Chemical compound (including carbohydrate) Any association of compounds (chemical
reactivity, structural similarity, etc.)COMPOUND, GLYCAN,
REACTION
Protein network Protein (including other gene products) Known interaction/relation of proteins
(direct protein±protein interaction, gene
expression relation, enzyme±enzymerelation)PATHWAY
Table 2. The hierarchy of KEGG orthology (KO)
01100 Metabolism
01110 Carbohydrate metabolism01120 Energy metabolism01130 Lipid metabolism
01140 Nucleotide metabolism
01150 Amino acid metabolism
00251 Glutamate metabolism..........00300 Lysine biosynthesis
K00003 E1.1.1.3, thrA; homoserine dehydrogenase
K00928 E2.7.2.4, lysC; aspartate kinase
K00133 E1.2.1.11, asd; aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenaseK01714 E4.2.1.52, dapA; dihydrodipicolinate synthaseK00215 E1.3.1.26, dapB; dihydrodipicolinate reductaseK00674 E2.3.1.117, dapD; 2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate N-succinyltransferase
K00821 E2.6.1.17; N-succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase
K01439 E3.5.1.18, dapE; succinyl-diaminopimelate desuccinylase
K01778 E5.1.1.7, dapF; diaminopimelate epimerase
K01586 E4.1.1.20, lysA; diaminopimelate decarboxylase..........
00310 Lysine degradation..........
01160 Metabolism of other amino acids
.........
01200 Genetic information processing01300 Environmental information processing01400 Cellular processes01500 Human diseaseD278 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issueSSDB graph, currently containing 200 million edges. The
resulting ortholog clusters can be examined by clicking on the
ORTHOLOG link in the GENES entry.
KO database
When the KEGG project was initiated in 1995, the integration
of genomic information and network information wasachieved via the EC numbers. The EC numbers were common
identi®ers for matching genes in the genome and gene
products (enzymes) in the metabolic pathway. Then, a newscheme using ortholog identi®ers was introduced (3) to extend
the matching procedure to regulatory pathways and to
overcome various problems inherent in the enzyme nomen-clature. KO is a further extension of this scheme based on
computational analysis, as well as manual curation, of SSDB
ortholog clusters in order to classify all gene functions andexplore unknown pathways. Each KO entry is identi®ed by theK number (accession number) with the previous ortholog
identi®er as an alternative name. In future releases of KEGG,
the KO hierarchy (Table 2) will become more complete, andthe current ortholog group tables will be part of the KO
database.
CHEMICAL UNIVERSE
COMPOUND database
The COMPOUND database contains chemical structures of
most known metabolic compounds and some pharmaceutical
and environmental compounds. All chemical structures are
manually entered, computationally veri®ed and continuouslyupdated. Currently the database contains 10 739 entries, eachof which is identi®ed by the C number (accession number). A
new feature implemented in the COMPOUND database is the
KCF (KEGG Chemical Function) representation of chemicalstructures shown in Figure 1 and the resulting graph-
based chemical structure comparison method (4). The
COMPOUND/REACTION databases are being moved fromthe ISIS system (5) to the in-house-developed relational
database system, in order to integrate with the GLYCAN
database. Once this is done the substructure search against thedatabase will be performed more rigorously by our graph
comparison algorithm rather than the bit string comparison in
the ISIS system.
GLYCAN database
GLYCAN is a new addition to the KEGG suite of databases.
We have initiated efforts to collect carbohydrate structuresbecause of the lack of a publicly available database after the
termination of the CarbBank project (6). The pathway
diagrams for metabolism of complex carbohydrates andmetabolism of complex lipids are now linked to individual
entries of carbohydrate structures in the GLYCAN database.
The reactions catalyzed by glycosyltransferases and othersugar-related enzymes are represented in the REACTIONdatabase in a simpler form of carbohydrate structures (Fig. 1)
rather than the all-atom representation. Each GLYCAN entry
is identi®ed by the G number (accession number) and thecurrent total is 10 445 entries, among which only a few
hundred were manually entered and linked to KEGG
pathways. The rest represents unique structures derived fromCarbBank. The GLYCAN database is maintained in a
relational database with the structure drawing tool in Java. A
database search is also made available based on newly
developed algorithms for tree structure comparisons.
REACTION database
The REACTION database contains reaction formulas for
enzymic reactions, currently totaling 5799 entries. Each entryis identi®ed by the R number (accession number) representing
a unique reaction corresponding to sets of reactants and
products represented by the C number in the COMPOUNDdatabase or the G number in the GLYCAN database. This
should be compared with the EC number, which may
correspond to multiple reaction formulas. The EC numberhierarchy is supposed to represent aspects of enzymaticreactions, but in reality it often contains aspects of enzyme
molecules. Within the KEGG resource, these two aspects of
EC numbers are clearly distinguished: R numbers for reactionsand K numbers for molecules. We are working to develop a
new hierarchy, tentatively called RC (Reaction Classi®cation),
for understanding chemistry of enzymic reactions.
ENZYME database
The ENZYME database contains enzyme nomenclature with
numerous links to KEGG databases. It is generated semi-
automatically from the enzyme nomenclature website (http://
www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/iubmb/enzyme/). The role of thisdatabase within KEGG has diminished, but the EC numberis still the simplest way to link to KEGG from outside
resources.
PROTEIN NETWORK
PATHWAY database
The protein network in KEGG is an abstract network of gene
products, representing not only the pathway or the complex
Figure 1. Chemical compound structures in the COMPOUND database and
carbohydrate structures in the GLYCAN database are graph objects, wherethe nodes are either atoms or monosaccharides and the edges are covalentbonds. For the purpose of chemical structure comparison, the chemical struc-ture is converted to the KCF (KEGG Chemical Function) representationwhere the same atoms are distinguished by their environments.Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D279resulting from direct protein±protein interactions, but also the
metabolic network viewed as a network of enzymes, and the
gene regulatory network viewed as a network of transcription
factors and target products (2,3). The PATHWAY database isa collection of manually drawn diagrams called the KEGGreference pathway diagrams (maps), each corresponding to a
known network of functional signi®cance. The PATHWAY
database also contains organism-speci®c pathways, which areautomatically generated by superimposing (coloring) genes in
given organisms. The database currently contains 13 457
entries including 235 reference pathway diagrams.
In the past, the pathway diagrams were available only in
GIF (or PNG) image ®les. Although the coordinates of nodes
(boxes) could be obtained from the HTML ®le, it was notpossible to reconstruct the pathway because the edge infor-
mation was not readily available. We have released the KEGG
Markup Language (KGML) as a speci®cation of graph objectsin KEGG. All metabolic pathways and some regulatorypathways are now available in KGML, enabling computa-
tional reconstruction and manipulation of KEGG pathways.
ACCESS METHODS
The primary mode of access to KEGG is through the
GenomeNet website at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/.
Different components of the KEGG resource can mostconveniently be accessed from the KEGG table of contents
page at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html. The four
databases for the chemical universe, COMPOUND,GLYCAN, REACTION and ENZYME are collectively called
the LIGAND database with a separate home page at http://
www.genome.ad.jp/ligand/. Table 3 summarizes these andother useful URLs including additional databases not covered
in the present article.
For computerized access to KEGG, the SOAP server is open
to academic users at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/soap/. Allthe KEGG databases, except SSDB, are also available toacademic users by anonymous FTP at http://www.genome.
ad.jp/anonftp/.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The computational resource was provided by the
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research,
Kyoto University. This work was supported by grants from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science andTechnology of Japan, the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science and the Japan Science and Technology Agency.
REFERENCES
1. Kanehisa,M. and Bork,P. (2003) Bioinformatics in the post-sequence era.
Nature Genet. ,33, 305±310.
2. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S. and Nakaya,A. (2002) The KEGG
databases at GenomeNet. Nucleic Acids Res. ,30, 42±46.
3. Kanehisa,M. and Goto,S. (2000) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. ,28, 27±30.
4. Hattori,M., Okuno,Y., Goto,S. and Kanehisa,M. (2003) Development of
a chemical structure comparison method for integrated analysis ofchemical and genomic information in the metabolic pathways. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. ,125, 11853±11865.
5. Goto,S., Okuno,Y., Hattori,M., Nishioka,T. and Kanehisa,M. (2001)
LIGAND: database of chemical compounds and reactions in biologicalpathways. Nucleic Acids Res. ,30, 402±404.
6. Doubet,S., Bock,K., Smith,D., Darvill,A. and Albersheim,P. (1989) The
complex carbohydrate structure database. Trends Biochem. Sci. ,14,
475±477.Table 3. URLs for the KEGG resource
Database/content URL
KEGG table of contents (PATHWAY, GENES, GENOME, KO, etc.) http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html
SSDB http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ssdb/LIGAND (COMPOUND, GLYCAN, REACTION, ENZYME) http://www.genome.ad.jp/ligand/EXPRESSION http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/expression/BRITE http://www.genome.ad.jp/brite/KGML http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/xml/
KEGG API http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/soap/
Anonymous FTP http://www.genome.ad.jp/anonftp/KEGG home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/DBGET home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/dbget/GenomeNet home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/D280 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue