Corresponding author: Hanaa A. Al-gaoudi, E-mail: hanaaahmed2007@yahoo.com, Tel. 01061031555
(Received  09/01/2021,  accepted 15/02/2021)
DOI: 10.21608/jtcps.2021.57300.1047
©2021  National Information and Documentation Centre (NIDOC)THE MAIN  objective of this study is to identify the differences between two important 
techniques of colouring and decorating textiles in ancient Egypt, namely the dyeing 
and painting and their influences on the morphology of archaeological textiles. In this study 
experimental samples were prepared from artificially aged dyed and painted linen textiles 
with some of the common pigments and natural dyes used in ancient Egypt, to obtain samples 
similar as possible to the archaeological ones. The samples were studied and investigated using 
a Scanning Electron Microscopy coupled with EDX unit (SEM-EDX) and Ultraviolet-visible 
(UV-VIS) microscopy. The results showed that the inorganic pigment particles are deposited on 
and in-between the fibres’ surfaces, and serve as a protective coating for the fibres against the 
morphological deterioration caused by artificial ageing. In contrast, the dye molecules are small 
enough to penetrate and colour the fibres uniformly. They also decreased the degradation of the 
surface morphology of the fibres after ageing.
Keywords:  Archaeological Textiles, Pigments, Natural Dyes, Accelerate ageing, SEM-EDX, 
UV-VIS microscopy.Archaeological Painted and Dyed Textiles: Studying Variations and 
Morphological Characteristics Using Microscopy Techniques
Hanaa A. Al-Gaoudi
Conservation Department, Faculty of Archaeology, Luxor University, Luxor, Egypt.
Introduction                                                                    
Textiles are naturally perishable materials, which 
therefore rarely survive in the archaeological 
archives. A notable exception is Egypt, where 
the sandy soil and the special burial rituals have 
helped the preservation of a large number of 
textiles, which formed a unique evidence of the 
spinning, weaving, dyeing and textile iconography 
over thousands of years [1]. The study of textiles 
can also shed new light on religious, cultural and 
economic life [2]. Textiles can be coloured by using 
organic or inorganic colourants, whether pigments 
or dyes, each of them require considerably 
different application methods because of its 
physical and chemical properties, it also leaves 
specific chemical signatures on the fibres [3].
Dyes are one of the main components of 
artworks and archaeological discoveries. The 
importance of natural dyes through prehistory and 
as well in historical periods is well- known and 
the high-quality dye was considered as invaluable 
as the noble metals [4][5]. The use of the textiles 
as painting substrate dates back to the ancient 
Egyptian cultures [6]. Among the painted textiles 
are mid-Eighteenth-Dynasty shrouds, as the Resti shroud with texts and vignettes from the Book of 
the Dead. It has been painted with hematite for 
red, Egyptian blue for blue, orpiment for yellow 
[3][7]. Ageing is the process of change over time, 
the concept of ageing applied to museum objects 
usually combines decay with degradation. The 
definition of the ageing term can be: irreversible 
changes that appear slowly in the long term [8]. 
The main aim of accelerating thermal degradation 
is the production of an artificially aged model of 
linen textile which is analogous as possible to the 
archaeological fabric, with the consideration that 
thermal deterioration increases with increasing 
temperature and ageing period [9].
UV-VIS microscopy uses fluorescence and 
phosphorescence to study the characteristics of 
organic or inorganic material. Moreover, it can 
provide distinct elaborated images of the coloured 
layers or the fibre morphology [10]. UV-VIS 
microscopy as well helps in the identification 
of weave structure, the torsion direction of 
the yarns and the used colouring techniques 
in archaeological fabrics either by painting or 
by dyeing [11] .The SEM allows greater detail, 
accuracy than the optical microscope [12]. 
Generally, SEM has been used for many years in 
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci., Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 1-9 (2021)
Journal of Textiles, Coloration and Polymer Science
https://jtcps.journals.ekb.eg/12
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)HANAA A. AL-GAOUDI 
the field of cultural heritage. It has been applied 
to a vast number of archaeological objects 
or similar experimental models and is now 
used with additional, powerful and innovative 
technologies to enrich morphological information 
with chemical details; physically and structurally 
[13]. As well as, it can be used for simultaneous 
imaging and analysis of biological degradation in 
ancient material, also for the investigation of the 
efficiency of conservation material [14 , 15].
This article sheds more light on the variations 
between dyeing and painting techniques on ancient 
textiles and identifying the materials and methods 
used in manufacturing them. Moreover, this paper 
aims to assess the influence of different colourants 
on the archaeological textiles morphology.The 
study was done on experimental 2 sets of artificially 
aged linen textile samples similar as possible to the 
ancient ones. The first set of mockups was dyed 
with indigo, cochineal and madder natural dyes, 
and the other set was painted with malachite, calcite 
and black charcoal. All mockups were investigated 
using Scanning Electron microscopy coupled 
with EDX unit (SEM-EDX) and Ultraviolet-
visible microscopy (UV-VIS), in addition to 
the visual investigation as a starting point. The 
information presented in this work will be helpful 
to other researchers and conservators investigating 
textiles and for the assessment of textiles and 
their appropriateness for restoration. The results 
of this article will help Egyptologists, academic 
researchers and conservators to get information 
about the differences between the materials and 
techniques of textiles colouration used in ancient 
Egypt. In addition, the information presented in 
this paper will help conservators in producing new 
mockups, coloured fabrics that simulate the older 
ones. These mockups can be used as test samples 
in the research of conservation and training young 
conservators. In addition, this information will 
help in choosing the right materials and methods in 
the treatment of coloured archaeological textiles.
Major Differences between Dyeing and Painting 
Techniques
Two fundamental methods for colouring textile 
materials were well-known in ancient Egypt, 
dyeing and painting, each one requires considerably 
different application methods because of its physical 
and chemical properties; It also leaves specific 
chemical signatures [3]. A dye can be defined as a 
high-coloured substance that is used to dye a variety 
of materials such as textiles, leather, paper, medicine, 
cosmetics and toothpaste, etc. In terms of dye chemistry, a dye molecule has two main chemical 
groups, namely Chromophores and Auxochromes 
groups. By dyeing, the fabrics are dyed through the 
same colour, while by painting; the fabric receives 
a coloured pattern by using a mixture of pigment 
and binder; which might be applied directly to the 
textiles or onto a painting ground. During the dyeing 
process, each fibre should be left with the dye evenly 
distributed in its substance instead of being mostly 
limited to its outer surface [16] . The dye is commonly 
used as an aqueous solution and may need a mordant 
to enhance the stability of the dye on the fibre. All 
ancient Egyptian dyes are organic components that 
could bind with the natural and synthetic fibres and 
make them coloured [17]. Otherwise, pigments are 
usually inorganic compounds made up of particles 
that are insoluble in the binding media of application.  
Thus, the pigment is simply removed unless fixed 
with a binding media [18]. Mineral pigments may 
be slightly limited in the range of composition, 
while organic dyes may be more difficult to identify, 
not only because a single plant or animal source 
may give multiple components, but also because 
these components break down into many different 
components. In addition, a single colour component 
could be obtained from different sources. Dyes are 
often combined and additional dyeing aids, such as 
mordants, chelating agents or pH-altering agents are 
added to help fibres adhere with dyes [19]. Painted 
textiles are complex, heterogeneous, and usually 
consists of multi-layered. The characterization of 
materials and techniques used for the production 
of painted fabrics is essential to improve our 
understanding of these objects. The restorer must 
understand the textile and colour elements, their 
complex interactions and their often conflicting needs, 
in order to be able to make informed decisions on 
cleaning, consolidation and preventive conservation 
processes [20]. The oldest known example of 
painted linen found at Gebelein and goes back to the 
Predynastic period, now at the Turin Museum. The 
use of textiles as painting substrate is due to ancient 
Egyptian culture [21]. The painted textiles have many 
forms ,including  processional banners [22], flags, 
costumes and accessories, wall hangings, painted 
and embroidered pictures, religious objects, such as 
thangkas and ancient Egyptian mummy cloths. These 
different objects are used in many different contexts 
and have a wide range of ornamental, social, political, 
and religious functions. The paint may be applied to 
just one area of the surface of a painted textile, which 
affects its appearance, function, decay and as well 
conservation, as the painted and unpainted parts have 
two clearly different surfaces [10].3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PAINTED AND DYED TEXTILES: STUDYING V ARIATIONS… 
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)
Gettens and Stout [1966] named some common 
inorganic pigments formerly used in ancient periods 
like oxides, phosphates, carbonates, sulfates, sulfides, 
and heavy metals silicates. There are only a few 
organometallic compounds that form pigments such 
as Emerald green and pigments constitute of pure 
elements such as carbon and gold [23]. The most 
common approach of painting, which has been used 
since ancient times, is that a liquid paint is usually 
applied to a surface of the support as coating, often 
with a brush, and sometimes with fingers, a stick, or a 
swab as well. The pigment cakes were probably made 
by mixing finely ground pigment with gum Arabic 
and water and left to dry and used in the same way as 
the modern watercolour painting [24].  Arabic Gum 
was widely utilized in ancient Egypt as a binding 
media for watercolours techniques [25]. According to 
Herodotus, it is also a prevailing constituent of ink [6].
The knowledge of tools and dyeing techniques 
of the ancients has survived till nowadays. These 
ancient techniques were kept as a top secret, as they 
have been passed down from father to son through 
the centuries. Plenty of natural dyes that were used 
thousands of years ago have proven very successful 
and still present a trusty and delightful colour. Recipes 
are often lost, but ancient manuscripts and books 
provide us with a good opportunity to discover these 
recipes [20]. Dyes are classified in accordance with 
their chemical structures or methods of application. 
A group of atoms in dye molecules named 
chromophores as anthraquinone, azo, carbonyl, 
methine, nitro and others, are responsible for the dye 
colour. As well as, substituents named auxochromes, 
as carboxyl, amine, hydroxyl and sulphonate, withdraw and/or donate electrons, in consequence, 
generate or intensify the colour of the chromophores 
[26]. Natural dyes are produced by both plants and 
insects. They are largely limited to red, yellow, blue 
and brown dyes. The other colours are obtained by 
mixtures of these or by the use of various mordants  
[20]. In ancient Egypt, the uses of natural dyes, both 
individually and in combination, evidenced that a 
minimum of three different dyeing techniques were 
known (1) direct dyeing which directly use the dye 
whithout mordants or metal salts to fix the colour. 
(2) Substantive dyeing. As safflower, madder and 
henna need mordants to fix the dye. The dyeing bath 
is usually prepared before the immersion of the yarn 
or fabric. (3) Double or over-dyeing. This method 
consists of more than one dyeing step. A well-known 
example is the production of colours such as purple 
[27]. According to (Bogensberger and Russell-
Motondorf 2020), purple is particularly appealing, 
as most of the old textiles studied; the use of plant 
dyes is usually a mixture of red and blue dyes. These 
dyeing techniques were used not only in the double-
dyeing of fibres, but also in the spinning of blue and 
red fibres to obtain purple dyes[28].  
Materials  and Methods                                             
Materials
Scoured and raw linen textiles were provided 
by Egylan Comany from Alexandria, Egypt. The 
linen fabrics with tabby weave 1/1. Respectively, 
the count of the warp and the weft threads are 
26 and 23/ cm. Commercial natural dyes and 
pigments were supplied by “Kremer Pigment” 
including malachite, calcite and carbon charcoal. Fig. 1.  (A) Show dyed linen textile, Tutankhamon tunic, No. JE 62625, New kingdom, Cairo Egyptian museum. 
(B) Show funerary shroud, Painted linen textile – No.TR 9.12.95.1, Roman period, Cairo Egyptian museum.
4
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)HANAA A. AL-GAOUDI 
Natural dyes as indigo, cochineal and madder. 
Gum Arabic was used as a medium for the 
pigments by dissolving it in hot water and leaving 
it for a day till it was fully dissolved  [29].
Preparing Experimental Samples
A group of linen specimens were painted 
directly without preparing layer by using a brush, as 
this technique is most often used in textile painting 
in ancient Egypt [30].  The other group of samples 
was dyed with the mentioned above selected natural 
dyes. The dyeing processes was done as stated 
by the methods in the published literature [31], 
by using Alum (potassium aluminium sulphate 
[KAl(SO4)2.12H2O)])  as a mordant with madder 
and cochineal dyes. For indigo, a vat dyeing method 
was used. All experimental samples (Fig.2) were 
then aged thermally in accordance with Kerr et al 
(1989) and Feller ( 1994)  in an electronic oven at 
a steady temperature of 140°C for 72 h [32][33].
Methods
Visual Observation 
Visual observations and low-level magnifications 
are very valuable in the first stage of the assessment of 
the condition of the textile objects. These observations 
could result in much variant data related to the type 
of the materials used, the construction, spinning and weaving structure, and colouring techniques. An in-
depth examination of the interface of the painted textile 
may indicate, for example, the possible existence of a 
ground layer. The condition of textiles as the presence 
of dirt, wrinkles, splits, peeling and erosion of the paint 
layers can also be documented [10].
Ultraviolet and Visible (UV-VIS) Microscopy   
The experimental linen fabric specimens were 
investigated by NIKON ECLIPSE E600 with 
a high-pressure mercury lamp as a UV source 
(UV-2A- EX330-380- DM400- BA 420) and 
fibres Optic Visible source (Shott KL 1500). The 
images were captured by the camera of NIKON 
DS- FI1C, NIKON DS-U3 Digital Sight, and the 
software was used is Nikon ACT-V2.6.
Scanning Electron Microscopy with Energy-
Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDX)
SEM was carried out to investigate the tested 
fibres’ surface morphology. Each sample was 
placed on an adhesive carbon disc mounted onto 
an aluminium SEM stub. The small piece of fibre 
samples was coated with a thin film of gold for 90 
seconds, using POLARON SC 7620 SPUTTER 
COATER to increase their conductivity and avoid 
charging effect [34].
Fig. 2. Experimental samples before and after ageing, (A, A-1) standard linen mockups, (C, C-1) malachite-painted 
mockups, (G, G-1) charcoal-painted mockups, (H, H-1) Calcite-painted mockups, (J, J-1) madder-dyed 
mockups, (M, M-1) cochineal-dyed mockups, (I, I-1) indigo-dyed mockups.5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PAINTED AND DYED TEXTILES: STUDYING V ARIATIONS… 
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)
Examination of the mockup samples was 
undertaken on the Jeol JSM 5600 system 
configured with an EDX detector, operating 
mostly at a 20-kV accelerating voltage and the 
working distance was 20-mm.
Results and Discussion                                                    
Visual observation and UV-VIS microscopy
Visual observation and UV-VIS microscopy 
of the empirical painted linen textiles with 
calcite, charcoal and malachite illustrated that the 
morphology of the fibres is completely covered 
by the pigment layers and their particles are too large to penetrate into the fabric, so they were 
deposited on and in-between the linen fibre 
surface.  On the contrary, the visual observation 
and the UV-VIS microscope of experimentally 
dyed fibre with indigo, cochineal and madder 
dyes [Fig.3] demonstrated that the fibres are dyed 
in the same colour as the applied dye, the dye is 
evenly distributed over the textile fibres, as the 
dye molecules are small sufficient to saturate the 
fibres with the colour of the dye . In addition, it is 
observed visually some changes in the colours of 
both pigments and natural dyes where they have 
become darker due to ageing.
Fig. 3. UV-VIS miceroscope images of (a, b) fiber samples dyed with indigo dye, (c, d) Cochineal-dyed sample.
Fig. 4. UV-VIS miceroscope images of (a, b, c) textile samples painted with carbon charcoal. The images show 
cleary the mask and deposition of the particles on and in-between the fibr e surfaces.
6
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)HANAA A. AL-GAOUDI 
SEM-EDX Microscopy
The SEM micrographs of the experimental 
samples painted with calcite, charcoal and 
malachite [Fig.5] showed the deposition of 
pigments particles on and in- between the fibers, 
without the linen fibres being damaged. The 
results generally elucidate that the pigments act as 
a protective role as they protect the morphology 
of the linen fibres from the degradation caused by 
heat ageing, where the morphology of the fibres 
is completely covered by the pigment layers.  
The SEM photos of the experimental samples 
dyed with indigo, madder, and cochineal [Fig. 6] 
showed that the dye molecules are small enough 
to penetrate into the fibres without considerable 
changes in either the morphology or the weaving structure of samples. The characteristic scales of 
flax fibres are obvious, and only a few fibres are 
slightly damaged in a form of small scratches, 
transverse crack, and longitudinal split on the 
linen fibre surfaces. The conditions of the dyeing 
procedure may as well have a differential impact 
on the morphological features of dyed linen 
fibres . It is observed from EDX patterns in [Fig. 
7, a, b, c] that the spectral profiles of the mockups 
colored with malachite, calcite and charcoal 
pigments are compatible with the existence of 
chemical elements that compose these pigments. 
EDX results of experimental dyed fibre samples 
are compliant with the presence of (Al, S, K) 
elements of alum mordant [Fig.7, d].
Fig. 5. SEM microphotographs of the painted textile samples with (a, b) malachite, (c, d) calcite, (e, f) black 
charcoal.The images illustrate the deposition of pigments particles on and in-between the fibers. 
Fig. 6. SEM microphotographs of the dyed textile samples with (a, b) indigo, (c, d)  madder, (e, f) cochineal, 
show that the dye molecules are small enough to penterate into the fibres without changing the fibre 
morphology. Also show minor degredation of the linen fiber surface after thermal ageing as small scratches 
and longitudinal splitting.7
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PAINTED AND DYED TEXTILES: STUDYING V ARIATIONS… 
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)
Conclusion                                                                                   
Two fundamental methods for colouring textile 
materials are known in ancient Egypt, dyeing 
and painting, each of them require considerably 
different application methods because of its 
physical and chemical properties; it also leaves 
specific chemical signatures. The categorization 
of dyed and painted textiles made here makes it 
possible to draw analogies of different production 
techniques. This knowledge is essential for 
an understanding of the composition and 
morphological characteristics of the painted and 
dyed textiles and for a better understanding of 
their different production and deterioration; These 
are all essential for further investigations and 
conservation plans.  The first important step of the 
study is the visual and microscopic examination. 
The results of these methods illustrate that the 
pigments act as a protective role as they protect 
the morphology of the linen fibres from the 
degradation caused by heat ageing.  Nevertheless, 
natural dyes also protect and decreased the surface 
morphology deterioration of linen fibres.
Acknowledgement
The author is thankful to all the staff of the 
ICVBC laboratory at Florence in Italy and also 
extends thanks to the ring of laboratory units and 
centres’ of the University of Ioannina, Greece.
Funding statements
Not applicabale.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.References                                                                          
1. Gulmini, M., Idone, A., Davit, P., Moi, M., Carrillo, 
M., Ricci, C., Bello., F.D., Borla, M., Oliva, C., 
Greco, C. and Aceto, M. The “Coptic” textiles of 
the “Museo Egizio” in Torino (Italy): a focus on 
dyes through a multi-technique approach. Archaeol 
Anthropol Sci ., 9, 485-497 (2017).
2. Letellier-Willemin, F. Tackling the technical history 
of the textiles of El-Deir, Kharga Oasis, the Western 
Desert of Egypt. In: Egyptian textiles and their 
production: ‘word’ and ‘object,’ Mossakowska-
gaubert M, ed. Zea Books, the University of 
Nebraska–Lincoln Libraries., p. 37, (2020).
3. El-Gaoudy, H., Kourkoumelis, N., Varella, E. and 
Kovala-Demertzi, D. The effect of thermal aging 
and color pigments on the Egyptian linen properties 
evaluated by physicochemical methods. Appl. Phys. 
A. Mater Sci. Process,  105, 497-507 (2011).
4. Kourkoumelis, N., El-Gaoudy, H., Varella, E. 
and Kovala-Demertzi, D. Physicochemical 
characterization of thermally aged Egyptian linen 
dyed with organic natural dyestuffs. Appl. Phys. A. 
Mater Sci. Process , 112, 469-478 (2013).
5. Elgaoudy, H.A. Physical Chemical Studies of 
Pigments of Archaeological Decorated Textiles And 
The Best Methods of Restoration and Conservation 
Them. University of Ioannina, Department oOf 
Chemistry, Section of Inorganic and Analytical 
Chemistry, Greece (2013).
6. Lucas, A. and Harris, J. Ancient Egyptian Materials 
and Industries . London, E. Arnold, London (1962).Fig. 7. EDX results of the experimental coloured textile fibres with (a) malachite, (b) black charcoal, (c) calcite and 
(d) madder.
8
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)HANAA A. AL-GAOUDI 
7. Bruni, S., Guglielmi, V . and Pozzi, F. Surface-
enhanced raman spectroscopy (SERS) on silver 
colloids for the identification of ancient textile dyes: 
Tyrian purple and madder. J. Raman Spectrosc.,  41, 
175-180 (2010).
8. Ahmed, H. Development of biotechnological 
processes for the restoration of historical textiles’ 
PhD Theses (2009).
9. May, E. and Jones, M. Conservation Science: Heritage 
Materials. Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) (2006).
10. Thompson, K., Smith, M. and Lennard, F. A 
literature review of analytical techniques for 
materials characterisation of painted textiles-Part 1: 
categorising painted textiles, sampling and the use 
of optical tools. J. Inst. Conserv.,  40, 64-82 (2017).
11. Bertrand, L., Cotte, M., Stampanoni, M., Thoury, 
M., Marone, F. and Schöder, S. Development 
and trends in synchrotron studies of ancient and 
historical materials. Phys. Rep.,  519, 51-96 (2012).
12. Smith, M., Thompson, K. and Lennard, F. A 
literature review of analytical techniques for 
materials characterisation of painted textiles—Part 
2: spectroscopic and chromatographic analytical 
instrumentation. J. Inst. Conserv.,  40, 252-266 (2017).
13. Burattini, S. and Falcieri, E. Scanning and transmission 
electron microscopy in cultural heritage: State of the 
art. Microscopie,  31, 20-25 (2020).
14. Pinna, D., Galeotti, M. and Mazzeo, R. Scientific 
Examination for the Investigation of Paintings . 
Centro Di, Firenze, Italy, (2010).
15. Singer, P. and Wylie, A. The conservation of a 
fourth century ad painted Egyptian mummy shroud. 
Conserv ., 19, 58-64 (1995).
16. Zvi, G.  Archaeological Chemistry. A John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, United States of 
America (2007).
17. Nicholson, P.T. and Shaw, I. Ancient Egyptian 
Materials and Technology . Cambridge University 
Press (2000).
18. Broadbent, A.D. Basic principles of textile coloration. 
Society of Dyers and Colourists , United Kingdom (2001).
19. Frei, K.M., Berghe, I.V ., Frei, R., Mannering U. and 
Lyngstrøm, H. Removal of natural organic dyes from 
wool-implications for ancient textile provenance 
studies. J. Archaeol. Sci ., 37, 2136-2145 (2010).
20. Abdel-Kareem, O. History of Dyes Used in 
Different Historical Periods of Egypt. Res J. Text. 
Appar.,  16, 79-92 (2012).
21. Baldia, C.M. and Jakes, K.A. Photographic methods 
to detect colourants in archaeological textiles. J. 
Archaeol. Sci.,  34, 519-525 (2007).22. Smith, M. J., Thompson, K. and Hermens, E. Breaking 
down banners: Analytical approaches to determining the 
materials of painted banners. Herit. Sci.,  4, 1-19 (2016)
23. Burgio, L., Clark, R.J.H. and Firth, S. Raman 
spectroscopy as a means for the identification of 
plattnerite (PbO2) of lead pigments and of their 
degradation products. Analyst.,  126, 222-227 (2001).
24. Al-Gaoudi, H.A.  Painted Ancient Egyptian 
Mummy Cloth Of Khonsuemrenep From Bab 
El-Gasus Excavation. Scientific Analysis And 
Conservation Strategy,  6, 49-64 (2020).
25. V ogelsang-Eastwood, G. Textiles. In: Ancient Egyptian 
Materials and Technology, Nicholson PT and Shaw I, eds. 
Cambridge, University press, UK, pp. 269-298 (2000).
26. Kumar, A. and Choudhury, R. Eco-Friendly Dyes 
And Dyeing. 2, 145-176 (2018).
27. Ahmed, H. E. History of  Natural Dyes in North 
Africa “Egypt.” Handb Nat Color,  27-36 (2009).
28. Bogensperger, I. and  Rösel-Mautendorfer , H.  
Dyeing in Texts and Textiles: Words Expressing 
Ancient Technology. In: Egyptian Textiles and Their 
Production : ‘Word’ and ‘Object, Mossakowska-
gaubert M, ed. Zea Books, the University of 
Nebraska–Lincoln Libraries, pp. 91-105 (2020).
29. Neuburger, A. The Technical Arts and Sciences of 
the Ancients . Barnes & Noble, Methuen & Co., 
New York, (1969).
30. Járo, M. and  Tóth , A. Genuine or false? Investigation 
of metal-printed textiles dated to the 11-15th centuries. 
In: ICOM Committee for Conservation 10th triennial 
meeting: Washington, DC, pp. 20-24 (1993).
31. Schweppe, H. Practical hints on dyeing with natural 
dyes - Production of comparative dyeings for the 
identificaction of dyes on historic textile materials. 
Conservation Analytical Laboratory. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, (1986).
32. Feller, R.L. Accelerated aging: Photochemical and 
Thermal Aspects . The J. Paul Getty Trust, United 
States of America, (1994).
33. Abdel-Kareem, O., Zidan, Y ., Lokma, N. and 
Ahmed, H. Conservation of a rare painted ancient 
Egyptian textile object from the Egyptian Museum 
in Cairo. e-Preservation Sci., 5, 9-16 (2008).
34. Joosten, I., Van Bommel, M.R., Keijzer, R.H.D. and 
Reschreiter, H. Micro analysis on hallstatt textiles: Colour 
and condition. Microchim Acta,  155, 16-174 (2006).9
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PAINTED AND DYED TEXTILES: STUDYING V ARIATIONS… 
J. Text. Color. Polym. Sci. Vol. 18 , No. 1 (2021)
 المنسوجات األثرية الملونة والمصبوغة : دراسة االختالفات والخصائص المورفولوجية
باستخدام تقنيات الفحص المجهري
هناء الجاعودي
 مصر.-  جامعة األقصر - األقصر- كلية اآلثار 
الهدف الرئيسي من هذه الدراسة هو التعرف على الفروق بين تقنيتين مهمتين لتلوين وتزيين المنسوجات في 
مصر القديمة ، وهما الصباغة والرسم وتأثيرهما على شكل المنسوجات األثرية. في هذه الدراسة تم تحضير 
عينات تجريبية من منسوجات كتانية مصبوغة ومطلية العمر صناعياً مع بعض األصباغ الشائعة واألصباغ 
الطبيعية المستخدمة في مصر القديمة ، للحصول على عينات مماثلة قدر اإلمكان للعينات األثرية. تمت دراسة 
( EDX (SEM-EDX  العينات وفحصها باستخدام الفحص المجهري اإللكتروني المقترن بوحدة 
أظهرت النتائج أن جزيئات الصبغة غير العضوية ( UV-VIS ) والفحص المجهري المرئي فوق البنفسجي 
تترسب على أسطح األلياف وفيما بينها ، وتعمل كطبقة واقية لأللياف ضد التدهور المورفولوجي الناتج عن التقادم 
. في المقابل ، جزيئات الصبغة صغيرة بما يكفي الختراق وتلوين األلياف بشكل موحد. كما أنها قللت من تدهور 
. الشكل السطحي لأللياف بعد التقادم