THEORY AND 
PRACTICE OF 
WATER AND 
WASTEWATER 
TREATMENT 
RONALD L. DROSTE 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Page 1 of 26
FWS1015Acquisitions Editor 
Production Editor 
Designer 
Manufacturing Manager 
Illustration Cliff Robichaud 
Ken Santor 
Laura Nicholls 
Mark Cirillo 
Jaime Perea 
Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is a policy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. to have books of enduring value published in the United States printed 
on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end. 
The paper in this book was manufactured by a mill whose forest management programs 
include sustained yield harvesting of its timberlands. Sustained yield harvesting principles 
ensure that the number of trees cut each year does not exceed the amount of new growth. 
Copyright© 1997, by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
All rights reserved. Published simultaneously in Canada. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning 
or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States 
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or 
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright 
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax 
(978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008. 
To order books or for customer service please, ca111(800)-CALL-WILEY (225-5945). 
Reproduction or translation of any part of 
this work beyond that permitted by Sections 
107 and 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act without the permission of the copyright 
owner is unlawful. Requests for permission 
or further information should be addressed to 
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Droste, Ronald L. 
Theory and practice of water and wastewater treatment/by Ronald 
L. Droste. 
p. em. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-471-12444-3 (cloth : alk. paper) 
1. Water-Purification. 2. Sewage-Purification. 
TD430.D76 1997 
628.1'62-dc20 
109 I. Title. 
96-15477 
CIP 
Page 2 of 26
FWS1015CONTENTS 
SECTION I CHEMISTRY I 
Chapter 1 Basic Chemistry 3 
1.1 Definitions 3 
1.2 The Expression of 
Concentration 3 
1.3 Ions, Molecules, and 
Bonding 5 
1.4 Balancing Reactions 9 
1.5 Oxidation-Reduction 
Reactions 10 
1.6 Equilibrium 13 
1.7 Conductivity and Ionic 
Strength 14 
1.8 Chemical Kinetics 16 
1.9 Gas Laws 20 
1.10 Gas Solubility: Henry's 
Law 21 
1.11 Solubility Product 23 
1.12 Complexes 25 
1.13 Nuclear Chemistry 27 
Chapter 2 The Thermodynamic 
Basis for Equilibrium 34 
2.1 Thermodynamic Relations 34 
2.2 Redox Potentials 42 
2.3 Corrosion 48 
Chapter 3 Acid-Base Chemistry 57 
3.1 pH 57 
3.2 Acids and Bases 58 
3.3 Equivalents and Normality 
3.4 Solution of Multiequilibria 
Systems 62 
3.5 Buffers 63 
3.6 Acid-Base Titrations 66 61 3.7 Natural Buffering of Waters from 
Carbon Dioxide and Related 
Compounds 71 
Chapter 4 Organic and 
Biochemistry 
4.1 Carbon 77 
4.2 Properties of Organic 
Compounds 77 
4.3 Functional Groups 78 
4.4 Aliphatic Compounds 79 
4.5 Nitrogen-Containing 
Compounds 81 
4.6 Aromatic Compounds 82 
4.7 Compounds of Sulfur 83 
4.8 Naturally Occurring Organic 
Compounds 83 
4.9 Biochemistry 87 
4.10 Glycolysis 87 
4.11 The Tricarboxylic Acid 
Cycle 87 
4.12 Enzyme Kinetics 88 
Chapter 5 Analysis and 
Constituents in Water 
5.1 Titration 94 
5.2 Primary Standards 95 
5.3 Acid-Base Titrations 95 
5.4 Complex and Precipitate 
Formation Titrations 97 
5.5 Redox Titrations and 
Potentiometric Analyses 98 
5.6 Colorimetric Analyses 103 
5.7 Physical Analyses 106 77 
94 
5.8 Chromatographic Analyses 109 
5.9 Determination of Organic 
Matter 110 
xi 
Page 3 of 26
FWS1015xii CONTENTS 
SECTION II MICROORGANISMS 
IN WATER AND 
WATER QUAUlY 133 
Chapter 6 Microbiology 135 
6.1 Bacteria 135 
6.2 Eukaryotes 138 
6.3 Other Microorganisms 140 
6.4 Growth of Microorganisms 140 
6.5 Identification and Enumeration of 
Microorganisms 146 
Chapter 7 Water, Wastes, and 
Disease 157 
7.1 Agents of Disease 157 
7.2 Indicators of Fecal 
Contamination 162 
7.3 Indicator Microorganisms 165 
Chapter 8 Water Components and 
Quality Standards 181 
8.1 Toxicity of Elements and 
Compounds 181 
8.2 Contaminants in Water 182 
8.3 Taste and Odor 190 
8.4 Bases for Standards 194 
8.5 Standards for Drinking 
Water 195 
8.6 Drinking Water Standards 197 
8.7 Canadian Inland Water 
Quality 203 
8.8 Water Consumption 205 
8.9 Canadian Federal Wastewater 
Quality Guidelines 207 
8.10 Wastewater 
Characteristics 208 
8.11 Wastewater Production 
SECTION III WATER 
AND WASTEWATER 210 
TREATMENT 217 
Chapter 9 Water and Wastewater 
Treatment Operations 219 
9.1 Water Treatment 
Operations 219 9.2 Wastewater Treatment Unit 
Operations 227 
9.3 Hydraulic Design of Water and 
Wastewater Treatment Plants 234 
Chapter 10 Mass Balances and 
Hydraulic Flow Regimes 243 
10.1 Setup of Mass Balances 243 
10.2 Flow Analysis of CM and PF 
Reactors 254 
10.3 Detention Time in 
Vessels 264 
10.4 Flow and Quality 
Equalization 267 
10.5 System Material Balances 269 
SECTION IV 
PHYSICAL-CHEMICAL 
TREATMENT PROCESSES 285 
Chapter 11 Screening and 
Sedimentation 287 
11.1 Screens and Bar Racks 287 
11.2 Sedimentation 291 
11.3 Type I Sedimentation 293 
11.4 Type II Sedimentation 298 
11.5 Type III Sedimentation: Zone 
Settling 308 
11.6 Weir-Launder Design 319 
11.7 Clarifier Design for Water and 
Wastewater Treatment 323 
11.8 Grit Chambers 328 
11.9 Inlet Hydraulics for 
Sedimentation Basins 345 
Chapter 12 Mass Transfer 
and Aeration 
12.1 Pick's Law 355 
12.2 Gas Transfer 357 
12.3 Aeration in Water and 
Wastewater Treatment 361 
12.4 Design of Aeration 
Systems 364 
12.5 Aeration in Biological 
Wastewater Treatment 373 355 
Page 4 of 26
FWS1015Chapter 13 Coagulation and 
Rocculation 
13.1 Coagulation 384 
13.2 Mixing and Power 
Dissipation 389 
13.3 Mixers 391 
13.4 Flocculators 400 
Chapter 14 Filtration 
14.1 Slow Sand Filters and Rapid 
Filters 416 
14.2 Filtering Materials 418 
14.3 Headloss in Filters 423 
14.4 Backwashing Filters 428 384 
416 
14.5 Support Media and Underdrains 
in Sand Filters 439 
14.6 Filter Beds for Water and 
Wastewater Treatment 442 
14.7 Air Binding of Filters 443 
14.8 Rapid Filtration 
Alternatives 446 
14.9 Pressure Filters 448 
14.10 Slow Sand Filters 448 
14.11 Biological Filtration for Water 
Treatment 450 
Chapter 15 Physical-Chemical 
Treatment for Dissolved 
Constituents 457 
15.1 Water Softening 457 
15.2 Lime-Soda Softening 459 
15.3 Chemical Stabilization of 
Water 468 
15.4 Iron and Manganese 
Removal 471 
15.5 Phosphorus Removal from 
Wastewater by Chemical 
Precipitation 474 
15.6 Ion Exchange 477 
15.7 Fluoridation and 
Deftuoridation 479 
15.8 Membrane Processes 480 
15.9 Carbon Adsorption 484 CONTENTS xiii 
Chapter 16 Disinfection 513 
16.1 Kinetics of Disinfection 514 
16.2 Chlorination 515 
16.3 Disinfection Practice 521 
16.4 Ozone 527 
16.5 Ultraviolet and Ionizing 
Irradiation 530 
16.6 Other Disinfectants 534 
SECTION V BIOLOGICAL 
WASTEWATER 
TREATMENT 545 
Chapter 17 Aerobic Biological 
Treabnent 547 
17.1 Microorganisms in Aerobic 
Biological Treatment 547 
17.2 The Activated Sludge 
Process 548 
17.3 Substrate Removal and Growth 
of Microorganisms 549 
17.4 Activated Sludge 
Configurations 554 
17.5 Process Analysis 557 
17.6 Food to Microorganism Ratio 
and Sludge Age 560 
17.7 Plug Flow Activated Sludge 
Treatment 572 
17.8 Variations of the Activated 
Sludge Process 574 
17.9 Sludge Production in Activated 
Sludge Systems 583 
17.10 Design of Activated Sludge 
Processes for Nitrogen and 
Phosphorus Removal 586 
17.11 Oxygen Uptake in Activated 
Sludge Processes 592 
17.12 Bulking and Foaming 
Sludge 592 
17.13 Process Operating 
Characteristics and Kinetic 
Coefficient Values 595 
17.14 Fixed Film Processes 595 
Page 5 of 26
FWS1015xiv CONTENTS 
Chapter 18 Anaerobic Wastewater 
Treahnent 622 
18.1 Anaerobic Metabolism 623 
18.2 Process Fundamentals 625 
18.3 Process Analysis 632 
18.4 Misconceptions and Barriers 
About Anaerobic Treatment 644 
18.5 New Anaerobic Treatment 
Processes 646 
18.6 Process Stability and 
Monitoring 656 
18.7 Comparison of Anaerobic and 
Aerobic Treatment Processes 659 
18.8 Energy Assessment of Anaerobic 
and Aerobic Treatment 661 
18.9 Pathogen Reduction in 
Anaerobic Processes 663 
Chapter 19 Treatment in Ponds ' Land Systems, and Wetlands 670 
19.1 Overview of Stabilization 
Ponds 670 
19.2 Pond Types 673 
19.3 Design of Pond Systems 675 
19.4 Indicator Microorganism Dieoff 
in Ponds 682 
19.5 Aerated Lagoons 683 
19.6 Treatment of Wastewater in 
Natural Systems 684 19.7 Wetlands for Wastewater 
Treatment 697 
Chapter 20 Sludge Processing and 
Land Application 709 
20.1 Sludge Characteristics and 
Conditioning 709 
20.2 Sludge Generation and 
Treatment Processes 713 
20.3 Sludge Conditioning 717 
20.4 Aerobic Sludge Digestion 720 
20.5 Model for Aerobic Sludge 
Digestion 721 
20.6 Sludge Thickening 727 
20.7 Mechanical Sludge 
Dewatering 732 
20.8 Land Application of 
Sludge 738 
Chapter 21 Effluent Disposal in 
Natural Waters 751 
21.1 Pollutants in Natural 
Waters 751 
21.2 Loading Equations for 
Streams 754 
21.3 Dissolved Oxygen Variation in a 
Stream 760 
Appendix 773 
Index 789 
Page 6 of 26
FWS1015ming EA > Eco), 
b.at make up Ec 
:r potential than 
n to proceed as 
(2.18) 
ential difference 
eral as different 
; are set up and 
ference between 
cells or not. An 
accurately. This 
l solution when 
•roceed. 
tll possible half­
(Esys)· 
0) (2.19) 
be written as a 
ll defined but it 
>t in the system. 
of a solution. It 
:ode is usually a 
ectrode because 
it is sensitive to 
to the voltmeter 
.nt potential and 
:ion. Their only 
nd makeup of a 
. be used. Effec­
m electrochemi-CHAPTER 2/The Thermodynamic Basis for Equilibrium 47 
cal cell. The other half-cell of the electrochemical cell is the solution with the other 
electrode immersed in it. The half-cells are separated and make electrical contact by 
a membrane or other equivalent means in the reference electrode. 
For a solution at equilibrium with its potential measured by an ideal electrode, 
Eq. (2.19) will apply. The electrode will transmit Esys· Defining the reference electrode 
potential as E,.r and considering it to be the anode, the potential reading on the 
voltmeter will be 
Emeter = Ec = Esys -Eref (2.20) 
The ORP is usually reported with respect to the hydrogen scale, i.e., the result is 
normalized with respect to using the SHE as the reference electrode. 
Because natural waters are unlikely to be in a state of complete equilibrium, the 
ORP is a gross indicator of the state of oxidation-reduction in the system. Besides 
this, the potential reading is influenced by how well the electrode "sees" species in 
solution among other factors. But this measurement is still a useful tool in many 
circumstances. 
The general form of the Nernst equation for a half-reaction is 
ORP = E = E" _ 0.0591 [reduced species] 
sys n og [oxidized species] (2.21) 
The charge balance always sums to neutrality, but it is seen from Eq. (2.21) that 
as the concentrations of species able to donate electrons (reduced species) increase, 
the ORP decreases and vice versa. Thus as oxygen or other oxidants are added to a 
solution, the 0 RP rises. Water with a pH of 7.00 and temperature of 25°C in equilibrium 
with oxygen at a partial pressure of 0.21 atm has an ORP of 800 m V on the hydrogen 
scale. At high ORP there will be a predominance of ions such as so~-, N03, and 
Fe3+ as opposed to their reduced forms of S2-, NHt, and Fe2+. As free oxygen is 
removed from a water by chemical or biological reactions, the state of the water 
changes from an aerobic to an anoxic state, wherein the concentration of oxidized 
species is predominant compared to their reduced counterparts but there is no signifi­
cant oxygen concentration. Many microorganisms are able to use so~-, N03, or other 
oxidized species as electron acceptors. As reaction progresses and oxidized species 
are consumed and the reduced species predominate, the water reaches an anaerobic 
state. In anaerobic reactors, ORPs in the range of -300 to -400 mV exist. 
• Example 2.6 Use of the Nernst Equation 
A platinum electrode and reference electrode were used to measure the ORP of a 
water. The meter reading was 0.01 V. The reference electrode was known to have a 
potential of 0.25 V and it can be considered to be the anode. The pH of the water 
was 8.21. If the water was in equilibrium, what is the ratio of [NHt] to [N03]? Was 
there any free dissolved oxygen in the water? 
The platinum electrode senses the potential of the solution. The potential reading 
on the meter is Ec. From Eq. (2.20), 
Esys = Emeter + Eref = 0.01 V + 0.25 V = 0.26 V 
From Table 1.3, the half-reaction for NHt -N03 is 
E0 = 0.880 
Page 7 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 9 
WATER AND WASTEWATER 
TREATMENT OPERATIONS 
Water and wastewater treatment plants are designed on a unit operations concept in 
which one operation is optimized to accomplish one task, although more than one 
problem substance may be remedied in the task. Each operation generally has ramifi­
cations on other downstream treatment processes, and tradeoffs between increasing 
the efficiency of one process or another depend on water characteristics and costs of 
each operation. A brief description of the processes used for water and wastewater 
treatment is given here with an explanation of where the process may occur in the 
treatment stream. 
There are a number of manufacturers that supply units designed for one process to 
prefabricated package plants that incorporate a number of individual unit operations. 
Package plants may be suitable for smaller installations ; larger installations are usually 
custom designed. 
Basins in a treatment operation may be built in parallel or in series. Either option 
may be dictated by the efficiency of the process and other considerations. Multiple 
units also provide the capability to treat water or wastewater while one unit is out of 
service because of breakdown or routine maintenance . In smaller plants, where the 
design of multiple units is not economical or feasible, bypasses are designed to accom­
modate shutdown of a unit. 
9.1 WATER TREATMENT OPERATIONS 
The choice of treatment operations depends on the quality and variability of the raw 
water source and the treatment objectives, which may vary for industrial as opposed 
to municipal needs. A thorough survey of the quality and quantity of all possible 
sources is the first and most important step for designing a water supply process. 
Compromising the water survey can prove to be very costly in the long run through 
payment for more complex and expensive treatment operations. Water treatment 
operations must be designed to handle the extremes in raw water quality variation to 
provide an acceptable product water at all times. 
The unit operations that may be incorporated into a water treatment plant are 
listed alphabetically below with some comments on their location in the treatment train. 
Activated Carbon. Activated carbon is a broad-scale adsorbent of dissolved sub­
stances. Dissolved , colloidal, and particulate substances are attracted and attached to 
the surface of the carbon particles. It is used to remove taste and odor causing 
compounds as well as toxic organic chemicals. Precipitation and other chemical reac-
219 
Page 8 of 26
FWS1015220 SECfiON III/Water and Wastewater Treatment 
tions also occur on the carbon surface. Activated carbon may be used for dechlori­
nation. 
A variety of carbon adsorbers can be designed, including batch and continuous 
flow units. The adsorption capacity of the carbon is eventually exhausted . The carbon 
is regenerated by heating the carbon, which burns and volatilizes the substances 
accumulated on it. Instead of heat, strong acids or bases, or other solvent solutions 
can be used to regenerate the carbon. Smaller operations normally do not regenerate 
the carbon on site. 
Activated carbon can also be used as one of the media in a filtration unit. 
Aeration. Aerators expose water to air to remove volatile dissolved components 
that are in excess of their saturation concentration. Some toxic organics are volatile. 
Taste-and odor-causing compounds may be removed to satisfactory levels. Groundwa­
ters may have a high C02 content that will be stripped to tolerable levels in aeration. 
The transfer of gases from the atmosphere to the water will also be effected. The 
addition of dissolved oxygen will enhance the oxidation of iron, manganese, and 
other metals to higher and more insoluble oxidation states. These precipitates will be 
removed in sedimentation basins and filtration units. 
Aeration is one of the first treatment operations applied to a water. It can be 
designed as an aesthetically pleasing spray aerator open to public view. 
Air Flotation. Air flotation is used to separate suspended matter from a water 
and sometimes used as an alternative to sedimentation. It is primarily used to thicken 
chemical sludge suspensions . Under pressurized conditions air is injected into the 
water. The water is released to a vessel at atmospheric pressure that causes the release 
of the dissolved air as tiny bubbles, which form nuclei to buoy up suspended particulates 
that are skimmed from the surface. 
Biological Treatment. Biological treatment is used for ammonia nitrogen conver­
sion to nitrate, nitrogen removal, and removal of organics in water. It can be accom­
plished in filters, fluidized beds, or packed beds containing granular activated carbon. 
Biological treatment of water is an emerging treatment. 
Ammonia nitrogen makes a water biologically unstable and high concentrations 
may be converted to nitrate. Biological removal of nitrogen is accomplished by con­
verting nitrates to nitrogen gas (denitrification). The nitrogen gas is stripped from the 
water. It is an alternative to ion exchange. 
Biological removal of organic matter lessens the amount of disinfection byproducts 
formed when disinfection agents are added at the end of the treatment plant and 
renders a water that is less hospitable for growth or regrowth of microorganisms. The 
water is more biologically stable. 
Chemical Feed Mixers. Many processes rely on the addition of chemical agents.1 
Mixers are designed to disperse the chemicals rapidly and thoroughly throughout 
the water. 
Coagulant Recovery. The sludge generated with alum and iron coagulant salts 
may be regenerated by addition of acid. Recalcination is used to recover calcium oxide 
(CaO) from calcium carbonate sludge by heating the sludge to drive off carbon dioxide. 
Calcium oxide is then slaked by adding water to convert it to lime [Ca(OH) 2]. 
Coagulation. Coagulation is the process of adding chemical reagents in a mixing 
device to destabilize colloidal particles and allow them to agglomerate or flocculate with 
'Some chemical agents used in water and wastewater treatment are given in the Appendix along with 
their bulk densities. 
Page 9 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 9/Water and Wastewater Treatment Operations 221 
other suspended particles to form larger more readily settled particles. Coagulation 
reactions are fast and occur in the rapid mixing device. It is essential that the coagulant 
be dispersed throughout the water to contact and react with the target substances 
before the coagulant is consumed in side reactions with water itself. 
Disinfection. Disinfection is the removal or inactivation of pathogenic microorgan­
isms (not necessarily sterilization). Chemical agents, commonly chlorine or its deriva­
tives, may be used or the water may be exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light or radiation. 
Ozone is becoming more widely used as a disinfectant. The disinfection tank or device 
(such as a UV chamber) maintains the water in contact with the dose of disinfectant 
for a time long enough to assure the required log reductions in indicator bacteria. It 
is exceedingly rare to find a raw water that would not require disinfection. 
North American practice advocates the addition of a small amount of chlorine 
(and possibly ammonia) to form chloramines, which maintain a small disinfectant 
residual in the distribution system when other disinfectants are used as the primary dis­
infectant. 
Disinfection is the last treatment applied to a water. 
Filtration. Filtration accomplishes polishing of a water and is required for almost 
every water. Filtration follows sedimentation if it is provided . Water moves through 
tanks that contain sand and other types of media. Fine solids that did not settle out 
· in a sedimentation basin will be entrapped in the filter. There also will be significant 
removal of bacteria in a filter but not enough (log reduction of bacteria is usually 
required) to provide a safe water. Larger microorganisms such as protozoans are 
completely removed in a properly operated filter. 
There are two filtration alternatives in common use. Slow sand filters have only 
sand media. They are cleaned by scraping off the top layer of media on a periodic 
basis as the filter clogs. Rapid filters are sand filters or multimedia filters that have 
anthracite, sand, and possibly other media in them. Loading rates of rapid filters are 
much higher than slow sand filters. Rapid filters are cleaned by backwashing-reversing 
the flow of water through the media and pumping at a rate sufficient to expand the 
media. Backwashing is necessary every 1-4 d depending on influent water quality. 
The influent to rapid filters generally must have a coagulating agent added to it 
at some upstream location. 
Flow through rapid and slow sand filters is due to gravity. Pressure filters, where 
water is forced through the filter by applied pressure in a completely enclosed unit, 
are used in some smaller installations. 
Roughing filters that contain coarse media may be used to prefilter water with a 
very high suspended solids content. 
Raw water that is of high quality may require filtration only to remove the small 
quantities of suspended solids that are present. Otherwise rapid filters are preceded 
by coagulation, flocculation, and sedimentation. 
Flocculation. Flocculators provide gentle agitation of a water that has been coagu­
lated to promote particle contact and formation of larger particles. Hydraulic or 
mechanically driven flocculators may be designed. Flocculators follow the rapid mixing 
coagulation tank and precede sedimentation and filtration units. 
Fluoridation. Fluoride is added to waters to reduce the incidence of dental caries 
in the population. The fluoride is added by a chemical feeder. Pumping and flow 
through the distribution pipes will ensure that the fluoride ion is thoroughly dispersed 
in the water. Fluoride is added at the end of the treatment train, where its concentration 
Page 10 of 26
FWS1015222 SECTION III/Water and Wastewater Treatment 
will not be affected by coagulation, precipitation, sedimentation, and adsorption pro­
cesses. 
When fluoride concentrations in the raw water exceed recommended limits, ion 
exchange with activated alumina is generally used to remove the excess fluoride. 
Ion Exchange. Ion exchange can be used to remove hardness ions, nitrates, or 
other inorganic constituents. Ion exchangers contain large molecular weight organic 
substances (resins) that have the ability to exchange one ion for another. For instance 
there are resins that will exchange hydrogen ions for calcium ions or other positively 
charged ions. Naturally occurring ion exchangers (crystalline aluminosilicates) are 
known as zeolites. Eventually the ion exchanger's capacity is exhausted and concen­
trated solutions of acid, base, or salt are used to regenerate the ion exchanger. 
Pipes, Channels, and Other Conduits. Flow in pipes and channels should have a 
minimum velocity of 0.3 m/s (1 ft/s) to avoid deposition of solids. Recommended 
velocities at various locations in the plant depend on the state of the water. 
Prechlorination or Pre-oxidation. Instead of using aeration, high concentrations 
of nuisance metals such as Fe and Mn and other metals that may be toxic can be 
oxidized to more insoluble states by chlorine or other oxidants. The precipitates will 
be removed by following processes of coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation , and 
filtration. Sulfides are also oxidized to sulfates. This treatment is also used to retard 
microbial growth throughout the plant. 
This operation is, as the name implies, at the front end of the treatment plant. 
Elemental chlorine should not be used at this point because it will have a greater 
tendency to form chloro-organics, some of which are carcinogenic. Other chlorine 
derivatives such as chloramines or other oxidation agents such as permanganate can 
be used. 
Recarbonation. In water softening plants, it is often necessary to add an excess 
of lime to facilitate removal of hardness ions. After sedimentation of the CaC0 3 and 
Mg(OH) 2 precipitates, the pH of the water is high because of the excess lime. Carbon 
dioxide is added to neutralize the excess OH-. 
Reverse Osmosis and Electrodialysis. These technologies are used for the removal 
of high concentrations of dissolved solids. Reverse osmosis essentially "filters" dis­
solved solids from the water by forcing the water through a membrane by applying 
pressure in excess of the osmotic pressure of the dissolved components in the solution. 
Electrodialysis uses electric current that induces ions to migrate through a membrane. 
These technologies are primarily used to desalinate brackish waters. They can also 
be used for softening. 
Suspended solids must be removed to a low level before water is subjected to 
reverse osmosis to prevent fouling of the membrane. 
Screens and Bar Racks. Screens and bar racks are used to remove coarse debris 
from a raw water source. This debris may damage pumps or deposit in channels, 
causing clogging. They are located at the intake for the water source and at the 
beginning of the treatment plant. Screenings are collected and disposed at a landfill site. 
Sedimentation. Exposing the water to relatively quiescent conditions will allow 
settleable solids to be removed by the action of the force of gravity. The sludge 
accumulated in these tanks may be disposed in landfills or the water source downstream 
of the withdrawal point for the water supply. Sedimentation that has not been preceded 
by coagulation and flocculation is known as plain sedimentation. Raw waters that 
contain a high sediment load may be settled in a plain sedimentation basin to remove 
Page 11 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 9/Water and Wastewater Treatment Operations 223 
the readily settled particulates. Then a chemical assist may be provided through 
addition of coagulant followed by flocculation and another sedimentation basin to 
remove slower settling particulates. 
Waters, particularly groundwaters that have a low concentration of suspended 
solids, may not require sedimentation. They can be directly filtered. 
Softening. Softening is the removal of multivalent cations (hardness) in the water. 
As noted above, ion exchange can be used to accomplish this task. Lime-soda 
(Ca(OH) 2-Na2COJ)softening involves the addition of these agents in a mixer, followed 
by flocculation, sedimentation, and filtration. The alkalinity added by lime and soda 
ash causes CaC0 3 and Mg(OH)z to precipitate and be removed in the sedimentation 
and filtration units. Softening will be practiced in conjunction with coagulation. It is 
possible to recover the lime. 
Super-chlorination . Chlorine is a strong oxidizing agent that can destroy some 
taste and odor compounds. Also, in plants where filtration is not present and there is 
a significant risk of protozoan pathogens, elevated levels of chlorination beyond those 
normally required to disinfect a water will be required. After the chlorine is added, 
the water is held in a contact basin for the required contact time. Super-chlorination 
will have to be followed by dechlorination to reduce residual chlorine and the tastes 
and odors arising from chlorine itself. The dechlorinating agent is usually sulfite, 
although activated carbon can also be used for dechlorination. 
Ultrafiltration. In ultrafiltration or nanofiltration, pressure is used to drive a liquid 
through a membrane that is permeable to some components. It is similar to reverse 
osmosis. The process is used to separate higher molecular weight compounds from a 
water. It is not commonly used for water treatment. Microfiltration uses membranes 
with larger sized openings to filter small particulates, bacteria, and protozoans from 
a water. 
Water Stabilization. Water stabilization refers to the adjustment of the pH, alkalin­
ity, and calcium content of a water such that there is a slight tendency for the finished 
water to precipitate CaC0 3• A thin deposit of CaC0 3 in the distribution system pipes 
will form a protective barrier to retard corrosion of the pipes by agents in the finished 
water. If softening is practiced, the process must be adjusted to produce the desired 
concentrations. It may be necessary to add acid or alkaline agents to achieve the 
desired balance among the three components. 
Not all of the above treatment processes will be required for a raw water. There 
is usually more than one process or a combination of processes that can be used for 
the same purpose. Also the efficiency of a single unit operation may be significantly 
influenced by upstream operations. It is even possible for treatment to produce negative 
results. For example, Himberg et al. (1989) found in a few instances that a conventional 
treatment process as depicted in Fig. 9.1 produced negative removals of bluegreen 
algae toxins presumably because of cell lysis and release of toxins to solution in an 
otherwise proper functioning treatment train. Typical flow charts for water treatment 
operations are shown in Figs. 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3. There are many possible substitutions . 
and configuration changes possible. Water treatment processes are classified according 
to their degree of contaminant removal in Table 9.1. 
Reservoirs 
Reservoirs are often required to provide a steady supply of water over periods of 
drought. Some improvement in the quality of a river water can also be obtained by 
Page 12 of 26
FWS1015Pesticides J:'-J:' r-u r-r 
THMs G-E p p p p F-G F-G F-G P-G F-E P-F p 
THM precursors p F-G P-F F-G - G-E F-E G-E F-G F-E P-F P-F 
Hepatotoxins and p p p -- - --pd E p 
neurotoxins from 
bluegreen algae' 
B. Secondary Contaminants 
Carbon dioxide G-E P-I" E p p p p p p p p p 
Chloride p p p F-G p G-E p G-E p p p 
Color p F-G F-G P-G - - -- F-E E G-E (l 
Copper p G G-E p F-G E E P-F F-G p 
Hardness p p E p E E G-E E p p p p 
Hydrogen sulfide F-E p F-G p p p p p F-E F-G p p 
Iron F-G F-E E p G-E G-E G G-E G-E p p p 
Manganese P-F F-E E p G-E G-E G G-E F-E p p p 
Methane G-E P-E p p p p p p p F-E P-G p 
Sulfate p p p G-E p E p E p p p G-E 
Taste and odor F-E P-F P-F P-G - - - - F-E G-E G-E P-F 
TOC F P-F G -G-E E - E p 
Total dissolved solids p p P-F p p G-E P-F G-E p p p p 
Zinc p F-G G-E p G-E E - E p 
c. Proposed Contaminants 
Aluminum p F F-G p G-E E - E p 
Disinfection byproducts - P-E P-F P-F - p F-G F-G F-G F-E P-G 
Radon G-E p p p p p p p p E P-F p 
Silver F-G G-E p G - - -p F-G P-F 
Uranium p G-E G-E E G-E E - E p F P-F G-E 
'From C. L. Hamann, J. B. McEwen, and A. G. Myers (1990), "Guide to Selection of Water Treatment Processes," in Water Quality and Treatment, 4th ed., F. W. Pontius, ed., American Water 
Works Association, McGraw-Hill, pp. 157-187. Reproduced with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
•p, poor (0-20% removal); F, fair (20-60% removal); G, good (60-90% removal); E, excellent (90-100% removal);"-", not applicable/insufficient data. 
'After Himberg et al. (1989). 
•with ozone as the oxidant. 
~ 
Page 13 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 9 /Water and Wastewater Treatment Operations 227 
Chemical 
oxidant 
Aeration t Contact tank 
trays · 
Ground~ ~ -?--
water --
Waste sludge 
to sewer 03 
Filtration ! 
--?--Contact 
chamber 
Pumps Distribution 
---;.. • ___,.. system 
Figure 9.3 Water treatment plant for Fe-Mn removal in groundwater. 
The benefits of building an impoundment in a river only for quality improvement 
must be weighed against the disadvantages . The costs of impoundment are generally 
high. Preliminary treatment gained in the reservoir is a. permanent gain. 
9.1.1 Home Water Treatment Units 
A number of point-of-use (applied at the water tap) or point-of-entry (applied at 
water supply point to the residence) treatment units, including water distillation units, 
activated carbon filters, reverse osmosis systems, and ion exchangers, have appeared 
on the market in recent years. Myths about water quality coupled with exaggerated 
claims from many manufacturers of these devices can lead to erroneous conclusions 
by the consumer. 
Distillation units produce water of high purity. The other units treat water as 
described above depending on the treatment process incorporated into the unit. The 
onus is on the user to maintain and operate these units properly according to manufac­
turer's instructions. Chlorine or its derivatives will be removed in carbon filters and 
the filter medium provides support surfaces for bacteria to colonize. Bacteria can 
populate filters, particularly those containing activated carbon, to high levels resulting 
in slug discharges (Geldreich et at., 1985). There is a risk that adventitious, opportunis­
tic pathogens may proliferate. Many activated carbon filters are impregnated with 
silver, which is toxic to microorganisms, to retard microbial growth. When these devices 
are properly designed and used they can supplement a central treatment system 
(Regunathan et a!., 1983). 
9.2 WASTEWATER TREATMENT UNIT OPERATIONS 
Wastewaters are normally treated by a combination of physical-chemical and biologi­
cal operations. However , it is possible to treat wastewaters solely with physical­
chemical methods. Again, operations are listed alphabetically for easy reference . 
Activated Carbon Treatment. Activated carbon may be added to biological treat­
ment processes or used as a treatment by itself. Activated carbon is used to adsorb 
toxic substances such as metals and pesticides that may be present in a wastewater. 
Air Flotation. Air flotation is used to separate suspended matter from a wastewater. 
It is primarily used to thicken biological or chemical sludge suspensions. See the 
description of the process given above. 
Page 14 of 26
FWS1015228 SECTION III/Water and Wastewater Treatment 
Aerobic Biological Treatment. Many types of processes are possible for the aerobic 
biological removal of dissolved and suspended organics. In the process, air (oxygen) 
is supplied to microorganisms that are in contact with the wastewater. The microorgan­
isms metabolize the organic material into carbon dioxide and other end products 
and new biomass. The putrescibility and soluble oxygen demand is reduced to a 
small amount. 
Some processes such as trickling filters or biodisks (rotating biological contactors) 
use a solid support media to provide surfaces on which bacteria grow and accumulate. 
In a trickling filter wastewater is sprayed over a rock or synthetic media bed. Waste­
water is applied on a continuous or an intermittent basis. Bacteria attach and grow 
on the media. Natural air currents supply oxygen. Biodisks work on a similar principle. 
A series of disks are partially submerged in a tank of wastewater. The disks are rotated 
to expose the biomass-covered disks to the atmosphere, where oxygen transfer to 
the biomass occurs. Providing immobilized media for microorganism attachment and 
growth is known as a fixed film process. 
The common activated sludge process is a suspended growth process where the 
microorganisms are mixed with the wastewater. Air is pumped into the basin to 
supply oxygen and mixing. Pure oxygen may be supplied as an alternative to air 
but supplemental mixing is required. There are many variations of the activated 
sludge process. 
Processes may also be designed to oxidize nitrogen or remove nitrogen from the 
wastewater. It is also possible to design a process for increased removal of phosphorus. 
All aerobic biological treatment processes convert some of the dissolved organics 
into biological solids that must normally be removed in a sedimentation basin following 
the biological treatment unit. Aerobic biological treatment is often preceded by sedi­
mentation to physically remove suspended organics that would be degraded in the 
biological treatment process at more expense. 
Air Strippers. Volatile compounds or gases present at supersaturated concentra­
tions are amenable to air stripping. Air stripping units are devices that enhance the 
mass transfer between liquid and the atmosphere . This is accomplished by increasing 
the surface area of the liquid to maximize its exposure to the atmosphere. There are 
many types of stripping devices, ranging from highly efficient countercurrent flow to 
diffused aeration systems. In countercurrent flow devices, the wastewater is injected 
at the top of a column that contains media such as ceramic berl saddles and air is 
injected at the bottom of the column. 
Diffused aerators inject air into the liquid through porous plates located near the 
bottom of a tank. 
Ammonia Stripping. Ammonia is a volatile component that may be removed by 
exposing the wastewater to the atmosphere. A high pH favors the formation of ammo­
nia as opposed to ammonium ion. Air strippers are used to remove the unionized am­
monia. 
Anaerobic Biological Treatment. High-strength wastewaters are amenable to 
treatment by an anaerobic process. Industrial and agricultural wastewaters are often 
highly concentrated. Anaerobic treatment occurs in enclosed reactors to prevent access 
of oxygen. The anaerobic microorganisms that are in contact with the wastewater 
convert the dissolved and suspended organics into biomass and methane. Significant 
quantities of methane are produced and it may be used as fuel. As in aerobic biological 
treatment operations, some processes incorporate solid support media for the microor­
ganisms (fixed film processes), whereas others keep the microorganisms in suspension. 
Page 15 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 9/Water and Wastewater Treatment Operations 229 
The biological solids produced in an anaerobic process must be settled in a clarifier 
that may follow the process or be incorporated into the anaerobic reactor. Fixed film 
and suspended growth processes among other options are used in anaerobic treatment . 
Anaerobic digesters are often used to treat solids produced in an aerobic treatment 
process and in the primary clarifier, considerably reducing the volume of solids finally 
to be removed from the plant. 
Fixed film processes include anaerobic filters and fluidized beds. The suspended 
growth process is also known as an anaerobic contact process. A unique process in 
anaerobic treatment is the upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor, wherein dense 
granules of microorganisms are retained in the reactor by inertia. 
It is not necessary to presettle the influent to an anaerobic reactor. 
Chemical Feed Mixers. Physical-chemical plants rely heavily on the addition of 
chemical agents.2 Chemical agents are also used in biological treatment plants. Mixers 
are designed to disperse the chemicals rapidly and thoroughly throughout the water. 
Coagulant Recovery. Physical-chemical plants use methods for coagulant recovery 
described under water treatment. 
Coagulation. This process has the same objectives as noted for water treatment 
and it is used in physical-chemical wastewater treatment processes. Also, chemicals 
may be added to precipitate a particular constituent such as phosphorus. Alum is 
commonly applied to effluent from an aeration basin for biological treatment to ensure 
that phosphorus is precipitated in the final clarifier. 
Comminutors. Comminutors are devices that macerate rags, sticks, paper, and 
other gross solid debris in the wastewater that can clog channels or otherwise obstruct 
flow through the plant. These devices are placed downstream of the grit chamber. 
The cuttings from the comminutor are returned directly to the wastewater. 
Disinfection. Clarified effluent from the plant may be disinfected to reduce patho­
gen concentrations prior to discharge to the receiving body of water. Chlorine is 
usually the disinfectant applied, although UV units are being used at greater frequency. 
A plug flow contact chamber is used to maintain the wastewater in contact with the 
disinfectant for the specified time. 
Equalization. When flow quantity and quality variations are significant, holding 
basins are incorporated near the front of the treatment train to allow wastewater to 
be input to the plant at a more uniform rate and quality. More uniform flows and 
concentrations reduce the variability of treatment and allow a more compact waste­
water treatment plant to be designed with higher utilization of all units. The equaliza­
tion basin is mixed and aeration may be applied to avoid septic conditions. The amount 
of biological treatment provided by aerating the wastewater will not be significant. 
Some stripping of volatile compounds will occur. 
Filtration. Filtration is often used in physical-chemical wastewater treatment pro­
cesses to remove fine colloidal or solid particles that cannot be settled in a sedimenta­
tion basin. Filtration is also used finally to polish effluent from clarifiers that have 
settled effluent from a biological treatment process. It is also used to remove algae 
in effluent from a stabilization pond process. 
Flocculation. This process has the same objectives as noted for water treatment. 
It is not commonly used in treatment plants that use biological processes but it is an 
important operation in physical-chemical treatment plants. 
2Some chemical agents used in water and wastewater treatment are given in the Appendix along with 
their bulk densities. 
Page 16 of 26
FWS1015230 SECTION III/Water and Wastewater Treatment 
Grit Chambers. After the wastewater is screened, grit is removed. Grit chambers 
are sedimentation basins designed to remove nonputrescible matter such as silt and 
sand that cause abrasive wear on channels and pumps and can accumulate and clog 
channels. Because the materials removed in a grit chamber are essentially nonbiode­
gradable, they are collected and disposed in a landfill site. 
Modern grit chambers are usually aerated chambers with an offset aerator that 
induces a small degree of water circulation to keep lighter organic particulates in 
suspension while the heavier grit materials settle. 
Incineration. Incineration is used for final stabilization of sludge. An incinerator 
is a furnace for high-temperature combustion of the sludge. Without emission control, 
incinerators produce a significant amount of atmospheric contamination. 
Lagoons. Lagoons are mechanically aerated ponds that provide aerobic biologi­
cal treatment. 
Membrane Technologies. The membrane technologies of reverse osmosis and 
electrodialysis described under water treatment can be applied to wastewaters for 
selective removal and recovery of species. 
Neutralization. Industrial wastes with extremely high or low pH are neutralized 
by acid or base addition. If biological treatment is to be used, a pH near neutrality 
is required. 
Oxidation Ditches. An oxidation ditch is an oval channel with a mechanical aera­
tion device installed to provide aerobic biological treatment. 
Pipes, Channels, and Other Conduits. Flow in pipes and channels should have a 
minimum velocity of 0.6-0.9 m/s (2-3 ft/s) to avoid deposition of solids (WEF and 
ASCE, 1992). Some facilities use minimum velocities as low as 0.3 m/s (1 ft/s) but 
the higher minimum is preferred by more operators. 
Recarbonation. Carbon dioxide is added to neutralize excess OH-ion that was 
added earlier in the process for coagulation-flocculation reactions. 
Screens and Bar Racks. Screens and bar racks are used to remove coarse debris 
from wastewater for the same reasons as in a water treatment plant. This debris may 
damage pumps or deposit in channels, causing clogging. Bar racks are located at the 
intakes to wet wells in pumping stations in the sewer system as well as at the intake 
to the wastewater treatment plant. At the wastewater treatment plant screens will 
also be used after the bar racks. Materials removed on the screens and racks are 
relatively nonbiodegradable. They are collected and disposed in a landfill site. 
Sedimentation. Primary clarifiers are designed to remove settleable solids from a 
wastewater before biologically treating it for dissolved organics. Removal of biodegrad­
able solids by sedimentation is much less expensive than treating them aerobically in 
an aeration basin. 
Secondary clarifiers follow biological treatment units and are designed to remove 
biomass formed during biological treatment and other solids present in the influent 
to the biological treatment unit. In addition to clarification of the wastewater, a 
secondary clarifier for a biological treatment process is designed to perform some 
thickening of the biological sludge that accumulates in it. 
Sedimentation basins in physical-chemical treatment systems will follow coagula­
tion and flocculation units. 
Sludge Concentration and Dewatering. The purpose of sludge concentration units 
is to reduce the volume of sludge for ultimate disposal in a landfill, incinerator, or on 
Page 17 of 26
FWS1015474 SECfiON IV/Physical-Chemical Treatment Processes 
Sequestering Iron and Manganese 
Instead of removing iron and manganese, sequestering agents may be added to a 
water that bind theiron and manganese in polymeric colloidal complexes which prevent 
them from forming color or turbidity within detention times in the distribution system. 
Sodium silicates, phosphates, or polyphosphates are the common sequestering agents 
used. Chlorine must be added simultaneously with sodium silicate to oxidize iron and 
manganese (Robinson et al., 1992). Iron is most effectively sequestered with silicate; 
manganese is less susceptible. Silicate doses in the range of 5-25 mg/L as Si02 are 
normal. 
Biological Removal of Iron and Manganese 
All of the processes previously discussed for iron and manganese removal are physical­
chemical processes. A recent innovation has been the development of biological iron 
and manganese removal (Mouchet, 1992). The processes are complex and only a brief 
description is given here (see Mouchet, 1992, for more detail). The processes use 
filters that support autotrophic iron-and manganese-oxidizing bacteria. Although 
some bacteria can oxidize both species, others can oxidize only one of them and the 
optimal conditions for iron removal are different from those for manganese removal. 
Two separate filters are usually required if both iron and manganese must be removed. 
The influent must be adjusted to ORP and pH conditions that promote the activity 
of the respective groups of bacteria. Dissolved oxygen content of the influent is critical. 
Conditions that cause physical-chemical removal of iron or manganese will decrease 
activity of iron and manganese bacteria and ultimately impair process performance. 
A water must be fully nitrified before biological manganese removal can take place. 
Higher filtration rates in the range of 25-40 m/h (80-130 ft/h) are used in iron removal 
filters; typical filtration rates in manganese filters are 10-40 m/h (33-130 ft/h). The 
higher filtration rates in iron or manganese filters are achieved with coarse sand media 
with an effective size (d10) of 0.95-1.35 mm or higher. Backwashing frequency depends 
on the raw water quality but the quantity of backwash water should be well below 
1% of the product water. 
There are more than 100 bio-Fe or -Mn operations in France alone and other 
installations throughout Europe. The process greatly reduces the use of chemical 
agents and is claimed to reduce capital and operating costs (Mouchet, 1992). Sludge 
produced from the process does not pose treatability problems. 
15.5 PHOSPHORUS REMOVAL FROM WASTEWATER 
BY CHEMICAL PRECIPITATION 
Phosphorus is usually the limiting nutrient for eutrophication in inland receiving 
waters for wastewater treatment plant effluent; therefore, phosphorus concentrations 
in effluents are controlled. Biological wastewater treatment processes remove some 
phosphorus in the biological sludge that is formed in these processes but the amount 
of P removal is normally inadequate for typical wastewaters. 
Agents used to precipitate dissolved phosphorus are salts of the metals calcium 
(Ca2+), iron (either Fe2+ or Fe3+), or aluminum [either alum, Al2(S04)3 • 18H20 or 
sodium .aluminate, Na2Al204]. The chloride and sulfate salts of Fe2+ and Fe3+ can be 
used. Pickle liquor, which is a waste product of the steel industry that contains ferrous 
iron in either a sulfuric or hydrochloric acid solution, may also be used. All of these 
Page 18 of 26
FWS1015626 SECTION V/Biological Wastewater Treatment 
18.1. The most important considerations for operation of anaerobic processes are 
discussed next. 
18.2.1 Environmental Variables 
Both physical and chemical variables influence the habitat of the microorganisms in 
the reactor. Oxidation-reduction potentials in anaerobic reactors are usually below 
-350 mV. 
Temperature 
As temperature increases the rate of reaction generally increases. For biological sys­
tems the rate increases are usually not as great as for chemical reactions. 
There are two optimal ranges for process operation to produce methane: 30-40°C 
(the mesophilic range is from 15 to 40°C) and 50-60°C (the thermophilic range is for 
temperatures above 40°C). The psychrophilic range is temperatures below 15-20°C. 
Methane has been produced at temperatures down to 10°C or lower, but for reasonable 
rates of methane production, temperatures should be maintained above 20°C. Rates 
of methane production approximately double for each 10°C temperature change in 
the mesophilic range. Loading rates must decrease as temperature decreases to main­
tain the same extent of treatment. Operation in the thermophilic range is not generally 
practical because of the high heating energy requirement. A stable temperature is 
more conducive to stable operation than any specific temperature. 
pH 
The most important process control parameter is pH. The optimum pH range for all 
methanogenic bacteria studied by Zehnder et al. (1982) was between 6 and 8 but the 
optimum pH for the group as a whole is near 7.0. The lower growth rates of the 
methanogens require that the process be run at conditions most favorable to them. 
Numerous references report that the pH required in anaerobic systems for good 
performance and stability is in the range of 6.5-7.5, although stable operation has 
been observed outside this range. The system must contain adequate buffering capacity 
to accommodate the production of volatile acids and carbon dioxide that will dissolve 
at the operating pressure. Excess alkalinity or ability to control pH must be present 
to guard against the accumulation of excess volatile acids. 
Anaerobic processes can operate over a wide range of volatile acids concentrations 
(from less than 100 mg/L to over 5 000 mg/L) if proper pH control is practiced. A 
constant pH lends stability to the process. Automatic pH control is often the most 
economical means of pH control because less chemicals are consumed. The alkalinity 
requirement varies with the waste, system operation, and type of process. 
The three major chemical sources of alkalinity are lime, sodium bicarbonate, and 
sodium carbonate. Sodium hydroxide, which is often used in vegetable and fruit peeling 
operations, is also an important source of alkalinity. Other substances that produce 
alkalinity are soaps or other salts of organic acids. 
Mixing 
Septic tanks, Imhoff tanks, and sludge digesters were the first anaerobic treatment 
operations. All of these processes employed single-tank anaerobic reactors. In septic 
tanks incoming solids are settled and digested in the same compartment. An additional 
compartment may be included for polishing of the effluent but the first compartment Figure 
is the 
treatm 
digesti 
mixing 
plishec 
E~ 
or wit] 
perf on 
of dige 
advanc 
Mi 
mental 
develo 
local b 
inhibit' 
Freear 
accliml 
the pre 
more f 
failure 
Wl 
which 
receiviJ 
ofmos1 
ever, w 
pH be) 
Sul 
in sulfi 
themse 
tate sul 
are inh 
NutriE 
The lm 
result i1 
Page 19 of 26
FWS1015650 SECTION V/Biological Wastewater Treatment 
Figure 18.5 Bench scale sequencing batch reactors at the end of a settle phase. 
process. The minimum SRT remains the same as for conventional reactors (Table 
18.2). The most effective loading range for contact reactors is 2-10 kg COD/m3/d 
(0.12-0.6lb/ft3/d). Higher loadings have been used with no process upsets, but removal 
efficiency drops. 
The smaller volume required for a contact vessel compared to a conventional 
vessel represents a cost saving and more effective mixing may be obtained at lower 
power input into the smaller volume. Solids may be separated and recycled to a degree 
largely independent of variations in influent flow and load. This provides more effective 
control of SRT. 
Settling devices for anaerobic processes may be subject to flotation problems 
because of gas formation and the subsequent attachment of gas bubbles to biological 
floes. The use of a flotation separator/thickener is therefore an alternative. If conven­
tional gravity sedimentation is used, temporary inhibition of the anaerobes should be 
incorporated to halt gas production. Oxygen may be added to the reactor effluent or 
its temperature may be rapidly decreased by 5-10°C. Each of these has only a tempo­
rary effect on the sludge and does not impair its activity in the reactor. Vacuum 
degasification before sedimentation does not stop gas production. Lamella or tube 
settlers are the most efficient gravity sedimentation devices; however, they are suscepti­
ble to clogging when treating effluent from a biological treatment process. 
Sequencing batch reactors may be used in anaerobic treatment. The operating 
cycle of a sequencing batch process has been described in Chapter 17. The process is 
a contact process wherein the sludge is recycled internally. During fill and react phases 
it may be necessary to apply mixing. Figure 18.5 shows a bank of sequencing anaerobic 
reactors at the end of the settle phase. 
18.5.3 Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactors 
The upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) process was developed in the Nether­
lands (Lettinga et al., 1980). The UASB system is the most commonly used high rate 
anaerobic treatment process. The reactor (Fig. 18.3) relies on development of a dense, 
Page 20 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER IR/ Anaerobic Wastewater Treatment 651 
active sludge mass in the lower portion of the reactor. Distinct sludge granules near 
the size of peas are usually formed (Fig. 18.6). but in some cases the sludge blanket 
is flocculent. Whether the sludge bed is granular or flocculent does not affect the 
operation or performance of UASB systems (Lettinga and Hulshoff Pol, 1991). VSS 
concentrations up to 100 g/L may occur in this zone. The waste is introduced at the 
bottom of the reactor. where upon contact with the sludge bed, it is degraded to CH4 
and CO,. Gas formation and evolution supply sufficient mixing in the bed. Some solids 
are buoyed up by rising gas bubbles but a quiescent settling zone is provided for their 
separation and return into the lower portions of the reactor. This internal recycling 
of solids removes the need for external solids recycle. 
Design of the gas separator and solids settling zone is important to the success 
of the reactor and. if incorrect. significant solids losses may occur, which could result 
in failure. The clarifier is normally incorporated into the top of the reactor to conserve 
space. New designs sometimes include flexirings or other media in the upper portion 
of the reactor to trap solids and encourage fixed film growth. This results in a hybrid 
sludge blanket-fixed film reactor. 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Figure 18.6 Granulation in UASB reactors. (a) Electron micrograph of a granule. (b) A 
granule split in half, showing the hollow core which usually develops. Note the evolution 
of a gas bubble. (c) Closeup of granules. (d) UASB reactors with a packed bed of granules. 
Page 21 of 26
FWS1015652 SECTION V /Biological Wastewater Treatment 
Mechanisms leading to formation of the granular sludge, which is the most signifi­
cant aspect of these reactors, are not currently well understood but dilute soluble 
wastes with TSS concentrations less than 1 000-2 000 mg/L give rise to better sludge 
blankets. The UASB is reported to be more sensitive than other processes to waste 
composition . Startup is more difficult and requires special considerations to develop 
the sludge blanket. It has also been reported that wastes high in NHt content or low 
in divalent cation content are not suited for treatment in a UASB. 
Upflow velocities in typical UASB reactors range up to 1-2 m/h (3.3-6.6 ft/h) 
although Lettinga ·and Hulshoff Pol (1991) and van Haandel and Lettinga (1994) 
recommend that the average daily upflow velocity should not exceed 1 m/h (3.3 ft/h). 
Expanded bed UASB reactors have also been studied (van Haandel and Lettinga 
(1994). Upflow velocities are in the range of 6-12 m/h (20-40 ft/h) to expand the 
granules to gain some of the advantages of fluidized bed reactors (discussed in the 
next section). The potential application of expanded bed UASB reactors is treatment 
of low-strength wastewaters even at low temperatures . More surface area of the 
granules is available for microorganism-wastewater contact and the additional mixing 
intensity from fluid flow compensates for the lower mixing intensity resulting from 
reduced biogas production of the low strength waste. Influent suspended solids will 
largely be carried through and out of the expanded bed reactor; therefore, the waste 
should be pre-settled. 
The U ASB process can be used for strong wastewaters provided that the VSS:COD 
ratio is less than 1.0 or that the VSS are highly biodegradable if the ratio is higher. 
The reactors have been found capable of treating dilute wastes from 500-600 mg 
COD/L up to 20 000 mg/L. There are relatively few studies on anaerobic reactors of 
any type utilizing low-strength wastes (less than 1 000 mg COD/L) and, as noted 
above, under practical operating conditions, 1 000 mg COD/Lis a realistic minimum 
cutoff point, although unsettled domestic sewage (BOD 5, 357 mg/L; COD, 627 
mg/L) has been successfully treated in UASB reactors operated with a 4-h HRT at 
temperatures ranging from 18 to 28°C (Barbosa and Sant'Anna, 1989). 
Loading rates for UASB reactors range on a COD basis from 0.5 to 40 kg/m3/d 
(0.03-2.5lb/ft3/d). The HRT can be 1 d or less. The high density of solids in the sludge 
zone is responsible for retaining the biomass well in excess of minimum SRT for 
methanogens . 
A UASB reactor was found to outperform an anaerobic fixed film reactor and a 
continuous flow aerobic system (Latkar and Chakrabarti, 1994). Maximum loading 
rates for 100% conversion of urea were 7.09, 2.73, and 1.3 kg urea/m3/d (0.44, 0.17, 
and 0.081 lb/ft3/d), respectively. A UASB system can operate safely with an NHt -N 
loading in the range of 2.4-3.4 kg NHt -N/m3/d (0.15-0.21 lb/ft3/d). 
18.5.4 Fixed Film Reactors 
Fixed film reactors employ a fixed medium that provides a surface on which bacteria 
attach and grow. The medium immobilizes the bacteria; consequently, these-reactors 
can achieve SRT in excess of 100 d. As a result, these processes adjust well to changes 
in both flow rate and quality of influent and are the most stable of the high-rate 
reactors. Nonattached biomass also plays a significant role in substrate conversion in 
fixed film reactors. 
As temperature drops, biomass concentrations must rise to maintain the same 
rate of treatment. These reactors have been demonstrated to perform well at low 
temperatures with dilute wastes. Fixed film reactors have been shown capable of 
Page 22 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 18/ Anaerobic Wastewater Treatment 653 
treating domestic wastewater at ambient temperature (25°C) on a lab scale and, along 
with the UASB, hold the most promise for full-scale domestic sewage treatment. 
Startup of a fixed film process is, in general, a more lengthy process than startup 
for a conventional suspended growth process. On the other hand, the UASB, which 
is an unconventional suspended growth process, is even slower than the fixed film 
process in startup. Size of inoculum has less effect for fixed film processes because it 
does not directly attach to the medium. It may take 6 mo. or more for a biofilm to 
develop for a low-strength waste treated at a low temperature. 
This disadvantage is compensated by the reactor's lowered sensitivity to hydraulic 
and load variations and its ability to withstand discontinuous operation. A 5-d feeding 
schedule is adequate and the reactor can recover in 1 or 2 weeks from a period of 
dormancy of 6 mo. or more. The reactor will retain active biomass when shut down 
with liquid remaining in it. This feature makes it particularly attractive for seasonal in­
dustries. 
There are three variations of fixed film reactors: the upflow, downflow, and fluid­
ized bed reactors. Each has particular strengths. 
Upflow Fixed Film Reactors 
Upflow fixed film reactors are often called "biofilters." This is a misnomer, because 
filtration does not play a significant role in their performance. They are actually 
"packed biological reactors," filled with rocks or plastic modules that provide a multi­
tude of random channels and a large surface area. Wastewater is introduced at the 
bottom and allowed to overflow at the top. Bacteria are present in clumps in channels 
near the filter bottom as well as being attached to media surfaces throughout the 
reactor. Flow rates are low and very little shear is exerted on the bacterial slime growth. 
Upftow reactors keep some solids in suspension in the pores and treatment derives 
from both suspended and fixed film growth. Because of the presence of active sus­
pended solids, the specific surface area of medium in upflow fixed film reactors is less 
important than it is for downftow reactors. Suitable media that have been used are 
raschig rings, ftexirings, pall rings, rock or plastic balls, and crossflow and tubular 
media (Fig. 18.7). Using rock or plastic balls of 20 mm (0.8 in.) diameter will result 
in a void or pore volume of about 40%. Flexirings provide a void volume of about 
95% and are therefore more desirable, but they are also more costly. Media used in 
upftow reactors generally have diameters ranging from 20 to 170 mm (0.8-6.7 in.). 
Crossflow Tubular Pall rings 
Figure 18.7 Commercial media used in upflow fixed film reactors. 
Page 23 of 26
FWS1015654 SECTION V /Biological Wastewater Treatment 
TABLE 18.3 Performance and Features of Full-Scale Upflow 
Anaerobic Reactors in North America•·b 
Characteristic 
Height, m (ft) 
Temperature, oc 
Influent COD, mg/L 
Loading, kg COD/m3/d (lb/ft3/d) 
Recycled flow: influent flow 
HRT,h 
COD removal efficiency, % 
'Adapted from Young and Yang (1989). 
bData on two atypical reactors were not included. Range 
3-12.2 (10-40) 
32-37 
2 500-24 000 
1.5-15 (0.09-0.9) 
0-10:1 
20-96 
61-90+ 
Media characteristics affect the operation and performance of the reactors. Ideal 
media have more surface area and high porosity. Higher porosity medium allows the 
accumulation of more biomass. Sintered glass, raschig rings, or granular activated 
carbon in addition to ftexirings are examples of more desirable media. Organic loading 
rates can be increased, which decreases required reactor volume and HRT and also 
increases the upftow velocity through the reactor. Higher upftow velocities retard 
clogging but the structure of highly porous media prevents significant biomass loss at 
higher velocities. A reactor with sintered glass media was able to withstand upftow 
velocities of 20 m/d (66ft/d) without biomass washout at organic loading rates up to 
13 kg COD/m3/d (0.8 lb/ft3/d) (Anderson et al., 1994); a reactor with PVC rings could 
only deliver equivalent removals at loading rates less than 6 kg COD/m3/d (0.4 lb/ 
ft3/d) and upftow velocities of 10 m/d (33 ft/d) or lower. 
The specific surface of commercial media used in full-scale reactors averages about 
100 m2/m3 regardless of the type of medium (Young and Yang, 1989). No instances 
of plugging or reactors using crossflow or tubular media were found by Young and 
Yang (1989) in their survey. 
COD loadings that can be accommodated by upflow fixed film reactors range 
from 5 to 30 kg/m3/d. The minimum influent COD concentration is 1 000 and 30 000 
mg/L is the upper limit. The reactors function best when influent suspended solids 
amount to less than 500 mg/L and the ratio of soluble to insoluble COD is greater 
than 1. Higher suspended solids input may lead to clogging. An HRT of 1 d is 
usually sufficient. 
Information on full-scale upftow anaerobic reactors is contained in Table 18.3. As 
noted below the table, data from two reactors were not included. One of these was 
treating domestic sewage with an influent BODs between 100 and 150 mg/L and 
operating at a loading rate of 0.1-1.2 kg COD/m3/d (0.006-0.075 lb/ft3/d). Removals 
were 60-70% on a BODs basis. The other was treating landfill leachate and operating 
at HRTs between 30-40 d. Over 90% of the BODs was being removed. 
More recent designs of upflow reactors incorporate a zone that does not have 
medium at the bottom of the reactor. Suspended growth can accumulate in this zone, 
resulting in a hybrid reactor. 
Downflow Fixed Film Reactors 
The downftow stationary fixed film (DSFF) reactor was developed at Canada's National 
Research Council laboratories. In this reactor bacteria are grown on vertically 
Page 24 of 26
FWS1015CHAPTER 18/ Anaerobic Wastewater Treatment 655 
oriented surfaces. Influent is introduced at the top of the reactor and effluent is 
withdrawn from the bottom of the reactor. 
The DSFF reactor is similar in loadings and HRT to the upflow reactor but is 
less subject to plugging because larger channels are provided in the medium. In a fully 
developed reactor, gas production from the film provides a considerable degree of 
mixing. This mixing helps keep the solids in suspension for some time rather than 
settling directly to the bottom. Suspended solids concentrations up to 3% can be 
accommodated by downflow fixed film reactors. At higher influent suspended solids 
concentrations it may be necessary to incorporate recycle to prevent them from settling 
and plugging the bottom of the reactor. 
Various types of vertically oriented supports may be used in DSFF reactors but 
porous, rough media such as clay or fibrous polyester materials have been found to 
give the best results. Most reactors have been designed with channels with sides on 
the order of 1-2.5 em (0.4-1 in.) and specific surfaces in the range of 100-150 m2/m3 
(30-46 ft'/ft3). The void volume is 60-90% of the total reactor volume (Kennedy and 
Droste, 1991). 
Fluidized Bed Reactors 
The fluidized or expanded bed reactor is the most recent innovation in anaerobic 
treatment technology. In these reactors, bacteria are grown on particles of a medium 
such as sand, and the liquid is pumped through the reactor at a high rate, thereby 
suspending the medium particles and obtaining high rates of mass transfer. Fluid 
shear developed by high liquid velocities limits the growth of bacterial films to small 
thicknesses. Smaller film thickness provides less diffusional resistance to mass transfer 
of substrate and nutrients than thicker films. Bacterial end products are also removed 
more quickly from thinner films. 
As liquid velocity in the bed is increased, media particles are forced apart and 
supported by the fluid as opposed to resting on each other. Also there is more move­
ment of the particles as higher velocities are used. Authors distinguish between ex­
panded and fluidized beds: expanded beds are expanded to a lesser degree than 
fluidized beds and there is little particle movement in an expanded bed. In this text, 
both expanded and fluidized beds are referred to as fluidized beds. 
Approaches described in Chapter 14 for backwashing filters can be used to calcu­
late fluid velocities and bed expansion . Most of the media materials used in fluidized 
reactors have been natural materials such as crushed rock and sand (Iza, 1991). Recom­
mended media sizes range between 0.1 and 0.7 mm (0.004..:..0.028 in.) nominal diameter . 
Granular activated carbon medium promotes more rapid accumulation of biomass 
during startup than anthracite or sand media (Fox et a!., 1990). 
In any case, fluidized bed reactors are all high-shear reactors. Flow rates that 
achieve fluidization require more pumping energy than that needed for other anaerobic 
processes but the requirement can be lessened by using media with specific gravities 
near that of water. A media trap, particularly in the case of low-density media, may 
be needed to prevent media from being carried out with the effluent. 
Bed expansion achieves many desirable features. Plugging potential is reduced 
because growth of thick films is limited. Mass transfer improvements have been men­
tioned above. However, in a fluidized bed reactor, sufficiently large masses of dense 
solids still form to provide SRTs in excess of the minimum desirable range. Expansion 
of the medium provides more surface area upon which bacteria can grow, resulting 
Page 25 of 26
FWS1015656 SECflON V /Biological Wastewater Treatment 
in more treatment capability per unit volume of reactor. In addition, flows through 
the reactor are more uniform. 
Fluidized beds have been demonstrated on a laboratory scale to treat domestic 
sewage at ambient temperatures. The range of acceptable influent COD concentrations 
is from 1 000 to 30 000 mg/L. The loading rate range is from 1 to 30 kg COD/m3/d 
(0.06-1.9 lb/ft3/d). HRTs of 9 h to 1 d are normal. Wastes should have soluble to 
insoluble COD ratios greater than 1 and should not contain solids in excess of 
1 000 mg/L. 
18.5.5 Two-Phase Anaerobic Digestion 
Two-phase anaerobic digestion is adapted to the two-stage nature of anaerobic metabo­
lism. Separate reactors are designed for acidogenesis and methanogenesis. The advan­
tage of this configuration is that conditions in each reactor can be optimized for each 
group of microorganisms. Low pH and low SRT will limit the growth of methanogens 
in the acid forming reactor. As noted before the optimal pH for the acid formers is 
around 5.6, whereas the methane formers have an optimum pH around 7.0. If a low 
pH in the range of 5.0-6.0 is maintained in the acid forming reactor, then any of the 
process modifications can be used and acid forming bacteria will be dominant with 
negligible methanogenic activity. For instance, Fongastitkul et al. (1994) used UASB 
reactors for each phase; Sutton and Li (1983) used fluidized bed reactors for each phase. 
Hydrolysis and formation of volatile fatty acids occurs in the first reactor (phase) 
and their conversion to methane occurs in the second reactor (phase). Any type of 
reactor may be designed for the second reactor. Although studies have found that the 
overall treatment efficiency may be improved in two-phase systems (Ghosh, 1990; 
Sutton and Li, 1983) there are not a large number of installations. One disadvantage 
of the process is the additional reactor. 
18.6 PROCESS STABILITY AND MONITORING 
Anaerobic metabolism is inherently more unstable than aerobic metabolism and, in 
general, anaerobic treatment is more unstable than aerobic treatment. However, aero­
bic treatment is not without problems and some of the new anaerobic processes, 
particularly the fixed film options, are virtually as stable as conventional aerobic 
treatment. The UASB and conventional processes appear to be the least stable anaero­
bic processes . This does not mean any of these processes are not viable alternatives. 
Anaerobic processes will generally require more time to recover from poisoning 
by toxic wastes than aerobic processes because of the lower synthesis rate of the 
anaerobes. Recovery time also depends on the inventory of biomass in the system. 
Fixed film processes are better able to handle toxicants because of their relatively 
larger SRT and larger biomass inventory . Wastes from the food and beverage indus­
tries, which are often amenable to anaerobic treatment because of their high strength, 
will not normally have toxicity problems. 
More parameters must be monitored in anaerobic processes but the workload 
increase is not substantial. Besides the routine parameters of pH, COD, VSS, TSS, 
and alkalinity, an anaerobic process usually requires measurement of volatile acids 
concentrations and gas composition. A gas chromatograph is needed for each of the 
latter parameters. These are availa~le for less than $5 000. Methane and carbon dioxide 
are the two components monitored in the gas. Hydrogen content of the gas requires 
a specialized instrument but it is another control parameter. 
Page 26 of 26
FWS1015