 
Review Article 
Current Concepts 
970 
/H11554 
April 2, 1998 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
S 
TATUS 
 E 
PILEPTICUS 
D 
ANIEL 
 H. L 
OWENSTEIN 
, M.D.,  
AND 
 B 
RIAN 
 K. A 
LLDREDGE 
, P 
HARM 
.D. 
From the Departments of Neurology (D.H.L., B.K.A.) and Anatomy
(D.H.L.), School of Medicine, and the Department of Clinical Pharmacy,School of Pharmacy (B.K.A.), University of California, San Francisco. Ad-dress reprint requests to Dr. Lowenstein at the Department of Neurology,Box 0114, UCSF School of Medicine, 505 Parnassus Ave., San Francisco,CA 94143-0114.
©1998, Massachusetts Medical Society. 
 PATIENT in status epilepticus has contin-
uous or rapidly repeating seizures. Althoughthe danger of this pattern of seizure activity
has been recognized since antiquity, our under-standing of the pathophysiology of status epilepticusis incomplete. The frequency of cases in the UnitedStates is approximately 102,000 to 152,000 per year,and roughly 55,000 deaths are associated with statusepilepticus annually. 
1 
 Twelve to 30 percent of adult
patients with a new diagnosis of epilepsy first presentin status epilepticus. 
2,3 
 This review focuses on gen-
eralized status epilepticus, which is the most com-mon form of the disorder. 
1,4 
 This is a life-threatening
condition that always requires prompt management.Our review emphasizes issues relevant to adults andolder children; status epilepticus in younger childrenhas been reviewed in detail elsewhere. 
5,6 
  
DEFINITIONS 
In 1981, the International League against Epilep-
sy defined status epilepticus as a seizure that “per-sists for a sufficient length of time or is repeated fre-quently enough that recovery between attacks doesnot occur.” 
7 
 The lack of a specific duration of the
seizures has made this definition difficult to use.More recent publications have defined status epilep-ticus as seizures that persist for 20 to 30 minutes,which is an estimate of the duration necessary tocause injury to central nervous system neurons. 
4,5,8 
Practitioners recognize the need to begin therapy
for status epilepticus well before 20 minutes haveelapsed, so such a definition is also unsuitable as aguide for treatment. Since isolated tonic–clonic sei-zures in adults rarely last more than a few minutes,we advocate the use of an operational definition ofA 
status epilepticus: either continuous seizures lasting
at least five minutes or two or more discrete seizuresbetween which there is incomplete recovery of con-sciousness. 
9,10 
 This definition differs from that of se-
rial seizures, which are two or more seizures occur-ring over a relatively brief period (i.e., minutes tomany hours), but with the patient regaining con-sciousness between the seizures. 
CLINICAL FEATURES OF GENERALIZED 
STATUS EPILEPTICUS 
When first seen, patients with status epilepticus
are unresponsive and usually have clinically obviousseizures, such as tonic, clonic, or tonic–clonic move-ments of the extremities. With time, ho wever, the
clinical manifestations often become subtle, and thediagnosis requires careful observation. Patients mayhave only small-amplitude twitching movements ofthe face, hands, or feet or nystagmoid jerking of theeyes. 
11,12 
 Some patients have no observable, repeti-
tive motor activity, and the detection of ongoingseizures requires electroencephalography. 
12 
 Electro-
graphic status epilepticus of this type may be morecommon in hospitalized, comatose patients than pre-viously thought. 
13 
 Patients who have electrographic
status epilepticus with little or no motor activity (in-cluding patients paralyzed for airway management)are still at risk for central nervous system injury andrequire prompt treatment. Myoclonic status epilep-ticus, which is usually seen in patients after pro-longed anoxia or other severe metabolic insults, con-sists of very brief, sudden movements of restrictedparts of the body that may be triggered by externalstimuli, such as mechanical ventilation. 
OUTCOMES AND CAUSES OF STATUS 
EPILEPTICUS 
The overall mortality rate among adults with sta-
tus epilepticus is approximately 20 percent, and pa-tients who have a first episode of status epilepticusare at substantial risk for future episodes and the de-velopment of chronic epilepsy. 
5 
 The outcome is usu-
ally worse in patients with status epilepticus of longduration and those who have severe physiologic dis-turbances. Ho wever, the pr edominant factor affect-
ing outcome is cause. Status epilepticus has manycauses, which vary depending on the patient popu-lation. It is useful to categorize the causes accordingto acute and chronic processes, because there are dif-ferences between the two in management, responseto treatment, and outcome. 
14-17 
 
Acute processes that cause status epilepticus in-
clude metabolic disturbances (e.g., electrolyte abnor- 
CURRENT CONCEPTS 
Volume 338 Number 14 
/H11554 
971 
malities, renal failure, and sepsis), central nervous sys-
tem infection, stroke, head trauma, drug toxicity, andhypoxia. Seizures in this category are often difficultto control and are associated with a higher mortality,especially those occurring after hypoxia and in olderpatients. 
16,17 
 Myoclonic status epilepticus after hypoxia
carries an especially grave prognosis and is often nottreated as aggressively as other forms of status epi-lepticus. 
18 
 
Chronic processes that cause status epilepticus in-
clude preexisting epilepsy in which status epilepticusis due to breakthrough seizures or the discontinua-tion of antiepileptic drugs, seizures in the context ofchronic ethanol abuse, and remote processes such ascentral nervous system tumors or strokes that lead tostatus epilepticus after a latent period that may spanweeks to years. In general, patients with status epi-lepticus due to these chronic processes respond wellto anticonvulsant treatment, and they recover fromthe acute episode of seizures. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
The fundamental pathophysiology of status epi-
lepticus involves a failure of mechanisms that nor-mally abort an isolated seizure. This failure can arisefrom abnormally persistent, excessive excitation orineffective recruitment of inhibition. The relativecontributions of these factors are poorly understood.The temporal and spatial determinants of status epi-lepticus are also relatively unknown; experimentalstudies suggest there is induction of reverberating sei-zure activity between, for example, hippocampal andparahippocampal structures and that the seizures pro-gress through a sequence of distinct electrographicchanges. 
19,20 
 
It is likely that numerous mechanisms are involved,
depending on the underlying cause. Our best in-sights come from cases in which status epilepticuswas caused by an exogenous toxin. The most nota-ble example involved the ingestion in 1987 of mus-sels contaminated with domoic acid, an analogue ofglutamate (the principal excitatory amino acid neu-rotransmitter in the brain). 
21 
 Some patients had pro-
longed and profound status epilepticus. 
22 
 This occur-
rence suggests that excessive activation of excitatoryamino acid receptors can cause prolonged seizuresand suggests that excitatory amino acids have a caus-ative role in status epilepticus. 
23 
 Status epilepticus
can also be caused by penicillin and related com-pounds that antagonize the effects of  
g 
-aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory neurotrans-mitter of the brain. 
19 
 Very recent studies suggest that
the failure of inhibition may be due in some cases toa shift in the functional properties of the GABA 
A 
 re-
ceptor that occurs as seizures become prolonged. 
24 
 
Status epilepticus lasting approximately 30 to 45
minutes can cause cerebral injury, especially in lim-bic structures such as the hippocampus, and seizureactivity itself is sufficient to damage the central nerv-
ous system. 
25,26 
 This damage is partly a consequence
of glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity and does notappear to be due primarily to an excessive metabolicdemand imposed by repetitive neuronal firing. Thesuperimposition of systemic stresses such as hyper-thermia, hypoxia, or hypotension exacerbates thedegree of neuronal injury in animal models of statusepilepticus, a finding consistent with empirical ob-servations in humans. 
27 ,28 
  
MANAGEMENT 
The initial care of a patient with status epilepticus
includes standard measures applicable to any acutemedical emergency (Fig. 1). A few aspects of man-agement deserve special mention. Proper assessmentand control of the airway and of ventilation in a pa-
tient with ongoing convulsive seizures can be chal-lenging. Arterial-blood gas monitoring is especiallyuseful. Many patients have a profound metabolicacidosis (e.g., arterial pH  
/H11021 
7 .0) that corrects itself
once seizures are controlled; treatment with sodiumbicarbonate should be reserved for the most extremecircumstances. 
14,29 
 However, arter ial-blood gas val-
ues may also reveal respiratory acidosis or hypoxiathat requires immediate treatment through airwaymanagement and supplemental oxygen.
Despite the periods of apnea and cyanosis that oc-
cur during the tonic or clonic phases of their seizures,most patients in status epilepticus breathe sufficientlyas long as the airway remains clear. Nonetheless, pa-tients should receive 100 percent oxygen by nasalcannula or a nonrebreathing mask, and airway paten-cy should be maintained by an oral or nasopharyn-geal device while the patient remains unresponsive.Nasal or orotracheal intubation or bag valve-maskventilation should be undertaken if there is clinical orlaboratory evidence of respiratory compromise. Ifneuromuscular blockade is needed to facilitate intu-bation, the use of a short-acting drug (e.g., 0.1 mgof vecuronium per kilogram of body weight) willhelp the physician promptly regain the ability to de-termine whether seizures are present clinically.
Hyperthermia occurs relatively frequently during
status epilepticus (in 28 to 79 percent of patients),and in many cases it is primarily a manifestation ofthe seizures rather than evidence of an infection. 
14,29 
Given the damaging effects of fever in patients with
central nervous system injury, hyperthermia shouldbe treated promptly with passive cooling.
Electroencephalographic monitoring should be
used for any patient who has received a relativelylong acting paralytic agent, remains unconscious af-ter the initial phase of antiepileptic-drug treatment,or requires prolonged therapy for refractory status ep-ilepticus (discussed below). Electroencephalographycontinues to be underused in such patients. Relativelysimple electroencephalographic monitoring devices 
972 
/H11554 
April 2, 1998 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
are now available and will probably become common
in emergency departments and intensive care units. 
PRINCIPLES OF DRUG TREATMENT 
The goal of treatment for status epilepticus is the
prompt cessation of seizure activity. Ideally, a drugused in this setting would be easy to administer,have an immediate and long-lasting antiseizure ef-fect, and be free of serious effects on cardiorespira-tory function and the level of consciousness. Un-fortunately, all current therapies fall short of thisideal. Benzodiazepines and barbiturates depress con-sciousness and respiratory drive in a dose-dependentmanner, phenytoin and fosphenytoin cause infusion-rate–related hypotension and cardiac dysrhythmias,and limits on the rate of intravenous administrationdelay the maximal antiseizure effect of phenytoin,fosphenytoin, and phenobarbital.
Drug treatment for status epilepticus should be
started without delay after the diagnosis has been es-tablished. This approach is supported by the correla-tion between the duration of status epilepticus and
the extent of neurologic morbidity and by experi-mental and clinical observations that status epilepti-cus of longer duration is less responsive to drug ther-apy than that of shorter duration. For example, in areview of status epilepticus in San Francisco in the1980s, we found that seizures were stopped by first-line therapy (usually diazepam followed by phenyto-in) in 80 percent of patients when treatment was be-gun within 30 minutes of the onset of the seizures. 
16 
In contrast, the response rate was less than 40 percent
when treatment was begun two hours or more afterthe onset of the seizures. In rats, status epilepticus be-comes progressively less responsive to treatment withdiazepam as electrographic seizures continue. 
30 
 
Figure 2 is a suggested algorithm for the treat-
ment of status epilepticus in adults and older chil-dren. The choice of drugs and the recommendedsequence of administration are based on the rapid on-set and extended duration of the effect of lorazepamand the presumed value of an additional long-acting 
Figure 1. 
 Algorithm for the Initial Management of Status Epilepticus.Start intravenous infusion
Take focused history and examine patient Perform laboratory studies
Undertake further workup to
define cause
Manage other medical problems1. Assess and control airway
2. Monitor vital signs (including temperature)3. Conduct pulse oximetry and monitor
cardiac function
4. Perform rapid blood glucose assay
Administer thiamine (100 mg)
and glucose (50 ml of 50 percent dextrose)
Start anticonvulsant therapy
Known seizure disorder or other illnesses?Trauma?Focal neurologic signs?Signs of medical illnesses (e.g., infection,
hepatic or renal disease, substance abuse)?Complete blood countSerum electrolytes and
calcium
Arterial-blood gasLiver functionRenal functionToxicologySerum antiepileptic-drug
concentrations 
CURRENT CONCEPTS 
Volume 338 Number 14 
/H11554 
973 
drug, such as phenytoin or fosphenytoin. In a recent
prospective, blinded clinical trial comparing loraz-epam alone, phenytoin alone, diazepam with pheny-toin, and phenobarbital alone for the treatment ofgeneralized status epilepticus, the treatments wereequally effective, except that lorazepam alone wassuperior to phenytoin alone when seizures were as-sessed 20 minutes after administration of the drugbegan. 
31 
 Lorazepam followed by phenytoin (i.e., the
medication sequence shown in Fig. 2) is currentlythe treatment preferred by many neurologists andepileptologists, but it was not studied in this trial.Nonetheless, the results of the study suggest thattreatment with lorazepam alone may be sufficient
and may obviate the need for intravenous phenytoinor fosphenytoin loading when status epilepticus iscaused by a rapidly reversible process (e.g., the ef-fects of subtherapeutic antiepileptic-drug concentra-tions or metabolic derangement). 
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY 
Benzodiazepines 
Benzodiazepines (diazepam, lorazepam, midazo-
lam, and clonazepam) are potent, fast-acting antisei-zure drugs, and they (particularly diazepam andlorazepam) are therefore preferred as initial therapy. 
Figure 2. 
 Antiepileptic-Drug Therapy for Status Epilepticus.
IV denotes intravenous, and PE phenytoin equivalents. The horizontal bars indicate the approximate duration of drug infusions.1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0
Time (minutes)Seizures continuing
Seizures continuing
Seizures continuingSeizures continuing
Seizures continuingAdditional emergency drug therapy may not be required if seizures
stop and the cause of status epilepticus is rapidly corrected.
Proceed immediately to anesthesia with midazolam or
propofol if the patient develops status epilepticus while in
the intensive care unit, has severe systemic disturbances
(e.g., extreme hyperthermia), or has seizures that have
continued for more than 60 to 90 minutes.Lorazepam
(0.1 mg/kg IV at 2 mg/min)
Phenytoin  (20 mg/kg IV at 50 mg/min) or
fosphenytoin  (20 mg/kg PE IV at 150 mg/min)
Phenytoin or fosphenytoin
(additional 5  – 10 mg/kg or 5  – 10 mg/kg PE)
Phenobarbital
(20 mg/kg IV at 50  – 75 mg/min)
Phenobarbital
(additional 5  – 10 mg/kg)
Anesthesia with midazolam
or propofol 
974 
/H11554 
April 2, 1998 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Their primary pharmacologic actions are probably
related to a benzodiazepine-receptor–mediated en-hancement of GABAergic transmission. At higherconcentrations, benzodiazepines also limit sustainedrepetitive neuronal firing in a manner similar to thatof carbamazepine and phenytoin, and this effect maybe relevant to their mechanism of action in statusepilepticus. 
32 
 
Lorazepam is less lipid-soluble than diazepam, and
in animals, brain and cerebrospinal fluid concentra-tions of lorazepam rise at a slower rate than those ofdiazepam after intravenous injection. 
33,34 
 H owever , a
double-blind, randomized comparison of intravenousdiazepam (10 to 20 mg) and lorazepam (4 to 8 mg)in patients with status epilepticus found both drugsto be equally fast-acting; the median time to the endof seizures was two minutes for diazepam and threeminutes for lorazepam. 
15 
 Both drugs were equally
effective in controlling generalized convulsive, ab-sence, and partial status epilepticus (response rates,79 percent for diazepam and 89 percent for loraz-epam). Despite their equivalence as initial therapies,lorazepam has a longer duration of antiseizure effect(12 to 24 hours) than diazepam (15 to 30 minutes),and it is this property that has made lorazepam pref-erable to diazepam for the treatment of status epilep-ticus. 
4 
 Adverse effects of intravenous benzodiazepines
include respiratory depression (in 3 to 10 percent ofpatients), hypotension (in  
/H11021 
2 percent), and impaired
consciousness (in 20 to 60 percent). 
15,35,36 
  
Phenytoin and Fosphenytoin 
Phenytoin is useful for maintaining a prolonged
antiseizure effect after rapid termination of seizureswith a benzodiazepine, as an initial therapy for ter-minating status epilepticus, or when benzodiaz-epines fail. The recommended starting dose is 20mg per kilogram administered intravenously at amaximal rate of 50 mg per minute. The commonpractice of giving a standard loading dose of 1000mg of phenytoin (14.3 mg per kilogram for a pa-tient weighing 70 kg) provides inadequate therapyfor many adults. 
37 
 As much as 30 mg per kilogram
may be required to stop seizures in some patients. 
37 
This dose may be reduced in patients known to have
a serum phenytoin concentration of more than 10mg per liter at the onset of status epilepticus. How-ever, therapy should not be delayed to measure se-rum drug concentrations. 
Brain concentrations of phenytoin are nearly max-
imal at the end of an intravenous infusion. 
38 
 Thus, it
may take 20 to 25 minutes for phenytoin to attainits maximal effect when a typical loading dose is giv-en to an adult. 
39 
 When phenytoin is administered at
the maximal recommended rate of 50 mg perminute, hypotension occurs in 28 to 50 percent ofpatients, and cardiac arrhythmias (bradycardia andectopic beats) occur in 2 percent. 
39,40 
 These adverseeffects are more common in patients over 50 years
old and those with preexisting cardiac disease. Car-diovascular complications of intravenous phenytoin,which are due to the phenytoin itself and to the pro-pylene glycol diluent, can be mitigated by slowing orstopping the infusion. 
40 
 
Fosphenytoin, a new water-soluble prodrug of
phenytoin, is converted to phenytoin (half-life, 15minutes) by nonspecific phosphatases. Doses of fos-phenytoin are expressed as phenytoin equivalents,which are the amounts of phenytoin released fromthe prodrug in the presence of phosphatases. Fos-phenytoin can be administered at phenytoin-equiva-lent rates of up to 150 mg per minute, since it is notformulated with propylene glycol. Therapeutic se-rum concentrations of phenytoin ( 
/H11091 
1 mg per liter
unbound) are attained within 10 minutes when fos-phenytoin or phenytoin is administered at maximalinfusion rates. Thus, fosphenytoin and phenytoin arelikely to have a similar time to the onset of an effectin controlling status epilepticus. 
41 
 No clinically sig-
nificant differences between the hypotensive or ad-verse cardiac effects of phenytoin loading and thoseof fosphenytoin loading have been reported, al-though infusion-site reactions (phlebitis and soft-tis-sue damage) are less common with fosphenytoin. 
Phenobarbital 
In a small, randomized study, phenobarbital was
as effective as the combination of diazepam andphenytoin for the treatment of status epilepticus. 
42 
However, the depressant effects of phenobarbital on
respiratory drive, level of consciousness, and bloodpressure may complicate management, especially whenphenobarbital is administered after a benzodiaz-epine. 
43 
 For these reasons, phenobarbital (20 mg per
kilogram at a rate of 50 to 75 mg per minute) is rec-ommended only when benzodiazepines and pheny-toin fail. Respiratory and blood-pressure supportmust be immediately available. 
Other Therapies 
Intravenous valproic acid, recently marketed in
the United States as an alternative to oral therapy,appears to stop some types of status epilepticus. 
44 
However, furt her experience is needed before this
therapy can be recommended. Lidocaine, chlor-methiazole (outside the United States), and paralde-hyde (the availability of which is limited in the Unit-ed States) have been used successfully to terminatestatus epilepticus. 
45 
 Each has substantial toxicity, and
they offer little or no advantage over the therapiespreviously discussed. 
Treatment of Refractory Status Epilepticus 
Status epilepticus that does not respond to a benzo-
diazepine, phenytoin, or phenobarbital is consideredrefractory and requires more aggressive treatment. 
CURRENT CONCEPTS 
Volume 338 Number 14 
/H11554 
975 
Continuous intravenous infusions with anesthetic
doses of midazolam, propofol, or barbiturates arethe most useful treatments. A team approach to pa-tient care, including the participation of an experi-enced neurologist and an intensivist, is often usefulbecause of the need for higher-level neurologic andcardiovascular monitoring and ventilatory support.
The use of midazolam (0.2 mg per kilogram ad-
ministered by slow intravenous bolus injection, fol-lowed by 0.75 to 10  
m 
g per kilogram per minute)
or propofol administered intravenously (1 to 2 mgper kilogram, followed by 2 to 10 mg per kilogramper hour) to induce anesthesia for the treatment ofrefractory status epilepticus (Table 1) has becomevery popular in recent years. Both drugs have thesubstantial advantage over barbiturates of rapidclearance, and midazolam has less pronounced hy-potensive effects. 
46-49 
 The infusion is typically main-
tained for 12 to 24 hours and is then withdrawngradually while the patient is observed for clinical orelectrographic evidence of seizure recurrence. If sei-zures continue, the therapy should be resumed forprogressively longer periods, as needed. Midazolammay be associated with tachyphylaxis, leading to theneed for exceedingly high doses. Seizures have beenobserved during the induction of anesthesia withpropofol and emergence from it, but the importanceof these proconvulsant effects in the management ofstatus epilepticus is unknown.
Thiopental and pentobarbital are potent antisei-
zure drugs that have potential, though unproved,cerebral protective effects in the management of sta-tus epilepticus. In adequate doses these drugs will al-most always control seizures, but severe hypotensionrequiring pressor therapy limits their safety. 
5,50 
 W e
therefore prefer to reserve anesthesia with barbitu-rates for patients in whom midazolam or propofolfails. Thiopental has pharmacokinetic disadvantages,including saturable metabolism, an active metabolite(pentobarbital), and the fact that it accumulates inlipoid tissues during prolonged infusions, with re-sultant delays in postinfusion recovery. 
5 
 Pentobarbi-
tal (10 to 15 mg per kilogram administered intrave-nously over a period of one hour, followed by a doseof 0.5 to 1 mg per kilogram per hour) is highly ef-fective, but cardiovascular toxicity is occasionallylife-threatening and postinfusion weakness may de-lay weaning from ventilatory support. 
37 ,47 
  
OUT-OF-HOSPITAL TREATMENT 
Status epilepticus frequently occurs outside the
hospital in situations in which treatment with intra-venous medications is not feasible or in which thereare inadequate resources to manage the potentialcomplications of intravenous therapy. Rectal and in-tramuscular routes of drug administration may beuseful in these settings. Intramuscular midazolam israpidly absorbed (mean time to peak serum concen-tration, 25 minutes), and limited experience in both
children and adults suggests that serial seizures andstatus epilepticus are usually terminated within 10minutes of administration. 
51-53 
 The usual dosage is
0.15 to 0.3 mg per kilogram. Rectal administrationof a parenteral solution of 0.5 mg of diazepam perkilogram (maximal dose, 20 mg) is approximately80 percent effective in controlling prolonged sei-zures in children, usually within 15 minutes. 
54 
 A gel
formulation of diazepam in a prefilled syringe forrectal administration (Diastat, Athena Neurosciences,South San Francisco, Calif.) has recently becomeavailable in the United States for the treatment ofseizure clusters in children and adults. Rectal ad-ministration of diazepam gel may be useful forout-of-hospital management of status epilepticus.However, the onset of the antis eizure effect of the
gel formulation requires further study. 
55 
 
In many emergency-medical-service systems, in-
travenous benzodiazepine therapy is administered byparamedics to patients with status epilepticus, withthe presumption that initiating therapy before pa-tients arrive at the emergency department will im-prove outcomes. Retrospective studies in adults andchildren suggest that prehospital therapy shortens theduration of status epilepticus and simplifies subse-quent management in the emergency department. 
56,57 
Nonetheless, this approach has not been studied
prospectively, and the relative risks and benefits re-main unknown.  
Supported by a grant (R01 31403) from the National Institutes of
Health. 
T 
ABLE 
 1. 
 P 
ROTOCOL 
  
FOR 
  
THE 
 T 
REATMENT 
  
OF 
 R 
EFRACTORY 
 S 
TATUS 
 
E 
PILEPTICUS 
  
WITH 
 E 
ITHER 
 M 
IDAZOLAM 
  
OR 
 P 
ROPOFOL 
. 
1. Intubate and ventilate patient; admit to intensive care unit.
2. Place electroencephalographic monitor.3. Place arterial catheter and central catheters if indicated.4. Administer either midazolam at a loading dose of 0.2 mg per kilogram 
(slow intravenous bolus), then at a dose of 0.75 to 10  
m 
g per kilogram 
per minute; or propofol at a dose of 1 to 2 mg per kilogram intravenous-ly, followed by a dose of 2 to 10 mg per kilogram per hour. Adjust main-
tenance dose on the basis of electroencephalographic-monitoring results. 
Continue electroencephalographic monitoring throughout therapy — i.e., check hourly once patient achieves a stable response to the selected drug. Primary end point for therapy is suppression of electroencephalo-graphic spikes. If blood pressure is adequate, secondary end point is burst-suppression pattern with short intervals between bursts (i.e.,  
/H11021 
1 second).
5. Continue maintenance doses of phenytoin and phenobarbital; track con-
centrations to determine optimal doses.
6. Use intravenous fluids and low-dose dopamine to treat hypotension. If 
necessary, add low-dose dobutamine. Decrease dosage of midazolam or propofol if there are any signs of cardiovascular compromise.
7 . Taper infusion at 12 hours to observe for further seizure activity. If sei-
zures recur, reinstate infusion in intervals of at least 12 hours. 
976 
/H11554 
April 2, 1998 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
REFERENCES 
1. 
DeLorenzo RJ, Pellock JM, T owne AR, Boggs JG. Epidemiology of sta-
tus epilepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol 1995;12:316-25. 
2. 
Sung C-Y, Chu N-S. Status epilepticus in the elderly: etiology, seizure 
type and outcome. Acta Neurol Scand 1989;80:51-6. 
3. 
Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: epidemiologic considerations. Neurolo-
gy 1990;40:Suppl 2:9-13. 
4. 
Treatment of convulsive status epilepticus: recommendations of the Ep-
ilepsy Foundation of America’s Working Group on Status Epilepticus. JAMA 1993;270:854-9. 
5. 
Shorvon S. Status epilepticus: its clinical features and treatment in 
children and adults. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
6.Pellock JM. Status epilepticus in children: update and review. J Child 
Neurol 1994;9:Suppl 2:S27-S35.7.Proposal for revised clinical and electroencephalographic classification of 
epileptic seizures: from the Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League against Epilepsy. Epilepsia 1981;22:489-501.8.Bleck TP . Convulsive disorders: status epilepticus. Clin Neuropharmacol 
1991;14:191-8.9.Gastaut H, Broughton R. Epileptic seizures: clinical and electrographic 
features, diagnosis and treatment. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C Thomas, 1972:25-90.10.Theodore WH, Porte RJ, Albert P , et al. The secondarily generalized 
tonic-clonic seizure: a videotape analysis. Neurology 1994;44:1403-7 .11.Simon RP , Aminoff MJ. Electrographic status epilepticus in fatal anox-
ic coma. Ann Neurol 1986;20:351-5.12.Lowenstein DH, Aminoff MJ. Clinical and EEG features of status ep-
ilepticus in comatose patients. Neurology 1992;42:100-4.
13.Jordan KG. Continuous EEG and evoked potential monitoring in the 
neuroscience intensive care unit. J Clin Neurophysiol 1993;10:445-75.14.Aminoff MJ, Simon RP . Status epilepticus: causes, clinical features and 
consequences in 98 patients. Am J Med 1980;69:657-66.15.Leppik IE, Derivan AT, Homan RW, Walker J, Ramsay RE, Patrick B. 
Double-blind study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepticus. JAMA 1983;249:1452-4.16.Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK. Status epilepticus at an urban public 
hospital in the 1980s. Neurology 1993;43:483-8.17.T owne AR, Pellock JM, Ko D, DeLorenzo RJ. Determinants of mor-
tality in status epilepticus. Epilepsia 1994;35:27-34.18.Celesia GG, Grigg MM, Ross E. Generalized status myoclonicus in acute 
anoxic and toxic-metabolic encephalopathies. Arch Neurol 1988;45:781-4.19.Lothman EW, Bertram EH III, Stringer JL. Functional anatomy of 
hippocampal seizures. Prog Neurobiol 1991;37:1-82.20.Treiman DM, Walton NY, Wickboldt C, DeGiorgio C. Predictable se-
quence of EEG changes during generalized convulsive status epilepticus in man and three experimental models of status epilepticus in the rat. Neu-rology 1987;37:Suppl 1:244-5. abstract.21.Perl TM, Bédard L, Kosatsky T, Hockin JC, T odd ECD, Remis RS. 
An outbreak of toxic encephalopathy caused by eating mussels contaminat-ed with domoic acid. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1775-80.22.Teitelbaum JS, Zatorre RJ, Carpenter S, et al. Neurologic sequelae of 
domoic acid intoxication due to the ingestion of contaminated mussels. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1781-7 .23.Lothman E. The biochemical basis and pathophysiology of status ep-
ilepticus. Neurology 1990;40:Suppl 2:13-23.24.Kapur J, Macdonald RL. Rapid seizure-induced reduction of benzo-
diazepine and Zn
2/H11001 sensitivity of hippocampal dentate granule cell GABAA 
receptors. J Neurosci 1997;17:7532-40.25.Corsellis JAN, Bruton CJ. Neuropathology of status epilepticus in hu-
mans. In: Delagado-Escueta AV, Wasterlain CG, Treiman DM, Porter RJ, eds. Advances in neurology. Vol. 34. Status epilepticus: mechanisms of brain damage and treatment. New York: Raven Press, 1983:129-39.26.Sloviter RS. “Epileptic” brain damage in rats induced by sustained 
electrical stimulation of the perforant path. I. Acute electrophysiological and light microscopic studies. Brain Res Bull 1983;10:675-97 .27.Meldrum BS, Brierley JB. Prolonged epileptic seizures in primates: is-
chemic cell change and its relation to ictal physiological events. Arch Neu-rol 1973;28:10-7 .28.Meldrum BS, Vigouroux RA, Brierley JB. Systemic factors and epilep-
tic brain damage: prolonged seizures in paralyzed, artificially ventilated ba-boons. Arch Neurol 1973;29:82-7 .29.Simon RP . Physiologic consequences of status epilepticus. Epilepsia 
1985;26:Suppl 1:S58-S66.30.Walton NY, Treiman DM. Response of status epilepticus induced by 
lithium and pilocarpine to treatment with diazepam. Exp Neurol 1988;101:267-75.31.Treiman DM, Meyers PD, Walton NY, Collins JF, DYA Status Epilep-
ticus Cooperative Study Group. Treatment of generalized convulsive status epilepticus: a multicenter comparison of four drug regimens. Neurology 
1996;46:Suppl:A219. abstract.
32.Macdonald RL, McLean MJ. Anticonvulsant drugs: mechanisms of ac-
tion. In: Delgado-Escueta AV, Ward AA Jr, Woodbury DM, Porter RJ, eds. Advances in neurology. Vol. 44. Basic mechanisms of the epilepsies: mo-lecular and cellular approaches. New York: Raven Press, 1986:713-36.33.Arendt RM, Greenblatt DJ, deJong RH, et al. In vitro correlates of 
benzodiazepine cerebrospinal fluid uptake, pharmacodynamic action and peripheral distribution. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1983;227:98-106.34.Walton NY, Treiman DM. Lorazepam treatment of experimental status 
epilepticus in the rat: relevance to clinical practice. Neurology 1990;40:990-4.35.Nicol CF, Tutton JC, Smith BH. Parenteral diazepam in status epilep-
ticus. Neurology 1969;19:332-43.36.George KA, Dundee JW. Relative amnesic actions of diazepam, fluni-
trazepam and lorazepam in man. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1977;4:45-50.37.Osorio I, Reed RC. Treatment of refractory generalized tonic-clonic 
status epilepticus with pentobarbital anesthesia after high-dose phenytoin. Epilepsia 1989;30:464-71.38.Wilder BJ, Ramsay RE, Willmore LJ, Feussner GF, Perchalski RJ, Shu-
mate JB Jr. Efficacy of intravenous phenytoin in the treatment of status ep-ilepticus: kinetics of central nervous system penetration. Ann Neurol 1977;1:511-8.39.Wilder BJ. Efficacy of phenytoin in treatment of status epilepticus. In: 
Delgado-Escueta AV, Wasterlain CG, Treiman DM, Porter RJ, eds. Advanc-es in neurology. Vol. 34. Status epilepticus: mechanisms of brain damage and treatment. New York: Raven Press, 1983:441-6.40.Cranford RE, Leppik IE, Patrick B, Anderson CB, Kostick B. Intrave-
nous phenytoin: clinical and pharmacokinetic aspects. Neurology 1978;28:874-80.41.Kugler AR, Knapp LE, Eldon MA. Attainment of therapeutic pheny-
toin concentrations following administration of loading doses of fospheny-toin: a metaanalysis. Neurology 1996;46:Suppl:A176. abstract.42.Shaner DM, McCurdy SA, Herring MO, Gabor AJ. Treatment of sta-
tus epilepticus: a prospective comparison of diazepam and phenytoin versus phenobarbital and optional phenytoin. Neurology 1988;38:202-7 .43.Goldberg MA, McIntyre HB. Barbiturates in the treatment of status 
epilepticus. In: Delgado-Escueta AV, Wasterlain CG, Treiman DM, Porter RJ, eds. Advances in neurology. Vol. 34. Status epilepticus: mechanisms of brain damage and treatment. New York: Raven Press, 1983:499-503.44.Giroud M, Gras D, Escousse A, Dumas R, Venaud G. Use of injectable 
valproic acid in status epilepticus: a pilot study. Drug Invest 1993;5:154-9.45.Brown TR. Paraldehyde, chlormethiazole, and lidocaine for treatment 
of status epilepticus. In: Delgado-Escueta AV, Wasterlain CG, Treiman DM, Porter RJ, eds. Advances in neurology. Vol. 34. Status epilepticus: mechanisms of brain damage and treatment. New York: Raven Press, 1983:509-17 .46.Kumar A, Bleck TP . Intravenous midazolam for the treatment of re-
fractory status epilepticus. Crit Care Med 1992;20:483-8.47.Bleck TP . Advances in the management of refractory status epilepticus. 
Crit Care Med 1993;21:955-7 .48.Parent JM, Lowenstein DH. Treatment of refractory generalized status 
epilepticus with continuous infusion of midazolam. Neurology 1994;44:1837-40.49.Stecker MM, Kramer TH, Raps EC, O’Meeghan R, Dulaney E, Skaar 
DJ. Treatment of refractory status epilepticus with propofol: clinical and pharmacokinetic findings. Epilepsia 1998;39:18-26.50.Yaffe K, Lowenstein DH. Prognostic factors for pentobarbital therapy 
for refractory generalized status epilepticus. Neurology 1993;43:895-900.51.Bell DM, Richards G, Dhillon S, et al. A comparative pharmacokinetic 
study of intravenous and intramuscular midazolam in patients with epilep-sy. Epilepsy Res 1991;10:183-90.52.Lahat E, Aladjem M, Eshel G, Bistritzer T, Katz Y. Midazolam in 
treatment of epileptic seizures. Pediatr Neurol 1992;8:215-6.53.Egli M, Albani C. Relief of status epilepticus after i.m. administration 
of the new short-acting benzodiazepine Midazolam (Dormicum). In: 12th World Congress of Neurology, Kyoto, Japan, September 20–25, 1981. 
Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica, 1981:44. abstract.
54.Hoppu K, Santavuori P . Diazepam rectal solution for home treatment 
of acute seizures in children. Acta Paediatr Scand 1981;70:369-72.55.Mitchell WG, Shellenberger K, Groves L, et al. Rectal diazepam gel 
(Diastat) for acute repetitive seizures: results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in children and adults with epilepsy. Epilepsia 1996;37:Suppl 5:154. abstract.56.Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Lowenstein DH. The effect of pre-hospital 
treatment of status epilepticus (SE) on subsequent patient management. Neurology 1992;42:Suppl 3:400. abstract.57.Alldredge BK, Wall DB, Ferriero DM. Effect of prehospital treatment 
on the outcome of status epilepticus in children. Pediatr Neurol 1995;12:213-6.