225
Journal of Medicine and Life Vol. 12, Issue 3, July-September 2019,  pp. 225–229
Tissue Engineering; Current Status & Futuristic Scope
Preeti Sharma1, Pradeep Kumar1, Rachna Sharma2, Vijaya Dhar Bhatt3, PS Dhot4
1. Department of Biochemistry, Santosh Medical College and Hospital (Santosh University), Ghaziabad, UP , India
2. Department of Biochemistry, TSM Medical College and Hospital, Lucknow, UP , India
3. Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics, Santosh Dental College and Hospital, Ghaziabad, UP , India
4. Department of Pathology, Santosh Medical College and Hospital, Ghaziabad, UP , India
Corresponding Author:
Dr. Preeti Sharma
Associate Professor 
Department of Biochemistry
Santosh Medical College and Hospital, Ghaziabad, India 
E-mail: prcdri2003@yahoo.co.in
Received: April 5th, 2019 – Accepted: July 23rd, 2019 
Abstract
Almost 30 years have passed since the term ‘tissue engineering’ was created to represent a new concept that focuses on the 
regeneration of neotissues from cells with the support of biomaterials and growth factors. This interdisciplinary engineering has attracted 
much attention as a new therapeutic means that may overcome the drawbacks involved in the current artificial organs and organ 
transplantation that have also been aiming at replacing lost or severely damaged tissues or organs. However, the tissues regenerated 
by tissue engineering and widely applied to patients are still minimal, including skin, bone, cartilage, capillary, and periodontal tissues. 
What are the reasons for such slow advances in clinical applications of tissue engineering? This article gives a brief overview of the 
current state of tissue engineering, covering the fundamentals and applications. The fundamentals of tissue engineering involve cell 
sources, scaffolds for cell expansion and differentiation, as well as carriers for growth factors. Animal and human trials are a major part 
of the applications. Based on these results, some critical problems to be resolved for the advances of tissue engineering are addressed 
from the engineering point of view, emphasizing the close collaboration between medical doctors and biomaterials scientists.
Keywords:  in born error, tissue engeneering, neonatesDOI:  10.25122/jml-2019-0032
Introduction
A newer concept named ‘tissue engineering’ came to 
light almost 30 years ago, the main focus of which was 
neotissue regeneration. With the help of biological tools in 
the form of biomaterials and growth factors, engineering of 
tissues technique emerged as a therapeutic means to treat 
many of the challenging medical conditions. Though still in 
its grooming stage, tissue engineering is able to meet the 
risks involved in organ transplantation and artificial organ 
implants. However, with a limited scope of the tissues, 
generated from this process, there is a lot to be done in the 
field in order to expand its clinical applications in service of 
mankind. The current review addresses many of the issues 
and challenges in the field.
Tissue engineering (TE) is the most exciting and rapidly 
growing area in the field of biomedical engineering. Despite 
recent technological advancement, thousands of people 
die every year due to lack of an organ donor or any other 
efficient substitute for the organ. A branch of regenerative 
medicine, tissue engineering is nowadays emerging as a 
means to replace diseased or damaged organs by artificially constructing tissues or organs in vitro and transplanted 
in vivo. The field of TE is a combination of various other 
branches of biology including cell biology, material science, 
chemistry, molecular biology, engineering, and medicine. 
Two stalwarts, Langer and Vacanti, introduced for the first 
time in 1993, the term ‘tissue engineering’ [1]. It is the 
field concerned with biological substitutes that maintain, 
improve, or restore tissue functions in order to cope up 
with the problem related to tissue damage. In the current 
scenario organ transplant, mechanical devices, or surgical 
reconstruction are prevalent as a substitute for tissue 
damage [2–3]. No doubt, these techniques have saved the 
lives of hundreds of patients, but parallelly, they generate 
several complications as well [4]. Mechanical devices do not 
accomplish all the functions performed by natural tissues 
and are not very effective at controlling the progressive 
deterioration of the patient’s condition [5]. The lack of donor 
to cover worldwide demand, as well as tissue rejection, is 
the major hurdles in the way to organ transplantation [6]. 
Consequences of surgical reconstruction are not always 
positive and lead to a long-term complaint [7]. TE has 
emerged as a solution to the problem associated with Journal of Medicine and Life Vol. 12, Issue 3, July-September 2019226into the patient [12]. The field of tissue engineering is a 
promising one, emerged as a technique to promote, direct 
and induce the innate capacity of tissues for regeneration 
and to assist in regaining function and shape, where the 
chances of natural healing are not possible [1]. In the past 
few years, a number of advances have been achieved 
in the regeneration and development of bone, cartilage, 
heart, pancreas and vasculature, dental implants and 
other organs [13]. Transforming the knowledge of human 
physiology and pathophysiology, the TE has emerged as a 
valuable tool in the field of biomedical research. 
Various challenges to face
This interdisciplinary engineering technique has attracted 
much attention as a new therapeutic means that may 
overcome the drawbacks involved in the current artificial 
organs and organ transplantation that have also been 
aiming at replacing lost or severely damaged tissues or 
organs. However, tissue regeneration by TE technique is 
very less in amount and cannot be widely applied to the 
patients. In the current paradigm, there has been a very 
slow and insidious advancement in the clinical applications 
of TE [14]. Also, the reported clinical trials are limited [15], 
though a tremendous amount of basic research studies 
have been done in this direction. TE technique requires 
three key elements: cells, scaffold, and growth factors 
[1, 2]. Besides all these, many factors are critical to tissue 
engineering, such as cell source, construction of scaffold, 
cell seeding and culture environment, matrix preparation, 
mechanical characteristics of the cell, scaffold construct 
and animal models [11]. 
The types of cell sources enormously influence TE. 
Autologous (patient’s cells), allogenic (other than patient’s 
cells) or xenogeneic (derived from animal cells) cells 
resources are the three significant types considered in TE 
[11]. Out of these, the xenogeneic cells are considered the 
least safe as there have been reports of the presence of 
porcine endogenous retrovirus in pigs [15]. Though safe 
for TE, autologous cells showed difficulty in harvesting 
sufficiently in cases of aged patients or severely ill 
ones [11]. Another drawback with cardiac cells is their 
harvesting in a poor amount in the patient that suffered 
from myocardial infarction [16]. In cases of poor harvesting 
of cells, their expansion is mediated by the method of 
culturing [16]. However, for this process, only clean cell 
processing centers are recommended in order to avoid any 
chance of contamination [16]. Also, the process is lengthy 
and time-consuming. There have been reports on the 
infection of fetal calf serum, which is frequently used for cell 
culturing [11]. Allogenic cells are best suited for skin tissue 
engineering owing to the powerful secretion of growth 
factors, but xenogeneic feeder cells used for engineering tissue damage with the development of in vitro tissues to 
repair in vivo damage. The engineered tissues obtained by 
TE technique, are of great help to study human physiology 
and regenerative medicine [8]. The term ‘regenerative 
medicine’ came into existence when two research groups 
from the USA have jointly developed human embryonic 
stem cells and embryonic germ cell lines in 1998 [9]. TE 
is an emerging technology that uses the combination of 
cells, engineering methods and materials and suitable 
biochemical and physicochemical factors to improve or 
replace biological functions, meant to reconstruct damaged 
or diseased organs and tissues in vitro and transplantation 
in vivo to recover lost or malfunctioned organ or tissue 
[1]. Well, growth and development of cells take place in 
well-organized three-dimensional extracellular matrix 
(ECM) surrounded by other cells, and cell-cell and cell-
ECM interactions decide upon the fate of the cell for its 
proliferation or differentiation, apoptosis or invasion [7]. 
The two-dimensional culture medium is not able to provide 
natural in vivo environment of cellular communication, 
gene and protein expression, or diffusion of various 
soluble molecules [10]. Animal models, as a substitute for 
human testing, provide insufficient information; they fail to 
capture the essential facts of human responses, are very 
costly and lead to ethical controversies. So here comes 
the importance of TE as a substitute to animal models or 
culture, provide natural in vivo environment. 
Tissue Engineering; What is the Need?
There are many clinical conditions warrant for the use of 
engineered tissues or organ. Like in conditions of congenital 
abnormalities, tissue reconstruction is needed. Following 
any disease or severe injury, most of the tissues are not 
able to regenerate or regenerate to a minimal extent, like 
bone and skin. Also, for organ transplantation, there is a 
scarcity of donor tissues. As a mean of persuasion of the 
body to heal itself, tissue engineering technique involves 
the regeneration of new tissue to replace the one which has 
become diseased or injured [1,2]. As human beings, there 
is a limited capacity of tissue regeneration under minimal 
circumstances. Repair of bone fractures and injured skin 
are a few examples of tissue regeneration in our body . 
The essence of tissue engineering is that those cells 
capable of initiating and sustaining the regeneration 
process are ‘switched on’, perhaps through growth factors 
or genes, so that they generate new functional tissue of 
the required variety [11]. This may be achieved with the 
help of a scaffold or matrix to guide the geometrical or 
architectural shape of the new tissue and may take place on 
a customized basis at the site of the injury in an individual 
patient or on a more industrial scale in an ex vivo bioreactor, 
where the resulting tissue construct is re-implanted Journal of Medicine and Life Vol. 12, Issue 3, July-September 2019227epidermal tissues from keratinocytes (because of high 
growth activity), showed a high risk of viral infection [17]. 
In cases of regeneration and development of large-sized 
tissues and organs in a three-dimensional manner, 
support in the form of a scaffold, template or artificial 
extracellular matrix (ECM) is needed to assist proliferation, 
differentiation, and bioengineering of cells [14]. ‘Cell therapy’ 
and ‘tissue engineering’ are two essential terms related 
to the development and growth of cells and tissues via 
regenerative medicine [1]. For tissue engineering purposes 
scaffold should meet some requirements. A scaffold must 
be sufficiently porous for proper nutrient supply; also, 
neovasculature formation needs these micropores as well 
[11]. Waste transport is also possible via these micropores, 
which are essential for cell survival. However, a significant 
issue related to the scaffold is the neovascularisation, 
which is essential for the supply of oxygen and nutrients 
to the cells in the construct [14]. In case of in vitro tissue 
engineering, it is impossible to expect vascularisation in the 
construct [11]. In contrast, neovascularisation is possible in 
vivo tissue engineering if proper stimuli and conditions are 
availed [11]. A vast range of growth factor proteins plays 
a vital role in cell growth, differentiation, and proliferation 
[14]. These may be autocrine or paracrine released 
endogenously . Nowadays, the growth factors much in use 
are bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) [18], basic fibroblast 
growth factors ( bFGF , bFGF-2) [19], vascular epithelial 
growth factor (VEGF) [20] and transforming growth factor-
beta (TGF- β) [21]. Addition of growth factors (GFs) to the 
cell scaffold construct is essential for tissue regeneration 
as they have got the remarkable capability to regenerate 
tissues [14]. The most critical issue related to GFs is their 
delivery to the site of action, but bulking injection to the site 
of regeneration is not an effective mean [11]. So far, three 
important ways of GFs delivery have been developed: the 
use of DNA plasmids encoded with the gene of the desired 
GF , introducing a gene encoding a particular GF into a 
specific cell type using a vector and implantation of GF 
proteins directly into the cell via some carriers [14]. 
 GFs-release kinetics is also decided upon by a carrier 
carrying GF to the site. Generally, a single GF is used for 
engineering of a single tissue. GFs have been found to 
induce neovascularization, providing an adequate supply 
of nutrients to the developing tissues [21]. However, 
the use of GFs is not very cost-effective, hindering its 
applicability in TE. Another hurdle coming way to TE is 
the availability of animal models [11], which cannot be 
frequently used majorly due to ethical constraints. In fact, 
many times, the nude mouse model is tiny to avoid any 
immune rejection of cell scaffold construct implanted [11] 
whereas large animal models are needed to mimic clinical 
situations in human beings. In order to assess the scope of tissue engineering of bones and articular cartilages, 
the evaluation of biochemical properties of normal bone 
and cartilage and their functional assessment is critical 
[22]. The technique to measure the above characteristics 
of normal, diseased, and bioengineered bone in vivo is 
fundamental, but it is still under developmental stage [22]. 
Similarly, although many in vitro and in vivo experiments 
have been performed on cardiovascular diseases, which 
represent the most abundant cause of mortality [23], long-
term studies are still needed to be done in bigger animals 
before bioengineered blood vessel valves, and heart 
tissues become commercially available in the market. 
Major Advances in Tissue Engineering to Meet Various 
Challenges
Considering the progress in tissue culture, preparation 
of scaffold techniques, scaffold 3D printing, and use of 
animal models for in vivo applications, the TE technique 
is advancing at great pace to overcome the challenges 
and major problems coming its way regarding clinical 
application [24–26].
Due to the limited supply of autologous stem cells for 
proliferation in tissue culture, enormous interest arose all 
through the world on stem cell plasticity in tissue culture. For 
this purpose, multi- or pluripotent stem cells were isolated from 
various regions of the body, such as interstitial or circulating 
cells, mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), and so forth [27]. 
MSCs are of so much importance and have been used for 
cartilage repair as microencapsulation of the cells increases 
their longevity and efficacy [28]. Human embryonic stem cells 
(hESCs) derived from the inner core of blastocytes (via in vitro 
fertilization) were also able to generate many cell lineages 
in tissue culture [29]. Besides all these, the development of 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) has been proved to be 
real advancement in various in vitro studies [30]. 
With regard to culture conditions for cell regeneration, 
many improved strategies have been made in order to increase 
the efficacy and output of the system. Some stem cells were 
found to be activated under physiological hypoxic conditions 
as has been found for muscle stem cells in contrast to 
routine culture conditions of high oxygen level (20%). Simple 
optimization in culture conditions for various parameters like 
oxygen supply, growth factors, extracellular matrix, to closely 
reach the living cell conditions, can significantly improve 
cellular response in the TE processes [31]. Recently, the 
major role played by non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in the 
molecular regulation of cell biology and tissue synthesis has 
also been identified, and these ncRNAs are found to be new 
targets for in vitro and in vivo tissue growth [32]. 
Many ways have been optimized with regard to scaffold 
preparation, material consistency, vascularisation, and so 
forth. A 3D extracellular matrix secreted by residing tissues Journal of Medicine and Life Vol. 12, Issue 3, July-September 2019228is like a scaffold, helps in tissue synthesis via various 
molecular signals in the course of regeneration with 
requisite molecular composition, physiological activities, 
and mechanical strength [33]. The native ECM for optimal 
growth and development of tissues can be obtained by 
careful digestion of living cells while retaining the maximum 
amount of ECF from the specific tissue site. Such kind of 
successful transplantation of human acellular scaffold 
has been clinically done for various tissues. But with the 
simultaneous threat of infection and immunogenicity with 
native ECM derived from non-human mammalian sources 
led to an interest in synthetic biomaterials for 3D scaffold 
construction [34]. These artificial scaffolds consisting 
of collagen fibronectin, elastin are often combined with 
various source generated stem cells, such as human-
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). Biodegradable 
silk fibroin protein, alginate (seaweed polysaccharide) and 
apple cellulose have been used for scaffold preparation. 
Hydrogel and polyacrylamide are widely used synthetic 
polymers for 3D scaffold preparation [35]. In order to 
increase the vascular supply, thick implantable viable 
tissue constructs have been the focus of research [36]. 
Combination of endothelial cell sheets and muscle 
precursors have been used to build vascularised heart 
muscles [37]. These and a number of other approaches 
need careful validation before clinical application. The 3D 
scaffold printing technique with desired cells for tissue 
preparation has completely revolutionized the TE technique 
by advancing the construction of biomimetic living tissues 
[38]. These kinds of strategies will further lead to the 
synthesis of vascularised 3D soft organs to meet the organ 
transplant crisis.
Conclusion
The field of tissue engineering holds many promises to meet 
various challenges with newer innovative developments and 
shall shortly bring many advances to apply to human beings 
successfully . The TE involving human stem cells merging 
with various approaches for bioscaffolds generation offers 
new avenues for basic research in the field of various 
scientific fields including biology, physiology, HTS (high-
throughput screening) for the pharmaceutical industry, 
pharmacokinetics and others as well. We have seen 
various examples of clinically successful implantations of 
acellular bioscaffold with host cell growth, and in the near 
future, its applications are more likely to spread rapidly 
in the service of mankind. Significant challenges to TE 
regarding in vivo applications are the low survival rate 
of the donors or autologous cells in vivo that are initially 
grown in tissue culture, and improper vascularisation of the implanted tissue/organ. However, the future appears to 
be bright. The use of acellular scaffolds, providing shelter 
to host cells has expanded the clinical application of TE 
many folds. The 3D printing of scaffolds with desired cells 
for tissue preparation has wholly revolutionized the TE 
technique by advancing the construction of biomimetic 
living tissues. While thick implantable viable tissue is 
being used to overcome the vascularisation issue, a very 
balanced and keen optimization and evaluation of various 
newer techniques along with ethical considerations are 
required to promote its potential clinical applications.
 Clinical purposes acellular scaffolds that provide a 
new home for host cells are already being used in various 
situations and are likely to have expanded applications. 
The primary clinical obstacles relate to problems with the 
transfer of living cells from the culture conditions into the 
human body; this applies to many isolated cells, tissue 
constructs and artificially engineered organs. Additionally, 
the vascularisation of implanted tissues/organs at the 
human scale is very challenging. While the rapid and creative 
advances in tissue bioengineering hold great promise for 
the future of regenerative medicine, balanced and critical 
evaluation of these new technologies, including robust 
ethical discussions, is required for realistic consideration 
and promotion of potential clinical applications.
Conflict of Interest
The authors confirm that there are no conflicts of interest .
References
1. Langer R, Vacanti JP (1993) Tissue Engineering. Science  
260:920–926.
2. Carrel A, Burrows MT (1911) Cultivation of tissues in vitro and its 
technique. J Exp Med  13:387–398.
3. Nerem RM (1991) Cellular engineering. Ann Biomed Eng  19:529–545.
4. Mertsching H, Schanz J, Steger V , Schandar M, Schenk M, 
Hansmann J, Dally I, Friedel G, Walles T . Generation and 
transplantation of an autologous vascularized bioartificial human 
tissue. Transplantation . 2009; 88: 203–10.
5. MacArthur BD, Oreffo RO “Bridging the gap”. Nature . 2005; 
433,7021.
6. Fuchs JR1, Nasseri BA, Vacanti JP . Tissue engineering: a 21st 
century solution to surgical reconstruction.  Ann Thorac Surg.  2001 
Aug;72(2):577–91.
7. Vacanti JP1, Langer R. Tissue engineering: the design and 
fabrication of living replacement devices for surgical reconstruction 
and transplantation. Lancet . 1999 l;354;1:SI32–4.
8. Griffith LG, Swartz MA (2006) Capturing complex 3D tissue 
physiology in vitro. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology 7:  
211–24.
9. Mahla, Ranjeet. “Stem Cell Applications in Regenerative Medicine 
and Disea se Therapeutics”.  International Journal of  Cell Biology 
2016; 1–24. Journal of Medicine and Life Vol. 12, Issue 3, July-September 201922910. Delphine Antoni, Hélène Burckel, Elodie Josset, and Georges 
Noel Mohamed N. Rahaman Three-Dimensional Cell Culture: A 
Breakthrough in Vivo .Int J Mol Sci . 2015,16(3): 5517–5527.
11. Jennifer L. Olson, Anthony Atala, and James J. Yoo Tissue 
Engineering: Current Strategies and Future Directions Chonnam 
Med J.  2011 Apr; 47(1): 1–13. 
12. Pampaloni F , Reynaud EG, Stelzer EH (2007) The third dimension 
bridges the gap between cell culture and live tissue. Nature reviews, 
Molecular cell biology  8: 839–845.
13. Alemany-Ribes M, García-Díaz M, Busom M, Nonell S, Semino 
CE (2013) Toward a 3D Cellular Mode for Studying In Vitro the 
Outcome of Photodynamic Treatments: Accounting for the Effects 
of Tissue Complexity . Tissue engineering.  Part A 19: 1665–1674.
14. Yoshito Ikada Challenges in Tissue Engineering  Journal of  The 
Royal Society Interface  3(10):589–601 November 2006.
15. Magdalena C. Kimsa, Barbara Strzalka-Mrozik, Malgorzata W . 
Kimsa, Joanna Gola, Peter Nicholson, Krzysztof Lopata, and Urszula 
Mazurek Porcine Endogenous Retroviruses in Xenotransplantation—
Molecular Aspects Viruses. 2014 May; 6(5): 2062–2083.
16. Kevin Dzobo, Nicholas Ekow Thomford, Dimakatso Alice 
Senthebane, Hendrina Shipanga, Arielle Rowe et al Advances in 
Regenerative Medicine and Tissue Engineering: Innovation and 
Transformation of  MedicineStem Cells International  2018; 1–24. 
17. Huanjing Bi and Yan Jin Current progress of skin tissue 
engineering: Seed cells, bioscaffolds, and construction strategies 
Burns Trauma . 2013; 1(2): 63–72.
18. Calori GM1, Donati D, Di Bella C, Tagliabue L. Bone 
morphogenetic proteins and tissue engineering: future directions 
Injury . 2009;40(3):S67–76. 
19. Ye-Rang Yun, Jong Eun Won, Eunyi Jeon, Sujin Lee, Wonmo 
Kang, Hyejin Jo,Jun-Hyeog Jang, Ueon Sang Shin, and Hae-Won 
Kim Fibroblast Growth Factors: Biology, Function, and Application 
for Tissue Regeneration J Tissue Eng . 2010;1(1): 1–18.
20. Kangwon Lee, Eduardo A. Silva, David J. Mooney Growth factor 
delivery-based tissue engineering: general approaches and a review 
of recent developments J R Soc Interface . 2011; 8(55): 153–170.
21. Madry H, Rey-Rico A, Venkatesan JK, Johnstone B, Cucchiarini M. 
Transforming growth factor Beta-releasing scaffolds for cartilage 
tissue engineering Tissue Eng Part B Rev . 2014 Apr;20(2):106–25.
22. Lijie Zhang, Jerry Hu, and Kyriacos A. Athanasiou The Role of 
Tissue Engineering in Articular Cartilage Repair and Regeneration 
Crit Rev Biomed Eng . 2009; 37(1-2): 1–57.
23. Helen M. Nugent, Elazer R. Edelman Tissue engineering therapy for 
cardiovascular disease Circulation research  2003; 92:1068–1078.
24. Fodor WL Tissue engineering and cell based therapies, from the 
bench to the clinic: the potential to replace, repair and regenerate. 
Reprod Biol Endocrinol . 2003 13;1:102.25. Salgado AJ, Oliveira JM, Martins A, Teixeira FG, Silva NA, Neves 
NM, Sousa N, Reis RL. Tissue engineering and regenerative 
medicine: past, present, and future. Int Rev Neurobiol.  2013;108:  
1–33.
26. O’Donnell BT , Ives CJ, Mohiuddin OA, Bunnell BA Beyond the 
Present Constraints That Prevent a Wide Spread of Tissue 
Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Approaches. Front Bioeng 
Biotechnol . 2019, 7;7:95.
27. Grounds, MD, White, JD, Rosenthal, N, Bogoyevitch, MA. The role 
of stem cells in skeletal and cardiac muscle repair. J Histochem 
Cytochem . 2002; 50: 589–610.
28. Li, F , Truong, VX, Thissen, H, Frith, JE, Forsythe, JS. Microfluidic 
encapsulation of human mesenchymal stem cells for articular 
cartilage tissue regeneration. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces . 2017; 9: 
8589–8601. 
29. Takahashi, K, Tanabe, K, Ohnuki, M, et al. Induction of pluripotent 
stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell. 
2007; 131: 861–872.
30. Chakravarthy, MV , Spangenburg, EE, Booth, FW . Culture in 
low levels of oxygen enhances in vitro proliferation potential of 
satellite cells from old skeletal muscles. Cell Mol Life Sci . 2001; 
58: 1150–1158.
31. Yoshioka, H, Yoshiko, Y . The roles of long non-protein-coding 
RNAs in osteo-adipogenic lineage commitment. Int J Mol Sci . 
2017; 18: 1236.
32. Chaturvedi, V , Naskar, D, Kinnear, BF , et al. Silk fibroin scaffolds 
with muscle-like elasticity support in vitro differentiation of human 
skeletal muscle cells. J Tissue Eng Regen Med . 2017; 11: 
3178– 3192.
33. Shen, Y , Redmond, SL, Papadimitriou, JM, et al. The biocompatibility 
of silk fibroin and acellular collagen scaffolds for tissue engineering 
in the ear. Biomed Mater . 2014; 9: 015015.
34. Modulevsky, DJ, Lefebvre, C, Haase, K, Al-Rekabi, Z, Pelling, AE. 
Apple derived cellulose scaffolds for 3D mammalian cell culture. 
PLoS One . 2014; 9: e97835. 
35. Naahidi, S, Jafari, M, Logan, M, et al. Biocompatibility of 
hydrogel–based scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. 
Biotechnol Adv . 2017; 35: 530–544. 
36. Perry, L, Flugelman, MY , Levenberg, S. Elderly patient-derived 
endothelial cells for vascularization of engineered muscle. Mol 
Ther. 2017; 25: 935–948.
37. Yang, J, Yamato, M, Nishida, K, et al. Cell delivery in regenerative 
medicine: the cell sheet engineering approach. J Controlled 
Release . 2006; 116: 193–203. 
38. Kim, MS, Lee, B, Kim, HN, et al. 3D tissue formation by stacking 
detachable cell sheets formed on nanofiber mesh. Biofabrication . 
2017; 9: 015029.