 
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   36  
5.0 Who Are the Tissue Engineers?  
This section examines the people and institutions that are active in tissue engineering or, in a few cases, 
played a key role i n the past.  We review some characteristics of the community of tissue engineers 
viewed in aggregate, introduce specific individuals and six major centers of activity that have played 
central roles in research or training since the earliest days of the eme rgence of tissue engineering, and 
conclude with a few observations on the corporate sector.  Our focus here is on those who are actually 
doing tissue engineering; the role of funding agencies is addressed in a later section.  
 
Our analysis draws heavily on a roster of 231 tissue engineers compiled by the study team, and presented 
in Appendix 2.  These include individuals who have published in the realm of tissue engineering, have 
trained with notable names in the field, or have otherwise self -proclaimed them selves as tissue engineers.  
The roster is not intended to be a definitive list of those who should be considered tissue engineers – 
rather, it should be viewed as a convenience sample intended to shed light in a qualitative sense on the 
nature of tissue e ngineering and its participants, and to provide an overall sense of trends affecting the 
character of the field.  With that purpose in mind, however, we believe that the list does contain the great 
majority of academic, non -physician researchers with facul ty appointments in the United States and 
Canada who have identified tissue engineering explicitly as an important component of their research 
interests.  In addition, the list includes a selection of the most prominent physician -researchers in the 
field, a long with a small sampling of individuals in the corporate sector.  
 
5.1 The Tissue Engineers as a Group  
Disciplinary affiliations of tissue engineers are difficult to analyze in a precise quantitative way, because 
the specific mix of research areas that ar e included in a department with a given name or are associated 
with a degree with a given designation, and the number and character of departmental affiliations awarded 
to faculty, vary from one institution to another in idiosyncratic ways.  Nevertheless, overall trends emerge 
clearly from a rough tally of the available data.  
 
Viewed in terms of both the departments by which their doctoral degrees were awarded and the 
departments in which those who are in academia now hold faculty appointments, tissue engin eers are 
indeed predominantly engineers . 
 
By training, more than half of the individuals for whom we have specific data are engineers.  
Approximately one fifth of the tissue engineers in our sample hold medical or dental degrees, often in 
conjunction with an engineering or science doctorate.  In view of the critical importance of cells and of 
physiology in tissue engineering, the fraction of individuals who hold only a doctorate in biological 
sciences (for example, biology, biochemistry, or non -clinical med ical sciences such as physiology or 
anatomy) is remarkably small – roughly one out of ten.  Chemical engineering is by a wide margin the 
engineering discipline most frequently encountered in this cohort, followed by biomedical or 
bioengineering, and by mec hanical engineering.  A more liberal interpretation of which aspects of 
contemporary orthopedics and biomechanics research should be considered part of tissue engineering 
would perhaps have yielded somewhat increased weights for biomedical and mechanical e ngineering in 
the sample.  
 
Current academic departmental affiliations of these tissue engineers are also strongly weighted toward 
engineering.  However, here bioengineering or biomedical engineering is the leading disciplinary 
affiliation by a wide margin,  followed by chemical engineering and, in a distant third place, mechanical 
engineering.  This pattern may reflect the relatively recent emergence of biomedical engineering as a 
discipline, and the migration of faculty – especially recent trainees taking t heir first faculty appointments  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   37 – from some of the classical engineering disciplines to newer and often growing departments of 
biomedical engineering.  
 
Biological science affiliations are few, and are weighted toward basic medical science departments.  
Clinical and clinical science departmental affiliations are strongly weighted toward surgery and surgical 
specialties, notably orthopedics.  This latter pattern may to some extent be an artifact of selection bias in 
construction of the sample; for example, it  is likely that a more liberal definition of tissue engineering to 
include a greater part of islet cell transplantation research and a correspondingly more aggressive search 
for clinicians who have been involved in such work would have resulted in the incl usion of more 
endocrinologists in the roster.  Nevertheless, we would expect surgeons to dominate in any reasonably 
representative sample of clinician -scientists active in tissue engineering.  
 
More than 70 universities are represented in the list of instit utions from which the tissue engineers in our 
sample received their non -clinical (i.e., PhD and ScD) doctorates.  Appendix 2 shows that MIT trained, 
by a wide margin, the largest number of individuals in this group, followed by the University of 
Pennsylvan ia, Rice University, the University of Michigan, the University of Minnesota, Columbia 
University, Stanford University, and the University of California at Berkeley.  Again, a more liberal 
definition of relevant orthopedics and biomechanics research would perhaps have yielded a slightly 
stronger representation for Rice, Columbia, the University of California at San Diego (UCSD), and 
Georgia Tech.  When postdoctoral training relationships are traced as well, the relative weight of MIT in 
this group increases  further.  
 
At present, most of the individuals active in this representative sample of tissue engineers entered the 
field after completing dissertations in other areas.  Because of the interdisciplinary character of tissue 
engineering, the field will likel y continue to have a relatively high proportion of post -doctoral -training 
entrants.  However, over time, the fraction of individuals whose thesis research was explicitly in tissue 
engineering, and the representation of universities other than MIT with broa d platforms of research and 
training activity in tissue engineering, such as Rice, UCSD and Georgia Tech, should increase as a 
proportion of any roster of researchers active in TE.  
 
One last characteristic of this cohort is noteworthy here.  The great majo rity of individuals are involved in 
TE on only a part -time basis.  That is, academic tissue engineers typically maintain a number of lines of 
research, some of which meet any reasonable definition of tissue engineering, some of which straddle the 
ill-defin ed boundary that delineates the field, and some of which are clearly situated within other 
intellectual domains.  By this measure, tissue engineering could be viewed more as a tactic than as a 
discipline – as part of an interdisciplinary assault on unsolve d therapeutic challenges that draws 
opportunistically on an ever -wider range of knowledge and tools from science and engineering.  
 
5.2 Notable Participants in Tissue Engineering and Leading Centers in the 
Field  
A bibliometric analysis of papers important t o the field of tissue engineering revealed a list of more than 
350 US institutions active in research .  Our interviews with experts in the field as well as extensive 
secondary research92 validated this list and also pointed toward several other institutions  as being highly 
                                                   92   In compiling these groups of researchers, we examined all major research universities in the country which had 
bioengineering departments —given the strong link between the field  of bioengineering and tissue 
engineering —and scoured faculty research pages for individuals in those departments to see which of these may 
participate in TE.  The research groups above were selected to appear in this report since, in our judgment, they 
had made significant research contributions or were comprised of multiple faculty or graduates who are 
considered major players in the field.    
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   38 influential in the field —not only in terms of their research contributions, but also in their training of 
personnel currently active in the field.  Below we highlight a sample of the key loci of tissue engineering 
research.   
 
Boston Area:   MIT and Harvard  
Perhaps the single most prominent geographical and institutional locus of research in tissue engineering 
has been in the Boston area, centered on the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Cambridge 
and the Harvard Medical School (HMS) in Boston, although researchers at other Boston -area institutions 
have been involved as well.  
 
MIT was the site of three independent, seminal lines of research on substitutes for human skin.  During a 
period from the mid -1970s through the mid -1980s, the laboratory of cell biologist Howard Green, MD (in 
the biology department at MIT until 1980, subsequently in the cell biology department at Harvard 
Medical School) achieved a breakthrough in the cultivation of human keratinocytes, developed it into a 
method for growing epithelial grafts from a small piece of autologous epidermis, and demonstrated the 
viability of this method in the treatment of burn victims.93  In 1987, this technique became the basis for a 
startup company called BioSurface Technology tha t offered cultured epidermal autografts commercially.  
The company was acquired by Genzyme in 1994 and became Genzyme Tissue Repair (now Genzyme 
Biosurgery), and the service is still offered under the name Epicel®.94  Dr. Green himself has continued 
his car eer as a cell biologist at HMS, but has not been prominent in the subsequent development of tissue 
engineering.  
 
Ioannis Yannas joined the faculty in the mechanical engineering department at MIT in 1966, after 
completing his PhD at Princeton.  From the sta rt, his research focused on the properties of collagen and its 
role in connective tissues, using approaches from chemistry, physics, and biomechanics.  By the 1970s, 
Yannas was investigating the use of acellular collagen -glycosaminoglycan matrices as wound  dressings 
designed to serve as biodegradable templates for the regeneration of viable skin.  In 1977, Yannas, in 
collaboration with Massachusetts General Hospital and Shriners Burns Institute surgeon John F. Burke, 
was awarded a patent for a “multilayer m embrane useful as synthetic skin”.95  In 1980, they published the 
first in a series of papers outlining design considerations for what they called an “artificial skin”, and 
shortly thereafter, they reported the successful use of such an artificial skin in t he treatment of extensive 
burn injury.96  This research resulted in the development of a commercial product, Integra® Dermal 
Regeneration Template, which is currently licensed to and manufactured by Integra LifeSciences 
                                                   93  Rheinwald JG, Green H, “Serial Cultivation of Strains of Human Epidermal Keratinocytes:  the Formation of 
Kerat inizing Colonies from Single Cells”, Cell 1975 Nov;6(3):331 -43;  Green H, Kehinde O, Thomas J, 
“Growth of Cultured Human Epidermal Cells into Multiple Epithelia Suitable for Grafting”, Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 1979 Nov;76(11)5665 -8;  and Gallico GG 3rd, O’Co nnor NE, Compton CC et al. , “Permanent Coverage of 
Large Burn Wounds with Autologous Cultured Human Epithelium”, N Engl J Med  1984 Aug 16;311(7):448 -51. 
94  Epicel® (cultured epidermal autografts) product information, 
http://www.genzymebiosurgery.com/opage_print.asp?ogroup=1&olevel=2&opage=96  (URL verified October 
26, 2002).  
95  Yannas IV, Burke JF, Gordon PL, Huang C, “Multilayer Membrane Useful as Synthetic Skin”, U S Patent 
4,060,081, November 29, 1977.  
96  Yannas IV, Burke JF, “Design of an Artificial Skin”, J Biomed Mater Res  1980 Jan;14(1):65 -81;  Burke JF, 
Yannas IV, Quinby WC Jr et al. , “Successful Use of a Physiologically Acceptable Artificial Skin in the 
Treatm ent of Extensive Burn Injury”, Ann Surg  1981 Oct;194(4):413 -28;  and Yannas IV, Burke JF, Orgill JP, 
Skrabut EM, “Would Tissue Can Utilize a Polymeric Template to Synthesize a Functional Extension of Skin”, 
Science  1982 Jan 8;215(4529):174 -6.  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   39 Corporation.97  Prof. Yannas has conti nued to maintain an active research program on the principles and 
applications of induced tissue regeneration.98 
 
Eugene Bell, a long -time faculty member in the biology department at MIT, also pursued in the 1970s a 
line of research that examined interactio ns between collagen and skin cells.  In 1979, Bell and colleagues 
published a paper describing the production in vitro  of a tissue -like structure, obtained via contraction of a 
collagen lattice seeded with fibroblasts.99  In 1981 Bell’s group reported the s uccessful grafting of a 
“living skin equivalent” consisting of fibroblasts cast in collagen lattices and seeded with epidermal 
cells.100  A patent was obtained for this “tissue -equivalent” in 1984, 101 and Bell left MIT in 1986 to found 
Organogenesis, Inc. and  pursue commercial development of the product.  He left Organogenesis in 1991 
to return briefly to MIT, but left again in 1992 to found Tissue Engineering Inc. (now TEI Biosciences).  
Bell has led an active proprietary research program at TEI Biosciences, focusing on the further refinement 
of collagen fiber -based scaffolds and the enrichment of these scaffolds with signaling molecules that 
induce stem cell development and tissue regeneration, but has published little in the peer -reviewed 
biomedical literatu re in recent years.102 
 
Although these three lines of research are widely recognized as milestones in the emergence of tissue 
engineering, in terms of visibility, and arguably in terms of scientific influence as well, they have long 
since been eclipsed by th e network of TE researchers that grew up around Robert Langer and Joseph (Jay) 
Vacanti.  Langer and Vacanti are widely recognized as coauthors on two seminal papers:  the 1993 review 
article in Science  that marked the “coming out” of tissue engineering as a field, and, with additional 
coauthors, the 1988 paper in the Journal of Pediatric Surgery  that introduced the strategy of using 
resorbable artificial polymer matrices seeded with cells as a vehicle for cell transplantation.103  However, 
their acquaintance and scientific collaboration predated these papers by more than a decade.  
 
Langer’s graduate studies were carried out under the supervision of yet another MIT researcher active 
during the “prehistory” of TE, Clark Colton of the chemical engineering departm ent.  Colton’s own PhD, 
completed in the same department in 1969 under the supervision of Kenneth A. Smith, was entitled 
Permeability and Transport Studies in Batch and Flow Dialyzers with Applications to Hemodialysis .  
Colton’s research on filtration tech nologies relevant to artificial organs continued following the 
completion of his PhD, and he collaborated with William Chick at Harvard Medical School, Pierre 
Galletti at Brown University and colleagues on the research which led to a 1975 publication in th e 
                                                   97  Integra® D ermal Regeneration Template Product Description, http://www.integra -ls.com/bus -
skin_product.shtml  (URL verified October 26, 2002).  
98  Yannas IV, “Synthesis of Organs:  In vitro  or In vivo ?” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  2000 Aug 15;97(17):9354 -6;  
and Yannas IV, Tissue and Organ Regeneration in Adults  (New York:  Springer, 2001).  
99  Bell E, Ivarsson B, Merrill C, “Production of a Tissue -Like Structure by Contraction of Collagen Lattices by 
Human Fib roblasts of Different Proliferative Potential in Vitro”, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  1979 
Mar;76(3):1274 -8. 
100  Bell E, Ehrlich HP, Buttle DJ, Nakatsuji T, “Living Tissue Formed in Vitro and Accepted as Skin -Equivalent 
Tissue of Full Thickness”, Science  1981 Mar  6;211(4486):1052 -4. 
101  Bell E, “Tissue -Equivalent and Method for Preparation Thereof”, US Patent 4,485,096, November 27, 1984.  
102  Dai J, Kumar J, Feng Y et al. , “The Specificity of Phenotypic Induction of Mouse and Human Stem Cells by 
Signaling Complexes” , In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim  2002 Apr;38(4):198 -204;  and “Platform Technologies” 
description, TEI Biosciences web site, http://www.teibio.com  (URL verified October 27, 2002).  
103  Langer R, Vacanti JP, “Tissue Enginee ring”, Science  1993 May 14;260(5110):920 -6;  and Vacanti JP, Morse 
MA, Saltzman WM et al. , “Selective Cell Transplantation Using Bioabsorbable Artificial Polymers as 
Matrices”, J Pediatr Surg  1988 Jan;23(1 Pt 2):3 -9.  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   40 Transactions of the American Society for Artificial Internal Organs  on a “hybrid artificial pancreas” for 
rats consisting of beta cells cultured on synthetic semipermeable hollow fibers.104  Colton (with coauthors, 
graduate student Keith Dionne and postdoc toral fellow Martin Yarmush) was the only senior MIT 
researcher represented with a paper at the Granlibakken workshop in 1988.  
 
Although contemporaneous with this early work on artificial organ technologies in Colton’s lab, the 
research that formed the bas is for Langer’s 1974 ScD in chemical engineering was part of a separate line 
of work being pursued by Colton in the area of enzyme engineering.105  Langer proceeded to a 
postdoctoral fellowship in the laboratory of Dr. Judah Folkman at Harvard Medical School  and Children’s 
Hospital in Boston.  Folkman’s pathbreaking work on implantable drug delivery systems and on 
angiogenesis in cancer addressed a number of fundamental issues that were to be of broader significance 
for tissue engineering, including identific ation and analysis of the factors that govern the growth and 
differentiation of blood vessels, and the design of delivery systems to enable the sustained release of 
bioactive proteins and other molecules in a desired location in order to influence tissue g rowth.  Langer’s 
first publication in the area of polymeric drug delivery systems, a line of research that was to become the 
foundation of the work of his own laboratory at MIT, was written in collaboration with Folkman and 
appeared in Nature  in 1976.106 
 
Langer’s entry into tissue engineering was catalyzed by a collaboration with Jay Vacanti.  Vacanti earned 
his MD at the University of Nebraska, and came to Boston in 1974 to begin his postgraduate training in 
surgery.  He completed a residency in general sur gery at the Massachusetts General Hospital during 1974 -
1981, followed by a fellowship in pediatric surgery at Children’s Hospital from 1981 -1983.  During the 
period of his residency at MGH, he spent two years – from 1977 to 1979 – in the laboratory of Dr. 
Folkman, where his collaboration with Robert Langer began.  Their first joint publication, written in 
collaboration with Folkman and two other colleagues, reported on experiments in the inhibition of tumor 
growth in animal models by regional infusion of a cartilage -derived angiogenesis inhibitor.107 
 
Returning to MIT following his postdoctoral work with Folkman, Robert Langer built a highly productive 
research and training program focused primarily on polymer -based drug delivery systems and their 
applications .  Vacanti, following his pediatric surgery fellowship, received two further years of clinical 
training in the renowned transplantation program at the University of Pittsburgh, then returned to Boston 
in 1985 to join the staff at Children’s Hospital and la unch his own clinical and research program.  
 
Vacanti’s clinical experience in transplantation in Pittsburgh, and then in launching a pediatric liver 
transplantation program in Boston, confronted him with the intractable problem of organ supply.  
Following his return to Children’s Hospital in Boston in 1985, he began to explore with Langer the 
problem of how to extend to three dimensions the early success of Eugene Bell in growing flat sheets of 
tissue from skin cells.  From this emerged the concept of using  a porous, resorbable, three -dimensional 
polymer scaffold as a template for cell growth, and the 1988 paper the Journal of Pediatric Surgery  
reporting its experimental application.  This technique was to be enormously influential in shaping the 
work of oth er investigators who entered the field – indeed, it could be said that it provided the intellectual 
                                                   104  Chick WL, Like AA, Lauris V et al. , “A Hybrid Artificial Pancreas”, Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs  
1975;21:8 -15. 
105  Langer RS, Enzymatic Regeneration of ATP , Thesis (ScD), Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department 
of Chemical Engineering, 1974.  
106  Langer R, Folkman J, “Polymers for the Sustained Release of Proteins and Other Macromolecules”, Nature  
1976 Oct 28;263(5580):797 -800. 
107  Langer R, Conn H, Vacanti J et al. , “Control of Tumor Growth in Animals by Infusion of an Angiogenesis 
Inhibitor”, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  1980 Jul;77(7):4 331-5.  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   41 “scaffolding” for the work of an entire cadre of investigators who shared the long -term vision of creating 
“replacement” solid organs for therapeutic purpos es. 
 
Although Langer himself is not primarily a tissue engineer, TE projects have remained an active line of 
research in his laboratory. He has mentored an extraordinary number of doctoral and postdoctoral 
trainees, some of whom focused their work specific ally on tissue engineering applications. Many have 
gone on to establish independent academic careers in which tissue engineering research has played an 
important part.  
 
Most lead authors in Tissue Engineering have worked at least once with Langer and Jay V acanti as shown 
in Table F.1 in Appendix 5.  Papers by Langer and Vacanti list over 250 coauthors.  Several leading 
authors appear to have started as students of Langer or Vacanti, and several more appear only as their co -
authors. Important alumni of the L anger laboratory who are active in tissue engineering include former 
graduate students:  
 
• Elazer Edelman (PhD, 1984), currently Professor of Health Sciences and Technology at MIT and 
director of the Harvard -MIT Biomedical Engineering Center)  
• Cato Lauren cin (PhD, 1987), currently Professor of Chemical Engineering at Drexel University)  
• W. Mark Saltzman (PhD, 1987), currently Goizueta Foundation Professor of Chemical and 
Biomedical Engineering at Yale University)  
• Lisa Freed (PhD, 1988), currently Princi pal Research Scientist in Langer’s laboratory)  
• David Mooney (PhD, 1992), currently Professor of Dentistry at the University of Michigan)  
• Michael Yaszemski (PhD, 1995), currently Associate Professor of Bioengineering at Mayo 
Medical School)  
• Jennifer E lisseeff (PhD, 1999), currently Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Johns 
Hopkins University)  
• Guillermo Ameer (ScD, 1999), currently Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at 
Northwestern University  
 
Former Langer postdoctoral or rese arch fellows include:  
 
• Kam W. Leong (currently Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Johns Hopkins University)  
• Linda Griffith (currently Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at MIT)  
• Peter Ma (currently Associate Professor of Biologic and Mate rials Sciences at the University of 
Michigan School of Dentistry)  
• Antonios Mikos (currently Professor in Bioengineering and Chemical Engineering at Rice 
University)  
• Laura Niklason (currently Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Duke Univers ity) 
• Kristi Anseth (currently Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at the University of 
Colorado)  
• Christine Schmidt (currently Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering at the University of 
Texas at Austin)  
• Gordana Vunjak -Novakovic (curren tly Principal Research Scientist in Langer’s laboratory and 
Adjunct Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Tufts University).  
• Michael Pishko (currently Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at Penn State University)  
• Venkatram Prasad Shastri (currently Research Assistant Professor at the University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine)  
• David Lynn (currently Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at the University of 
Wisconsin, Madison)  
 
Jay Vacanti continues an active research pro gram in his Tissue Engineering and Organ Fabrication 
Laboratory at the Massachusetts General Hospital.  Together with junior colleagues including brother  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   42 Charles Vacanti and Anthony Atala, he has helped define a branch of tissue engineering that has earned  
substantial public visibility with a fairly aggressive approach to early demonstration of potential new 
clinical applications.  He has also played an important role in developing the infrastructure of the field 
through his active involvement in the creati on and early leadership of the journal Tissue Engineering and 
the Tissue Engineering Society.  
 
Another prolific source of researchers who have gone on to be active in tissue engineering is the 
laboratory of Douglas Lauffenburger, Professor of Chemical Engi neering and Director of the 
Biotechnology Process Engineering Center, an NSF -funded Engineering Research Center at MIT, and 
formerly a faculty member at the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Illinois.  As with 
Langer, Lauffenburger’s own res earch has been centered away from the core of tissue engineering, 
focusing primarily at the molecular level on quantitative physicochemical principles governing ligand - 
and architecture -controlled cell behavior.  
 
Graduates from Lauffenburger’s tenure at th e University of Pennsylvania who are active in tissue 
engineering include:  
 
• Robert Tranquillo (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1986), currently Distinguished McKnight 
University Professor of Bioengineering at the University of Minnesota  
 
• Helen Buettner (P hD in Chemical Engineering, 1987), currently Associate Professor of 
Biomedical Engineering at Rutgers University  
 
• Paul DiMilla (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1991), who served as a postdoctoral fellow in the 
laboratory of George Whitesides at Harvard, was  Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at 
Carnegie Mellon University and most recently served on the staff of Organogenesis, Inc.  
 
From Lauffenburger’s tenure at the University of Illinois:  
 
• Christine Schmidt (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1995) com pleted a postdoctoral fellowship 
with Robert Langer and is now Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering at the University 
of Texas at Austin.  
 
From Lauffenburger’s tenure at MIT:  
 
• Sean Palecek (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1998) is now Assistant Pro fessor of Chemical 
Engineering at the University of Wisconsin, Madison  
 
• David Schaffer (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1998) is now Assistant Professor of Chemical 
Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley  
 
• Anand Asthagiri (PhD in Chemical En gineering, 2000) is now Assistant Professor of Chemical 
Engineering at the California Institute of Technology  
 
Former Lauffenburger postdoctoral fellows include:  
 
• Peter Zandstra, now Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Appli ed 
Chemistry at the University of Toronto  
 
• Fred Allen, now Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Drexel University  
  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   43 Another important laboratory active in tissue engineering, with links to both Harvard and MIT, is the 
Center for Engineering in  Medicine / Laboratory of Surgical Science and Engineering at the 
Massachusetts General Hospital, led by Ronald G. Tompkins, who also serves as Chief of Staff and 
Director of Research at the Shriners Burns Hospital in Boston.  Dr. Tompkins earned his MD at  Tulane 
University in 1976, and his ScD in chemical engineering at MIT in 1983, under the supervision of Clark 
Colton and Kenneth A. Smith.  Another long -serving senior member of the lab and Colton postdoctoral 
alumnus, Martin Yarmush, MD, PhD, has recentl y assumed the leadership of the Department of 
Biomedical Engineering at Rutgers University.  A third lab member, Mehmet Toner, earned his PhD in 
1989 from the Medical Engineering and Medical Physics Program in the Harvard -MIT Division of Health 
Sciences an d Technology, under the supervision of Ernest Cravalho.  Tompkins, Toner, Yarmush and 
other colleagues have been collaborating on fundamental research intended to lay the foundations for 
rational design of a bioartificial liver.  Yarmush/Tompkins postdocto ral fellow Howard Matthew has 
established a research group at Wayne State University focusing on biomaterials for tissue engineering.  
Toner alumna Sangeeta Bhatia (PhD in the HST Program, 1997) is now Associate Professor of 
Bioengineering and head of the Microscale Tissue Engineering Laboratory at the University of California, 
San Diego, and Toner/Cravalho alumnus Jens Karlsson (PhD in Mechanical Engineering, 1994) is now 
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology and a member of the 
Georgia Tech/Emory Center for the Engineering of Living Tissues.  
 
Alan Grodzinsky, who earned his ScD in electrical engineering at MIT in 1974, under the supervision of 
James Melcher, with a thesis on membrane electromechanics, is now Profe ssor of Electrical, Mechanical, 
Bioengineering and Biological Engineering and Director of the Center for Biomedical Engineering at 
MIT.  Grodzinsky leads a wide -ranging research program on the mechanical, chemical and electrical 
properties of connective ti ssue, including studies on cartilage tissue engineering.  Grodzinsky lab alumnus 
Robert Sah (ScD in the HST Medical Engineering and Medical Physics Program, 1990) is now Associate 
Professor of Bioengineering and leads the Cartilage Tissue Engineering Labor atory at the University of 
California, San Diego.  
 
Donald Ingber, another physician -researcher who served as a postdoctoral fellow in Judah Folkman’s 
laboratory during the mid -1980’s, now maintains his own laboratory as a Professor of Pathology at 
Harvard Medical School and Children’s Hospital.  Ingber’s work has been distinctive for its focus on 
mathematical and mechanical engineering approaches to molecular and cellular structures.  Collaborators 
in recent years have included George Whitesides of the chem istry department at Harvard, and Whitesides’ 
postdoctoral fellow from 1994 -96, Milan Mrksich, who is now associate professor in the chemistry 
department at the University of Chicago.  
 
Other Boston -area alumni prominent in tissue engineering through their o wn work and/or through those 
they have trained include:  
 
• Nicholas Peppas completed his ScD in Chemical Engineering at MIT in 1974, under the 
supervision of Edward Merrill, and did postdoctoral work at the MIT Arterisclerosis Center under 
HST faculty memb er Robert Lees.  Peppas has been on the faculty at Purdue University since 
1976 and is presently the Showalter Distinguished Professor in the School of Chemical 
Engineering;  he will be moving to the University of Texas at Austin in December, 2002.  
Peppas ’s work has focused primarily on polymers and drug delivery technology.  He supervised 
Antonios Mikos’s master’s and doctoral theses at Purdue.  
 
• Michael Sefton completed an ScD in Chemical Engineering at MIT in 1974, under the 
supervision of Edward Merri ll, and is now director of the Institute of Biomaterials and 
Biomedical Engineering at the University of Toronto  
  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   44 • Barry Solomon, PhD served as a postdoctoral fellow at MIT from 1975 -77 and published in 
collaboration with Clark Colton, and has pursued res earch on biohybrid artificial organ systems at 
Amicon, WR Grace, and most recently at Circe Biomedical  
 
• Rena Bizios completed her PhD in Chemical Engineering at MIT in 1979 under the supervision 
of Robert Lees.  She is presently Professor of Biomedical E ngineering and leads an active TE 
research program at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  
 
• Elliot Chaikof, MD, PhD completed a residency in general surgery at Massachusetts General 
Hospital and a PhD in Chemical Engineering at MIT in 1989, under the superv ision of Edward 
Merrill;  he is now Chief of the Division of Vascular Surgery at Emory University and a member 
of the Georgia Tech / Emory Center for the Engineering of Living Tissues  
 
There is no single institutional or programmatic locus for tissue engin eering in the Boston area.  
“Regenerative biological technologies”, defined as encompassing tissue engineering, micro - and nano -
scale biomedical engineering, and hybrid systems, has become one of three major research thrust areas of 
the Harvard -MIT Divisio n of Health Sciences and Technology (HST).  The Department of Chemical 
Engineering, the Division of Biological Engineering and the Center for Biomedical Engineering at MIT 
are also central to the network of tissue engineering researchers at Harvard and MIT , and most of the 
more prominent researchers have multiple appointments in these and other units while maintaining 
numerous collaborations that cross formal departmental or program boundaries.  
  
University of California, San Diego  
Tissue engineering at the  University of California, San Diego (UCSD) is centered on the Department of 
Bioengineering, the latest incarnation of one of the oldest bioengineering programs in the United States.  
The program’s origins can be traced to 1964 -65, when Benjamin Zweifach, a physiologist with a lifelong 
interest in the study of blood microcirculation, took a sabbatical from his professorship at New York 
University to serve as a visiting professor at the California Institute of Technology.  While at Caltech, 
Zweifach had the opportunity to share ideas with Harold Wayland, a pioneer in the engineering study of 
microcirculation, and his colleagues Y.C. Fung, Professor of Aeronautics and Applied Mathematics at 
Caltech, and research fellow Marcos Intaglietta, who had completed his  PhD in Applied Mechanics at 
Caltech in 1963.  In 1966, Zweifach, Fung and Intaglietta moved to the then -new UCSD to launch a new 
bioengineering program in its Department of Applied Mechanics and Engineering Sciences.  
 
In addition to his pioneering activit ies in biomechanics and bioengineering, Fung was to play a central 
role in the creation of the concept of tissue engineering as we know it today.  As noted previously in 
Chapter 3, in 1985, Fung submitted a proposal to NSF for an Engineering Research Cente r to be entitled 
“Center for the Engineering of Living Tissues”.108  Reflecting its intellectual origins, the proposal 
envisioned a program of research with a strong biomechanics and engineering flavor.  Although this 
proposal was not accepted, the UCSD rese arch program continued to develop through support from other 
sources, notably the Whitaker Foundation, and the tissue engineering concept stayed alive, to be raised by 
Fung at the spring 1987 review panel meeting of NSF’s Bioengineering and Research to Aid  the 
Handicapped Program.  
 
The development of the UCSD Program was bolstered during this period by the arrival from Columbia 
University in 1988 of two other pioneering researchers in biomechanics and the study of the 
microcirculation – Richard Skalak and S hu Chien.  As Director of Columbia’s Bioengineering Institute, 
Skalak had been a participant in the special Panel Meeting on Tissue Engineering at NSF in October 
                                                   108  “A Proposal to the National Science Foundation for An Engineering Research Center at UCSD, CENTER FOR 
THE ENGINEERING OF LIVING TISSUES”, UCSD #865023, courtesy of Y.C. Fung, August 23, 2001.   
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   45 1987, and helped to coordinate the Granlibakken workshop in February 1988 along with Fung and Fred 
Fox of the University of California, Los Angeles.  Additional UCSD researchers represented at the 
Granlibakken workshop were John Hansbrough and Savio L.Y. Woo.  Hansbrough, a surgeon and leader 
in research on burn treatment, had begun to investigate skin substitutes in the mid -1980s and maintained 
an active line of research in this area until his untimely death in 2001.  Although not a member of the 
bioengineering program proper, Hansbrough held an affiliation with the cross -departmental UCSD 
Institut e for Biomedical Engineering (now the Whitaker Institute of Biomedical Engineering).109  Woo, an 
engineer who has focused on biomechanics of connective tissue, led the Orthopedic Bioengineering 
Laboratory at UCSD until his departure in 1990 for the Universit y of Pittsburgh.  
 
At present, the Department of Bioengineering at UCSD supports a wide range of fundamental and applied 
research that is relevant to tissue engineering.  Core faculty who specifically identify their research as 
focused at least in part on t issue engineering include:  
 
• Sangeeta Bhatia MD, PhD (PhD in Health Sciences and Technology, MIT, 1997, under Mehmet 
Toner) is Associate Professor of Bioengineering and head of the Microscale Tissue Engineering 
Laboratory, focusing on hepatic tissue engin eering and BioMEMS (biological micro -electro -
mechanical systems).  
 
• Shu Chien, MD, PhD, formerly of Columbia University, is Professor of Bioengineering and 
Medicine, and Director of WIBE, leads the Vascular Bioengineering Laboratory, investigating 
molecul ar mechanisms by which mechanical forces affect cellular functions such as proliferation, 
migration and apoptosis.  
 
• Andrew McCullough (PhD in Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, University of Auckland, NZ, 
1986) is Professor of Bioengineering, and leads t he Cardiac Mechanics research group.  Group 
member Jeffrey Omens (PhD in Applied Mechanics and Engineering Sciences (Bioengineering), 
UCSD, 1988, under Y.C. Fung) is Associate Adjunct Professor of Medicine and Bioengineering.  
 
• Bernhard Palsson, PhD, Prof essor of Bioengineering, joined the department in 1995 from a prior 
faculty position at the University of Michigan, and leads the Genetic Circuits research group;  his 
TE-related work focuses on tissue engineering of bone marrow.  
 
• Robert Sah, MD, ScD (Me dical Engineering and Medical Physics in the HST Program at MIT 
under Alan Grodzinsky, 1990) is Associate Professor of Bioengineering and leads the Cartilage 
Tissue Engineering laboratory.  
 
• John A. Frangos (PhD in Chemical Engineering (Bioengineering) at  Rice University under Larry 
McIntire, 1987) was an active member of the department core faculty from 1994 -2002;  he is 
currently Adjunct Professor, and continues to lead research on bone and vascular tissue 
engineering as president of the new La Jolla Bio engineering Institute.  
 
                                                   109  The UCSD Institute for Biomedical Engineering, whic h was renamed the Whitaker Institute for Biomedical 
Engineering (WIBE) in 1999 in recognition of support from the Whitaker Foundation, is a cross -departmental 
unit that promotes and coordinates interdisciplinary research at the interfaces of engineering, b iology and 
medicine.  The Institute includes among its membership faculty from the Department of Bioengineering as well 
as other departments from the schools of engineering, medicine and natural science and other affiliated 
organizations.  WIBE, directed b y Shu Chien, has identified “tissue engineering research” as one of its major 
research thrusts.   
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   46 Rice University  
At Rice University, faculty active in tissue engineering are based in the Institute of Biosciences and 
Bioengineering (IBB) and the Department of Bioengineering, both chaired by Larry McIntire.  The IBB 
was founded i n 1986, and serves as a coordinating mechanism for cross -disciplinary research in 
biological, chemical and engineering disciplines involving researchers at Rice and at Texas Medical 
Center, the Johnson Space Center, industry, and other collaborators.  Earl y efforts to organize a research 
focus in tissue engineering at Rice were bolstered by a special opportunity award from the Whitaker 
Foundation to IBB in 1994, and a large development grant from the Whitaker Foundation in 1996 made 
possible the creation of  the Department of Bioengineering.  
 
McIntire completed his PhD at Princeton University in 1970, with a thesis in the area of fluid dynamics.  
In connection with artificial heart -related research in Houston during the 1970s, he became involved in 
studies of  the effects of hemodynamics on blood coagulation, later extending that work to effects on 
endothelial cells and blood vessels.  Within this still -ongoing line of work, he has supervised the PhD 
research of the following individuals who have established in dependent careers in tissue engineering, 
including:  
 
• Jeffrey Hubbell (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1986), now Professor of Biomedical Engineering 
and director of the Institute for Biomedical Engineering at the Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule (ETH) i n Zürich  
 
• John A. Frangos (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1987)  
 
• Timothy M. Wick (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1988), currently Associate Professor of 
Chemical Engineering at Georgia Tech, and a member of the Georgia Tech/Emory Center for the 
Engineering  of Living Tissues  
 
• B. Rita Alevriadou (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1992), currently Assistant Professor of 
Biomedical Engineering at Johns Hopkins University  
 
• Charles W. Patrick, Jr. (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1994), now Assistant Professor and 
Director of Research, Department of Plastic Surgery, MD Anderson Cancer Center, and Adjunct 
Assistant Professor in the Department of Bioengineering at Rice University  
 
• Julia M. Ross (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1995), now Associate Professor of Chemical a nd 
Biomedical Engineering at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County  
 
Another cornerstone of the tissue engineering program at Rice has been Antonios Mikos, who earned his 
PhD in chemical engineering under Nicholas Peppas at Purdue, then completed a p ostdoctoral fellowship 
with Robert Langer at MIT.  Mikos joined the faculty at Rice in 1992 and is now John W. Cox Professor 
of Bioengineering and Chemical Engineering.  Mikos leads a broad research program known especially 
for contributions to bone tissue  engineering and to the further development of polymer and scaffolding 
technology for TE applications.  In 1993 he created the continuing education course “Advances in Tissue 
Engineering” that continues to be offered annually at Rice.  Mikos lab alumni act ive in tissue engineering 
include:  
 
• Susan Ishaug -Riley (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1996), who joined the staff of Advanced 
Tissue Sciences  
 
• Susan Peter (PhD in Chemical Engineering, 1998), who joined the staff of Osiris Therapeutics  
  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   47 • Vasilios Sikav itsas (postdoctoral fellow) who is now Assistant Professor of Chemical 
Engineering and Materials Science at the University of Oklahoma  
 
• Aaron Goldstein (postdoctoral fellow) who is Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at 
Virginia Polytechnic Insti tute and State University  
 
• Julia Babensee (postdoctoral fellow) who is Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at 
Georgia Institute of Technology, and is active in the Georgia Tech/Emory Center for the 
Engineering of Living Tissues  
 
Other Rice core  faculty in TE include:  
 
• Kyriacos Athanasiou (PhD under Van Mow, Columbia University, 1989), leads the 
Musculoskeletal Bioengineering Laboratory.  
 
• Kyriacos Zygourakis, PhD, Professor of Bioengineering and Chair of the Chemical Engineering 
Department, m aintains a research track in TE as part of a diverse research program in 
bioengineering and chemical engineering.  
 
• Jennifer West (PhD thesis under Jeffrey Hubbell during his tenure at the University of Texas at 
Austin, 1996) is Associate Professor in the  Department of Bioengineering.  
 
Other Rice alumni active in TE include:  
 
• Konstantinos Konstantopoulos (PhD in Chemical Engineering under J. David Hellums, 1995), 
now Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at Johns Hopkins University  
 
• Brenda K. Man n, (PhD in Chemical Engineering, under Jacqueline V. Shanks, 1997), now 
Assistant Professor in the Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Science, Claremont, CA  
 
Georgia Institute of Technology / Emory University  
The Georgia Tech/Emory Center for the Engi neering of Living Tissues (GTEC) is a National Science 
Foundation -sponsored Engineering Research Center established in 1998 within the context of an evolving 
institutional framework for research and education in biomedical engineering linking the Georgia I nstitute 
of Technology with the Emory University School of Medicine.  A key milestone in the development of 
bioengineering at Georgia Tech was the 1993 receipt of a Whitaker Foundation Biomedical Engineering 
Development Award, which provided funds for facu lty and institutional development and the creation of 
a new PhD program.  Today, the major institutional elements in which bioengineering is centered are the 
Parker H. Pettit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience (IBB) at Georgia Tech and the joint G eorgia 
Tech/Emory Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering.  
 
Both GTEC and IBB are led by Robert Nerem, who joined the Georgia Tech faculty in 1987.  Nerem 
received his PhD from Ohio State University in 1964, and served on the faculty of the  Department of 
Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering at Ohio State and the Department of Mechanical Engineering 
at the University of Houston before coming to Georgia Tech.  He has been active in bioengineering 
research for more than thirty years, star ting with work on cardiovascular fluid dynamics and expanding 
into the study of the effects of physical forces on anchorage -dependent mammalian cells, especially as 
found in blood vessels.  Nerem was represented at the 1988 Granlibakken workshop with a pap er on the 
implications for the development of endothelialized synthetic vascular grafts of cell responses to shear 
stress.  
  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   48  
Figure 5.1: Nerem has been active in bioengineering for more than 25 years.  He has conducted 
fundamental research on problems in cardiovascular fluid dynamics.  This Figure shows his work 
on the influence of physical forces on anchorage -dependent mammalian cells, with much of this 
work focusing on the cells which make up a blood vessel, and some work on modeling the 
pancreas. (From CHI Report Appendix 5)  
 
The Georgia Tech/Emory tissue engineering program was initiated in 1994 and expanded with the support 
of the NSF ERC award beginning in 1998.  GTEC lists 29 faculty participants, whose primary faculty 
appointments are concentrated i n the joint Biomedical Engineering department, the Mechanical 
Engineering department at Georgia Tech, and the Surgery and Orthopedic Surgery departments at Emory.  
 
Georgia Tech/Emory alumni active in tissue engineering include:  
 
• Kacey Marra, now Assistan t Professor of Surgery at the University of Pittsburgh, and Janine 
Orban, now a research scientist at the DePuy Orthobiologics division of Johnson & Johnson, 
former postdoctoral fellows of Elliot Chaikof  
 
• Naomi Chesler, currently Assistant Professor of B iomedical Engineering at the University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, who carried out postdoctoral research with David Ku and Zorina Galis  
 
Columbia University  
Bioengineering studies have been ongoing at Columbia University since 1962, notably in the areas of 
cardiac and orthopedic biomechanics, although a formal department of biomedical engineering was not 
created until 2000.  Three of the leaders in the development of bioengineering at Columbia have played 
prominent roles in the emergence of tissue engineering.  
 Ziegler T
Nerem RM
Sambanis A
Nerem RM, 1991, Ann Biomed Eng p529
Ziegler T, 1994, J Cell Biochem p204
Ziegler T, 1995, Ann Biomed Eng p216
Nerem RM, 1995, Tissue Engineering p3
Tziampazis E, 1995, Biotechnol Progr p115
Nerem RM, 2000, Yonsei Medical Journal p7351991
1994
1995
2000This paper is among the top 10%  papers 
most cited in the TE review articles.
Legend
Paper Author
Patent Inventor
Lead Author
Lead Inventor
Paper or patent 
acknowledging 
NSF support
Other author(s) 
appearing on one 
paper only
Lead author 
institutions*Georgia Institute of Technology 
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   49 Richard Skalak received his PhD in civil engineering and engineering mechanics from Columbia in 1954, 
and joined the faculty in that department upon completing his doctorate.  His early research was focused 
on fluid mechanics, but by the mid -1960s he bega n to combine engineering mechanics and biomedical 
sciences in a series of pioneering investigations, notably in the area of blood rheology.  As noted 
previously, Skalak was a participant in the special Panel Meeting on Tissue Engineering at NSF in 
October 1987, and helped to coordinate the 1988 Granlibakken workshop.  Skalak served as director of 
Columbia’s Bioengineering Institute, a forerunner of today’s academic department, until his departure for 
the University of California at San Diego in 1988.  He di ed in 1997.  
 
Following completion of his medical training in Taiwan, Shu Chien came to the United States to study 
physiology at Columbia, receiving his PhD in 1957 with a thesis on the role of the sympathetic nervous 
system in compensatory mechanisms to he morrhage.  Chien continued this line of research as a faculty 
member at Columbia, and by the mid -1960s was focusing on blood rheology.  Starting in the late 1960s 
he conducted important work in this area in collaboration with Richard Skalak.  Shu Chien mov ed to 
UCSD in 1988 as well, where he has continued his research on blood rheology at the molecular and 
cellular level, and has served as director of WIBE and chair of the Department of Bioengineering.  
 
Van C. Mow earned his doctorate in applied mechanics a t Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1966.  As a 
faculty member at RPI in the early 1970s, he began to focus on orthopedic biomechanics.  He joined the 
Department of Orthopedic Surgery at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and 
the Department of Mechanical Engineering in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at 
Columbia in 1986, and currently serves as director of the Orthopedic Research Laboratory and chairman 
of the new Department of Biomedical Engineering.  Mow participat ed in the Granlibakken workshop in 
1988.  Former Mow doctoral students active in tissue engineering include:  
 
• Kyriacos Athanasiou (PhD, 1989), now Professor of Bioengineering at Rice University  
 
• Gerard Ateshian (PhD, 1991), currently Professor of Mecha nical Engineering and Bioengineering 
at Columbia  
 
• Louis Soslowsky (PhD, 1991), currently Associate Professor of Bioengineering at the University 
of Pennsylvania  
 
• Farshid Guilak (PhD, 1992), now Assistant Professor of Orthopedic Surgery at Duke Universi ty 
 
University of Pennsylvania  
The University of Pennsylvania has offered graduate degrees in bioengineering since 1961, and its 
Department of Bioengineering, established in 1973, was one of the earliest in the field.  Penn currently 
offers a PhD program t rack in Cell and Tissue Engineering.  More generally, however, as one of the most 
productive bioengineering departments, with long -standing research activities in many aspects of the 
application of mechanics to biomedical problems, the bioengineering depar tment at Penn has trained a 
number of researchers currently active in tissue engineering.  
 
Current Penn bioengineering faculty active in tissue engineering include:  
 
• Paul Ducheyne (PhD in Materials Science, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven), Professor of 
Bioengineering  
 
• Keith Gooch (PhD in Chemical Engineering, Penn State, 1995, under John A. Frangos), Assistant 
Professor of Bioengineering  
  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   50 • Steven Nicoll (PhD in Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley and San Francisco, 
2000), Assistant Profe ssor of Bioengineering  
 
• Solomon Pollack (PhD in Physics, University of Pennsylvania, 1961), Professor of 
Bioengineering  
 
• Louis Soslowsky (PhD in Engineering Mechanics, Columbia, 1991, under Van C. Mow), 
Associate Professor of Bioengineering  
 
Penn bioen gineering alumni active in the field include:  
 
• Fred Allen (PhD, 1996, under Solomon Pollack) is Assistant Professor of Biomedical 
Engineering at Drexel University  
 
• Kristen Billiar (PhD, 1998, under Michael Sacks) worked at Organogenesis after completin g her 
doctorate, and is now Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Worcester Polytechnic 
Institute  
 
• Andres Garcia (PhD, 1996, under David Boettiger and Paul Ducheyne) is Assistant Professor of 
Mechanical Engineering at Georgia Tech and a partic ipant in GTEC  
 
• Kevin Healy (PhD, 1990, under Paul Ducheyne) is Associate Professor of Bioengineering and 
Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley  
 
• Clark Hung (PhD, 1995, under Solomon Pollack) is Assistant Professor o f Biomedical 
Engineering at Columbia University  
 
• David Kohn (PhD, 1989, under Paul Ducheyne) is Associate Professor of Biologic and Materials 
Sciences at the University of Michigan School of Dentistry  
 
• Michelle LaPlaca (PhD, 1996, under Lawrence Thibau lt) is Assistant Professor of Biomedical 
Engineering at Georgia Tech, and a member of GTEC  
 
• Helen Lu (PhD, 1998, under Solomon Pollack) is Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering 
at Columbia University  
 
• David Shreiber (PhD, 1998, under David Mean ey) is Assistant Professor of Biomedical 
Engineering at Rutgers University  
 
Chemical Engineering graduates from Douglas Lauffenburger’s tenure at the University of Pennsylvania 
have been noted previously.  
 
5.3 Collaborations Among Tissue Engineers  
We exam ined patterns of co -authorship for several prominent authors in tissue engineering in order to 
understand the nature of collaboration occurring in the field.  Through an analysis of primary and 
secondary authors on a selection of tissue engineering papers,  CHI Research found several core 
collaborations which appear to have produced fruitful results.  Appendix 5 summarizes CHI’s conclusions 
about co -authorship patterns.  The analysis revealed the interweaving of public and private knowledge 
and the public an d private sectors in the development of tissue engineering research.  Figure 5.3 is 
included as an illustration (with Figure 5.2 as legend). The Figure shows that Jay Vacanti and Langer are 
prominent not only because of their highly cited Science  paper ref erred to above; nor because they have  
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   51 double or triple the number of papers compared to any other lead author; but also because of the highly 
collaborative nature of their work. Nine of the other lead authors shown in this Figure co -authored papers 
with Va canti and/or Langer.  Many of these might be PhD students who became established in their own 
right, including Mooney, Atala, Mikos and Ma.   
  
Figure 5.2: Legend for Overview of Lead Author Coauthorship (to explain Figure 5.3)Author
1st year
Papers
Pre-1990
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
A 19XX T N N NNNNN/M N N
B 19XX T N N NNNN N N N
C 19XX T N N NNNN N N N
D 19XX T N NN N
Authors B & C work 
together on all or almost all 
of their papers (i.e. 
equivalent to dots and bars 
connecting the authors in 
every year.)Authors C & D collaborated 
in 1994 & 1997.Authors A & B collaborated with Vacanti 
and/or Langer in 1993, 1994 and - for author 
A only - 1995 & 1996Authors A & B collaborated 
with Vacanti and/or Langer in 
1994 on the same paper.
Year of author's first paper in the set.Total number of papers
M = number of papers 
acknowledging NSF support.N = Number of 
papers author 
published each year 
that are in the set. 
 
Abt Assoc iates Inc.            Emergence of Tissue Engineering – Final Report   52  
Figure 5.3: Overview of Le ad Author Coauthorship Patterns  Author
1st year
Papers
Pre-1990
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Vacanti JP 1988 92 213413/2 12/3 7/28/37/3 214 15 4
Langer R 1985 76 237111/3 11/3 8/36/38/36/2 9 2 2
Vacanti CA 1991 31 2 310/1 2321 1 2 5
Mooney DJ 1990 53 112 2 5/2 4/25/34/17/510/2 10/2 2
Ingber DE 1987 17 5121 4 1 11 1
Atala A 1992 28 2 4 2 215 4 7 1
Yoo JJ 1997 10 12 3 3 1
Mikos AG 1993 25 5/1 3/3 1224 4 3 1
Freed LE 1993 20 2 4 1 24 5 1 1
Vunjaknovakovic G 1993 18 1 3 1 24 5 1 1
Ma PX 1995 15 2231 3 13
Grande DA 1987 12 2 2 1 11 3 1 1
Caplan AI 1989 27 2244 3 24 4 2
Goldberg VM 1989 17 2232 1 14 3 1
Bruder SP 1990 10 1 1 43 1
Yannas IV 1967 21 72 1 125 11/1 1
Spector M 1997 14 33 24/1 2
Galletti PM 1977 10 9 1
Aebischer P 1987 26 8143/1 1 2 2 1 2 1 1
Winn SR 1987 14 4 31 2 1 3
Hollinger JO 1986 14 2 2 312 3 1
Wozney JM 1988 11 12 2 32 1
Boyan BD 1988 14 3 1 1 5/11/1 2 1
Schwartz Z 1988 10 2 1 3/11/1 2 1
Athanasiou KA 1995 11 1312 3 1
Reddi AH 1972 13 5 5 11 1
Green H 1975 11 10 1
Bell E 1981 11 8 3
Hansbrough JF 1988 11 3 32 1 1 1