Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)
Documentation for Chlordane in
Back River
Prepared by the
Maryland Department of the Environment
2500 Broening Highway
Baltimore, MD  21224
Submitted to:
Water Protection Division
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region III
1650 Arch Street
Philadelphia PA  19103 -2029
July 1999TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ..................... 1
PREFACE ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 1
1.0 INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ .......................... 2
2.0 WATERSHED CHARACTERIZATION AND WATER QUALITY
DESCRIPTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ......3
      2.1 General Setting ................................ ................................ ........................... 3
      2.2 Water Quality Characterization ................................ ................................ .3
      2.3 Supporting Data
Pesticides in Baltimore Area Streams – 1994 -- Table 1 ................... 4
                   Back River Fish Tissue Data -- Table  2   ................................ .......... 6
      2.4 Technical Methods ................................ ................................ ..................... 7
3.0 TARGETED WATER QUALITY GOALS  8
4.0 SOURCE ASSESSMENT ................................ ................................ ................ 9
5.0 TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOADS AND LOAD ALLOCATIONS ........ 9
6.0 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT ................................ ................................ ............ 11
7.0 REFERENCES ................................ ................................ .............................. 12
ATTACHMENTS
1 ----- Health Advisory
2 ----- Back River Watershed (map)
3 ----- Finfish Sampling Regions (map)
4 ----- MDE Facts About – Contaminants and Toxicity
5 ----- MDE Facts About – Monitoring Contaminant Levels in Fish, Shellfish, and
Crabs1 Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)
 for Chlordane in Back River
Basin Code: 02-13-09-01
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Chlordane, a pesticide no longer authorized for use in the United States, has been detected in
certain Back River fish tissues at levels that required the issuance of a consumption advisory.  This
advisory has been in place since February 5, 1986 (attachment 1).  As a consequence of this
impairment by chlordane, Back River was identified as a water quality limited segment on the 1996
Section 303(d) list.  This document establishes a TMDL of 0.00059 ug/L in the water column
based on the United States Environmental Protection Agency water quality criterion for chlordane
and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidance level of 0.3 mg/kg in fish tissue.  Since the
TMDL value is impracticable to monitor directly in the water column, the U.S. FDA guidance level
will serve as the targeted endpoint.  In the absence of any defined current sources of chlordane
other than sporadic low levels from urban runoff sources, there is no opportunity to allocate loadings
among point and non-point sources.  The State intends to periodically monitor the contaminant
levels of fish and sediments in Back River to track the expected gradual declines, which are
indicated in currently available sediment data.  The goal of the monitoring program will be to identify
fish tissue levels that would allow for the withdrawal of the fish consumption advisory.
PREFACE
Section 303(d) of the federal Clean Water Act directs States to identify and list waters, known as
water quality limited segments ( WQLSs), in which current, required controls of a specified
substance are inadequate to achieve water quality standards.  For each WQLS, the State is to
establish a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) of the specified substance that the water can
receive without violating water quality standards.
On the basis of water quality problems associated with Back River, the watershed was identified on
the Maryland’s 1996 list of WQLSs as being impaired by toxic contaminants, specifically the
pesticide chlordane.  This report documents the proposed establishment of the chlordane TMDL for
the Back River.
Once the TMDL is approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
approved TMDL will be documented through the State’s Continuing Planning Process.  In the
future, the established TMDL will document monitoring activities required to track restoration of the
impaired resource and the lifting of the associated fish consumption advisory.21.0 INTRODUCTION
The Clean Water Act Section 303(d)(1)(C) and federal regulation 40 CFR 130.7(c)(1) direct each
State to develop a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) for all impaired waters on its Section
303(d) list.  A TMDL reflects the maximum pollutant loading of the impairing substance a
waterbody can receive and still meet water quality standards.  A TMDL can be expressed in mass
per time, toxicity, or any other appropriate measure (40 CFR 130.2( i)).  TMDLs must take into
account seasonal variations and a margin of safety ( MOS) to allow for uncertainty.  Maryland’s
1996 303(d) list, submitted to EPA by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), lists
the Back River watershed segment for toxics, specifically the pesticide chlordane.  That 1996 listing
was prompted by historical fish tissue data and an associated fish consumption advisory based on
1980s monitoring of the fish resources.
This report documents the development of a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) for chlordane in
the estuarine portion of Back River.  This watershed, referred to as basin
02-13-09- 01, was first identified as being impaired because of chlordane on Maryland’s 303(d) list
for 1996.
Chlordane has been identified as a pollutant of concern because it is a bioaccummulative pesticide
that can cause both acute toxic and longer-term chronic effects, and it has carcinogenic potential in
animals.  Chlordane was used from its introduction in the 1940s until it was withdrawn from the
market in 1988 as a broad-spectrum pesticide for agricultural, home, and commercial control of
insects.  Its polycyclic chlorinated organic structure produces biological effects similar to those of
DDT, PCBs, and other related substances.
The Maryland Department of Agriculture suspended broad-based uses of chlordane in 1975 by
restricting its use to termite control.  Only certified applicators were authorized to purchase
quantities greater than ½ gallon after that date.  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
reached an agreement with the sole producer of the product on July 1, 1986, which led to the
further restriction of use to the exterior of buildings, and to the ultimate termination of all sales by
April 15, 1988.  EPA officially cancelled the product's registration in 1993.
Concerns with the substance were largely brought to the State’s attention through results of its fish
tissue monitoring, which has been an element of the State’s water quality monitoring efforts since the
1970s.  Water quality impairments in the estuary of Back River were initially suggested as a result of
fish taken from waters of the tidal portion of the basin in 1981.  The levels were of sufficient
magnitude to justify the issuance of a fish consumption advisory.  All available evidence indicates
that the source of the chlordane in the fish tissue is the historical accumulation of chlordane in the
sediments of the tidal reaches of the watershed.
The river’s designation as a “water quality limited segment” is based upon violations of the use
designation for the waterbody and the narrative standard for toxic substances in the State’s
regulations.  Specifically, the use designation of Class I waters, which requires at Code of Maryland
Regulations (COMAR) Title 26.08.02.01 B (2) (a), that “All waters of this State shall be protected3for the basic uses of water contact recreation, fish, other aquatic life, wildlife, and water supply.”
Later in the regulations at COMAR 26.08.02.01 C, the narrative statement concerning toxic
pollution states that “the waters of this State may not be polluted by: . . . (3) high temperature, toxic,
corrosive or other deleterious substances attributable to sewage, industrial wastes, or other waste in
concentrations or combinations which: . . . (b) are harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.”
Because the fish inhabiting the waters cannot be consumed without restriction, the river is
considered to be impaired.
2.0 WATERSHED CHARACTERIZATION AND WATER QUALITY
DESCRIPTION
2.1 General Setting
Back River is a tidal estuary of the Chesapeake Bay located on the western shore just north of
Baltimore Harbor (see attachment 2).  The watershed of Back River is fed primarily by Herring
Run, Redhouse Run, and Stemmers Run. The entire watershed is about 15 miles long and 6 miles
wide at its widest point.   The watershed has a northwest to southeast longitudinal orientation.
The upper-most portion of the watershed originates in the Piedmont Plateau region of the State.  At
about six miles from its origin, the primary tributary, Herring Run begins to traverse the Fall Line,
which separates the Piedmont Plateau from the Coastal Plain.  Thus, a majority of the watershed lies
within the Coastal Plain Province.
The watershed is largely developed, with most being in residential use.  There is some industrial
development along the lower end of the free flowing portion of Herring Run, and along the south
shore of the tidal portion of the basin.  The largest wastewater discharge is from the Back River
sewage treatment plant.  It discharges approximately 120 million gallons per day of treated
wastewater to the upper tidal reaches of the estuarine portion of the system.
2.2 Water Quality Characterization
Water quality information on chlordane in ambient waters of the basin is limited.  Data from an
unpublished 1994 urban stormwater runoff study by the Department of the Environment (MDE draft
August 1997) suggests that the occurrence of chlordane is unpredictable in spatial scope and
temporal extent.  Seven of the ten samples taken from Back River watershed stations (ZHR0001-
upstream and HRR0033-downstream) produced chlordane levels that were either not detected
(ND), or less than the level of quantification.  Of the three that were measurable, one was at the
level of quantification (0.02 ug/L or parts per billion - ppb), one was at 0.03 ug/L, and the third was
at 0.08 ug/L (Table 1).  Downstream observations were equal to or less than upstream
observations.
Table 1 Pesticides in Back River Tributary – 19944Herring Run Winter Spring Summer-1 Summer-2 Fall
ZHR0001a0.03 ND 0.02 <0.02 0.08
HRR0033b<0.02 ND <0.02 <0.02 <0.02
    Units in ug/L or ppb.
     a.  Upstream
     b.  Downstream
Since the level of detection in this study was two orders of magnitude above the EPA water quality
criterion for chlordane, and the measured levels were relatively close to the level of detection, the
reliability of the data for determining absolute conditions is considered to be questionable.
The only chlordane data from point sources in the watershed is from the Back River wastewater
treatment plant.  In 1989 no chlordane was detected.  More recent sampling in May and August
1998 also produced no detectable chlordane.  The detection levels in 1998 were 0.086 ug/L
(personal communication – John Martin, Baltimore City DPW).
2.3 Supporting Data
Fish tissue samples serve as a key source of data for chlordane.  Two or more fish species,
representing bottom feeders and higher trophic level predators, are targeted for collection at each
statewide monitoring location.  Species having a wide range of occurrence are targeted to allow for
regional comparisons in addition to the temporal trends at each network site.  Chlordane has been
identified in almost every fish tissue sample collected under the State’s fish tissue monitoring
program, which was institutionalized in 1976.  The fish tissue monitoring program currently consists
of a network of over thirty monitoring locations where triennial sampling allows for statewide trend
assessments.  This network is supplemented with additional monitoring sites of suspected concern.
Statewide, most fish tissue chlordane levels have been well below the 0 .3 ppm action level
established by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).  Elevated levels of chlordane in
fish tissue have appeared most commonly in urban areas, especially those located near the head of
tidal influence.  Among the sites of greatest accumulation were Baltimore Harbor (Patapsco River)
and Back River.  In these water bodies, and Lake Roland (an impoundment on Jones Falls and a
tributary to the Patapsco River), the levels of chlordane in selected fish tissues frequently exceeded
the action guidelines of the USFDA.
Following the initial surveys of the 1970s, where the results indicated a potential for problems in
selected urban areas, additional monitoring efforts were focused on the areas of greatest concern,
which included Back River.  The limited monitoring conducted in Back River in 1981 substantiated
the concern for urban waters and resulted in additional and more definitive monitoring in subsequent
years.  Results of the monitoring in the Back River watershed are contained in the files of the
Department of the Environment and are summarized in Table 2.5Table 2.  Fish Tissue Data from Back River
Sampling
Year Species Sample TypeConcentration
mg/kg wet weightNumber
of FishRiver
 Region
1981 Brown bullhead Whole fish 0.50 N/A 1
White perch Whole fish 0.46 N/A 1
1982 Gizzard shad Edible portion 0.24 N/A N/A
Channel catfish Edible portion 0.15 N/A N/A
White catfish Edible portion 0.60 N/A N/A
White perch Edible portion 0.13 N/A N/A
1983 American eel No skin, no head 0.07 1 4
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.31 15 1
Channel catfish Fillet 0.67 14 1
White perch Fillet 0.49 5 1
White perch Fillet 0.20 14 4
Yellow perch Fillet 0.10 3 1
1985 Channel catfish Fillet 1.06 10 1
Channel catfish Fillet 0.82 4 2
Channel catfish Fillet 0.77 5 3
Channel catfish Fillet 0.17 24 4
White perch Fillet 0.29 20 1
White perch Fillet 0.08 3 2
White perch Fillet 0.16 19 3
White perch Fillet 0.10 27 4
American eel No skin, no head 0.33 5 1
American eel No skin, no head 0.44 1 2
American eel No skin, no head 0.18 1 4
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.24 23 1
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.16 18 2
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.13 18 3
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.15 38 4
Spot Fillet 0.08 1 4
White catfish Fillet 0.12 1 4
1986 Brown bullhead Fillet 0.31 16 1
Brown bullhead Fillet 0.38 4 2
Channel catfish Fillet 1.34 2 1
Hogchoker Whole fish 0.15 31 3
White catfish Fillet 1.25 5 1
White catfish Fillet 0.39 2 2
White perch Fillet 0.38 4 1
White perch Fillet 0.16 4 2
White perch Fillet 0.17 7 3
1987 Channel catfish Fillet 0.25 11 2
White catfish Fillet 0.39 1 1
White catfish Fillet 0.26 2 4
Hogchoker Whole fish 0.08 5 2
Hogchoker Whole fish 0.08 5 3
White perch Fillet 0.05 1 1
White perch Fillet 0.12 11 3
White perch Fillet 0.34 2 4
N/A – Information not available
*River region = 1 – head of tide, 2 – upper middle, 3, lower middle, 4 – lower region  (attachment 3)
Concentrations in bold exceed the USFDA guidance level of 0.3 mg/kg6Since chlordane was detected in a number of fish tissue samples above the 0 .3 ppm USFDA action
level, primarily in the headwaters region of the estuary, the waterbody was considered to be
impaired.
 
 2.4 Technical Methods
 
 Because chlordane was banned nearly 15 years ago, chlordane loadings other than those from
existing bottom sediments are expected to be negligible (see Section 4.0, Source Assessment).
Consequently the bottom sediments are assumed to be the dominant current day source of
chlordane in Back River water and fish tissue1.  This means that the rate of reduction of chlordane
concentrations in the biologically active sediment layer will ultimately control the water column and
fish tissue concentrations.   Chlordane concentrations in sediments are reduced by a number of
processes.
 
• Burial/dilution of contaminated sediments;
• Dissolution into, followed by vaporization from, the water column;
• Uptake by biota living in the sediment;
• Chemical degradation; and
• Biological degradation.
The dominant processes are likely burial and/or dissolution followed by volatilization from the water
body.  Eskin et al.  (1996) estimated sedimentation rates in the Back River estuary to range from
0.2 to 0.93 cm/yr.  Howard (1991) provides estimated volatilization half-lives from a representative
environmental pond, river and lake as 8-26, 3.6-5.2, and 14.4-20.6 days, respectively.  Howard
also states that adsorption to sediments can significantly affect the importance of volatilization.
Within this system, neither uptake by biota or degradation are expected to significantly reduce
chlordane levels in sediments.
Water quality criteria have been developed by EPA to protect marine aquatic life from toxic effects
(0.004 ug/L) and to protect humans from the consumption of aquatic organisms (0.0022 ug/L)
(EPA 1999).  These values were recently updated from the earlier water quality criteria developed
by EPA to protect marine aquatic life from toxic effects (0.0043 ug/L) and to protect humans from
the consumption of aquatic organisms (0.00059 ug/L) (EPA 1999).  As an added margin of safety,
the earlier and more conservative ambient water quality criteria for the protection of humans from
the consumption of organisms was employed, adding a safety margin of over a factor of three to the
TMDL.
An equilibrium approach, based on the EPA 1993 sediment criteria development methodology
(EPA 1993), was employed to provide an upper estimate of the dissolved water column
concentration based on recent sediment concentrations following the steps provided below.
                                                                1   Note that Observed data ( Eskin 1996), and other analyses (See Section 2.4) suggest that the sediment
concentrations of chlordane in the Back River are declining over time due to natural recovery of the estuary,
through gradual biodegradation, dispersal, and natural burial by sedimentation.7First, the log Koc is estimated from the log Kow from the empirically derived equation provided
below.
log Koc =  0.00028 + 0.983 × log Kow 
where:
Kow  =  octanol/water equilibrium partition coefficient
Koc  =  octanol/organic carbon equilibrium partition coefficient
Substituting the experimentally determined log Kow chlordane (5.54) from Howard, 1991 into this
equation yields:
log Koc =  0.00028 + 0.983 × 5.54 
log Koc =  5.45
Koc =  279,000 L/kg
The concentration in water in equilibrium with this sediment can be estimated by the equation
provided below.  It should be emphasized that this best represents the pore water concentration and
the overlying water column may be subject to greater dilution.
Cw = Cs /(foc × Koc)
where:
Cw =  concentration in water ( ug/L)
Cs    =  concentration in sediment ( ug/kg)
foc   =  fraction organic carbon ( unitless)
Koc  =  organic carbon/water equilibrium partition coefficient (L/kg)
Recent measurements of Back River sediments (Baker et al.  1997) indicate an average
concentration of 1.12 ng/g (dry weight) for chlordane, 5.06% total carbon (dry weight). Applying
these values yields a predicted water column concentration of  0.0000793 ug/L  (7.93 x 10-5 ug/L),
significantly lower than the most conservative water quality criteria.
Cw = Cs /(foc × Koc)
Cw = 1.12 ug/kg  /(0.0506 g/g  × 279,000 L/kg)
Cw = 0.0000793 ug/L  = 7.93 x 10-5
This equilibrium approach can also be used to estimate a sediment quality benchmark (SQB) from
the water quality criteria as shown in the equation below (EPA 1993).8SQB = WQC × foc × Koc
where:
WQC = water quality criteria 
Substituting 0.00059 ug/L value for the water quality criteria in the above equation:
SQB = 0.00059 ug/L  ×  0.0506 g/g   ×  279,000 L/kg
SQB = 8.33 ug/kg or 8.33 ng/g
Current sediment levels (1.12 ng/g dry weight) are well below the calculated SQB.  This represents
indirect evidence that sediment concentrations of chlordane have declined below levels that would
result in elevated fish tissue levels.
Direct evidence of this decline is provided by comparing the recent concentration of chlordane in
Back River sediments to older studies.  Baker et al.  1997 report an average chlordane
concentration of 1.12 ng/g in Back River sediments while Eskin et al.  1996 report 22.4 ng/g in
1991.  Although historical data are sparse, these data indicate a twenty-fold decrease in measured
chlordane concentrations over a five year period.  This indicates that natural attenuation processes
have already reduced chlordane levels below all pertinent water quality criteria and sediment quality
benchmarks.  Further, it is anticipated that continued watershed monitoring efforts will indicate a
corresponding reduction in fish tissue concentrations as well as continued reductions in sediment
concentrations.
3.0  TARGETED WATER QUALITY GOALS
Although the State has not adopted any specific guidance levels for chlordane in its regulations or
water quality standards, it does take action on environmental contaminants that significantly increase
the risk of cancer.  The level of significance used by the State in these analyses is that level that
produces an increased risk greater than one in 100,000 of the population.  This is generally
expressed as a risk that is greater than 1.0 x 10-5.  Assuming that the general population has a risk
of cancer from all causes of at least 25%, or 25,000 in 100,000, the threshold for concern for a
single substance would increase the general risk to 25,00 1 in 100,000.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) has established specific guidance levels
for fish tissue in the commercial market.  This level of 0.3 mg/kg ( ≈ parts per million ( ppm)), in
association with the assumed average daily consumption of fish (6.5 grams per day), produces an
estimated excess cancer risk associated with chlordane of 1.0 x 10-5.  Since this value approximates
the 1.0 x 10-5 level of risk used by the State for determining levels of significant excess cancer risk,
Maryland generally considers waters to be impaired when edible fish tissue levels for any species
exceed the USFDA guidance level of 0.3 mg/kg.  Project endpoints for the control or mitigation of9chlordane as it affects the edibility of fish taken from Back River in the future would be linked to the
achieving of a reduction of chlordane in the targeted fish tissues to a level of 0.3 mg/kg or less.
4.0  SOURCE ASSESSMENT
The majority of environmental loadings of chlordane were required to cease as of 1988 with the end
of authorized commercial use.  However, stocks held by homeowners could be a continuing source,
as would be the erosion and transport of existing soils previously contaminated by chlordane and
related compounds.  Occasional studies of urban and agricultural runoff, as presented in Section
2.2, detect minute amounts of chlordane, but the occurrence is not sufficiently stable to allow for the
identification of definitive sources ( MDE  draft 1997, see Section 2.2).  Thus, there do not appear
to be any defined sources of chlordane to control or regulate at this time.  These undefined sources
are gradually diminishing, and are not believed to constitute a significant contribution to the existing
conditions in the estuary.
Chlordane is not an expected substance in point source discharges.  If it were to occur in municipal
discharges, it would be through intermittent, illicit, and generally untraceable sources.  Therefore,
further regulation and control of point sources is not considered to be a viable means of controlling
the environmental occurrence of chlordane.  Efforts to enhance these source reductions are being
promoted by local governments through the offering of  “household hazardous chemical disposal
days.”  These offerings have been ongoing since the late 1980s and are continuing to provide local
citizens with an environmentally acceptable means of disposal.  Similar efforts have been extended
to farmers for disposal of agricultural chemicals no longer suitable for use.
5.0 TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOADS AND LOAD ALLOCATIONS
Chlordane is a persistent substance, which has a high affinity for sediment adsorption and generally
settles to the bottom with the sediment in the estuary.  Water column measurements are thus
generally extremely low and difficult to achieve in a manner that would allow for the adequate
characterization of a large estuarine system.  Sediment analyses are also costly and provide
information only on the precise location where sampling occurred.  Fish tissue, however, serves to
accumulate and integrate bioaccumulative contaminants, such as chlordane, and is, therefore, the
preferred endpoint measure of environmental contamination for this substance.
Water Quality Endpoint :   As noted above, the water quality endpoint for this TMDL is
expressed in terms of achieving the specific criterion for which Back River was identified on the
303(d) list.  Specifically, the current US FDA guidance level for fish tissue concentrations of 0.3
mg/kg were used to determine the need to list Back River as being impaired by chlordane.
Consequently, this value is the appropriate water quality endpoint.
Total Maximum Daily Load :   The computations provided above establish a linkage of the fish
tissue water quality endpoint of 0.3 mg/kg to a water column concentration of 0.00059 ug/L or less
(EPA 1980).  Thus, MDE is establishing a concentration of 0.00059 ug/L as the appropriate
measure for the Back River chlordane TMDL.10Seasonal Variations and Critical Conditions :   The TMDL is represented as a concentration
level that is protective of toxic human health effects at all times .  Implicitly, the TMDL accounts for
seasonal variations since it is protective throughout the year (i.e., “at all times”).  This situation does
not present an issue of controlling for critical conditions for several reasons.  First, the notion of
“critical conditions” does not arise in the traditional sense for this TMDL.  The allowable
concentrations of chlordane are based on human fish consumption over a long time period, which
averages out any critical events.  Additionally, human health standards, upon which the TMDL is
founded, account critical sub-populations that might be more susceptible to toxic risk.  Second, the
TMDL is protective at all times, which implies that any “critical conditions” within that timeframe are
considered.  Finally, the TMDL level established to be protective of human health are more
conservative than the chlordane levels established to protect environmental resources, implying that
critical conditions for environmental resources are also addressed by the previous logic that applied
to human health.
TMDL Allocation :  The studies referenced above suggest that the transient events, in which
minute levels of chlordane have been observed in association with point and nonpoint sources, are
too insignificant to support the quantification of  meaningful allocations to these sources.  Existing
chlordane in the bottom sediment layer of the estuary is the only significant source causing elevated
fish tissue concentrations.  Therefore, the sole allocation of chlordane is to the existing bottom
sediments of the Back River estuary.
Margin of Safety :   EPA’s TMDL guidance requires each TMDL to include a margin of safety
(MOS) that accounts for uncertainty in the relationship between pollutant sources and the quality of
the receiving waters.  The USDA fish tissue guidance level, which serves as the water quality
measurement endpoint, identified the specific need for a TMDL.
The older and more conservative US EPA ambient water quality standard for the protection of
humans from the ingestion of aquatic life (0.00059 ug/L) serves as the basis of the TMDL.  This
criterion is more conservative than the current ambient water quality criteria (0.0022 ug/L) and was
employed to add a margin of safety.
TMDL Summary :
Based on the previous discussion, the TMDL or Chlordane may be summarized as follows:
 TMDL = WLA +    LA + MOS
 0.00059=    0 +
0.00059+ built-in
(ug/l – at all times).  No future allocation is provided.
Where, WLA is Waste Load Allocation
LA is Load Allocation, and
MOS is Margin of Safety11Reasonable Assuredness of Implementation :   The State of Maryland is committed to
protecting the State’s rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands, and estuaries.  Observed data ( Eskin 1996)
suggest that the sediment concentrations of chlordane in the Back River are declining over time due
to natural recovery of the estuary, through gradual biodegradation, dispersal, and natural burial by
sedimentation.  The computations provided in Section 2.4 suggest that current sediment
concentrations of chlordane are below levels expected to result in elevated fish tissue
concentrations.  No observations of fish tissue are currently available to confirm this, and older fish
may continue to have elevated levels due to past bioaccumulation.
Aside from the processes of natural recovery, dredging of this shallow estuary would be the only
other means of removing the chlordane-contaminated sediments.  Environmental concerns and the
high costs associated with dredging place the chlordane impairment in Back River in the category of
“Extremely Difficult Problems” as defined in Chapter 6 of the Report of the Federal Advisory
Committee on the Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) Program.
In consideration of the very difficult and extremely costly process that would be involved in
removing the contaminated sediments, Maryland is proposing to institute an iterative monitoring and
evaluation process to track the natural attenuation of the contaminant as the means of ensuring
minimal impact to human health and the environment.  Routine sediment and fish tissue monitoring in
the estuary, with occasional stream and water column samples, will be established on a time frame
sufficient to ensure the discernment of trends.  At a minimum, triennial monitoring of the fish and
surficial sediments will be conducted in the estuarine or tidal portion of the river.  An evaluation of
the required sampling frequency will be considered each year as information from the statewide
monitoring network is developed.
6.0 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
Maryland’s inventory of water quality is documented in a report prepared under section 305(b) of
the Clean Water Act (CWA).  This report, commonly called the “305(b) Report”, serves as the
primary source of information used to develop Maryland’s 303(d) list of water quality limited
segments.  The 305(b) report is developed with consideration of information provided by State
agencies, local governments, and citizens.  The 303(d) list, which is updated every two years,
undergoes a formal public comment process.
In reviewing options for managing the concerns regarding chlordane in fish tissue, the State opted to
issue fish consumption guidelines.  A press release issued on February 5, 1986 provided the initial
information to the public and continuing information is provided via notification in the fishing
guidebooks provided to all licensed anglers in the State.
Notice has been published annually in the State’s tidewater fishing guide since the late 1980’s.  The
specific language in the guide is as follows:
      Salt Water Fishing Health Advisory12• “Individuals are advised to limit their consumption of channel catfish and American eels from
Back River and the Baltimore Harbor because the contamination level of chlordane exceeds
FDA’s approved standards.
• These fish should not be used as a substantial part of the daily diet.
• These fish should be avoided by women of childbearing age, infants, and children.”
Various public information and education documents have been prepared to help reduce the
potential for unacceptable exposure by the fish-consuming public.  Fact sheets advising of
“Contaminants and Toxicity” (attachment 4) and “Monitoring Contamination Levels in Fish, Shellfish
and Crabs” (attachment 5) have been produced and distributed by the Department of the
Environment.  Additional public information literature has been prepared to assist individuals in
minimizing risks through proper preparation of fish for consumption.137.0REFERENCES
• Baker, J., Mason, R., Cornwell, J., Ashley, J., Halka, J., Hill, J., 1997, “Spatial mapping of
Sedimentary Contaminants in the Baltimore Harbor/Patapsco River/Back River System.”
Report to the Maryland Department of the Environment.
• Eskin, R.A., Rowland, K.H., Alegre, D.Y. 1996. “Contaminants in Chesapeake Bay Sediments
1984-1991”, Chesapeake Bay Program, CBP/TRS 145/96.
• Handbook of Environmental Fate and Exposure Data for Organic Chemicals, Volume III,
Pesticides. Howard, P.H. ed., 1991, Lewis Publishers, Inc.
• Maryland Department of the Environment, 1997.  Residential Use Pesticides in Streams of Four
Metropolitan Baltimore Neighborhoods 1994 (draft).
• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Jul. 1998.  Report of the Federal Advisory Committee
on the Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) Program, The National Advisory Council for
Environmental Policy and Technology (NACEPT).  EPA 100-R-98-006.
• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Feb. 1998.  Integrated Risk Information System
(IRIS) – Chlordane (Technical) CASRN 12789-03-06.
http://www.epa.gov.ngispgm3/iris/subst/0142.htm
• U.S. EPA. 1980. "Ambient Water Quality Criteria for Chlordane", Office of Water, EPA
440/5-80-027, October 1980.
 
• U.S. EPA. 1999. "National Recommended Water Quality Criteria", Office of Water, May 21,
1999.
• U.S. EPA. 1993. "Technical Basis for Deriving Sediment Quality Criteria for Nonionic Organic
Contaminants for the Protection of Benthic Organisms by Using Equilibrium Partitioning", Office
of Water, EPA-822-R-93-001, September 1993.