ROMANIAN  JOURNAL  OF NEUROLOGY  – V OLUME  XVI, N O. 3, 2017 89Delirium in acute neurological care 
department. Causes, pathogenesis and 
management
Iulian Dan Cuciureanu2, Cristina Croitoru2, Victor Constantinescu1, 
Tudor Cuciureanu1
1“Gr . T . Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi , Romania
2“Prof. Dr . N. Oblu” Emergencies Clinical Hospital, Iasi, Romania
ABSTRACT
Deﬁned as an organic decline, often transient, undulant, mainly of cognitive function, memory, language, delirium is 
often considered the attribute of patients hospitalized with multiple illnesses. Medical costs, and subsequent 
psycho-logical implications, prognostic particularities gives him a special social importance. Although with multiple 
recog-nized etiology, its pathogenesis is partially known, involving relays and neural networks. In the presence of 
known predisposing factors and under some precipitating inﬂuence like acute metabolic or inﬂammatory disorders 
(interleu-kins 1, 6, caspaze), infections, vascular endothelial dysfunction that cause malfunctions of neurotrans -
mitters (GABA, glutamate, acetylcholine, melatonin) occurs, mainly, an attentional  matrix disruption (attention 
modulation is done through the collaboration of the neocortex, thalamus and brainstem’s reticular substance) as 
well as structural chang-es of neural networks and their interaction with cerebral default network. Its prevalence is 
estimated at the time of admission between 11-30% of patients. Early identi ﬁ cation of patients at risk and multi-
factorial and multidisciplinary approach represents ef ﬁcient solution to prevent delirium consequences. Authors 
performed a synthetic rundown of the main theoretical  aspects of delirium and exemplify by a retrospective study in 
“Prof. Dr. N. Oblu” Neurological  Clinic of Emergencies hospital, Iasi. From 3,707 patients admitted in one year, 
32% had impaired language and only 7% have presented confusional syndrome: 58% in ischemic strokes or 
hemorrhagic  (9%), epilepsy (18%), intra-cerebral  tumors (1.8%), metabolic encephalopathies (7%), neuro -
degenerative disorders (22%), infections (3%). Ages prevailed over 60 years and males (64%), low outcome in 
15%, 80% had improvement in evolution and 5% died.
Keywords: delirium, causes, management
Corresponding author:
Cristina Croitoru 
E-mail: croitorucristinag@yahoo.comORIGINAL ARTICLES
INTRODUCTION
Delirium is also known throughout medical lit-
erature as acute confusional state, organic psycho-
sis, acute organic brain syndrome, acute cerebral insufﬁ  ciency or toxic-metabolic encephalopathy 
(10), all re ﬂ ecting the word’s etymology. Delirium 
derives from the latin word “delirare” which can be literally translated into “deviate from the furrow”. 
In a much more complex de ﬁ nition of the term, 
delirium is an acute, ﬂ uctuating, transient, usually 
reversible neuropsychiatric syndrome character-ized by two main features: cognitive dysfunctions and inattention, the last being a sine qua noncondi-tion (10).Delirium can occur at any age; however it is a 
frequent cause and an important complication of hospitalization especially among elderly people (10). In studies where patients were assessed within 24 hours, prevalence rates ranged from 10% to 31% among older hospitalized patients (26,21). 
Even though it is de ﬁ ned as a reversible mental 
disorder, delirium can become chronic with perma-nent functional and cognitive sequelae (16). Pre-dominantly in the elderly, it can be the trigger fac-tor for poor outcomes, irrespective of the underlying cause: functional decline, loss of independence, increased hospitalization (10) and rapid progres-sion of underlying dementia (9). Death occurs in an Ref: Ro J Neurol. 2017;XVI(3) 
DOI: 10.37897/RJN.2017.3.2
Article History: 
Received: 28 August 2017 
Accepted: 15 September 2017ROMANIAN  JOURNAL  OF NEUROLOGY  – V OLUME  XVI, N O. 3, 2017 90
approximately quarter to third of patients (33,23) 
and it is due either to the underlying condition that precipitated delirium or to complications second-ary to prolonged in bed immobilization. 
Despite the fact that approximately 30-40% of 
delirium cases are preventable (26), there is an in-creased rate of under diagnosis. This is an second-ary to incomplete understanding of pathogenic mechanisms, dif ﬁ culty in recognizing the symp-
toms as delirium, lack of biological markers and limited pharmacological therapy. 
Taking into consideration the fact that early 
identi ﬁ cation of patients at risk and multifactorial 
and multidisciplinary approach represents ef ﬁ cient 
solution to prevent its consequences, the authors performed a rundown of the main synthetic theory of delirium. Therefore, the most frequent causes, pathogenic mechanisms and main principles of pre-vention and management are discussed and then illustrated by a retrospective study in “Prof. Dr. N. Oblu” I Neurology Clinic of Emergency Clinical Hospital.
MATERIALS AND METHOD
The authors performed a retrospective clinical 
study of 3707 patients admitted at the Iasi “Prof. Dr. N. Oblu” Emergency Clinical Hospital, neuro-logical clinics, between 101 2015 and 31 12 2015. The data were collected from the clinic’s medical records, emergency medical records and intensive care charts. Clinical information registered includ-ed: diagnosis at admission, diagnosis at 72 hours and diagnosis at release from hospital, age and gen-der psychological assessment using Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Global Assess-
ment of Functioning Scale (GAFS). Statistical analysis of data obtained was then performed.
RESULTS
From the 3,707 patients admitted 7% presented 
acute confusional non traumatic state characterized mainly by psychomotor involvement and impaired cognition, with slowly or no response to question-ing but also by psychomotor agitation, excitation and hyper vigilance. Age over 60 years prevailed as well as male sex (60%). Regarding the main pa-thology, 39% of delirium cases occurred secondary to an ischemic stroke, while 9% to a hemorrhagic 
one. Neurodegenerative pathology was found in 22% of patients. Epilepsy was the cause of either ictal or postictal delirium in 18% of cases. Other causes were less frequent: metabolic encephalopa-thy (7%), infections (3%) or cranial space occupy-ing lesions (1,8%).
Regarding the short time outcome, 80% of pa-
tients improved, 15% had no change in general 
condition and 5% deceased due to underlying dis-ease.
DISCUSSIONS
Delirium is clinically characterized by subacute 
changes in cognition, awareness, behavioral distur-
bances, inversion of the sleep-wake cycle and also illusions and simple hallucinations. The two com-mon features of these manifestations are ﬂ uctuation 
during the course of the day and nocturnal exacer-bation (19). In many reviews of medical literature, delirium is divided into three categories: hyperac-tive secondary to alcohol, benzodiazepine or barbi-turate withdrawal (14), hypoactive witch is the most common form in elderly patients and mixed syndromes. It appears that hyperactive delirium has the best prognosis (18).
Delirium is a multi-factorial mental disorder 
that results from the attack of multiple possible 
trigger factors upon an individual that possess nu-merous predisposing/risk factors. Risk factors are classically divided into modi ﬁ able (sensory impair-
ment, immobilization, polypharmacy, environment, sustained sleep deprivation, emotional distress or alcohol excess) and nonmodi ﬁ able (age over 65 
years, male sex, history of delirium, stroke, neuro-logical disease, falls or gait disorder, multiple co-morbidities) (10). 
The most studied non modi ﬁ able risk factor that 
has shown the highest cause-effect association is ROMANIAN  JOURNAL  OF NEUROLOGY  – V OLUME  XVI, N O. 3, 2017 91
preexisting dementia (3). At least two thirds of cas-
es of delirium occur in patients with underlying de-mentia or cognitive impairment (13). It appears that vascular dementia and late-onset Alzheimer disease predispose to delirium more than fronto temporal dementia (24). 
The results of the present study correspond to 
the literature: male predominance and advanced age are known non modi ﬁ able risk factors. Neuro-
degenerative diseases were found in 22% of deliri-um cases. This is consistent with the fact that syn-aptic loss and neuron destruction increase the vulnerability of the nervous system to trigger fac-tors, by altering the “brain reserve” (7). It is also interesting to mention that the relation between de-lirium and dementia is bilateral: an acute confu-sional state could contribute to developing demen-tia in the future. Also, delirium may unmask a previously “mute” dementia. However, by Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-ders, Fifth Edition (DSM5)  criteria, dementia can-
not be diagnosed with certainty when delirium is present (1). 
In terms of trigger factors, acute confusional 
states have six major causes: toxic-metabolic en-cephalopathies, multifocal brain lesions (including neurodegenerative disorders and infections of the central nervous system) which produce multiple small neuronal lesions, focal brain lesions especial-ly secondary to ischemic stroke, head trauma le-sions which produce a disturbance in the structure of cortex/midbrain/brainstem, space-occupying le-sions and epilepsy (19). 
Theoretically any metabolic disturbance that 
modiﬁ  es acid/base balance, electrolyte balance or 
nutritional requirements of both neurons and glia can interfere with neurotransmitter action: acidosis, alkalosis, hyponatremia, hypernatremia (31), hy-perglycemia, hypoglycemia, renal insuf ﬁ ciency, 
hepatic failure, anemia, endocrinopathies (thyroid storm, Hashimoto’s encephalopathy), hypoxia/an-oxia, infection and paraneoplastic states. In this category are also included both alcohol, barbitu-rates, opiates withdrawal and administration of var-ious medication especially drugs that interfere with the cholinergic transmission: mainly antiparkinso-nian medication (levodopa) but also neuroleptics, antidepressants and antihistamines (19).
One of the most frequent space-occupying le-
sion that produces delirium in elderly people is a chronic subdural hematoma which can appear fol-
lowing a minor trauma of a brain with increased venous fragility and generalized brain atrophy. Also, primary or secondary brain tumors may man-ifest with delirium. 78% of patients have psychiat-ric symptoms during brain tumor development, but only 18% of these present with isolated psychiatric symptoms as the ﬁ rst clinical manifestation (15). A 
recent case report states delirium as the ﬁ rst pre-
senting syndrome of melanoma brain metastases (20). The low prevalence of space-occupying le-sions as a cause of delirium in the present study may be explained by the fact that most space-occu-pying lesions are admitted in a neurosurgery ser-vice and not in a neurology clinic.
The connection between delirium and epilepsy 
is quite complex due to the fact that these condi-tions are often intertwined: absence or complex partial seizures can mimic delirium, many of the conditions resulting in delirium may also induce seizures and both conditions may coexist at the same patient (14). Epileptic seizures are due to and also produce a disturbance in the electrical network of the cortex and lower central nervous structures which may induce delirium. In relation to a seizure, delirium can be ictal or postictal. Ictal delirium can occur during repeated or prolonged absence sei-zures or complex partial seizures. Post ictal deliri-um refers to cortical impairment lasting for 4 to 10 days after a cluster of seizures (2). It is important to distinguish postictal delirium from postictal psy-chosis which is characterized by religious delusions and feelings of mystic fusion with the universe or from chronic interictal psychosis which is charac-terized by mainly auditive hallucinations (6).
In terms of delirium and stroke, the two patho-
logical entities are frequently associated, some-times delirium being the only presenting feature of a stroke in common investigation schedule. The incidence of delirium in the acute phase of stroke varied from 13% to 48% and was higher in elderly patients (22). Given the fact that there have been only a limited number of studies that have assessed delirium post-stroke (18), it is not clear whether de-lirium is a direct consequence of stroke or if it is due to stroke complications (infections, aspiration). However, delirium was more common after stroke than after acute coronary symptoms (13% versus 2%), indicating that it might be more related to ROMANIAN  JOURNAL  OF NEUROLOGY  – V OLUME  XVI, N O. 3, 2017 92
brain damage than complications of prolonged in 
bed immobilization (22). 
It appears that onset of delirium is dependent on 
speciﬁ  c features of the stroke: type of stroke – more 
frequent in intracerebral hemorrhages (4) and in 
cardioembolic stroke or total anterior circulation infarction (27); extent of stroke, the extent of cere-bral edema post-stroke and extent of cerebral hy-poperfusion. In terms of speci ﬁ c area of brain af-
fected by stroke, several studies have shown that 
delirium is more frequent in left-sided strokes (11), unilateral lesions in the parahippocampal-fusi-form-lingual gyri on either side of the brain, in-farcts of posterior parietal and inferior prefrontal regions in the right hemisphere (19), lesions in the thalamus and caudate nucleus (18).
In the present study, 39% of delirium cases oc-
curred secondary to an ischemic stroke, while 9% to a hemorrhagic one. These results are consistent with the ones in the medical literature, con ﬁ rming 
once again that stroke is a well known precipitating factor for delirium (8).
The similar clinical presentation of delirium 
suggests common pathogenesis regardless of mul-tiple predisposing and precipitating factors. Al-though pathogenic mechanisms are not entirely known (34) there are some generally accepted the-ories. The matrix of attention is severely impaired by disruption of either neurotransmission or con-nections of the neuronal network. Several mecha-nisms are involved: elevated levels of cortisol asso-ciated with acute stress response (29), endothelial dysfunction secondary to impaired auto regulation of cerebral blood ﬂ ow (25) or increase in pro in-
ﬂ ammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 β gener-
ated through adenosine-dependent activation of caspase 1 after reoxygenation (5).
The main hypothesis is reversible impairment of 
cerebral oxidative metabolism and multiple neuro-
transmitter abnormalities (35). From all neuro-transmitters, lack of acetylcholine is the most stud-ied in delirium (33). Pro arguments are the facts that anticholinergic drugs can cause delirium in susceptible patients and that central cholinesterase inhibitors, such as Donepezil can improve delirium in this case (10). Also, an imbalance between ace-tylcholine and dopamine, with the excess of the lat-ter can cause delirium. That is why antiparkinsoni-an drugs may cause symptoms of delirium and also haloperidol, a dopamine antagonist is effective in 
controlling them (18). Decreased gamma-amin-obutyric acid activity has been implicated in deliri-um from sedative drug-withdrawal or toxic deliri-um (30). Other neurotransmitters also appear to be implicated: glutamate, 5-hydroxytryptamine, be-ta-endorphin (10).
Direct injury of neuronal a network can be 
caused by multiple metabolic insults. Lesions that interfere with the bottom-up or top-down regula-tion of attention or disruption of intentional modu-lations gives rise to the clinical syndrome of acute confusional states (19). Also, lesions in the default memory network can cause delirium, especially in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex which is a node that modulates attention, motivation, error detec-tion and network memory (32).
Regarding management and prevention, to date, 
there is no unanimous protocol. However, non pharmacological measures targeting modi ﬁ able 
predisposing factors can signi ﬁ cantly reduce the in-
cidence of delirium (12). Pharmacological preven-
tion may include haloperidol administration which can reduce the severity and duration of symptoms, but not for routine prophylaxis (10).
Non pharmacological strategies are the ﬁ rst line 
of treatment for all patients with delirium: nursing 
in a good sensory environment, avoiding physical restraints, preventing pressure sores and malnutri-tion (18). Current pharmacological strategies are largely based on case series and retrospective stud-ies and seem to differ accordingly to the clinical form of delirium (10). For acute agitation, haloper-idol is the drug of choice, although the evi-dence-base for this is weak (17). Moreover, antip-sychotics increase the risk of stroke in elderly patients with dementia and also can prolong QT interval (10). Cholinesterase inhibitors may be used in the future. Benzodiazepines are not recommend-ed as ﬁ  rst-line agents because they may induce over 
sedation. They are reserved for treatment of drug withdrawal, diffuse Lewy body disease or sec-ond-line treatment of delirium (10). 
Overall, the presence of delirium increases the 
medical costs. It determines increased number of hospitalization days and higher per day hospital losses resulting in a substantial economic burden. 
Many avenues of future research exist in the 
complex ﬁ eld of delirium: unmasking complete ROMANIAN  JOURNAL  OF NEUROLOGY  – V OLUME  XVI, N O. 3, 2017 93
pathogenesis, developing new screening tools and 
biological markers. All in order to prevent and manage delirium, as a method of increasing quality of life of patients and lowering the medical eco-nomic burden.
1.American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition . 5th ed. W ashington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association; 2013.
2.Biton V., Gates J.R., DePadua S.L.  Prolonged postictal encephalo-
pathy. Neurology. 1990; 40: 963-966.
3.Bruce A.J., Ritchie C.W., Blizard R., Lai R., Raven P. The
incidence of delirium associated with orthopedic surgery: a
meta-analytic review . Int. Psychogeriatr. 2007; 19: 197–214.
4. Caeiro L., Ferro J., Albuquerque R., Figueira M.L. Delirium in the
ﬁ rst days of acute stroke. J Neurol. 2004; 251: 171-178.
5. Chiu G.S., Chatterjee D., Darmody P.T., Walsh J.P., Meling D.D.,
Johnson R.W ., Freund G.G.  Hypoxia/reoxygenation impairs
memory formation via adenosine-dependent activation of caspaze 1.J Neurosci. 2012; 32(40): 13945-13955.
6. Croitoru C.G., Rosu I., Turliuc S.  From epilepsy to schizoform
organic delusional disorder – a case report of chronic interictalpsychosis. Bulletin of Integrative Psychiatry.  2017; 2(73): 97-103.
7.Davis D.H.J., Skelly D.T ., Murray C., Hennessy E., Bowen J.,
Norton S., Brayne C., Rahkonen T., Sulkava R., Sanderson D.J.,
Rawlins N., Bannerman D.M., MacLullich A.M.J., Cunningham C.Worsening cognitive impairment and neurodegenrative pathologyProgressively increase risk for delirium. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry .
2015; 23(4): 403-415.
8.Ferro J.M., Caeiro L., Verdelho A.  Delirium in acute stroke. Curr
Opin Neurol.  2002; 15: 51-55.
9.Fong T.G., Jones R.N., Shi P., Marcantonio E.R., Y ap L.,
Rudolph J.L., Yang F.M., Kiely D.K., Inouye S.K.  Delirium
accelerates cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease.  Neurology .
2009; 72(18): 1570-1575.
10.Fong T.G., Tulebaev S.R., Inouye S.K.  Delirium in elderly adults:
diagnosis, prevention and treatment. Nat Rev Neurol.  2009;
5(4): 210-220.
11. Gustafson Y., Olson T., Erikkson S., Asplund K., Bucht G.  Acute 
confusional states (delirium) in stroke patients. Cerebrovasc Dis
1991; 1: 257-264.
12.Inouye S.K., Bogardus S.T., Charpentier P .A., Leo-Summers L.,
Acampora D., Holford T.R., Cooney L.M. Jr. A multicomponent
intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl
J Med. 1999; 340: 669-676.
13.Inouye S.K., Ferrucci L.  Elucidating the pathiphysiology of Delirium
and the Interrelationship of delirium and dementia. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci. 2006; 61(12): 1277-1280.
14. Kaplan P.V. Delirium and epilepsy. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience.
2003; 5(2): 187-200.
15. Keschner M., Bender M.B., Strauss I. Mental symptoms associated
with brain tumor: a study of 530 veri ﬁ ed cases. JAMA. 1938; 1 10(10):
714-718.
16.Levkoff S.E., Evans D.A., Liptzin B., Cleary P .D., Lipsitz L.A.,
Welte T.T., Reilly C.H., Pilgrim D.M., Schor J., Rowe J.  Delirium.The occurrence and persistence of symptoms among elderly hospitalized patients. Arch. Intern. Med.  1992; 152:334–340. 
17.
Lonergan E., Britton A., Lixemberg J., W
yller T. Antipsyhotics for
delirium. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2007; 18(2): CD005594
18. McManus J., Pathansali R., Stewart R., Macdonald A., Jackson S.  
Delirium post-stroke. Age and Aging.  2007; 36: 613-618.
19. Mesulam M.M. (2000). Principles of behavioral neurology. New York,
US: Oxford University Press.
20. Morais S., Cabral A., Santos G., Madeira N.  Melanoma brain
metastates presenting as delirium: a case report. Arch Clin
Psychiatry
. 2017; 44(2): 53-54.
21.National Guidelines. Royal College of Psysicians. The prevention,diagnosis and management of delirium in older people. 2006.
22. Oldenbeuving A.W. (2013). Delirium in the acute phase after stroke.
Doctoral Thesis, Utrecht University, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
23.Rabins P.V., Folstein M.F.  Delirium and dementia: diagnostic criteria
and fatality rates. Br J Psyciatry. 1982; 140: 149-153.
24. Robertsson B., Blennow K., Gottfries C.G.  Delirium in dementia. Int
J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1998; 13: 49–56.
25.Sanders R.D. Delirium, Neurotransmission, and Network Connecti-
vity: The Search for a Comprehensive Pathogenic Framework.Anesthesiology . 2013; 118: 494-496.
26. Siddiqi N., House A.O., Holmes J.D.  Occurrence and outcome of
delirium in medical in-patients: a systematic literature review . Age
Ageing.  2006; 35: 350–364.
27.Shang A.Z., Shen Q., Cordato D., Shen Q., Zhang Y., Chan D.K.Y .
Delirium within three days of stroke in a cohort of elderly patients.JAGS. 2006; 54: 1 192-1198.
28. Trzepacz P.T. Is there a common neural pathway in delirium? Focus
on acetylcholine and dopamine. Semin Clin Neuropsyciatry . 2000;
5: 132-148.
29. Trzepacz P.T., van der Mast R. The Neuropathophysiology of
Delirium. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2002.
30.van Sweden B., Mellerio F. Toxic ictal delirium. Biol Psychiatry .
1989; 25: 449-458.
31.Votey S.R., Peters A.L., Hoffman J.R.  Disorders of water
metabolism: hyponatremia and hypernatremia. Emerg Med Clin
North Am 1989; 7: 749.
32. Washington S.D., VanMeter J.W.  Anterior-posterior connectivity 
within the default Mode Network increases during maturation. Int J
Med Biol Front. 2015; 21(2): 207-218.
33. Weddington W.W. The mortality of delirium: an underappreciated
problem? Psychosomatics.  1982; 23: 1232-1235.
34.
White S. The neuropthogenesis of delirium. Rev Clin Gerontol.  2002;
12: 62-67.
35.
Maldonado J.R. Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current
etiologic theories and common pathways. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2013 Dec. 21 (12):1 190-222.REFERENCESConflict of interest:  none declared 
Financial support:  none declared