Abstract Volume
16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting
Bern, 3oth November – 1st December 2018
19.  Environmental Biogeochemistry  
 of Trace Elements
558
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19. Environmental Biogeochemistry  
 of Trace Elements
 Moritz Bigalke, Montserrat Filella, Adrien Mestrot, Andreas Voegelin, Lenny Winkel
TALKS:
19.1 Bagnoud A., Chourey K., Hettich R.L., de Bruijn I., Andersson A.F., Diomidis N., Leupin O.X., Schwyn B., Bernier-
Latmani R.:  A microbial ecosystem in Opalinus Clay rock fueled by hydrogen gas
19.2 Bernier-Latmani R., Loreggian L., Bretagne S., Novotny A.:  Oxidation of non-crystalline U(IV): role of reduced 
sulfur
19.3 Caplette J., Mestrot A.:  Trapping of volatile antimony (Sb): method validation and first in-situ measurements
19.4 Catrouillet C., Hirosue S., Manetti N., Peña J.:  Arsenic removal in manganese-containing groundwater
19.5 Cheolyong Kim, Inseong Hwang:  Transformation of Nano Zero-Valent Iron during Oxidation Process using 
Persulfate
19.6 de Meyer C., Rodriguez J., Wahnfried I. , Kipfer R., Berg M.:  Geogenic contaminants in groundwater resources 
of Amazonian riverine communities: results of a vast exploratory field-study
19.7 Etique M., Bouchet S., Byrne J., Thomas Arrigo L., Kaegi R., Kretzschmar R.:  Mercury reduction by vivianite
19.8 Feinberg A., Maliki M., Stenke A., Sudret B., Gysin S., Peter T., Winkel L.H.E.:  Using global sensitivity analysis to 
establish priorities in atmospheric selenium research
19.9 Filella M., Turner A.:  Should plastics be considered in the biogeochemical cycles of trace elements?
19.10 Gogos A., Wielinski J., Voegelin A., Kaegi R.:  Transformation of cerium dioxide nanoparticles during incineration 
of sewage sludge
19.11 Hitzfeld B.,:  Challenges of trace elements in the Swiss environment
19.12 Liu Y., Schäffer A., Lenz M.:  Studying Bacterial Selenium Methylation at Environmental Relevant Concentrations
19.13 Marafatto F.F., Ferreira-Sanchez D., Grolimund D., Göttlicher J., Voegelin A.:  X-ray spectroscopic 
characterization of As(V)-rich Tl(III)-particles in a weathered Tl-As-Fe-sulfide mineralization
19.14 Van Groeningen N., Christl I., Kretzschmar R.:  Competitive sorption of Mn(II) and Cd(II) to clay minerals
19.15 Viacava K., Dyer S., Leberdalle Meibom K., Mestrot A., Bernier-Latmani R.:  Arsenic methylation across microbial 
phyla
19.16 Wanner C., Pöthig R., Carrero S., Fernandez-Martinez A., Jäger C., Furrer G.:  Uptake of As by nanocrystalline 
Al-hydroxysulfates naturally forming along a mountainous stream in the Engadin area
19.17 Wick S., Peña J., Voegelin A.:  Thallium Sorption onto Birnessite559
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
POSTERS:
P 19.1 Gfeller L., Mestrot A.:  Methylmercury distribution and formation in polluted agricultural floodplain soils
P 19.2 Hausladen D., Keiluweit M., Peña J.:  Transformation of Manganese Oxides by Organic Constituents in Natural 
and Laboratory Systems
P 19.3 Imseng M., Wiggenhauser M., Frossard E., Müller M., Keller A., Wilcke W., Bigalke M.:  Copper mass balances 
and stable isotopes as analytical tool to tace sources and processes in agricultural systems
P 19.4 Jiranek G., Filella M., Loizeau J.-L., Cobelo-García A.:  Evolution of Technology-Critical Element contents in 
sediments of a contaminated bay of Lake Geneva (Switzerland) over the past century
P 19.5 Manetti N., Catrouillet C., Peña J.:  Arsenic removal from lake water, river water and groundwater using an 
electrocoagulation system
P 19.6 Müller E., Bouchet S., von Gunten U., Winkel L.:  Reactions between hypobromous acid, organic sulfur species 
and dissolved organic matter in marine waters
P 19.7 Roethlin R.L., Dubois N.:  Paleo-ecotoxicology: Shining a light on the true impacts of pollution
P 19.8 Segovia Campos I., Martignier A., Jaquet J.-M., Barja F., Filella M. , Ariztegui D.:  Investigating the potential of 
intracellular mineral inclusions in microalgae as a novel bioremediation method for radioactive 90Sr water pollution
P 19.9 Wielinski J., Gogos A., Marafatto F., Voegelin A., Morgenroth E., Kaegi R.:  Transformation of Cu (nanoparticles) 
during sewage sludge incineration studied by bulk- and micro-XAS560
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.1 
A microbial ecosystem in Opalinus Clay rock fueled by hydrogen gas
Alexandre Bagnoud 1,2, Karuna Chourey 3, Robert L. Hettich 3, Ino de Buijn 4, Anders F. Andersson 5,  Nikitas Diomidis 6, 
Olivier X. Leupin 6, Bernhard Schwyn 6, Rizlan Bernier-Latmani 1
1 Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland  
  (alexandre.bagnoud@gmail.com; rizlan.bernier-latmani@epfl.ch)
2 Haute Ecole d’Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud, 1401 Yverdon-les-Bains, Switzerland
3 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, USA
4 Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden
5 Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
6 National Cooperative for the Disposal of Radioactive Waste,  Wettingen, Switzerland
A significant part of microbial biomass is found in the deep subsurface and little is known about metabolisms in these 
environments (McMahon and Parnell 2014). This remote biosphere is decoupled from sunlight-derived organic carbon and 
rely exclusively on geogenic gases, such as methane or hydrogen (Lovley and Chapelle 1995)
Opalinus Clay is a low-porosity clay rock, which is supposed to host nuclear repositories in Switzerland. In this regard and 
thanks to the underground rock laboratory of Mont-Terri in St-Ursanne, it has been extensively characterized (Bossart and 
Thury 2008). It is well established that pristine rock, because of its small pore size distribution, is not suitable for hosting 
microbial activity. But as soon as space is provided, because of the presence of organic matter (i.e., acetate) and electron 
donor (i.e., sulfate) in Opalinus Clay rock, microbial activity can take place (Stroes-Gascoyne et al. 2007). Thus, this project 
aimed at characterizing the biological response to H2, which will be produced by the anoxic corrosion of steel canisters, in 
repository-relevant conditions. An in-situ experiment was carried out where H2 was amended to borehole water for more 
than 500 days.
H2 was rapidly consumed concomitantly with a production of hydrogen sulphide, an increase in planktonic cell density, and 
a decrease in CO2 concentration, suggesting that autotrophic sulfate reduction was the dominating process in this system. 
A metagenomic sequencing allowed the assembly of 15 high-quality genomes, together representing 75% of the microbial 
community. Metaproteomic analysis highlighted the presence of a complete carbon cycle. Two organisms oxidize hydrogen: 
a sulfate-reducing bacterium (Desulfobulbaceae) representing 42% of the community, and a Rhodospirillaceae reducing 
sulfite. Biomass produced by autotrophs is then oxidized to acetate by a Hyphomonas  species. Fermentation products are 
finally oxidized to CO2 by several species of heterotrophic sulphate-reducing bacteria (Figure 1).
This work provides the first insight into a complete carbon cycle in the deep subsurface and significantly expands our 
knowledge of microbial metabolisms in the deep biosphere. It also suggests that allowing microbial activity in nuclear waste 
repositories is beneficial, by buffering the pressure increase due to in-situ H2 production.
REFERENCES 
Bossart P, Thury M. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory. Project, Programme 1996 to 2007 and Results. Bern: Federal office of 
topography swisstopo, 2008.
Lovley DR, Chapelle FH. Deep subsurface microbial processes. Rev Geophys 1995;33:365–81.
McMahon S, Parnell J. Weighing the deep continental biosphere. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2014;87:113–20.
Stroes-Gascoyne S, Schippers A, Schwyn B et al. Microbial community analysis of Opalinus Clay drill core samples from the 
Mont Terri underground research laboratory, Switzerland. Geomicrobiol J 2007;24:1–17.561
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
Figure 1. Microbial ecosystem fueled by hydrogen in Opalinus Clay rock.562
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.2 
Oxidation of non-crystalline U(IV): role of reduced sulfur
Rizlan Bernier-Latmani°, Luca Loreggian, Sophie Bretagne, Agens Novotny
Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, IIE, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)  
(°rizlan.bernier-latmani@epfl.ch)
Uranium is a contaminant of concern in subsurface environments impacted by mining or ore processing or in areas of 
naturally occurring uranium-bearing rocks. Hexavalent uranium is soluble and highly mobile, and represents a threat to 
water quality. Remediation approaches aim at immobilizing uranium, preferably in situ. Reductive precipitation is one such 
strategy and relies on microbial processes to reduce hexavalent uranium to its tetravalent state, which is largely insoluble. 
Two major types of U(IV) precipitates have been identified: crystalline U(IV) such as uraninite (UO2) and non-crystalline 
forms in which U(IV) is associated with a solid phase but coordinated with functional groups such as carboxylic or 
phosphato groups [1,2]. The latter, referred to as non-crystalline U(IV) (NCU4), is not well characterized, its reactivity is not 
well constrained and the role of iron sulfide precipitates in its stability poorly understood [3]. In this work, we seek to 
compare NCU4 stability under oxic conditions in the presence and absence of iron sulfide species. Non-crystalline U(IV) 
was produced through the reduction of U(VI) in a flow-through column packed with sediment from the Old Rifle CO (USA), 
experimental site and receiving a cocktail of electon donors in the presence and absence of sulfate (and thus, iron sulfide 
precipitates). After accumulation of U(IV) in the sediment, it was characterized and found to harbor approximately ~85-95% 
NCU4. Each sediment type (with or without sulfate) was then placed in continuously stirred tank reactors through which 
oxic or anoxic water was flowing. The water contained either 1 or 10 mM sodium bicarbonate. The leaching of uranium was 
monitored and the speciation of the sediment post-leaching characterized. We observed that, under oxic conditions, about 
~90% of the NCU4 was oxidized both both conditions (sulfate and no sulfate) while UO2 largely remained constant. In 
contrast, batch experiments revealed that, surprisingly, the presence of reduced sulfur in the sediment enhanced the rate of 
oxidation of NCU4. Further investigation showed that reactive oxygen species play an important role in NCU4 oxidation 
under fully oxic conditions. The work presented offers a more definitive view of the fate of NCU4 under environmentally 
relevant conditions.
REFERENCES  
1. D. S. Alessi, J. S. Lezama-Pacheco, J. E. Stubbs, M. Janousch and J. R. Bargar et al. The product of microbial uranium 
reduction includes multiple species with U(IV)-phosphate coordination, in Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, vol. 131, 
p. 115-127, 2014.
2. R. Bernier-Latmani, H. Veeramani, E. Dalla Vecchia, P. Junier and J. Lezama-Pacheco et al. Non-uraninite products of 
microbial U(VI) reduction, in Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 44, num. 24, p. 9456-9462, 2010.
3. Y. Bi, M. Stylo, R. Bernier-Latmani and K. F. Hayes. Rapid mobilization of noncrystalline U(IV) coupled with FeS 
oxidation, in Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 50, num. 3, p. 1403-1411, 2016.563
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.3 
Trapping of volatile antimony (Sb): method validation and first in-situ 
measurements
Jaime Caplette 1 and Adrien Mestrot 1
1 Trace Element Speciation Group, Geographisches Institut, Universitat Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern  
  (jaime.caplette@giub.unibe.ch)
Antimony (Sb) is a naturally occurring element, ranging from 0.3 – 8.4 mg kg-1 in the soil environment. Sb concentrations 
can be elevated in the vicinity of mining and smelting, industrial, and shooting range activities. The United States 
Environmental Protection Agency and European Union consider Sb a priority pollutant of interest and potentially 
carcinogenic.
Volatile Sb, stibine (SbH3), monomethylstibine (MeSb), dimethylstibine (Me2Sb), and trimethylstibine (Me3Sb), can be 
produced at low temperatures under aerobic and anaerobic conditions and represent an understudied portion of the 
biogeochemical cycling of Sb. Very few studies have investigated volatile Sb production in natural media with a majority of 
the works focussed on sewage sludge fermentation and hydrothermal vents, landfills, and production in headspace gases 
from fungi (e.g., S. brevicaulis)  and methanogenic Archaea. However, the current knowledge of volatile Sb production from 
the soil environment is poorly understood. 
In this work, we validated a method for SbH3 and Me3Sb trapping using activated carbon sorbent tubes. The volatile species 
were formed by hydride generation from dissolved solutions of Sb(III) and trimethylstibine oxide, respectively. Activated 
carbon traps were digested using an aqua regia closed vessel digestion. Recoveries of trapped SbH3 and Me3Sb were 
93.7% ± 7.95 and 95.5% ± 1.34, respectively. This method was used to capture volatile Sb produced from manure 
amended (5%) flooded shooting range soils (Laupen, Switzerland) during an incubation period of 36 days. After 12 days of 
incubation, 37.9 - 155 ng of total Sb was detected on the traps, with a maximum flux of 31.2 µg kg-1·yr-1. 
Furthermore, we investigated the in-situ production of volatile Sb in two rice paddy fields in the vicinity of the worlds largest 
Sb deposit (Xikuangshan mine, Lengshuijiang, China) using the newly validated trapping method for SbH3 and Me3Sb. We 
used six gas collection chambers equipped with filter cassettes and activated carbon adsorbent traps on the inlet and outlet 
ports, respectively at each field site for 4 days and preliminary results will be discussed. 
Sb biovolatilisation in soils can be quantitatively assessed using the aforementioned method in-situ as well as in incubation 
experiments. This method can yield information on the importance of volatilisation with regards to the biogeochemical 
cycling of Sb. 564
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.4 
Arsenic removal in manganese-containing groundwater
Charlotte Catrouillet 1, Sachiko Hirosue 1, Nathalie Manetti 1 & Jasquelin Peña 1,1 
1 University of Lausanne IDYST, Geopolis, CH-1015 Lausanne (charlotte.catrouillet@unil.ch)
Arsenic (As) can occur naturally in groundwaters worldwide (e.g., Bengladesh, India, Amazon region, etc.). Because of this 
large-scale contamination and its high toxicity and carconegicity, exposure to As leads to millions of deaths worldwide. 
Therefore, strategies to remove As from water using efficient and cheap treatement system are critically needed. Iron(0) 
electrocoagulation (EC) has gained attention as a low-cost method for As removal because it has short supply chain and 
low energy requirements and, importantly, is easy to operate. In EC, a current is passed through an Fe(0) electrode, such 
that Fe(0) is oxidized to Fe(II). The production of Fe(II) generates reactive oxidants that oxidize As(III) to form As(V) – a 
less dangerous form of As, and Fe(II) to Fe(III), which forms nanoscale iron precipitates that remove arsenic from solution 
(van Genuchten et al. 2012, Nidheesh et al. 2017). However, the mechanism and efficicency of As removaldepend strongly 
on the chemical composition of the groundwater. Thus, successful implementation of EC requires systematic chemical and 
mineralogical studies under varying operating conditions and groundwater chemistry.
In some waters, As and Mn co-occur at high concentrations (Gillipsie et al. 2016, de Meyer et al. 2017). Recent work shows 
that Mn(II) can also be removed from water using an EC system. Moreover different oxidants are responsible of the 
oxidation of Fe and Mn at different pH and the greatest Mn removal occurs at pH 8.5 (van Genuchten et al. 2017). 
Combined, these studies suggest that As and Mn compete for the same pool of oxidants in an EC system and therefore 
that the efficiency of As removal may be influenced by the presence of Mn. The main goal of this work is thus to understand 
the extent to which As and Mn are removed during EC when aqueous As(III) and Mn(II) are initially present in the 
groundwater. In addition, knowledge of the speciation of As and Mn in the solid phase is needed in order to understand the 
mechanism of contaminant removal (oxidation and sorption) under varying conditions (concentrations of Mn, As, pH, and 
presence or absence of H2O2).
Analysis of aqueous and solid phase samples showed that the kinetics of As and Mn oxidation and mechanism of removal 
to the solid phase vary strongly according to the type of oxidant present in the system (e.g., .OH and Fe(IV), respectively). 
At acidic pH, As concentrations were less than the 10 µg L-1 (WHO recomendation) in the presence of H2O2 after 30 min, 
but at basic pH the concentrations of As were higher than the WHO recomendation. In the O2 system, As concentrations 
decreased over time, but did not attain the 10 µg L-1 target. Solution pH, the initial oxidant (O2 vs. H2O2) and Mn 
concentration influenced significantly the extent of As and Mn removal. The speciation of As and Mn in the solid phase, as 
determined by X-ray absorption spectroscopy (Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, BL 4-1), showed greater As 
oxidation at pH 4.5 than at pH 8.5 and in the presence of Mn. On the contrary, greater Mn oxidation was observed at pH 
8.5 than at pH 4.5. Moreover, in the O2 system, Mn and As were mainly present in reduced form in the solid phase. Then, 
the acidic pH are the most favorable pH to remove As from water because of favorable oxidation of As(III) and sorption of 
As(V), but this pH is not practical for water treatment. The other best pH to remove As depends on Mn concentrations in 
waters. Determine water matrice is then a very critical point to improve the performances of the system.
REFERENCES 
Gillipsie, E.C., Andujar, E., Polizzotto, M., 2016. Chemical controls on aiotic and biotic release of geogenic arsenic from 
Pleistocene aquifer sediments to groundwater. Environmental Science Processes & Impacts, 18, 1090-1103.
de Meyer, C. M. C., Rodríguez, J. M., Carpio, E. A., García, P. A., Stengel, C. & Berg, M. 2017: Arsenic, manganese and 
aluminum contamination in groundwater resources of Western Amazonia (Peru). Science of The Total Environment , 607-
608, 1437-1450.
Nidheesh, P. V. & Singh, T. S. A. 2017: Arsenic removal by electrocoagulation process: Recent trends and removal 
mechanism. Chemosphere , 181, 418-432.
van Genuchten, C. M., Addy S.E.A., Peña, J., Gadgil, A.J. 2012: Removal Arsenic from Synthetic Groundwater with Iron 
Electrocoagulation: An Fe and As K-edge EXAFS Study. Environmental Science & Technology , 51, 2982-2991.
van Genuchten, C. M. & Peña, J. 2017: Mn(II) Oxidation in Fenton and Fenton Type Systems: Identification of Reaction 
Efficiency and Reaction Products. Environmental Science & Technology , 46, 986-994.565
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.5 
Transformation of Nano Zero-Valent Iron during Oxidation Process 
using Persulfate 
Cheolyong Kim 1,2 & Inseong Hwang 1
1 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Pusan National University, 2 Busandaehak-ro 63 beon-gil,  
  Busan, 46241, Korea (cheolyong.kim@eawag.ch)
2 Department Water Resources & Drinking Water, Eawag - Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology,  
  Überlandstrasse 133, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland
The sulfate radical (SO4•−), which can be generated by activating persulfate, is an emerging oxidant for treating 
groundwater contaminants. Recently, nano zero-valent iron (NZVI) has attracted interest as a persulfate activator because 
it is more efficient than conventional activators such as aqueous Fe2+ (Li et al., 2014). NZVI transformation products such 
as Fe-(oxyhydr)oxide minerals substantially affect the persulfate activation by NZVI. Therefore, the transformation of NZVI 
during the oxidation process needs to be elucidated in order to predict the efficiency of sulfate radical formation. This study 
aimed to identify the transformation products of NZVI and to predict the evolution of the NZVI core-shell structure during 
the reaction of persulfate with NZVI.
The X-ray diffraction pattern of the Fe solid after 1 h reaction time contained a peak characteristic for poorly ordered 
crystals of schwertmannite. Scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy indicated that the 
surface of the reacted NZVI was composed of 56% Fe, 33% O, 7% S, and traces of other elements, matching closely to 
the ideal formula of schwertmannite, Fe8O8(OH)6SO4 (Bigham et al., 1996).
Figure 1. Scheme of nano zero-valent iron transformation in the presence of persulfate (Kim et al., 2018).
Extended X-ray absorption fine stucture (EXAFS) spectroscopy at the Fe K-edge showed that Fe0 in the NZVI particles was 
completely consumed after a reaction time with persulfate of only 10 min. The Fe0 reacted with persulfate rapidly to form 
aqueous Fe2+ and Fe3+, and Fe-(oxyhydr)oxide minerals. Magnetite, lepidocrocite and schwertmannite were major NZVI 
transformation products according to the EXAFS analysis. In a first stage, Fe0 was oxidized to form magnetite, 
schwertmannite then formed through further oxidation of the magnetite and reaction of the Fe(III) with sulfate ions.
The magnetite content of the reacted NZVI was intially 26%, then increased to 74% after 10 min reaction time. The 
increase in magnetite content implied that the reacted NZVI became coated with multiple shells during reaction with 
persulfate, because magnetite at the later stage could only form directly on the surface because of the very low steady 
state aqueous Fe2+ concentration. The bulk conduction of electrons through the Fe-(oxyhydr)oxide shell presumably played 
an important role in the evolution of a multi-layered shell of NZVI (Handler et al., 2009). Bulk conduction would not only 
allow the growth of the magnetite shell by electron transfer from Fe0 to magnetite shell but also the continuing activation of 
persulfate by electron transfer from the Fe0 core to the solution.
The NZVI transformation processes elucidated in the current study impact on the extent of sulfate radical formation during 
oxidation processes using persulfate and NZVI. The impact of the the different Fe minerals on sulfate radical formation and 
the activation mechanism require further study.566
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
REFERENCES
Li, H., Wan, J., Ma, Y., Wang, Y., & Huang, M. 2014: Influence of particle size of zero-valent iron and dissolved silica on the 
reactivity of activated persulfate for degradation of acid orange 7. Chem. Eng. J., 237, 487-496.
Bigham, J.M., Schwertmann, U., Traina, S.J., Winland, R.L., & Wolf, M. 1996: Schwertmannite and the chemical modeling of 
iron in acid sulfate waters. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 60 (12), 2111-2121.
Kim, C., Ahn, J. Y., Kim, T. Y., Shin, W. S., & Hwang, I. 2018: Activation of Persulfate by Nanosized Zero-Valent Iron (NZVI): 
Mechanisms and Transformation Products of NZVI. Environmental science & technology, 52(6), 3625-3633.
Handler, R.M., Beard, B.L., Johnson, C.M. & Scherer, M.M. 2009: Atom exchange between aqueous Fe (II) and goethite: an 
Fe isotope tracer study. Environ. Sci. Technol., 43 (4), 1102-1107.567
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.6 
Geogenic contaminants in groundwater resources of Amazonian riverine 
communities: results of a vast exploratory field-study 
Caroline de Meyer 1, Juan Rodriguez 2, Ingo Wahnfried 3 , Rolf Kipfer 1 & Michael Berg 1
1 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science & Technology, Ueberlandstrasse 133, CH- 8600 Dübendorf  
  (caroline.demeyer@eawag.ch)
2 Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería, Av. Tupac Amaru 210, Lima, Peru
3 Geosciences Department, Universidade Federal do Amazonas, Av. Gal. Rodrigo Otávio Jordão Ramos, 3000, Manaus,  
  Brazil
World-wide, river basins and deltas with arsenic (As) and manganese (Mn) contaminated groundwater are characterized by 
a locally high spatial variability of contaminant concentrations. Since As and Mn are of concern for human health, it is 
important to understand where and under which environmental conditions these elements are mobilized from aquifer 
sediments and accumulated in groundwater. Unraveling the regional geochemical mechanisms triggering the enrichment of 
toxic elements in groundwater forms therefore a particularly important step to raise awareness and implement mitigation 
where needed.
Here, we discuss the results of a large-scale field study, exploring geogenic contaminants in shallow groundwater resources 
throughout the vast Amazon Basin. We sampled groundwater from household tube-wells from riverine communities along 
the main Amazon River and some of its major tributaries, covering large parts of the Peruvian and Brazilian Amazon region. 
We compare the main and trace element hydrochemistry of groundwater pumped by wells located on the older terraces, 
with those located in the actual river plain, characterized by young, reactive deposits. The latter are most prone to reach 
aquifers in which strongly reducing conditions prevail, leading to mobilization of redox sensitive trace elements, such as 
arsenic, manganese and iron. We further link patterns of measured groundwater arsenic concentrations with available 
remote sensing data for different geological settings along the Amazon River and its tributaries, with the aim to gain insights 
on the factors inducing spatial variability in contaminant groundwater chemistry. 
Our study highlights the importance of the geological history of this dynamic river basin on the presence and distribution of trace elements 
in groundwater resources of Amazonian riverine communities. 568
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.7 
Mercury reduction by vivianite
Marjorie Etique 1, Sylvain Bouchet 1, James Byrne 2, Laurel Thomas Arrigo 1, Ralf Kaegi 3, Ruben Kretzschmar 1
1 Soil Chemistry Group, IBP, ETH Zürich, Universitaetstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zürich (marjorie.etique@usys.ethz.ch)
2 Geomicrobiology, Center for Applied Geosciences, University of Tuebingen, Sigwartsrasse 10, D-72076 Tuebingen
3 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Ueberlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Duebendorf
Mercury (Hg) is a toxic element of global environmental concern, released into the environment by human activities since 
the late 1700s. In aquatic/terrestrial systems, Hg can be converted by anaerobic microorganisms to mono-methylmercury 
(MeHg), a potent neurotoxin accumulated in the food web [1]. In iron-rich sediments where Hg is methylated, vivianite, a 
ferrous phosphate mineral, commonly occurs in immediate vicinity of organic remains. However, FeII-bearing minerals are 
recognized as HgII reducers such as magnetite [2] or green rusts [3]. The reduction of HgII to Hg0 by vivianite 
(FeII
3(PO4)2.8H2O) was investigated by fluctuating Hg/Fe ratios (0.1, 1, 100) at circumneutral pH under anoxic conditions to 
illuminate kinetic parameters and the nature FeIII-bearing minerals formed. The ability of vivianite to reduce inorganic 
divalent Hg is of high importance to (i) unravel the interplay of Hg and Fe biogeochemical cycles, and to (ii) limit the 
production of MeHg in anoxic sediments by the formation of elemental Hg.
 020406080100Hg2+ reduced (%)
 100:1 1:10 Water 1:1
FeII:HgII ratios
A) B) 
 
Figure 1. Percentage of inorganic divalent mercury (Hg2+) reduced by vivanite with various Fe/Hg ratios (100:1, 1:1, 1:10); a control was 
done with water (A). Elemental distribution map of vivianite nanoparticles after mercury reduction (B).
REFERENCES
[1] Syversen T., Kaur P. (2012 ) The toxicology of mercury and its compounds. Journal of Trace Elements in Medicine and 
Biology , 26:215-226. 
[2] Wiatrowski H.A., et al. ( 2009 ) Reduction of Hg(II) to Hg(0) by magnetite. Environmental Science & Technology , 43:5307-
5313. 
[3] Remy P.-Ph., et al. ( 2015 ) Pseudo-first-order reaction of chemically and biologically formed green rusts with HgII and 
C15H15N3O2: Effects of pH and stabilizing agents (phosphate, silicate, polyacrylic acid, and bacterial cells). Water 
Research , 70:266-278.569
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.8 
Using global sensitivity analysis to establish priorities in atmospheric 
selenium research 
 
Aryeh Feinberg 1,2, Moustapha Maliki 3, Andrea Stenke 1, Bruno Sudret 3, Severin Gysin 1, Thomas Peter 1  
& Lenny H. E. Winkel 1,2
1 Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH Zürich, Universitätstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zürich  
  (aryeh.feinberg@env.ethz.ch)
2 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf
3 Chair of Risk, Safety and Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation, Department of Civil Engineering, ETH Zürich, Stefano-Franscini-  
  Platz 5, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
Selenium is an essential trace element for humans and animals, as it is included in several proteins which have anti-
oxidative functions. Although selenium toxicity has affected people in specific regions in the past, there is a more 
widespread risk for selenium deficiency. Selenium deficiency is a concern for people and animals that eat food grown in 
soils with low levels of bioavailable selenium. In addition to geological sources, selenium deposition from the atmosphere is 
one of the sources of selenium to soil. Selenium levels in soil have been linked to the local amount of precipitation for 
several regions worldwide. Atmospheric selenium cycling may therefore play an important role in determining the 
distribution of selenium in soils worldwide, as well as the prevalence of selenium deficiency. 
To investigate the atmospheric selenium cycle further, we have implemented selenium chemistry in a global chemistry-
climate model, SOCOL-AER. The modelled selenium cycle is based on the existing sulfur cycle in SOCOL-AER, because 
these two elements are expected to behave in a similar way. Gas phase selenium species (DMSe, H2Se, CSSe, CSe2, 
OCSe, and SeO2) are emitted in the model through natural (e.g. volcanoes, biogenic sources) and anthropogenic (e.g. coal 
combustion, metal smelting) activities. These species are oxidized in the atmosphere, forming condensable compounds that 
can be taken up by aerosols. With SOCOL-AER we can track the transport and speciation of atmospheric selenium, from 
emission to deposition. 
However, since the atmospheric selenium cycle has not been thoroughly investigated in the past, the input parameters for 
our model related to selenium are very uncertain. Parametric uncertainties include the magnitude and speciation of 
emissions, the atmospheric reaction rates of selenium species, and the amount and size of particulate matter not calculated 
online by SOCOL-AER, which only includes sulfate aerosols. We can apportion the uncertainties in the model output into 
contributions from 34 model input parameters, using techniques from the field of global sensitivity analysis (Saltelli et al., 
2008). Since our model is computationally expensive (simulating one year of SOCOL-AER requires ~25 CPU days; on a 
parallel architecture with 48 CPU it requires 12 hours), we replaced it with a surrogate model using the MATLAB-based 
UQLAB software (Marelli & Sudret, 2014). The surrogate model, in the form of polynomial chaos expansions (PCE, 
Ghanem & Spanos (2003)), is constructed from a series of SOCOL-AER training simulations conducted throughout the 
parametric uncertainty space. This surrogate model is analyzed using the variance-based Sobol› method, which yields the 
contribution of each input parameter to the overall variance of the model output (Sudret, 2008). We focus on identifying 
which input parameters are most important in determining the atmospheric lifetime of selenium, and therefore would most 
affect the long-range transport of selenium. This sensitivity analysis study can help prioritize research into the atmospheric 
selenium cycle. Input parameters that are found to play a major role in determining the atmospheric selenium lifetime are 
the most important to be constrained by future studies. We can also identify parameters that can be neglected, for example 
reaction rates that are not important for the atmospheric selenium lifetime and therefore further research into these reaction 
rates would not be necessary to understand the global selenium cycle. The application of global sensitivity analysis to our 
atmospheric selenium model is the first step towards more accurate predictions of selenium deposition to agricultural soils. 
REFERENCES
Ghanem, R. & Spanos, P. (2003) Stochastic Finite Elements: A Spectral Approach, Courier Dover Publications, Mineola.
Marelli, S., & Sudret B. 2014: UQLab: A framework for uncertainty quantification in Matlab, Vulnerability, Uncertainty, and 
Risk: Quantification, Mitigation, and Management, 2554-2563.
Saltelli, A., Ratto, M., Andres, T., Campolongo, F., Cariboni, J., Gatelli, D., Saisana, M. & Tarantola, S. (2008) Global 
sensitivity analysis -- the primer, Wiley.
Sudret, B. (2008) Global sensitivity analysis using polynomial chaos expansions Reliab. Eng. Sys. Safety, 93, 964-979.570
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.9 
Should plastics be considered in the biogeochemical cycles  
of trace elements?
Montserrat Filella 1 & Andrew Turner 2
1 Department F.-A. Forel, University of Geneva, Boulevard Carl-Vogt 66, CH-1205 Geneva, Switzerland,  
  (montserrat.filella@unige.ch)
2 School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Plymouth University, Drake Circus, Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK
Plastic debris hase emerged as a global environmental problem and a potential marker of the anthropocene. It is generally 
acknowledged that the ubiquitous presence of plastics of different sizes in all environmental compartments raises important 
health problems. Some studies have recently mentioned the plastic cycling itself (Lecher, 2018) or the role of the plastics in 
the elemental cycle of elements such C, P, S, directly involved in the degrading, transporting and burial of microbial organic 
matter (Posth et al., 2017). However, plastics also contain a number of trace elements like Pb, Cd, Sb, sometimes at very 
high concentrations (Turner, 2016; Filella and Turner, 2018). Thus, it is probably timely to consider whether they should be 
included as active actors in the biogeochemical cycles of these elements. In an initial step, this would require the evaluation 
of their presence (i.e., how much) and the study of their behaviour (e.g., leaching, sorption, etc.). A first evaluation will be 
presented and discussed.
REFERENCES
Filella, M., & Turner, A. 2018. Observational study unveils the extensive presence of hazardous elements in beached plastics 
from Lake Geneva. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 6, doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2018.00001
Lecher, A.L. 2018: Piecing together the plastic cycle. Nature Geoscience, 11, 153.
Posth, N.R., Chiriaev, S., Gorokhova, E., Neu, T., & Strand, J. 2017. Biogeochemical cycling in the Plastisphere. 
Goldschmidt2017 Abstract.
Turner, A. 2016. Hazardous metals, metalloids and other elements in marine litter. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 111, 136–142571
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.10  
Transformation of cerium dioxide nanoparticles during incineration  
of sewage sludge 
Alexander Gogos 1, Jonas Wielinski 1,2, Andreas Voegelin 1 and Ralf Kaegi 1
1 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, 8600 Dübendorf / Switzerland  
  (alexander.gogos@eawag.ch)
2 ETH Zürich, Institute of Environmental Engineering, 8093 Zürich / Switzerland
Wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) show high removal efficiencies for different types of (engineered) nanomaterials ((E)
NM), resulting in their accumulation within sewage sludge, which is incinerated at an increasing share in many countries 
including Germany (~30%) and Switzerland (~70%). Given the predicted increase of cerium dioxide nanoparticle (CeO2 NP) 
production and related release to WWTP and the growing importance of sewage sludge incineration, knowledge on the 
physical-chemical transformations of CeO2 NP during these treatments is required for understanding the fate of CeO2 NP 
and assessing the (eco-)toxicological effects related to their increased use. Previous studies indicate that the complexity of 
the experimental system (e.g. type of incineration, matrix in which the CeO2 NP are dispersed) influences the speciation of 
Ce in the ashes. 
We therefore incinerated municipal sewage sludge spiked with CeO2 NP in a pilot fluidized bed reactor (FBR) to investigate 
physical- chemical changes of the CeO2 NP caused by the incineration process. We used Ce K-edge X-ray absorption 
spectroscopy (XAS) to assess the chemical speciation of the CeO2 NP in both sludge and corresponding ash. Linear 
combination fit analysis (LCF) conducted on extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra suggests that ~20% 
of the total Ce was reduced to a Ce(III)-phase in the sewage sludge after one week of anaerobic incubation. After 
incineration, a nearly complete reduction (86%) of the remaining Ce(IV)O2 to a Ce(III)-phase was observed. Enrichment 
factors (Ce concentration ash:sludge) obtained from different analytical techniques (ICP-MS, XRF, XAS) ranged between 
1.2 and 1.5. Ashes from pristine sludges obtained using the same FBR, however, revealed enrichment factors of ~3-4, 
which is expected for non-volatile components. These results therefore suggest significant losses of Ce during incineration 
of nanoparticulate CeO2 and thus a significant difference in the incineration behaviour between spiked nanoparticulate and 
other Ce-phases present in the sewage sludge. 572
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.11  
Challenges of trace elements in the Swiss environment
Bettina Hitzfeld
Federal Office for the Environment, Berne, Switzerland; Bettina.Hitzfeld@bafu.admin.ch
Trace elements of geogenic and anthropogenic origin still pose many challenges in the Swiss environment. Especially 
metals and heavy metals such as lead, arsenic and mercury but also fluor are present in soils and other environmental 
media and are a danger to human health and the environment. Arsenic of geogenic origin seems to pose a risk in certain 
regions in Switzerland when it is present in agricultural areas. The concentrations and the extent of the putative pollution 
are however as yet unknown. Mercury pollution in Switzerland is of anthropogenic origin and concentrated in regions where 
industrial activity led to contamination of extended areas of land. Effects on the human population, agricultural land and 
studies that inform risk assessment will be presented. Lead pollution is known in soils in the proximity of shooting ranges 
and in city centres as a legacy of industrial activities. This pollution may have effects on wildlife, cattle and humans, esp. 
children. It is therefore essential to develop knowledge on toxicological and ecotoxicological effects and environmental 
processes in order to keep legislation up to date, so that human health and the environment may be protected. The 
challenges of the Swiss Federal Administration when dealing with the pollution of legacy and emerging trace elements will 
be discussed in the context of European and international activities.573
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.12  
Studying Bacterial Selenium Methylation at Environmental Relevant 
Concentrations   
Ying Liu 1,2, Andreas Schäffer 2, Markus Lenz 1  
1 Institute for Ecopreneurship, School of Life Sciences, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland,  
  Hofackerstrasse 30, 4132 Muttenz, Switzerland (ying.liu@fhnw.ch)
2 Institute for Environmental Research (Biology V), RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany
The trace element selenium (Se) which acts as a component of major metabolic pathways is essential for animals and 
humans health. However there are abundant Se deficiencies worldwide and millions of people may be affected by the 
accompanying endemic diseases (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011). Methylation and subsequent volatilization is an important 
Se cycle process in natural environments which may lessen available Se in soils, ultimately limiting its entry into the food 
chain (Winkel et al., 2012). Se methylation is mostly regarded as a detoxification process for organisms since volatilization 
decreases the intracellular Se content. Previous studies of Se volatilization were performed using Se concentrations 103 - 
106 fold higher (sub-ppm / ppm) than those commonly found in the environment (Luxem et al., 2017; Vriens et al., 2016). 
Se volatilization fluxes based on those experiments using high concentrations may have limited relevance for most 
environments which only contain trace amounts of Se. 
Here, we developed a method to study Se methylation using a Pseudomonas  strain with treatment of different 
concentrations of SeIV in sub-ppb to ppb range. The substrate 74Se-selenite were synthesized from elemental 74Se through 
a nitric acid oxidation reaction. Headspace SPME-GC-MS was used to quantify methylated 74Se compounds while 80Se 
methylated from the background Se in the culture medium was measured. Using Se stable isotope allowed distinguishing 
external from endogenous Se methylation and for the first time studying microbial selenium methylation at environmental 
relevant concentrations. 
REFERENCES  
Fairweather-Tait, S. J., Bao, Y., Broadley, M. R., Collings, R., Ford, D., Hesketh, J. E. & Hurst, R., 2011: Selenium in Human 
Health and Disease, Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 14(7), 1337-1383.
Luxem, K. E., Vriens, B., Behra, R. & Winkel, L. H. E., 2017: Studying selenium and sulfur volatilisation by marine algae 
Emiliania huxleyi and Thalassiosira oceanica in culture, Environmental Chemistry 14(4), 199-206.
Vriens, B., Behra, R., Voegelin, A., Zupanic, A. & Winkel, L. H. E., 2016: Selenium Uptake and Methylation by the Microalga 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Environmental Science & Technology 50(2), 711-720.
Winkel, L. H. E., Johnson, C. A., Lenz, M., Grundl, T., Leupin, O. X., Amini, M. & Charlet, L., 2012: Environmental Selenium 
Research: From Microscopic Processes to Global Understanding, Environmental Science & Technology 46(2), 571-579.574
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.13  
X-ray spectroscopic characterization of As(V)-rich Tl(III)-particles in a 
weathered Tl-As-Fe-sulfide mineralization
Francesco Femi Marafatto 1,2, Dario Ferreira-Sanchez 1, Daniel Grolimund 1, Jörg Göttlicher 3, Andreas Voegelin 2
1 Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI (francesco.marafatto@psi.ch)
2 Eawag, CH-8600 Dübendorf
3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen
Thallium is a highly toxic trace metal of growing environmental concern. In Erzmatt (Swiss Jura mountains) soils were 
found to contain high levels of Tl and As due to their formation from carbonate rock hosting a weathered hydrothermal Tl-
As-Fe mineralization. Although Tl in this site was constrained to a limited area, it is ideally suited to study the long-term 
transformation of Tl at contaminated sites and its speciation in soils.
In a previous study, the Erzmatt soils were found to contain TII-substituted jarosite and avicennite (TlIII
2O3) as important 
secondary Tl-bearing minerals [1]. The dominant soil-formed Tl species was TlI associated with illite. Elevated levels of TlIII 
were associated with soil Mn concretions, but accounted for only a minor fraction of total soil Tl. Circumstantial evidence 
suggested that another unidentified TlIII-rich phase is present in the Erzmatt soils.
In continuing work, we identified and characterized the unknown TlIII-rich phase by examining soil and rock thin sections as 
well as individual particles isolated from soil and rock combining laboratory X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) and 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) with synchrotron-based bulk X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and micro-resolved XRF/XRD 
tomography.
Our results suggest that the composition of the Tl-rich particles corresponds to Tl2O3 with up to 0.25 As(V)/Tl. Extended 
X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra in combination with XRD data suggest that the AsV-rich TlIII
2O3 grains are 
amorphous or nanocrystalline precursors of crystalline avicennite. We speculate that these particles form by the oxidation 
of Tl-As sulfide minerals such as lorandite (TlAsS2) or ellisite (Tl3AsS4) and that the AsV inhibits the crystallization of Tl2O3 
into avicennite.
Avicennite and AsV-rich Tl2O3 particles in the Erzmatt soils are coated with Mn-oxides that we identified as layered MnO2, 
possibly in association with a tectomanganate. The MnO2-crusts contain up to 0.2 Tl/Mn as Tl(I) and may have formed via a 
redox reaction between dissolved Mn2+ and TlIII.
The results from this work provide new insights into the processes that control the release of Tl from Tl-bearing sulfide 
minerals and the sequestration of Tl in soils, and are relevant with respect to the assessment of risks arising from 
geogenically and anthropogenically Tl-contaminated sites.
REFERENCES  
1. Voegelin, A.; Pfenninger, N.; Petrikis, J.; Majzlan, J.; Plotze, M.; Senn, A. C.; Mangold, S.; Steininger, R.; Gottlicher, J., 
Thallium speciation and extractability in a thallium- and arsenic-rich soil developed from mineralized carbonate rock. 
Environ Sci Technol 2015, 49, 5390-5398.575
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.14  
Competitive sorption of Mn(II) and Cd(II) to clay minerals
Natacha Van Groeningen 1, Iso Christl 1 & Ruben Kretzschmar 1
1 Soil Chemistry Group, Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics, Department of Environmental Systems  
  Science, CHN, ETH Zurich, Universitätstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Redox variable environments such as riparian floodplain soils, wetlands, and rice paddies are of great importance for the 
mobilization of trace elements from terrestrial environments into aquatic systems. Elevated dissolved concentrations of 
trace elements in terrestrial and aquatic systems are of concern since they can cause detrimental effects on biota due to 
toxic responses in plants (e.g. Mn, Zn, Cu) as well as in animals and humans (e.g. Cd, Pb). Both natural and anthropogenic 
sources can lead to local enrichments of trace elements in the environment. During periods of water-saturation, high 
concentrations of dissolved Mn2+ are observed in redox variable environments as a result of the reductive dissolution of 
Mn(IV,III)-(oxyhydr)oxides. The high concentrations of Mn2+ are expected to influence fate of trace elements cations (e.g. 
Zn2+, Cd2+) as Mn2+ competes for cation adsorption to mineral surfaces. Herein, clay minerals are considered key sorbent 
phases for trace element cations due to their large specific surface area, the presence of permanently negatively charged 
surfaces and reactive surface hydroxyl groups, and due to their chemical stability under anoxic conditions. 
To date, it is not well known how and to which extent the sorption of Mn2+ to clay minerals surfaces influences the retention 
of others trace elements under reducing conditions. To investigate this, we studied Cd(II) and Mn(II) sorption to smectite 
(Syn-1) separately under anoxic conditions (O2 < 0.1 ppm). The experiment were carried out to cover a wide range with 
respect to pH, total metal concentration and CaCl2 background electrolyte concentration in order to obtain a large database 
for modelling single metal sorption to smectite. Based on model parameter optimization of single metal sorption data, the 
competitive effect of Mn2+ on Cd2+ sorption was predicted.
Two types of binding sites were assumed for the sorption of metal onto the smectite: edge sites (Y-0.5) which have a pH-
dependent charge and face sites (Ex-) with a permanently negative charge. The mineral-water interface at the edge sites 
was described with a 1-pK three plane model (TPM). Interactions at the face sites were modelled with a three plane model 
and a conventional cation exchange model (Gaines-Thomas) for comparison. To obtain site densities and protonation 
constants for edge and face sites, acid-base titration data of Syn-1 were fitted. To describe acid-base titration data, the 
charge of Ca2+ had to be placed partially inner sphere at the edge sites (Dz0=+1.2). The use of the three plane model for 
the face sites yielded a better description of the acid-base titration data and was thus selected for modelling metal sorption 
to smectite. 
The results for Mn2+ and Cd2+ sorption to Syn-1 as a function of pH and ionic strength are shown in Figure 1. Both Mn2+ and 
Cd2+ sorption was increased with increasing pH due to proton-metal cation competition for binding sites. A pronounced ionic 
strength effect was observed for both Mn2+ and Cd2+ sorption at pH below 6.5 indicating the predominance of sorption to 
face sites under acidic conditions. The comparison of Cd2+ and Mn2+ sorption revealed that Mn2+ was more strongly 
influenced by the presence of Ca2+ indicating a weaker sorption of Mn2+. Accordingly, very high concentrations of dissolved 
Mn2+ as typically found in water-saturated soils are required to affect Cd2+ sorption to clays. Environmental impacts of the 
presence of Mn2+ on trace element sorption to clays will be discussed. 
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11-4.0-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.0
-4.0-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.0
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
pHa.
Cd= 1 □M
 10 mM CaCl2
 1 mM CaCl2
 0.1 mM CaCl2)gk/lom( dC debros gol 30 mM CaCl2
 3 mM CaCl2
 0.1 mM CaCl2Mn= 1 □Mb.log sorbed Mn (mol/kg)
pH
Figure 1. Sorption of Cd2+ (a) and Mn2+ (b) on Syn-1 (~1 g/L) as function of pH at CaCl2 concentration. Total metal concentrations of 1 µM 
were used for both Cd2+ and Mn2+, respectively. All samples were equilibrated for 1 day. Lines represent best-fit description with the TPM/
TPM-model.576
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.15  
Arsenic methylation across microbial phyla
Karen Viacava 1, Shannon Dyer 1, Karin Lederballe Meibom 1, Adrien Mestrot 2 & Rizlan Bernier-Latmani 1
1 École Polytechniqeu Fédéral de Lausanne (EPFL), ENAC - IIE -EML Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne  
  (karen.viacava@epfl.ch)
2 TrES group, Institute of Geography, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern
Arsenic (As) undergoes extensive microbial cycling in the environment, and, because of the toxicity of this metalloid, many 
bacteria and archaea harbour genes that confer resistance to it [1]. As methylation is one of the many microbially-mediated 
process, it consists in the addition of one or several methyl groups to inorganic arsenic generating volatile and non-volatile 
arsenicals. The reaction is catalysed by the enzyme arsenite methyltransferase (ArsM). It has been proposed as a 
detoxification mechanism but also as an activation pathway or a precursor reaction for the synthesis of more complex 
arseno-organic molecules. As methylation has been subject of study due to the presence of methylarsenicals in rice, a 
major source of arsenic in the human diet. The methylarsenicals are derived from microorganisms in paddy soils given that 
rice plants lack the ability to catalyse the reaction [2]. 
In paddy soils, arsM-harbouring microorganisms are phylogetically diverse and abundant [3] but it is still unclear whether all 
synthesize functional proteins and active methylate As once present in the soil. Previous studies have identified a few 
active As methylators, most of them aerobic microbial species, including the Bacteroidete Arsenicibacter rosenii  SM-1 [4]. In 
contrast, only two anaerobic species were identified: the Firmicute Clostridium  sp. BXM [5] and the archaeon 
Methanorsarcina acetivorans  C2A [6]. Thus, the goal of this study is twofold: first, to test the As-methylation activity of arsM-
harbouring microbial species belonging to various phyla and representing diverse metabolisms present in paddy soils and, 
second, to systematically probe the functionality and the in vivo activity of the enzymes encoded in their arsM genes. 
As(III) methylation and volatilization was tested across five anaerobic microbial strains: two archaea (Methanosarcina mazei 
Gö1, Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A); two Firmicutes (Anaeromusa acidaminophila DSM 3853, Clostridium pasteurianum  
DSM 525); a Deltaproteobacterium (Geobacter metallireducens  GS-15); and two aerobic strains: a Streptomycete 
(Streptomyces vietnamensis  DSM 41927); and a Bacteroidete (Arsenicibacter rosenii  SM-1). All arsM genes were cloned 
into the arsenic-sensitive Escherichia coli AW3110(DE3) and As methylation quantified.
The results show that most of the strains were not able to methylate As despite harbouring arsM genes that encode 
functional ArsM proteins. Our first conclusion is that the presence of arsM does not equate As methylation even in the 
presence of the metalloid. Further, we hypothesize that more efficient As detoxification pathways might be prevalent, 
precluding methylation, therefore more work is warranted to deconvolute arsM regulation.
REFERENCES
[1] Andres et al. 2016: The microbial genomics of arsenic, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 40, 299-322. 
[2] Zhao et al. 2013: Methylated arsenic species in rice: Geographical variation, origin, and uptake mechanisms, Environ. 
Sci. Technol., 47, 3957-3966. 
[3] Reid et al. 2017: Arsenic methylation in a rice paddy soil anaerobic enrichment culture, Environ. Sci. Technol., 51, 10546-
10554. 
[4] Huang et al. 2016: Efficient Arsenic Methylation and Volatilization mediated by a novel bacterium from an arsenic-
contaminated paddy soil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 50, 6389-6396. 
[5] Wang et al. 2015: Identification and catalytic residues of the arsenite methyltransferase from a sulfate-reducing 
bacterium, Clostridium  sp. BXM, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 362, 1-8. 
[6] Wang et al. 2014: Identification and characterization of arsenite methyltransferase from an archaeon Methanorsarcina 
acetivorans  C2A, Environ. Sci. Technol., 48, 12706-12713.577
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.16  
Uptake of As by nanocrystalline Al-hydroxysulfates naturally forming 
along a mountainous stream in the Engadin area
Christoph Wanner 1, Rosemarie Pöthig 2, Sergio Carrero 3, Alejandro Fernandez-Martinez 4, Christian Jäger 5  
& Gerhard Furrer 6
1 Rock-Water Interaction Group, Institute of Geological Sciences, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 3, CH-3012 Bern,  
  Switzerland (wanner@geo.unibe.ch)
2 Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Berlin, Germany
3 Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California Berkeley, USA 4Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ.  
  Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, IRD, IFSTTAR, ISTerre, Grenoble, France
5 BAM-Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, Division I.3, Working Group NMR Spectroscopy, D-12489  
  Berlin, Germany
6 Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics (IBP), Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH  
  Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Nanocrystalline basaluminite [Al4OH10(SO4)·(H2O)3-5] and aggregation of the ε-Keggin polyoxocation [Al12(AlO4)
(OH)24(H2O)12]7+, referred to as Al13, have both been described to form in acid mine drainage environments. Although the 
chemical composition is quite similar, their crystalline varieties significantly differ, demonstrating that various types of 
precipitates can form under very similar conditions and that their respective formation is not fully understood yet. 
Here we report the occurrence of large amounts of nanocrystalline Al-hydroxysulfates that form naturally in a small alpine 
catchment in the Engadin area where an acidic mountainous stream (pH∼4) is neutralized successively after mixing with 
several neutral tributaries (Fig. 1). 
Synchrotron-based high-energy X-ray diffraction (HEXD) and subsequent pair distribution function (PDF) analyses 
demonstrate that these precipitates are structurally the same as basaluminite samples obtained from acid mine drainage 
sites (Wanner et al., 2018). In contrast, only minor amounts of tetrahedrally coordinated Al, as present in Al13, were 
identified by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. 
We hypothesize that in our field system, high sulfate and fluoride concentrations on the order of 1-2 and 100 mg/L, 
respectively, as well as low water temperatures (<8°C) favor the formation of basaluminite instead of Al13-bearing sulfate 
precipitates. 
Interestingly, the basaluminite precipitates are characterized by elevated As concentrations up to 600 μg/g, whereas other 
heavy metals are at background concentrations only. Given the low As concentrations in the stream from which precipitation 
occurs (<0.03 mg/L), high As concentrations confirm that basaluminite serves as a highly efficient As sink. 
We conclude that the high affinity for As results from the high sorption capacity of basaluminite and hence from the uptake 
of arsenate anions under the prevailing oxidizing conditions.
REFERENCE
Wanner, C., Pöthig, R., Carrero, S., Fernandez-Martinez, A., Jäger, C. & Furrer, G. 2018: Natural occurrence of 
nanocrystalline Al-hydroxysulfates: Insights on formation, Al solubility control and As retention, Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 238, 252-269.578
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
(a) 
(b) 
 (c) 
Figure 1. Photographs of basaluminite precipitation occurring along “Ova Lavirun”, a mountainous stream in the Engadin area. (a): Aerial 
photograph of the Ova Lavirun watershed, clearly illustrating the white bedload coating originating from basaluminite precipitation. (b) 
Photograph of the first basaluminite occurrence near the red marker shown in (a). (c) Photograph of the widespread basaluminite 
occurrence along a section near the yellow marker shown in (a).579
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
19.17  
Thallium Sorption onto Birnessite
Silvan Wick 1, Jasquelin Peña 2 & Andreas Voegelin 1
1 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf  
  (silvan.wick@eawag.ch)
2 Institute of Earth Surface Dynamics, Faculty of Geosciences and Environment, University of Lausanne, CH-1015  
  Lausanne
Thallium (Tl) is a highly toxic trace element and may pose a serious threat to human health when present in soil or water 
resources. Tl commonly occurs in the environment as monovalent TlI and, to a lesser extent, as trivalent TlIII. Micaceous 
clay minerals and Mn-oxides are key sorbents for Tl in soils [1]. With respect to Mn-oxides, it has been shown that 
hexagonal birnessite can oxidatively sequester TlIII, whereas triclinic birnessite binds TlI without oxidation [2]. However, the 
sorption capacity and affinity of these different uptake mechanisms on Mn-oxides and their impact on Tl speciation and 
solubility in soils has not been studied to date.
We combined batch sorption experiments with X-ray absorption spectroscopy to elucidate the extent and mechanisms of Tl 
sorption onto synthetic d-MnO2 and triclinic birnessite. Our results confirm that the uptake mechanism depends on the oxide 
structure, especially the vacancy and MnIII content. In contact with d-MnO2 with a high vacancy content and an average Mn 
oxidation state close to IV, dissolved Tl is oxidized to TlIII during sorption. Only at Tl-loadings >30’000 mg/kg (molar Tl/Mn ~ 
0.025), the maximum capacity for oxidative Tl uptake is approached. That is evidenced by increasing fractions of sorbed TlI 
at these or higher Tl loadings. In contact with triclinic birnessite, whose structure consists of MnIII,IV-sheets without 
vacancies, no Tl oxidation is observed and the dominant sorption process appears to be cation exchange. The distribution 
coefficients (log Kd-values; for Kd in L/kg) of d-MnO2 range from ~9 at low loadings (~3’000 mg/kg) to ~5 at the highest 
loadings (~300’000 mg/kg), whereas log Kd-values for Tl sorption onto triclinic birnessite varied only between 4.5 and 5.0 
over the tested concentration range.
Our results yield information on the affinity and capacity of non-oxidative and oxidative Tl uptake by different birnessites. 
The importance of these uptake mechanisms in soils will depend on the abundance of birnessite minerals relative to other 
sorbent phases as well as on the competition of other (trace) metal cations for reactive surface sites on birnessites.
REFERENCES
[1] Voegelin, A.; Pfenninger, N.; Petrikis, J.; Majzlan, J.; Plötze, M.; Senn, A. C.; Mangold, S.; Steininger, R.; Gottlicher, J. 
2015: Thallium speciation and extractability in a thallium- and arsenic-rich soil developed from mineralized carbonate 
rock, Environmental Science and Technology, 49, 5390-5398.
[2] Peacock, C. L.; Moon, E. M. 2012: Oxidative scavenging of thallium by birnessite: Explanation for thallium enrichment 
and stable isotope fractionation in marine ferromanganese precipitates. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 84, 297-313.580
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.1  
Methylmercury distribution and formation in polluted agricultural 
floodplain soils. 
Lorenz Gfeller*, Adrien Mestrot*
1 Institute of Geography, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern (lorenz.gfeller@giub.unibe.ch)
The biomethylation of mercury (Hg) is well studied in the marine environment. However, there is still a lack of knowledge 
concerning monomethyl-mercury (MMHg) formation in soils. Our main aim with this study was to characterize soil 
parameters potentially driving MMHg formation in agricultural soils. To do so, we investgated a Hg polluted agricultural 
floodplain situated between Visp and Raron, in the Canton of Valais.
There, an acetaldehyde producing plant released an estimated 50 t of Hg into a discharge canal between the 1930s and 
the 1970s. On several occasions, the Hg-rich canal sediments were used to fertilize agricultural fields and private gardens. 
In this area, we chose five agricultural sites (1 gradient, 2 hotspot and 2 background). The soil was sampled in a 
rectangular grid to a depth of 50 cm in 10 cm intervals. 300 Samples were analysed for Hg, MMHg, other relevant metals 
and a range of soil parameters such as pH, N, S and organic carbon (OC).
In the top soil, concentrations ranged from 0.05 - 107 mg kg-1 and 0.3 - 11.2 µg kg-1 for Hg and MMHg respectively. MMHg/
Hgtot ranged from 0.004 - 3.785 % . In background sites the soil Hg methylation potential MMHg/Hgtot was negativly 
correlated with pH and Fe concentration and positively correlated with OC. We also found that MMHg/Hgtot varies with land-
use types (cornfiled vs. pasture field).
According to our results, Hg methylation in soil is influenced by pH and OC, which is similar to Hg methylation in 
sediments. Furthermore, the type of fertilizer application in an agricultural soil may change OC and pH drastically. To what 
extend fertilisation (e.g. manure application) is governing Hg methylation is still an open question. 581
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.2  
Transformation of Manganese Oxides by Organic Constituents in 
Natural and Laboratory Systems
Debra Hausladen 1, Marco Keiluweit 2, & Jasquelin Peña 1  
1 Institute of Earth Surface Dynamics, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (debra.hausladen@unil.ch)
2 Stockbridge School of Agriculture, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA.
Biological processes are the predominant driver of manganese oxide precipitation in the environment. The formation of Mn 
biooxides, one of nature’s most potent solid-phase oxidants and an important scavenger of metals in the environment, 
depends on organic carbon compounds to fuel microbial catalysis. Additionally, the precipitation of these Mn oxides within 
biofilm matrices can contribute to either the retention or oxidation of carbon. This study investigates the reaction of both 
chemogenic and biogenic manganese oxides with a range of organic compounds. First, we look at how three commonly 
used Good’s buffers transform Mn oxide reactivity. Our results show that the differences in chemical structure, initially 
designed to allow the buffers to function over their respective pH ranges, influence the capacity for electron transfer from 
redox-active amine moieties to Mn oxides, with TRIS buffer showing the most reduction followed by HEPES and then MES 
buffers. Biogenic Mn oxides were precipitated in the absence of C compounds (e.g., growth media, organic buffers) and 
initial reduction by HEPES followed the same trend as predicted by abiotic oxides, although continued reduction does not 
occur between 1 and 24 h as with abiotic oxides. Next, biogenic and abiotic Mn oxides were reacted with phenolic model 
compounds in order to better understand the role of Mn biominerals on lignin biodegradation in soil systems. The results of 
this study assess to what extent the use of chemically synthesized versus biogenically precipitated Mn oxides may impact 
predictions of natural organic matter degradation. In addition, this study provides insight into the control of organic carbon 
species on Mn oxide structure and oxidation state within the environment.582
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.3  
Copper mass balances and stable isotopes as analytical tool to trace 
sources and processes in agricultural systems
Martin Imseng 1, Matthias Wiggenhauser 2/3, E. Frossard 3, Michael Müller 4, Armin Keller 4, Wolfgang Wilcke 5  
and Moritz Bigalke 1
1 Geographic Institute, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern
2 Institute of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zürich, Eischikon 33, CH-8315 Lindau
3 Institut des Sciences de la terre, Université Grenoble Alpes – CNRS, F-38058 Grenoble Cedex 9
4 Swiss Soil Monitoring Network (NABO), Agroscope, Reckenholzstrasse 191, CH-8046 Zürich
5 Institute of Geography and Geoecology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Reinhard-Baumeister-Platz 1, D-76131  
  Karlsruhe
In animal husbandary, copper (Cu) is used as feed additive and pharmaceutical. The Cu is tranferred into manure and 
distributed on agricultural land. Finally, the Cu from the manure can accumulate in agricultural soils. Although being a 
micronutrient, high Cu concentrations are toxic for microorganisms and invertebrates and endanger the soil fertility. Former 
studies revealed Cu accumulations in Swiss agricultural soils in the past decades. However, these studies were not 
completely based on in-situ measured data. The aim of this study was to fill this gap and measure Cu fluxes at selected 
Swiss agricultural sites. Specifically, the aim was to trace Cu in the soil and to differentiate between anthropogenic and 
geogenic sources. Additionally, the metal distribution in Swiss agricultural systems was further elucidated, based on stable 
isotope ratios of system fluxes and soil pools.
For that purpose, Cu balances of three grassland sites were determined by measuring the soil metal concentrations and all 
inputs (atmospheric bulk deposition, manure & parent material) and outputs (seepage water and grass harvest) during one 
hydrological year (May 2014 – May 2015). Furthermore, stable Cu isotope compositions of the soil and all inputs will be 
measured.
Cu mass balances showed net accumulations at all three sites (25-209 g ha-1 yr-1) and manure application was the most 
important flux (146-340 g ha-1 yr-1). Inputs with bulk deposition and through parent material weathering were by 1-2 orders 
of magnitude smaller. Beside the Cu budgets, stable isotope data (not yet analysed) will be presented and discussed to 
assess the biogeochemical processes and redistribution of (anthropogenic) Cu in agricultural systems.
REFERENCES  
Keller, A., Rosser, N. & Desaules A. 2005: Agroscope FAL.
Schultheiß, U., Döhler, H., Roth, U., Eckel, H., Goldbach, H., Kühnen, V., Wilcke, W., Uihlein, A., Früchtenicht, K. & Steffens, 
G. 2004: VDLUFA-Schriftenreihe, 59, 232-243.
Sheppard, S. C. & Sanipelli, B. 2012: Journal of Environmental Quality, 41, 1846-1856.583
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.4  
Evolution of Technology-Critical Element contents in sediments of a 
contaminated bay of Lake Geneva (Switzerland) over the past century
Guillaume Jiranek 1, Montserrat Filella 1, Jean-Luc Loizeau 1, Antonio Cobelo-García 2
1 Department F.-A. Forel, University of Geneva, Boulevard Carl-Vogt 66, CH-1205 Geneva, Switzerland,  
  (Guillaume.Jiranek@etu.unige.ch)
2 IIM-CSIC. Eduardo Cabello 6, E-36208 Vigo, Spain
Research on environmental concentrations and processes of technology-critical elements (TCE) is gaining relevance in the 
recent years due to their increasing use in a variety of emerging technological applications (e.g. Cobelo-García et al. 2015). 
However, knowledge on their temporal evolution in anthropogenically impacted areas during the past century has not been 
well documented. To this aim, TCE (e.g. Ta, Te, Nb, Ga, Ge, In, Tl, Rare Earth Elements, platinum group elements) have 
been analyzed in a dated sediment core collected from a contaminated bay of Lake Geneva, Switzerland in which a high 
degree of enrichment for ‘common’ (e.g. Pb, Cu, Hg, Ni) metals has already been reported (Gascón Díez et al. 2017). We 
observed a significant degree of contamination for several TCE (e.g. In, Te; Figure 1) following a trend similar to other 
common metals, and linked to the implementation of the Lausanne city wastewater treatment plant discharging its treated 
and untreated effluent in the bay. For other TCE like Tl or Ge, low or null contamination was found.
0
20
40
60
80
1000 0,02 0,04 0,06 0,08Depth (cm)In/Th (w/w)
0
20
40
60
80
1000 0,01 0,02 0,03Depth (cm)Te/Th (w/w)
2010 
1930 
2001 
1964 
Figure 1. Temporal trend of Th-normalized concentrations of In (left) and Te (right) in a sediment core collected in the Vidy Bay (Lake 
Geneva, Switzerland). 
REFERENCES
Cobelo-García, A., Filella, M,. Croot, P., Frazzoli, C., Du Laing, G., Ospina-Álvarez, N., Rauch, S., Salaun, P., Schäfer, J., & 
Zimermann, S., 2015: COST Action TD1407 network of technology critical elements – from environmental processes to 
human health threats, Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 22, 15188-15194.
Gascón Díez, E., Corella, J.P., Adatte, Th., Thevenon, F., & Loizeau, J.-L., 2017: High-resolution reconstruction of the 20th 
century history of trace metals, major elements, and organic matter in sediments in a contaminated area of Lake Geneva, 
Switzerland, Applied Geochemistry, 78, 1-11. 2010
193020011964584
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.5  
Arsenic removal from lake water, river water and groundwater using an 
electrocoagulation system
Nathalie Manetti 1, Charlotte Catrouillet 1 & Jasquelin Peña 1 
1 University of Lausanne IDYST, Geopolis, CH-1015 Lausanne 
Arsenic (As) is a toxic element that occurs naturally in the environment. The contamination of groundwater by arsenic is a 
worldwide concern, affecting the health of thousands of people, especially in South-East of Asia (West Bengal, Bangladesh, 
etc.). The consumption of drinking water represents a major source of human exposure to arsenic, which can lead to the 
development of different types of cancer, skin lesions, cardiovascular diseases, etc.
A number of studies have investigated the potential to use iron electrocoagulation (EC) as a method to remove arsenic from 
water. This system is a low-cost water treatment method with low energy requirements, both of which are important 
requirements for water treatment in decentralized communities. In this system, a current is passed through an Fe(0) 
electrode which is oxidized and dissolved to Fe(II). Successive reactions including Fe(II) oxidation to Fe(III) generate 
oxidants (Fenton reactions) able to oxidize either Fe(II) and As(III) to As(V), the less dangerous form of As. Furthermore, 
Fe(III) forms nanoscale Fe precipitates that efficiently sorb (according to the pH) As(III) and As(V). Subsequently, As-rich 
iron precipitates can be removed from water by filtration and/or settling (Ratna Kumar, Chaudhari, Khilar, & Mahajan, 2004). 
Ions and substances present in the raw groundwater can compete with As for sorption sites of Fe oxides (e.g., phosphates, 
transition metals, organic matter) and/or oxidation (redox sensitive elements such as Mn) (van Genuchten & Peña, 2017). 
To test the performance of the system for different water chemistries, lake water, river water and groundwater were 
sampled from the University of Lausanne campus and spiked with As(III) or As(V). 
The different waters were first filtered using a 0.2 µm filter and spiked with 10 µM As(III) or As(V). The experiments were 
conducted in the presence of natural O2 (from air) and with the addition of 250 µM of H2O2, an oxidant naturally produced in 
the system. As(III), As(V) and Fe aqueous concentrations (after filtration at 0.2 µM) and Fe and As concentrations in the 
total phase were measured over time (0, 6, 13, 23 and 32 minutes). Total organic carbon and the major cations and anions 
were also determined at the beginning and at the end of the experiment to determine which elements are in competition 
with As. 
River water and groundwater generally contained higher concentrations of ions such as Ca, Mg, K and Na compared to 
lake water. However, the As removal was faster for the lake water than for the other waters. The total organic carbon (TOC) 
concentrations were similar for the three waters (less than 5 mg L-1). These results provide insight into the control of co-
occuring elements on the reactions and the As removal efficiency in EC systems. 
REFERENCES  
Kumar, P. R., Chaudhari, S., Khilar, K. C., & Mahajan, S. P. 2004: Removal of arsenic from water by electrocoagulation. 
Chemosphere, 55, 1245-1252.
van Genuchten, C. M. & Peña, J. 2017: Mn(II) Oxidation in Fenton and Fenton Type Systems: Identification of Reaction 
Efficiency and Reaction Products. Environmental Science & Technology , 51, 2982-2991.585
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.6  
Reactions between hypobromous acid, organic sulfur species and 
dissolved organic matter in marine waters
Emanuel Müller 1, Sylvain Bouchet 2, Urs von Gunten 1,2,3, Lenny H.E. Winkel 1,2
1 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Department of Water Resources and Drinking Water  
  (W+T), Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf
2 ETH Zurich, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics (IBP),  
  Department of Environment Systems (D-USYS), Universitätstrasse 16, 8092 Zürich
3 EPFL, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Route Cantonale, 1015 Lausanne
Volatile organic bromine (e.g. bromoform, CHBr3) and sulfur (dimethylsulfide, DMS) compounds produced in marine waters 
are important constituents in atmospheric chemistry and climatic processes.1,2 In the atmosphere, volatile organic bromine 
species photolyze to Br atoms which are known for their ozone destruction potential.3 Dimethylsulfide triggers the formation 
of aerosols and clouds via its oxidation to sulfuric acid.2 A key compound in the production of volatile bromine species in 
marine waters is enzymatically produced hypobromous acid (HOBr/OBr-) which reacts with dissolved organic matter 
(DOM).1,4 However, apart from its reaction with DOM, we hypothesize that HOBr might also react with marine organic sulfur 
compounds (i.e. dimethylsulfide, DMS; dimethylsulfoxide, DMSO and dimethylsulfoniopropionate, DMSP), potentially 
implying a competition between reactions of DOM and organic sulfur species with HOBr. Therefore, reactions between 
HOBr and marine organic sulfur compounds may affect the production of volatile organic Br species and also represent an 
additional sink for marine S compounds. We studied the reactivity between HOBr and marine organic S species and 
determined the second order rate constants of these reactions. The reaction between HOBr and DMS was found to have a 
very high second order rate constant (k=2·109 M-1 s-1), which is around 10 orders of magnitude higher than for the 
corresponding HOBr reactions with DMSO (0.4 M-1 s-1) and DMSP (< 0.1 M-1 s-1). To identify and quantify the S products of 
these reactions we developed a HPLC-ICP-MS/MS method, with which we could show that DMS and DMSO oxidation by 
HOBr results in DMSO and DMSO2 formation, respectively. In combination with estimated marine HOBr concentrations via 
reported HOBr production and sink fluxes, our results indicate that the reaction between DMS and HOBr respresents an 
additional, so far ignored, major sink for marine DMS. 
However, as DOM is a well-known sink of HOBr in marine waters (leading to production of bromoform among other 
products), the reactions between HOBr and DMS will compete with the reaction between HOBr and DOM. Therefore, we 
further studied the reactivity of HOBr and DMS in the presence of representative DOM. In these experiments we found that 
increasing DMS concentrations lowered the production of brominated volatile organic compounds (i.e., CHBr3 and CHBr2Cl) 
indicating that DMS can indeed play a role in diminishing the production of volatile organic Br species. Furthermore, we 
could show that for DMS and DOM concentrations reflecting marine concentration ratios, a major fraction of DMS was 
consumed by HOBr and that the reacted DMS was found as DMSO (100% yield). These results confirm the high reactivity 
between DMS and HOBr for relevant ratios of DMS, HOBr and DOM and the corresponding reactions thus need to be 
considered in marine-atmosphere systems. 
References
1 Wever, R., & van der Horst M.A. 2013: The role of vanadium haloperoxidases in the formation of volatile brominated 
compounds and their impact on the environment. Dalton Transactions 42, 11778-11786.
2 Stefels et al. 2007: Environmental constraints on the production and removal of the climatically active gas dimethylsulphide 
(DMS) and implications for ecosystem modelling. Biogeochemistry 83, 245-275.
3 Salawitch, R. 2006: Atmospheric chemistry: Biogenic bromine. Nature 439, 275-277.
4 Rehder D. 2014: Vanadate-Dependent Peroxidases in Macroalgae: Function, Applications, and Environmental Impact. 
Oceanography 2, 121.586
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.7  
Paleo-ecotoxicology: Shining a light on the true impacts of pollution
Remo L. Roethlin 1,2, Nathalie Dubois 1,2
1 Eawag, Department of Surface Waters Research + Management, Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf  
  (remo.roethlin@eawag.ch)
2 ETH Zürich, Department of Earth Sciences, Soneggstrasse 5, CH-8092 Zürich
Traditional ecotoxicology is focused on short-term toxicological effects of pollution on biota. Paleo-ecotoxicology is an 
emerging discipline using sediment archives to extend the scope of ecotoxicology by looking at changes of biological 
proxies over long timespans (Korosi, Thienpont, Smol, & Blais, 2017). It allows assessing the long-term dynamics of aquatic 
ecosystems exposed to pollutants. 
Here we present the outline of a new project, where we will retrieve data on past changes in aquatic ecosystems induced 
by the introduction of anthropogenic pollutants through a multi-proxy analysis of lacustrine sediment cores. We warmly 
welcome suggestions and discussions that could provide useful inputs for the project’s progress.
We will especially focus on the connection of bioassays and other means commonly used in ecotoxicology with sediment 
records to overcome limitations of short-term effect models. We then will use the remains of indicator organisms found in 
sediment archives, such as Diatoms, Chironomids, Cladocera and others to assess the impact of pollutants on the 
bioindicators. 
This approach will be validated using different target organisms and different lakes with varying pollutants. Finally, we will 
extend this paleo-ecotoxicological approach to include meta-genomic surveys of aquatic ecosystems in sediment records. 
By extracting ancient DNA from sediment samples (sedDNA), it will be possible to assess the long-term impact of pollution 
on an ecosystem without the bias of morphological identification and including those species that leave no identifiable 
subfossil remains in sediment cores.
REFERENCES
Korosi, J. B., Thienpont, J. R., Smol, J. P., & Blais, J. M. (2017). Paleo-ecotoxicology: What Can Lake Sediments Tell Us 
about Ecosystem Responses to Environmental Pollutants? Environmental Science & Technology , 51, 9446–9457. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b02375587
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.8  
Investigating the potential of intracellular mineral inclusions in 
microalgae as a novel bioremediation method for radioactive 90Sr water 
pollution
Inés Segovia Campos 1, Agathe Martignier 1, Jean-Michel Jaquet 1, François Barja 2, Montserrat Filella 3 & Daniel Ariztegui 1
1 Département des Sciences de la Terre, Université de Genève, Rue de Maraîchers 13, CH-1205 Genève, Suisse  
  (ines.segoviacampos@unige.ch)
2 Unité de Microbiologie, Université de Genève, Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30, CH-1205 Genève, Suisse
3 Département F.-A. Forel, Université de Genève, Boulevard Carl-Vogt 66, CH-1205 Genève, Suisse
It has been recently discovered that numerous microalgae species of the genus Tetraselmis  (Chlorophyta) form intracellular 
carbonates called micropearls .These mineral inclusions are composed of hydrated amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) in 
which other elements such as strontium can also accumulate. Under both laboratory and natural conditions, the Sr/Ca ratio 
of the micropearls can be more than 200 times higher than in the growing medium, indicating that these Tetraselmis  
species have a strong capacity to concentrate strontium (Martignier et al., 2018). Ongoing experiments with cultures of 
Tetraselmis  under controlled laboratory conditions will provide missing information about the uptake mechanism of this 
element. Because these algae are widely spread in the aquatic environment (brackish water, seawater and freshwater), 
they may have a larger impact on the geochemical cycle of this alkaline-earth metal than previously thought. Hence, they 
should be considered as potential candidates for new bioremediation solutions regarding radioactive 90Sr water pollution. 
REFERENCES 
Martignier, A., Filella, M., Pollok, K., Melkonian, M., Bensimon, M., Barja, F., Langenhorst, F., Jaquet, J.M. & Ariztegui, D. 
2018: Marine and freshwater micropearls: Biomineralization producing strontium-rich amorphous calcium carbonate 
inclusions is widespread in the genus Tetraselmis (Chlorophyta). Biogeosciences Discuss. 2018, 1-22.588
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
P 19.9  
Transformation of Cu (nanoparticles) during sewage sludge incineration 
studied by bulk- and micro-XAS
Jonas Wielinski 1,2, Alexander Gogos 1, Francesco Marafatto 1,3, Andreas Voegelin 1, Eberhard Morgenroth 1,2 & Ralf Kaegi 1
1 Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf
2 Institute of Environmental Engineering, ETH Zürich, Stefano-Franscini-Platz 5, CH-8093 Zürich
3 MicroXAS-X05LA beamline, Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, Forschungsstrasse 111, CH-5235 Villigen
  Contact: jonas.wielinski@eawag.ch 
Engineered nanoparticles (NP) are well retained during wastewater treatment (WWT) and accumulate in the sewage 
sludge. In Switzerland sewage sludge is mostly digested and incinerated preferably in mono-combustion facilities for 
volume reduction and energy recovery. The resulting ash is landfilled for potential phosphate recovery in the future. 
Previous studies suggested that CuO-NP transform into Cu-sulfides during the WWT and in environments with comparable 
redox conditions (Donner et al., 2011; Gogos et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2014) but did not address further Cu transformation 
during sludge incineration.
We spiked CuO-NP or dissolved Cu to digested sewage sludge and reacted the sludge under mesophilic, anaerobic 
conditions for 24 h. Sludge aliquots were collected and freeze dried for solid-phase analysis. The remaining sludge was 
dried at 105 °C overnight and incinerated in a pilot- bubbling bed type fluidized bed incinerator. To determine the speciation 
of Cu in the spiked sludges and ashes, the homogenized sludge and ash samples were prepared as 7-mm diameter pellets 
for bulk EXAFS analysis at the SuperXAS beamline at the Swiss Light Source (SLS, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen). To 
assess the distribution and speciation of Cu at the micrometer-scale, the undisturbed samples were embedded in resin and 
cut into thin sections (30 µm) on Si-wafers. These sections were investigated at the microXAS beamline at the SLS. One 
500×500 µm2 area was mapped by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) with a 3×3 µm2 spatial resolution at an incident photon energy 
of 18 keV to assess the spatial distribution of Cu and other elements (Fe, Ce, etc.). On the same area, 7 XRF maps were 
recorded at incident photon energies around the Cu K-edge to obtain spatially-resolved information on Cu speciation.
Linear combination fit (LCF) analysis of the bulk-EXAFS spectra indicated complete sulfidation of Cu spiked in dissolved 
form to digested sludge after 24 h reaction time, whereas a minor fraction (8%) of the spiked CuO-NP were still present in 
the digested CuO-NP-spiked sludge (Fig. 1). LCF analysis of the ash samples indicated that incineration lead to a 
significant change in Cu speciation which was independent of the initially spiked form of Cu. The respective EXAFS spectra 
were described as a combination of about 33% amorphous CuS, 33% tenorite (CuO), 17% copper sulphate (CuSO4) and 
17% cupro spinel (CuFe2O4) (Fig. 1). A preliminary analysis of the spatially-resolved measurements revealed an uneven 
distribution of individual Cu species in the sludge and ash samples. Whether CuO-NP spiked to digested sludge and the 
corresponding ashes resulted in distinct distribution patterns in terms of Cu concentration or bonding environment is 
currently under investigation.
REFERENCES
Donner, E., Howard, D. L., Jonge, M. D. d., Paterson, D., Cheah, M. H., Naidu, R., & Lombi, E. (2011). X-ray Absorption and 
Micro X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy Investigation of Copper and Zinc Speciation in Biosolids. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 45(17), 7249-7257. doi:10.1021/es201710z
Gogos, A., Thalmann, B., Voegelin, A., & Kaegi, R. (2017). Sulfidation kinetics of copper oxide nanoparticles. Environmental 
Science: Nano, 4 (8), 1733-1741. doi:10.1039/C7EN00309A
Ma, R., Stegemeier, J., Levard, C., Dale, J. G., Noack, C. W., Yang, T., Lowry, G. V. (2014). Sulfidation of copper oxide 
nanoparticles and properties of resulting copper sulfide. Environmental Science: Nano, 1 (4), 347-357. doi:10.1039/
C4EN00018H589
Symposium 19: Environmental Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements
Platform Geosciences, Swiss Academy of Science, SCNAT Swiss Geoscience Meeting 2018
Figure 1. Results of LCF to sludge and ash samples. Digested sludge was spiked with either CuO-NP or dissolved Cu, reacted for 24 h and 
incinerated in a pilot reactor. 