Treatment of textile wastewater by homogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton
oxidation processes
S. Karthikeyan, A. Titus, A. Gnanamani, A.B. Mandal, G. Sekaran ⁎
Environmental Technology Division, Council of Scienti ﬁc & Industrial Research (CSIR)-Central Leather Research Institute (CLRI), Adyar, Chennai, 600 020, India
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 14 May 2011Received in revised form 28 July 2011Accepted 13 August 2011Available online 14 September 2011
Keywords:Heterogeneous Fenton oxidationTextile wastewaterMesoporous activated carbonHomogeneous Fenton oxidationIn the present investigation an attempt was made to degrade organic pollutants in the textile ef ﬂuent by ho-
mogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton systems. Experiments were carried out under the batch as well asunder the continuous operating conditions. The effect of time, pH, H
2O2concentration, FeSO 4.7H 2O concen-
tration and the mass of mesoporous activated carbon on the degradation of organics in the wastewater
were critically examined. The kinetic constants and the thermodynamic parameters for the oxidation of or-
ganics in wastewater were determined. The quantitative removal of COD, BOD and TOC from the wastewaterwas evaluated. The degradation of organics in textile wastewater was con ﬁrmed through FT-IR, UV –Visible
spectroscopy, and cyclic voltammetry.
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Textile Industry employs a wide spectrum of chemicals viz. enzymes,
detergents, dyes, acids, sodium salts etc. for the conversion of natural ﬁ-
bers into textile ﬁbers. The conventional treatment systems that are used
in the ef ﬂuent treatment plants or in the common ef ﬂuent treatment
plants, include primary clari ﬁer, secondary biological aerobic system,
secondary clari ﬁer, sand ﬁlter and activated carbon ﬁlter[1].T h ew a s t e -
water discharged from the textile industry seldom meets the discharging
standards prescribed by the pollution control boards in India. This is due
to the presence of high COD to BOD ratio, unspent dyes and total dis-
solved solids. The poor biodegradab ility of wastewater is due to the pres-
ence of high concentration of azo dyes. The major pollutants identi ﬁed in
the textile wastewater are high pH, color, nutrients (nitrogen and phos-
phorus), inorganic salts and refractory organics [2,3].
The azo and other chromophoretic groups in the dye matrix render
geno toxicity to the biodiversities in the environment. Advanced Oxida-
tion Processes (AOPs) have been suggested for the partial or complete
removal of pollutants in the wastewater or their transformation into
less toxic and more biodegradable products. Furthermore, the partial de-
composition of non-biodegradable organic pollutants can lead to biode-
gradable intermediates. There are indications of partial decomposition,elimination of chromophoretic groups, increase in the solubility index
of the compounds and reduction in the aromaticity which lead to an im-
provement in the biodegradability of the textile wastewater by AOPs.Fenton oxidation, one of the AOP's was studied extensively by
many researchers for the treatment of wastewater containing refrac-
tory/xenobiotic organic compounds [4,5] . The sequential steps that
take place in the process of Fenton oxidation of organics in wastewa-
ter are shown below.
H
2O2þFe2þ→Fe3þþOH−þOH•k¼70 M−1s−1ð1Þ
OH•þRH→CO2þH2Ok ¼109–1010M−1s−1ð2Þ
R•þFe3þ→RþþFe2þð3Þ
H2O2þFe OHðÞ3→H2OþO●þFe OHðÞ3 ð4Þ
Eq.(1)suggests that there is a wide scope for the precipitation of fer-
ric ion with hydroxide ions as ferric hydroxide. The ferrous ion is exces-
sively used in order to sustain the Fenton oxidation reaction. This
demands a post treatment for the Fenton oxidized wastewater for the
decontamination of heavy metal pollution. Moreover, the ferric hydrox-
ide sludge produced is the source for the decomposition of hydrogen
peroxide. Thus, the generation of sludge and huge consumption of che-micals were the identi ﬁed disadvantages of homogeneous Fenton oxida-
tion of organics in wastewater. This can be overcome by the following
two methods (i) providing a sink to abstract an electron from hydroxyl
ion to generate hydroxyl radical [6]and (ii) providing a second matrix
phase to prevent the ferric ion from combining with the hydroxyl ion.
Mesoporous Activated Carbon (MAC) has been shown to possess the
above two characteristics. The active sites of MAC are made available
for the adsorption of organic compounds according to the energyDesalination 281 (2011) 438 –445
⁎Corresponding author at: Environmental Technology Division, Central Leather Re-
search Institute, Adyar, Chennai, 600 020, India. Tel.: +91 44 24452491; fax: +91 4424912150.
E-mail address: ganesansekaran@gmail.com (G. Sekaran).
0011-9164/$ –see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.desal.2011.08.019
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Desalination
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/desalpossessed by them [7]. The organic compounds are oxidized by hydroxyl
radicals into their end products. Considering the favorable characteristics
of MAC many researchers have applied it as heterogeneous catalyst for
the oxidation of organics in wastewater [8–10]. However, it has been ob-
served that the application of MAC for the Fenton oxidation of organics in
the textile wastewater is limited. Thus, the focal theme of the present in-
vestigation was to demonstrate the performance of the Homogeneousfollowed by Heterogeneous Fenton oxidation processes (using MAC as
heterogeneous catalyst) for the removal of dissolved organics in the
wastewater at low residence time and with the low consumption of
Fenton's reagent under batch and continuous mode operations [11].
2. Materials and methods2.1. Preparation of electron rich activated carbon matrix
Rice husk, a precursor material obtained from the agro industry was
used for the preparation of MAC in sequential steps such as carboniza-
tion at 400 °C and activation using phosphoric acid at 700 °C, 800 °C
and 900 °C. The activated carbon samples were washed with distilled
water until the wash water showed negative test for phosphate. The
washed mesoporous activated carbon was dried at 110 °C to get the ﬁn-
ished product and they were labeled as MAC
700,M A C 800,a n dM A C 900
respectively.
2.2. Characterization of MAC samples
MAC 700,M A C 800, and MAC 900samples have been characterized for
surface area, pore volume and pore siz e distribution using an automatic
adsorption instrument (Quantach rome Corp. Nova-1000 gas sorption
analyzer). The free electron density of MAC was determined by electron
spin resonance spectroscopy (Bruker IFS spectrophotometer ESR). The
elemental composition (Carbon, Hydrogen and Nitrogen content) of
the MAC samples was determined us ing CHNS 1108 model Carlo-Erba
analyzer. A Philips X' pert diffractometer was used to determine the crys-
tallites present in the MAC 800sample by X-ray diffraction technique
(XRD) and a Perkin-Elmer infrared spectrophotometer was used for
the investigation of the surface functional groups in the MAC samples.
The surface morphology of MAC was determined using Leo –Jeol scan-
ning electron microscope and the Energy gap value of MAC was deter-
mined by using Diffuse Re ﬂectance Spectroscopy.
2.3. Collection and pre-treatment of wastewater
The wastewater was collected from the over ﬂow of a primary clar-
iﬁer in an ef ﬂuent treatment plant of a textile industry in Tamil Nadu,
India. The wastewater was screened to remove the ﬂoating solids and
was sand ﬁltered to remove the suspended solids.
2.4. Fenton oxidation of organics in textile wastewater under batch mode
The effect of pH (2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 7.0), the effect of concentration of
hydrogen peroxide (3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 mM/L) and the effect of concen-
tration of FeSO 4.7H 2O (0.4, 0.8, 1, 1.4 to 1.8 mM/L) and effect of temper-
ature (303, 313, 323, 333 K) were carried out to determine the
optimum conditions for the oxidation of organics in the textile waste-
water. The process consists of adjusting the pH of the sand ﬁltered tex-
tile wastewater to the desired pH level using sulfuric acid (36N, sp. gr.
1.81, 98% purity). The homogeneous Fenton oxidation was carried out
by dosing the textile wastewater with H 2O2and FeSO 4.7H 2O. Aliquots
of samples were withdrawn every 1 h and analyzed for pH, ORP,
BOD, COD and TOC according to the procedure reported in the stan-
dard methods for analysis of water and wastewater. The heteroge-
neous Fenton oxidation was carried out by dosing the wastewater
with H 2O2(30% w/v) and FeSO4.7H 2O followed by the addition of
MAC 800(10 g/L). Air at a ﬂow rate of 1.2 L/h and at a pressure0.6 kg/cm2was applied at ambient temperature and pressure main-
tained for homogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton oxidation processes.
The COD measured in the wastewater samples after Fenton oxidation of
organics was corrected in accordance with the equation shown below to
prevent the interference of H 2O2in COD analysis
CODA¼CODM−RP/C30:25 ð5Þ
where COD Ais the actual COD in the sample; COD Mis the measured
COD and R Pis the residual hydrogen peroxide in the wastewater sam-
ple after Fenton oxidation.
2.5. Integrated homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic treatment of
organics in textile wastewater under continuous mode
A PVC reactor of height 50 cm and diameter of 6 cm was fabricat-
ed. The volume of reactor was 1 L with the working volume of
400 mL. The bottom of the reactor was ﬁlled with quartz stones cov-
ering a height of 8 cm and gravel above it for about 2 cm. The reactor
was then ﬁlled with 150 g of the MAC and provision was made to dis-
tribute air in the MAC bed to facilitate oxygen transfer for oxidation as
shown in Fig. 1 . The outlet of the homogeneous reactor was the inlet
to the heterogeneous reactor in the integrated catalytic treatment
process. For simpli ﬁcation purposes the integrated catalytic treat-
ment process is de ﬁned as heterogeneous process throughout this
manuscript. The pH of the textile wastewater was adjusted to 3.5
using H 2SO4(36N, speci ﬁc gravity of 1.81). 2 mM/L of H 2O2(30%
w/v) and FeSO 4.7H 2O (0.1 g/L) were added to the wastewater and
then applied to the reactor through sample distribution system pro-
vided at the top of the reactor in the down ﬂow direction. The ﬂow
rate was maintained in such a way that the hydraulic retention time
provided was 1 h. The aliquots of sample were collected and analyzed
for pH, ORP, BOD COD and TOC.
2.6. Instrumental analysis
The raw and the Fenton oxidized samples were scanned using
UV–Visible spectrophotometer (Varian, Cary 100 Conc.). The FT-IR
spectra of the MAC sample, raw wastewater sample and the treated
wastewater sample were recorded using Perkin-Elmer infrared
spectrophotometer for the identi ﬁcation of the functional groups.
The dried samples were mixed with spectroscopic grade potassium
bromide and made in the form of pellets at a pressure of about
1 MPa of dimensions; diameter, 10 mm and thickness, 1 mm. The
samples were scanned in the spectral range of 4000 –400 cm−1.
The Cyclic Voltagram was recorded for the untreated and treated
wastewater samples at potential in the range +10 V to −10 V and
current in the range +250 mA to −250 mA with a cyclic voltam-
meter (CHI600D type). The CV was recorded with Ag/AgCl as refer-
ence electrode and Pt wire as counter electrode. The working
electrode was Pt and the scan rate was 0.1 V/s.
2.7. Physico-chemical analysis of the wastewater
The primary treated, sand ﬁltered and the Fenton oxidized waste-
water samples were analyzed for pH, BOD 5(Biochemical Oxygen De-
mand), COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand), TOC (Total Organic Carbon)
and TDS (Total Dissolved Solids), according to the methods summa-
rized in the standard methods for the analysis of wastewater [12].
3. Results and discussion3.1. Characterization of MAC
The characteristics of MAC samples are presented in Table 1 .T h e
maximum re ﬂectance at a wavelength corresponding to 800 nm439 S. Karthikeyan et al. / Desalination 281 (2011) 438 –445Download English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/624814
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/624814
Daneshyari.com