AUGUST 1, 2003  /  V OLUME 68, N UMBER 3 www.aafp.org/afp AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN 469cus. Practically speaking, any person who
exhibits persistent seizure activity or who doesnot regain consciousness for five minutes ormore after a witnessed seizure should be con-sidered to have status epilepticus.
CLASSIFICATION SCHEME
Although there is no consensus over a clas-
sification system for status epilepticus, classifi-cation is necessary for appropriate manage-ment of the condition because effectivemanagement depends on the type of statusepilepticus. In general, the various systemscharacterize status epilepticus according towhere the seizures arise—from a localizedregion of the cortex (partial onset) or fromboth hemispheres of the brain (generalizedonset). The other major categorization hingeson the clinical observation of overt convul-sions; thus, status epilepticus may be convul-sive or nonconvulsive in nature.
Various approaches to classifying status
epilepticus have been suggested.
5-7One ver-
sion5classified status epilepticus into general-
ized (tonic-clonic, myoclonic, absence, atonic,akinetic) and partial (simple or complex) sta-tus epilepticus. Another version
6divides the
condition into generalized status epilepticusStatus epilepticus is an under-recog-nized health problem associatedwith substantial morbidity andmortality. An estimated 152,000cases occur per year in the United
States, resulting in 42,000 deaths and an inpa-tient cost of $3.8 to $7 billion per year.
1-3This
review concentrates on the clinical manage-ment of status epilepticus (particularly con-vulsive status epilepticus), the theoretic andclinical considerations involved in choosingan antiepileptic drug to treat this emergencysituation, and the consensus protocol devisedby the Epilepsy Foundation of America (EFA)Working Group on Status Epilepticus.
Definition, Classification, 
and Epidemiology 
DEFINITION
A decade ago, the EFA convened a working
group to define status epilepticus.4They
described this condition as two or moresequential seizures without full recovery ofconsciousness between seizures, or more than30 minutes of continuous seizure activity.
4
This definition is generally accepted, althoughsome investigators consider shorter durationsof seizure activity to constitute status epilepti-Status epilepticus is an increasingly recognized public health problem in the United States. Status
epilepticus is associated with a high mortality rate that is largely contingent on the duration ofthe condition before initial treatment, the etiology of the condition, and the age of the patient.Treatment is evolving as new medications become available. Three new preparations—fos-phenytoin, rectal diazepam, and parenteral valproate—have implications for the management ofstatus epilepticus. However, randomized controlled trials show that benzodiazepines (in particu-lar, diazepam and lorazepam) should be the initial drug therapy in patients with status epilepti-cus. Despite the paucity of clinical trials comparing medication regimens for acute seizures, thereis broad consensus that immediate diagnosis and treatment are necessary to reduce the morbid-ity and mortality of this condition. Moreover, investigators have reported that status epilepticusoften is not considered in patients with altered consciousness in the intensive care setting. Inpatients with persistent alteration of consciousness for which there is no clear etiology, physiciansshould be more quickly prepared to obtain electroencephalography to identify status epilepticus.Physicians should rely on a standardized protocol for management of status epilepticus toimprove care for this neurologic emergency. (Am Fam Physician 2003;68:469-76. Copyright© 2003American Academy of Family Physicians.)Management of Status Epilepticus
JOSEPH I. SIRVEN, M.D., Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona 
ELIZABETH WATERHOUSE, M.D., Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia
See page 406 for 
definitions of strength-of-evidence levels.(overt or subtle) and nonconvulsive status epilepticus (sim-
ple partial, complex partial, absence). The third version7
takes a different approach, classifying status epilepticus bylife stage (confined to the neonatal period, infancy andchildhood, childhood and adulthood, adulthood only).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Status epilepticus of partial onset accounts for the
majority of episodes.1-4,8-12One epidemiologic study1on
status epilepticus found that 69 percent of episodes inadults and 64 percent of episodes in children were partialonset, followed by secondarily generalized status epilepti-cus in 43 percent of adults and 36 percent of children. Theincidence of status epilepticus was bimodally distributed,occurring most frequently during the first year of life andafter the age of 60 years.
1,2Among adults, patients older
than 60 had the highest risk of developing status epilepti-cus, with an incidence of 86 per 100,000 persons peryear.
1-3Among children 15 years or younger, infants
younger than 12 months had the highest incidence andfrequency of status epilepticus.
1A variety of etiologies
accounted for the condition. In adults, the major causeswere low levels of antiepileptic drugs (34 percent) andcerebrovascular disease (22 percent), including acute orremote stroke and hemorrhage.
1-3
The rate of mortality from status epilepticus (defined as
death within 30 days of status epilepticus) was 22 percent inthe Richmond study.
1,13The mortality rate among children
was only 3 percent, whereas the rate among adults was 26percent.
1,13,14The elderly population had the highest rate of
mortality at 38 percent.1,13,14The primary determinants of
mortality in persons with status epilepticus were durationof seizures, age at onset, and etiology.
13,14Patients with
anoxia and stroke had a very high mortality rate that wasindependent of other variables.
13-15Patients with status
epilepticus occurring in the setting of alcohol withdrawal orlow levels of antiepileptic drugs had a relatively low mortal-ity rate. In nonfatal cases, status epilepticus is associatedwith significant morbidity. Cognitive decline following anepisode, as documented by neuropsychometric testing, is awell-established end result of prolonged secondarily gener-alized and partial status epilepticus.
16
Systemic Pathophysiology
Generalized convulsive status epilepticus is associated
with serious systemic physiologic changes resulting fromthe metabolic demands of repetitive seizures. Many ofthese systemic changes result from the profound auto-nomic changes that occur during status epilepticus,including tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension, pupil-lary dilation, and hyperthermia because of the massive cat-echolamine discharge associated with continuous general-ized seizures. Systemic changes requiring medicalintervention include hypoxia, hypercapnia, hypoglycemia,metabolic acidosis, and other electrolyte disturbances.Table 1
7,17-19summarizes the physiologic changes that
occur during status epilepticus.
Management of Status Epilepticus
GENERAL MEASURES
The treatment of status epilepticus involves the use of
potent intravenous medications that may have serious
470 AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN www.aafp.org/afp VOLUME 68, N UMBER 3  /  A UGUST 1, 2003Status epilepticus is defined as two or more
sequential seizures without full recovery of consciousness between seizures, or more than 30 minutes of continuous seizure activity. 
TABLE 1
Systemic Complications of Generalized 
Convulsive Status Epilepticus
Metabolic Renal
Lactic acidosis Acute renal failure from 
Hypercapnia rhabdomyolysis*
Hypoglycemia Myoglobinuria*
Hyperkalemia Cardiac/respiratory
Hyponatremia Hypoxia
CSF/serum leukocytosis Arrhythmia
Autonomic High output failure*
Hyperpyrexia Pneumonia
Failure of cerebral autoregulation*
Vomiting
Incontinence
CSF = cerebrospinal fluid.
*—Rare complications of status epilepticus.
Information from references 7 and 17 through 19.adverse effects. Therefore, the first step in managing the
condition is to ascertain that the patient has tonic-clonicstatus epilepticus, and that prolonged or repetitive seizureshave occurred. A single generalized seizure with completerecovery does not require treatment. Once the diagnosis ofstatus epilepticus is made, however, treatment should beinitiated immediately. Necessary interventions includemaintaining oxygenation and circulation, assessing the eti-ology and laboratory evaluations, obtaining intravenousaccess, and initiating drug therapy.
Physicians first should assess the patient’s airway and
oxygenation. If the airway is clear and intubation is notimmediately required, blood pressure and pulse should bechecked and oxygen administered. In patients with a his-tory of seizures, an attempt should be made to determinewhether medications have been taken recently. A screeningneurologic examination should be performed to check forsigns of a focal intracranial lesion.
Obtaining intravenous access is the next step, and
blood should be sent to the laboratory for measurementof serum electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen, glucose, andantiepileptic drug levels, as well as a toxic drug screen andcomplete blood cell count. Isotonic saline infusionshould be initiated. Because hypoglycemia may precipi-tate status epilepticus and is quickly reversible, 50 mL of50 percent glucose should be given immediately if hypo-glycemia is suspected. If the physician cannot check forhypoglycemia or there is any doubt, glucose should beadministered empirically. Thiamine (100 mg) should begiven along with the glucose, because glucose infusionincreases the risk of Wernicke’s encephalopathy in sus-ceptible patients.
After administration of oxygen, blood gas levels should
be determined to ensure adequate oxygenation. Initially,acidosis, hyperpyrexia, and hypertension need not betreated, because these are common findings in early statusepilepticus and should resolve on their own with promptand successful general treatment. If seizures persist afterinitial measures, medication should be administered.Imaging with computed tomography is recommendedafter stabilization of the airway and circulation. If imagingis negative, lumbar puncture is required to rule out infec-tious etiologies.
ROLE OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY
Electroencephalography (EEG) is extremely useful,
but underutilized, in the diagnosis and management ofstatus epilepticus. Although overt convulsive statusepilepticus is readily diagnosed, EEG can establish thediagnosis in less obvious circumstances. Researchers inone study
20used EEG to diagnose status epilepticus in 37
percent of patients with altered consciousness whosediagnosis was unclear on the basis of clinical criteria. Asurprising number of patients had no clinical signs ofstatus epilepticus, and EEG was necessary to establish thediagnosis.
EEG also can help to confirm that an episode of status
epilepticus has ended, particularly when questions ariseabout the possibility of recurrent episodes of more sub-tle seizures. In another study,
21investigators monitored
patients for at least 24 hours after clinical signs of statusepilepticus had ended. They found that nearly one halfof their patients continued to demonstrate electro-graphic seizures that often had no clinical correlation.The investigators concluded that EEG monitoring afterpresumed control of status epilepticus is essential foroptimal management.
Patients with status epilepticus who fail to recover
rapidly and completely should be monitored with EEG forat least 24 hours after an episode to ensure that recurrentseizures are not missed. Monitoring also is advised if peri-odic discharges appear in the EEG of a patient with alteredconsciousness who has not had obvious seizures. Periodicdischarges in these patients suggest the possibility of pre-ceding status epilepticus, and careful monitoring may clar-ify the etiology of the discharges and allow the detection ofrecurrent status epilepticus.
Pharmacologic Management 
Rapid treatment of status epilepticus is crucial to pre-
vent neurologic and systemic pathology. The goal of treat-
ment always should be immediate diagnosis and termina-tion of seizures. For an anti-seizure drug to be effective instatus epilepticus, the drug must be administered intra-venously to provide quick access to the brain without therisk of serious systemic and neurologic adverse effects.Multiple drugs are available, each with advantages anddisadvantages.Status Epilepticus
AUGUST 1, 2003  /  V OLUME 68, N UMBER 3 www.aafp.org/afp AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN 471The first step in managing status epilepticus is
assessing the patient’s airway and oxygenation. BENZODIAZEPINES
The benzodiazepines are some of the most effective
drugs in the treatment of acute seizures and status epilep-
ticus. The benzodiazepines most commonly used to treatstatus epilepticus are diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ati-van), and midazolam (Versed). All three compounds workby enhancing the inhibition of g-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) by binding to the benzodiazepine-GABA and bar-biturate-receptor complex.
Diazepam. Diazepam is one of the drugs of choice for
first-line management of status epilepticus.
18,22-24[Refer-
ences 18 and 22 through 24—Evidence level A, random-ized controlled trials (RCTs)] Although the drug entersthe brain rapidly because of its high lipid solubility, after15 to 20 minutes it redistributes to other areas of the body,reducing its clinical effect.
24,25Despite its fast distribution
half-life, the elimination half-life is approximately 24hours. Thus, sedative effects potentially could accumulatewith repeated administration.
Diazepam in a typical intravenous dosage of 5 to 10 mg
per minute terminates seizures of any type in about 75 per-cent of patients with status epilepticus.
22,23,26Adverse
effects include respiratory suppression, hypotension, seda-tion, and local tissue irritation. Hypotension and respira-tory suppression may be potentiated by the co-administra-tion of other antiepileptic drugs, particularly barbiturates.Diazepam also may be given intramuscularly and rectally(Diastat).
27 
Despite its pharmacokinetic and adverse effect limita-
tions, diazepam remains an important tool in the manage-ment of status epilepticus because of its rapid and broad-spectrum effect.
Lorazepam. Lorazepam has emerged as the preferred
benzodiazepine for acute management of status epilepti-cus.
24[Evidence level A, RCT] Lorazepam differs from
diazepam in two important respects. It is less lipid-solu-ble than diazepam, with a distribution half-life of two tothree hours versus 15 minutes for diazepam. Therefore, itshould have a longer duration of clinical effect.
24
Lorazepam also binds the GABAergic receptor moretightly than diazepam, resulting in a longer duration ofaction. The anticonvulsant effects of lorazepam last six to12 hours, and the typical dose ranges from 4 to 8 mg. Thisagent also has a broad spectrum of efficacy, terminatingseizures in 75 to 80 percent of cases.
26Its adverse effects
are identical to those of diazepam. Thus, lorazepam alsois an effective choice for acute seizure management, withthe added possibility of a longer duration of action thandiazepam.
Midazolam. Although midazolam is rarely used as the
first-choice benzodiazepine for treatment of statusepilepticus in the United States, it is used commonly inEurope. A more complete review of this agent and itsrole in the treatment of status epilepticus is availableelsewhere.
28,29
PHENYTOIN
Phenytoin (Dilantin) is one of the most effective drugs
for treating acute seizures and status epilepticus. In addi-tion, it is effective in the management of chronic epilepsy,particularly in patients with partial and secondarily gener-alized seizures. The pharmacokinetic properties of pheny-toin are reviewed elsewhere.
23,25,30
The main advantage of phenytoin is the lack of a sedat-
ing effect. However, a number of potentially seriousadverse effects may occur. Arrhythmias and hypotensionhave been reported, particularly in patients older than 40years. It is likely that these effects are associated with amore rapid rate of administration and the propylene gly-col vehicle used as its diluent. In addition, local irritation,phlebitis, and dizziness may accompany intravenousadministration.
472
AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN www.aafp.org/afp VOLUME 68, N UMBER 3  /  A UGUST 1, 2003The Authors
JOSEPH I. SIRVEN, M.D., is director of electroencephalography andepilepsy at the Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale, Ariz., and assistant professorof neurology at Mayo Medical School, Arizona campus. Dr. Sirvenreceived his medical degree from Louisiana State University, NewOrleans, and completed a residency in neurology at the University ofMinnesota Medical School—Minneapolis and a fellowship in electroen-cephalography and epilepsy at the University of Pennsylvania School ofMedicine, Philadelphia. He served as the status epilepticus course direc-tor for the American Academy of Neurology from 1998 to 2001. 
ELIZABETH WATERHOUSE, M.D., is associate professor of neurology at
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond,where she is also coordinator of the clinical curriculum for third-yearmedical students and director of the neurology residency training pro-gram. Dr. Waterhouse received her medical degree from Harvard Med-ical School, Boston, where she completed a residency in neurology. Shealso completed a fellowship in electroencephalography and epilepsy atthe University of Virginia School of Medicine, Health Sciences Center,Charlottesville. 
Address correspondence to Joseph I. Sirven, M.D., Department of Neu-
rology, Mayo Clinic, 13400 E. Shea Rd., Scottsdale, AZ 85262 (e-mail:Sirven.Joseph@mayo.edu). Reprints are not available from the authors. FOSPHENYTOIN
Fosphenytoin (Cerebyx) received approval for treatment
of status epilepticus from the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) in 1996. Fosphenytoin is a water-soluble pro-drug of phenytoin that completely converts to phenytoinfollowing parenteral administration. Thus, the adverseevents that are related to propylene glycol are avoided. Likephenytoin, fosphenytoin is useful in treating acute partialand generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Fosphenytoin is con-verted to phenytoin within eight to 15 minutes.
31-34It is
metabolized by the liver and has a half-life of 14 hours.Because 1.5 mg of fosphenytoin is equivalent to 1 mg ofphenytoin, the dosage, concentration, and infusion rate ofintravenous fosphenytoin are expressed as phenytoin equiv-alents (PE). The initial dose of fosphenytoin is 15 to 20 mgPE per kg, so it can be infused at a rate as high as 150 mg PEper minute, a rate of infusion that is three times faster thanthat of intravenous phenytoin. Intramuscular doses also canbe given, but the drug does not reach a therapeutic level for 30 minutes.
35
Adverse effects that are unique to fosphenytoin include
perineal paresthesias and pruritus; however, both arerelated to higher rates of administration.
30Unlike pheny-
toin, fosphenytoin does not cause local irritation. Intra-venous therapy has been associated with hypotension, socontinuous cardiac and blood pressure monitoring are rec-ommended. Although fosphenytoin represents animprovement over traditional phenytoin, it is expensive,and some hospital formulary committees are unwilling topay the difference.
18
PHENOBARBITAL
Phenobarbital typically is used after a benzodiazepine
or phenytoin has failed to control status epilepticus. Thenormal loading dose is 15 to 20 mg per kg. Because high-dose phenobarbital is sedating, airway protection is animportant consideration, and aspiration is a major con-cern. Intravenous phenobarbital also is associated withsystemic hypotension. Although phenobarbital can beloaded fairly rapidly, a full therapeutic dose may take 30minutes to infuse. It is diluted in 60 to 80 percent propy-lene glycol, which is associated with a number of compli-cations, including renal failure, myocardial depression,and seizures.
22,25These limitations relegate phenobarbital
to use in patients who have not responded to otheragents.VALPROATE
The FDA approved valproate (Depacon) for use in 1997.36
Parenteral valproate is used primarily for rapid loading andwhen oral therapy is impossible. It has a broad spectrum ofefficacy and may be useful in patients with absence ormyoclonic status epilepticus. Adverse effects include localirritation, gastrointestinal distress, and lethargy. This drug isnot FDA-approved for the treatment of status epilepticus.
Choice of Antiepileptic Drug 
Although there is no ideal drug for treatment of status
epilepticus, a number of considerations influence the
choice of antiepileptic drug for this condition. Table 2
summarizes dosages, pharmacology, and adverse effects ofmedications used to manage status epilepticus and refrac-tory status epilepticus. Comparative studies of treatmentsare few, but consensus has emerged concerning initialmedications. Most authors agree that lorazepam ordiazepam should be initiated, followed by phenytoin. Theevidence for these choices is summarized below.
DIAZEPAM VS . LORAZEPAM
In one trial,26intravenous lorazepam was compared
with diazepam as first-line treatment for status epilepticus.This randomized, double-blind trial, which included alltypes of status epilepticus, enrolled 78 patients whoreceived 10 mg of diazepam or 4 mg of lorazepam by intra-venous injection over two minutes. There were no signifi-cant differences in efficacy or latency of action betweenthe drugs, but the number of patients was too small todetermine true significance. Seizures were terminated in58 percent of patients receiving diazepam compared with78 percent of patients treated with lorazepam. Diazepamhad a median latency of two minutes (range: immediateto 10 minutes) versus a median latency of three minuteswith lorazepam (range: immediate to 15 minutes).
26
VETERANS AFFAIRS COOPERATIVE STUDY
The Veterans Affairs Status Epilepticus Cooperative
Study Group23compared response rates for four differentStatus Epilepticus
AUGUST 1, 2003  /  V OLUME 68, N UMBER 3 www.aafp.org/afp AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN 473Most authors agree that lorazepam or diazepam
therapy should be initiated first in the treatmentof status epilepticus, followed by phenytoin. treatments in 384 patients with overt (presumably early)
status epilepticus and 134 patients with subtle (presumablylate) status epilepticus. The four regimens consisted of0.15 mg per kg of diazepam followed by phenytoin (18 mgper kg), lorazepam (0.1 mg per kg), phenobarbital (15 mgper kg), or phenytoin alone (18 mg per kg). For overt sta-tus epilepticus, the highest response occurred in patientswho received lorazepam (64.9 percent), followed by thosewho received phenobarbital (58.2 percent), diazepam withphenytoin (55.8 percent), and phenytoin monotherapy(43.6 percent).
Patients with subtle status epilepticus, which is often a
late manifestation of status epilepticus, had significantlylower response rates to all treatments. Phenobarbital-treated patients had the highest response rate at 24.2 percent, followed by those receiving lorazepam (17.9 percent), diazepam plus phenytoin (8.3 percent), andphenytoin monotherapy (7.7 percent).
23However, theauthors noted no statistically significant differencesbetween treatments for overt and subtle status epilepticus.
23
There also were no differences between the treatments withrespect to recurrence during the 12-hour study period, theincidence of adverse reactions, or the outcome at 30 days.
These data help to underscore the difference in response
between early and late status epilepticus and the differingefficacies of medications, depending on the duration of thecondition. Furthermore, the dramatic drop in responserate between early and late status epilepticus emphasizesthe importance of early treatment. The authors concludethat lorazepam is the easiest medication to use amongfirst-line agents in patients with status epilepticus.
20[Evi-
dence level A, RCT]
Recommendations of the Working Group 
In 1993, the EFA ’s committee on the treatment of con-
vulsive status epilepticus published guidelines and a treat-
474 AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN www.aafp.org/afp VOLUME 68, N UMBER 3  /  A UGUST 1, 2003TABLE 2
Antiepileptic Drugs Used in Status Epilepticus
Dialyzable 
Maintenance Route of (% protein 
Drug Loading dose dosage metabolism binding) Adverse effects
Diazepam 10 to 20 mg None Hepatic >90 Respiratory depression, 
(Valium) hypotension, sialorrhea
Lorazepam 4 mg None Hepatic 90 Same as diazepam
(Ativan)
Phenytoin 18 to 20 mg per kg 5 mg per kg per day Hepatic 70 Cardiac depression, 
(Dilantin) at 50 mg per minute hypotension
Fosphenytoin 18 to 20 mg per kg None Hepatic 70 Cardiac depression, 
(Cerebyx) PE at 150 mg per minute hypotension, paresthesias
Phenobarbital 20 mg per kg 1 to 3 mg per kg per day Hepatic 50 to 60 Respiratory suppression
Pentobarbital 2 to 8 mg per kg 0.5 to 5 mg per kg per hour Hepatic 59 to 63 Hypotension, respiratory 
suppression
Midazolam 0.2 mg per kg 0.75 to 10 mg per kg per Hepatic 96 Hypotension, respiratory 
(Versed) minute suppression
Propofol 2 mg per kg 5 to 10 mg per kg per hour Hepatic 97 to 98 Respiratory depression, 
(Diprivan) initially, then 1 to 3 mg per hypotension, lipemia, 
kg per hour acidosis
PE = phenytoin equivalents.ment protocol. The protocol was based on a literature
review and input from expert reviewers and a professionaladvisory board.
4Figure 14,18outlines the protocol for the
management of status epilepticus.
The committee made special mention of the treatment of
status epilepticus in children. They noted that drug efficacyis similar in adults and children, but that children may tol-erate more rapid intravenous administration than olderpatients. Although these guidelines are helpful, more stud-ies are needed to determine whether this protocol is applic-able to children and to address the role of newer drugs suchas fosphenytoin, rectal diazepam, and parenteral valproatein the treatment of status epilepticus. If initial treatmentwith a benzodiazepine or fosphenytoin fails to controlseizures, a neurologist should be contacted immediately.
The authors indicate that they do not have any conflicts of inter-
est. Sources of funding: none reported.Status Epilepticus
AUGUST 1, 2003  /  V OLUME 68, N UMBER 3 www.aafp.org/afp AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN 475Protocol for Management of Status Epilepticus
At: zero minutes
Initiate general systemic support of the airway (insert nasal airway or intubate if needed)
• Check blood pressure.• Begin nasal oxygen.• Monitor ECG and respiration.• Check temperature frequently.• Obtain history.• Perform neurologic examination.
Send sample serum for evaluation of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, glucose level, complete blood cell count, toxic drug screen, and
anticonvulsant levels; check arterial blood gas values.
Start IV line containing isotonic saline at a low infusion rate.
Inject 50 mL of 50 percent glucose IV and 100 mg of thiamine IV or IM.Call EEG laboratory to start recording as soon as feasible.Administer lorazepam (Ativan) at 0.1 to 0.15 mg per kg IV (2 mg per minute); if seizures persist, administer fosphenytoin (Cerebyx) at
18 mg per kg IV (150 mg per minute, with an additional 7 mg per kg if seizures continue).
At: 20 to 30 minutes, if seizures persist
Intubate, insert bladder catheter, start EEG recording, check temperature.
Administer phenobarbital in a loading dose of 20 mg per kg IV (100 mg per minute).
At: 40 to 60 minutes, if seizures persist
Begin pentobarbital infusion at 5 mg per kg IV initial dose, then IV push until seizures have stopped, using EEG monitoring; continue
pentobarbital infusion at 1 mg per kg per hour; slow infusion rate every four to six hours to determine if seizures have stopped, with
EEG guidance; monitor blood pressure and respiration carefully. Support blood pressure with pressors if needed.
or
Begin midazolam (Versed) at 0.2 mg per kg, then at a dosage of 0.75 to 10 mg per kg per minute, titrated to EEG monitoring.
or
Begin propofol (Diprivan) at 1 to 2 mg per kg loading dose, followed by 2 to 10 mg per kg per hour. Adjust maintenance dosage o n
the basis of EEG monitoring.
FIGURE 1. Suggested management of status epilepticus. (ECG = electrocardiography; IV = intravenous; IM = intramuscu-
lar; EEG = electroencephalography)
Adapted with permission from Treatment of convulsive status epilepticus. Recommendations of the Epilepsy Foundation of America’ s
Working Group on Status Epilepticus. JAMA 1993;270:857, and Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK. Status epilepticus. N Engl J Med
1998;338:972.REFERENCES 
1. DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR, Boggs JG, Pellock JM, Pen-
berthy L, et al. A prospective, population-based epidemiologic
study of status epilepticus in Richmond, Virginia. Neurology1996;46:1029-35.
2. Hesdorffer DC, Logroscino G, Cascino G, Annegers JF, Hauser WA.
Incidence of status epilepticus in Rochester, Minnesota, 1965-1984. Neurology 1998;50:735-41. 
3. Cascino GD, Hesdorffer D, Logroscino G, Hauser WA. Morbidity of
nonfebrile status epilepticus in Rochester, Minnesota, 1965-1984.Epilepsia 1998;39:829-32. 
4. Treatment of convulsive status epilepticus. Recommendations of
the Epilepsy Foundation of America’s Working Group on StatusEpilepticus. JAMA 1993;270:854-9. 
5. Gastaut H. Classification of status epilepticus. Adv Neurol
1983;34:15-35.
6. Treiman DM. Electroclinical features of status epilepticus. J Clin
Neurophysiol 1995;12:343-62.
7. Shorvon SD. Status epilepticus: its clinical features and treatment in
children and adults. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
8. Wieser H. Simple partial status epilepticus. In: Engel J, Pedley TA,
Aicardi J, eds. Epilepsy: a comprehensive textbook. Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven, 1998:709-23.
9. Williamson PD. Complex partial status epilepticus. In: Engel J, Ped-
ley TA, Aicardi J, eds. Epilepsy: a comprehensive textbook.Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1998:680-99. 
10. Treiman D. Generalized convulsive status epilepticus. In: Engel J,
Pedley TA, Aicardi J, eds. Epilepsy: a comprehensive textbook.Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1998:669-80.
11. Snead OC, Dean C, Penry K. Absence status epilepticus. In: Engel
J, Pedley TA, Aicardi J, eds. Epilepsy: a comprehensive textbook.Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1998:701-7.
12. Ohtahara S, Ohtsuka Y. Myoclonic status epilepticus. In: Engel J,
Pedley TA, Aicardi J, eds. Epilepsy: a comprehensive textbook.Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1998:725-9.
13. DeLorenzo RJ, Ko D, Towne AR, Garnett LK, Boggs JG, Water-
house EJ, et al. Prediction of outcome in status epilepticus. Epilep-sia 1997;38(suppl 8):210-5.
14. Towne AR, Pellock JM, Ko D, DeLorenzo RJ. Determinants of mor-
tality in status epilepticus. Epilepsia 1994;35:27-34.
15. Waterhouse EJ, Vaughan JK, Barnes TY, Boggs JG, Towne AR,
Kopec-Garnett L, et al. Synergistic effect of status epilepticus andischemic brain injury on mortality. Epilepsy Res 1998;29:175-83.
16. Krumholz A, Sung GY, Fisher RS, Barry E, Bergey GK, Grattan LM.
Complex partial status epilepticus accompanied by serious mor-bidity and mortality. Neurology 1995;45:1499-504.
17. Lothman E. The biochemical basis and pathophysiology of status
epilepticus. Neurology 1990;40(5 Suppl 2):13-23.
18. Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK. Status epilepticus. N Engl J Med
1998;338:970-6.
19. Prokesch RC, Rimland D, Petrini JL Jr, Fein AB. Cerebrospinal fluid
pleocytosis after seizures. South Med J 1983;76:322-7.20. Privitera M, Hoffman M, Moore JL, Jester D. EEG detection of non-
tonic-clonic status epilepticus in patients with altered conscious-ness. Epilepsy Res 1994;18:155-66.
21. DeLorenzo RJ, Waterhouse EJ, Towne AR, Boggs JG, Ko D,
DeLorenzo GA, et al. Persistent nonconvulsive status epilepticusafter the control of convulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsia1998;39:833-40.
22. Shaner DM, McCurdy SA, Herring MO, Gabor AJ. Treatment of
status epilepticus: a prospective comparison of diazepam andphenytoin versus phenobarbital and optional phenytoin. Neurol-ogy 1988;38:202-7.
23. Treiman DM, Meyers PD, Walton NY, Collins JF, Colling C, Rowan
AJ, et al. A comparison of four treatments for generalized convul-sive status epilepticus. Veterans Affairs Status Epilepticus Cooper-ative Study Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:792-8.
24. Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Isaacs SM, Corry MD, Allen F, Ulrich S, et
al. A comparison of lorazepam, diazepam, and placebo for thetreatment of out-of-hospital status epilepticus. N Engl J Med2001;345:631-7.
25. Ramsay RE, Hammond EJ, Perchalski RJ, Wilder BJ. Brain uptake of
phenytoin, phenobarbital, and diazepam. Arch Neurol 1979;36:535-9.
26. Leppik IE, Derivan AT, Homan RW, Walker J, Ramsay RE, Patrick B.
Double-blind study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepti-cus. JAMA 1983;249:1452-4.
27. Camfield CS, Camfield PR, Smith E, Dooley JM. Home use of rec-
tal diazepam to prevent status epilepticus in children with convul-sive disorders. J Child Neurol 1989;4:125-6.
28. Lahat E, Goldman M, Barr J, Bistritzer T, Berkovitch M. Compari-
son of intranasal midazolam with intravenous diazepam for treat-ing febrile seizures in children: prospective randomised study. BMJ2000;321:83-6.
29. Parent JM, Lowenstein DH. Treatment of refractory generalized
status epilepticus with continuous infusion of midazolam. Neurol-ogy 1994;44:1837-40.
30. Eldon MA, Loewan GR, Voightman RE, Koup JR. Pharmocokinet-
ics and tolerance of fosphenytoin and phenytoin administrationintravenously to healthy subjects. Can J Neurol Sci 1993;20:S810.
31. Allen FH, Runge RW, Legarda S. Safety, tolerance and pharmaco-
kinetics of intravenous fosphenytoin in status epilepticus. Epilep-sia 1995;36(suppl 4):90-4.
32. Browne TR, Kugler AR, Eldon MA. Pharmacology and pharmaco-
kinetics of fosphenytoin. Neurology 1996;46(6 Suppl 1):S3-7.
33. Cerebyx: ready reference guide to the prescribing information.
New York: Parke-Davis, 1996.
34. Ramsay RE, DeToledo J. Intravenous administration of fospheny-
toin: options for the management of seizures. Neurology1996;46(6 Suppl 1):S17-9. 
35. Uthman BM, Wilder BJ, Ramsay RE. Intramuscular use of fos-
phenytoin: an overview. Neurology 1996;46(6 Suppl 1):S24-8. 
36. Sinha S, Naritoku DK. Intravenous valproate is well tolerated in
unstable patients with status epilepticus. Neurology 2000;55:722-4.
476 AMERICAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN www.aafp.org/afp VOLUME 68, N UMBER 3  /  A UGUST 1, 2003Status Epilepticus