Trichoderma  asperellum  laccase  mediated  crystal  violet  degradation –
Optimization  of  experimental  conditions  and  characterization
Sabarathinam  Shanmugama,  Priyadharshini  Ulaganathanb,  Savitha  Sivasubramaniana,
Sivakumar  Esakkimuthua,  Swaminathan  Krishnaswamya,*,  Sadhasivam  Subramaniama,c,*
aBioprocess  and  Biomaterials  Laboratory,  Department  of  Microbial  Biotechnology,  Bharathiar  University,  Coimbatore  641046,  India
bBioremediation  Laboratory,  Department  of  Microbiology,  Periyiar  University,  Salem  636011,  India
cDepartment  of  Extension,  Career  Guidance  and  Students  Welfare,  Bharathiar  University,  Coimbatore  641046,  India
A  R  T  I  C  L  E  I  N  F  O
Article  history:
Received  30  September  2016
Received  in  revised  form  27  November  2016
Accepted  29  November  2016
Available  online  30  November  2016
Keywords:
Crystal  violet
Dye  degradation
LaccaseGenotoxicityTrichoderma asperellumA  B  S  T  R  A  C  T
Biodegradation  of  crystal  violet  (CV)  by  Trichoderma  asperellum  laccase  was  herein  reported.  The  process
parameters  viz.,  enzyme  concentration,  dye  concentration,  pH  and  incubation  time  were  experimentally
optimized  for  the  maximum  dye  degradation.  The  degradation  of  CV  was  physico-chemically
characterized  by  UV–vis  spectroscopy,  FTIR,  HPTLC,  HPLC  and  GC–MS  analyses.  In  UV–vis  spectroscopy,
a  major  reduction  in  characteristic  peak  from  588  nm  to  575  nm  has  suggested  the  disappearance  of
triphenyl  methane  chromophore.  From  the  FT-IR  spectra,  the  formation  of  new  peaks  at  3707  cm/C01(/C0/C0OH
stretching)  and  1726  cm/C01(C¼O  stretching)  indicates  the  successful  transformation  of  the  crystal  violet.
Similarly,  the  existence  of  a  prominent  peak  (Rf/C0  0.39)  in  HPTLC  and  a  signiﬁcant  reduction  in  peak
intensity  of  crystal  violet  had  suggested  the  laccase  mediated  dye  degradation.  GC–MS  analysis  of  crystal
violet  degraded  metabolites  were  identi ﬁed  as  Leucocrystal  violet,  Olivetol  dimethyl  ether
(1,3-Dimethoxy-5-pentylbenzene)  and  1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene  by  a  hydride  ion  (H-)  transfer  followed
by  oxidative  methylation.  The  genotoxicity  studies  by  Allium  cepa  assay  has  shown  that  the  degraded
intermediates  of  CV  are  minimally  toxic  than  the  original  dye.  Owing  to  the  above-discussed  signiﬁcance,
T.asperellum  laccase  may  be  considered  for  the  development  of  more  environmental  friendly  treatment
processes.
©  2016  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.
1.  Introduction
Synthetic  dyes  play  an  extensive  role  in  the  textile,  dying  and
printing  industry,  which  in  turn,  consumes  a  large  amount  of  water
(up  to  150  l  of  water  to  dye  1  kg  of  cotton)  and  generates  huge
quantity  of  polluted  efﬂuents.  It  is  estimated  that  8  /C2  105tons  of
synthetic  dyes  are  produced  annually  and  nearly  15%  of  the
untreated  dyes  are  directly  discharged  into  water  streams,  which
pose  a  serious  threat  to  the  environment  [1].  Triphenylmethane
dyes  are  the  major  group  of  bright  coloured  cationic  dyes  used  in
various  dying  processes.  These  cationic  dyes  are  recalcitrant  and
contain  mutagenic  substances  owing  to  the  presence  of  a
delocalized  electron  in  its  aromatic  ring  structure  and  they  arehighly  toxic  over  anionic  dyes  [2].  These  dyes  cause  serious  health
issues  by  navigating  into  the  entire  food  chain  and  leading  to
biomagni ﬁcations  [3,4] .  Though  conventional  physicochemical
methods  are  available  for  the  removal  of  ionic  dyes  from  textile
wastewater  such  as  adsorption,  ozonation,  precipitation  and
electrochemical  methods  [5],  they  have  only  limited  applicability
and  are  commonly  associated  with  economic  unfeasibility  and
accumulation  of  concentrated  quantities  of  sludge,  which  further
leads  to  secondary  toxicity  [6,7] .
Biological  methods  using  microbes  have  been  continuously
researched  for  the  decolorization  and  degradation  of  textile  dyes
since  they  are  cost-effective  and  eco-friendly.  It  was  reported  that
Sol-Gel  immobilized  Pseudomonas  sp.  had  produced  more  than
seven  times  higher  amounts  of  extracellular  enzymes  which
results  in  the  efﬁcient  biodegradation  of  azo  dyes  [8].  Unlike
bacteria,  White-rot  fungi  are  known  for  strong  bioremediation
capacity  due  to  its  extracellular  lignolytic  enzyme  assembly  where
it  can  be  able  to  degrade  a  range  of  xenobiotic  compounds  hence,*  Corresponding  authors  at:  Department  of  Microbial  Biotechnology,  Bharathiar
University,  Coimbatore  641046,  India.
E-mail  addresses:  kswamibiotech@gmail.com ,  sadhaon@gmail.com
(S.  Subramaniam).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2016.11.044
2213-3437/©  2016  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.Journal  of  Environmental  Chemical  Engineering  5  (2017)  222–231
Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect
Journal  of  Environmental  Chemical  Engineering
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/je  ce
researchers  paid  more  attention  on  fungi  in  recent  years  [9].
Currently,  biological  degradation  of  dyes  by  fungi  or  their  enzyme
systems  is  of  great  interest  due  to  its  speci ﬁcity,  low  energy  cost,
ease  of  control  and  low  impacts  on  environment  [10].  This
treatment  procedure  results  in  the  complete  or  partial  conversion
of  toxic  dyes  into  safe  (non-toxic)  end  products,  which  combats  the
issue  of  generation  of  secondary  toxic  pollutants.  For  dye
decolorization,  most  of  the  studies  have  employed  only  a  single
fungal  strain  and  recently  fungal  co-culture  technology  has
emerged  as  an  efﬁcient  method  of  dye  decolorization.  The
lignocellulolytic  fungi  Pleurotus  ﬂorida  (PF)  and  Rhizoctonia  solani
(RS)  has  resulted  in  highest  dye  decolorization  (98.54%)  at  2%  (w/v)
of  synthetic  brilliant  green  carpet  industry  dye  as  compared  to
monocultures  [11].
Ligninolytic  enzymes,  such  as  lignin  peroxidase  (LiP;  EC
1.11.1.14),  manganese  peroxidase  (MnP;  EC  1.11.1.13)  and  laccase
(p-diphenol:  dioxygen  oxidoreductase;  EC  1.10.3.2)  can  be  applied
in  dye  degradation  [12].  Decolorization  of  synthetic  dyes  by  the
lignin  peroxidase  (LiP)  and  manganese  peroxidase  (MnP)  are
highly  sensitive  to  the  acidic  pH  and  further  requires  the  addition
of  H2O2[13].  These,  laccase-based  treatment  deserves  much
attention  because  it  catalyzes  the  oxidation  of  an  array  of
substrates  by  the  reduction  of  molecular  O2to  water  and  it  can
be  further  extended  by  the  addition  of  redox  mediators.  Since  it
produce  molecular  O2and  water  as  the  only-by  product,  laccase-
based  catalytic  reactions  are  considered  as  green-chemistry
approach  and  have  been  increasingly  used  in  bioremediation
processes  [14].
The  experimental  factors  viz.,  dye  concentration,  enzyme
concentration,  pH,  temperature  and  incubation  time  has  been
used  to  determine  the  efﬁcacy  of  the  enzymatic  dye  degradation
process.  Optimization  of  these  factors  provides  a  commercially
viable  evaluation  of  operational  conditions  for  dye  degradation  as
well  as  the  identi ﬁcation  of  plausible  synergic  or  antagonistic
interactions  which  exist  between  them.  Herein,  the  optimization
of  experimental  variables  such  as  enzyme  concentration,  dye
concentration,  pH  and  incubation  time  have  been  reported  for  the
laccase-mediated  crystal  violet  degradation.  The  results  of  the  dye
degradation  process  and  its  intermediates  were  further  conﬁrmed
by  UV–vis  spectroscopy,  FTIR,  HPTLC,  HPLC  and  GC–MS  analyses.
The  toxicity  of  enzyme  degraded  crystal  violet  by-products  were
also  assessed  by  the  genotoxicity  studies.  This  is  the  ﬁrst  report  of
Trichoderma  asperellum  laccase  mediated  dye  degradation  using
the  response  surface  methodology.
2.  Materials  and  methods
2.1.  Microorganism  and  culture  conditions
The  surface  grown  mycelium  of  wood  rotting  fungi  Trichoderma
asperellum  BPLMBT1  (Accession  number  KC243781.1)  used  in  the
study  was  collected  from  the  Western  Ghats,  South  India  (latitude:
10.1667/C14N,  longitude:  77.0667/C14E).  The  inoculum  was  prepared  as
described  by  [15]  with  slight  modi ﬁcations.  The  spores  were
harvested  after  6  days  of  incubation  on  2%  (w/v)  malt  extract  agar
slants  without  disturbing  the  mycelial  growth  using  a  sterile  Camel
hairbrush.  The  spore  concentration  was  adjusted  to  105spores/mL
and  used  as  inoculum  for  further  studies.
2.2.  Enzyme  assays  and  protein  determination
The  cell  free  supernatant  of  T.  asperellum  obtained  from
C–limited  medium  was  served  as  the  enzyme  source.  Lignin
peroxidase  activity  was  measured  by  the  oxidation  of  dye  azure  B
in  presence  of  H2O2at  651  nm  [16].  Manganese  peroxidase  activity
was  assayed  at  610  nm  by  using  phenol  red  and  H2O2[17].  One  unitof  enzyme  activity  was  deﬁned  as  a  change  in  absorbance  (units
per  milligrams  of  protein  per  minute).  The  laccase  activity  (EC
1.10.3.2)  was  determined  by  measuring  the  oxidation  of
2,20-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic  acid)  (ABTS)  at
436  nm  (e436=  36,000  M/C01cm/C01).  Brieﬂy,  the  reaction  mixture
contained  0.9  ml  of  1  mM  ABTS  in  0.1  M  sodium  acetate  buffer  (pH
4.5)  and  0.1  ml  of  enzyme.  The  enzyme  unit  were  expressed  as
international  units  (IU)  where  one  unit  of  laccase  activity  was
deﬁned  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  that  oxidized  1  mM  ABTS  per  min
[18].
2.3.  Laccase  production  and  puriﬁcation
Laccase  production  was  performed  on  the  C-limited  medium  at
27  /C6  2/C14C  under  agitation  (125  r/min)  for  6  days  [19].  The  puriﬁca-
tion  of  laccase  was  adapted  from  the  protocol  as  described  by
Sadhasivam  et  al.  [15]  with  modi ﬁcations.  For  the  enzyme
puriﬁcation,  0.1  M  sodium  acetate  buffer  of  pH  4.5  was  used  and
the  enzyme  puriﬁcation  steps  were  carried  out  at  4/C14C,  unless
otherwise  speci ﬁed.  To  obtain  the  crude  enzyme  ﬁltrate,  6  days  old
liquid  medium  was  centrifuged  at  6000  rpm  for  10  min  and  the
clear  supernatant  was  collected.  The  supernatant  fractionated
using  66%  pre-chilled  acetone  (v/v)  was  kept  at  /C020/C14C  for  6  h  and
then  centrifuged  at  5,600  x  g  for  10  min.  The  as-obtained  pellet  was
resuspended  in  0.1  M  sodium  acetate  buffer  (pH  4.5)  and  dialyzed
against  the  same  buffer.  The  partially  puriﬁed  enzyme  was
obtained  by  loading  the  dialysate  onto  a  pre-equilibrated  Sephadex
G-100  column  (45  /C2  2.5  cm)  and  subsequently  eluted  with  0.1  M
NaCl  in  buffer.  The  fractions  showing  laccase  activity  were  pooled,
concentrated  by  freeze-drying  and  stored  at  /C04/C14C.  The  freeze-
dried  sample  was  loaded  onto  a  DEAE-Sepharose  FF  anion
exchange  column  chromatography  equilibrated  with  sodium
acetate  buffer  and  washed  with  the  same  buffer  until  the  A280
reading  was  less  than  0.02.  A  linear  gradient  of  NaCl  (0–0.5  M)
prepared  in  buffer  was  used  to  elute  the  bound  proteins.  The  active
fractions  showing  laccase  activity  were  pooled,  dialyzed  (mem-
brane  molecular  weight  cut-off  12,000  Da)  overnight  against  the
same  buffer  and  concentrated  using  Amicon  ultra  spin  concentra-
tor  column  (Millipore)  with  a  molecular  cut-off  of  10  kDa.  At  each
step,  the  protein  content  [20]  and  laccase  activity  [18]  were
determined.
2.4.  Dye  degradation  experiment
A  recalcitrant  triphenylmethane  dye,  crystal  violet  was
purchased  from  Himedia  and  used  without  any  further  puriﬁcation
(Mumbai,  India).  The  dye  degradation  experiments  were  carried
out  by  the  desired  concentrations  of  the  dye  as  obtained  from  the
dilution  of  stock  solution  (1000  ppm)  and  stored  at  room
temperature  in  dark  condition  until  further  use.  The  dye
degradation  experiment  was  performed  in  a  5.0  ml  reaction
mixture  consists  of  50  ppm  of  dye  solution  in  0.1  M  sodium
acetate  buffer  (pH  4)  and  0.5  U  ml/C01of  laccase  was  incubated  for
60  min  at  room  temperature  under  static  conditions.  All  the
experiments  were  performed  in  triplicates  and  a  heat  inactivated
enzyme  was  served  as  control.  The  residual  dye  concentration  was
measured  spectrophotometrically  (Shimadzu  UV  1800)  at  580  nm
(lmax)  and  the%  dye  degradation  was  calculated  by  the  below  given
formula:
D  ¼Aini/C0  Aobs ð  Þ
Aini/C2  100
where  D  is  the  degradation  of  crystal  violet  (%),  Ainiis  the  initial
absorption  at  time  zero  and  Aobsis  the  absorption  at  determinedS.  Shanmugam  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Environmental  Chemical  Engineering  5  (2017)  222–231  223Download English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/6477320
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/6477320
Daneshyari.com