A major surface glycoprotein
ofTrypanosoma brucei is expressed
transiently during development and canbe regulated post-transcriptionallyby glycerol or hypoxia
Erik Vassella,1Jan Van Den Abbeele,2Peter Bu ¨ tikofer,3Christina Kunz Renggli,4Andre ´ Furger,1
Reto Brun,4and Isabel Roditi1,5
1Institut fu ¨ r Allgemeine Mikrobiologie, Universita ¨t Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland;2Department of Parasitology, Prince
Leopold Institute of Tropical Medicine, B-2000 Antwerp, Belgium;3Institut fu ¨ r Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, CH-3012
Bern, Switzerland;4Swiss Tropical Institute, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland
Differentiation is a means by which unicellular parasites adapt to different environments. In some cases, the
developmental program may be modulated by interactions with the host, but the mechanisms are largelyunknown. Trypanosoma brucei is transmitted between mammals by tsetse flies. The development of the
procyclic form in the tsetse midgut is marked by the synthesis of a new glycoprotein coat, composed of EPand GPEET procyclins, that is important for survival. Here we demonstrate that the composition of the coatchanges in response to extracellular signals in vitro and during development in vivo. EP and GPEET arecoinduced when differentiation is initiated. Subsequently, EP expression is maintained, whereas GPEET isrepressed after 7–9 days. The timepoint at which GPEET is repressed coincides with the appearance ofparasites in a new compartment of the fly midgut. In culture, down-regulation of GPEET can be prevented byexogenous glycerol or accelerated by hypoxia. Regulation is post-transcriptional, and is conferred by theGPEET 3* untranslated region. The same sequence also regulates expression of a reporter gene in the fly. The
finding that GPEET is expressed during a defined window during the establishment of infection suggests thatit has a specific function in host-parasite interactions rather than a generalized role in shielding underlyingmembrane molecules.
[Key Words: EP procyclin; GPEET procyclin; tsetse; 3 8UTR; differentiation; RNA stability]
Received October 21, 1999; revised version accepted January 18, 2000.
A number of important pathogens, including the proto-
zoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei , which causes human
sleeping sickness, rely on insects as vectors for their dis-semination. The transmission of T. brucei from one
mammalian host to the next requires the tsetse fly as anobligate intermediate host. Successful transmission en-tails the progression of the parasite through a set of dis-tinct life cycle stages and its migration through differentinsect organs before becoming infective for a new mam-malian host.
Two distinct life cycle stages are found in the mam-
malian bloodstream, a proliferating long slender formand a quiescent short stumpy form that is preadapted forfurther development in the tsetse fly. When bloodstreamforms are ingested by the fly, the stumpy form rapidlydifferentiates into the procyclic form, which colonizesthe posterior midgut (Vickerman et al. 1988) and latercrosses (or circumnavigates) the peritrophic matrix andproliferates in the ectoperitrophic space between the ma-trix and the gut epithelium. In a second phase, known asmaturation, the parasite progresses through several morerounds of differentiation as it migrates to the salivaryglands (Van Den Abbeele et al. 1999), finally giving riseto the metacyclic form, which is capable of infecting anew mammalian host. Both the strain of trypanosomeand the species of tsetse fly have an influence on thetransmission rate (Maudlin and Welburn 1994), but themolecular basis is unknown.
The differentiation of bloodstream forms to procyclic
forms can be induced efficiently in vitro by a reduc-tion in temperature from 37°C to 27°C and the addi-tion of cis-aconitate to the culture medium (Brun and
Schoenenberger 1981). During the course of differentia-tion, the parasite’s variant surface glycoprotein (VSG)
5Corresponding author.
E-MAIL isabel.roditi@imb.unibe.ch; FAX 41 31 631 4684.
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 14:615–626 © 2000 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/00 $5.00; www.genesdev.org 615 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from coat is replaced by a different coat composed of procyc-
lins. This is accompanied by a switch from glucose toproline as the main energy source. Short stumpy forms,which are able to differentiate synchronously, expressprocyclin within 2 hr and lose VSG after 4 hr (Ziegel-bauer et al. 1990; Rolin et al. 1993; Matthews and Gull1994; Vassella et al. 1997). The exchange of coat occursmore slowly and asynchronously in long slender forms(Roditi et al. 1989), which first need to reach a particularposition in the cell cycle before they are competent todifferentiate (Matthews and Gull 1994).
There are two distinct classes of procyclin that are
characterized by their internal repeat motifs (Roditi andClayton 1999). EP procyclins contain up to 30 tandemrepeats of glutamic acid-proline, and GPEET procyclincontains 6 pentapeptide repeats (gly-pro-glu-glu-thr).Both types of procyclin are attached to the membrane bythe same glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor (Fergusonet al. 1993; Treumann et al. 1997). The EP procyclins,which are encoded by three distinct genes ( EP1-3), can be
distinguished by specific residues in their amino ter-mini, differences in the length of the dipeptide repeatsand the presence or absence of amino-linked glycosyla-tion sites (summarized in Roditi et al. 1998). GPEET con-tains no glycosylation sites but, unusual for an extracel-lular protein, it is extensively phosphorylated on thethreonine residues in the pentapeptide repeat (Bu ¨ tikoferet al. 1997; Mehlert et al. 1999). EP null mutants havebeen obtained by successive deletion of all three classesofEP(and one of the two copies of GPEET) from the
diploid genome (Ruepp et al. 1997). These trypanosomesshowed no obvious phenotype in culture, but the fre-quency with which they established heavy infections inthe tsetse fly was 5–10 times lower than the parental line(Ruepp et al. 1997). Attempts to generate GPEET nullmutants were not successful, suggesting that the twoclasses of procyclin are not functionally equivalent.
The stage-specific expression of procyclins is regulated
at several levels. Transcription initiation is 6- to 10-foldhigher in the procyclic form than in the bloodstreamform (Pays et al. 1990; Vanhamme et al. 1995) and tran-scription elongation along the polycistronic transcrip-tion units is enhanced (Vanhamme et al. 1995). In addi-tion, the 38 untranslated regions (UTRs) of procyclin
mRNAs contain three discrete elements that affectmRNA stability and translation (Hehl et al. 1994; Furgeret al. 1997; Hotz et al. 1997; Schu ¨ rch et al. 1997). Al-though only the EP138UTR has been analyzed in detail,
the same conserved elements are found in the other 3 8
UTRs (Hehl et al. 1994; Schu ¨ rch et al. 1997). The 38 UTR
ofGPEET is 86% identical to that of EP1, and includes
all three elements, so it is generally assumed that it iscoordinately regulated.
Despite the fact that EP and GPEET are both induced
when trypanosomes differentiate in vitro (Bu ¨ tikofer et al.1999), the relative amounts of the two classes of procy-clin can vary considerably in long-term cultures. Differ-ent stocks of T. brucei were found to display a whole
spectrum of coat phenotypes ranging from <10% to>85% GPEET (Bu ¨ tikofer et al. 1997) and even differentlaboratory cultures of the same stock (427) differed morethan fivefold in their relative levels of EP and GPEET(Bu ¨ tikofer et al. 1997; Ruepp et al. 1997; Treumann et al.1997; Acosta-Serrano et al. 1999). We also found thatGPEET was a minor component of the coat shortly aftertrypanosomes of the stock STIB 247 were isolated fromthe tsetse midgut, but became the major species whenthese cells were maintained in culture for severalmonths (Roditi et al. 1998). In contrast, other trypano-some stocks expressed EP almost exclusively followingfly transmission and were unaffected by passage (Bu ¨ ti-kofer et al. 1997).
To establish whether these changes in coat composi-
tion are an inevitable part of the differentiation programor whether they occur in response to external factors, wehave performed a parallel analysis of procyclin expres-sion in trypanosomes differentiating in vivo and in vitro.We show that, in the fly, GPEET expression is a transientevent during the establishment of midgut infections. Inaddition, it can also be modulated in vitro by compo-nents of the culture medium or in response to hypoxicconditions. We further demonstrate that developmentalregulation of the GPEET mRNA is mediated specificallyby the GPEET 38UTR.
Results
Expression of GPEET during synchronous
differentiation to procyclic forms
The pleomorphic strain AnTat 1.1 has the dual advan-
tage that it is fly transmissible, completing the life cyclein a high percentage of infected flies (Le Ray et al. 1977;Delauw et al. 1985; E. Vassella and M. Boshart, in prep.)and that it is possible to obtain a pure population ofstumpy forms using defined culture conditions (Vassellaand Boshart 1996; Reuner et al. 1997). The kinetics ofexpression of EP and GPEET procyclins were investi-gated during synchronous differentiation of stumpyforms in DTM medium by flow cytometry using specificantibodies (see Materials and Methods). EP procyclinsrapidly appeared on the cell surface, and after 6 hr, 84%of the trypanosomes expressed them at almost maximallevels (Fig. 1A). Likewise, both the unphosphorylatedform and the mature phosphorylated form of GPEETwere synchronously expressed, but appeared with slowerkinetics than the EP procyclins. They could first be de-tected on the surface 6–12 hr after initiating differentia-tion and were maximally expressed between 12 and 24hr.
Culture conditions regulate surface expression
of GPEET
When trypanosomes were further cultured in DTM me-
dium, which was used in the differentiation experimentdescribed above, a slight reduction in the levels of sur-face EP and GPEET procyclins could be detected 2 daysafter triggering differentiation; nevertheless, the try-
Vassella et al.
616 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from panosomes continued to express high levels of procyc-
lins for at least 8 months (data not shown). In contrast,when stumpy forms were triggered to differentiate inSDM-79 and the resulting procyclic forms were passagedin the same medium, they completely repressed surfaceexpression of GPEET after 2 weeks, but retained EP (Fig.1B). This suggested that a specific compound in one ofthe two media might control GPEET expression. Thetwo media were therefore compared and those com-pounds that differed at least fivefold in their concentra-tions were selected for further testing. Stumpy formswere triggered to differentiate in SDM-79 or DTM,supplemented with compounds from the other medium,and then analyzed for GPEET expression. By this ap-proach, the active compound could be identified as glyc-erol, which is present in DTM at a concentration of 10m
M, but is absent from SDM-79. In the absence of glyc-
erol, GPEET was transiently expressed on the surface,but then completely repressed after 9–11 days (Fig. 1C).In contrast, GPEET was constitutively expressed in try-panosomes grown in SDM-79 supplemented with 10 m
M
glycerol even after several months in culture.
Repression of GPEET is irreversible and preceded
by a transient cell cycle arrest
Procyclic trypanosomes showed a marked increase in the
length of the cell body before they repressed GPEET (datanot shown). This was accompanied by a transient growthinhibition, usually starting 2–4 days after triggering dif-ferentiation and lasting for 4–6 days, before they re-sumed growth (see Fig. 2). This indicates that early pro-cyclic forms differentiate further to a distinct late pro-cyclic stage that is GPEET negative. In contrast,trypanosomes cultured in DTM or SDM-79 supple-mented with 10 m
Mglycerol grew with a constant popu-
lation doubling time of ~20 hr and maintained the same
morphology. The percentage of the parasites entering orprogressing through the S phase of the cell cycle wasdetermined by incorporation of 5 8-bromo-28deoxyuridine
(BrdU) into the DNA during a labeling period of 4 hr.Consistent with the results from the growth curve, only18% of the cells grown in SDM-79 alone incorporatedBrdU after 6 days in culture. In contrast, 86% of the cellsgrown in SDM-79 supplemented with glycerol were posi-tive for BrdU.
Figure 2. Growth properties of procyclic forms in different me-
dium. Cultures were started from stumpy forms following trig-
gered differentiation (day 0) and diluted at 2-day intervals. Thepopulation growth was calculated as cell density multiplied bythe cumulative dilution factors. ( d) DTM; (s) SDM-79 alone, or
(l) SDM-79 supplemented with 10 m
Mglycerol; (,) 15% FCS;
(×) 1.6 m Mglutamate; ( L)1 1m Mglutamine; (+) 20 µ Mbiotin, or
(n)1 2µ Mhaemin. SDM-79 supplemented with all compounds
from DTM except glycerol is indicated by an asterisk.Figure 1. Detection of GPEET and EP
procyclins on the surface of trypanosomesby flow cytometry. The percentage of cellsshowing increased fluorescent staining(within the gray area of the histogram)relative to undifferentiated cells was de-termined. (A) Appearance of procyclinsduring synchronous differentiation ofstumpy forms into procyclic forms. ( B)
GPEET surface expression depends on theculture medium. Procyclic forms derivedfrom a stumpy population were culturedin SDM-79 or DTM for 12 days. ( C) Con-
stitutive expression of GPEET requiresglycerol. Stumpy forms were transferred tonormal SDM-79 medium (−glycerol) orSDM-79 supplemented with 10 m
Mglyc-
erol (+glycerol) and triggered to differenti-ate by the addition of cis-aconitate. At day
11, those trypanosomes that had been pre-viously cultured in the presence of glyc-erol were cultured for a further 6 days inthe absence of glycerol and vice versa.Development regulation of GPEET by T. brucei
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 617 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from To investigate whether GPEET repression is a revers-
ible event, trypanosomes that had been kept for 11 days
in SDM-79 (and which were negative for GPEET, see Fig.1C) were transferred to medium supplemented withglycerol and cultured for 6 days. In these cells, glycerolno longer induced reexpression of GPEET on the cellsurface. However, cells that were grown in the presenceof glycerol for 11 days were still able to repress GPEET ata later time point when glycerol was left out of the me-dium (Fig. 1C).
Expression of GPEET is a transient event in the
establishment of midgut infections in tsetse flies
To investigate whether the repression of GPEET only
occurs in vitro, or whether it is an integral part of adevelopmental process in the life cycle of the parasite,tsetse flies (Glossina morsitans morsitans ) were infected
with stumpy forms and the percentage of trypanosomesexpressing surface EP and/or GPEET was determinedduring the course of infection. After 2–4 days, the ma-jority of trypanosomes coexpressed both forms of procy-clin, but by day 7, all of them expressed high levels of EPbut were negative for GPEET (Table 1). GPEET was alsonot detected in any later life cycle stages (J.V.D. Abbeele,unpubl.). In contrast, EP is not only expressed by midgutforms, but also by epimastigotes in the salivary glands(Vickerman et al. 1988). These results demonstrate thatboth the induction and subsequent repression of GPEETare events that are programmed to occur in vivo, andwith similar kinetics to those observed in vitro.
Glycerol-dependent regulation of GPEET expression is
controlled post-transcriptionally
Procyclin expression is controlled at different levels in-
cluding transcription initiation and elongation, mRNAstability, and translation (Roditi et al. 1998). To identifythe level at which glycerol-dependent regulation ofGPEET expression occurred, procyclic forms cultured inthe presence or absence of 10 m
Mglycerol were com-
pared in the following set of experiments. To investigatewhether GPEET was still synthesized, but no longertransported to the surface, in cells that were cultured inthe absence of glycerol, immunoblot analysis was per-formed using the mAb 5H3 (which detects the phos-phorylated form of GPEET). No GPEET protein could bedetected in cells cultured in the absence of glycerol (Fig.3A) indicating that the lack of surface expression was notdue to a block in trafficking. The same cells were ana-lyzed for the presence of GPEET mRNA, but again, no
hybridization signal was obtained in Northern blots (Fig.3B). To investigate whether GPEET was regulated bytranscription initiation or elongation, nuclear run-on ex-periments were performed. Similar hybridization signalswere obtained when nascent transcripts from GPEET-positive and GPEET-negative cells were hybridized toGPEET DNA (Fig. 3C). The GPEET andEP3 genes form
part of a polycistronic transcription unit (Fig. 3D) thatTable 1. Percentage of midgut forms expressing surface EP
and/or GPEET procyclins
Days
p.i.EP only
(%)EP + GREET
(%)GREET only
(%)
249 2 4488 8 47 100 0 0
11 100 0 0
G. morsitans morsitans were infected with short stumpy blood-
stream forms of AnTat 1.1.
Figure 3. Glycerol-dependent regulation of GPEET expression.
(A) Protein expression. Lysates from equal numbers of procyclic
forms were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting usingthe mAb 5H3. An equivalent blot was incubated with an anti-serum against the T. brucei paraflagellar rod (PFR) as a control
for the sample loading. ( B) Steady-state level of mRNA. Total
RNA was hybridized with radiolabeled probes from the codingregion of GPEET, PAG3,a n db-tubulin or from the 3 8UTR of
EP1as indicated in the Materials and Methods section. Hybrid-
ization signals were quantified using a PhosphorImager and nor-malized to b-tubulin (b-tub) mRNA. (C) Nascent RNA expres-
sion. Run-on transcripts from isolated nuclei were hybridized toa DNA fragment consisting of the coding region of GPEET re-
leased from pBluescript (pBS) ( left). The signals were normalized
to the amount of RNA hybridized to EP1 (data not shown). ( D)
Targeting construct to replace the coding region of GPEET and
downstream sequences with the hygromycin acetyltransferasegene (hyg). Arrows indicate the promoter, solid boxes the 5 8and
38UTRs, and broken lines the locus-specific sequences. ( E)
Northern blot analysis of the trypanosome mutant C-hyg. TotalRNA was hybridized with radiolabeled sequences from hygor
probes as indicated in B. Procyclic forms of the wild-type
(A,B,C) or clone C-hyg (E) were cultured in SDM-79 in the ab-sence (−) or presence (+) of 10 m
Mglycerol.Vassella et al.
618 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from contains the single copy of the procyclin-associated gene
PAG3 (Berberof et al. 1996). The PAGs from the different
procyclin loci share common 5 8ends, but they can be
distinguished by unique sequences in their 3 8ends (Ber-
berof et al. 1996). Using a probe from the unique region,we could show that the level of PAG3 mRNA was simi-
lar in trypanosomes cultured in the presence or absenceof glycerol (Fig. 3B). This, in addition to the results ob-tained from the nuclear run-on experiments, clearlydemonstrates that regulation does not occur at the levelof transcription. We can therefore conclude that GPEETis regulated post-transcriptionally either at the level ofmRNA processing or stability.
The regulatory element is located in the 3 8UTR
of the GPEET mRNA
We first considered a possible role for the 5 8UTR in
regulating the steady state levels of GPEET mRNA. If
this sequence conferred glycerol-dependent regulation,
we would expect that the EP1mRNA would be regulated
the same way, as both transcripts have identical 5 8
UTRs. However, we consistently observed 30% higherlevels of EP1 mRNA in cells that had repressed GPEET
(Fig. 3B; data not shown). We next investigated a deriva-tive of AnTat 1.1 that had been stably transfected withthe construct pCorleone–hyg. In this mutant (C-hyg), thecoding region of GPEET and downstream sequences were
deleted in one of the two GPEET/PAG3 loci and replaced
by the hygromycin-resistance gene ( hyg) flanked by the
58UTR of GPEET and the last 19 bp of the 3 8UTR of EP3
(Fig. 3D). When procyclic forms of C-hyg were culturedin the absence of glycerol, they did not down-regulatethehygmRNA (Fig. 3E), suggesting that the control el-
ement must be located in the coding region or the 3 8
UTR of GPEET.
To distinguish between regulatory elements in the
coding region and the 3 8UTR, chloramphenicol acetyl-
transferase (CAT) cassettes were constructed. Two con-
structs, pC-CAT/EP1 and pC-CAT/GPEET containedthe procyclin promoter from the GPEET/PAG3 (Pro C)
locus, whereas a third construct, pA-CAT/EP1, con-tained the promoter from the EP/PAG1 (Pro A) locus.
The CAT gene in the constructs pA-CAT/EP1 and pC-
CAT/EP1 was flanked by the 3 8UTR and intergenic re-
gion from the EP1 gene and in the construct pC-CAT/
GPEET by the corresponding sequences from the GPEET
gene. CAT activity of transiently transfected procyclicforms was expressed as a percentage of that obtainedwith pA-CAT/EP1. This construct gave rise to similarabsolute enzyme activities in trypanosomes cultured inthe presence or absence of 10 m
Mglycerol (data not
shown). The construct pC-CAT/EP1 gave rise to 80%CAT activity relative to the pA-CAT/EP1 control (Fig.4), indicating that the GPEET/PAG3 promoter is slightly
less active than the EP/PAG1 promoter, at least in an
episomal context. The same level of activity was ob-tained irrespective of whether the cells were cultured inthe presence or absence of glycerol, and confirms thefinding by nuclear run-on analysis that the activity of theGPEET/PAG3 promoter is unaffected. In contrast to the
constructs with an EP1 38UTR, pC-CAT/GPEET pro-
duced 100-fold less CAT activity in cells cultured with-out glycerol than in glycerol-treated cells, demonstratingthat expression is controlled by the GPEET 3 8UTR. The
EP1 andGPEET 38UTRs did not give equivalent activi-
ties in cells cultured in the presence of glycerol. Instead,theGPEET 38UTR showed a twofold higher activity
relative to that of EP1. To further define the regulatory
element that controls GPEET expression, three hybridcassettes were constructed. In the construct pC-CAT/
140G-E, the first 140 bp of the EP1 3 8UTR were replaced
by sequences from the GPEET 38UTR. Conversely, in
the construct pC-CAT/140E-G, the first 140 bp of the 3 8
UTR were from EP1, whereas the second half of the 3 8
UTR and the downstream intergenic region were fromGPEET. Transient transfections of trypanosomes withthese constructs clearly revealed that the regulatory el-ement must be at least 140 bp downstream of the start ofthe GPEET 38 UTR: Cells transfected with pC-CAT/
140G-E showed similar levels of CAT activity in the
presence or absence of glycerol, whereas cells transfectedwith pC-CAT/140E-G showed an 83-fold difference (Fig.4). In common with pC-CAT/GPEET, the latter con-struct also showed a twofold higher activity in the pres-ence of glycerol relative to that of pC-CAT/EP1, indicat-ing that the same region must also contain a positiveregulatory element. Finally, to distinguish between regu-latory elements in the 3 8UTR and intergenic region, we
used pC-CAT/300E-G, which contains the entire EP1 3 8
UTR followed by the GPEET intergenic region. This con-struct gave rise to similar levels of CAT activity in try-panosomes grown in the presence or absence of glycerol,Figure 4. Transient transfections of AnTat 1.1 procyclic forms
cultured in SDM-79 in the presence of 10 m Mglycerol (+) or
absence of glycerol (−). Values are represented as the means
(n=3 )± S.D. of CAT activities relative to the activity obtained
with the construct pA-CAT/EP1.Development regulation of GPEET by T. brucei
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 619 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from confirming that the regulatory element must be in the
GPEET 38 UTR. Because the last 100 nucleotides of the
EP1 and GPEET 38 UTR are identical, the regulatory el-
ement must lie in the region between nucleotides 140and 200 of the GPEET 3 8UTR.
Regulation of GPEET in the fly
To investigate at what level GPEET expression is regu-
lated in the fly, we generated a series of stable transfor-mants expressing the Trypanosoma congolense surface
protein GARP (glutamic acid/alanine-rich protein)
(Bayne et al. 1993; Beecroft et al. 1993). For these experi-ments, we used bicistronic constructs that were de-signed to target specific loci and to replace tandemlylinked procyclin genes by GARP and an antibiotic resis-
tance gene (shown schematically in Fig. 5A). The dele-tion of procyclin genes can lead to a reduction in infec-tivity (Ruepp et al. 1997), but as we have shown recently,this can be overcome by the expression of GARP by pro-cyclic forms of T. brucei (Ruepp et al. 1999). Mutants
were derived from T. brucei 427, because this stock is
particularly easy to culture and to transform, and inde-pendent clones can be selected within 2 weeks. Whentsetse flies are infected with this stock, it behaves ex-actly like AnTat 1.1, showing GPEET expression at thebeginning of the infection (Fig. 5B; Table 2), but com-plete repression after 7–14 days (Fig. 5C; Table 2).
We first analyzed trypanosomes transfected with the
construct pGAPRONE-wild type (Furger et al. 1997), inwhich GARP is fused to the EP1 38UTR. Two clones,
A-GARP/EP1, which had integrated into the EP-PAG1
locus, and C-GARP/EP1, which had integrated into theGPEET/PAG3 locus (shown schematically in Fig. 5A)
were selected for further investigation. In both cases,GARP was expressed even 14 days post infection (Fig.5D,E; Table 2), at which point GPEET was repressed bythe majority of cells. The construct pCorleone–GARP, inwhich GARP is fused to the GPEET 38UTR (Fig. 5A),
was targeted to the GPEET–PAG3 locus. In the resulting
clone C-GARP/GPEET, expression of GARP mirroredthat of the endogenous GPEET, with most cells express-ing both glycoproteins 3 days post infection (Table 2),and neither of them by day 14 (Table 2; Fig. 5F). Try-panosomes isolated from midguts on day 14 were scoredfor the few cells that still expressed GPEET. Of 22 cellsidentified, 20 also expressed GARP. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that it is the 3 8UTR, and not
the chromosomal context, that determines whether ornot GARP and GPEET are coordinately regulated in thefly.
Table 2. Percentage of transgenic trypanosomes expressing
GPEET and GARP
Days
p.i.A-GARP/EP1
(%)C-GARP/EP1
(%)C-GARP/GPEET
(%)
GARP GPEET GARP GPEET GARP GPEET
49 05 59 59 77 6 7 8
14 80 6 85 0 0 0
G. morsitans morsitans were infected with mutant procyclic
forms derived from stock 427.Figure 5. (A) Schematic depiction of the two polymorphic al-
lelic loci EP/PAG1 and EP/PAG2, and the two allelic loci
GPEET/PAG3 together with the constructs used to stably trans-
form trypanosomes by homologous recombination. Locus-spe-
cific sequences upstream of the promoter region and within the38e n do ft h ePAG genes are indicated by broken lines. Arrows
indicate the promoter region and solid boxes the 5 8and 38 UTRs.
The 38 UTR and intergenic region from EP1 are indicated by
light gray boxes and the corresponding sequences from theGPEET gene are indicated by dark gray boxes. Mutants are
named according to the locus that has been targeted (A standsforEP/PAG1,Cf o rGPEET/PAG3) followed by the gene to be
expressed and the origin of the 3 8UTR and intergenic se-
quences. (B–F) Immunofluorescent staining of trypanosomesisolated from the midgut of infected tsetse flies 3 days ( B)o r1 4
days (C–F) after infection with procyclic forms. Wild-type try-panosomes of strain 427 ( B,C) were labeled with anti-GPEET
antibodies (K1 antiserum) and the mutant clones A-GARP/EP1(D), C-GARP/EP1 (E), and C-GARP/GPEET ( F) were labeled
with a rabbit antiserum against GARP. ( Left) The FITC image;
(right) the corresponding DAPI image from the same field.Vassella et al.
620 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from Repression of GPEET mRNA by hypoxia
When trypanosomes are ingested by the tsetse fly during
a blood meal, might they be transferred to a hypoxicenvironment? To test whether hypoxic conditions mightinfluence GPEET expression in vitro, trypanosomesgrown in medium containing glycerol were transferredto a chamber containing <1% oxygen and increased con-centrations of carbon dioxide (>10%). During the incu-bation period, trypanosomes showed an increased popu-lation doubling time (36 hr), but no cell death was ob-served. Under these conditions, glycerol no longerprevented GPEET mRNA repression (Fig. 6). Under the
same conditions, the hyg mRNA levels in the mutant
C-hyg were unchanged. To further verify that hypoxiadid not induce unspecific down-regulation of mRNAs,the same blot was rehybridized with probes from thecoding region of b-tubulin or from the 38 UTR of EP1.
While the levels b-tubulin mRNA were unaffected, ex-
pression of EP1showed a two- to threefold up-regulation
under hypoxic conditions in comparison to normoxicconditions. It remains to be established whether thedown-regulation of GPEET and up-regulation of EP1
mRNAs by hypoxia is caused by interference with glyc-erol catabolism, or whether glycerol and hypoxia controlthe steady state levels of both mRNAs by independentpathways.
Discussion
The observation that GPEET is expressed at high levels
in some cultures of procyclic form trypanosomes, but atlow levels in others, prompted us to investigate its ex-pression in trypanosomes of the fly-transmissible strainAnTat 1.1. During the synchronous differentiation ofstumpy bloodstream forms to procyclic forms in vitro,both EP and GPEET were induced and rapidly appearedon the surface, suggesting that the expression of bothsurface glycoproteins is an important step in the differ-entiation program.
Procyclic forms cultured in DTM medium grew expo-
nentially and constitutively expressed EP and GPEET.When trypanosomes were transferred to SDM-79 me-dium, however, they underwent a transient cell cyclearrest 2–4 days after the initiation of differentiation fol-lowed by complete repression of GPEET by day 9. Thisprocess was irreversible and accompanied by morpho-logical changes. This suggests that an early procyclicform expressing GPEET undergoes a further differentia-tion step to a late stage that is GPEET negative. Differ-entiation of slender to stumpy forms in the bloodstreamof the host is also preceded by a cell cycle arrest. In thiscase, however, cell cycle arrest is not transient and try-panosomes need a second signal allowing them to differ-entiate to the next life-cycle stage, the procyclic form, toresume cell growth (Matthews and Gull 1994; Vassella etal. 1997). Both progression through the cell cycle andGPEET expression were maintained when trypanosomeswere cultured in medium containing glycerol, suggestingthat these trypanosomes are retained in the early procy-clic stage, but can be released from this stage when glyc-erol is removed. GPEET is also repressed during midgutinfection, with slightly faster kinetics than in vitro, in-dicating that this differentiation step is an integral partof the developmental process in the fly. The time atwhich GPEET repression occurs correlates with the para-site crossing the peritrophic matrix and colonizing theforegut and the proboscis (Van Den Abbeele et al. 1999).In addition, GPEET-negative trypanosomes most closelyresemble anterior midgut mesocyclic trypomastigotes,which are in the ectoperitrophic space. However, it stillremains to be seen whether GPEET repression is a causeor a consequence of crossing the peritrophic matrix, orwhether it occurs simply because GPEET is no longerneeded for survival from this point onward.
It has been reported previously that the monomorphic
strain T. brucei 427 predominantly expressed EP shortly
after differentiation, but that GPEET was the major sur-face glycoprotein after long-term passage in SDM-79(Treumann et al. 1997), and we obtained similar resultswith the pleomorphic strain STIB 247 (Roditi et al. 1998).At first sight, these observations seem to be contradic-tory to the results described here, which demonstratethat GPEET is first expressed, but later repressed. It isworth noting, however, that both of these strains hadbeen cultured for 1 month before the first analysis wasmade, making it likely that the trypanosomes had al-ready repressed GPEET at that time point. To investigatewhether GPEET might reappear after long-term culture,we passaged AnTat 1.1 trypanosomes in SDM-79 for 8months. We confirmed that GPEET was re-expressed af-ter long-term culture, but the expression level was sig-nificantly lower than in a population cultured in parallelin medium containing glycerol (E. Vassella, unpubl.).This indicates that re-expression of GPEET can occur
Figure 6. Down-regulation of GPEET mRNA under hypoxic
conditions. Total RNA was extracted from procyclic forms cul-
tured under hypoxic conditions (<1% O2) with increased con-
centrations of CO2(10%–20%), or under atmospheric condi-
tions in the presence (+) or absence (−) of glycerol. Northernblots were hybridized with radioactively labeled probes as indi-cated in the legend to Fig. 3. Hybridization signals were quan-tified using a PhosphorImager and normalized to b-tubulin (b-
tub) mRNA.Development regulation of GPEET by T. brucei
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 621 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from after prolonged culture in the absence of glycerol, but it
is not clear whether the entire population gradually re-activates expression or whether this occurs in a sub-population that is progressively selected during passage.Although GPEET expression may become independentof glycerol in vitro, as is the case for strain 427, it is stillrepressed completely during the course of midgut infec-tions (see Fig. 5). We have shown previously that an EP
null mutant (clone Nour 6C) survived very poorly in thefly (Ruepp et al. 1997), suggesting that this class of pro-cyclins either shields the trypanosome from harmful fac-tors, such as digestive enzymes, or is required for posi-tive interactions with tsetse-derived molecules. An al-ternative explanation, however, might be that these cellswould no longer have a procyclin coat once GPEET isrepressed, and therefore no longer be viable. This is sup-ported by the observation that the few surviving Nour6C cells 14 days post infection are positive for GPEETand therefore still coated (E. Vassella, unpubl.), at a pointat which wild-type cells are normally GPEET negative.
There is increasing evidence that small molecules play
a crucial role in differentiation processes in parasites.Bloodstream form trypanosomes release a soluble factor<500 Da, termed stumpy induction factor (SIF), whichaccumulates in conditioned medium and which inducesdifferentiation of slender to stumpy forms (Vassella et al.1997). Differentiation of bloodstream to procyclic formscan also be triggered by a small molecule, cis-aconitate,
which, however, is only effective at high concentrationsand therefore unlikely to be the physiological trigger. Ithas also recently been shown for Plasmodium that a
mosquito-derived gametocyte-inducing factor is xanth-urenic acid (Billker et al. 1998). We now demonstratethat both glycerol and oxygen can regulate the differen-tiation of procyclic forms in culture. It still remains to beestablished, however, whether these two signals play arole in fly transmission.
Although GPEET and EP1 are coordinately induced
during differentiation of bloodstream to procyclic forms,they are differentially regulated by glycerol, oxygen,and during the establishment of midgut infections. Glyc-erol-dependent regulation of GPEET is controlled post-transcriptionally. The GPEET 38UTR was sufficient to
confer a glycerol response to a transiently expressed re-porter gene. Chimaeras of the EP1 andGPEET 38UTRs
allowed the regulatory element to be mapped to a regionbetween positions 140 and 200 of the GPEET 38UTR. In
stable transformants, the 3 8UTR mediated the develop-
mental regulation of GARP, in concert with GPEET, inthe tsetse fly. Hypoxic culture conditions resulted indown-regulation of GPEET, which could be attributed tothe coding region and/or 3 8UTR. In contrast, EP1
mRNA showed 30% up-regulation in the absence ofglycerol and two- to threefold upregulation under hyp-oxic conditions. The 3 8UTR of EP1 contains three do-
mains (LI–LIII) that play a role in stage-specific expres-sion (Furger et al. 1997; Hotz et al. 1997; Schu ¨ rch et al.1997). LI and LIII both stabilize the mRNA, whereas LIIdestabilizes it (Furger et al. 1997; Schu ¨ rch et al. 1997). LIand LIII are conserved in the GPEET 38UTR (91% and95% identity) and are predicted to form the same sec-ondary structure as in EP1. In contrast, the LII domain is
more divergent (71% identity to EP1) and is predicted to
form a different secondary structure. The 60-bp regionencompassing the glycerol-responsive element largelyoverlaps with LII. This domain may have multiple func-tions, firstly in the coordinate repression of EP1 and
GPEET mRNAs in bloodstream forms, and secondly in
their differential response to glycerol. Future experi-ments should establish whether the same element me-diates the response to oxygen and developmental regu-lation in the fly.
Glycerol and oxygen are both known mediators of
gene expression in other organisms. Glycerol controlstranscription in a variety of prokaryotes, notably of genesinvolved in its own catabolic pathway (Smith and Char-ter 1988; Schweizer 1991; Nilsson et al. 1994) and inchemotaxis (Zhulin et al. 1997). Moreover, it induces thesporulation of vegetative cells of Myxococcus xanthus ,
thus bypassing the normal development of the interme-diate fruiting body (Killeen and Nelson 1988). In most ofthese cases, glycerol, or a metabolite, is the active com-pound controlling gene expression, but in other cases,the trigger is the increase in membrane potential in-duced by glycerol (Zhulin et al. 1997). In procyclic formtrypanosomes, glycerol enters the cell by diffusionthrough the lipid bilayer and is rapidly metabolized forenergy production (Ryley 1962; ter Kuile and Opperdoes1991). At present, it is not clear whether glycerol itself,or a metabolite, regulates GPEET. We have tested a va-riety of different substrates (glucose, glycerol-3-phos-phate, succinate) and inhibitors of glycolysis and oxyda-tive phosphorylation (e.g., rotenone, antimycin A, andsalicylhydroxamic acid), but they do not influenceGPEET expression. This suggests that regulation doesnot operate through these pathways.
To the best of our knowledge, our data provide the first
example of post-transcriptional regulation by glycerol ineukaryotes. In contrast, there are several examples ofeukaryotic transcripts that are regulated post-transcrip-tionally by hypoxia. These include erythropoietin (Mc-Gary et al. 1997) and tyrosine hydroxylase (Czyzyk-Krzeska et al. 1997), which are regulated by sequences intheir 38 UTRs, as well as the more complex example of
vascular endothelial growth factor, which requires thecooperation of multiple elements in the coding regionand 58 and 38 UTRs (Dibbens et al. 1999).
It is well documented that both the trypanosome
strain and the tsetse fly species have an influence on theefficiency of cyclical transmission (Le Ray 1989; Molooet al. 1998) implying that there is cross talk between theparasite and its vector. The finding that environmentalsignals can translate into differences in coat compositionmay explain why, in some circumstances, the trypano-some is able to complete its life cycle, whereas in othersthe infection is confined to the midgut. Apart fromGPEET, it is not known whether additional surface mol-ecules are transiently expressed at later stages of the lifecycle. These might be specific forms of EP or other, asyet unidentified components of the surface coat.
Vassella et al.
622 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from Materials and methods
Trypanosomes
The pleomorphic strain AnTat 1.1 (Le Ray et al. 1977; Delauw
et al. 1985) and the monomorphic strain 427 (Cross and Man-ning 1973) were used in this study. Bloodstream forms of AnTat1.1 were cultured on agarose plates as described (Vassella andBoshart 1996; Reuner et al. 1997). A total of 1 × 10
5long slender
forms were spread per plate and pure populations of stumpyforms were harvested after 4–5 days. Procyclic forms were cul-tured at 27°C in SDM-79 (Brun and Schoenenberger 1979)supplemented with 10% FBS or in modified DTM medium ac-cording to Vassella and Boshart (1996).
Differentiation of bloodstream to procyclic forms
and flow cytometry
Short stumpy bloodstream forms were triggered to differentiate
by the addition of 6 m
Mcis-aconitate and a drop in temperature
to 27°C as described (Vassella et al. 1997). Surface expression ofprocyclin was monitored by flow cytometry using formalde-hyde/glutaraldehyde fixed cells (Roditi et al. 1989; Vassella andBoshart 1996). EP and the mature, phosphorylated form ofGPEET were detected using the monoclonal antibodies (mAb)TRBP1/247 (Richardson et al. 1988) and 5H3 (Bu ¨ tikofer et al.
1999), respectively, and the unphosphorylated form of GPEETwas detected with the polyclonal rabbit antiserum K1 (Ruepp etal. 1997). TRBP1/247 was used at a dilution of 1:500, 5H3 at1:1000, and K1 at 1:500. FITC-conjugated second antibodies(Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) were used at dilutions of 1:400.
Infection of tsetse flies and isolation of midgut forms
Pupae of Glossina morsitans morsitans were obtained from the
International Livestock Research Institute (Nairobi, Kenya) or
the International Atomic Energy Agency (Vienna, Austria). Ten-eral flies were infected with trypanosomes during the first bloodmeal after emergence as described (Ruepp et al. 1997). The mealconsisted of 2 × 10
6short stumpy forms/ml defibrinated horse
blood (TCS Microbiology, Buckingham, UK) or 2 × 106procyclic
forms/ml SDM-79 supplemented with washed horse red bloodcells (Ruepp et al. 1997). Infected flies were fed with three bloodmeals per week through artificial membranes. Midguts wereisolated from infected flies and disrupted by mechanical force inPBS containing 1% BSA. Large tissue fragments were removedby sedimentation, and the trypanosomes in the supernatantwere collected by centrifugation at 1300 gfor 10 min and spread
onto slides.
Immunofluorescence
Cell smears were air dried and fixed with acetone for 10 min at
−20°C. Antibodies that recognize the different forms of procy-clins were used at the same dilutions as for flow cytometry (seeabove). A rabbit polyclonal antiserum raised against a GARP-glutathione S-transferase fusion protein (diluted 1:500) wasgenerously provided by D. Jefferies and J.D. Barry (WellcomeCentre of Molecular Parasitology, Glasgow, Scotland). Fordouble immunofluorescence, FITC-conjugated sheep anti-rab-bit and TRITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibod-ies (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were used at dilutions of 1:200. Cellswere counterstained with the DNA intercalating dye DAPI. In-corporation of BrdU into the nuclei and kinetoplasts of trypano-somes was performed as described (Vassella and Boshart 1996).To determine the percentage of stained cells, at least 50 try-panosomes were counted per sample.Cultivation at low O
2and high CO2concentrations
Procyclic forms, derived from short stumpy forms and grown for2 days under atmospheric conditions, were used to initiate cul-tures in the GENbag system (bioMe ´rieux, Lyon, France). Incu-
bation was performed under hypoxic conditions (<1% oxygen)and 10%–20% CO
2according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Cultures were diluted with fresh medium at 2-day inter-vals to ensure that the cell density in the GENbag system wasbetween 2 × 10
6and 1 × 107cells/ml. No cell death could be
observed during the incubation period, but after 2–4 days, cellsshowed a reduced growth rate under hypoxic conditions. Hyp-oxia was measured by coincubation of the cultures with anindicator strip (bioMe ´rieux). The same pattern of GPEET and
EP1 mRNA expression was obtained when trypanosomes werecultured in the BBL GasPak Anaerobic System (Becton Dickin-son) under hypoxic conditions with 4%–10% CO
2(data not
shown).
Constructs
Constructs designed to target the GPEET/PAG3 locus (Roditi
and Clayton 1999) (formerly known as the Pro C locus; Ko ¨nig et
al. 1989) contain a SalI/HindIII fragment from clone pKOH
(Ruepp et al. 1997), which includes locus-specific 5 8flanking
sequences together with the procyclin promoter and the 5 8UTR
of the GPEET gene. In addition, all constructs share the same 3 8
targeting sequences for homologous recombination consisting
of the last 19 bp of the EP3 38UTR, the intergenic region, and
the first 950 bp of PAG3. The appropriate fragment was ampli-
fied from the genomic clone Pro C using the primer pair KO1(containing a BamHI site; Ruepp et al. 1997) and PAGrev (5 8-
GCTCTAGAATTCATGATGGAACGAA-3 8; the underlined
sequence indicates a XbaI site introduced to facilitate cloning).
The 38 targeting sequence of pKOH was excised with BamHI
andXbaI and replaced by the amplification product to generate
pCorleone–hyg. This construct was used to generate pCorle-one–GARP: In a first cloning step, pCorleone–hyg was linear-ized with BamHI, the ends were treated with Klenow, and re-
ligated to generate a ClaI site. The hygwas released by cleavage
with HindIII and ClaI and, in subsequent cloning steps, replaced
by 3 fragments (from 5 8to 38 in pCorleone–GARP) as follows:
The first fragment was the GARP coding region, released from
pGAPRONE (Furger et al. 1997) by cleavage with HindIII and
BamHI. The second fragment consisted of the sequence be-tween the stop codon of GPEET and the start codon of EP3from
theGPEET/PAG3 locus. The appropriate fragment was ampli-
fied from the genomic clone Pro C using the primer pair CPD(58-AATAGATATCGGATCCAAGCGGATGCAAGCGTGT-
AA-38) and RPU (58-CAGCGCCGGCAAGCTTGTGAATTT-
TACTTTTTG-38) and ligated into the HindIII and BamHI sites
of pBluescript. The plasmid was linearized with HindIII, the
ends were filled with Klenow, and religated to generate a NheI
site. This construct was named pBS-intergenic. The insert wasreleased from pBluescript by cleavage with BamHI and NheIa n d
cloned into pCorleone–GARP. The third fragment, locateddownstream of the other two, consisted of the phleomycin-re-sistance gene ( ble) derived from pBS-phleo (Ruepp et al. 1997).
The flanking HindIII and BamHI sites in this construct were
first converted into NheIa n dClaI sites as described above and
together with the other two fragments, cloned into pCorleone–GARP. For stable transformation, all pCorleone constructs werelinearized with SalIa n dXbaI and pGAPRONE-wild type was
linearized with KpnIa n dNotI.
For construction of pC-CAT/GPEET, a HindIII/ BamHI frag-
ment containing the GARP coding region was released fromDevelopment regulation of GPEET by T. brucei
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 623 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from pCorleone–GARP and replaced by the CAT coding region (Hehl
et al. 1994). In a further cloning step, the sequences between
CAT and blein this cassette were released with BamHI and
NheI and replaced by the corresponding sequence from the EP/
PAG1 locus, excised from pGAPRONE-wild type (Furger et al.
1997), to generate pC-CAT/EP1. pGAPRONE-wild type wasused to generate pA-CAT/EP1 by replacing the coding region ofGARP with CAT. CAT constructs containing 3 8UTRs that
were hybrids between EP1 andGPEET sequences were gener-
ated using a common SspI site 140-bp downstream of the stop
codon. A HindIII/ SspI fragment containing the CAT gene and
the first 140 bp of the EP138UTR was released from pC-CAT/
EP1 and cloned between the HindIII and SspI sites of pC-CAT/
GPEET to generate pC-CAT/140E-G. Likewise, a HindIII/ SspI
fragment containing the CAT gene and the first 140 bp of theGPEET 38UTR was released from pC-CAT/GPEET and cloned
between the HindIII and SspI sites of pC-CAT/EP1 to generate
pC-CAT/140G-E. A hybrid construct containing the EP1 38
UTR and GPEET intergenic region was generated by two se-
quential amplification steps. The EP1 38UTR was amplified
from pC-CAT/EP1 using a CAT-specific primer (5 8-GCGAA-
TTCGGATGAATGGCA-38) and primer 16–(5 8-GAAATCTA-
CAGGGCTG-38) from the LIII domain (Furger et al. 1997; Hotz
et al. 1997; Schu ¨ rch et al. 1997), which is identical in EP1 and
GPEET. The intergenic region of GPEET was amplified from
pBS intergenic using the primer 16+, which is complementaryto 16−, and a Bluescript-specific primer. In a second step, theproducts of the two PCR reactions were allowed to anneal byhybridization of the complementary 16 mer sequence, ampli-fied using the CAT-specific and Bluescript-specific primers, andcloned between the BamHI and NheI sites of pC-CAT/GPEET
to generate pC–CAT/300E-G.
Stable and transient transfection of trypanosomes
Procyclic forms of the strain 427 were stably transformed as
described (Carruthers et al. 1993). After electroporation, cellswere transferred to 10 ml of SDM-79 and subsequent dilutionsof 1:100 and 1:1000 were performed in SDM-79 containing 25%conditioned medium (harvested from a stationary phase cul-ture). A total of 1 ml of aliquots were transferred to each well of24-well plates. After an 18-hr incubation to allow recovery, 1 mlof fresh medium containing 10 µg/ml phleomycin or 100 µg/mlneomycin was added to each well. Independent antibiotic-resis-tant clonal cell lines were obtained after 10–12 days.
The method used for stable transfection of bloodstream forms
of the pleomorphic strain AnTat 1.1 will be described elsewhere(E. Vassella and M. Boshart, in prep.). Transient transfections ofAnTat 1.1 procyclic forms were performed as described (Hehl etal. 1994), except that transfected cells were resuspended inSDM-79 supplemented with 30% conditioned medium.
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting
Total cell protein extracts were separated on 12% polyacryl-
amide gels and transferred to Immobilon-P (Millipore, Bedford,MA). Detection of procyclins was performed as described (Bu ¨ ti-
kofer et al. 1999). A polyclonal antibody directed against theparaflagellar rod (PFR) was used at a dilution of 1:1000 (Deflorinet al. 1994).
Nucleic acid analysis
Northern blot and Southern blot analyses were performed by
standard procedures (Sambrook et al. 1989). Multiprime-labeledprobes used for hybridization were generated from the codingregions of GPEET, GARP,a n dhyg, from a fragment from
pGAPRONE-wild type (Furger et al. 1997) encompassing the 3 8
UTR of EP1and downstream intergenic region up to a XbaI site,
from a PstI fragment derived from the b-tubulin gene or from a
EcoRV/ SalI fragment from PAG3. Hybridization and washing
conditions were 7°C–15°C below the calculated melting tem-perature of the respective probe. Nuclear run-on transcriptionwas performed as described (Berberof et al. 1995). Hybridizationand washing was performed at T
m−7°C. Hybridization signals
were quantified with a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics).
Acknowledgments
We thank Terry Pearson and Dave Barry for antibodies, DrLuger, I.A.E.A., Vienna, Austria, for supplying tsetse pupae andDirk Dobbelaere for constructive comments on the manuscript.This research was supported by grants from the Swiss NationalScience Foundation, the Helmut Horten Foundation, and theStanley Thomas Johnson Foundation to I.R. and the Fund forScientific Research—Flanders (Research Programme G.0358.97)to J.V.D.A.
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be herebymarked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section1734 solely to indicate this fact.
References
Acosta-Serrano, A., R.N. Cole, A. Mehlert, M. Lee, M. Ferguson,
and P. Englund. 1999. The procyclin repertoire of Trypano-
soma brucei. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 29763–29771.
Bayne, R.A., E.A. Kilbride, F.A. Lainson, L. Tetley, and J.D.
Barry. 1993. A major surface antigen of procyclic stage Try-
panosoma congolense .Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 61:295–
310.
Beecroft, R.P., I. Roditi, and T.W. Pearson. 1993. Identification
and characterization of an acidic major surface glycoproteinfrom procyclic stage Trypanosoma congolense .Mol. Bio-
chem. Parasitol. 61:285–294.
Berberof, M., L. Vanhamme, P. Tebabi, A. Pays, D. Jefferies, S.
Welburn, and E. Pays. 1995. The 3 8-terminal region of the
mRNAs for VSG and procyclin can confer stage specificity togene expression in Trypanosoma brucei .EMBO J. 14:2925–
2934.
Berberof, M., A. Pays, S. Lips, P. Tebabi, and E. Pays. 1996.
Characterization of a transcription terminator of the procy-clin PARP A unit of Trypanosoma brucei .Mol. Cell Biol.
16:914–924.
Billker, O., V. Lindo, M. Panico, A.E. Etienne, T. Paxton, A.
Dell, M. Rogers, R.E. Sinden, and H.R. Morris. 1998. Identi-fication of xanthurenic acid as the putative inducer of ma-laria development in the mosquito. Nature 392: 289–292.
Brun, R. and M. Schoenenberger. 1979. Cultivation and in vitro
cloning of procyclic culture forms of Trypanosoma brucei in
a semi-defined medium. Acta Trop. 36:289–292.
———. 1981. Stimulating effect of citrate and cis-aconitate on
the transformation of Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream
forms to procyclic forms in vitro. Z. Parasitenkd. 66:17–24.
Bu ¨ tikofer, P., S. Ruepp, M. Boschung, and I. Roditi. 1997.
’GPEET’ procyclin is the major surface protein of procyclicculture forms of Trypanosoma brucei brucei strain 427. Bio-
chem. J. 326: 415–423.
Bu ¨ tikofer, P., E. Vassella, S. Ruepp, M. Boschung, G. Civenni, T.
Seebeck, A. Hemphill, N. Mookherjee, T.W. Pearson, and I.Vassella et al.
624 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from Roditi. 1999. Phosphorylation of a major GPI-anchored sur-
face protein of Trypanosoma brucei during transport to the
plasma membrane. J. Cell Sci. 112: 1785–1795.
Carruthers, V.B., L.H. van der Ploeg, and G.A. Cross. 1993.
DNA-mediated transformation of bloodstream form Try-
panosoma brucei .Nucleic Acids Res. 21:2537–2538.
Cross, G.A.M. and J.C. Manning. 1973. Cultivation of Trypano-
soma brucei ssp. in semi-defined media. Parasitology
67:315–331.
Czyzyk-Krzeska, M.F., W.R. Paulding, J.E. Beresh, and S.L.
Kroll. 1997. Post-transcriptional regulation of tyrosine hy-droxylase gene expression by oxygen in PC12 cells. Kidney
Internat. 51:585–590.
Deflorin, J., M. Rudolf, and T. Seebeck. 1994. The major com-
ponents of the paraflagellar rod of Trypanosoma brucei are
two similar, but distinct proteins which are encoded by twodifferent gene loci. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 28745–28751.
Delauw, M.-F., E. Pays, M. Steinert, D. Aerts, N. Van Meir-
venne, and D. Le Ray. 1985. Inactivation and reactivation ofa variant-specific antigen gene in cyclically transmitted Try-
panosoma brucei .EMBO J. 4:989–993.
Dibbens, J.A., D.L. Miller, A. Damert, W. Risau, M.A. Vadas,
and G.J. Goodall. 1999. Hypoxic regulation of vascular en-dothelial growth factor mRNA stability requires the coop-eration of multiple RNA elements. Mol. Biol. Cell 10:907–
919.
Ferguson, M.A., P. Murray, H. Rutherford, and M.J. McConville.
1993. A simple purification of procyclic acidic repetitive pro-tein and demonstration of a sialylated glycosyl-phosphati-dylinositol membrane anchor. Biochem. J. 291: 51–55.
Furger, A., N. Schu ¨ rch, U. Kurath, and I. Roditi. 1997. Elements
in the 38 untranslated region of procyclin mRNA regulate
expression in insect forms of Trypanosoma brucei by modu-
lating RNA stability and translation. Mol. Cell Biol. 17:
4372–4380.
Hehl, A., E. Vassella, R. Braun, and I. Roditi. 1994. A conserved
stem-loop structure in the 3 8untranslated region of procyc-
lin mRNAs regulates expression in Trypanosoma brucei .
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91:370–374.
Hotz, H.R., C. Hartmann, K. Huober, M. Hug, and C. Clayton.
1997. Mechanisms of developmental regulation in Trypano-
soma brucei: A polypyrimidine tract in the 3 8untranslated
region of a surface protein mRNA affects RNA abundanceand translation. Nucleic Acids Res. 25:3017–3026.
Killeen, K.P. and D.R. Nelson. 1988. Acceleration of starvation-
and glycerol-induced Myxospore formation by prior heatshock in Myxococcus xanthus .J. Bacteriol. 170: 5200–5207.
Ko¨nig, E., H. Delius, M. Carrington, R.O. Williams, and I.
Roditi. 1989. Duplication and transcription of procyclingenes in Trypanosoma brucei .Nucleic Acids Res. 17:8727–
8739.
Le Ray, D. 1989. Vector susceptibility to African trypanosomes.
Ann. Soc. belge Me ´d. trop. 69:165–171.
Le Ray, D., J.D. Barry, C. Easton, and K. Vickerman. 1977. First
tsetse fly transmission of the “AnTat” serodeme of Trypano-
soma brucei. Ann. Soc. belge Me ´d. trop. 57:369–381.
Matthews, K.R. and K. Gull. 1994. Evidence for an interplay
between cell cycle progression and the initiation of differen-tiation between life cycle forms of African trypanosomes. J.
Cell Biol. 125: 1147–1156.
Maudlin, I. and S.C. Welburn. 1994. Maturation of trypanosome
infections in tsetse. Exp. Parasitol. 79:202–205.
McGary, E.C., I.J. Rondon, and B.S. Beckman. 1997. Post-tran-
scriptional regulation of erythropoietin mRNA stability byerythropoietin mRNA-binding protein. J. Biol. Chem.
272: 8628–8634.Mehlert, A., A. Treumann, and M.A. Ferguson. 1999. Trypano-
soma brucei GPEET-PARP is phosphorylated on six out of
seven threonine residues. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 98:291–
296.
Moloo, S.K., I.O. Okumu, and N.M. Kuria. 1998. Comparative
susceptibility of Glossina longipennis andG. brevipalpis to
pathogenic species of Trypanosoma .Med. Vet. Entomol.
12:211–214.
Nilsson, R.-P., L. Beijer, and B. Rutberg. 1994. The glpT and
glpQ genes of the glycerol regulon in Bacillus subtilis .Mi-
crobiology 140: 723–730.
Pays, E., H. Coquelet, P. Tebabi, A. Pays, D. Jefferies, M. Stein-
ert, E. Koenig, R.O. Williams, and I. Roditi. 1990. Trypano-
soma brucei: Constitutive activity of the VSG and procyclingene promoters. EMBO J. 9:3145–3151.
Reuner, B., E. Vassella, B. Yutzy, and M. Boshart. 1997. Cell
density triggers slender to stumpy differentiation of Try-
panosoma brucei bloodstream forms in culture. Mol. Bio-
chem. Parasitol. 90:269–280.
Richardson, J.P., R.P. Beecroft, D.L. Tolson, M.K. Liu, and T.W.
Pearson. 1988. Procyclin: An unusual immunodominant gly-coprotein surface antigen from the procyclic stage of Africantrypanosomes. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 31:203–216.
Roditi, I. and C. Clayton. 1999. An unambiguous nomenclature
for the major surface glycoproteins of the procyclic form ofTrypanosoma brucei .Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 103: 99–100.
Roditi, I., H. Schwarz, T.W. Pearson, R.P. Beecroft, M.K. Liu, J.P.
Richardson, H.J. Bu ¨ hring, J. Pleiss, R. Bu ¨ low, R.O. Williams
et al. 1989. Procyclin gene expression and loss of the variantsurface glycoprotein during differentiation of Trypanosoma
brucei. J. Cell. Biol. 108: 737–746.
Roditi, I., A. Furger, S. Ruepp, N. Schu ¨ rch, and P. Bu ¨ tikofer.
1998. Unravelling the procyclin coat of Trypanosoma bru-
cei.Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91:117–130.
Rolin, S., P. Paindavoine, J. Hanocq Quertier, F. Hanocq, Y.
Claes, D. Le Ray, P. Overath, and E. Pays. 1993. Transientadenylate cyclase activation accompanies differentiation ofTrypanosoma brucei from bloodstream to procyclic forms.
Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 61:115–125.
Ruepp, S., A. Furger, U. Kurath, C.K. Renggli, A. Hemphill, R.
Brun, and I. Roditi. 1997. Survival of Trypanosoma brucei in
the tsetse fly is enhanced by the expression of specific formsof procyclin. J. Cell Biol. 137: 1369–1379.
Ruepp, S., U. Kurath, C.K. Renggli, R. Brun, and I. Roditi. 1999.
Glutamic acid/alanine-rich protein from Trypanosoma con-
golense is the functional equivalent of ’EP’ procyclin from
Trypanosoma brucei .Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 98:151–156.
Ryley, J.F. 1962. Studies on the metabolism of the protozoa.
Biochem. J. 85:211–223.
Sambrook, J., E.F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. In Molecular
cloning: A laboratory manual . Cold Spring Harbor Labora-
tory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Schu ¨ rch, N., A. Furger, U. Kurath, and I. Roditi. 1997. Contri-
butions of the procyclin 3 8untranslated region and coding
region to the regulation of expression in bloodstream formsofTrypanosoma brucei .Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 89:109–
121.
Schweizer, H.P. 1991. The agmR gene, an environmentally re-
ponsive gene, complements defective glpR, which encodes
the putative activator for glycerol metabolism in Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa .J. Bacteriol. 173: 6798–6806.
Smith, C.P. and K.F. Charter. 1988. Structure and regulation of
controlling sequences for the Streptomyces coelicolor glyc-
erol operon. J. Mol. Biol. 204: 569–580.
ter Kuile, B.H. and F.R. Opperdoes. 1991. Glucose uptake by
Trypanosoma brucei . Rate-limiting steps in glycolysis andDevelopment regulation of GPEET by T. brucei
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 625 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from regulation of the glycolytic flux. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 857–
862.
Treumann, A., N. Zitzmann, A. Hulsmeier, A.R. Prescott, A.
Almond, J. Sheehan, and M.A. Ferguson. 1997. Structural
characterization of two forms of procyclic acidic repetitiveprotein expressed by procyclic forms of Trypanosoma bru-
cei.J. Mol. Biol. 269: 529–547.
Van Den Abbeele, J., Y. Claes, D.V. Bockstaele, D.L. Ray, and M.
Coosemans. 1999. Trypanosoma brucei spp. development in
the tsetse fly: Characterization of the post-mesocyclic stagesin the foregut and proboscis. Parasitology 118: 469–478.
Vanhamme, L., M. Berberof, D. Le Ray, and E. Pays. 1995.
Stimuli of differentiation regulate RNA elongation in thetranscription units for the major stage-specific antigens ofTrypanosoma brucei .Nucleic Acids Res. 23:1862–1869.
Vassella, E. and M. Boshart. 1996. High molecular mass agarose
matrix supports growth of bloodstream forms of pleomor-phic Trypanosoma brucei strains in axenic culture. Mol. Bio-
chem. Parasitol. 82:91–105.
Vassella, E., B. Reuner, B. Yutzy, and M. Boshart. 1997. Differ-
entiation of African trypanosomes is controlled by a densitysensing mechanism which signals cell cycle arrest via thecAMP pathway. J. Cell Sci. 110: 2661–2671.
Vickerman, K., L. Tetley, K.A.K. Hendig, and C.M.R. Turner.
1988. Biology of African trypanosomes in the tsetse fly. Biol.
Cell 64:109–119.
Zhulin, I.B., E.H. Rowsell, M.S. Johnson, and B.L. Taylor. 1997.
Glycerol elicits energy taxis of Escherichia coli andSalmo-
nella typhimurium .J. Bacteriol. 179: 3196–3201.
Ziegelbauer, K., M. Quinten, H. Schwarz, T.W. Pearson, and P.
Overath. 1990. Synchronous differentiation of Trypanosoma
brucei from bloodstream to procyclic forms in vitro. Eur. J.
Biochem. 192: 373–378.Vassella et al.
626 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from  10.1101/gad.14.5.615 Access the most recent version at doi: 14:2000, Genes Dev.   Erik Vassella, Jan Van Den Abbeele, Peter Bütikofer, et al.   post-transcriptionally by glycerol or hypoxiatransiently during development and can be regulated  is expressed Trypanosoma brucei A major surface glycoprotein of 
  References
   http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/14/5/615.full.html#ref-list-1This article cites 48 articles, 17 of which can be accessed free at:
  License
ServiceEmail Alerting
   click here. right corner of the article or Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on August 29, 2024 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 