Feature Review
The heart of darkness: growth and
form of Trypanosoma brucei
in the tsetse ﬂy
Reuben Sharma1,4, Eva Gluenz2, Lori Peacock3, Wendy Gibson3,
Keith Gull2and Mark Carrington1
1Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK
2Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK
3School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK
4Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia
The ﬁrst description of African trypanosomes was made
over a century ago. The importance of the tsetse intransmission and cyclic development of trypanosomeswas discovered soon afterwards, and has been the focusof numerous studies since. However, investigation oftrypanosomes in tsetse ﬂies requires high resourceinvestment and unusual patience; hence, many facetsof trypanosome biology in the tsetse remain to be charac-terised despite the long history of research. Here, currentknowledge and questions about some of the develop-mental changes in trypanosomes that occur in tsetse ﬂies
are summarised, along with recent technical advances
that can now be used to provide some answers.
Over a century of discovery
The ﬁrst scientiﬁc description of African trypanosomes was
at the end of the nineteenth century by Plimmer andBradford [1]. From the earliest investigations of trypano-
somes present in tsetse ﬂies, it was clear that a range ofcellular morphologies were present [2].Trypanosoma bru-
ceimorphology was ﬁrst characterised using light micro-
scopy, the only tool available at the time. Differentmorphologies were deﬁned on the basis of the: (i) dimen-sions of the cell body (particularly the length-to-widthratio); (ii) relative positions of the ﬂagellum, nucleus andkinetoplast (concatenated mitochondrial DNA) along the
anteroposterior (AP) axis of the cell; and (iii) point of
emergence of the ﬂagellum from the cell body [3](see
Box 1 for a description of Trypanosomatid cellular
morphologies). Bruce showed the link between trypanoso-miasis and tsetse in his studies on ‘the ﬂy disease’ in SouthAfrica, but Kleine was the earliest investigator to elucidatethat Trypanosoma brucei had to complete a set cycle
through a tsetse to produce and transmit forms that wouldinfect mammals [4]. Bruce corroborated this ﬁnding for
T. brucei gambiense , and noted that trypanosomes takenup in a bloodmeal reacquired their infectivity to mammals
after a discrete period of at least 12 days within the ﬂy,consistent with a developmental cycle [5]. Bruce went on to
describe the developmental stages (morphotypes) presentin tsetse, and demonstrated that distinct morphotypeswere restricted to different tissues [6]. Robertson and
Bruce deﬁned the sequentially occurring morphotypes ofT. brucei gambiense as it matured in the tsetse vector using
morphometry (measurement of cellular features) and illus-trations [7–10]. Further detail was added to the life cycle
over the next 40 years [11,12] .
The beautifully drawn diagram of the life cycle by Keith
Vickerman that has become iconic, and will be familiar toany student of parasitology, was originally drawn toincorporate observations made using electron microscopy,the next stage of understanding of the life cycle [13,14] .
Ultrastructural features of the various developmentalstages were described in detail [13–20]. The major ﬁndings
came from comparison of trypanosomes from mammalsand tsetse, and provided evidence of different cell surfacesin the two hosts and ultrastructural detail. For example,the mitochondrion in trypanosomes from tsetse ﬂies was
fully elaborated with cristae, whereas it was smaller and
lacked cristae in cells from mammals. This observationcorrelated with the biochemistry: an active mitochondrionin insect forms is necessary for oxidative catabolism,whereas the mitochondrion is reduced in size and complex-ity in mammalian forms that predominantly use glycolysis[21].
Here, two of the many questions that remain about
trypanosome biology in the tsetse are addressed: (i) whatare the mechanisms underlying the changes in trypano-some cellular morphology during the life cycle? And (ii)what are the cellular events necessary for genetic
exchange? Some of the original observations from 50 –
100 years ago are cited throughout to illustrate the needfor the use of newly available techniques to answer ques-tions ﬁrst posed a long time ago. Finally, recent techno-logical advances that hold the prospect of providing someanswers are described.Review
Corresponding authors: Sharma, R. ( reuben@vet.upm.edu.my );
Gluenz, E. ( eva.gluenz@path.ox.ac.uk ); Peacock, L. ( lori.peacock@bris.ac.uk );
Gibson, W. ( W.Gibson@bris.ac.uk ); Gull, K. ( keith.gull@path.ox.ac.uk );
Carrington, M. ( mc115@cam.ac.uk ).
1471-4922/$ –see front matter /C2232009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2009.08.001 Available online 9 September 2009 517We have restricted ourselves to T. brucei because this is
the species most amenable to experimentation. Otherauthors have recently considered differentiation betweenlife-cycle stages [22], and the molecular interactions be-
tween trypanosomes and tsetse [23]. The tsetse is para-
sitized by trypanosomes, and the factors that affect thedevelopment of the infection [24]and the response of the
tsetse to infection have also been reviewed recently [25].
Other trypanosome species behave differently from T.
brucei in the tsetse ﬂy, with attachment of epimastigotes
to the chitinous lining of the proboscis and cibarium in T.
congolense andT. vivax [26], and hindgut development of
metacyclics in T. grayi , the tsetse-transmitted crocodile
trypanosome [27]. There are no differences in the devel-
opmental progression of T. b. brucei and the human infec-
tive subspecies, T. b. gambiense and T. b. rhodesiense ,
although different strains vary in their efﬁciency of trans-mission [28].
Structures that underlie cellular morphology
The shape of a trypanosome results from a spiraled corsetof interlinked microtubules that underlies the plasmamembrane. This microtubule cytoskeleton must be ableto accommodate growth and division of the cell [29], and
has to be remodelled to accommodate the different cellularmorphologies of the various developmental forms. The sub-pellicular microtubules are oriented with the plus ends atthe posterior pole [29]; the exception is the microtubule
quartet adjacent to the ﬂagellar attachment zone thatoriginates near the basal body and have plus ends extend-
ing to the anterior pole. The cells have a single ﬂagellum
that originates at a basal body which is physically con-nected to the kinetoplast [30]. The ﬂagellum exits the cell
through a hole in the microtubule corset. The replication ofthe ﬂagellum is an integral part of the cell cycle and theseparation of the old and new ﬂagellum before cytokinesisrequires that the hole(s) through which the two ﬂagellaemerge can move relative to one another in the context ofthe corset. As the new ﬂagellum emerges and then extendsalong the cell body, the tip remains adjacent to the oldﬂagellum. In procyclic forms, the tip is held on the oldﬂagellum by a structure, the ﬂagella connector [31,32] that,
in turn, marks and possibly determines the location wherethe cytokinetic furrow starts [33].
Travels in a tsetse and changes in morphology
The arrangement of the kinetoplast, nucleus and ﬂagellumin different developmental forms of T. brucei is shown in
Figure 1 . Cells are shown with a single kinetoplast and
nucleus (1K1N) and also just before cytokinesis after kine-toplast duplication and mitosis (2K2N) where such formsoccur. The two types of change readily apparent are altera-tions in cell dimensions in the AP and radial axis, and achange in the relative positions of the nucleus and kine-toplast along the AP axis.
In tsetse ﬂies, a bloodmeal is channelled viathe food
canal, ﬁrst into the crop and then into the lumen of themidgut within the peritrophic matrix, the endoperitrophicspace ( Figure 2 ). To survive, trypanosomes in the blood-
meal must differentiate into procyclic trypomastigotes, an
event that occurs within 24 h. This differentiation can be
accurately recapitulated in vitro, and occurs over 8 –10 h in
a G1 cell-cycle arrest; this is by far the best-characteriseddifferentiation in trypanosomes [22]. In terms of cellular
morphology, the starting and ﬁnal cells are trypomasti-gotes, but the position of the kinetoplast along the AP axisis different; in the bloodstream form, it is close to theposterior pole, whereas it is approximately halfway be-tween the nucleus and posterior pole in the procyclic form.Changes in morphology have been investigated in detailusing in-vitro differentiation [34]. The change in position of
the kinetoplast results from: (i) selective elongation of the
microtubules at the posterior end of the cell during thedifferentiation process that effectively moves the posteriorpole away from the kinetoplast; and (ii) decrease in thedistance between the kinetoplast and nucleus [34]. A sec-
ond consequence of the differentiation is that the pattern ofkinetoplasts and nuclei along the AP axis in a 2K2N cellchanges from KKNN in the bloodstream form to KNKN inthe procyclic form ( Figure 1 ). It is unclear if there is speciﬁc
directed movement of organelles and, if so, what processaffects the movement.Box 1. Trypanosomatid cellular morphologies
The flagellum is at the anterior pole of the cell, and the morphology is defined by the relative positions of the nucleus, the kinetoplast
(mitochondrial DNA) (which is physically linked to the basal body) and point of emergence of the flagellum from the cell body. T. brucei is
restricted to the trypomastigote and epimastigote stages in the red box. Other species of kinetoplastids are characterised by other combinationsof morphologies; for example, T. cruzi has trypomastigote, epimastigote and amastigote stages, Leishmania spp. have promastigote and
amastigote forms.Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
518Invasion of the ectoperitrophic space occurs within a few
days of infection [35]. Direct evidence for secondary colo-
nisation of the ectoperitrophic space by the midgut trypo-mastigotes emerged from studies by Gordon usingsystematic serial sections of the infected ﬂy [36]. However,
the exact route taken by trypanosomes from the endo- toectoperitrophic space remained contentious for some years[37]. Suggestions included a route viathe posterior end of
the peritrophic matrix, which is ruptured by the rectal
spines in the hindgut; penetration at the medial section ofthe midgut; and penetration of the soft anterior peritrophicmatrix close to the proventriculus, which is also the routefor re-entering the endoperitrophic space for migratory
trypanosomes en route to the salivary glands. Electron
micrographs convincingly demonstrated that T. brucei
exited the endoperitrophic space by passage through themembrane over the central two-thirds of the anteriormidgut in Glossina morsitans [37,38] . It is not known
whether a viable trypanosome population remains in thelumen, or whether only the ectoperitrophic space popu-
lation proliferates. The procyclic trypomastigotes in the
ectoperitrophic space are signiﬁcantly longer and thinnerthan in the midgut lumen [39].
The proventriculus
The anterior migration of the trypomastigotes within theectoperitrophic space is followed by the colonisation of theproventriculus by elongated proventricular procyclic try-pomastigotes. The length of the cell increases further as itnears the proventriculus [39,40] again coupled with a
further reduction in the width of the cell body. Once the
cell length has exceeded a value ( /C2435mm using T. b. brucei
J10: Box 2 ), proliferation ceases and there is a G2 arrest
until the cell reaches the proventriculus [39]. Once the
procyclic trypomastigotes reach the proventriculus, thereis a further elongation and cells reach lengths of up to/C2440mm(T. b. brucei J10) [39] to 60 mm[14] to form
mesocyclic trypomastigotes. These cells deviate from thenormal sequence of events in the cell cycle in that they haveundergone nuclear S-phase, but have not separated theirkinetoplasts; this delay in separation may be preparationfor building the short new ﬂagellum (see below). It is not
Figure 1 . A simplified summary of the morphotypes present in a tsetse, and a comparison with a dividing population in the bloodstream of a mammalian host. Throu ghout
the life cycle, there are a series of transitions between different morphotypes that include a remodelling of cell shape (length and diameter), and a r e-ordering of internal
organelles. Solid lines are used to indicate transitions that are fairly well characterised; dashed lines indicate alternative or uncharacterised steps. Question marks indicate
morphologies that are not fully characterised. Two of the transitions that occur in tsetse flies have been studied in detail, the differentiation of b loodstream to procyclics
and, in lesser detail, the asymmetric division that gives rise to epimastigotes. There are four stages shown that undergo cell division: the midgut pr ocyclic forms, salivary
gland attached epimastigotes and the mammalian bloodstream forms can all undergo repeated rounds of cell division to amplify a population whereas th e proventricular
epimastigote undergoes a single asymmetric division and is not a self-sustaining population. In each case, the internal arrangement of the nucleus a nd kinetoplast is shown
for 1K1N and 2K2N cells before cytokinesis. There has been no recent detailed description of dividing salivary gland epimastigotes.
Figure 2 . Tsetse viscera. Cartoon of some of the internal organs of a tsetse fly
based on a drawing at www.tulane.edu/ /C24wiser/protozoology/notes/vector.html .
Proliferative procyclic forms inhabit the midgut, initially in the endoperitrophic
space but rapidly moving into the ectoperitrophic space. From here, there is ananterior movement to the proventriculus, where differentiation to epimastigotes
occurs. Proliferation resumes when epimastigotes adhere to the epithelium of the
salivary glands where differentiation to mammal-infective metacyclics occurs.Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
519known whether the trypanosomes actively migrate
through the ectoperitrophic space towards the proventri-culus or whether the cells diffuse there as the numberincreases. There is some evidence that the elongation of thecell body is in response to proximity to the proventriculus
because cells removed from this location return to shorter,
proliferating forms [40].
What are the alterations in the cytoskeleton during the
differentiation to mesocyclic forms? In the proventriculus,the extension in length and decrease in width occursduring a single cell cycle [39]. The increase in length can
be explained by elongation of microtubules to extend thecytoskeleton and/or by sliding of microtubules relative toeach other. Normal extension of any microtubule occurspredominantly at the plus end and in trypanosomes wouldextend the posterior end of the cell. The decrease in
diameter is not a result of reduced spacing between sub-
pellicular microtubules [39]. Therefore, the decrease in
diameter must occur viaremoval of microtubules and/or
by sliding of microtubules past one another to the extentthat the number of overlapping microtubules decreases.The decrease in the number of overlapping microtubuleswould also result in an increase in cell length. The resol-ution of how the cytoskeleton alters will provide evidenceon whether the cell can remove microtubules from the sub-pellicular array by depolymerisation.
The differentiation of the long trypomastigote to a short
epimastigote (the form believed to colonise the salivary
gland) involves a reduction in length by approximatelytwo-thirds, but no substantial increase in cell diameter.This transformation is achieved through an asymmetricdivision that produces one long and one short daughterepimastigote; the long epimastigote daughter appears todie[39,40] . Asymmetrically dividing T. brucei cells were
identiﬁed by Lewis and Langridge while investigating themorphotypes in the foregut and saliva of G. morsitans [12].
An earlier study [9]also demonstrated that T. b. gambiense
could initiate a form of asymmetric cellular division to
produce two unequal-sized daughter epimastigotes. The
dramatic reduction in cell length is achieved through anasymmetric segregation of microtubules, as opposed to aloss of microtubules from the sub-pellicular array. Neitherform of epimastigote proliferates in the proventriculus, sothe trypanosome population in the proventriculus is notself-sustaining and requires continual renewal from theprocyclic trypomastigotes in the ectoperitrophic space.
How does the reversal of positions of the kinetoplast and
nucleus along the AP axis occur during the differentiationof trypomastigotes to epimastigotes? Most cells in theproventriculus are elongated trypomastigotes with oval
or elongated nuclei [39]. As these cells increase in length,
the distance of the nucleus and kinetoplast from theanterior pole increases, and the nucleus elongates signiﬁ-cantly and takes on a ‘sausage’ shape. This change is
possibly enforced on the nucleus by the diminishing
diameter of the cell which ﬁnally adopts a ‘tadpole’ shapewith the posterior pole increasing in diameter and theremainder of the cell decreasing in diameter. The tran-sition to epimastigotes occurs at the same time as separ-ation of daughter kinetoplasts and mitosis. Throughout theprocess, the distance between the kinetoplast and posteriorpole of the cell remains relatively constant. As the tran-sition starts, the distance between the nucleus and theposterior of the cell decreases until the nucleus is posi-tioned in the posterior end of the cell, and the nucleus
rounds up and divides. By this point, the nucleus is closer
to the posterior pole than to the kinetoplasts and, ascytokinesis occurs, two daughter epimastigote cells areproduced [39](Figure 1 ). The divided kinetoplast remains
in close proximity to the anterior –lateral aspect of the
nucleus, with one daughter kinetoplast in a juxta-anteriorposition. At this stage, the nucleus is already clearlydividing and, as the asymmetric division progresses, theposterior-most daughter kinetoplast is located between thedivided nuclei. The anterior kinetoplast remains in closeproximity to the anterior pole of the divided nucleus, and
these go on to be the nucleus and kinetoplast of the post-
cytokinesis long epimastigote. The posterior nucleus –kine-
toplast pairs along with the new short ﬂagellum to even-tually become the short epimastigote ( Figure 1 ). The use of
the new ﬂagellum in short epimastigotes raises the possib-ility that it is constructed to include components necessaryfor the subsequent attachment to the salivary gland epi-thelium.
The asymmetric division requires several coordinated
changes in cell shape. The narrowing and elongation of theanterior part of the cell occurs without a decrease in the
spacing between microtubules, and so must occur through
removal of many microtubules or by sliding of microtubulesrelative to one another. The sliding of microtubules couldexplain the increase in length. The increase in diameter atthe posterior end of the cell must result from the selectivenucleation of additional microtubules within the sub-pel-licular array at the posterior end. The transition betweenmorphotypes is most readily explained by movement of thenucleus within the cytoplasm to a position posterior to thekinetoplasts; this mechanism does not require drasticremodelling of the sub-pellicular microtubule array. How-
ever, a drastic remodelling of the sub-pellicular microtu-
bules in response to movement of the basal bodies andkinetoplast cannot be ruled out.
How is the asymmetry in the cell division established?
In the cell-division cycle that contains the asymmetricdivision, the new ﬂagellum emerges from the ﬂagellarpocket after S-phase late in the cell cycle, after the nucleushas migrated to the posterior end of the cell. The newﬂagellum is short, and the ﬂagella connector progressesonly a short distance down the old ﬂagellum. If the ﬂagellaconnector marks the site of furrow ingression (as it might Box 2. Absolute or relative size?
Very few numbers for the absolute size of cells have been given in
this review. This lack of numbers has been used to avoid confusion.Absolute cell lengths and diameters vary with strain and growthconditions. The size of a trypanosome varies with the environment,for example T. brucei Lister 427 procyclic forms proliferate at similar
rates in the two culture media SDM-79 and DTM, but cell size isdifferent. In T. brucei Lister 427, procyclic trypomastigotes are
longer than bloodstream trypomastigotes, but the opposite is true inT. brucei J10. Proventricular trypomastigotes up to 60 mm were
reported for T. brucei [14], but none greater that 42 mm were seen in
hundreds of infections with T. brucei J10[39].Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
520do in procyclics), then the asymmetric division is achieved
by limiting the growth of the new ﬂagellum, possibly byrestricting initiation to late in the cell cycle. In turn, thelate initiation might be downstream of a late duplication ordivision of the basal bodies, seen as a late separation of
kinetoplasts. The proventricular cells contrast with pro-
cyclic- and bloodstream-form trypomastigotes where sep-aration of kinetoplasts occurs during nuclear S-phase.
Production of infective metacyclics in the salivary
glandsThe morphotypes in the salivary glands have been dividedinto four stages: attached epimastigotes, premetacyclics,and nascent metacyclics, as well as mature free metacyc-lics[17,14] (Figure 1 ). The attachment occurs through an
elaboration of the membrane of the ﬂagellum [20] that
forms junctional complexes with salivary gland epithelial
cell microvilli [14]. The attached epimastigotes possess an
elongated posterior process and are actively dividing. Thenucleus is oval-to-round, and the kinetoplast in the 1N1Kcell positioned juxta-anterior or juxta-lateral to thenucleus.
The differentiation of epimastigotes to premetacyclic
trypomastigotes occurs while the cells remain attachedto the epithelium, but is otherwise not well characterised[17,20,41] . It remains uncertain whether the exchange in
the positions of the nucleus and kinetoplast on the AP axis
occurs as a result of an altered conformation before cyto-
kinesis or in a non-dividing epimastigote. The attachedpremetacyclics are characterised as nascent metacyclicswhen they arrest in G1 before release from the epithelium[14,20,39,41] . A detailed description of differentiation pro-
cesses occurring in the salivary gland poses the greatesttechnical challenge due to the difﬁculties not only inobtaining material, but also in the imaging of individualattached cells. The importance of an improved descriptionof events in the salivary glands is twofold; (i) it remains theleast-characterised part of the life cycle, and (ii) the sali-
vary glands are the location of genetic exchange [42]and
nothing is known about the cell biology of this in trypano-somes.
Fusing two closed cages
Tsetse ﬂies infected with two different isolates of T. brucei
can produce metacyclic trypomastigotes that are hybridprogeny [43]. Thus, genetic exchange occurs within the
tsetse ﬂy. The pattern of inheritance of heterozygous loci isMendelian [44,45] , providing strong evidence that sexual
genetic exchange occurs. The characterisation of this
genetic exchange is important not only for an understand-
ing of the spread of traits such as human infectivity withinpopulations, but also to the development of a system for in-
vitro crosses providing a simpler forward genetics than
currently available. Three cellular events are central togenetic exchange: (i) a meiotic cell cycle including homolo-gous recombination; (ii) fusion of two nuclei; and (iii)reconstitution of diploidy. There is an implicit requirementfor cell fusion to occur for random assortment of chromo-somes and for mitochondria to fuse for genetic exchangebetween kinetoplasts (mitochondrial DNA) [32,46,47] .
Cells undergoing meiosis and/or cell fusion have not beendeﬁnitively identiﬁed, and the temporal order of meiosis
and cell fusion is unknown. The location of geneticexchange within the tsetse ﬂy was investigated in a crossusing parental lines expressing different coloured ﬂuor-escent proteins. Trypanosomes expressing both ﬂuorescent
proteins were observed in the salivary glands, but not in
the preceding developmental forms [42]. Part of the pro-
blem in identifying the cells undergoing meiosis is thatgenetic exchange is not an obligatory part of the life cycle,and often only parental genotypes are recovered afterpassage through tsetse ﬂies. Meiotic cells must be distin-guished from the background population of mitoticallyproliferating epimastigotes present in the salivary glands,and this requires speciﬁc tools.
Meiosis and regeneration of the diploid in trypanosomes
has two problems. First, there is a problem of the unitary
organelles, in particular the complex of the kinetoplast,
tripartite attachment complex, basal body and ﬂagellum[35]. Any meiotic cell cycle contains S-phase followed by the
ﬁrst division that separates the homologues, and then thesecond division that separates sister chromatids. Thus, theproducts of meiosis could be four haploid cells that have toshare two ﬂagella, which may lead to aﬂagellate cells afterthe second meiotic division. Fusion of diploid cells beforemeiosis leads to the reverse problem: after meiotic S-phasethe cell would have four ﬂagella. The requirement formitochondrial fusion to account for mixed minicircles
and maxicircles adds to the complexity [46].
Second, there must be a molecular mechanism for fusion
of the plasma membrane from two cells and, after thefusion, a route to reverse the crosslinking between micro-tubules in the sub-pellicular corset, which must relaxsufﬁciently to allow mixing of the two nuclei and mitochon-dria in a common cytoplasm. At the two extremes, cellfusion could occur side-by-side or end-to-end. In the former,the AP axes of the two cells must be identical to conservethe polarity of the microtubule corset. Membrane fusionmust be followed by loosening of the inter-microtubule
connections so that the two cylinders of microtubules
become one. End-to-end joining would probably involvefusion of the posterior poles of two cells because fusioninvolving an anterior pole would compromise the ﬂagel-lum. The mixing of cytoplasm after fusion of two posteriorpoles would require a relaxation of the ties that bring thesub-pellicular microtubules to a point at the posterior pole.However, end-to-end fusion would result in anti-parallelmicrotubules, so the fusion would have to be reversed orfollowed by bending and a zipping-up of the two cells alongthe AP axis to make the microtubules parallel.
So far, the changes in trypanosome morphology as the
cells differentiate from one life cycle stage to another andthe probable events involved in genetic exchange havebeen discussed. Many of the changes can be explainedby alterations to the microtubule arrays already presentthrough sliding of microtubules relative to one anotherand/or by the addition of new microtubules within thearray. There is no evidence that there is substantial depo-lymerisation of microtubules necessary for any transition,and the dramatic shortening of cell length that occurs asepimastigotes are formed results from an asymmetricdivision of a pre-existing array.
Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
521Experimental approaches
The extent of understanding of the molecular mechanismsresponsible for a biological process depends on the types ofexperimental approaches available. Thus, most researchon trypanosomes uses bloodstream and procyclic forms
that are readily cultured. By contrast, some of the most
interesting life-cycle stages present in the proventriculusand salivary glands are transitory and non-proliferative,whereas the dividing epimastigote population in the sali-vary glands is intimately attached to the epithelium, acondition so far irreproducible in culture for T. brucei .
Successful culture of epimastigotes is available for T. con-
golense and this has recently been used for some molecular
characterization of adherence [48]. Infected tsetse ﬂies do
not contain many trypanosomes; a heavily infected ﬂycontains about 1 /C210
6trypanosomes, equivalent to
100ml of cultured procyclics. Furthermore, the populations
isolated from the proventriculus and salivary glands con-tain mixtures of cell types. This combination of featuresmeans that most experiments are usually designed toenable data to be collected from individual cells. Bio-chemical analysis is challenging, but not impossible, asdemonstrated by the elegant identiﬁcation of the majorcell-surface protein on epimastigotes in the salivary glands[49] and the changes in cell-surface proteins in procyclic
forms [50]. Using single-cell assays, it is important to use a
sufﬁcient number of cells for a statistical analysis, and a
second difﬁculty is to obtain the full range of developmen-
tal stages from tsetse ﬂies. In a recent study that charac-terised the asymmetric division of proventriculartrypomastigotes [39],>1000 ﬂies were dissected over a
six-month period to ﬁnd the 334 ﬂies with infected proven-triculi and salivary glands used in the study. Often, thistime-consuming aspect of working with tsetse ﬂies isneither realised nor recognised.
Newly developed tools designed to exploit the genome
sequence that work at the single-cell level can provideaccess to processes occurring within the tsetse. The gen-
ome sequence allows the production of reagents speciﬁc for
an individual protein. The protein can act as a marker for aparticular process, for example SCC1, which is part of thesister chromatid cohesion complex, was used as a markerfor S and G2 phases of the cell cycle [39]. A gene product
can be used to identify cells undergoing a particular pro-cess such as a protein expressed only during meiosis, anapproach successfully adopted in Giardia using the SPO11
endonuclease [51].I nT. brucei , a successful example is the
characterisation of expression of endocytic markersthroughout the life cycle [52].
Two approaches can be used to determine whether and
where (cell type and subcellular localisation) a protein isexpressed. The ﬁrst is detection in ﬁxed cells using anantibody, and the second is tagging to make a ﬂuorescentprotein fusion that usually renders the protein visible inliving cells if the polypeptide is sufﬁciently abundant.Antibodies are routinely raised against recombinantproteins, and production of the antibodies requires knowl-edge of only the sequence. Tagging of genes is best under-taken at the endogenous locus so that the ﬂuorescentprotein is at the N-terminus because this leaves regulatorysequences in the 3
0UTR unaffected. Both approaches haveadvantages and disadvantages, and careful controls are
needed to minimise the risk of artefactual results. It iscrucial to demonstrate the speciﬁcity of an antibody, rou-tinely this should be done using RNAi knockdown.
Gene function can be addressed by removing the protein
through targeted gene deletion or, sometimes, through
reducing expression by RNAi. Targeted gene deletion isa powerful technique for genes that are developmentallyregulated; the knockout can be made conditional by delet-ing the gene in a life-cycle stage where it is not expressed,and then cycling the trypanosomes through tsetse ﬂies.Successful RNAi knockdown of a trypanosome gene in atsetse ﬂy has not been reported, but there has been suc-cessful tetracycline-induced transgene expression [53] so
there is no reason why an RNAi approach should not work.A set of experiments to investigate cell morphology and sex
in trypanosomes is described below as a simple example of
the approaches outlined above.
Mechanisms underlying changes in cell morphology
Cell morphology can be described in detail through mor-phometry and a series of cells assembled to build a model ofa morphological transformation. In the case of the asym-metric division that occurs in the proventriculus, the modelprovides evidence that the major change in the conversionof trypomastigote to epimastigote is movement of thenucleus (as opposed to the kinetoplast) along the AP axis.
However, the model does not provide information on the
molecular mechanisms underlying movement of thenucleus or a change in shape. One means of obtaininginformation about how changes in cell shape are achievedis to visualise newly polymerised microtubules. Previously,this was achieved by immuno-electron microscopy of cytos-keletons using a monoclonal antibody (mAb) that recog-nises the tyrosinylated form of a-tubulin, which is
characteristic of newly assembled microtubules [54]. Such
an approach is demanding for trypanosomes isolated fromtsetse ﬂies because the small number of trypanosomes
leads to technical difﬁculties; so are there complementary
or alternative approaches that are easier to use? Micro-tubule plus end-binding proteins have been used as ﬂuor-escent protein fusions to visualise microtubule dynamics[55], it is possible that the same approach could be used to
mark growing ends of microtubules in trypanosomes,thereby allowing visualisation of extending microtubules.
Characterising sex
The identiﬁcation of events during meiosis can beaddressed using an analogous route. The timing of nuclear
fusion can be determined by using parental lines carrying
different colour ﬂuorescent proteins localised to thenucleus, so that when the nuclei are yellow the twoparental nuclei are present in the same cell. A similarapproach using proteins localised to the mitochondrialmatrix can be used to observe fusion of mitochondria, orproteins localised to the kinetoplast to visualise mixing ofthe kDNA.
The genome sequence represents a tremendous
resource for identiﬁcation of genes with a function ingenetic exchange. Meiosis and cell fusion can be investi-gated by identifying orthologues of genes with a restrictedReview Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
522function in either process. For example, SPO11 encodes the
endonuclease that initiates homologous recombination inthe prophase of meiosis I and is expressed only at thatpoint in the life cycle of all eukaryotes in which it has beencharacterised, and apparent orthologues are present in the
genomes of protozoa [56]. Cell fusion can be approached
using the HAP2 gene (E. Gluenz and K. Gull, unpublished)
[57]. HAP2 is necessary for fusion of membranes after
adhesion of gametes in plants and Plasmodium [57].
SPO11 andHAP2 genes are good examples of where clear
prediction can be made about the phenotype of nullmutants—both should be unable to cross—and wherethe expression will provide insights into the biology,SPO11 expression would identify cells undergoing meiosisand HAP2 expression would identify one of the fusogeniccell types.
Concluding remarks
Many aspects of trypanosome biology take place in thedarker recesses of tsetse ﬂies and have yet to be recapitu-lated in culture. The small number of trypanosomes in anytsetse and the heterogeneity of cell types present in popu-lations harvested from a single tissue means it is difﬁcultto collect data other than by observations in individualcells. One outcome of the genome project is a greater ease ofmaking tools speciﬁc for individual gene products. There isnow a prospect of being able to address both the questions
outlined above, as well as many others. At the moment, we
cannot fully exploit the tremendous resource that is thegenome because we are capable of easy interrogation ofonly a small proportion of the cell types occurring duringthe life cycle. To understand this pathogen more comple-tely, we need to study all the stages. This may require acorporate investment of many researchers. The move tostudy pleomorphic bloodstream forms has been a verywelcome development, ensuring slender- and stumpy-formanalysis. The development of systems to study the stages ofthe salivary gland is no less necessary: this is, after all, the
route out of the darkness and into the host!
Disclosure statement
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
Work in the research group of M.C. is funded by the Wellcome Trust. K.G.
and E.G. are funded by the Wellcome Trust and EPA Trust. K.G. is a
Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow. Work in the research group of
W.G. is funded by the Wellcome Trust (grant number 079375). R.S. held aPhD studentship from the Ministry of Science, Technology andInnovation Malaysia.
References
1 Plimmer, H.G. and Bradford, J.R. (1899) A preliminary note on the
morphology and distribution of the organism found in the tsetse ﬂydisease. Proc. R. Soc. London 65, 274 –281
2 Minchin, E.A. et al. (1906) Glossina palpalis in its relation to
Trypanosoma gambiense and other trypanosomes (preliminary
report). Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B. 78, 242 –258
3 Hoare, C.A. and Wallace, F.G. (1966) Developmental stages of
Tryposomatid ﬂagellates: a new terminology. Nature 212, 1385 –1386
4 Stephen, L.E. (1986) Trypanosomiasis: a Veterinary Perspective ,
Pergamon Press
5 Bruce, D. et al. (1909) The development of Trypanosoma gambiense in
Glossina palpalis .Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 81, 405 –4146 Bruce, D. et al. (1911) Further researches on the development of
Trypanosoma gambiense inGlossina palpalis .Proc. R. Soc. London
Ser. B 83, 513 –527
7 Robertson, M. (1912) Notes on certain aspects of the development of
Trypanosoma gambiense inGlossina palpalis .Proc. R. Soc.London Ser.
B85, 241 –248
8 Robertson, M. (1912) Notes on the life history of Trypanosoma
gambiense etc.Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B. 86, 66 –71
9 Robertson, M. (1913) Notes on the life-history of Trypanosoma
gambiense , with a brief reference to cycles of Trypanosoma nanum
andTrypanosoma pecorum inGlossina palpalis .Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
London B. 203, 161 –184
10 Bruce, D. et al. (1914) The trypanosome causing disease in man in
Nyasaland. Part III. Development in Glossina morsitans. Proc. R. Soc.
London Ser. B. 87, 516 –525
11 Lloyd, L. and Johnson, W.B. (1924) The trypanosome infection of tsetse
ﬂies in Northern Nigeria and new method of estimation. Bull. Entomol.
Res. 14, 265 –288
12 Lewis, E.A. and Langridge, W.P. (1947) Development forms of
Trypanosoma brucei in the saliva of Glossina pallidipes and
Glossina austeni .Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 41, 6 –13
13 Vickerman, K. (1969) On the surface coat and ﬂagellar adhesion in
trypanosomes. J. Cell Sci 5, 163 –193
14 Vickerman, K. (1985) Developmental cycles and biology of pathogenic
trypanosomes. Br. Med. Bull. 41, 105 –114
15 Vickerman, K. (1966) Electron microscopy of tsetse salivary gland
stages in the life cycle of Trypanosoma rhodesiense .Trans. R. Soc.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 60, 7
16 Vickerman, K. (1970) Ultrastructure of Trypanosoma and relation to
function. In The African Trypanosomiases (Mulligan, H.W., ed.),
George Allen & Unwin Limited
17 Steiger, R.F. (1973) On the ultrastructure of Trypanosoma
(Trypanozoon )brucei in the course of its life cycle and some related
aspects. Acta Trop. 30, 64 –168
18 Bohringer, S. and Hecker, H. (1975) Quantitative ultrastructural
differences between strains of the Trypanosoma brucei subgroup
during transformation in blood. J. Protozool. 21, 694 –698
19 Vickerman, K. and Tetley, L. (1977) Recent ultrastructural studies on
trypanosomes. Ann. Soc. Belg. Med. Trop. 57, 441 –457
20 Tetley, L. and Vickerman, K. (1985) Differentiation in Trypanosoma
brucei : host-parasite cell junctions and their persistence during
acquisition of the variable antigen coat. J. Cell Sci. 74, 1 –19
21 Vickerman, K. (1965) Polymorphism and mitochondrial activity in
sleeping sickness trypanosomes. Nature 208, 762 –766
22 Fenn, K. and Matthews, K.R. (2007) The cell biology of Trypanosoma
brucei differentiation. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 539 –546
23 Roditi, I. and Lehane, M.J. (2008) Interactions between trypanosomes
and tsetse ﬂies. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 11, 345 –351
24 MacLeod, E.T. et al. (2007) Factors affecting trypanosome maturation
in tsetse ﬂies. PLOS One 2, e239
25 Lehane, M.J. et al. (2004) Immune response and parasite transmission
in blood-feeding insects. Trends Parasitol. 20, 433 –439
26 Jefferies, D. et al. (1987) Cibarial infections of Trypanosoma vivax and
T. congolense inGlossina .Parasitol. Res. 73, 289 –292
27 Hoare, C.A. (1931) Studies on Trypanosoma grayi III. Life cycle in
tsetse-ﬂy and in the crocodile. Parasitology 23, 449 –484
28 Welburn, S.C. et al. (1995) Trypanozoon : infectivity to humans is linked
to reduced transmissibility in tsetse I. Comparison of human serum-resistant and human serum-sensitive ﬁeld isolates. Exp. Parasitol. 81,
404–408
29 Robinson, D.R. et al. (1995) Microtubule polarity and dynamics in the
control of organelle positioning, segregation, and cytokinesis in thetrypanosome cell cycle. J. Cell Biol. 128, 1163 –1172
30 Ogbadoyi, E.O. et al. (2003) A high-order trans-membrane structural
linkage is responsible for mitochondrial genome positioning andsegregation by ﬂagellar basal bodies in trypanosomes. Mol. Biol.
Cell 14, 1769 –1779
31 Moreira-Leite, F.F. et al. (2001) A trypanosome structure involved in
transmitting cytoplasmic information during cell division. Science 294,
610–612
32 Briggs, L.J. et al. (2004) The ﬂagella connector of Trypanosoma brucei :
an unusual mobile transmembrane junction. J. Cell Sci. 117, 1641 –
1651Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
52333 Davidge, J.A. et al. (2006) Trypanosome IFT mutants provide insight
into the motor location for mobility of the ﬂagella connector andﬂagellar membrane formation. J. Cell Sci. 119, 3935 –3943
34 Matthews, K.R. et al. (1995) Mitochondrial genome repositioning
during the differentiation of the African trypanosome between lifecycle forms is microtubule mediated. J. Cell Sci. 108, 2231 –2239
35 Yorke, W. et al. (1933) The relation of polymorphic trypanosomes
developing in the gut of Glossina , to the peritrophic membrane.
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 27, 347 –355
36 Gordon, R.M. (1957) Trypanosoma congolense in its passage through
the peritrophic membrane of Glossina morsitans .Trans. R. Soc. Trop.
Med. Hyg. 51, 296
37 Ellis, D.S. and Evans, D.A. (1977) Passage of Trypanosoma brucei
rhodesiense through the peritrophic membrane of Glossina morsitans
morsitans .Nature 267, 834 –835
38 Evans, D.A. and Ellis, D.S. (1983) Recent observations on the
behaviour of certain trypanosomes within their insect hosts. Adv.
Parasitol. 22, 1 –42
39 Sharma, R.S.K. et al. (2008) Asymmetric cell division as a route to
reduction in cell length and change in cell morphology intrypanosomes. Protist 159, 137 –151
40 Van den Abbeele, J. et al. (1999) Trypanosoma brucei spp. development
in the tsetse ﬂy: characterization of the post-mesocyclic stages in theforegut and proboscis. Parasitology 118, 469 –478
41 Tetley, L. et al. (1987) Onset of expression of the variant surface
glycoproteins of Trypanosoma bruce i in the tsetse ﬂy studied using
immunoelectron microscopy. J. Cell Sci. 87, 363 –372
42 Gibson, W. et al. (2008) The use of yellow ﬂuorescent hybrids to indicate
mating in Trypanosoma brucei .Parasite Vectors 1, 4
43 Jenni, L. et al. (1986) Hybrid formation between African trypanosomes
during cyclical transmission. Nature 322, 173 –175
44 Gibson, W. and Stevens, J. (1999) Genetic exchange in the
Trypanosomatidae. Adv. Parasitol.
43, 1 –46
45 MacLeod,A. et al. (2005) Allelicsegregation and independentassortment
inTrypanosoma brucei crosses: Proof that the genetic system is
Mendelian and involves meiosis. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 143, 12 –1946 Gibson, W. and Garside, L. (1990) Kinetoplast DNA mini-circles are
inherited from both parents in genetic hybrids of Trypanosoma brucei .
Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 42, 45 –54
47 Turner, C.M. et al. (1995) Trypanosoma brucei : inheritance of
kinetoplast DNA maxicircles in a genetic cross and their segregationduring vegetative growth. Exp. Parasitol. 80, 234 –241
48 Sakurai, T. et al. (2008) Identiﬁcation and molecular characterization
of a novel stage-speciﬁc surface protein of Trypanosoma congolense
epimastigotes. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 161, 1 –11
49 Urwyler, S. et al. (2007) A family of stage-speciﬁc alanine-rich proteins
on the surface of epimastigote forms of Trypanosoma brucei .Mol.
Microbiol. 63, 218 –228
50 Acosta-Serrano, A. et al. (2001) The surface coat of procyclic
Trypanosoma brucei : programmed expression and proteolytic
cleavage of procyclin in the tsetse ﬂy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
98, 1513 –1518
51 Poxleitner, M.K. et al. (2008) Evidence for karyogamy and exchange of
genetic material in the binucleate intestinal parasite Giardia
intestinalis .Science 319, 1530 –1533
52 Natesan, S.K. et al. (2007) Activation of endocytosis as an adaptation to
the mammalian host by trypanosomes. Eukaryot. Cell 6, 2029 –2037
53 Peacock, L. et al. (2005) Tetracycline induction of gene expression in
Trypanosoma brucei within the tsetse ﬂy vector. Mol. Biochem.
Parasitol. 140, 247 –249
54 Sherwin, T. and Gull, K. (1989) Visualization of detyrosination along
single microtubules reveals novel mechanisms of assembly duringcytoskeletal duplication in trypanosomes. Cell 57, 211 –221
55 Mimori-Kiyosue, Y. et al. (2000) The dynamic behaviour of the APC-
binding protein EB1 on the distal ends of microtubules. Curr. Biol. 10,
865–868
56 Ramesh, M.A. et al. (2005) A phylogenomic inventory of meiotic genes:
evidence for sex in Giardia and an early eukaryotic origin of meiosis.
Curr. Biol. 15, 185 –191
57 Liu, Y. et al. (2008) The conserved plant sterility gene HAP2 functions
after attachment of fusogenic membranes in Chlamydomonas and
Plasmodium gametes. Genes Dev. 22, 1051 –1068Review Trends in Parasitology Vol.25 No.11
524