SPRING 2000
ISSUE 139
RESOURCESRESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE RESEARCH THAT MAKES A DIFFERENCE
3GOINGS ON
Home Loan Program Designed to Combat Sprawl Could Lead to Higher Default Rate•
Reducing the Service Sector's Environmental Toll May Take New Incentives for Businesses
• Plan to Harness Solar Power with Satellites Faces Technical Difficulties • Tracking the Cost
of Complying with Environmental Regulations MI Environmental Citizenship to Support
Transboundary Pollution Reduction in the Danube • RFF Scholars Meet with Thai
Researchers and Officials to Discuss Public's Role in Environmental Decisionmaking
FEATURE
7 Unleashing the Clean Water ActThe Promise and Challenge of the TMDL Approach to Water Quality
11Jim Boyd
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency will issue final rules this
summer that will invigorate the largely dormant Total Maximum Daily
Load (TMDL) provisions of the Clean Water Act and have immediate
implications for improving water quality.
FEATURE
Greening the GDPIs It Desirable? Is It Feasible?Joel Darmstadtet
Environmental activists as well as a number of mainstream economists,
have voiced dismay about the limitations of the gross domestic product
(GDP) as a reliable measure of national economic performance and
thereby as a basis for policy decisions. The National Research Council's
new book on expanding the GDP to include the environment offers use-
ful insights into how to address this complex problem.
FEATURE
16 The Surge in Oil PricesAnatomy of a Non•CrisisJ.W. Anderson
This winter's price rise, which came less than a year after oil dropped to
its lowest price in a generation, underscores the inherent unpredictability
of the world oil market. But unlike previous hikes, which were triggered
by dramatic political or military events, this year's run-up was caused by
the most basic economic forces—a mismatch of supply and demand.
FROM THE PRESIDENT 2 • INSIDE RFF 20 • DEVELOPMENT 23FROM THE PRESIDENT
Paul R. PortneyTrade and the Environment
Last month—just days before hundreds of protestors were
arrested trying to disrupt the annual meetings of the World
Bank and International Monetary Fund—RFF and the Brook-
ings Institution held a media briefing on the topic of world
trade, the environment, and labor standards (see coverage
on page 20). My colleague Wally Oates and I presented our
view that while there are good reasons for concern about envi-
ronmental quality in developing countries, restricting global trade is exactly the
wrong way to tackle the problem. As has happened in the United States, Western
Europe and other developed economies, prosperity through expanded trade can
be the environment's best friend for the simple reason that as people's incomes
grow, their concern for improving the environment rises dramatically.
The feature articles in this issue of Resources illustrate how far the United States
has come in improving its environment, and provide a glimpse of its rising ambi-
tion to do even more. RFF Fellow Jim Boyd writes about the last major hurdle to
overcome in cleaning up our nation's waterways. Nearly 30 years after the Clean
Water Act was passed, most large industrial and municipal sources of water pol-
lution have been brought into check, and federal officials are now revisiting an
ambitious plan to curb contamination that comes from "nonpoint" sources such
as road and farm runoff. As Jim writes, this approach will alter the politics and eco-
nomics of water quality regulation, and if successful, it will have a major impact.
A second feature looks at how changes in environmental quality and our nat-
ural resource base might be accounted for differently in the nation's income accounts.
The so-called "Green GDP" concept described by Senior Fellow Joel Darmstadter
and our newest RFF Board Member, economist Bill Nordhaus, has been contro-
versial in Congress, but it may provide a more informative view of the relationship
between environmental and economic progress.
These issues are strikingly different from those that the United States faced as
recently as 30 years ago and those that developing countries face today The west-
ern world enjoys an affluence that allows it the luxury to set ambitious environmental
goals for itself, and to dedicate substantial resources to meeting them. Our pros-
perity brings with it an obligation to help other nations improve their standards of
living, and to show them that economic progress, fostered in part through expanded
trade, does not have to come at the expense of the environment.
Teu,11),v1-v\AA-?
Paul PortneyRESOURCESRESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036-1400
202-328-5000
FAX: 202-939-3460
E-MAIL: info@rff.org
WORLD WIDE WEB:
hftp.//www rff.org
OFFICERS
President, Paul R. Portney
Vice President -Finance and
Administration, Edward F. Hand
Vice President for Programs, Raymond J.
Kopp
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Darius W. Gaskins Jr., Chair
Catherine G. Abbott, Jodie T. Allen,
Norman L. Christensen Jr.,
James H. S. Cooper, John M. Deutch,
Anthony S. Earl, Mary A. Gade,
Robert E. Grady, F. Henry Habicht II,
Thomas C. Jorling, Kenneth L. Lay,
Lawrence U. Luchini, Jim Maddy,
Karl-Garan Maier, Frank L. Matthews,
William D. Nordhaus, Steven M. Percy,
Mark A. Pisano, Paul R. Portney,
Robert M. Solow, Joseph E. Stiglitz,
Edward L. Strohbehn Jr.,
Linda C. Taliaferro, Victoria J. Tschinkel
RESOURCES
Editor, Felicia Day
Published quarterly since 1959,
Resources (ISSN 0048-7376) contains
news of research and policy analysis
regarding natural resources and the
environment. The views offered are those
of the contributors and should not be
attributed to Resources for the Future, its
directors, or its officers. Articles may be
reproduced, providing credit is given
and a copy of the reproduced text is
sent to Resources.
Resources is sent to individuals and insti-
tutions without fee. Write or e-mail
Resources at RFF; or call 202-328-
5000. The publication is also available
at the RFF Web site.
® Printed on recycled paper with
20% post-consumer content.
Wig
2 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139
-MNGOINGS ON
Home Loan Program Designed to
Combat Sprawl Could Lead to
Higher Default Rate
A new mortgage program designed to com-
bat urban sprawl may actually lead to
higher rates of default on home loans,
according to a recent analysis by researchers
at Resources for the Future. The program,
known as the "location -efficient mortgage,"
promotes home buying close to cities or
mass transit by relaxing downpayment
requirements for buyers in these areas.
Location -efficient mortgages, a component
of the Clinton administration's Livable
Cities Initiative, are being pilot-tested in
Chicago, San Francisco, and other cities
through a $100 million initiative spear-
headed by Fannie Mae and others.
According to advocates of the program,
people who live in densely populated or
transit-rich areas incur lower transportation
costs, mainly because they own fewer cars
and drive their cars less. As a result, the
argument goes, they have more disposable
income and their downpayment require-
ments can be relaxed without increasing the
risk that they will default.
According to the RFF study, however,
the transportation "savings" people may
enjoy in these neighborhoods do not trans-
late into lower default risk. RFF Fellow
Allen Blackman and Senior Fellow Alan
Krupnick examined the incidence of
default for 8,000 loans made by the Fed-
eral Housing Administration in greater
Chicago between 1988 and 1992. They
concluded that people in the areas targeted
by the loan program are every bit as likely
to default as those in other areas, all other
factors being equal. This conclusion holds
for a number of different measures of loca-
tion efficiency, including greater housing
density, better access to mass transit, morepedestrian "friendliness," and an index of
these attributes used by loan providers. The
findings do not mean that there are no
transportation savings in these areas, the
authors say; rather, they simply show that
the savings are not sufficiently large to affect
the probability of default.
The implication of these findings is that
extending higher levels of credit to bor-
rowers in these areas through a large-scale,
location -efficient mortgage plan may actu-
ally raise default rates, causing increased
losses for mortgage institutions. These insti-
tutions may need to subsidize these loan
programs or modify them to reduce default
risk by, for example, requiring borrowers
to undergo financial counseling, an idea
currently under discussion. The added
costs of subsidies would have to be bal-
anced against any benefits the program
might bring, such as controlling sprawl.
RFF's research was funded under a
cooperative agreement with the U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency. The paper,
Location Efficiency and Mortgage Default, can
be downloaded at www.l.org/disc_papers/
PDF Jiles/9949revpdf
Reducing the Service Sector's
Environmental Toll May Take
New Incentives for Businesses
The service sector, which now accounts for
three-quarters of the nation's employment
and Gross Domestic Product, has a major
influence on environmental quality in the
United States, according to a new RFF study
led by Terry Davies, director of the Center
for Risk Management. As the nation con-
tinues to evolve into a post-industrial
economy, businesses and regulators should
explore ways to improve the environmen-
tal practices of firms in the service sector,
which can influence the behavior of theirsuppliers "upstream" and consumers
"downstream." The three-part study paints
the most complete picture yet of how the
health care, foodservice, and tourism
industries affect the environment.
Minimizing the environmental impacts
of the service sector will require a different
regulatory approach from that applied to
manufacturing, mining, or agriculture, the
study shows. Rather than cranking out new
regulations, federal and local officials
should instead focus on devising incentives
for service businesses to adopt environ-
ment-friendly behaviors, ranging from
reducing energy use in fast-food chains to
educating tourists about protecting sensi-
tive habitats, the reports say. For example:
Health care leaders and government
regulators should continue to encourage
the use of substitute materials for mercury,
for example in dental fillings. At the same
time, they should accelerate the transition
away from on-site assembly of all medical
products using both mercury and radioac-
tive materials in favor of central, off-site
locations, where the waste that is generated
can be better handled.
The health care industry should also be
encouraged to find ways to reduce the cur-
rent stream of solid medical waste, which
has grown in recent years as hospitals have
sought to reduce the risk of hospital -
acquired infections.
The foodsenice and food retail indus-
tries should attempt to leverage the
behavior of suppliers and consumers by
encouraging producers, wholesalers and
distributors to reduce packaging, use recy-
cled materials, and reduce pesticide use.
Finns also can offer more environment -
friendly choices to consumers, thus helping
raise consumer awareness.
Businesses and regulators are most
likely to reduce the harmful environmen-
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 13 RESOURCES 3GOINGS ON
tal effects of tourism by launching educa-
tional efforts that are tailored for specific
audiences and designed to complement
existing regulations. For example, officials
could combine a prohibition against
anchoring a sightseeing boat in a sensitive
marine ecosystem with an explanation of
the potential damage a boat can do to that
ecosystem.
Hotels can offer guests the choice of
having their linens cleaned less frequently,
and use this as an opportunity to explain
the environmental benefits of such a pro-
gram. Educational approaches also could
be targeted at the industry by emphasizing
the cost savings and marketing benefits of
"green" tourism, the report says.
All three reports—Environmental Impli-
cations of the Tourism Industry,  Environmental
Implications of the Health Care Service Sec-
tor, and Environmental Implications of the
Foodservice and Food Retail Industries—can
be downloaded at http://www.rff.org/
disc_papers/2000.htm. The study was
funded by the U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency. M
Plan to Harness Solar Power
with Satellites Faces Technical
Difficulties
For more than 30 years scientists have wres-
tled with an intriguing possibility—could
orbiting satellites be used to harness solar
energy for generating electricity on earth?
Advocates have speculated that satellite
solar power (SSP) could someday take its
place among other renewable energy
sources as an alternative to fossil fuels.
A new REF report concludes that this
technology is not likely to become a viable
energy source in the next 20 years. The
RFF study, led by Senior Fellow Molly
Macauley, projects that future demand forsatellite solar energy is unlikely to be
enough to justify the considerable costs
involved in developing it. By 2020, when
many experts believe SSP could be techni-
cally feasible, conventional electricity
generation is likely to be sufficient in terms
of cost, supply, and mitigated environ-
mental impacts.
Under the scenario envisioned by SSP
proponents, satellites would be launched
to gather solar energy and send the energy
back to earth, where a receiving antenna
on the ground would convert it to a form
usable by electric utility grids. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) actively pursued this idea for nearly
a decade before it halted this work in the
early 1980s because of its likely high costs
and technical difficulty The agency recently
resurrected the idea, however, after inde-
pendent reports and a 1997 NASA-
sponsored study reached a more favorable
conclusion about the potential of satellite
solar power to become part of the world's
energy portfolio.Because the technology needed to
develop SSP is still in its early stages, it is
difficult to assess how much it will ulti-
mately cost to develop, and thus how
competitive it may be compared to other
forms of energy, the REF study says. For
SSP to be competitive, significant reduc-
tions would be needed in the costs of
launching the satellites into space and
other key technologies.
Additionally, demand for SSP may be
low among foreign countries unless they
share in control of the system. At the same
time, some in the public continue to worry
about the possible health effects of electric
and magnetic fields, a fact that may further
weaken SSP's public support.
The report encourages the federal gov-
ernment to continue developing new
technologies that would lower the costs of
SSP—particularly focusing on technolo-
gies that may be transferable to other
projects. Over the course of its study, RFF's
economic researchers communicated fre-
quently with NASAs technical engineers.
4 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139GOINGS ON
If plans to develop SSP move forward, such
collaborations between technical design
researchers and those conducting eco-
nomic and market analyses should
continue, the report says, and the energy
industry should be invited to participate in
these discussions as well.
Given the large uncertainty about
demand and costs, it would be premature
for the government to make more serious
financial commitments to satellite power,
such as by guaranteeing loans or providing
tax incentives or other financial assistance
to private companies to develop it, the
report says.
While its economic viability for gener-
ating power on earth may be limited,
satellite space power may prove useful for
powering systems based in space, the Inter-
national Space Station, other large orbiting
platforms, lunar bases, or other activities to
explore and develop space. REF will release
a follow-up report this summer that
assesses the costs and benefits of these other
nonterrestrial applications.
The study, Can Power from Space Com-
pete: The Future of Electricity Markets and the
Competitive Challenge to Satellite Solar Power,
was funded by NASA. It appears on the REF
Web site at http://www. /ff. org.
Tracking the Cost of Complying
with Environmental Regulations
For more than 20 years, the U.S. Census
Bureau tracked the cost of complying with
environmental regulations through its Pol-
lution Abatement Costs and Expenditures
(PACE) survey. Begun in 1972, the PACE
survey was suspended in 1995 for budget
reasons, but the Census Bureau is planning
to reinstate it again this spring.
At the request of the U.S. Environmen-
tal Protection Agency (EPA)—a partial[under of the PACE survey—REF held a
workshop in March to explore ways that
the survey can be improved. The reap-
praisal comes at a critical time. Since the
survey was first designed in the early 1970s,
firms have embarked on increasingly ambi-
tious ways of complying with regulations,
the costs of which are typically hard to
measure. Workshop participants, who
included government officials, academics,
and business representatives, discussed a
host of issues reflective of this more expan-
sive view toward pollution prevention.
Some of the questions that were addressed
concerned: which types of abatement
actions should be measured, which sectors
of the economy should participate in the
survey, and whether investments in energy
efficiency or other greenhouse gas mitiga-
tion should be tracked. Survey design
factors—such as how to value abatement
costs associated with changes in process or
design, and how to improve the quality of
the survey responses—were also consid-
ered. Insights gained at the workshop will
be described in a report to EPA, due to be
completed this summer. 9
Environmental Citizenship to
Support Transboundary Pollution
Reduction in the Danube
REF recently began work on a pilot proj-
ect to develop an institutional framework
for providing public access to environ-
mental information and developing public
participation procedures in Hungary and
Slovenia. REF'S partners in this effort are
New York University (NYU) School of Law
and the Regional Environmental Center for
Central and Eastern Europe (REC). The
project is designed to assist international
efforts to reduce transboundary pollution
from the discharge of nutrients and toxicsinto the Danube River. It is funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF), with
funds administered by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).
RFF, NYU, and the REC will work with
officials from the Environment Ministries
of Hungary and Slovenia and nongovern-
mental environmental law organizations
from both countries. Hungary and Slove-
nia are among the "fast-track" countries
emerging from 50 years under the Soviet
system.
Both countries have made strong, pub-
lic commitments to developing open
government provisions in their adminis-
tration of environmental protection.
However, they are still in the process of
developing experience to support these
changes. The pilot project will help build
capacity in these two countries to establish
the legal, institutional, social, and practical
infrastructure for public access to environ-
mental information and also for informed,
meaningful public participation in pro-
tecting the Danube.
In addition to supporting the efforts of
Hungarian and Slovenian environmental
experts, the project will also demonstrate
how open government measures can help
other Danube countries to achieve
region-wide commitments to improve
deteriorating water quality and provide
greater public access to environmental
information in each of their countries.
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 5GOINGS ON
RFF Scholars Meet with Thai
Researchers and Officials to
Discuss Public's Role in
Environmental Decisionmaking
Three RFF scholars—Ruth Greenspan Bell.
Thomas Beierle, and Ramanan Laxmi-
narayan—recently met with Thai researchers
and officials to explore the evolving role for
citizens in environmental decisionmaking.
The setting was a workshop, held March
18-19, in Bangkok, Thailand. The work-
shop, entitled "Good Governance, Public
Participation and the Decision -Making
Process for Environmental Protection,"
was attended by 150 Thai government
officials, representatives from nongovern-
mental organizations and industry, and
academics.
The motivation for the workshop was
Thailand's 1997 constitution, which
expanded the legal rights of citizens to
become involved in government decision -making. Many of Thailand's environmen-
tal procedures are being reexamined to
incorporate greater public involvement.
The Thai government has not yet decided
how possible new practices will be institu-
tionalized in government agencies.
Workshop participants were particularly
interested in the role of public hearings in
the overall environmental impact assess-
ment process, especially in light of ongoing
controversy in Thailand over large-scale
industrial and natural resource projects.
Bell, director of the RFF program on
International Institutional Development
and Environmental Assistance, outlined the
U.S. perspective on public participation
and explained the role of the courts and the
public in environmental impact assessment
under the United States' National Envi-
ronmental Policy Act. Beierle and
Laximinaryan described the "lessons
learned" from case studies of public par-
ticipation in controversial environmentaldecisions in the United States, Canada, and
India. In turn, the Thai researchers
described public participation in Thailand
from the point of view of the country's
unique legal, political, and cultural con-
text. At the conclusion of the workshop,
RFF researchers and their Thai colleagues
began formulating ideas for continued col-
laborative research.
The workshop was jointly sponsored by
RFF and the Institute for Social and Eco-
nomic Policy (ISEP), an independent
research organization in Bangkok. RFF's
partner in organizing the workshop was
1SEP's Suthawan Sathirathai, who has
worked previously with RFF researchers
David Simpson and Roger Sedjo. Addi-
tional support for the workshops came
from the United States-Asia Environmen-
tal Partnership, the Canadian International
Development Agency, and the Thailand
Research Fund. M
AIIPIP",„„izn afrrOnehtitohnicatfereCniZtraittfr ra-rr tivzia•wwwiposit..11•1•12,1111114
ON GOOD GOVERNA NCEPUBLIC PA RTICIPATIalmyTHEDECISIONMAKING
PPOCESS rn `rNTAL PROTECTION
14,fli ILLSIZOTIgylCHISEP)
— 4.
EMMV11 RES
Workshop speakers included: Dr Vanchai Vatanasapt, Khon Kaen University, Prof. Dr Tongroj Onchan, Thailand Environment Institute, and RFF's
Ruth Greenspan Bell and Ramanan Laxminarayan
6 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139Unleashing the Clean Water ActThe Promise and Challenge of the
TMDL Approach to Water Quality
Jim Boyd
Nowhere are the promise and challenge of holistic policymaking better
illustrated than in changing approaches to water quality regulation. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency will soon issue final rules that will invigorate
the largely dormant Total Maximum Daily Load provisions of the Clean Water
Act. Over the next iwo decades, these rules will put into motion significant,
state-led changes in the regulation of pollutant sources.
The environmental movement's greatest intellectual tri-
umph is the now-common understanding that
environmental conditions are the end-product of com-
plex interactions between a variety of physical, biological,
and social systems. Environmental policy itself is grow-
ing toward a more holistic, and complex, approach to
the diagnosis and resolution of environmental problems;
however, this growth will not come without difficulty.
Nowhere are the promise and challenge of holistic pol-
icymaking better illustrated than in changing approaches
to water quality regulation. Last August, the U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed new rules
to invigorate the largely dormant Total Maximum Daily
Load (TMDL) provisions of the Clean Water Act (CWA).
The final rule, due this summer, will have immediate
implications for water quality monitoring and analysis.
Over the next two decades, the rules will put in
motion significant, state-led changes in the regulation of
pollutant sources. Instead of the technology -based, end-
of-pipe approach to controlling point sources that has
characterized water quality enforcement to date, theTMDL program promises an "ambient" approach to water
monitoring and standards. Rather than focus on releases
from known sources of pollution, regulations will increas-
ingly address the overall quality of waterbodies. In a
nutshell, the TMDL approach is to monitor lake, river,
and estuarine water quality; identify the nature and loca-
tion of polluted waters; trace pollutants to their sources;
and impose controls adequate to guarantee the health of
various waterbodies.
Implicit in the TMDL approach is a focus on the
causes and effects of pollution throughout a watershed.
More explicitly, the TMDL program will seek the identi-
fication of any and all sources of pollution. It also will
focus on what we all ultimately care about the most—
the cleanliness of our waterbodies. It all sounds sensible
and straightforward, but in fact it is a radical, untried
departure from current practice.
CWA regulation over the last 25 years has yielded sig-
nificant water quality improvements. Nevertheless, the
current approach is somewhat limited due to its focus
on point sources, the most easily identifiable and recti-
..•••MINSPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 7CHESAPEAKE BAY FOUNDATION JIM BOYD
fiable pollution sources. Point sources are typically large facto-
ries or municipal sewage treatment plants. The fact that they
were responsible for a significant fraction of water quality prob-
lems in the past and were easy to identify justified this narrow
approach. But the low-hanging fruit of low-cost, high-volume
point source controls has been harvested. Today, significant
water quality improvement requires the expansion of controls
to nonpoint sources.
While industrial and municipal point sources will no doubt
continue to be vivid symbols of the nation's water pollution prob-
lems, this image is increasingly inappropriate. Water pollution
from agricultural, commercial, and urban sources—called non-
point pollution— while harder to caricature, should be the focus
of our dissatisfaction. Hundreds of thousands of river miles and
millions of lake acres remain impaired on account of it. Because
nonpoint sources are a primary cause of those impairments,
TMDLs will change the politics, economics, and implementa-
tion of water quality regulation. Along the way, water quality
will increasingly be seen as interdependent with other spheres
of concern, notably air quality and land use programs. More-
over, the tools required to understand the fate of pollutants,
assign responsibility, and monitor compliance within water-
sheds will tax regulators' technical and financial resources. Such
is the price of holistic policymaking.
The Nonpoint Source Challenge
Water quality improvements over the last 25 years have resulted
primarily from point source controls. Future improvements
must come principally from nonpoint source controls. Today,
agricultural runoff, in the form of pesticides, fertilizer, and ani-
mal wastes, is the single largest contributor to the impairmentof rivers and lakes. Logging and construction activities, many
of them on federal lands, are a significant source of sediment
contamination, as runoff carries fine-grained soils from roads
and construction sites into lakes and streams.
In urban and suburban areas, watershed degradation is
closely tied to increased population density and residential and
commercial development. In such areas, the relatively imper-
meable nature of the groundcover leads to rapid, unfiltered
runoff to rivers, lakes and oceans from roadways and parking
lots, chemically treated lawns, and commercial establishments.
Increased attention is also being given to atmospheric deposi-
tion, where pollutants from airborne dust and industrial and
commercial air emissions are absorbed by surface waters or pre-
cipitated via rainfall.
One of the reasons why nonpoint sources are such a signif-
icant problem is that they present serious implementation,
monitoring, and enforcement challenges. Nevertheless, the water
quality problems they cause can no longer be ignored. In this
context, it is not surprising that political and legal pressures are
being applied to the EPA, and in turn to the states, to make some-
thing of the regulatory potential contained in the CWA's TMDL
provisions.
The Changing Politics of Water Quality
The seeds of this shift in regulatory emphasis have been in place
since the CWAs passage in 1972. The act contains provisions
that call for enforcement to be driven by ambient water quality
rather than end-of-pipe controls and for states to identify waters
for which the point source controls elsewhere in the act "are not
stringent enough to implement any water quality standard appli-
cable to such waters." States must prioritize any waters so
identified, based on analysis of use and severity of degradation,
and establish total maximum daily pollutant loads sufficient to
bring the waters into compliance.
During the first two decades of CWA enforcement, the states
as well as the federal government largely ignored the TMDL pro-
visions. But the failure of most states to attain water quality goals
and the federal government's desire to bring more sources into
the regulated sphere has led to a reexamination of latent enforce-
ment power in the CWA. The TMDL provisions are important
because they require statewide assessments and public docu-
mentation of water quality problems, and they appear, at least
in principle, to imply that states must allocate pollutant load
reductions to sources not currently covered by load restrictions.
8 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139UNLEASHING THE CLEAN WATER ACT
Since the bulk of current impairment is caused by nonpoint
sources, any state seeking further load reductions (at least on a
cost-benefit basis) will be led directly to nonpoint sources. In
this way, the shift to ambient monitoring and standards almost
necessarily leads to a greater emphasis on nonpoint sources.
EPA's authority to implement the new TMDL rules is being
challenged by a variety of agricultural interests on the grounds
that authorizing legislation is required, given ambiguities in the
CWA. The agency's opponents argue that the CWA covers only
waters impaired by point sources, thus leaving EPA without
authority to promulgate such rules. The agency contends that
the CWA provides it with ample authority to step in and issue
nonpoint controls if there is evidence of ongoing impairments
and inadequate state responses to them. These issues must be
resolved in the coming years. The scope of federal authority will
be challenged, as will state efforts to assign responsibility for load
reductions under their own statutes. (In fact, the legal scrum is
already well underway. A recent RFF report, "The New Face of
the Clean Water Act: A Critical Review of the EPA's Proposed
TMDL Rules," explores these issues in more detail.) But despite
bumps in the road, movement toward a system of regulation
that addresses nonpoint sources and that views water quality as
a watershedwide issue is inevitable.
Any enforcement of the CWA's TMDL provisions will alter
the politics of load reduction. The need to meet in situ water
quality standards sets up a state-by-state confrontation between
well-organized industrial interests (which can claim to have
already paid their pollution control dues) and organized agri-
cultural, commercial forestry, and municipal interests who
resist the "expansion" of CWA-driven requirements to their
hard-to-solve nonpoint problems. Absent nonpoint controls,
point sources can reasonably expect to be held responsible for
load reductions on TMDL-impaired waterbodies. This sce-
nario is obviously of great concern to current point source
permit holders.
Technical Hurdles Posed by Watershed -Level
Regulation
A striking leature of this political and legislative history is that
we have been down this road before. Statutory approaches that
predate the CWA, such as the Water Quality Act of 1965, also
called for ambient water quality standards and state-driven
implementation plans (two fundamental features of the TMDL
approach). The failure of these earlier approaches to water qual-ity regulation is a cautionary tale. Water quality-driven standards
and controls present a variety of daunting challenges. Looking
to the future, these challenges loom large.
The first step in the TMDL process is the listing of a water-
body as impaired. Impairment is established in reference to
criteria set by the states; the criteria describe the standards, data
to be used, and relevant guidelines necessary to ensure the qual-
ity of data analysis. These monitoring, classification, and
notification requirements are the first administrative and tech-
nical challenge for states. While this is the least taxing of the
exercises set in motion by the TMDL process, it is worth noting
that many states have had difficulty in meeting even these pre-
liminary requirements.
With knowledge of impairments, states must put forward
defensible plans for source reductions to bring the affected water-
body into attainment. This kind of exercise is fraught with
technical difficulties. Analysis of loadings and the effect of load
reductions requires some form of watershedwide modeling that
captures transport processes (such as infiltration and runoff),
groundwater and surface water interactions, pollutant accumu-
lation and decay, and in-stream mixing. In the CACP of nonpoint
source loads, the science is relatively undeveloped due to the
complexity of the interacting systems involved. Knowledge of
the relationship between control practices and loadings is par-
ticularly poor.
Because of the wide range of pollutant sources, pathways,
and factors that affect loadings, source contributions will rarely
if ever be known with certainty. Instead, the regulator must rely
on models that attempt to capture the factors that affect the trans-
port, deposition, and ultimate fate of pollutants in the waterbody
Models will also be required to predict how changes in land use
brought on by economic growth will add to future loadings.
The modeling techniques and data required for TMDL
implementation will contribute significantly to the costs of
implementation. Some simplicity and cost savings will undoubt-
edly be possible as states become more practiced in TMDL
development (and as more resources are devoted to the devel-
opment of data and models for use in this kind of program.)
However, the degree to which data sources and modeling tech-
niques can be standardized is limited. Each listed water segment
is, in some sense, unique because of its hydrology, transport path-
ways, pollutant sources, and so forth. TMDL development will
invariably involve site-specific analysis.
A lack of scientific certainty will not by itself legally hobble
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 9JIM BOYD
TMDL plans, since certainty is not a prerequisite for program
implementation. Uncertainty does place a premium, however,
on administrative procedures that provide the greatest possible
level of scientific credibility to standards, models, and data col-
lection. Pollutant sources, unhappy with their designation, will
undoubtedly seek relief from TMDL controls by challenging a
state's modeling tools, water quality criteria, and data collection
procedures. Accordingly, the technical details of state TMDL pro-
grams should be subject to ongoing notice and comment
procedures and evaluation by expert panels. This is likely to be
a source of both significant up-front and long-run program costs.
Credibility, transparency, and enforceability are particularly para-
mount if flexible environmental controls, such as effluent trading,
are to be realistically contemplated.
The Scope of Interactions
The TMDL program's ambitions are all the more notable when
their interactions with other areas of environmental law and reg-
ulation are considered. Consider the potential impact of TMDLs
on air quality regulation. Air deposition is a major source of water
pollution; a prime example is nitrogen oxides deposition to the
Chesapeake Bay. Air deposition links water quality in one state
with air emissions in another. While the implications of this link-
age have not been fully contemplated, it does create the distinct
possibility of jurisdictional conflict both across state borders
and within EPA program offices. (See Resources 137, "A Dilemma
Downwind" for more on the inter-jurisdictional implications of
clean air policy)In addition, the TMDL rules will increasingly highlight the
artificial distinction between water quality and quantity issues,
particularly in the West. Water quantity decisions, which are
controlled primarily by state law, often have a direct impact on
water quality: changes in stream flow affect the transport of pol-
lutants; the amount of water taken or returned to a waterbody
may significantly affect the dilution of pollutants; and water
supply often determines the suitability of a waterbody as habi-
tat for fish or other species. Because of these interactions, water
quantity decisions (relating to irrigation, damming, reservoir
management, basin-to-basin trades, and the like) may affect a
water's TMDL status. Accordingly, TMDLs will in some rases con-
strain water transfers involving impaired waterbodies.
Despite the challenges it presents, the TMDL approach clearly
demonstrates movement toward a welcome, mature phase of
water quality regulation. The key feature of EPA's proposed
TMDL rules is that they are motivated by, and address, water
quality issues created by the widest range of sources. The holis-
tic, watershed -level analysis required by the TMDL process will
inevitably identify a larger sphere of often-unregulated discharge
sources. For these reasons alone, the TMDL program is likely to
promote significant, desirable changes in the implementation
of water quality regulation. M
Jim Boyd is a fellow in RFF's Energy and Natural Resources Division.A
10 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139Greening the GDPIs It Desirable? Is It Feasible?
Joel Darmstadter
Eight years ago, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce started exploring the issues involved in adjusting the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) to include activities associated with the environment
and natural resources. Congress subsequently suspended BEA's work, pending
an independent review by the National Research Council's (NRC) Committee
on National Statistics. That process is now complete and the committee's find-
ings are presented in a new book, Nature's Numbers: Expanding the National
Economic Accounts to Include the Environment.
RFF Senior Fellow Joel Darmstadter offers his assessment of the committee's
work and the broader historical issues associated with measuring the impact of
environmental and natural resource activities. Separately, Yale economist
William Nordhaus, who chaired the NRC Committee on National Statistics,
discusses the report's implications.
I n recent years, environmental activists, as well as a
number of mainstream economists, have voiced dis-
may about the limitations of the gross domestic product
(GDP) and related social-accounting aggregates as reli-
able measures of national economic performance and
thereby as a legitimate basis for important policy deci-
sions. This criticism has focused in particular on the
extent to which measured GDP fails to reflect two impor-
tant phenomena: the depletion of natural resources as
well as damage to the ambient environment.
Why, critics ask, do we make allowances in our
national accounts for the depreciation of structures and
industrial equipment but not for the depletion of petro-leum lifted from reservoirs? Why include damage to and
losses from physical capital but not for the deterioration
of an urban airshed? Hence, the call for an adjusted.
"green" GDP—or more precisely, NNP (net national prod-
uct)—that would rectify these measurement weaknesses.
It is worth noting, however, that, being primarily a meas-
ure of the country's output of marketed goods and
services, GDP has long been recognized to have certain—
virtually unavoidable—flaws. GDP is no guarantor of
human happiness or, by itself, an entirely reliable key to
human welfare. For example, the fact that two countries
with comparable levels of per capita GDP can have strik-
ingly different degrees of inequality raises profound
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 13 RESOURCES 11JOEL DARMSTADTER
A Terminological Clarification
The issue of incorporating green accounts in the nation's
national -income -and-product accounts (NIPA) can be clar-
ified by reference to a few basic relationships. More than
60 years ago, Prof. John Hicks, who later won the Nobel
prize in economics, pointed out that a rising level of gross
national product (GNP) (the difference between GNP and
GDP need not detain us here) does not ensure that new
investment in a country's private and public infrastructure
compensates for the depreciation of such physical capi-
tal. In other words, GNP or GDP could continue growing
(at least for a while) even while the physical capital, on
which future prosperity depended, was wearing out.
Hence, a precondition for at least maintaining prevailing
levels of economic activity was constancy in the value of
net national product (NNP), which equals gross output
minus depreciation or, as NIPA labels it, "capital con-
sumption allowances."
Critics of conventional NIPA measurement practices
recognize the constant NNP condition as a necessary, but
insufficient, basis for sustained levels of economic activ-
ity since it fails to account for changes in the stock of
environmental and natural resource assets. It is at this
point where the seemingly dry question of NIPA meas-
urement conventions links up with the deeper, more
emotionally charged issue of society's prospects for a sus-
tainable future.
ethical issues regarding human well-being. It is also the case that
certain nonmarket activities, such as household work by fam-
ily members or crops grown and consumed on farms, understate
national output. (Attempts to "impute" market values to some
of these activities have progressed both here and abroad.) And
when persons voluntarily opt for leisure in preference to paid
work, they most likely enjoy increased welfare while contributing
to diminished market output.
The economics profession has hardly shrugged off such vex-
ing conceptual and measurement problems. A landmark 1973
paper by Yale economists William Nordhaus and James Tobin
sought to compare recorded output with a range of indicators
designed to capture trends reflecting assumed changes in humanwelfare. Their preferred measure of economic welfare (MEW)
per capita showed a long-term growth rate markedly below that
of per capita NNP. At the same time, they observed that "progress
indicated by conventional national accounts is not just a myth
that evaporates when a welfare-oriented measure is substituted."
And that judgement, I believe, remains valid today; one cannot
lightly dismiss the extent to which existing national account
aggregates, with all their defects, correlate well with a number
of important indicators reflecting quality of life.
In spite of this long-standing awareness of such measure-
ment issues, and attempts to grapple with them here and
internationally, it is fair to say that the somewhat unique dilemma
posed by use of natural resources and environmental "services"
is of much more recent origin—at least with respect to quan-
tification. The most ambitious effort to address these issues was
a proposed multiyear initiative by the U.S. Department of Com-
merce's Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which was launched
with an initial, highly tentative set of findings (limited to selected
mineral commodities) issued in 1994.
For reasons that have never been made entirely clear, this effort
became politically unwelcome in Congress, which quickly
enjoined BEA from pursuing its long-range plan, pending an inde-
pendent acsessment of the possibilities and problems associated
with such social accounting reforms. (See Joy E. Hecht, "Envi-
ronmental Accounting: Where Are We Now, Where Are We
Heading," Resources 135, Spring 1999.) A distinguished NRC
panel, chaired by Nordhaus and entrusted with that assessment
task, has now produced the result of its deliberations, Nature's
Numbers: Expanding the National Economic Accounts to Include the
Environment (National Academy of Sciences Press, 1999).
How significant is the NRC report as an analysis of, and brief
for, a green GDP and related improvements in the nation's
national -income -and-product account (NIPA) system? (See the
box on this page for a description of basic GDP terminology)
In my judgment, the volume deserves to be viewed as an out-
standing contribution to this complex subject, one that should
give combatants in this frequently passionate debate pause for
some thoughtful reflection.
While evaluation of BEAs accounting explorations constitutes
a significant part of the panel's report, Nature's Numbers also pro-
vides an up-to-date review of both the conceptual underpinnings
of resource and environmental accounts as well as the method-
ological and empirical challenges in their estimation.
The three principal elements of environmental and resource1
12 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139GREENING THE GDP
accounts are nonrenewable assets, renewables, and environ-
mental quality Of these, it is the first whose estimation would
appear to be the most tractable and whose exclusion from con-
ventional accounting systems is least logical and excusable. After
all, numerous activities involving subsoil mineral assets are
already reflected in market transactions. For example, revenues
from crude oil production, and investment in and depreciation
of tangible physical assets, like drilling rigs and gathering lines,
are part of the existing account structure. Why not, therefore,
include the depletion of (or accretion to) the oil in the ground,
the availability of which may be vital to sustaining the economic
well-being of future generations?
Challenge of Choosing Appropriate Tools
As the NRC report observes, however, valuing changes in sub-
soil assets presents formidable challenges, even though it is a lot
less complicated than the diminution of national wealth attrib-
utable to, say, the value of impaired visibility due to power-plant
emissions. The major problem relates to the array of choices
regarding the appropriate price to apply to the additions to, sub-
tractions from, or revaluation of resources in the ground. Another
challenge has to do with the choice of quantities by which such
prices are multiplied. After all, while there may be a consensus
as to the 10- or 20-year "on-the-shelf' inventory of proved oil
or gas reserves, there may be much disagreement and uncer-
tainty as to the extent of resources beyond proved reserves and
the technological conditions under which assets shift from one
to the other category.
No wonder that when it comes to green accounting, ranges
of possible values—rather than the point estimates one finds in
the conventional GDP accounts—are an inherent necessity in
resource and environmental accounts. Thus, the report takes note
of BEAs estimate of the value of subsoil mineral additions in 1987;
these vary between 0.4% and 1.4% of that year's GDP
Undoubtedly, the range of estimates designed to measure the
value of changes in environmental quality would be wider still.
Again, in the case of reduced visibility, measurement techniques
that attempt to express such change in terms of imputed mar-
ket values—for example, by using contingent valuation, hedonic
pricing, and travel-cost methodologies—are now much more
robust than several decades ago. They are far from universally
accepted, however, and surely warrant emphatic caveats as one
contemplates incorporating the estimates in the standard NIPA
system. (See the box on this page regarding GDP treatment ofPollution Control Expenditures and GDP
A tangential issue in the green accounting debate has to
do with those environmental control or improvement
expenditures, such as utility scrubbers, that do enter the
GDP accounts, and constitute about 2% of the GDP It is
legitimate to question whether or not such investments
adequately offset the value of the damage they are meant
to avert. To the extent that they do not, conventionally
measured net national product (NNP) would exceed a
"true" estimate, provided one can ascribe a marketlike
equivalent to such damage. Some people may judge such
damage to be beyond quantitative reckoning, believing
their welfare to have been "incalculably" diminished. But
as pointed out earlier in this essay, GDP whether con-
ventionally measured or subject to a green adjustment,
cannot purport to reflect all aspects of changes in human
welfare.
A largely irrelevant issue that sometimes arises in dis-
cussions of GDP and its shortcomings is a challenge to the
inclusion of items like pollution -abatement spending in
the first place. The challenge rests on the contention that,
like other so-called -defensive" expenditures, such as den-
tal checkups and oil changes, it does not add to material
well-being but merely keeps it from getting worse. If some
ombudsman of people's utility functions could establish
the boundary between defensive and nondefensive out-
lays, perhaps this conundrum could be resolved. But don't
hold your breath!
pollution control expenditures.) Moreover, there is bound to be
an irreducible set of negative environmental and social impacts
that, while clearly adverse to social welfare, is not amenable to
the dollar metric used to measure economic activity.
To the NRC committee, these problems are neither surpris-
ing nor a reason to throw in the towel on further development
of resource and environmental accounting systems. On the con-
trary, the panel appears wholeheartedly to support the benefits
to society of efforts to gauge the extent—however approxi-
mate—to which conventionally measured GDP is either a
serviceable or misleading proxy of overall economic and envi-
ronmental health.
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 13JOEL DARMSTADTER
At the same time, the NRC committee made clear its view
that this more rounded picture should take the form of periodic
"satellite" accounts rather than being commingled with the GDP
accounts, as presently calculated. Especially for shorter-term
policy guidance, the existing GDP account structure must remain
the system of choice. Perhaps in time, some components of
resource and environmental accounts can be so integrated, just
as—following a period of lengthy analysis and vetting—price
indices have been modified to reflect emerging trends and new
Insights into technological change and new product develop-
ment. But even under the best of circumstances, it is unrealistic
to suppose that the existing annual time-series measures of eco-
nomic performance can ever be augmented to track resource
and environmental trends with the same frequency. The NRC
committee states its views quite unambiguously:
"[E]xtending the [NIPA accounts] to include assets and pro-
duction activities associated with natural resources and the
environment is an important goal. Environmental and natural
resource accounts would provide useful data on resource trendsand help governments, businesses, and individuals better plan
their economic activities and investments. The rationale for aug-
mented accounts is solidly grounded in mainstream economic
analysis ... [however,] environmental accounts must not come
at the expense of maintaining and improving the current core
national accounts, which are a precious national asset."
Perhaps the best way to encapsulate the value of the NRC
study is to say that, for some time to come, the conceptual and
philosophical aspects of accounting reforms have been firmly
laid down and are not likely to be significantly enhanced by fur-
ther scholarly discourse. The direction should now shift toward
quantification (where feasible) and to Congress, that body's
charge for an even-handed exploration of the difficult issues at
hand having been conscientiously and admirably met.
Joel Darmstadter is a senior fellow in RFF's Energy and Natural Resources Division. He thanks
Winston Harrington for helpful comments on an earlier version of this article.
14 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139GREENING THE GDP
Future Directions for Environmental and Augmented National Accounts
William D. Nordhaus
The national income and product accounts (NIPA) are the most important measures of overall economic activity for a nation. Nevertheless,
there have been ongoing concerns that the accounts are incomplete and misleading because they omit nonmarket activity such as unpaid
work, the value of leisure time, and most investment in human capital. Most recently attention has focused on extending the accounts to
include natural resources and the environment.
Intensive work on environmental accounting began in the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department of Commerce in
1992. BEA published the first official U. S. environmental accounts, known as the Integrated Environmental and Economic Satellite Accounts,
in 1994. Shortly thereafter, for reasons that were never clear, Congress directed the Commerce Department to suspend further work in this
area and to obtain an external review of environmental accounting. A National Research Council committee was charged with examining the
objectivity and application of integrated environmental and economic accounting. That report, Nature's Numbers, was published last summer
by the National Academy of Sciences.
Over the last quarter century we have become increasingly aware of the interactions between human societies and the natural environ-
ment in which they thrive and upon which they depend. Scholars at Resources for the Future and other organizations have made great
contributions to our understanding about resource scarcity local and national environmental degradation, and global environmental issues.
The combination of increased awareness of the environment and recognition of the primitive state of much of the nation's environmental
data has led to a widespread desire to supplement U.S. national economic accounts to include the services of natural resources and the envi-
ronment. The idea of including environmental assets and services in the national economic accounts is part of a larger movement to develop
broader social and environmental indicators. This movement reflects the reality that economic and social welfare does not stop at the mar-
ket's border, but extends to many nonmarket activities.
The traditional national accounts primarily include the final output of marketed goods and services—namely goods and services that are
bought and sold in market transactions. Notwithstanding the importance of the traditional accounts, it has long been recognized that limiting
them to market transactions distorts the accounts as a measure of economic activity and well-being. There is a vast and rapidly evolving array
of near-market goods and services—ones that are similar to marketed goods but that are omitted from traditional accounts. This boundary dis-
torts our measures of economic activity Services provided by nannies are reckoned as pan of the gross domestic product, while the services of
mommies and daddies are not; the value of swimming in a commercial swimming pool is captured by GDP while the value of swimming in
the Atlantic Ocean is not.
Augmented national economic accounts are designed to provide better measures of genuine national output—what consumers currently
enjoy in the way of goods and services, and the accumulation of capital, of all kinds, which will permit the future production of goods and
services. Although many different approaches have been taken, the guiding principle in augmented economic accounts is to measure as much
of economic activity as is feasible, regardless of whether it takes place inside or outside the marketplace.
Extending the accounts is not just an academic exercise. Better natural-resource and environmental accounts can provide valuable informa-
tion on the interaction between the environment and the economy help determine whether the nation is using its stocks of natural resources and
environmental assets in an unsustainable manner, and provide data on the implications of different regulations, taxes, and consumption patterns.
We seek better measures for scorekeeping (to devise better measures of national saving and investment or broader measures of economic well-
being. But the data in augmented accounts are also useful for resource management) to help the nation better manage its subsoil assets, public
lands, and precious environmental heritage.
After a thorough review, the NRC committee urged the adoption of an ambitious program for developing a comprehensive set of near-mar-
ket and nonmarket accounts. In addition to developing environmental and natural resource accounts, significant extensions would include the
value of: home production and unpaid work, research and development capital, nonmarket time of the population, and informal and home
education. In a wealthy country like the United States, providing information on the structure and interactions of the economy and the envi-
ronment is an essential function of government. It deserves a serious research effort by the federal government and private research organizations.
William D. Nordhaus is the A. Whitney Griswold Professor of Economics at Yale University, New Haven, Conn. He recently chaired a National Research Council Panel that produced the report
Nature's Numbers: Expanding the National Economic Accounts to Include the Environment (National Academy of Sciences Press, 19991.
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 15The Surge in Oil PricesAnatomy of a Non•Crisis
J. W. Anderson
This winter's price hike, which came less than a year after oil dropped to its
lowest price in a generation, underscores the inherent unpredictability of the
world's oil market. But the price increase came nowhere close to threatening
the American economy. Unlike previous hikes, which were triggered by dra-
matic political or military events, this year's run-up was prompted by the most
basic of economic forces—a mismatch of supply and demand.
Crude oil prices tripled over the past year. Gasoline, at
the high point in late March, was up 68% to $1.53 a
gallon for regular grade. In February in New England,
home-heating oil was briefly more than double the price
from the year before.
But by mid-spring the market was declining again.
Spot prices for crude oil had fallen sharply in the six
weeks following the peak, and the average price of gaso-
line was down five cents a gallon. These drastic swings
in price invite questions about the underlying causes
and the public policy response—if any—that might be
warranted.
Last winter was the fourth time in 30 years that oil
prices had suddenly, without warning, shot upward. The
sudden price spike was caused by two miscalculations
by OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries. OPEC expanded production just as East Asia
was going into a recession; however, OPEC and most
observers underestimated its severity. That produced a
glut of oil, which forced prices down, in early 1999, to
a lower level, adjusted for inflation, than they had been
for a generation. Then, to correct that glut, OPEC cut
production in late 1999 just as East Asia was coming outof the recession much faster than expected. With demand
rising and production falling, prices shot up.
The point is not that Saudi Arabia, the dominant force
in OPEC, should have been smarter. The point is that a
lot of genuinely unpredictable things happen in the
world, and the markets for commodities like oil are inher-
ently unstable.
The three previous oil shocks were related to great
military and political events: the Arab-Israeli War of 1973,
the Iranian Revolution of 1979, and the Iraqi attack on
Kuwait in 1990. The recent experience demonstrates
that this kind of shock can also occur in peaceful times,
in the absence of any unusual political tension.
In the oil markets, elasticities—at least in the short
term—are low. Relatively small imbalances in volume can
result in very large price movements. In the last three
months of 1999 and the first three months of 2000,
demand for crude oil was greater than supply by per-
haps 2.5 million barrels a day (mbd) (the shortfall was
filled by drawing down stocks). This shortfall, 3.4% of
world oil production, was sufficient to propel the price
of crude from $9 a barrel in early 1999 to more than $30
a barrel in February 2000.
16 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139THE SURGE IN OIL PRICES
The chronology of this episode begins in fall 1997. World
demand had been rising rapidly, and OPEC expected that rise to
continue. It had been coming from two regions, North America
and East Asia, reflecting the long economic boom in both. The
planners did not fully comprehend the force of the financial cri-
sis that had begun in July with Thailand's drastic devaluation.
But the crisis in Thailand led to similar currency troubles in sev-
eral other countries. Because oil is priced in dollars, the
devaluations had the immediate effect of hugely increasing the
cost of oil in Asian economies that had accounted for a large part
of the increase in world consumption.
Factors that Influenced the Oil Glut
While misjudgment of the East Asian financial crisis was the pri-
mary cause of the glut in 1998-99, there were other factors that
aggravated it. They were all coincidental, but they all pushed in
the same direction. (Lawrence Goldstein, president of the Petro-
leum Industry Research Foundation, Inc., has made this point,
among other places, in his paper Market Factors Not Price "Dump-
ing," an Analysis of the 1998 Oil Price Collapse, August 1999.) One
contributor was the weather. The winter of 1997-98 was unusu-
ally warm in North America, Europe, and Japan. Another was
Russia's financial distress—the country had defaulted on some
of its debt in August 1998, leading to a sharp depreciation of the
ruble. That both depressed internal demand for fuel and greatly
increased the incentive to sell Russian oil abroad.
And then there was Iraq. Upon its defeat in the Gulf War of
1991, the United Nations (UN) Security Council placed Iraq
under sanctions that cut off its exports of oil. As social condi-
tions in the country deteriorated, the UN began negotiating a
procedure under which the Iraqis could sell limited amounts of
oil to pay for necessary imports. These limits were progressively
expanded as the UN tried to defend itself against charges that
the sanctions were causing great suffering among Iraq's people
and particularly its children. One consequence was to add to
the oversupply on world markets. Because the limits were set
in dollars, they permitted increasing amounts of oil to be sold
as the market fell.
Although OPEC agreed in December 1997 to increase pro-
duction, within weeks it realized that it had miscalculated. But
the cartel does not make decisions easily or quickly; it suffers
many internal divisions, and discipline has always been inter-
mittent. After prices declined through the winter, the cartel met
again in March 1998 to announce a substantial cut in produc-tion. Several members—Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Venezuela—
dropped their production a little. But others—Iraq and
Iran—raised theirs, and OPEC's total output was unchanged.
In June, the cartel tried again. It announced another large
cut, and there was a stronger response by its members. But the
price continued to sag. Finally, in March 1999, with the price
bouncing around $10 a barrel, the cartel agreed again to cut.
Desperation stiffened the member governments' resolution and
this time production fell substantially. With that, the market at
last began to tighten.
Incidentally, it is useful to note that while OPEC's three
announcements of production cuts in 1998-99 add up to 4.3
mbd, the actual cuts came to about 1.6 mbd. The relationship
between the announcements and reality is a loose one at best.
During 1999, the East Asian economies began growing
strongly again and their oil demand was up. By the end of the
year, the price had more than doubled to over $20 a barrel—
higher, but still in what the world regards as the normal range.
The rapidly rising momentum of the oil market, clear in retro-
spect, was not obvious at the time. In particular there was great
uncertainty about oil stocks. The production statistics of the pre-
vious two years implied that someone must be holding huge oil
stocks, but whether they actually existed was an open question.
It was clear that some traders were holding unusually large stocks
against the possibility of Y2K disruptions in the market at the
turn of the year. The upward movement of prices was not con-
tinuous. Prices actually dropped fora couple of weeks in October.
In view of all these conflicting signals, OPEC decided at its
December 1999 meeting to make no change in production.
By February of this year, the price was over $30 a barrel and
vehement protests were arising from consumers, particularly
those in the United States where a presidential election cam-
paign was under way.
Iraq had significantly reinforced the price run-up in the late
autumn. Quarrelling with the UN Security Council over the
terms of the semiannual extension of the oil-for-food regime.
Iraq shut down exports entirely for a couple of weeks in late
November and early December. In December, the Security Coun-
cil revised the sanctions and dropped the limits on oil sales
altogether. Iraqi export volumes since then have been erratic,
varying hugely from week to week. It is unclear whether this
performance is due to technical constraints on production, or
to politics—that is, a deliberate tactic of disrupting the market
to force a loosening of the sanctions.
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 17J.W. ANDERSON
The International Energy Agency recently concluded, "The
answer is probably midway between the two explanations. The
technical problems are real. But politics have led the Iraqis to
be less willing to risk permanent reservoir damage than they
were last year, particularly when they perceive that the time is
right (high prices and tight supply) to try to exert pressure."
Among OPEC's 11 member governments, there is no endur-
ing consensus about pricing policy. In general the countries with
large populations and urgent requirements for development
financing tend to favor the highest possible prices now But the
countries with large reserves and small populations—above all,
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait—take a longer view and try to man-
age prices to maximize total return over a period of decades.
That means holding prices down in a range that most consumers
will regard as reasonable, so that they will continue to rely on
oil rather than turning to other fuels, and so that non-OPEC
producers will not be given incentives to develop high-cost oil
sources to compete with OPEC.
In the absence of unusual emotional circumstances like those
generated by the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Saudi-Kuwaiti pric-
ing strategy usually prevails. When it became clear last winter
that prices had indeed moved above the reasonable range, OPEC,
led by the Saudis, did not delay. The cartel did not try to hold
prices high through the winter to scoop up additional billions
of revenue in the high-demand season, instead moving to reas-
sure its customers that prices would come down. And prices
did start to fall several weeks before OPEC's announcement
March 28 that it would increase production.
What to Do About High Oil Prices?
As prices rose over the winter, many political leaders called for
action by the federal government to protect consumers. But
experience in the earlier oil shocks strongly indicates that inter-
vention in the market can cost far more than it saves. Price
controls in the 1970s caused disruptive shortages and long lines
of frantic motorists at filling stations in 1974 and 1979.
Recessions accompanied the first three oil shocks, and for a
time it seemed evident that the shocks had caused them. But
careful analysis has demonstrated the opposite. The danger of
macroeconomic disruption has diminished over the years, as
the consumption of oil in relation to the size of the whole econ-
omy has fallen. The impact of oil price changes on the rest of
the economy is significantly less now than in, say, the 1970s.
In the 1970s, the unprecedented leap in oil prices causedwidespread public panic and hoarding that made the disrup-
tions far worse, while in the 1990 case, the public reaction was
much more moderate. Over the past winter, there has been
grumbling and irritation with oil and gasoline prices, but none
of the fear that met the first oil shocks. According to the auto-
mobile manufacturers, the high prices have hardly affected the
sales of low-mileage models like sports utility vehicles. Gaso-
line consumption is still rising, although not as rapidly as in the
recent past.
There is one circumstance in which a sudden rise in oil prices
can create serious social distress, and that is among low-income
families who depend on oil to heat their homes. Congress rec-
ognized this need long ago and has made Low-Income Home
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) grants available through
the states. In the past winter, the highest prices were in New
England because of distribution difficulties peculiar to the region.
Most of the New England States also have assistance programs
of their own to supplement the LIHEAP grants.
Except for this special case, the arguments for government
intervention in the oil market are not persuasive, in the range
of prices predicted and experienced last winter. At one point,
when gasoline was at its peak nationwide average of $1.53 a gal-
lon for regular grade, there was talk of its going up to $2 a gallon.
Even at that level, the policy errors of the 1970s suggest that
intervention in the market would bring little benefit to consumers
and potential harm to the economy.
Some leaders in Congress have called for cutting the gaso-
line tax by 4.3 cents a gallon (the total federal tax is 18.4 cents
a gallon). That proposal has run into opposition because the tax
funds road construction, and 4.3 cents a gallon raises $5.5 bil-
lion a year. Another reason for opposing a reduction in the
gasoline tax is that any short-term benefit to American consumers
could soon be redirected to producers, as the higher demand
led to higher prices.
Surely, there is a point at which rising oil prices could threaten
the economy, but prices this past winter came nowhere near it.
The high prices of the past winter were an annoyance for most
consumers and a hardship for some. But for the country as a
whole they never constituted a real economic crisis, and they
are now declining.
Where Are We Headed Now?
At a contentious meeting in late March, OPEC decided to raise
its production quotas 1.7 mbd. That announcement does not
18 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139THE SURGE IN OIL PRICES
appear to be a firm commitment, but rather a signal that the
exporting countries acknowledge their customers' complaints
and intend to respond. The formal statements were followed by
explanations that the organization's president would have the
authority to request countries to make adjustments as necessary
to hold prices in the agreed range. It is the price, not the vol-
ume, which guides policy, and no one knows exactly what
volume will produce a given price—that's what the argument
in the OPEC meeting was about.
One OPEC oil minister, an Algerian, described the desired
price range as $22 to $28 a barrel. Another minister, a Saudi,
somewhat more precisely spoke of $20 to $25 for North Sea
Brent crude. By April 19, the spot price for Brent crude was
$22.54, down from $30.05 six weeks earlier. Crude oil futures
for May delivery were down $5 a barrel from a high of $32.57,
and the futures market showed a steady decline to less than $20
a barrel by the end of 2002. The unexpectedly rapid drop in
prices during April was a reminder that just as a rising price is
an incentive to hoard, a falling price is an incentive to dump.
The effect is to reinforce the volatility of the market.
American gasoline prices usually rise during the summer,
when consumption is high. In April the EIA forecast a price by
September of about $1.39 a gallon for regular grade, although
meeting the projected demand for gasoline this summer without
further price surges would require running American refineries
at close to full capacity The rising environmental requirements
for gasoline used in this country make it more difficult than in the
past to depend on imports to meet seasonal surges in demand.
The trend in gasoline consumption in this country over the past
decade has been a rise of about 1.5% a year, but that accelerated
significantly in the late 1990s. The effect has been to put unex-
pected pressure on the refining industry. In this situation accidents
or other outages could send gasoline prices upward, even while
the underlying crude oil price remains steadyNo long-term trend in oil prices exists. Since 1973 prices
have fluctuated wildly but without any sustained direction. Even
at $30 a barrel, oil was slightly less expensive than the average,
adjusted for inflation into today's dollars, over the past quarter
of a century. (The peak, in today's dollars, for crude oil was $67
a barrel in 1980, and for gasoline, $2.57 a gallon in 1981.)
The only really reliable prediction is that the oil markets are
very difficult to stabilize, and from time to time there will be
surprises. Consumers are not defenseless in dealing with an
unstable market. Many of them can go elsewhere. Industrial con-
sumers have often responded over the years by switching to
natural gas. A generation ago American electric utilities depended
heavily on oil. They have now all but eliminated it, partly for
environmental reasons but also to avoid price bumps that they
have difficulty passing on to their customers. Other large con-
sumers have taken out insurance by buying futures. Most
residential customers have also switched to gas.
The most sensible course now appears to be no change in
present policy, which means holding the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve for dire emergencies, not for tweaking minor changes
in the market. It also means encouraging improvements in the
fuel economy of the country, both for heating and for trans-
portation; supporting research on alternative fuels, to provide
consumers with choices; and reminding consumers not to count
on stable prices of oil products. From time to time, unexpect-
edly, the world's oil market will swing the price dramatically up
or down for reasons that are not apparent until after it happens.
J.W. Anderson is RFF's Journalist in Residence. The author wishes to acknowledge the many
useful comments provided by Joel Darmstadter, senior fellow, Resources for the Future.
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 13c RESOURCES 19SYLVIA 
JOHNSON 
PHOTOGRAPHY INSIDE RFF
RFF and Brookings Scholars
Assess Protesters' Claims about
World Bank/IMF Environmental,
Labor Policies
At an April 12 press briefing, scholars from
RFF and the Brookings Institution offered
a candid assessment of the charges being
raised by the protesters who attempted to
shut down the spring meetings held April
16-17 by the World Bank and the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF).
RFF President Paul Portney and RFF
University Fellow Wallace Oates joined
Brookings Vice President Robert Litan and
Brookings Senior Fellow Gary Burtless in
endorsing the protesters' fundamental goals
—protecting the environment and
safeguarding workers in developing coun-
tries—while criticizing their lack of
perspective about how expanded free trade
can address these issues. The panelists also
commented on alternative approaches for
solving environmental and social problems
in developing countries and possible rea-
sons why the international monetary
organizations have become the target of somuch political furor.
"Emotions run very high on these issues
but they are extremely difficult to disen-
tangle intellectually" said panel moderator
Zanny Minton-Beddoes, Washington eco-
nomics correspondent for The Economist.
"Does free trade improve living standards
or does it begin a race to the bottom? What's
the role of voluntary standards? How do
you deal with cross-border environmental
issues, such as global warming?"
According to Oates, while there can be
troubling, short-term conflicts between
environmental goals and trade objectives,
it is critically important to see the relation-
ship between trade and the environment
over the long haul. The body of available
evidence clearly shows that environmental
quality is systematically higher in richer
countries, he said. For example, there is a
very strong correlation between access to
safe drinking water and levels of income.
"This should come as little suprise," Oates
said. "People care about their environment
and, as their incomes rise, want to devote
a larger share of their resources to protec-
tion of the environment."
Zanny Minton-Beddoes and RFF's Paul Portney and Wallace OatesAccording to Oates, environmental prob-
lems caused by international free trade tend
to be very particular in nature and require
targeted solutions, such as technical assis-
tance supported by financial aid. Restricting
trade tends to be a self-defeating measure,
he said; unilateral setting of tariffs or import
bans often have little effect on the behavior
of polluting industries abroad.
Portney argued that trade, particularly
in the form of foreign direct investment in
developing countries, can also have a pow-
erful, short-term benefit. The record clearly
shows that when firms based in the United
States or OECD (Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development) countries
invest in developing countries, they build
plants that are akin to those they would
build in their home countries, he said. This
in turn puts pressure on indigenous firms
to lift their environmental standards up to
the levels both for occupational safety and
health and environmental protection in the
developed world, he said.
"In a world in which we want to encour-
age rather than discourage international
trade, there are other mechanisms for har-
nessing the marketplace to solve
environmental and health and safety prob-
lems that need to be explored," Portney
said. These include increased use of prod-
uct labeling, greater support for multilateral
environmental agreements, elimination of
harmful commodity subsidies, direct finan-
cial assistance to developing countries to
allow them to invest in cleaner technolo-
gies; and development of an alternative
forum for discussing international envi-
ronmental practices outside the World
Trade Organization (WTO).
Defining Appropriate Worker Protection
Many protesters want to see the World
Bank, the IMF, and the WTO refrain from
20 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139INSIDE RFF
entering into agreements with countries
that lack certain fundamental worker pro-
tection provisions, such as prohibitions on
child labor. According to Brookings' Burt-
less, certain minimum protections are
acceptable as conditions for loans, or for
participation in international credit agree-
ments. But it is important, he said, to keep
two cautions in mind.
First, although many advocates of
tougher standards really do have the inter-
ests of workers in the developing world in
mind, Burtless said, others are primarily
interested in defending the interests of
much better-off workers, namely those in
rich countries. "Insisting that your trade
partner have just as strong worker protec-
tions as you do can easily turn into a
standard trade protection," he said. Sec-
ond, worker protections designed in Paris,
London, or Washington "might not be the
ones that are terribly appropriate" to peo-
ple living in certain developing countries,
where half or more of the population lives
on $2 a day or less, he said.
Brookings' Litan contended that many
of the protesters, who professed "to be wor-
ried about people abroad, are also worried
about themselves." There is as much
worker anxiety today about losing one's
job, in a world with 4% unemployment, as
there was during the 1991 recession, when
unemployment was double that, he said.
The booming, Internet -driven economy
has sparked a rapid increase in productiv-
ity growth but there is a corresponding
downside—more goods can be produced
by fewer people, which has led to down-
sizing and increased job turn, he said.
The average citizen doesn't see the ben-
efits of expanded free trade, which is
perceived as a game played by the Fortune
500 companies, Litan said. "The more we
continue [to] rely on corporate America ...to lead the free trade movement, [the more]
it will play right into the hands of the peo-
ple in the street who are saying it's all one
big conspiracy to bring down the fate of
the world." M
Raymond Kopp Named RFF Vice
President for Programs
Raymond J. Kopp,
a senior fellow in
the Quality of the
Environment Divi-
sion, has been
named RFF's Vice
President for Pro-
grams, the insti-
tution's senior
research position.
He has conducted
research at RFF
since 1977 on a
host of environmental and natural resource
issues, including climate policy, the bene-
fits and costs of regulations, and how people
value the preservation of pristine wilder-
ness areas. He holds a Ph.D. in economics
and has published widely in the economic
literature.
Ray also serves as executive editor of
Weathervane (www.weathervane. rff. org),
RFF's Web site on climate policy, and is a
member of the U.S. State Department's
Advisory Committee on International Eco-
nomic Policy. He was the director of RFF's
Quality of the Environment Division from
1988 to 1998, and served as director of
strategic planning for the past two years.
"Ray's strengths are his keen intellect
and his firm commitment to elevating the
quality of policy debate through careful
research. These will be valuable accets as
we expand our research programs in tech-
nology, biodiversity, urban development,Raymond). Koppand the environmental and resource prob-
lems of the developing world," RFF
President Paul Portney said. M
Richard Morgenstern Joins RFF
as Senior Fellow
Richard MorgensternRichard (Dick)
Morgenstern, an
influential figure in
international cli-
mate policy, has
joined RFF as a
senior fellow in the
Quality of the Envi-
ronment Division.
Most recently, he
was senior eco-
nomic counselor to
the Under Secre-
tary for Global Affairs at the U.S. State
Department, where he was a member of the
U.S. negotiating team for the Kyoto Proto-
col. Dick served at the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency for more than a decade.
While at EPA he acted as Deputy Adminis-
trator (1993) and Assistant Administrator
for Policy, Planning, and Evaluation
(1991-93). He led the Agency's study on
multimedia environmental risks, Unfinished
Business.
His recent domestic research has
focused on the accuracy with which the
costs of environmental protection are meas-
ured, and on the use of economic incentives
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. He
has written widely on these issues in both
academic and popular journals. His book,
Economic Analyses at EPA: Assessing Regula-
tory Impact, was published by RFF in 1997,
while he was a visiting scholar.
"Dick's extensive experience—both as
a researcher and a policymaker—will be a
valuable addition to RFF," Portney said. IN
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 21HEINZ KUGLFR PHOTOGRAPHY INSIDE RFF
Two New Board Members
RFF welcomes two new members to its
board of directors, Enron Chairman and
CEO Kenneth L. Lay and distinguished
Yale economist William D. Nordhaus.
Lay joined
Enron in 1986, fol-
lowing the merger
of Houston Nat-
ural Gas and
InterNorth Inc. in
1985. He joined
Houston Natural
Gas in 1984, as
chairman and chief
executive officer. Previously, he served as
president and chief operating officer of
Transco Energy Co., from 1981 to 1984.
Before that, he was president of Continen-
tal Resources Co. and executive vice
president of its parent company, the Con-
tinental Group.
Lay holds a Ph.D. in economics from
the University of Houston, and master's and
bachelor's degrees in economics from the
University of Missouri. He has served as an
officer in the U.S. Navy technical assistant
to a member of the Federal Energy Regu-Kenneth L. Laylatory Commission, and as a Deputy Under
Secretary of the U.S. Department of the
Interior.
Currently, Lay is a member of the board
of directors of Compaq Computer Corp.,
Eli Lilly and Co., and Trust Co. of the West.
He also serves on the board of trustees of
the H. John Heinz III Center for Science,
Economics, and the Environment; the Busi-
ness Council; and the National Petroleum
Council. Among other honors, Lay was
named one of the 25 top managers by Busi-
ness Week for 1996 and 1999.
Nordhaus is
the A. Whitney
Griswold Profes-
sor of Economics
at Yale University.
He joined the Yale
faculty in 1967
and has been a full
professor of eco-
nomics since
1973. He received
his undergraduate
degree from Yale
and his Ph.D. in economics from the Mass-
achusetts Institute of Technology in 1967.
Nordhaus was a member of the Presi-William D.
Nordhausdent's Council of Economic Advisers from
1977 to 1979. He has held senior leader-
ship positions at Yale, serving as Provost
from 1986 to 1988, and as Vice President
for Finance and Administration from 1992
to 1993. Currently, he is a member of and
senior advisor to the Brookings Institution's
Panel on Economic Activity.
Co-author of the classic textbook, Eco-
nomics, with Paul Samuelson, Nordhaus
has written several other books, including
Invention, Growth and Welfare, Is Growth
Obsolete?, The Efficient Use of Energy
Resources, Reforming Federal Regulation, and
Managing the Global Commons.
Nordhaus's research has focused on eco-
nomic growth and natural resources, as
well as the question of the extent to which
resources constrain economic growth. He
also has conducted studies in wage and
price behavior, augmented national
accounting, the political business cycle,
productivity, and the costs and benefits of
regulation. Recently, his work has focused
on the economics of global warming,
including the construction of integrated
economic and scientific models to deter-
mine an efficient path for coping with
climate change. M
Welcome to the RFF Council
RFF would like to thank the following corporate Council members for their generous sup-
port of our efforts to inform and influence environmental policy.
Al Collins
Director of Health, Environment and Safety
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
Martin Durbin
Associate Director, Federal and
International Affairs
American Plastics Council
Katherine Fish
Director of Public Policy
Monsanto CompanyMichael McAdams
General Manager, Government Affairs
BP Amoco
Susan Sischke
Senior Vice President, Regulatory Affairs
and Passenger Car Operations
DaimlerChrysler CorporationRecent Grants to RFF
The Energy Foundation
$125,000 to study the distribution
effects of various domestic green-
house gas control policies
Cummins Engine Company, Inc.
$15,000 to support general opera-
tions and research
22 RESOURCES SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139•
DEVELOPMENT
Challenpes of Urban Sprawl Call
for Unbiased Research, RFF
Council Concludes
Urban sprawl has become one of voters' top
concerns, according to national opinion
polls, but even defining it remains a diffi-
cult challenge. Low-density development,
strip-mall aesthetics, long traffic jams and
diminished wildlife habitat are all related
to sprawl. But do these conditions describe
the disease, or are they merely the symp-
toms of a larger problem?
Given the lack of certainty surrounding
these kinds of issues, researchers have a
key role to play in helping shape policies
that can guide future growth policies, mem-
bers of the RFF Council concluded at the
group's annual spring meeting April 13-14
in Miami Beach, Fla.
Members of the Council met with
researchers, policy advocates, urban plan-
ning officials, private landowners and
others in an attempt to understand the
Hooper Brooks, program director for the
environment, Surdna Foundationproblems of sprawl, and to help RFF craft
a future research agenda that can point the
way to sensible urban growth policies.
RFF assembled panels that described
recent trends in three key areas—land use
and urban development, conservation and
habitat protection, and transportation and
congestion. After discussing these issues in
depth, Council members broke into small
groups to identify key research questions
that emerged.
In the area of land use, for example,
they concluded that more information is
needed on the long-term economic bene-
fits of brownfield redevelopment.
Standardized, high-quality methods for
measuring these benefits could help spur
redevelopment of contaminated sites.
At the same time, developers need a
clear understanding of what the public
wants in cities and towns, and in particu-
lar whether people truly desire more
pedestrian -centered areas, as many advo-
cates believe. If this is the case, researchers
should examine the forces that have kept
developers from vigorously embracing this
type of development.
Council members also said that
researchers should identify economic
incentives that can encourage the acquisi-
tion of key wildlife habitats. Biologists and
economists should help officials determine
what makes a good land acquisition and
advise them on how to effectively direct
their limited conservation budgets.
Research in the area of transportation
and congestion should focus on the rela-
tive contributions that various forms of
transportation—such as commercial traf-
fic and commuter trips—have on overall
traffic patterns. Also, researchers should
develop new ways to measure the success
of transportation projects to answer the
timeless question of whether new or410
Jo Cooper, president, Alliance of
Automobile Munufacturers
improved roads encourage new develop-
ment or vice versa, and should encourage
regional decisionmaking on transportation
issues, some Council members said.
Perhaps nowhere are the challenges fac-
ing local officials more acute than in
Southeast Florida, where the meeting took
place. Already one of the country's fastest-
growing metropolitan areas, the population
of Southeast Florida is expected to swell by
more than two million new residents by
2015. Growth pressures centered in the
suburbs to the west of Miami are placing
unprecedented pressure on the delicate
Everglades ecosystem, and municipal lead-
ers are grappling with how to accommodate
growth while simultaneously attending to
the environmental needs of the area. After
the meeting, Council members were
guided by Miami officials on a tour of what
they believe are some of the city's successes
and failures in urban development, includ-
ing areas of unchecked development,
redeveloped brownfields sites, and restored
historic areas. M
SPRING 2000 / ISSUE 139 RESOURCES 23e:11:1 RESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036-1400
ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED
1Non-profit
US Postage Paid
Permit No. 1228
Merrifield, VA