Review article
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic
encephalopathy
Valproate (VPA) is a drug commonly used in
neurology and psychiatry. Valproate-inducedhyperammonemic encephalopathy (VHE) is anunusual, but serious, adverse eﬀect of VPA treat-ment (1). VHE is a serious disease that can lead todeath. It can, however, be reversed if a precociousdiagnosis is made (2). It is therefore extremelyimportant to recognize it and discontinue VPA
treatment.Predisposing causes
The main physiopathological mechanism that
leads to VHE is an increased serum ammonialevel. There are many causes of hyperammone-mia such as urea cycle enzyme deﬁciency, Reye’ssyndrome, several drugs (VPA, 5-Fluorouracil,and salicylates), and renal or hepatic failure(Table 1) (3).Acta Neurol Scand: 2006: 114: 1–7 DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2006.00655.x Copyright /C211Blackwell Munksgaard 2006
ACTA NEUROLOGICA
SCANDINAVICA
Segura-Bruna N, Rodriguez-Campello A, Puente V, Roquer J.
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy.
Acta Neurol Scand 2006: 114: 1–7. /C211Blackwell Munksgaard 2006.
Valproate-induced hyperammone mic encephalopathy (VHE) is an
unusual complication character ized by a decreasing level of
consciousness, focal neurological de ﬁcits, cognitive slowing, vomiting,
drowsiness, and lethargy. We have thoroughly reviewed the
predisposing factors and their screening, the biochemical and
physiopathological mechanisms in volved, the diﬀerent treatments
described, and those that are being i nvestigated. Etiopathogenesis is
not completely understood, alt hough hyperammonemia has been
postulated as the main cause of the cl inical syndrome. The increase in
serum ammonium level is due to several mechanisms, the mostimportant one appearing to be the i nhibition of carbamoylphosphate
synthetase-I, the enzyme that begi ns the urea cycle. Polytherapy with
several drugs, such as phenobarb ital and topiramate, seems to
contribute to hyperammonemia. Hyperammonemia leads to an
increase in the glutamine level in the brain, which produces astrocyte
swelling and cerebral edema. There are several studies that suggest thattreatment with supplements of carnitine can lead to an early favorableclinical response due to the probabl e carnitine deﬁciency induced by a
valproate (VPA) treatment. Development of the progressive
confusional syndrome, associated wi th an increase in seizure frequency
after VPA treatment onset, obliges us to rule out VHE by screening for
blood ammonium levels and the existence of urea cycle enzyme
deﬁciency, such as ornithine car bamoyltransferase deﬁciency.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is characterized by signs of severe
encephalopathy with continuous generalized slowing, a predominance
of theta and delta activity, occasi onal bursts of frontal intermittent
rhythmic delta activity, and triphasic waves. These EEG ﬁndings, as
well as clinical manifestations and hyperammonemia, tend to
normalize after VPA withdrawal.N. Segura-Bruna, A. Rodriguez-
Campello, V. Puente, J. Roquer
Servei de Neurologia, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona,
Spain
Key words: adverse effects; antiepileptic drugs;
epilepsy; molecular biology; inherited metabolic
disorders; EEG
Nuria Segura-Bruna, Servei de Neurologia, Hospital del
Mar, Barcelona, Passeig Maritim, 25-29, 08003 Barce-lona, SpainTel.: 932483235Fax: 932483376e-mail: 94407@imas.imim.es
Accepted for publication March 14, 2006
1Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) or ornithine
carbamoyltransferase deﬁciency is the most com-monly inherited cause of hyperammonemia. About1 of 30,000 women in the United States isheterozygous for this urea cycle defect (4). OTCdeﬁciency is an important risk factor for develop-ing VHE in patients taking VPA. Therefore,recommendations for the screening of this and
other urea cycle enzyme deﬁciencies include:
1. Those patients with a known family history of
OTC deﬁciency.
2. Those patients who, after beginning treatment
with VPA, develop unexplained episodes ofconfusion, especially in the setting of knownstress factors (i.e., sepsis); aversion to protein
(headache causing); and a family history of
unexplained death in male children (especiallymales, because OTC is an X-linked disorder).Renal and liver functions, blood ammonia level,and excretion of urinary orotic acid should bescreened. A provocative test such as allopurinolloading may also be carried out. This test
consists of taking a single oral dose of allopur-
inol, which signiﬁcantly increases the urinary
excretion of orotic acid in OTC-deﬁcientpatients.
Therefore, in OTC deﬁciency we ﬁnd high blood
levels of ammonium, glutamine, and alanine, lowblood levels of citrulline, and near-undetectableblood levels of arginine in combination with an
increased excretion of urinary orotic acid (Fig. 1).
When hyperammonemia occurs in the neonatal
period, some laboratory studies such as plasmaand urinary amino acids, serum glucose, arterialblood gases, bicarbonate, lactate, citrulline, carni-tine, urinary ketones, and urinary orotate can helpmake a speciﬁc diagnosis. Thus, organic acidemiasshould be suspected when hyperammonemia is
associated with acidosis, ketosis, and low bicar-
bonate level. Some kinds of organic acidemias arealso associated with hyperglycinemia and hypogly-cemia. On the other hand, hyperammonemia, inaddition to acidosis, ketosis, and increased lactateTable 1 Hyperammonemia causes
Enzyme defects in
urea cycleOTC deficiency
CPS-I deficiency
NAGS deficiencyAS deficiency
AL deficiency
Arginase deficiency
Fatty acid oxidation defects Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Systemic carnitine deficiency
Congenital lactic acidosis Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Mitochondrial diseases
Organic acidemias Isovaleric acidemia
Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Glutaric acidemia type IIMultiple carboxylase deficiency
Beta-ketothiolase deficiency
Dibasic amino acid
transport defectLysinuric protein intolerance
Hyperammonemia-hiperornithinemia
-homocitrullinuria
Drugs Valproate
5-Fluorouracil
Salicylates
Liver diseases Acute or chronic liver diseases
(cystic fibrosis, Wilson disease,
biliary atresia, AAT deficiency …)
Renal diseases Urinary tract infections with
Proteus mirabilis ,Staphylococcus
orCorynebacterium
Reye's syndrome, parenteral
hyperalimentation
Transient hyperammonemia
of the newborn
AAT, a-1-antitrypsin deficiency; AL, argininosuccinic acid lyase; AS, argininosuc-
cinic synthetase; CPS-I, carbamoylphosphate synthetase-I; NAGS, N-acetylgluta-
mate synthetase; OTC, ornithine transcarbamylase.
(a)
(b)
Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
Fp1-F7
Fp2-F8
F8-T4
T4-T6T6-O2
25a-
CommentF7-T3
T3-T5
T5-O1Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
Fp1-F7
Fp2-F8
F8-T4
T4-T6
T6-O2
25a-
CommentF7-T3
T3-T5
T5-O1
Figure 1. (a) EEG shows an irregular, continuous, severe and
diffuse slowing with predominance of rhythmical theta anddelta activity, which are diffuse signs of severe encephalopathy.
(b) EEG made 9 days after VPA withdrawal and the ﬁrst EEG
shows an improvement with mild slowing and predominance ofrhythmical theta activity, maximum at 8 Hz, which are diffusesigns of mild encephalopathy.Segura-Bruna et al.
2and citrulline, indicates pyruvate carboxylase deﬁ-
ciency. In contrast, urea cycle defects or transient
hyperammonemia of the newborn causes hyper-
ammonemia with respiratory alkalosis. Inargininosuccinic acid synthetase deﬁciency plasmathe citrulline level is very high (>1000 lmol/l),
whilst in argininosuccinic lyase deﬁciency thecitrulline level is only mildly increased (100–300lmol/l). Plasma citrulline levels are almost
undetectable in carbamoylphosphate synthetase-I
(CPS-I) and OTC deﬁciencies. In a similar way to
OTC deﬁciency, N-acetylglutamate synthetase
(NAGS) deﬁciency requires a liver biopsy for adeﬁnite diagnosis.
Clinical findings
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalop-
athy is a serious disease that can lead to death. It
can, however, be reversed if a precocious diagnosisis made (2) and VPA treatment is discontinued.
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephal-
opathy is clinically characterized by an acute orsubacute decreasing level of consciousness thatgoes from drowsiness to lethargy and coma, ataxia,vomiting, and focal neurological deﬁcit. Low-grade
fever (5), amblyopia, and an increase in the
frequency of seizures (6) can also be found. Thisﬁnding can even lead to an increase in VPA dosebefore diagnosis, with the consequent worsening.
Laboratory findings
Laboratory tests usually show a normal liver
function with hyperammonemia. A relationship
between the daily doses of VPA and the appear-ance and severity of VHE has not been found (7).Therefore, there does not seem to be any relation-ship between the development of VHE and serumVPA levels. Blood VPA levels are within thera-peutical ranges in most VHE cases (8). No corre-lation between clinical severity and higher blood
ammonium levels when hyperammonemia is con-
ﬁrmed has been found (7). Other laboratory testsrelated to OTC deﬁciency have been describedpreviously.
Electroencephalography (EEG)
An EEG study usually shows diﬀuse signs of severe
encephalopathy. The main ﬁndings are irregular,
continuous, severe, and diﬀuse slowing with apredominance of rhythmical theta and delta activ-ity. Occasionally, triphasic waves can be found,with bursts of frontal intermittent rhythmic deltaactivity (Fig. 1A).Once VPA is discontinued, all these ﬁndings can
be reversed, particularly if there is an early
diagnosis. Progressive clinical improvement corre-
lates with the normalization of EEG and serumammonium levels (Fig. 1B).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
A previous study showed bilateral T2-hyperintenselesions in MRI located in the cerebellar white
matter and globus pallidus. Proton MR spectros-
copy (MRS) showed a severe depletion of myo-
inositol and choline with glutamine excess, and amoderate decrease of N-acetyl aspartate (9, 10).
Pathologic findings
Most of the information about pathologic anat-
omy changes in VHE has been collected from the
extensive number of articles published by Soba-niec-Lotowska (11–13). These are studies concern-ing cerebellar and temporal lobe ultrastructurechanges in rats in VPA encephalopathy induced bychronic administration of VPA (9 and 12 months),and after its withdrawal for 1 and 3 months. Inthese studies, damage to astrocytes of the hippo-
campal gyre cortex and neocortex of the temporal
lobe, mainly in the pyramidal layer, has beenobserved. The observed ultrastructural changes arecell swelling, decrease in the number of glioﬁla-ments, and empty cytoplasmic vacuoles. Damageto Purkinje cells has been shown, mainly inmitochondria, but also in Golgi complex, granularand smooth endoplasmic reticulum, leading to the
inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation, abnormal
protein synthesis, and cell death. Most of theseabnormalities tend to disappear 3 months afterVPA withdrawal. However, damage to the synap-tic junctions in the cerebellar cortex, mainly in themolecular layer, did not appear to be repaired3 months after VPA withdrawal, and the abnor-malities observed may suggest damage caused by
ischemia because of changes in microcirculation
(11–13).
Etiopathogenesis and therapeutic possibilities
The pathogenesis of VHE is not completelyunderstood. Hyperammonemia has been postula-ted as the main cause of encephalopathy, although
a high blood ammonium level has not been
observed in all cases of VHE. Treatment withVPA can lead to hyperammonemia because ofseveral mechanisms, the hepatic and renal eﬀect ofVPA and their metabolites being very important.On the one hand, increased uptake of glutamine,Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy
3and the release of ammonium in the kidneys, favor
hyperammonemia through stimulation of kidneyglutaminase in the renal cortex, and this seems tobe produced by a VPA metabolite, sodium 2-
propyl-4-pentenoate (4-en-VPA). Nevertheless, it
appears that this mechanism is responsible for lessthan 25% of the increase in blood ammoniumlevels (14).
On the other hand, a VPA metabolite (propion-
ate) is remarkable for producing a decrease ofhepatic N-acetylglutamate (NAG) levels. This leads
to the inhibition of hepatic mitochondrial CPS-I, the
enzyme that begins the urea cycle (a chemical
reaction set whose aim is to produce urea byremoving two ammonium ions in each cycle)(8, 15, 16) (Fig. 2). Another VPA metabolite,4-en-VPA, causes a decrease in the availability ofacetyl-coenzymeA (acetyl-CoA) due to the forma-tion of valproyl-CoA and its metabolites. Acetyl-CoA, together with glutamate, is needed to produce
NAG. As a result, this leads to a decrease in hepatic
NAG which causes an increase in blood ammoniumlevels as explained previously (8, 14, 15, 17, 18).Thus, urea cycle enzyme deﬁciencies, such as
OTC deﬁciency and carnitine deﬁciency (congen-ital or acquired, e.g., from hepatic failure, strictvegetarian diet), concomitant to the treatment with
VPA, favor hyperammonemia and the develop-
ment of VHE. OTC deﬁciency is an X-linkeddisorder and is the most commonly inherited causeof hyperammonemia (4, 19–21). OTC is one of theurea cycle enzymes. It catalyzes the reaction ofcarbamoylphosphate and ornithine to producecitrulline. As a result, in OTC deﬁciency there isan accumulation of carbamoylphosphate in the
mitochondrion that leaks out of the cytoplasm to
the pyrimidine synthesis pathway which increasesurinary orotic acid excretion (19) (Fig. 2). There-fore, patients with VHE should be screened forOTC deﬁciency. This occurs mainly in women withVHE, because most men with OTC deﬁciency diein the neonatal period. Heterozygote females,however, may be either asymptomatic or have an
aversion to protein until the development of VHE.
Screening should be made for urinary orotic acidlevel (which would be increased, and it would also
ACYLCARNITINE ACYL   COA
ACYL  COACARNITINE 
CITRATE 
α-KETOGLUTARATE α-KETOGLUTARATE 
OXALACETATE 
MDH 
MALATE 
AST 
FUMARASE 
FUMARATE 
CYTOSOL ASPARTATE 
AL ARGININOSUCCINATE 
ARGININE ARGINASE CITRULLINE CITRULLINE ORNITHINE 
MITHOCONDRION CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE NAG 
NAGS ACETYL COAOXALACETATE PYRUV ATE GLUTAMATE 
GS 
GLUTAMINE GDH 
NH4+ CO2+ 
H2O 
HCO3-
CPS-I CA PYRUV ATE GLUCOSE 
OTC 
ORNITHINE 
UREA OROTATE, OROTIDINE, 
URACIL CARBAMOYL ASPARTATE CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE 
AS 
Figure 2. Urea cycle and Krebs cycle. AL, argininosuccinic acid lyase; AS, argininosuccinic acid synthetase; AST, aspartate amino
transferase; CA, carbonic anhydrase; CPS-I, carbamoylphosphate synthetase-I; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GS, glutaminase;MDH, malate dehydrogenase; NAGS, N-acetylglutamate synthetase; OTC, ornithine transcarbamylase.Segura-Bruna et al.
4raise with the allopurinol test) and blood citrulline
level (which would be decreased). The most certain
diagnosis, however, is given by DNA analysis or
biopsy (OTC deﬁciency in hepatocytes or entero-cytes) (19, 20).
Some investigators have found a decrease in
carnitine concentrations in plasma and skeletalmuscle, maximum at day 14 of VPA treatment andreversible after VPA withdrawal (14, 22–24). Con-sequently, VHE patients might beneﬁt (especially
those with fulminant hepatic failure) from an oral
supplement of l-carnitine (25, 26), with 100 mg/kg/
day (26–28) at ﬁrst, followed by 25 mg/kg/8 h (29).However, the beneﬁt of treatment with l-carnitine
in VHE patients without fulminant hepatic failureis under discussion. Also not clear are the dose andpathway to be used (oral or endovenous), becauseno published studies have demonstrated statisti-
cally signiﬁcant changes in ammonium kinetics in
patients treated with l-carnitine and controls (27).
There are studies that prefer an endovenous linebefore oral dose in the treatment with l-carnitine
(25). A Pediatric Neurology Advisory Committeein 1996 recommended the l-carnitine endovenous
treatment, 150–500 mg/kg/day, in VPA-inducedhepatotoxicity and VPA overdose, and also recom-
mended 100 mg/kg/day oral l-carnitine dose in
VHE, as mentioned previously (28). Furthermore,carnitine seems to contribute to a more rapiddecrease in blood ammonium levels, and this couldlead to an early favorable clinical response, eventhough it is known that the initial blood ammo-nium level is not correlated with the severity ofclinical VHE (27, 29). Related to this, Gidal et al.
postulated that a signiﬁcant reduction in blood
ammonium levels occurred in those patients withVPA treatment who, after taking a protein diet,had ingested a supplement with 50 mg/kg/day orall-carnitine (14). Another study suggested a higher
risk of diabetic patients developing VHE due to theeffect of VPA and diabetes of decreasing plasmacarnitine levels (30). In contrast, Stadler et al.
concluded that VPA treatment did not reduce
carnitine level in adults because the kidney adaptedto conserve carnitine (23).
Ammonium toxicity is mediated by the excessive
activation of the NMDA-type of glutamate recep-tors, mainly in acute hyperammonemia (31). Theprotective effect of carnitine (and probably othercompounds with a trimethylamine group) against
ammonium toxicity seems to be produced due to
the action of glutamate against neurotoxicity, withan increase in the binding afﬁnity of glutamate formetabotropic glutamate receptors (32).
Furthermore, there are many drugs, such as
topiramate and phenobarbital, which favor hyper-ammonemia, because of the inhibition of the
cerebral glutamine synthetase. This enzyme cata-
lyzes the reaction that produces glutamine from the
two compounds, ammonium and glutamate(Fig. 2). This glutamate is taken up by astrocytesas a protective effect against excitotoxicity (23, 33).It has also been demonstrated that phenytoin,phenobarbital, and carbamazepine lead to anincrease in 4-en-VPA which produces a decreasein acetyl-CoA availability, and this causes a
decrease in NAG. As a consequence, an increase
in serum ammonium levels is produced, whichexplains the effect of polytherapy in the develop-ment of VHE (28). On the other hand, topiramateis also an inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase, whichleads to hyperammonemia because it restricts theway of urea cycle. This synergic effect of VPA andtopiramate could explain the relationship in VHE
patients that have been taking a concomitant
treatment with topiramate (6, 34). Furthermore,it has been suggested that high serum ammoniumlevels and low carnitine levels are more pro-nounced in those patients with polytherapy(VPA, phenytoin, and phenobarbital) than inthose with monotherapy with VPA (35). VHEhas also been related to a concomitant treatment
with VPA and pivmecillinam, also known to
decrease serum carnitine concentration (36).
Other drugs, such as salicylate, favor hyperam-
monemia by facilitating the development of VHE(this fact could explain a possible physiopatholog-ical relationship with Reye’s syndrome in children)(17, 37). This increase in serum ammonium levelshas not been observed with other non-steroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen and
naproxen. And even paracetamol appears todiminish the blood ammonium level (37).
The excessive inhibition of GABA due to the use
of several drugs at the same time, which act overthe GABA receptor, could lead to clinical en-cephalopathy (6, 34). Furthermore, ammoniumseems to have an amplifying effect, direct and
indirect, over the GABAergic neurotransmission,
and is probably related to its serum level, produ-cing either depression of the central nervous systemor a neuroexcitatory effect with seizures (38).
The increase in seizure frequency in VHE could
be explained by the toxicity that high ammoniumlevels have on astrocytes, leading to an inhibitionof glutamate uptake by the cell, and the consequent
neuronal damage and cerebral swelling. Ammo-
nium is conjugated in the brain with a-ketogluta-
rate (and this reaction is catalyzed by glutamatedehydrogenase enzyme) to form glutamate(Fig. 1). Extracellular glutamate accumulationcould produce damage by excitotoxicity with theValproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy
5consequent increase in frequency of seizures (6, 7).
On the other hand, glutamate production through
the excess of ammonium could lead to depletion of
a-ketoglutarate in the brain which produces a
block in Krebs cycle. Therefore, the absence ofoxidative phosphorylation and Krebs cycle activitycould lead to irreparable cell damage and neuronaldeath (33).
The mechanism through which hyperammone-
mia leads to encephalopathy could be explained by
the mechanism explained previously and, also by
the increase in serum glutamine levels (due to theexcess of ammonium that would conjugate withglutamate to form glutamine). This, together withthe inhibition of glutamine release from astrocytesthat are exposed to ammonium, leads to anincreased glutamine level in the astrocyte. Theseraised glutamine levels increase intracellular osmo-
larity, with the consequent entry of water into the
astrocytes, which then swell. This impedes theenergetic metabolism of the astrocyte, leading tocerebral edema and a higher intracranial pressure(7). Osmotic factors are, therefore, very importantin hyperammonemia and, even if glutamine acts asan increased organic osmolyte, myo-inositol acts as
a compensatory decreased organic osmolyte in
hyperammonemic states (39). This is in agreement
with the severe depletion of myo-inositol shown in
proton MRS in a VHE patient (9, 10).
In agreement with this, Takahashi et al. man-
aged to prevent cerebral edema in hyperammone-mic rats through the irreversible inhibition of theenzyme glutamine synthetase using the stereoisom-erl-methionine S-sulfoximine (MSO). This pre-
vents the increase in glutamine in the astrocyte and
its osmotic eﬀect (40, 41). It has been suggested,therefore, that the group of hyperammonemic ratswhich were treated with MSO had a higher plasmaammonium level, and also a lower glutamine level,in the brain than those untreated, with the conse-quent decrease in cerebral water percentage. Allthese ﬁndings would suggest that the accumulation
of glutamine in the astrocyte is necessary for
cerebral swelling, and that hyperammonemia on itsown is not enough to develop VHE (39). Inhyperammonemic states the cerebral glutaminelevel, normally 5 mmol/kg of brain, increases to18 mmol/kg. An increase in extracellular potas-sium activity in the brain in hyperammonemicstates – an effect that has also been attenuated by
MSO – has been suggested. However, the probable
adverse effect of MSO in reducing the seizurethreshold which has been postulated in severalstudies in rats (although with the highest MSOdose range) and, also, clinical psychomotor agita-tion and hallucinations which occurred in a studywith terminal cancer patients, have obstructed the
chance of using MSO as a VHE treatment. The
MSO dose and the type of stereoisomer used has
not been described in these studies (39).
Conclusion
The development of progressive confusional states,sometimes severe, and sometimes coexisting withthe increase in frequency of seizures after the onset
of VPA treatment (and also after the onset of any
other treatment with topiramate, phenobarbital, orpivmecillinam in a patient in concomitant treat-ment with VPA) obliges us to rule out VHE. Inthese patients, EEG is characterized by a severeencephalopathy that tends to normalize after VPAwithdrawal. Therefore, when a VHE diagnosis issuspected the serum ammonium level and, if
possible, the blood glutamate level should be
observed. Moreover, urea cycle enzyme deﬁcien-cies, mainly OTC deﬁciency through blood ornith-ine level and urinary orotic acid level, a metabolicpathway involved in VHE physiopathology (4, 42),should be screened.
References
1.Kay JD, Hilton-Jones D, Hyman N . Valproate toxicity and
ornithine carbamoyltransferase deﬁciency. Lancet
1986; 2:1283–4.
2.Hawkes ND, Thomas GAO, Jurewicz A et al. Non-hepatic
hyperammonaemia: an important, potentially reversiblecause of encephalopathy. Postgrad Med J 2001; 77:717–22.
3.Elsas LJ, Longo N, Rosenberg LE . Enfermedades heredit-
arias del metabolismo de los aminoa ´cidos y por depo ´sito
de los mismos. In: Fauci AS, Harrison TR, eds. Principios
de Medicina Interna. Interamericana de Espan ˜a, S.A.U.:
McGraw-Hill, 1998;2497–500.
4.Oechsner M, Steen C, Stu ¨renburg HJ, Kohlscu ¨tterb A.
Hyperammonaemic encephalopathy after initiation of
valproate therapy in unrecognised ornithine transcarba-
mylase deﬁciency. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry1998; 64:680–2.
5.O’Neil M, Dubrey RW, Grocott-Mason RM . Valproate
encephalopathy and hyperammonaemia. Postgrad Med J
2002; 78:316–7.
6.Hamer HM, Knake S, Schomburg U, Rosenow F . Valproate-
induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy in the presence
of topiramate. Neurology 2000; 54:230–2.
7.Verrotti A, Trotta D, Morgese D, Chiarelli F . Valproate-
induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy. Metab Brain
Dis 2002; 17:367–73.
8.Chen W-T, Yen D-J, Yu H-Y, Liao K-K . Valproate-induced
encephalopathy. Chin Med J 2001; 64:474–8.
9.Ziyeh S, Thiel T, Spreer J, Klisch J, Schumacher M . Val-
proate-induced encephalopathy: assessment with MR
imaging and 1H MR spectroscopy. Epilepsia2002; 43:1101–5.
10.Takanashi J, Kurihara A, Tomita M et al. Distinctly
abnormal brain metabolism in late-onset ornithine tran-
scarbamylase deﬁciency. Neurology 2002; 59:210–4.Segura-Bruna et al.
611.Sobaniec-Lotowska ME . Ultrastructure of astrocytes in
the cortex of the hippocampal gyrus and in the neo-
cortex of the temporal lobe in experimental valproateencephalopathy and after withdrawal. Int J Exp Pathol2003; 84:115.
12.Sobaniec-Lotowska ME . Ultrastructure of synaptic junc-
tions in the cerebellar cortex in experiments valproate en-cephalopathy and after terminating chronic application ofthe antiepileptic. Folia Neuropathol 2002; 40:87–96.
13.Sobaniec-Lotowska ME . Ultrastructure of Purkinje cells
and their dendritic processes in the rat cerebellar cortex inexperimental encephalopathy induced by chronic applica-tion of valproate. Int J Exp Pathol 2001; 82:337.
14.Gidal BE, Inglese CM, Meyer JF, Pitterle ME, Antonopo-
lous J, Rust RS . Diet-and valproate-induced transient hy-
perammonemia: eﬀect of l-carnitine. Pediatr Neurol
1997; 16:301–5.
15.Katano H, Fukushima T, Karasawa K, Sugiyama N, Ohkura
A, Kamiya K . Primidone-induced hyperammonemic en-
cephalopathy in a patient with cerebral astrocytoma. J Clin
Neurosci 2002; 9:79–81.
16.Coulter DL, Allen RJ . Secondary hyperammonemia: a
possible mechanism for valproate encephalopathy. Lancet1980; 2:1310–1.
17.Code FX, Rabier D, Cathelinerau L, Grimber G, Parvy P,
Kamoun P . A mechanism for valproate-induced hyperam-
monemia. Adv Exp Med Biol 1982; 153:153–61.
18.Holowach Thurston J, Carroll JE, Hauhart RE, Schiro JA .
A single therapeutic dose of valproate aﬀects liver carbo-hydrate, fat, adenylate, amino acid, coenzyme A, andcarnitine metabolism in infant mice: possible clinical sig-
niﬁcance. Life Sci 1985; 36:1643–51.
19.Vainstein G, Korzets Z, Pomeranz A, Gadot N . Deepening
coma in a epileptic patient: the missing link to the ureacycle. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002; 17:1351–3.
20.Leao MMD . Valproate as a cause of hyperammonemia in
heterozygotes with ornithine-transcarbamylase deﬁciency.Neurology 1995; 45:593–4.
21.Honeycutt D, Callahan K, Rutledge L, Evans B . Hetero-
zygote ornithine transcarbamylase deﬁciency presenting assymptomatic hyperammonemia during initiation of val-proate therapy. Neurology 1992; 42:666–8.
22.Tein I, Xie ZW . Reversal of valproic acid-associated
impairment of carnitine uptake in cultured human skinﬁbroblasts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994; 204:753–
8.
23.Stadler DD, Bale JF, Chenard CA, Rebouche CJ . Eﬀect of
long-term valproic acid administration on the eﬃciency ofcarnitine reabsorption in humans. Metabolism 1999; 48:74–
9.
24.Beversdorf D, Allen C, Nordgren R . Valproate-induced
encephalopathy treated with carnitine in an adult. J NeurolNeurosurg Psychiatry 1996; 61:211.
25.Bohan TP, Helton E, MacDonald I et al. Eﬀect of l-car-
nitine treatment for valproate-induced hepatotoxicity.Neurology 2001; 56:1405–9.26.Osuna MT, Burcet J, Ramio ´L, Ustrell X, Silva Y, Molins A .
Encefalopatı ´a hiperamonie ´mica asociada al uso de val-
proato so ´dico. Neurologia 2003; 18:347–50.
27.Sztajnkrycer MD . A reply to /C212Carnitine /C213and /C212Role of car-
nitine in valproic acid toxicity /C213. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
2003; 41:901–2.
28.McCall M, Bourgeois JA . Valproic acid-induced hyper-
ammonemia: a case report. J Clin Psychopharmacol2004; 24:521–6.
29.Vossler DG, Wilensky AJ, Cawthon DF et al. Serum and
CSF glutamine levels in valproate-related hyperammone-mic encephalopathy. Epilepsia 2002; 43:154–9.
30.Averbuch-Heller L, Ben-Hur T, Reches A . Valproate
encephalopathy and hypocarnitinaemia in diabetic
patients. J Neurol 1994; 241:567–9.
31.Felipo V, Butterworth RF . Neurochemistry of ammonia.
Neurochem Int 2002; 41:79.
32.Llansola M, Erceg S, Herna ´ndez-Viadel M, Felipo V . Pre-
vention of ammonia and glutamate neurotoxicity by car-nitine: molecular mechanisms. Metab Brain Dis
2002; 17:389–97.
33.Sua´rez I, Bodega G, Ferna ´ndez B . Glutamine synthetase
in brain: eﬀect of ammonia. Neurochem Int 2002; 41:
123–42.
34.Gail E, Solomon GE . Valproate-induced hyperammonemic
encephalopathy in the presence of topiramate. Neurology2000; 55:606.
35.Shakoor KA, Khan K . Valproic acid-induced hepatotoxicity
and protective role of carnitina. Pakistan J Pathol1997; 8:133–4.
36.Lokrantz CM, Eriksson B, Rosen I, Asztely F . Hyperam-
monemic encephalopathy induced by a combination of
valproate and pivmecillinam. Acta Neurol Scand2004; 109:297–301.
37.Uetrecht JP . Salicylate potentiates valproate-induced hy-
perammonemia in the rat. Pharmacology 1987; 34:279–85.
38.Basile AS . Direct and indirect enhancement of GABAergic
neurotransmission by ammonia: implications for the
pathogenesis of hyperammonemic syndromes. Neurochem
Int 2002; 41:115–22.
39.Brusilow SW . Hyperammonemic encephalopathy. Medi-
cine 2002; 81:240–9.
40.Takahashi H, Koehler RC, Brusilow SW, Traystman RJ .
Inhibition of brain glutamine accumulation prevents cer-ebral edema in hyperammonemic rats. Am J Physiol HeartCirc Physiol 1991; 261:825–9.
41.Willard-Mack CL, Koehler RC, Hirata T et al. Inhibition
of glutamine synthetase reduces ammonia-induced astro-cyte swelling in rat. Neuroscience 1996; 71:589–99.
42.Sheali G, Shaji M, Madhulika K, Veena K . Intermittent
hyperammonemic encephalopathy in a child with ornithine
transcarbamylase deﬁciency. Indian J Pediatr 2004; 71:
645–8.Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy
7