The trypanosome
ﬂagellum
Sue Vaughan and Keith Gull*
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK
*Author for correspondence (e-mail:
keith.gull@path.ox.ac.uk)
Journal of Cell Science 116, 757-759 
© 2003 The Company of Biologists Ltd
doi:10.1242/jcs.00287
Movie available online
Introduction
African Trypanosomes are ﬂagellated
protozoan parasites that cause sleepingsickness in humans and Nagana in cattle.During its life cycle, Trypanosoma
bruceialternates between an insect
vector (tsetse ﬂy) and a mammalian host.Within each of these, the parasite
proliferates and undergoes separateperiods of differentiation in preparationfor each new host/vector environment.The differentiated cell types of thetrypanosome life cycle are deﬁnedmorphologically by the position of thesingle ﬂagellum, nucleus and kinetoplast(the single mass of mitochondrialDNA). The ﬂagellum is key to thesemorphological events and hence muchattention has focused recently onunderstanding its role in trypanosomemorphogenesis and pathogenicity.However, the tractable cell biology,reverse genetics and advanced genomeproject mean that the trypanosome isalso emerging as an ideal modelorganism for the studies of eukaryoticﬂagella and cilia in general.Flagellum functions:
morphogenesis to pathogenicity
The positioning of the mitochondrial
genome in the kinetoplast is a directconsequence of the position andsegregation of the ﬂagellum basal bodies(Robinson and Gull, 1991). In addition,the construction of a set of internalcytoskeletal microtubules and ﬁlamentsare inﬂuenced by, and at times deﬁnedby, the ontogeny of the externalﬂagellum. Given that these cytoskeletalstructures also deﬁne three distinctplasma membrane regions (the ﬂagellummembrane, the cell body membrane andthe ﬂagellar pocket membrane), theﬂagellum exhibits a pivotal role inmorphogenesis of the trypanosome withmany functions beyond those of motility(Gull, 1999). 
Cell Science at a Glance 757
(See poster insert)
758
The trypanosome ﬂagellum is now
recognized as a major contributor topathogenicity of these parasites. In thiscontext, it contributes motility functionsimportant in moving both thetrypanosome and surface molecules,sensory recognition of the host/vectorenvironment and, ﬁnally, recognition andattachment necessary for immobilizingthe parasite at vector surfaces at certaincritical life-cycle stages (Borst andFairlamb, 1998; Gull, 1999).
The intrinsic feature of the trypanosome
ﬂagellum is that the existing ﬂagellum ismaintained and a new ﬂagellum isproduced during each cell cycle. Giventhat many of the trypanosome organellesexist as single copies, the basic issuefacing the cell is a problem ofcoordinated duplication and segregationof structures and organelles, some in aconservative and some in a semi-conservative manner (Gull, 1999).
Flagellum structure
The single ﬂagellum exits the ﬂagellar
pocket at the posterior end of thetrypanosome and is attached to the cellbody along its length. In ultrastructuralterms, the ﬂagellum exhibits a canonical‘9+2’ microtubule axoneme, as well asa lattice-like structure termed theparaﬂagellar rod (PFR). The ﬂagellum isattached to the cell body by a uniqueﬁlament and positioned alongside this inthe subpellicular array is a set of fourspecialised microtubules; together thesetwo elements constitute the ﬂagellumattachment zone (FAZ). This FAZﬁlament and specialised microtubulesoriginate close to the basal bodies at theproximal end of the ﬂagellum in theﬂagellar pocket zone (Sherwin and Gull,1989a). Duplication and positioning ofthe elements within this zone are centralto the morphological modulationsobserved during cell differentiation andcell proliferation (Gull, 1999).
The ﬂagellum and cell
morphogenesis
Modulations in cell form that
characterise the life-cycle stages rangefrom what might appear to be simplechanges in cell body length (the slenderto stumpy bloodstream forms), to majorcell-shape- and organelle-positioningevents such as those of the epimastigote
form. However simple these cell shapemodulations may seem, they must takeplace within the conﬁnes of the existingsubpellicular microtubule cytoskeleton,which remains intact during both celldifferentiation and cell proliferation(Gull, 1999).
Essentially three processes encapsulate
the morphological events involved incell proliferation and cell differentiationin T. brucei – duplication, positioning
and segregation. The earliestmorphological events in cellproliferation occur with duplication ofthe basal bodies, formation of the newﬂagellum and other connectedcytoskeletal elements. The preciseduplication and positioning of thesecytoskeletal elements are crucial toensure correct segregation to the twodaughter cells (Gull, 1999). These earlyevents occur in a strict temporal orderand are coordinated with the periodickinetoplast S-phase to ensure that theduplicated mitochondrial genome isconnected to the duplicated basal bodies,securing its inheritance and segregationto the two new daughter cells (Robinsonand Gull, 1991). 
Once duplication and positioning of the
new ﬂagellum and connected elementsare achieved, the process of building anew subpellicular array of microtubulesbegins. This occurs by the insertionof new microtubules between oldmicrotubules, such that the complex issegregated semi-conservatively to eachdaughter trypanosome (Sherwin andGull, 1989b). Details of these eventsvary slightly between the bloodstreamand vector forms of the parasite. Thedetails below, poster and movie (seehttp://jcs.biologists.org/supplemental)describe the events of the procyclic(tsetse midgut) form of the parasite.
Spatial patterning and the
ﬂagellum
The precise 2D positioning of the
cytoskeletal elements and their temporalorder of duplication and positioningthroughout the cell proliferation cycle inT. brucei is well described. However, it
is clear that an appreciation of the 3Dspatial positionings are critical forunderstanding the mechanisms ofinheritance of pattern and form in T.
brucei. This is exempliﬁed by recent
experiments, which, with the discoveryof the ﬂagella connector in the procyclicform, have highlighted a templatingmechanism involving the trypanosomeﬂagellum. The extending new ﬂagellumis always positioned posterior to the oldﬂagellum and its distal tip is connectedto the side of the old ﬂagellum by adistinct structure, the ﬂagella connector.The ﬂagella connector ‘tracks’ along theold ﬂagellum as the new ﬂagellumextends, replicating the helical path ofthe old ﬂagellum, until the new ﬂagellumreaches full length. Axis and polarityinformation embedded in existing cellstructure is, therefore, used in acytotactic process to inﬂuence themorphogenesis of the new cell (Moreira-Leite et al., 2001). 
Spatial organisation is an important
aspect to our understanding of manycellular processes that are of interest tocell biologists (e.g. mitotic spindleassembly/disassembly, cell division,centrosome duplication and cellpolarity). The complexity of cytoskeletalconstruction and remodelling within theconﬁnes of the intact cytoskeleton of T.
bruceiis an example of the difficulties
faced in attempting to understandand explain spatial organisation.Construction of the 3D spatial models inthis poster and the accompanying movieresulted from a collaboration betweenlaboratory scientists and computergraphic artists. The requirements ofproviding a distinct spatial blue-print tothe graphic artists proved to be anexcellent test of the laboratory scientist’sknowledge. It led to the formulation of anumber of new research programmesand highlighted the lack of real 3D detailin the descriptions of many cellbiological systems. The use of newcomputer technology to enable 3Dspatial organisation of different types ofcell biological data to be documented,visualized and analysed at highresolution has increasing relevance.However, our experience is that whendeveloped in an interactive manner, itnot only facilitates visualisation ofcomplicated events, but also highlightsdata limitations and enables formulationof new questions.
We acknowledge collaboration of Robert Kay and
George Leaver (Manchester Visualization Centre,Journal of Cell Science 116 (5)University of Manchester), and Ian Miller
(Graphics Unit, University of Manchester). Thiswork was supported by a Wellcome TrustProgramme Grant. Keith Gull is supported by aWellcome Trust Principal Fellowship. 
References
Borst, P. and Fairlamb, A. (1998). Surface
receptors and transporters of Trypanosoma brucei .
Annu. Rev. Microbiol .52, 745-778.
Gull, K. (1999). The cytoskeleton of
Trypanosomatid Parasites. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
53, 629-655.Moreira-Leite, F. F., Sherwin, T., Kohl, L. and
Gull, K.(2001). A trypanosome structure involved
in transmitting cytoplasmic information during celldivision. Science 294, 601-602.
Robinson, D. R. and Gull, K. (1991). Basal body
movement as a mechanism for mitochondrialgenome segregation in the trypanosome cell cycle.Nature 352, 731-734.
Sherwin, T. and Gull, K. (1989a). The cell-
division cycle of Trypanosoma brucei brucei –
timing of event markers and cytoskeletalmodulation. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser B .
323, 573-588.
Sherwin, T. and Gull, K. (1989b). Visualisationof detyrosination along single microtubules reveals
novel mechanisms of assembly during cytoskeletalduplication in trypanosomes. Cell 57, 211-221.Cell Science at a Glance 759
Cell Science at a Glance on the Web
Electronic copies of the poster insert are
available in the online version of this article
at jcs.biologists.org. The JPEG images can
be downloaded for printing or used as
slides.
Year 2003 Travelling Fellowships
JCS offers fellowships of up to US$4000 to graduate students and post-docs wishing to make
collaborative visits to other laboratories.These are designed to cover the cost of travel andother expenses, and there is no restriction on nationality. Applicants should be working inthe ﬁeld of cell biology and intend to visit a laboratory in another country. Each applicationis judged on the excellence of the candidate, and the importance and innovative quality ofthe work to be done.
Application forms can be downloaded from our Web site at http://jcs.biologists.org. Please
send the completed application form,together with a copy of your CV,an account of the workto be done and a breakdown of the costs involved,as well as letters of recommendation fromthe heads of the laboratory in which you currently work and the laboratory you hope to visit,to the Production Editor at the address below.
Journal of Cell Science Editorial Office,
The Company of Biologists Limited, Bidder Building, 140 Cowley Road,
Cambridge CB4 0DL, UK
Next deadline: 30 April 2003