United States
Environmental Protection
AgencyOffice of Water
Washington, D.C.EPA 832-F-00-016
September 2000
Wastewater
Technology Fact Sheet
Package Plants
DESCRIPTION
Package  plants are pre-manufactured treatment
facilities  used to treat wastewater in small
communities or on individual properties.
According  to manufacturers, package plants can be
designed  to treat flows as low as 0.002 MGD or as
high as 0.5 MGD, although they more commonly
treat flows between 0.01 and 0.25 MGD (Metcalf
and Eddy, 1991).
The most common types of package plants are
extended  aeration plants, sequencing batch reactors,
oxidation ditches, contact stabilization plants,
rotating biological contactors, and
physical/chemical  processes (Metcalf and Eddy,
1991 ).  This fact sheet focuses on the first three, all
of which are biological aeration processes.
Extended aeration plants
The extended aeration process is one modification
of the activated sludge process which provides
biological treatment for the removal of
biodegradable  organic wastes under aerobic
conditions.   Air may be supplied by mechanical or
diffused  aeration to provide the oxygen required to
sustain  the aerobic biological process.  Mixing must
be provided by aeration or mechanical means to
maintain  the microbial organisms in contact with
the dissolved organics.  In addition, the pH must be
controlled  to optimize the biological process and
essent ial nutrients must be present to facilitate
biological  growth and the continuation of biological
degradation.
As depicted in Figure 1, wastewater enters the
treatment  system and is typically screenedimmediately  to remove large suspended, settleable,
or floating solids that could interfere with or
damage  equipment downstream in the process.
Wastewater may then pass through a grinder to
reduce  large particles that are not captured in the
screening process.  If the plant requires the flow to
be regulated, the effluent will then flow into
equaliz ation basins which regulate peak wastewater
flow rates.  Wastewater then enters the aeration
chamber, where it is mixed and oxygen is  provided
to the microorganisms.  The mixed liquor then
flows  to a clarifier or settling chamber where most
microorganisms  settle to the bottom of the clarifier
and a portion are pumped back to the incoming
wastewater  at the beginning of the plant.  This
returned material is the return activated sludge
(RAS).   The material that is not returned, the waste
activated  sludge (WAS), is removed for treatment
and disposal.  The clarified wastewater then flows
over a weir and into a collection channel before
being diverted to the disinfection system.Influent
Screening/
GrindingFlow
Equalization
(if required)Extended
AerationDigestionTo Solids Handling,
Disposal, or
Beneficial Reuse
Clarification DisinfectionEffluentWaste Activated
Sludge (WAS)Return Activated
Sludge (RAS)
Source: Parsons Engineering Science, 2000.
FIGURE 1 PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM
FOR A TYPICAL EXTENDED AERATION
PLANTExtended  aeration package plants consist of a steel
tank that is compartmentalized into flow
equalization,  aeration, clarification, disinfection,
and aerated sludge holding/digestion segments.
Extended aeration systems are typically
manufactured  to treat wastewater flow rates
between  0.002 to 0.1 MGD.  Use of concrete tanks
may be preferable for larger sizes (Sloan, 1999).
Extended  aeration plants are usually started up
using "seed  sludge" from another sewage plant.  It
may take as many as two to four weeks from the
time it is seeded for the plant to stabilize (Sloan,
1999).
Sequencing batch reactors
A sequencing batch reactor (SBR) is a  variation of
the activated sludge process.  As a fill and draw or
batch  process, all biological treatment phases occur
in a single tank.  This differs  from the conventional
flow through activated sludge process in that SBRs
do not require separate tanks for aeration and
sedimentation  (Kappe, 1999).  SBR systems contain
either  two or more reactor tanks that are operated in
parallel,  or one equalization tank and one reactor
tank.   The type of tank used depends on the
wastewater  flow characteristics (e.g. high or low
volume).   While this setup allows the system to
accommodate  continuous influent flow, it does not
provide  for disinfection or holding for aerated
sludge.
There  are many types of SBR systems, including
continu ous influent/time based, non-continuous
influent/tim e based, volume based, an intermittent
cycle  system (a SBR that utilizes jet aeration), and
various  other system modifications based on
different  manufacturer designs.  The type of SBR
system used depends on site and wastewater
characteristics as well as the needs of the area or
community  installing the unit.  Package SBRs are
typic ally manufactured to treat wastewater flow
rates between 0.01 and 0.2 MGD; although flow
rates  can vary based on the system and
manufacturer.
As seen in Figure 2, the influent flow first goes
through  a screening process before entering the
SBR.  The waste is  then treated in a series of batchphases  within the SBR to achieve the desired
effluent concentration.  The sludge that is wasted
from  the SBR moves on to digestion and eventually
to solids handling, disposal, or beneficial reuse.
The treated effluent then moves to disinfection.  An
equalization  tank is typically needed before the
disinfection  unit in batch SBRs in order to store
large  volumes of water.  If the flow is not equalized,
a sizable filter may be necessary to accommodate
the large flow of water entering the disinfection
system.   In addition, SBR systems typically have no
primary  or secondary clarifiers as settling takes
place in the SBR.
There  are normally five phases in the SBR
treatment  cycle: fill, react, settle, decant, and idle.
The length of time that each phase occurs is
controlled  by a programmable logic controller
(PLC),  which allows the system to be controlled
from  remote locations (Sloan, 1999).  In the fill
phase,  raw wastewater enters the basin, where it is
mixed  with settled biomass from the previous cycle.
Some  aeration may occur during this phase.  Then,
in the react phase, the basin is aerated, allowing
oxidation  and nitrification to occur.  During the
settling  phase, aeration and mixing are suspended
and the solids are allowed to settle.  The treated
wastewater  is then discharged from the basin in the
decant  phase.  In the final phase, the basin is idle as
it waits for the start of the next cycle.  During this
time,  part of the solids are removed from the basin
and disposed of as waste sludge (Kappe, 1999).
Figure  3 shows this sequence of operation in an
SBR.Influent
Screening/
GrindingSBR DisinfectionEffluentDigestionTo Solids Handling,
Disposal, or
Beneficial Reuse
Source: Parsons Engineering Science, 2000.
FIGURE 2  PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM
FOR A TYPICAL SBRSludge wasting is an important step in the SBR
process and  largely affects system performance.  It
is not considered a basic phase since the sludge is
not wasted at a specific time period during the
cycle.   The quantity and rate of wasting is
determined  by performance requirements.  An SBR
system  does not require an RAS system, as both
aeration  and settling occur in the same tank.  This
prevents any sludge from being lost during the react
step and eliminates the need to return sludge from
the clarifier to the aeration chamber (Metcalf and
Eddy, 1991).
Oxidation ditches
An oxidation ditch, a modified form of the
activated sludge process, is an aerated, long term,
complete  mix process.  Many systems are designed
to operate as extended aeration systems.  Typical
oxidation  ditch treatment systems consist of a single
or multi-channel configuration within a ring, oval,
or horseshoe-shaped basin.  Horizontally or
vertically  mounted aerators provide aeration,
circulation, and oxygen transfer in the ditch.
Package oxidation ditches are typically
manufactured  in sizes that treat wastewater flow
rates  between 0.01 and 0.5 MGD.  As seen in
Figure  4, raw wastewater is first screened before
entering  the oxidation ditch.  Depending on the
system size and manufacturer type, a grit chamber
may be required.  Once inside the ditch, thewastewat er is aerated with mechanical surface or
submer sible aerators (depending on manufacturer
design)  that propel the mixed liquor around the
channel  at velocities high enough to prevent solids
deposition.   The aerator ensures that there is
sufficient oxygen in the fluid for the microbes and
adequate  mixing to ensure constant contact between
the organisms and the food supply (Lakeside,
1999).
Oxidation  ditches tend to operate in an extended
aeration  mode consisting of long hydraulic and
solids  retention times which allow more organic
matter  to break down.  Treated sewage moves to the
settling  tank or final clarifier, where the biosolids
and water separate.  Wastewater then moves to
other  treatment processes while sludge is removed.
Part of it is returned to the ditch as RAS, while the
rest is removed from the process as the waste
activated  sludge (WAS).  WAS is wasted either
continuously  or daily and must be stabilized prior to
disposal or beneficial reuse.
APPLICABILITY
In general, package treatment plants are  applicable
for areas with a limited number of people and small
wastewate r flows.  They are most often used in
remote  locations such as trailer parks, highway rest
areas, and rural areas.
Extended aeration plants
Extended  aeration package plants are typically used
in small municipalities, suburban subdivisions,
apartment  complexes, highway rest areas, trailerAir On
Air OnMixed Fill
React FillInfluent
Influent
ReactSettleMixer
Decanter
Effluent
Discharge
Wasted SludgeDecant
Source: CASS Water Engineering, Inc., 2000.
FIGURE 3 SBR SEQUENCE OF
OPERATIONInfluent
Screening/
GrindingOxidation
DitchDigestionTo Solids Handling,
Disposal, or Beneficial
Reuse
Clarification DisinfectionEffluentWaste Activated
Sludge (WAS) Return Activated Sludge (RAS)
Source: Parsons Engineering Science, 1999.
FIGURE 4  PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM
FOR A TYPICAL OXIDATION DITCHparks,  small institutions, and other sites where flow
rates are  below 0.1 MGD.  These systems are also
useful for areas requiring nitrification.
Sequencing batch reactors
Package  plant SBRs are suitable for areas with little
land,  stringent treatment requirements, and small
wastewater  flows.  More specifically, SBRs are
appropriate  for RV parks or mobile homes,
campgrounds,  construction sites, rural schools,
hotels,  and other small applications.  These systems
are also useful for treating pharmaceutical, brewery,
dairy, pulp and  paper, and chemical wastes.  While
constant  cycles with time-fixed process phases are
sufficient  in most cases, phases should be
individually  adapted and optimized for each plant.
SBRs  are also suited for sites that need minimal
operator  attendance and that have a wide range of
inflow and/or organic loadings.  
Industries  with high BOD loadings, such as
chemical  or food processing plants, will find SBRs
useful  for treating wastewater.  These systems are
also suitable for facilities requiring nitrification,
denitrification,  and phosphorous removal.  Most
significantly,  SBRs are applicable for areas where
effluent  requirements can change frequently and
become stricter,  as these systems have tremendous
flexibil ity to change treatment options.  However,
part of the economic advantage of the SBR process
is lost when advanced treatment processes must be
added  downstream since intermediate equalization
is normally required.
Oxidation ditches
Oxidation  ditches are suitable for facilities that
require  nutrient removal, have limitations due to the
nature of the site, or want a biological system that
saves  energy with limited use of chemicals unless
required  for further treatment.  Oxidation ditch
technology  can be used to treat any type of
wastewater that is responsive to aerobic
degradation.   In addition, systems can be designed
for denitrification and phosphorous removal.
Types  of industries utilizing oxidation ditches
include:  food processing, meat and poultry packing,
breweries,  pharmaceutical,  milk processing,petrochemical, and numerous other types.
Oxidation  ditches are particularly useful for
schools,  small industries, housing developments,
and small communities.  Ultimately, this technology
is most applicable for places that have a large
amount of land available.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
Some  advantages and disadvantages of package
plants are listed below.
Extended aeration plants
Advantages
CPlants  are easy to operate, as many are manned
for a maximum of two or three hours per day.
CExtended  aeration processes are often better at
handling organic loading and flow fluctuations,
as there is a greater detention time for the
nutrients to be assimilated by microbes.
CSystems are easy to install, as they are shipped in
one or two pieces and then mounted on an onsite
concrete pad, above or below grade.
CSystems  are odor free, can be installed in most
locations,  have a relatively small footprint, and
can be landscaped to match the surrounding
area.
CExtended  aeration systems have a relatively low
sludge  yield due to long sludge ages, can be
designed  to provide nitrification, and do not
require a primary clarifier.
Disadvantages
CExtended  aeration plants do not achieve
denitrification  or phosphorus removal without
additional unit processes.
CFlexibility is limited to adapt to changing
effluent  requirements resulting from regulatory
changes.
CA longer aeration period requires more energy.CSystems  require a larger amount of space and
tankage  than other "higher rate" processes,
which have shorter aeration detention times.
Sequencing batch reactors
Advantages
CSBR s can consistently perform nitrification as
well as denitrification and phosphorous removal.
CSBRs have large operational flexibility.
CThe ability to control substrate tension within
the system allows for optimization of treatment
efficiency and control over nitrogen removal,
filamentous  organisms, and the overall stability
of the process.
CSince  all the unit processes are operated in a
single  tank, there is no need to optimize aeration
and decanting to comply with power
requirements  and lower decant discharge rates.
CSludge bulking is not a problem.
CSignifi cant reductions in nitrate nitrogen can
occur  by incorporating an anoxic cycle in the
system.
CSBRs  have little operation and maintenance
problems.
CSystems require less space than extended
aeration plants of equal capacity.
CSBRs  can be manned part time from remote
locations,  and operational changes can be made
easily.
CThe system allows for automatic and positive
control  of mixed liquor suspended solids
(MLSS)  concentration and solids retention time
(SRT) through the use of sludge wasting.
Disadvantages
CIt is hard to adjust the cycle times for small
communities.CPost equalization may be required where more
treatment is needed.
CSludge must be disposed frequently.
CSpecific energy consumption is high.
Oxidation ditches
Advantages
CSystems are well-suited for treating typical
domestic waste, have moderate energy
requirements,  and work effectively under most
types of weather.
COxidation  ditches provide an inexpensive
wastewater  treatment option with both low
operation  and maintenance costs and operational
needs.
CSystems  can be used with or without clarifiers,
which affects flexibility and cost.
CSystems  consistently provide high quality
effluent  in terms of TSS, BOD, and ammonia
levels.
COxidation  ditches have a relatively low sludge
yield,  require a moderate amount of operator
skill, and are capable of handling shock and
hydraulic loadings.
Disadvantages
COxidation  ditches can be noisy due to
mixer/aeration equipment, and tend to produce
odors when not operated correctly.
CBiological  treatment is unable to treat highly
toxic waste streams.
CSystems have a relatively large footprint.
CSystems  have less flexibility should regulations
for effluent requirements change.DESIGN CRITERIA
Table  1 lists typical design parameters for  extended
aeration plants, SBRS, and oxidation ditches.
Extended aeration plants
Package extended aeration plants are typically
constructed  from steel or concrete.  If the system is
small  enough, the entire system will arrive as one
unit that is ready to be installed.  If the system is
larger,  the clarifier, aeration chamber, and chlorine
tank are  delivered as separate units, which are then
assembled on-site (WEF, 1985).
Key internal components of extended aeration
treatment plants consist of the following: transfer
pumps to move wastewater between the
equalization  and aeration zones; a bar screen and/or
grinder  to decrease the size of large solids; anaeration system consisting  of blowers and diffusers
for the equalization, aeration, and sludge holding
zones; an airlift pump for returning sludge; a
skimmer  and effluent weir for the clarifier; and UV,
liquid  hypochlorite, or tablet modules used in the
disinfection  zone.  Blowers and the control panel
containing  switches, lights, and motor starters are
typically  attached to either the top or one side of the
package plant (Sloan, 1999).
Biological  organisms within the system need
sufficient  contact time with the organic material in
order  to produce effluent of an acceptable quality.
Typical  contact time for extended aeration package
plants  is approximately 18-24 hours.  The contact
time,  daily flow rate, influent parameters, and
effluent  parameters  determine the size of the
aeration tank where air is used to mix wastewater
and to supply oxygen to promote biological growth.
A package  extended aeration system is sized based
on the average volume of wastewater produced
within  a twenty-four hour period.  Although
provisions  are made for some peaking factor, a flow
equalization  system may be necessary to prevent
overloading  of the system from inconsistent flow
rates in the morning and evening.  Equalization
allows  the wastewater to be delivered to the
treatment  plant at more manageable flow rates
(WEF, 1985).
Systems  should be installed at sites where
wastewater  collection is possible by gravity flow.
In addition, the site should be stable, well drained,
and not prone to flooding.  The facility should be
installed  at least 30 meters (100 feet) from all
residential  areas and be in accordance with all
health  department regulations or zoning restrictions
(WEF, 1985).
In order to ensure ease of operation and
maintenanc e, extended aeration systems should be
installed  so that the tank walls extend nearly 0.15
meters (6 inches) above ground.  This will supply
insulation  in the winter, prevent surface runoff from
infiltrat ing the system, and allow the system to be
serviced  readily.  If a plant is installed below
ground,  it must have distinct diversion ditching or
extension walls in order to prevent surface water
infiltration into the plant.  When the plant is
installed  completely above ground, it may beTABLE 1  TYPICAL DESIGN
PARAMETERS FOR PACKAGE PLANTS
Extended
AerationSBR Oxidation
Ditch
BOD 5 loading
(F:M)
(lb BOD 5/ lb
MLVSS)0.05 - 0.15 0.05 -
0.300.05 - 0 30
Oxygen
Required
Avg. at 20 EEC
(lb/lb BOD 5
applied)2 - 3 2 - 3 2 - 3
Oxygen
Required
Peak at 20 EEC
(value x avg.
flow)1.5 - 2.0 1.25 -
2.01.5 - 2.0
MLSS (mg/L) 3000 -6000 1500
-50003000 -6000
Detention Time
(hours)18 - 36 16 -
3618 - 36
Volumetric
Loading 
(lb BOD 5/d/ 103
cu ft)10 - 25 5 - 15 5 - 30
Source:  Adapted from Metcalf and Eddy, 1991 and
WEF, 1998.necessary  to provide insulation for cold weather and
walkways for easy maintenance (WEF, 1985).
Sequencing batch reactors
Importan t internal components include an aeration
system,  which typically consists of diffusers and a
blower;  a floating mixer; an effluent decanter; a
pump for withdrawing sludge; and a sequence of
liquid  level floats.  The PLC and the control panel
are usually positioned within a nearby control
building (Sloan, 1999).
When  the wastewater flow rate at the site is less
than 0.05 MGD, a single, prefabricated steel tank
can be used.  This tank is divided into one SBR
basin,  one aerobic sludge digester, and one influent
pump  well.  Concrete tanks may also be used, but in
North America are  not as cost effective as steel for
small systems.  If the plant must be able to treat 0.1
to 1.5 MGD, multiple concrete SBR basins are
commonly used (CASS, 1999).
The design of SBR systems can be based on
carbonaceous  BOD removal only or both
carbonaceous  and nitrogenous BOD removal.  The
system  can be expanded to achieve optimum
nitrification  and carbonaceous removal by operating
primarily in an oxic state with few anoxic periods
such as during settle and decant.
Denitrification  and biological phosphorous removal
can be promoted by providing adequate anoxic
periods after intense aerobic cycles.  This allows
DO to be dissipated and nitrate to be used by the
consuming  organism and released as elemental
nitrogen.   By introducing an anaerobic process after
the anoxic process, bacteria conducive to excess
phosphorous  uptake will develop.  Phosphorous
will be released in the anaerobic phase, but
additional  phosphorous is incorporated into the cell
mass  during subsequent aerobic cycles.  Since the
excess  phosphorous is incorporated in the cell mass,
cell wastage must be practiced to achieve a net
phosph orous removal.  Anaerobic conditions should
be avoided in treating the waste sludge since they
may result in the release of the phosphorous.
A low food to microorganism (F:M) ratio SBR
system  designed for an average municipal flowpattern  will usually have an operating cycle
duration of  four hours, or six cycles per day.  For a
two reactor system, there will be twelve  cycles per
day and for a four reactor system, twenty-four
cycles per day.  The distribution and  number of
cycles  per day can be adjusted based on specific
treatment requirements or to accommodate alternate
inflow patterns.
Cycle sequences are time controlled with  sufficient
volume  provided to handle design flow rates.  If
incoming  flow is significantly less than the design
flow, only a portion of the reactor capacity is
utilized  and aeration time periods can be reduced to
save energy and prevent over aeration.  If flow rates
are greater than usual resulting from storm runoff,
the control system detects the high rise in the
reactor  and modifies the cycle to integrate peak
flow rates.  This will shorten the aeration, settle,
and decant sequences, minimize the anoxic
sequence  (if supplied), and provide more cycles per
day.  As a result, hydraulic surges are incorporated
and the diluted wastewater is processed in less time.
In order to make the above optimizations, the logic
control must be provided by the PLC (Kappe,
1999).
Small  SBRs can experience a variety of problems
associated  with operation, maintenance, and
loadings.   Therefore, more conservative design
criteria  are typically used due to the wide range of
organic  and hydraulic loads generated from small
communities.   This type of design utilizes a lower
F:M ratio and longer hydraulic retention time
(HRT) and SRT (CASS, 1999).
Oxidation ditches
Key components of a typical oxidation ditch
include  a screening device, an influent distributor
(with  some systems), a basin or channel, aeration
devices  (mechanical aerators, jet mixers, or
diffusers,  depending on the manufacturer),  a
settling tank or final clarifier (with some systems),
and an RAS system (with some systems).
Typic ally, the basin and the clarifier are
individually  sized to meet the specific requirements
of each facility.  These components are often built
to share a common wall in order to reduce costs and
save space (Lakeside, 1999).Conc rete tanks are typically used when installing
package  plant oxidation ditches.  This results in
lower  maintenance costs as concrete tanks do not
require  periodic repainting or sand blasting.
Fabricated  steel or a combination of steel and
concrete can also be used for construction,
depending on site conditions (Lakeside, 1999).
The volume of the oxidation ditch is determined
based  on influent wastewater characteristics,
effluent  discharge requirements, HRT, SRT,
temperature,  mixed liquor suspended solids
(MLSS),  and pH.  It may be necessary to include
other  site specific parameters to design the
oxidation ditch as well.
Some  oxidation ditches do not initially require
clarifiers, but can later be upgraded and expanded
by adding clarifiers, changing the type of process
used, or adding additional ditches (Kruger, 1999).
PERFORMANCE
The performance of package plants in general can
be affected by various operational and design issues
(Metcalf and Eddy, 1991).
CLarge and sudden temperature changes
CRemoval  efficiency of grease and scum from the
primary  clarifier (except with oxidation ditches
that do not use primary clarifiers) 
CIncredibly small flows  that make designing self-
cleansing conduits and channels difficult
CFluctuations  in flow, BOD 5 loading, and other
influent parameters
CHydraulic  shock loads, or the large fluctuations
in flow from small communities
CSufficient control of the air supply rate
Extended aeration plants
Extended aeration plants typically perform
extremely  well and achieve effluent quality as seen
in Table 2.  If chemical precipitation is used, total
phos phorous (TP) can be < 2 mg/L.  In some cases,extended  aeration systems result in effluent with
< 15 mg/L BOD and < 10 mg/L TSS.
Aldie Wastewater Treatment Plant
The Aldie Wastewater Treatment Plant, located in
Aldie,  Virginia, is an extended aeration facility
which  treats an average of 0.0031 MGD with a
design  flow of 0.015 MGD.  This technology was
chosen  because it would allow the area to meet
permit  requirements while minimizing land use.
The plant consists of an influent chamber which
directs  the flow to two parallel aeration basins,
parallel clarifiers, and a UV disinfection system.
Sequencing batch reactors
The treatment performance of package plant SBRs
is largely influenced by the plant operator.  While
the process requires little assistance, training
programs  are available to teach operators how to
become skilled with small plant operations.  SBRs
perform  well, often matching the removal efficiency
of extended aeration processes.  Systems can
typica lly achieve the effluent limitations listed in
Table 3.
In addition, SBR systems have demonstrated a
greater  removal efficiency of carbonaceous BOD
than other systems due to optimization of microbial
activity via anoxic stress and better utilization of
applied  oxygen in the cyclic system.  The system
can consistently provide carbonaceous BOD
effluent levels of 10 mg/L.TABLE 2  EXTENDED AERATION
PERFORMANCE
Typical
Effluent
QualityAldie WWTP
(monthly
average)
BOD (mg/L) < 30 or <10 5
TSS (mg/L) < 30 or <10 17
TP (mg/L) < 2* **
NH3-N (mg/L) < 2 **
* May require chemicals to achieve.
** DEQ does not require monitoring of these parameters.
Source: Sloan, 1999 and Broderick, 1999.TABLE 3  SBR PERFORMANCE
Typical
EffluentHarrah WWTP
%
RemovalEffluent
BOD (mg/L) 10 98 3
TSS (mg/L) 10 98 3
NH3 (mg/L) < 1 97 0.6
Source: Sloan, 1999 and Reynolds, 1999.
Harrah Wastewater Treatment Plant
The Harrah wastewater treatment plant in
Oklahoma  treats an average wastewater flow of
0.223 MGD.  The SBR has achieved tertiary
efflue nt quality without filtration from the time it
was first installed.  Pretreatment involves an aerated
grit chamber and comminutor.  Waste activated
sludge is taken to a  settling pond where the settled
sludge  is dredged annually.  A nitrogen removal
study  performed for nine months confirmed that
nitrification  and denitrification occur consistently
without special operator care.
Oxidation Ditches
Although  the manufacturer's design may vary, most
oxidation  ditches typically achieve the effluent
limitations  listed in Table 4.  With modifications,
some oxidation  ditches can achieve TN removal to
# 5 mg/L and TP removal with biological means.
City of Ocoee Wastewater Treatment Plant
Currently,  the wastewater treatment plant in Ocoee,
Florida accepts an average flow of 1.1 to 1.2 MGD.
The city chose to use an oxidation ditch because it
was an easy technology for the plant staff to
understand  and implement. The facility is also
designed  for denitrification without the use of
chemical  additives.  Nitrate levels consistently test
at 0.8 to 1.0 mg/L with limits of 12 mg/L (Holland,
1999).   Table 4 indicates how well the Ocoee
oxidation ditch performs. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
Operati on requirements will vary depending on
state requirements for manning package  treatment
systems.   Manning requirements for these systems
may typically be less then eight hours a day.  Each
type of system has additional operational
procedures that should be followed to keep the
system  running properly.  Owners of these systems
must  be sure to follow all manufacturer’s
recommendations  for routine and preventative
maintenance  requirements.  Each owner should
check with the manufacturer  to determine essential
operation and maintenance (O&M) requirements.
Depending  on state requirements, most systems
must  submit regular reports to local agencies.  In
addition,  system operators must make safety a
primary  concern.  Wastewater treatment manuals
and federal and state regulations should be checked
to ensure safe operation of these systems.
Extended aeration plants
Operational  procedures for these systems consist of
performing  fecal coliform tests on the effluent to
ensure  adequate disinfection and making periodicTABLE 4  OXIDATION DITCH
PERFORMANCE
Typical
Effluent
QualityOcoee WWTP
With 2°
ClarifierWith
Filter%
RemovalEffluent
CBOD
(mg/L)#10 5 > 97 4.8
TSS
(mg/L)#10 5 > 97 0.32
TP
(mg/L)2 1 NA NA
N-NO 3
(mg/L)NA NA > 95 0.25
Note:  2° = secondary.  NA = not available.
Source: Kruger, 1999 and Holland, 1999.inspections  on dissolved oxygen levels (DO) and
MLSS  concentrations in the aeration compartment.
Sludge-volume  index (SVI) tests in the clarifier
must  also be performed to determine how well the
sludge is settling.  Other sampling and analyses will
be required on the effluent in accordance with state
regulations.
Typical  maintenance steps for extended aeration
systems  include checking motors, gears, blowers,
and pumps to ensure proper lubrication and
operation.  Routine  inspection of equipment is also
recommended  to ensure proper operation.  Check
with the manufacturer for specific O&M
requirements.
Sequencing batch reactors
To ensure proper  functioning of the system, O&M
must be provided for several pieces of equipment.
Operational  procedures include sampling and
monitoring  of DO, pH, and MLSS levels.
Additional  sampling and analyses on the effluent
will be required based on state regulations.
Maintenance  requirements include regular servicing
of aeration blowers, which is usually performed
when  greasing is done, and monthly inspection of
belts on the blowers to determine if they need to be
adjusted  or replaced.  Submersible pumps require
routine  inspections and servicing as required by the
manufacturer.  The decanter will require monthly
greasing.   Additional O&M may be required
depending  on system requirements. Check with the
manufacturer for specific maintenance
requirements.
Oxidation ditches
Depending  on the manufacturer's design, typical
operational procedures for oxidation ditches include
monitoring  of DO, pH, MLSS, and various other
types of sampling and analyses.
Maintenance  steps include periodically inspecting
the aerator, regularly greasing rotors, and following
manufa cturer recommendations for maintenance of
the pumps.  Operators should follow all
manuf acturer recommendations for operation and
maintenance of the equipment.COSTS
Costs are site specific and generally depend on flow
rate, influent wastewater characteristics, effluent
discharge requirements, additional required
equipment, solids handling equipment, and other
site specific conditions.  Manufacturers should be
contacted for specific cost information.
Extended aeration plants
As provided by Aeration Products, Inc., smaller
extended aeration package  plants designed to treat
less than 0.02 MGD cost approximately $4 to $6
per gallon of water treated, based on capital costs.
For larger plants, capital costs will be
approximately  between $2 to $2.50 per gallon of
wastewater treated. Maintenance processes for these
plants  are labor-intensive and require semi-skilled
personnel,  and are usually completed through
routine  contract services.  Maintenance cost
averages $350 per year.
Table  5 provides the cost estimates for various
extended  aeration packages.  These costs include
the entire  package plant, as well as a filtration unit.
Sequencing batch reactors
The capital cost per capita for small SBR plants is
greater  than for large SBR plants.  Approximate
equipment  costs disregarding concrete or steel tanks
costs  are provided in Table 6.  Operation energy
costs  are likely to be higher for small SBR plants
than for larger plants as a result of numerous
loadings.TABLE 5  COST ESTIMATES FOR
EXTENDED AERATION
Flow (MGD)Estimated  Budget
Cost per Gallon ($)
0.015 9-11
0.04 7
1.0 1.3
Note:  Larger flow rates are available from the
manufacturer.   Estimated cost per gallon was determined
based on the mid-flow range.
Source: Parsons Engineering Science, 1999.System  costs will vary, depending on the specific
job.  Factors influencing cost include average and
peak  flow, tank type, type of aeration system used,
effluent requirements, and site constraints.
Operation  and maintenance costs are site specific
and may range from $800 to $2,000 dollars per
million  gallons treated.  Labor and maintenance
requi rements may be reduced in SBRs because
clarifiers  and RAS pumps may not be necessary.
On the other hand, maintenance requirements for
the more sophisticated valves and switches
associated  with SBRs may be more costly than for
other systems.
Oxidation ditches
Table 7 lists budget cost estimates for various sizes
of oxidation ditches.  Operation and maintenance
costs for oxidation ditches are significantly lower
than other secondary treatment processes.  In
comparison  to other treatment technologies, energy
requirements  are low, operator attention is minimal,
and chemical addition is not required.
REFERENCES
Other Related Fact Sheets
Sequencing Batch Reactors
EPA 932-F-99-073
September 1999Oxidation Ditches
EPA 832-F-00-013
September 2000
Aerobic Treatment
EPA 832-F-00-031
September 2000
Other  EPA Fact Sheets can be found at the
following web address:
http://www.epa.gov/owmitnet/mtbfact.htm
1. Broderick,  T., 1999. Aldie Wastewater
Treatment  Plant, Aldie, Virginia. Personal
communication  with Dacia Mosso, Parsons
Engineering Science, Inc.
2. CASS  Water Engineering, Inc., 2000.
Literature provided by manufacturer.
3. Crites,  R. and G. Tchobanoglous, 1998.
Small  and Decentralized Wastewater
Management  Systems .  WCB McGraw-Hill,
Inc.  Boston, Massachusetts.
4. Holland, R, 1999. City of Ocoee
Wastewater  Treatment Plant, Ocoee,
Florida.   Personal communication with
Dacia  Mosso, Parsons Engineering Science,
Inc.TABLE 6  COST ESTIMATES FOR SBRs
Flow (MGD)Estimated  Budget
Cost per Gallon ($)
0.01 4-5
0.05 2
0.2 0.7
1.0 0.25
Note : Larger flow rates are available from the
manufacturer.   Estimated cost per gallon was determined
based on the mid-flow range.
Source: CASS, 1999.TABLE 7  COST ESTIMATES FOR
OXIDATION DITCHES
Flow Range
(MGD)Budget Price
($)Estimated 
Budget Cost
per Gallon ($)
0 - 0.03 80,000 5.33
0.03 - 0.06 91,000 2.02
0.06 - 1.1 97,500 0.17
1.1 - 1.7 106,000 0.08
1.7 - 2.5 114,700 0.05
Note:  Larger flow rates are available from the
manufacturer.   Estimated cost per gallon was determined
based on the mid-flow range.
Source: Lakeside, 1999.TABLE 7  COST ESTIMATES FOR
OXIDATION DITCHES
Flow Range
(MGD)Budget Price
($)Estimated 
Budget Cost
per Gallon ($)
0 - 0.03 80,000 5.33
0.03 - 0.06 91,000 2.02
0.06 - 1.1 97,500 0.17
1.1 - 1.7 106,000 0.08
1.7 - 2.5 114,700 0.05
Note:  Larger flow rates are available from the
manufacturer.   Estimated cost per gallon was determined
based on the mid-flow range.
Source: Lakeside, 1999.For more information contact:
Municipal Technology Branch
U.S. EPA
Mail Code 4204
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 204605. Hydro-Aerobics,  July 1999.  Literature
provided by manufacturer.
6. Kappe  Associates Engineered Systems,
Frederick,  Maryland, 1999. Literature
provided by distributor. 
7. Kruger,  July 1999. Literature provided by
manufacturer.
8. Lakeside,  July 1999. Literature provided by
manufacturer.
9. Metcalf  & Eddy, Inc., 1991. Wastewater
Engineering:  Treatment, Disposal, and
Reuse.  3rd ed. The McGraw-Hill
Companies. New York, New York.
10. Reyno lds, S., 1999. US Filter Jet Tech,
Edwardsville, Kansas.  Personal
communication  with Dacia Mosso, Parsons
Engineering Science. 
11. Sloan  Equipment, Owings Mills, Maryland,
1999.  Literature provided by distributor and
manufacturer (Aeration Products, Inc.).
12. Water  Environment Federation (WEF),
1998.  Design of Municipal Wastewater
Treatment  Plants. Manual of Practice No. 8.
4th ed. vol. 2. WEF. Alexandria, Virginia.
13. Water  Environment Federation (WEF),
1985.  Operation of Extended Aeration
Package  Plants. Manual of Practice No.
OM-7. WEF. Alexandria, Virginia.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Extended aeration plants
Ted Jackson (O&M)
Tim Coughlin (General questions)
Manager Engineering Programs
Aldie WWTP
P.O. Box 4000
Leesburg, VA 20177Mr. Mike Lynn
Onsite Solutions
P.O. Box 570
Nokesville, Virginia 20182
Sequencing batch reactors
Steve Giarrusso
Operator
213 Osborne Street
Minoa, NY 13116
Steven Urich
Facility Manager
Medley Pretreatment Facility
9431 Live Oak Place
Suite 309
Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33324
Oxidation ditches
Robert Holland
Utilities Superintendent
Ocoee Wastewater Treatment Plant
1800 A. D. Mims Road
Ocoee, FL 34761
Michael Eldredge
Chief Operator
Edgartown Wastewater Department
P.O. Box 1068
Edgartown, MA 02539
The mention of trade names or commercial
products  does not constitute endorsement or
recommendation for use by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.