Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. 
Wastewater Engineering 
Treatment and Reuse 
(Fourth Edition) 
George Tchobanoglous 
Franklin L. Burton 
H. David Stensel Wastewater Engineering: 
An Overview 
1-1 TERMINOL(X;Y 3 
1·2 IMPAO OF REGUlATIONS ON WASTEWATER ENGINtERING 3 
1-3 HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAl CONCERNS IN WASTEWATER 
MANAGEMEN T 7 
1-4 WASTEWATER CHARAOER ISTICS 9 
Improved Analyt1cal Techniques 1 0 
Importance oF Improved vVastewater Characterization 1 0 
1-5 WASTEWATER TREATMENT 1 0 
Treatment Mefhods I I 
Current Status 12 
New Directions ond Concerns 15 
Future Trends in Wastewot¥ Treatment 20 
1·6 WASTEWATER RECLAMATION AND REUSE 20 
Current Status 21 
New Directions and Concerns 2 1 
Future Trends in Technology 21 
1-7 BIOSOLIDS AND RESIDUA LS MANAGEMENT 22 
Current Status 22 
New Directions and Concerns 23 
Future Trends in Biosolids Processing 23 
REFERENCES 24 
Every community produce" both liyuid and solid wastes and air emissions. The liquid 
wastr-wastewater--i ~ e~scntially the water supply of the community after it has been 
used in a variety ()f applic<Uiuns (see Fig. 1-1 ). From the standpoint of sources of gener~ 
ation, wastewater may he de fined a~ a combmation of the liquid or water-carried wastes 
removed from residence-;. imtimtinns, ;md commercial and industrial establishmentc;, 
together with such groundwater. ~urface water. and stonnwater as may be present. 
When untreated wastt'v .. ater aa:curnulates and is allowed to go septic. the decom­
position of tbe organic rnaucr il contain~ will lead to nuisaoce conditions including the 
production of malodorou " ga!'.es. In addition, untreated wastewater contains numerous , 2 I Chapter 1 Wasl'ewoter Engineering: An Overview 
Figure 1-1 
Schematic diogrom of a 
waslewoter monogeme11t 
infrastructure. 
cso 
treatment 
facility 
OWF 
/rreatment 
facility Domes lie 
~ wastewater 
pathogenic microorgan i~ms that dwell in the human intestinal tract. Wastewater also 
contains nutrient~ , which can ~timu late the growth of aquatic plants, and may contain 
toxic compound!! or compounds that potentially may be mutagenic or carcinogenic. For 
these reasons, the immediate and nuisance-free removal of wastewater from its sources 
of generation, followed by treatment, reuse, or dispersal into the environment is neces­
sary to protect public health and the environment. 
Wastewater engineering is that bmnch of environmental engineering in which the 
basic principles of science and engineering are applied to solving the issues associated 
with the treatment and reuse of wastewater. The ultimate goal of wastewater engineering 
is the protection of publi<.: health in a manner commensurate with environmental, eco­
nomic, social, and political concerns. To protect public health and tbe environmem, it is 
necessary to have knowledge uf (I) constituents of concern in wastewater , (2) impacts of 
these constituent~ when wastewater is dispersed into the environment. (3) the transfor­
mation and 1ong-term fate of these constituents in treatment processes, (4) treatment 1-2 Impact of Regulations on Wa~tewoter Engineering J 3 
methods that can be used to remove or modify the constituents found in wastewate r, and 
(5) methods for beneficial usc or disposal of solids generated by lhe treatment systems. 
!o provi?e an initi~l persp~ctive on the field of wa~:~tewater engineering, common 
tenmnology lS first detmed followed by (I) a discussion of the issues that need to be 
addressed in the planning and de!.ign of wastewater management systems and (2) the 
current status and new directions in wa~tewater engineering. 
1-1 TERMINOLOGY 
ln the literature. and in governmental regulanons, a variety of terms have been used for 
individual constituents of concern in wastewater. The tenninology userl commonly for 
key concepts Ulld tenns in the field of wastewater management is summarized in Table 
1-1. In some cases. confusion and undue negative perceptions arise with the use of the 
terms contdminants. impuriries, and pollutants, which are often used interchangeab ly. To 
avoid confusion. the term cotlstiruent is used in thi~ text in place of these terms to refer to 
an individual compound or clement, such as ammonia nitrogen. The term characteri.r;tic 
is used to refer to a group of constituents, such a) physical or biological chamcteristic~ . 
The tenn <~sludge" has been u11ed for many years to signify the residuals produced 
in wastewater treatment. (n 19<>4, the Water Environment Fedenu.ion adopted a policy 
defining "biosolids .. as a prim;uily organic, solid wastewater treatment product that can 
be recycled beneficially. Tn this policy, "solids'' are defined as the residuals thar are 
derived from the treatment of wastewater. Solid~ that have been treated to the poim at 
which they are suimble for ben~ficia1 use are termed ''biosolids." In this text, the tenns 
of solids and biosolids are used exten"iively, but "sludge" continues to be used. espe­
cially in cases where untreated solid material and chemical residuals are referenced . 
1-2 IMPACT OF REGULATIONS ON 
WASTEWATER ENGINEERING 
From about 1900 to the early 1970s, treatment objectives were concerned primarily 
with (I) the removal of colloidal, suspended, and floatable material, (2) the treatment 
of biodegradable organic!\, and (3) the elimination of pathogenic organismo;. Imple­
mentation in the United State!. of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment s 
of 1972 (Public Law 92-500). also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), stimulated 
substantial changes in wascew11ter treatment to achieve the o~jectives of "fishable and 
swimmable" water.s. Unfortunate ly. these objectives were not uniformly met. 
From the early 1970s to about 1980, wa~tewater treatment objectives were based 
primarily on aesthetic and environmental concerns. The earlier objectives involving the 
reduction of biological oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS). and path­
ogenic organisms continued but at higher levels. Removal of nufriencs, such as nitrogen 
and phosphorus, also began lt) be addre~sed, particularly in some of the inland streams 
and lakes, and estuaries and hays such a<: Chesapeake Bay and Long Lc;land Sound. 
Major programs were undcnak.t:n h)' both Mate and federal agencies to achieve more 
effective and widespread treatment of wastewater to improve the quality of the surface 
waters. These programs were b(lbC::d, in part, on (I) an increased understanding of the 
environmenta l effects caused by wastewater discharges; (2) a greater appreciation of the 
adverse Jong-tenn effects caused by Lhe (.li:-;charge of some of the specific constituents 4 I Chapter I Wastewater Engineering: An Overview 
I Table 1-1 
Terminology commonly used in the field of wastewater engineering 0 
Tenn 
Biosolids 
Cla~s A bioso lid~h 
Closs B bio)()lids11 
Chorocteri$tic!. 
(wastewater) 
Composition 
Constituentsc 
Contaminants 
Disinfection 
EfRuent 
Impurities 
Nonpoint source~ 
Nutrient 
Po,.orne~r 
Point sources 
Pollutants 
Reclamation 
Rccyding 
Repurificotion 
Revse 
Sludge 
Solids Definition 
P~imar.ily an organic: semisolid wast~~'Oter ptoduct that remains ofter solids ore stabilized 
b.ol091cally or chem•colly ond ere su•toble for bene~cia luse 
B1osolids in which t~e pathogen~ (induding entefic virv~~, pathogenic bacteria, ond viable 
helminth ova) ore reduced below current detectable levels 
Biosolids in which the pathogens are reduced to levels that are unlikely to pore o threat to 
public health and the environment under specific use conditions. Closs 8 biosolids cannot be 
sold or given away in bags or oth~ container$ or applied on lawns or home gardens 
General classes of wastewater constituents such os physical, chemical, biological, 
and biochemical 
The makeup o{ wa5tewater, including the physical, chemical, and biological constituents 
Individual component~ , elements, or biological ~ntities such as suspended solids or ammonia 
nitrogen 
Constituents added to the water supply through use 
Reduction of disease-causing microorganisms by phys;col or chemical means 
The liquid discharged from o processing step 
Constituenis added to the water supply through use 
Sources of pollution thot originate from multiple sources over o relatively large areo 
An element that is essential for the growth of plants and animals. Nutrients in wastewater, 
usually nitrogen and phosphorus, may cause unwanted algol and plant growths in lakes and 
streams 
A meosuroble foetor such os temperature 
Pollvtionalloads discharged at o speci~c kx:ohon from pi~$1 ot,~tfolls, and conveyance methods 
from either municipal wastewater treatment plants or industrial WO$te treatment facilities 
Consti!uenls added to the wote• supply through t.~se 
Treatment of waslewoter for subsequent reuse application or the od of reusing treated 
wastewater 
T~e reuse of treated wmtewater and biosolids for bene~cial purposes 
Treatment of wastewater to a level suitable for a variety of appl~cafions includ~ng indirect or 
direct potable reuse 
Beneficial use of reclaimed or repurified wastewater or stabaized biosolids 
Solids removed from wastewater during treo~nt . Solids 1hot are treated Further ore termed 
biosolids 
Material removed from wmtewater by 9ravity sepora~on !by darifiers, thickeners, and 
lagoons) and ;s the solid residue from dewatering operations 
0 Adopted, in port, from Crites ond Tchobonoglous 11998] 
b U.S. EPA {1997b). 
'To avoid confusion, the term ''consf1tuents" is used in th1~ tcx· 1n place of c;ontommants, impurities, and pollutants. Table J-2 
Summary of 
significant U.S. 
federal regulations 
that affect 
wastewater 
management 1-2 Impact of Reguloti011s on Wastewater Engineering I 5 
t"ound in wastewater: and (.~ l th~ devdoprnent of national concern for the protection of 
the environment. As a re~ult of these programs. significant improvement s have been 
made in the quality of the 'iurfa~.:~ water ~. 
Since 1980, the water-quality improvement objectives of the 1970s have continued, 
but the emphasis ha..; shift~d to th~ dt:tinition and removal of constituents th:1t may 
cause long-term health effcl' t~ and em ironmema.l impact\. Health and environmental 
concern~ are discu~~l'd in nlOrt" dctatl in rhe following section. Consequently, while the 
earl)' treatment o~jectives rt?mam Yaltd today, the required degree of treatment has 
increased ~ignificantl)' . and <ldd1,ional trt'a\mem ohjecti'ves and goals have heen added. 
Therefore, treatment ohjectiH~~ 111u~ t go hand in hand with the water quality objectives 
or standards estahlish~d by rh~ f~dcral. ~:t:.tLe, and regional regulatory authorities. Impor­
tant federal regulations that ha\c brought about changes in the planning and design of 
wastewater trcatmt..nt taciliti-:" in Lhe l fnircd State~ are :-.ummari.led in Tuble 1-2. It is 
interesting to note that the. dean :mace-. of I <no and 1990 have had a ~ignificant impact 
on industrial and municipal \vao.,tt:wah:r programs, primarily through the implementa ­
tion of treatment facilitie~ for rlh' control of ern1~ ~ion!>. 
Regulation 
deon Water Act ICWA) 
(Federal Water Pollution 
Control Act Amendments of 
1972/ 
Water Quality Act of 1987 
IWQA) (Amendment of the 
CWA) 
40 CFR Part 503 ( 1993) 
(Sewage Sludge 
Regulations) 
Notional Combined Sewer 
Overflow ICSO) Policy 
11994) 
dean Air Act of 1970 and 
199{) Amendments 
40 CFR f>ort 60 
Toto! maximum dai~ load 
ITDMll (2000) 
Section 303\d} of the CWA Description 
Establishes the Notional Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
INPDES), o permittin9 progrom bosed on uniform 
technological minimum standards for each discharger 
Strnngthens federal water quality regulations by providing 
chonges in permitting and odds substantial penalties for permit 
v1o'ations. Amends solids control program by emphasizing 
rdentifiwtion ond regulation of toxic pollutants in sewage 
sludge 
R~Ju lates the use and disposal of biosolids from wastewater 
treatment plants. Limitations ore established for items such as 
contaminants (mainly melolsl, pathogen content, ond vector 
attraction 
· Coordinates planning, .selection, design, end implementotion of 
CSO managemen t prodices and controls to meet requiremenn 
of CWA. Nine minimum conko!s and development o~ long­
term CSO control plans are required to be implemented 
imrnediately 
E!>tnblishes lrmitotions for specific air pollutonts and institutes 
pr('venlion of significant deterioration in air quality. Maximum 
ochievable control technology is required for ony of 1 89 listed 
chEJmicah. from "mo1or sources," i.e., plants emitting at least 
60 kg/d 
Establishes air emission limits for sludge incir1erators with 
capac1ties lorger than 1000 kg/d {2200 lb/dl dry basis 
R~1uires states to develop prioritized lists of polluted or 
thmatened water bodi~s and to establish the maximum amount 
of polll.rtont (TMDLI thot a water body can re<eive and still 
meet water quality standards 6 I Chapter 1 Wastewater Engineenng: Afl Overvu~w 
Pur-;uant lu Section 304{d) of Publir Law 92-500 {see Table 1 -2). 1he U ~· 
ronmental Prott:clioo Agency (l:.s. EPA) publi~he d its detioinon o1 minunum ·'. 
for secondary trcatmenl. Thi.~ ddinitiun, originally issued in 1973. wa~ ameno~ .. 
t9R5 to allow additional flexihilJty rn applytng the percem removal requirement" of pd­
huants to treatment facilities ~en ing ... cpara(\! sewer system~. The definition of sel:onJ-' 
at)· treatment is reported in Tabk l-3 and includes three major ~ftluem param eter~ .. )­
day HOD_ TSS. and pH. Tht: ~uh!:-litu tion of 5~day carbonaceous BOD <CROD..J fnr 
BOD ~ may be made at the option of the permitting authority. The.\e standurd <; pro\ ided 
the b~si~ for the design and operation of most Lre.atment plants. Special interpre tation~ 
of the detinifion of ~econuary treatment are pcrmttted for publicly owned treatm~nr 
work~ ( 1) served hy combined sewer ~ystem\. (2) using waste stabilizuLion pond~ and 
trickling tilter~. <3l receiving indu~trial flow!., or (4) receiving Jess concentrated mflu­
em wa-.tl!water frotn ":>eparatc ~ewer~. The ~econdary lreaunent regulalion\ ~eH' 
amended further in 1989 to darify the percent removal requirement!. during dry period~ 
for treatmcrtt facilitk·~ sef\ed b) combined ~ewe r~. 
In 1987, Congre s~ enacted the Water Quality Act of I CJ87 <WQA). the fir.,t maJm 
revi..,ion of the Clean Water Act. Important provi~1on~ of the WQA were·. {I l '>trcn~lll­
erung federal 'Water qualit) regulations by providing change.-; in permining and adtling. 
.<mbsrantial penallies for ~rmiT violation~. {2) significantly amenrling thr CWA\ formal 
sludge control program b) empha\17.ing 1hc identification and regulation of toxic pol­
llllant" in sludge. (3) providing funding for '>tate and U.S. EPA ~ludic~ for dc~fining nrm­
point and toxic source ~) o:· polluti<>n, (4) cslablishing ne'Y\ deadlines for compliantf' 
including priorities and permit requircmenh for ~tormwater , and (51 a pha.•;e-out of the 
conc;rructiOil grants program as a mcrhod ot fmaoc.:ing publicly owned treatment worb 
(POTW). 
I Table 1..-3 
Minimum national standards for secondary treotment0 b 
Unit of Average 30-cfay Awrote 7-doy 
Charact8rillic of chchorge ~nt con~' conceftlrafionC 
BOD5 mg/l 3Qd 45 
Totol suspended solids mg/L 300 45 
Hydrogen· ion concentration pH untts Within the range of 6.0 to 9 0 at all time!.e 
C80DsF mg/1 25 40 
o Federaf Rttgister (1988, 1989). 
b Pre$ent stondords allow stabilization ponds and tnc:kling hhers to hove higher 30-doy average concentrahons {45 mg/l) and ? . 
day overage concentrolions 165 mg/l) of BOD/suspended solids perfofmance levels as long os the wafer quality of the 
rece1v•ng water is not adversely affected. Exceptions are oiso permitted for combined sewer!>, certain mdustrial categorie!., ond 
less concentrated wastewater from separate sewers. for precise requHemenl~ of exreplio1'1s, F&derof Register !1988) should br! 
consulted. 
t Not lo be exceeded 
d Averoge removal shall not be less than 85 percent. 
-'Only enforced if cou$ed by industrial wostewoter or by in-plant inorganic chemical addition. 
1 Moy. be sub~ tiMed for 8005 of the option of rile permiHing authority. 1-3 Health r:;nd Environmental Concern~ in Wastewater Monogeme.,l I 7 
Recent regulations thar affecT wastewater facilities design include those for the 
treatment, di<.>posal. and beneficial use of biosolids (40 CFR Part 503). In the biosolids 
regulation promulgated in \9<n_ natjonnl standards were set for pathogen and heav-y 
metal coment and for the ~arc handling and use ofbiosohds. The standards are designed 
to pmtect human health and the cnvironme11t ·where biosolids are applied beneficially 
to land. The rule also promot~s the development of a ''clean sludge" (U.S. EPA, 1999). 
The total maximum dail~ load {TMDL) program was promuJgated in 2000 but is 
not scheduled to be in effect until 2.002. The TMDL rule is designed to protect ambi­
ent water quality. A TMDL represents the maximum amount of a pollutant thal a water 
body can receive and still meet water quality ~tandard s. A TMDL is the sum of (I) the 
individual waste-load allocauon'i for point ~ources, (2) load allocations fur nonpoint 
sources, (3) natural background levels, and (4) a margin of safety (U.S. EPA, 2000). To 
implement the rule, a c;omprehcnsive watershcd -basc:d waLcr 4uaJity management pro­
gram must be un<ienakcn to tind and control nonpoint sources in addition to conven­
tional point source discharge-.... With implcmenlalioll of tht: TMDL rule, 1he focus on 
water quality shifts from technology-based conrrols 10 preservatio11 of ambiem water 
quality. The end rc~ulc it-; an inte~rated planning approa~h that transcends jurisdiclional 
boundarie!-. and force~ different ~~ctors . .such as agriculture, water and wastewater util­
ities, and urhan runoff mana gl:'r~ to cooperate. lmplememalion of the TMOL rule will 
vary depending on the -.pccilic v.ater quality objectives establh,hed for each watershed 
and, in some cases. will require rhe installalton of advanced le\'els of treatment 
l-3 HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS 
IN WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT 
As research into the c::haracteri~tJc<; of wastewater has become more extensive, and as 
the techniques for amtlyzi ng 'ipecific constituents and their potential health and envi­
ronmental etfccts have becom~: more comp rehefl~ive, th~ body of scientific knowledge 
ha~ expanded signifieamly. \1any of the new treatment methods being developed are 
designed to dcaJ with health and environmental concerns associated with findings of 
rece11t re~earch. However. the <l(lvancem~nt in treatment technology effectiveness has 
not kept pace wtth the ~nhan ced constituent detection capability. Pollutants can be 
detected at lower con<:e ntratinn~ than can be attained by available. treatment technology. 
Therefore, careful as~essment or health and environment effectc; and community con­
cern~ about these effect~ bec:umc'i increasingly important in wastewater management. 
The need to establish a dialogue with the communiry is important to assure that heaJth 
and environmental issues arc being addressed. 
Water quality is~ues ans~ when increasing amounts of treated wastewater are dis­
charged to water hodies thar an.: eventually used as water supplies. The waters of the 
Missjssippi River and many n\'Cr\ in the ea.<;tern United States are used for municipal and 
industrial water supplies and a~ repositories for the resulting treated wastewater. In 
southern California , a semi and region, increa~ing amounts of reclaimed wastewater are 
being used or are planned H} he used for groundwater recharge to augment existing 
potable water supplies. Significanl questions remain about the testing and levels of treat­
ment necessary to protec[ human health where the corruningling of highly treaten waste· 
wa!.er with drinking water source~ result!. in indirect potable reuse. Some professional s a t Chc""'r 1 Wa~tvwater Engineering: An Overview 
Figure 1-2 
Atomic ad~tion 
spectrometer used for 
the detection of melols. 
Pholo was taken in 
wastewater treotmtnl 
plant lobototory. The 
use of such analytical 
in$trumenb is nCi'N 
commonplace at 
wastewa,.r treatment 
plan~ . object in principle to the indirect reuse of treated wastewater for potable purposes; oth­
ers exprc~s concern that cunent techniques are inadequate for detecting aU microbial 
and chemical contaminants of health significance (Crook et al., 1999). Among the lat­
ter concern.~ are (I) the lad, of sufficient infonnation regarding the health risks posed 
by some microbial pathogens and chemical constiruencs in wastewater, (2) the nature of 
unknown or unidentified chemical constituents and potential pathogens, and (3) the 
effectiveness of treatment processes for their removal. Defining risks to public health 
ba.,ed on sound science is an ongoing challenge. 
Because new and more sensitive methods for detecting chemicals are available and 
methods have been developed that better detennine biological effects, constituents that 
were undetected previously are oow of concern (see Fig. 1-2). Examples of such chem­
ical constituents found in both .surface and ground waters include: n-nitrosodimethylamine 
(NDMA), n principal inbrreuient in rocket fuel, methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE). a 
highly soluble gasoline additive, medically active substances including endocrine dis­
ruptors, pesticides, industriul chemicals, and phenolic compound s commonly found in 
nonionic surfactants. Endoc1ine-disrupting chemicals are a special health concern as they 
can mimic honnoncs produ c~d in vertebrate animals by causing an exaggerated response, 
or they can block the effects of a hormone on the body (Trussell, 2000). These chemicals 
cal\ cause problems with development, behavior, and reproduction in a variety of species. 
Increases in testicular, pro•nate. and brea~t cancers have been blamed on endocrine­
disruptive chemicals (Rocfcr et al., 2000). Although treatment of these chemicals is not 
currently a rnission of municipal wastewa£er treatment, wastewater treatment facilities 
may have tube designed to dcuJ with these chemicals in the future. 
Other health concern~ relate lo: (I) the release of volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) and toxic air (;OJJtaminants (TACs) from collection and treatment facilities, 
(2) cblorine disinfection . and (3) disinfection byproducts (DBPs). Odors are one of the 
most serious environmental ~.:uncems to the public. New techniques for odor measure­
ment are used to quantify the development and movement of odors that may emanate 
from wastewater fatiliric.s, and special efforts are being made to design facilities that 
minimize che development uf odors, contain them effectively, and provide proper treat· 
ment for their destruction (see Fig. 1-3). Covered treatment plant 
fa<:ilities for the control 
of odor emissions. 1-4 Wastewater Charuct&ri$ti~s 9 
Many ind11.strial wastes contain VOCs that may be flammable, toxic, and odorous. 
and may be contributors to photochemical smog and tropospheric ozone. Provisions of 
the Clean Air Act and local air quality management regulations are directed toward 
(1) minimizing VOC releases at the source, (2) containing wastewater and their VOC 
emissions (i.e., by adding enclosure s). treating wastewater for VOC removal, and col­
lecting and treating vapor emissions from wastewater. Many VOCs, classified as TACs, 
are discharged to the ambient atmosphere and transported to downwind receptors. 
Some air management districts are enforcing regulations based on excess cancer risks 
for lifetime exposures 10 chemicals such as benzene, trichloroethylene, chloroform, and 
methylene chloride (Card and Co~i, 1992). Strategies for controlling VOCs at waste­
water treatment plants are reviewed in Chap. 5. 
Effluents containing chlorine residuals are toxic to aquatic life, and, increasingly, 
provisions to eliminate chlorine residuals are being instituted. Other important heaJth 
issues relate to the reduction of disinfection byproducts (DBPs} that are potencial car­
cinogens and are formed when chlorine reacts with organic matter. To achieve higher 
and more consistent microorganism inactivation Levels, improved performance of dis­
infection systems must be addressed. In many communities, the issues of safety in the 
transporting, storing, and handling of chlorine are also being examined. 
1-4 WASTEWATER CHARACTERISTICS 
, Prior to about 1940, most municipal wa<;tewater was generated from domestic sources. 
After 1940, as industrial development in the United States grew sjgnificantly. increasing 
amounts of industrial wastewater have been and continue to be discharged to municipal 
collection systems. The amounts of heavy metals and synthesized organic compounds 
generated by industrial activities have increased, and some 10~000 new organic com­
pounds are added each year. Many of these compounds are now found in the wastewater 
from most municipalities and communities. 
As technological changes take place in manufacturing, changes also occur in the 
compounds discharged and the resulting wastewater characteristics. Numerous com­
poW1ds generated from indu->triai processes are difficult and costly to treat by conven­
tional wastewater treatment processes. Therefore, effective industrial pretreatment 1 0 Chapter l Wastewater E~inee ring: An Overview 
becomes an essential pan of •tn overall water quality management program. Enforce­
ment of an industrial pretreatment program is a daunting task, and some of lhe regu­
lated pollutants still escape to the municipal wastewater collecLion ~}'sltill and must be 
treated. In the future with the nbjecti\·e of pollution prevention. every effon ~hould be 
made by industrial Llischargns to assess the cnvironmemaJ impacts of any new com­
pounds that may enter the wastewater ~cream before being approved for us.e. If a com­
pound cannot be treated effenively with existing technology, it should nut be u~ed. 
lmpro..,ed Analyticol Techniques 
Great strides in analyticul techniques have been made with the development of new <md 
more sophisticated instrumentation. While most constituent concentrations are reported 
in milligrams per liter (mg/L), measurement~ in micrograms per filer (J.lg/L) and 
nanograms per liter (ng/LJ an· now ~ommon. As detection methods become more sensi­
tiv~ and a broader range of compounds are monitored in water supplies, more contami~ 
nant~ that affect human-; and the em ironment will be found. Many trace compound ~ and 
microorganisms, !'UCh a!-. Giwdin lamMia and Cf}1Jiosporidium pan1um. have been iden­
tified that potentially may cau~e adverse health effects. Increased analytical sophistica­
tion also allows the scientist ,md engineer to gain greater knowledge of the behavior of 
wastewater constituents and how lhey affect process perfonnunce and effluent quality. 
Importance oF Improved Wastewater Charamnzation 
Becau!te of changing wastewater characteri~tics and the imposilion of stricter limits 
on wastewater dil\chargel> and biusolids rhat are used beneficially, greater emphasis 
is being placed on wastewater characterization. Because process modeling is widely 
used in the de~ign and oplilllization uf biological treatment processes (e.g .• activated 
sludge), thorough characterialtion of wastewater, particularly wastewaters contain­
ing industrial wastl'. is increasingly important. Process modeling for activated sludge 
as il is currently conceived requires experimental assessment of kinetic and stoi­
chiometric comaa nt.~. Fracrjonit:arion of organic nitrogen, chemkal oxygen demand 
(COD), and total organic ca.rbon into soluble and particulate constituents is now used 
to optimize the performance of both exi~ting and proposed new biologicaltr~tment 
plan~ designed to achlt'V~ nutrient removal. Techniques from the microbiological 
sciences, such a~ RNA and DNA typing. are being used to idemify rhe active mass 
in biological treatment pn.x:es<;es. Because an unde~landing of the nature of waste­
water is fundamental tu lhe de~ign and operation of wastewater collection, treatment, 
and reuse facilities, a dcta]led di-;cussion of wastewater comtituents is provided in 
Chap. 2. 
1-5 WASTEWATER TREATMENT 
Wastewater collected from mutlidpalitics and communities must ultimately be returned 
to receiving water~ or to the land or reused. The complex question facing lhe de~ign ~ngi­
neer and public health officials is: What levels of treatment must be achieved in a given 
applicati on~beyond those prescribed by discharge permits-to ensure protection of 
public health and the environment? The answer to this question requires detailed anaJy-Table 1-4 
Levels of wastewater 
treatment0 1-5 Wastewate r Treatment 111 
ses or local conditions and need~. application of rscientific knowledge and engineering 
judgment based on past experience, and consideration of federal, state, and local regula­
tions. ln some ca~s. a detailed ri~k a~~e-;'iment may be required. An overview of waste­
water treatment is pro\lided in llti~ se<.:tion. ·me rcu~e and disposal of biosolids, vexing 
problems for some communiti es, are discussed in rhe following section. 
Treatment Methods 
Methods of treatment in which the application of physical forces predominate arc known 
as unil operations. Mt:thud~ of lr~atment in whk:h the removal of cont~m1inants i~ brought 
about by chemical or biological reactions arc known a.'> unit processes. At the present 
time, unit operations and processes are grouped togerner to provide various levels of 
treatment known as preliminary . primary, advanced primary> secondary (without or with 
nutriem removal). and advanced (or terriar)·) (reatment (see Table 1-4). In preliminary 
treatment, gross solids ..;uch a~; large obje<.:t~. mgs. and grit arc removed that may dam­
age eqmpment. In primary rrcatm<:nt. a phy~ica l operation, usually sedimentation, is 
used to remove the floating and .!.ettleahlc materials found in wastewater (see Fig. 1-4) . 
.For advanced primal)' rreatmt:nt. chemical!> arc added ro enhance the removal of sus­
])fnded solids and. to a le!>~er ~>-.lent. di~;so lved solid~. In secondary tre.aiment, bi!)log\· 
cal and chemica] pmcesse!- are used to remove most of the organic maHer. 1n advanced 
treatment, additional comb ination~ of unit operations and processes are used w remove 
residual suspended "iolids and or.her con"itituents that are not reduced significantly by 
conventional secondary treatment. A li~cing of unit operations and processes used for 
treatment level 
Preliminary 
Primary 
Advonced primary 
Secondary 
Secondory with 
nutrient removal 
Terliory 
Advanced Description 
Removal of woslewoter constihJents such as rags, sticks, Rootab le~. 
grit, and grease that may cause maintenance or operational problem~ 
with the lreolmenl operations , proce$ses, and ancil1ary systems 
Removal of a portioo of the su$pended solids and organic matter from 
the wastewater 
Enhanced removal of su~pended solids and organic molter from the 
wastewater . Typically accomplished by chemical addition or filtra~on 
Removal of biodegradable organic matter [in :.elution or suspension} 
end suspended solids. DisinfeCtion is also typically induded in the 
definition of conventional secondary treatment 
Removal of biodegradab le organics, suspended solids, ond 
nutrients {nitrogen. phosphorus, or both nitrogen and phosphorus) 
Removal of residuol suspended solids (after secondary treotment), 
usually by granular medium filtration or microscreens . Disinfection is 
also typiwlly a part of tertiary treatment. Nutrient removal is often 
included in this definition 
Removal of dissolved and suspended materials remaining cher normcl 
biologicol treatment when required for various water reuse 
applications 
"Adapted , in part, from Crites and Tchobaooglous (l 9Q8). 12 I Chapter I Wastewater Enginee rit~g : An Overview 
Figure 1-4 
Typical primary 
sedimentat ion tanks 
used to remove Rooting 
ond settleable material 
from wastewater. 
the removal of major consticuent s found in wastewater and addressed in this text is pre~ 
sented in Table 1~5. 
About 20 years ago, biolugJca1 nutrient removal (BNR)-for the removal of nitro­
gen and phosphoru5.-wa ' viewed as an innovative process for advanced wastewater 
treatment Because of the extensive research mto the mechaoisms of BNR, the advan­
tages of il~ u.~. and the number of BNR systems that have been placed into operation. 
nutrient removal, for all practical purposes, has become a part of conventional waste­
water treatment. When compared to chemical treatment methods, BNR uses less chem­
ical, reduces the production of waste solids, and has lower energy consumption. 
Because of the importance of BNR in wastewater treatment, BNR is integrated into the 
discussion of theoty, application, and de~ign of biological treatment systems. 
Land treatment processes, commonly termed "natural systems." combine physical, 
chemical, and biological treatment mechanisms and produce water with quality similar 
to or bener than that from advanced wastewater treatment. Natural systems are not cov­
ered in this text as they are used mainly with small treatment systems; descriptions may 
be found in the predec~~or edition of this text (Metcalf & Eddy, 1991) and in Crites 
and Tchobanoglous (1998) and Crites et al. (2000). 
Current Statu$ 
Up until the late 1980r.;, conventiona l secondary ttearment was the most COllUllon method 
of treatment for the removal of BOD and TSS. In the United States, nutrient removal 
was used in special circumstance s, such as in the Great Lakes area, Aorida, and the 
Chesapeake Bay, where semitive nutriem-reJated water quality conditions were identi­
fied. Because of nutrient enrichment that has led to eutrophication and water quality 
degradation (due in part to point source discharges), nutrient removal proce.~;ses have 
evolved and now arc used extensively in other areas as well. 
As a result of implementation of the Federal Wacer Pollution ControJ Act Amend­
ments, significant data havl' been obtained on the numbers and types of wa~tewater 
facHities used and needed in accomplishing me goals of the program. Surveys are con­
ducted by U.S. EPA ro track these data, and the results of me 1996 Needs Assessment 
Survey (U.S. EPA, 1997 a) are reported in Tables 1-6 and 1-7. The number and types of 1-5 Wastewater Treatment 113 
I Table 1-5 
Unit operations and processes used to remove constitvents found in wastewater 
Constituent 
Suspended solids 
Biodegradab le organics 
Nutrients 
Nitrogen 
Phosphorus 
Nitrogen and phosphorus 
Pathogens 
Colloidal end dissolved solids 
Volatile organic compounds 
Odors Unit operation or process 
Screening 
Grit removal 
Sedimentation 
High-rate clarification 
Flotation 
Chemical precipitation 
Depth filtration 
Surface filtration 
Aerobic suspended growth variations 
Aerobic attached grov.1h variations 
Anaerobic suspended growth variations 
Anaerobic attached growth variations 
Lagoon variations 
Physical·chemica l systems 
Chemical oxidation 
Advanced oxidation 
Membrane filtration 
Chemical oxidation !breakpoint chlorination! 
Suspend.d·growth nitrification and denitrification vcriations 
fixed·film nitrification and denitrification variations 
Air stripping 
lon exchange 
Chemical treatment 
Biologicol phosphoru s removal 
Biological nutrient removal variations 
Chlor-ine compounds 
Chlorine diol(ide 
Ozone 
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation 
Membranes 
Chemical treatment 
Carbon adsorption 
lon exchon9e 
Air stripping 
Carbon adsorption 
Advanced oxidation 
Chemical scrubbers 
Carbon adsorption 
Biofilters 
Compost filters See Chop. 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 
II 
l I 
8, 14 
9 
10, 14 
10 
8 
6, 11 
6 
I 1 
8, 11 
6 
8 
9 
11 
11 
6 
8,9 
8, 9 
12 
12 
12 
12 
l1 
11 
ll 
11 
5, 11 
11 
11 
15 
11, l5 
15 
15 14 Chopter 1 Wastewater Engineering: An Overview 
Table 1.-6 
Number of U.S. 
wastewater treatment 
focilitie~ by Row 
range (1996)0 
Table 1-7 facilities needed in the future ( ~20 yr) arc also shown in Table 1-7. These data are use­
ful in forming an overall view of th~ current status of wastewater treatment in the 
Uniced State!!. 
The municipal wasrewater rreatmcnt enterprise i s composed of over 16~000 plants 
that are used to treat a total tluw (l[ ab1)Ut 1400 cubic meter~ per second {m1Js) [32,000 
million gallon<; per day (Mgal/d)J. Approximacely 92 percent of the total exj~ting flow 
is handled by plants having a capacity of 0.044 ru3/s f1 million gallons per day 
(Mgal/d)] and larger. Ncurl) one-half of the present de!-.ign capacity is situated in plants 
Flow ranges 
0.000-{).100 
0.101-l.OOO 
1.001-10.000 
10.001-100.00 
>100.00 
Othef-1> 
Total 0. ooo-Q. 00438 
0.0044-0.0438 
0.044--().438 
0.44-4.38 
>4.:38 
0Adapled from U.S. EPA (1997o) 
bflow data unknown. Number of 
faciliti .. 
6,4.44 
6,476 
2,573 
446 
47 
38 
16,204 TOMI existing 
ftowrate 
Mgal/d m'/J 
287 12.57 
2}323 101.78 
7,780 340.87 
11,666 511.12 
10,119 443.34 
32,175 1,409.68 
Number of U.S. wastewater treatment facilities by design capacity in 1996 and in the future when needs 
ore met<J 
FYtun focit•r• •• 
Existing facilitiM (wt.a,....cnmet) 
Number of NumMrof 
I.-vel of treatment facilitfes Mgal/d ms/s fadlti .. 
less than secondary 176 3,054 133.80 61 
Secondary 9,388 17,734 776.98 9,738 
Greater than secondaryb 4,428 20,016 876.96 6,135 
No dischorgec 2,032 1;421 62.26 2,369 
Total 16,024 42,225 1,850.00 18,303 
0Adopted From U.S. EPA (1997a). 
bTreatment plants that meet efAoent standa rd~ higher than lno5e g1ven in Table l-3. 
•Plants that do not discharge to a water body ond use ~ome Form of land application. lfteiiJ/d ,..,,,.:;. 
601 26.33 
17,795 779.65 
28,588 l,252.53 
1,803 78.99 
48,787 2,137.50 Figure 1-5 
Facilities u~ for 
chemical treotm~nt of 
odors from treatment 
facilities. 1-5 Wastewo1er Treatment lu 
providing greater than secondary treatment. Thus, the basic material presented in thls 
text is directed toward the design of plants larger than 0.044 m3/s ( l MgaVd) with the 
consideration that many new designs will provide treatment greater lhan secondary. 
In the last I 0 years. many plant" have been designed using BNR Effluent filtration 
has also been installed where lhe removal of residual suspended solids is required. Filtra~ 
tion is especially effective in improving the effectiveness of disinfection, especially for 
ultraviolet (UV) disinfection systems. bt:<.:ause (1) the removal of larger particles of sus­
pended solids that harbor bacteria enhances the reduction in coliform bacteria and (2) the 
reduction of turbidity improves the transmittance of UV light Effluent reuse systems, 
except for many that are used for agricultural irrigation. almost always employ filtration. 
New Directions and Concerns 
New directions and concerns in wastewater treatment are evidenl in various specific 
areas of wastewater treatment. The changing nature of the wastewater to be treated. 
emerging health and environmental concern~. the problem of industrial wastes. and the 
impact of new regulations, all of which have been discussed previously, are among the 
most important. Further. other important concerns include: ( l} aging infrastructure, 
(2) new methods of process analysis and control, (3) treatment plant performance and 
reliability, (4) wastewater disinfection, (5) combined sewer overflows, (6) impacts of 
storm water and sanitary overflows and nonpoint sources of pollution, (7) separate treat­
ment of return flows, (8) odor control (see Fig. 1-5) and the control ofVOC emission~ 
and (9) retrofitting and upgrading wastewaler treatment plants. 
Aging Infrastructure. Some of the problems that have to be addressed in the 
United States deal with renewal of the aging wa!!rewater collection infrastructure and 
upgrading of trearment plants. Issues include repair and replacemen t of leaking and 
un<Jersized sewers, control und treatment of overflows from sanitary and combined col­
lectjon systems, control of nonpoint discharges , and upgrading treatment systems to 
achieve higher removal levels of specitic constituents. Upgrading and retrofitting treat­
ment plants is addressed later in this section. 16 I O.aple< 1 Wa:.fewater Engineering: An Overview 
Portions of the collection ~y:;tcm~. pm1kulnrly those in the older cities in the east­
ern and midwe~tern United Srates, are older than the treatment plums. Sewers con­
~tructcd of brick and vitrified day "'"itt-. mortar joints, tor example, are still used to carry 
sanitary wastewater and storn l\~·ater. Became of rhe age of the pipes and ancillary struc­
ture~ . the types of matcnals and methods of construction. and lack of repair. leakage is 
common. Leakage i:; in Lhe form of both infiltration and intlow where warer enters the 
collection sy~tem, and C)'.. tiltr·;ation where w"ter leave~ the pipe. In Lhe former case, 
extraneou') water has to he collected and treated, and oftentimes may overflow before 
treatmem. especially during wet weather. ln the latter case, exfiltration cau~es untreated 
wastewater to enter the groundwater and/or mig.rate to nearby surface water bodies. It 
is intere~ti ng lu note th;.H wllile the standards for treatment have increased significantl y, 
comparatively little or no attfntion has been focused on the disr.:harge of untreated 
wastewater from sewer<; through cxfi ltration. In the future, however, leaking sewer) are 
ex.pected to become a major concern and will require correction. 
Process Analysis and Control. Because of the changing characteristic s of the 
wastewater (dis\:ussed abo\c), studic!> of v.·astewater treatability are increasing: espe­
cially with reference to the treatment of specific constituents. Such studies are especially 
important where new treatment proces ~e..<; are being considered. Therefore, the engineer 
must understand the general approach and methodolo gy involved in: (I) as~css ing the 
treatability of a wastewater {domestic or indu'\trial) , (2) conducting laboratory and pilot 
p1ant studies, and (J) tran•dating ex pen mental data into design parameters . 
Compu£ational fluid U} munics (CPD). computer-based computational methods tor 
solving the fundamental equations of fluid dynamics (i.e., continuity , momentum, and 
energy), is now being u!.rd t•> improve and optimi~e the hydraulic perfonnance of 
wastewater treatment facihtie<>.. Applications of CFD include the design of new systems 
or the optiminltion of~) ~tt>m:c. such as vonex separators, mixing tanks, sedimentation 
tanks, dissolved-air tlotauon lmits, and chlorine contact tanks to reduce or eliminate 
dead zones and short circuiting. Improved UV disinfection systems are being designed 
using CfD. One of the main ad\antages of CFD is simulating a range of operating con­
ditions to evaluate perfonnan~L' before de~ign~ and operating changes are finalized. 
Another advamnge is that dynam1c models can be integrated with the process control 
!-.ystem to optimiLe ongoing operation. 
Treotment Process Performance and Reliability. Important factors in 
process selection and design are (reatment plant performance and reliability in meeting 
permit requirements. In mo~;r discharge pennits, effluent constituent requiremen ts, 
based on 7-day and -~0-day average concentration s. are specified (see Table 1-3}. 
Becauoe wastewater treatmt.!nl eft1uent quality is variable because of varying organic 
loads, changing environmental conditions, and new industrial discharges. it is necessary 
to design the treatment ~ystem to produce effluent concentratio ns equal to or less than 
the limits prescribed by the discharge pennit. Reliability is especially important where 
critical water quahty paramet t~r~ have to be maintained such as in reuse applicacions. 
On-line monitoring of critical parameters SllCh as total organic carbon (TOC), trans­
missivity, turbidity, and dissolved oxygen is necessary for building a database and for 
improving process control. Chlorine residual monjtoring is useful for do!>age control, 
and pH monitoring as.'ii!-.ts in controlling nitrification systems. 1-5 Wo-.tewoter Treofment I 17 
Treatment plant reliahilit} c.m be definl!d a:\ the probabihty that a system c·an meet 
escablished performance criteria consiscemly over extended periods of time. Two com­
ponent." of reliahihty. the mhercnt reliability of the process and mechanical reliubility, 
are discussed in Chap. I 5. As improved microbiological technique~ are developed, it 
will be po~'ible to optimize the disinfection process. 
The need to conserve t>nergy and re!.ources i ~ fundamental to all aspects of 
wa!'.>tewacer collection, treatment. 11nd reuse. Opcracion and maintenance co~l~ arc 
extremely important to operating agencies becau!\e these cost~ arc funded totall} with 
local money~. Detailed energ) analy ... cs and audits are impon:ant part!> of trcalment 
plant design and operation a') signiticant savings can be realized by selecting e-nergy­
efficient pruces~es and c4uipmenl. Large amount~ of electricity are used for aeration 
that is needed for biological treatmem. TyptcaJiy, about one-half of the entire plant 
electricity usagr is for aerati( m. In the de'>ign of wa!'ttewater tn:atmelll plants power 
use can he minimiled by paying more careful auention to plant siting, ~ekc ting 
energy-efficient e4uipmcnr. and d~-.igning facilities to recove1 t=m:rgy for in-pla11l 
usc. Energy management in treatment plant design and operation i~ also con~idered 
in Chap. 15. 
Wastewater Disinfection . Change!. in regulations and the development of new 
technolo gi~s have affected tht• design of disintection sy~tems. Gene probes are now 
being used to identify where spec1fic groups of organisms are found m treated second­
ary eftluem (i.t:., in suspen1,ion or particle-a~sociate d). Hi~lorica lly, chlorine ha!-t been 
the disinfecwnt of chorce lor ~a--tewall.:r. Wirh the 1ncreasrng numher of pcnni t~ requir­
ing low or nondetectablc amount~ of chlorine residual in treated effluents. dechlorina­
tion facilities have had ro b~ added. or chlonnation systems have been replaced by 
alternative disinfection ~)'"tem'i such a..; u)traviolet (CV) radiation (see Fig. 1-6). Con­
cerns about chemi~.:al :)afely hav~ also aftecteo design considerations of chlorination 
and dechlorination .~ystem~. Improvements that have been made in UV lamp and bal­
last design within lhe p<l~t 10 }ears have tmproved sign1tic~ntly the performance and 
reliabiJity of UV disinfcciion )y:-.tems. Effecti-.·e guidelines have aho been developed 
for the application and de1:1ign of UV system~ tNWRl, 2000). Capital and operating 
costs have also been lowered. It is anticipated that the appJkation of UV for treated 
drinking water and for !'ttorrnwalrr will continue to increase in the future. Bec.lu\e t:v 
produces ec;sentially no rroublnome byproduct~ and is also effective in the reduction of 
NOMA and other related r01npound!>. it~!-u~c for disinfeclion 1s further ~nham :eJ a.~ 
compared to chlorine compound~. 
Combined Sewer Overflows (CSOs), Sanitary Sewer Overflows 
(SSOs), and Nonpoint Sources. Ovl:rflows from combined sewer and 'ani­
lacy sewer collection sy~tcm., have been recognized as di:fficuit problem" reqmring 
solution. especially for man) llf the older cities in the United States. The prohlem has 
become more critical as greater development change!\ the amount and characleri~tics of 
stormwaler runoff and in~rta...,~s tbc ~h.nmdizution of runu1T tnto storm, combined. and 
sanitary wllect1on sy~tem~. Combined systems carry a mixture of wa.<;tew~ter and 
stormwater runoff and, when the capacity of the interceptors is reached, overflows 
occur to the receiving waren._ Large overflows can impact receiving water quality and 
can prevent attainment of mandated standards. Recreational beach closings and shellfish 18 I Chapter 1 
figure 1-6 
UV lamps used k>r 
the disinfec ~on of 
wosfe'NOter . Wasiewoter Engineering: An Overview 
bed closures have been attributed to CSOs (Lape and Dwyer. 1994). Federal regulations 
for CSOs are still under drvl"lopment and have not been issued at the time of writing 
this text (200 1). 
A combination of factor-; has resulted io the release of untreated wastewater from 
partS of sanitary collection ~ystems . These releases are termed sanitary system over­
flows (SSOs). The SSOs may be caused by (1) the entrance of excessive amounts of 
stonnwater, (2) blockages, or (3) structural, mechanical, or electrical failures. Many 
overflows result from aging coUection systems that have not received adequate 
upgrades, maintenance , and repair. The U.S.. EPA has estimated that at least 40,000 
overflows per year occur from sanitary collection systems. The untreated wastewater 
from these overflows represents threats to public health and the environment. The U.S. 
EPA is proposing to clarify and expand permit requirements fur municipal sanitary col­
lection systems under the Clean Water Act that will result in reducing the frequency and 
occurrence of SSOs (U.S. EPA 2001 ). At the time of writing this text (2001) the pro­
posed regulations are under review. The U.S. EPA estimates that nearly $45 billion is 
required for constru<.:ting facilities for controlling CSOs and SSOs in the United States 
(U.S. EPA. 1997a). 
The effecrs of pollution from nonpoint sources are growing concerns as evidenced 
by the outbreak of gasrroime~tinal iHness in Milwaukee traced to the oocysts of Cryp­
tosporidium parvum, and the occurrence of Pfiesteria piscicida in the waters of Mary­
land and North Carolina. Pfiesteria is a form of aJgae that is very toxic to fish life. 
Runoff from pastures and feedlots has been attributed as a potential factor that biggers 
the effects of these microorganism s. 1-5 Wastewater Treatment I 19 
The extent (Jf lhe measure!\ that will be needed co control nonpoint sources is not 
known at this time of writing this te>..t (200 I). When studies for assessing TMDLs arc 
complet~...d (estimated ro be in 2008), the remedial measures for controlling nonpoint 
sources may require tinancinl resource~ rivaling those for CSO and SSO correction. 
Treatment of Return Flows. Perhaps one of the signiticant future de'Velop· 
ment!> in wa.;tewater treatment will be the provision of separate facilities for trcaring 
return flows from biosolid ~ and other processing facilities. Treatmem of return flows 
will be especialJy imp<mant where low levels of nitrogen are to be achieved in the 
treated effluent. Separate treatment facilities may include (I) steam stripping for 
removal of ammonia from bio.'\olid~ return flows, n{)w typically routed to lhe p!ant 
headworks; (2) high-rate sedimentation for removing fine and difficulHo-seule col­
loidal material that also <;hields bacreria from disinfection; (3) flotation and high-rate 
sedimentati on for treating tiller backwash woter to reduce solids loading on the liquid 
treatment process; and (4) ~olublc heavy metals removal by chemical precipitati on to 
meet more stringent discharge requiremem s. The specific treatmem system used will 
depend on the constituents tha.t will impact the wastewater treatment process. 
Control of Odou and VOC Emissions. The control of odors and in paJticu­
lar the control of hydrogen o.;ullide generation is of concern in collection systems and at 
treatment facilitie ~. The release of hydrogen ~ulfide to the atmosphere above <;ewers and 
at treatment plant headworks ha.!\ occurred in a number of location.'\, The release of 
excess hydrogen sulfide ha!> led to the accelerated corrosion of concrete sewer~. head· 
works structures, and equipment, and to the release of odor!;. The control of odors ic; of 
increasing environmenta l concern u.."i residential and commercia l development con.tin~ 
ues to approach existing treatment plant locali ons. Odor control facilities mel uding cov­
ers tor process units, spec1<1l ventilation equipment, and treatment of odorous gases 
need to be integrated Vl'ith treatment plant de~ign . Control of hydrogen sui tide is also 
fundamental to maintaining ~y~>tem reliability. 
The presence of VOC ~ and VTOCs in wastewater has also nC(essitated the cover­
ing of trea(ment plant head works and primary treatment facilities and the installation of 
special facilitie~ to treat me compounds before they arc released. In some cases, 
improved industrial pretrtatment has been employed to eliminate these compounds. 
Retrofitting and Upgrading Wastewater Treatment Plants. Large 
numbers of wastewater treatment plants were constructed in the United States. during the 
19708 and 1980s when large sums of federal money were available for implementation 
of the CWA. Much of the equipment, now over 20 years old, is reaching the end of its 
useful life and will need to be replaced. Process changes to improve performance, meet 
stricter permit requirement s, and increase capacity will also be needed. For these rea· 
son~. significant future efforts in the planning and design of wastewater treatment plants 
in the United States will be directed to modifying , improving , and expanding existing 
treatment facilities. Fewer completely new treatment plants will be constructed. In 
developing countries, opportunities for designing and building completely new facili· 
ties may be somewhat greacec Upgrading and retrofitting treatment plants is addressed 
in Chap. 15. 20 I Chapter 1 Wo$tewote r Engineering : An Overview 
future Trends in Wastewoter Treatment 
In the U.S. EPA Needs As~es~ment Survey, the total treatment plant design capacity is 
projected to increase by about IS percent over the next 20 to 30 years (see Table 1-7). 
During this period, the U.S. EPA estimate.~ that approximately 2,300 new plants may 
have to be built, must of which will be providing a level of treatment greater than sec­
ondary. The design capacity of plants providing greater than secondary treatment is 
expected to increase by 40 pen.:ent in the future (U.S. EPA, I 997). Thus. it is clear that 
the future trends in wastewater treatment plant design will be for facilities providing 
higher levels of rreatmem. 
Some of the innovative treatment methods being utilized in new and upgraded 
treatment facilities include vortt:x separators , high rate cJarification, membrane biore­
actors, pressure-driven membrane filtration (ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis-see 
Fig. 1-7), and ultraviolet ra.diarion (low-pressure, low-and high-intensity UV lamps, 
and medium-pressure, high-intensity UV lamps). Some of the new technologies, espe­
cially those developed in europe, are more compact and are partkularly welJ suited for 
plants where available space for expansion is limited. 
In recent years, numerou!-1 propnetary wastewacer treannent proces~e~ have been 
developed that offer porential savings in constructio n and operation. This trend will 
likely continue. particularly where alternative treatment systems arc: ev-d.Juated or facil­
ities are privati7.ed. Privatization is generally defined as a public-private partnership in 
which the private partner arrange.o; the financing, design, building, and opentcion of dl<: 
treatment facili6es. In some cases, the private partner may own the facilities. The rea­
sons for privatization, howevl'r, go well beyond the possibility of installing proprietary 
processes. In the United States, the need for private financing appears to be the princi­
pal rationale for privatization; the need to preserve local control appears to be the lead­
ing pragmatic rationale against privatization (Dreese and Beecher, 1997). 
1-6 WASTEWATER RECLAMATION AND REUSE 
Figure 1-7 
Reverse OM"Oosis 
membrane system 
used for the removo I 
of residuol suspended 
solids remaining after 
conventional secondory 
treatment. In many locations where the available supply of fresh water has become inadequate to 
meet water needs, it is clear that tne once-used water collected from communities and 
municipalities must be \'tewed not as a wa.&te to be disposed of but as a resource that 1-6 Wostewoter Redorno~on a!ld Reuse I 21 
must be reu~ed. The concept of rem,e is becoming accepted more widely as other pttrts 
of the country experience watt'r ~hortagcs. The us~ of dual water systems, such as now 
used in St. Petersburg in Florida and Rancho Viejo i.n California, is expected to increa-se 
io the future. In both locauon~. treated e1fluent i~ used for land!.cape watering and other 
nonpotahle uses. Satellite redamarion systems ~uch a<;, those used in the Los Angeles 
basin, Where wastewat~r 11ow~ are mined (Withdrawn from collection .'>y)tems) l"or local 
treatment and reuse, are examples where tran:iporlation and treatment costs of redaio1ed 
water can be reduced significanlly. Because water reuse i~ expected to hecome of even 
greater importance in the future. reuse application s are considered in Chap. 13. 
Current Status 
Most of the reuse of wastewaTer occur.-. in the arid and .~miarid western and souihwe ~t­
ern Slales of the United States; however. the number of reuse projects i<> incrca ~ing in 
the south especially in florida and South Carolina. Because of health and safety con­
cerns, water reuse applications <lre moslly restricted to nonpotable u~c~ sul:h a~ land­
scape and agricultura l irrigation. ln a report by the National Research Council ( 1998). it 
was concluded that indirect potable reu~e of reclaimed water (mtroducing reclaimed 
water to augment a potable water source before treatment) is viable. The report also 
stated that direct potable reuse ~introducing reclaim~d wat~r directly into a water distli­
l>ution sy~tem) was not practtC<i.ble. Because of the concerns about potential health 
effects associate« with the rtdctimed water reuse, plans are proceeding sluwl)' about 
expanding reu~e beyond agricultural and landscape irrigation, groundwater recharge for 
repelling salrwater intrusjon. and nonpotable industrial uses (e.g., boiler water and cool­
ing water). 
New Directions and Concern$ 
Many of the concerns mentioned in the National Research Council (:--JRC, ll)l)~ ) report 
regarding potential microbial und chemical contamination of water supplies also apply 
to water sources that receive mcidenral or unplanned wastewatl:r discharges. A number 
of communities use water sour(;cs that contain a significant wastewater component 
Even though the<>e source~. after treatment, meet current drinking water standards. the 
growing knowledge of the porential impacts of new trace contaminants raises concern. 
Conventional technologies for both water and wastewater treatment may be incapable 
of reducing the levels of trace contaminant s below \\.'here they are not considered as a 
potential threal to public health. Therefore, new technologies that offer sjgoificaocly 
improved levels of treatment or constituent reduction need to be tested and evaJuated. 
Where indirect potable reuse is considered, risk assessmenc also becomes an impoflam 
component of a water reuse investigation. Risk assessment is addressed in Chap. I 3. 
future Trends in Technology 
Technologies that are suitable for water reuse applications indude membrane~ (pressure­
driven, electrically driven, and membrane bioreactors ). carbon adsorption, advanced 
oxidation, ion exchange, and ait stripping. Membranes are most significant develop­
ments as new producfs are now available for a number of (reatment applications. Mem­
branes had been limited previously to desalination , but they are being tested increas­
ingly for wastewater applications to produce h1gh-quality treated effluent suitable for 
reclamation. Increased levels of l:Ontaminant removal not only enhance the product for 22 I Chapter 1 Wastewate r Engineering: An Overview 
reuse but also lc~~cn health n\ks. A~ indirect potable reuse intensifies to augment exist­
ing water supplie~ . mclllb ran~~ are expected to be one of the predomina nl lreatment 
technologies. Ad\lanced wa~tcwater treatment technologies are discussed in Chap. t 1, 
and water reuse i~ con~ide red in Chap. 13. 
1-7 BIOSOLIDS AND RESIDUALS MANAGEMENT 
The managemenr of rhe ~ol rd.., and concentrated contaminants removed by treannent 
has been and continue!. to hf one of the most difficult and expensive problems in the 
field of wastewater englntA:nng. W~hte\\.atcr solids ure organic products that can be 
used beneficially after ~tabili;ation by processes such as <maerobic digcsrion and corn­
posting. With the advent of rt•gulations that encourage biosolids usc. -.ignificam efforts 
have been directed to prod~K·,ng a ''dean sludge'' {Class A biosolid">-!,ee definition in 
Table l~l) that meets hea\')' metab and pathogen requiremenrs and is ~uitable fur land 
application. Rcgulationo.. for Cla~s H biosolid~ call for reduced density in pathogenic 
bacteria and enteric viru,e.:,, hut not to the level~ of Class A biosolids. Further. the appli­
caliun of Clas~ B biosolill" l<' land 1s ~trktly regulated. and distrihulion for home use is 
prohibited (see. Tuble 1-1 l. 
Other treatment plant rt:' idual!. such a'> wit and <>creenings hav~ to be rendered ~uil­
able for dispo~a1, customarily in land!illl-1. Landtilb u:-.ually require ~ome form of dewa­
tering to limit moisture comf>nt. With the increased use of membranes, especially in 
wastewater reuse applicmitm:-,, a new type ()[ residual, brine concentrate, requires fur­
ther pro<.:essing and Jispo,al. Solar evaporarion pond-.. and dlscharBC to a saltwater envi­
ronment are only viabk in communities where suitable and environmental geographic 
~ondi tions pre\'ail; brin~ <.·onccnlnuion and re!.iduals ~olidif} cation are genemlly too 
complex. and co~tly to implc"ment. 
Current Statu.s 
Treatment technologie~ for 'olld) proce"c;ing buve focused on traditional merhods such 
as thickening , st<lbililation. dewatering. and drying. Evolution in the technologies has 
not occurred a~ rapidly a~ in liqmd treatment proce')c;es, but some ~igniticant improve­
ments have occurred. Centrifuge~ that produce a sludge cake with higher solids content, 
egg-shaped digester~ rhat improve operation. and dryers that minimi7e water content 
are just a few example~ uf product:-, that have come into use in recent years. These 
developm ent~ are largely driven b}' the nc:t:d to produce biosolid!> that arc clean, have 
less volume, and can be ustd beneficially. 
Landfills still continue to be used extensively for the disposal ot' treatment p\ant 
solids, either in ~ludge -only monofills or with municipal solid waste. The number and 
capacity of landfills. huwc\·cr. have be~n reduced, and new landfill location~ that meet 
public and regulatory ac~eptance and economic requirements are increasingly difficult 
to find. Incineration of ~olid~ b> large municipa!Hies cominues to be practiced, but 
incineration operation and t·mission control are subject to greater regulatory restriccions 
and adverse puhlit: s~.:rut iny. Alternatives to landfills and im:ineration include tand 
application of liquid or dri~..--d biosolids and composting for distribution and marketing. 
Land applicatiotl of bio~olids is used extensively to reclaim marginal land for produc­
tive uses and to utilize nutrient con lent in the biosolids. Composting, although a more 1-7 Bioso,id$ ond Residuals Monogement I 23 
expensive alternative, is a means of stabilizing and distributing biosolids for use as a 
soil amendment. Alkaline stabiliL.ation of biosolids for land application is also used but 
to a lesser extent 
New Directions and Concerns 
Over the last 30 years, the principal focus in wastewater engineering has been on 
improving the quaiity of treated eft1ucnt through the construction of secondary and 
advanced wastewater lreatment plants. With improved treatment methods, higher levels 
of treatment must be provided no t only for conventional wastewater constiruents but also 
for the removal of specjfic compounds such as nutrients and heavy metal!\. A byproduct 
of these efforts has been the increased generation of solids and biosolids per person 
served by a munidpal wastewater syc;tem. In many cases, the increase in solids produc­
tion clearly taxes the capacily of existing solids processing and d1sposal methods. 
In addition to the shear volume of solid~ that has to be handled and processed, man­
agement options continue to be reduced through stricter reg11lation s. Limitations that 
affect options are: (I) land till !>ires are becoming more difficult to find and have per­
mitted, (2) air emi~sions from mdnerator.'\ are more closely regulated, and {3) new 
requirement"> for the land application of biosolids have been instituted. In large urbao 
areas, haul distances to landfill or land application sites have ~ignificantly affected the 
cost of solids processing and disposal. Few new incinerators are being planned because 
of difficultie~ in tlnding suitable sites and obtaining permits. Emission control regula­
tions of che Clean Air Act also require the installation of complex and expensive pollu­
tion control equipment . 
More communities are look1ng toward (I) producing Class A biosolids to improve 
beneficial reuse opportunit1e' Of (2) impkrnenting a form of volume reduction, thus 
lessening the requirement~ for disposal. The issue-"are Class A biosolids clean 
enough?"-will be of ongoing. concem to the public. The continuing s~an .:h for better 
methods of solids processing, di!-posal. and reuse will remain as one of the highest pri­
orities in the future. Additionally. ctevdoping m~aning ful dialogue with lht: public about 
health and environment al effect~ will continue to be very imponam. 
Future 1rentls in Biosolicls Processing 
New solid!. processing systems have not been developed as rapidly as liquid unit oper­
ations and processes. Anaerobic dig~stion remains rhe principal process for the stabi­
litation of solids. Egg-shaped digesters, developed in Europe for anaerobic digestion, 
are being used more extensively in the United States because of advantages of easier 
operation, lower operation and maintenance costs, and, in some cases. increased 
volatile solids destruction (which also increa.;es the production of reusable methane 
gas) (see Fig. 1-8). Other development ~ in anaerobic and aerobic digestion include 
temperature -phased anaerobic digestion and autothennal aerobic digestion (ATAD), 
another process developed in Europe. These processes offer advan1ages of improved 
volatile solids destruction and the production of stabilized biosolids that meet Oass A 
requirements. 
High solids centrifuge..-. and heat dryers are expected to be used more extensively. 
High solids centrifuges extract a greater percentage of the water in liquid sludge, thus 
providing a dryer cake. Improved dewacering not only reduces the volume of solids 24 I Chaptef 1 Wo51eworer Engineering: An Overview 
Figure 1-8 
Egg-shaped digesturs 
U$ed for the onQerobic 
treatment of biosolids. 
requiring further processing and disposal. but allows composting or subsequent drying 
to be performed more efficiently. Heat drying provides further volume reduction and 
improves the quality of the product for potential commercial marketing. Each of the 
newer methods of biosolids processing is described in Chap. l4. 
REFERENCES 
Boyd, J. (2000) "Unleashing chc Clean Water Act, the Promise and Challenge of the TMDL 
Approach ro Wacer Quality," Resources, Issue 139. 
Card, T. R., and R. L. Corsi (1992) "A Flexible Fate Model for VOCs in Wastewater ," Water 
ETnJironment & Technology. vol. 4, no. 3. 
Crites, R. W., S. C. Reed, and R. K. Ba'>tion (2000) Land Treatment Systems for Municipal and 
Industrial Wastes, McGraw-Hill. New York. 
Crites, R., and G. Tchobanoglous (1998) Small and Decentralized Wasrewater Management 
Systerru, McGraw-Hill, New YQrk. 
Crook. J., J. A. MacDonald , and R. R. Trussel (1999) "Potable Use of Reclaimed Water," 
Journal American Water Wor.b Association , voL 91, no. 8. 
Curren, M. D. (1999) "Total Maximum Daily Loads," Environrntntal Protection. vol. 10, 
no. 11. 
Dreese, G. R., and J. A. Beecher ( 1997) "To Privatize or Not to Privatize,•• Water Emironment 
& Techoology, vol. 9, no. I, Water Environment Federation. Alexandria , VA. 
Federal Register (1988) 40 CFR Part 133, Secondary Treatment Regulation . 
Federal Register (1989) 40 CFR Part 133, Amendments to the Secondary Treatment 
Regulations: Percent Removal Requirements During Dry Weather Periods for T~me nt 
Work.s Served by Combined Sewers. 
Federal Register (1993) 40 CFR Parts 257 and 503, Standards for the Disposal of Sewage 
Sludge. 
Lape, J. L., and T. J. Dwyer ( 1994) A New Policy on CSO.s, Water Environment & Technology, 
vol. 6, no. 6. 
Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. (1991) Wasrewater t:ngineering: Treatment , Disposal and Reuse, 3d ed., 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
National Research Council ( 1998) Issues in Poltlble Reuse-Tilt Viability of $gm.eruin g Drinking 
Water Supplies with Reclaimtd Water, National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 