sustainability
Article
Potential Toxic Effects of Airport Runoff Water Samples on
the Environment
Anna Maria Sulej-Suchomska1,*
, Piotr Przybyłowski1
and ˙Zaneta Polkowska2,*
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Sulej-Suchomska, A.M.;
Przybyłowski, P .; Polkowska, ˙Z.
Potential Toxic Effects of Airport
Runoff Water Samples on the
Environment. Sustainability 2021 ,13,
7490. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su13137490
Academic Editor: Pere Suau-Sanchez
Received: 18 May 2021
Accepted: 29 June 2021
Published: 5 July 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Department of Quality Management, Faculty of Management and Quality Sciences,
Gdynia Maritime University, 81-225 Gdynia, Poland; p.przybylowski@wznj.umg.edu.pl
2Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Gda ´ nsk University of Technology,
80-233 Gda ´ nsk, Poland
*Correspondence: a.sulej-suchomska@wznj.umg.edu.pl (A.M.S.-S.); zanpolko@pg.edu.pl ( ˙Z.P .)
Abstract: Despite the positive aspects of the intensive development of aviation, airports are consid-
ered large-scale polluters. Pollution caused by runoff water (stormwater) is one of the major problems
related to airport operations. The aim of this study was to characterize the potential toxic impact
on aquatic life from runoff water discharges from four international airports in Europe. Samples
of stormwater were collected at airports with different capacities of passenger movement in four
seasons of the year from 2011 to 2013. Within the ecotoxicological analyses, a battery of biotests
incorporating organisms of different trophic levels (Microtox®test, Thamnotoxkit F ™) were used. A
relatively high number of runoff water samples collected at the investigated airports in Europe was
recorded as having very high acute hazard (16.8%), acute hazard (27.7%), and slight acute hazard
(18.1%) levels. The results of the research indicate that winter and autumn present a greater toxic
threat than the rest of the year. The highest number of toxic samples was observed for samples
collected in the de-icing area, the runway and the vicinity of airport terminals. The ecotoxicological
assessment applied in this research can be used as a tool for assessing the environmental effect
of airports.
Keywords: airport runoff water; airport stormwater; toxicity; environmental quality management;
sustainable development; water quality; Vibrio ﬁscheri ;Thamnocephalus platyurus ; airport management;
management of wastewater
1. Introduction
Worldwide, air trafﬁc has experienced a net increase in recent decades [ 1,2]. Statistics
show that passenger air trafﬁc has increased globally at an average rate of 5.3% per year
since 2000 [ 2]. Moreover, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency estimates that the
number of ﬂights will increase by 42% from 2017 to 2040 according to the most likely
forecast [ 3]. Despite the many positive aspects resulting from the extensive development
of commercial aviation, airports are a major source of environmental pollution [ 4–8]. In
this regard, a crucial aspect is the contamination caused by airport stormwaters (runoff
waters). Airport runoff waters are formed when precipitation or atmospheric deposition
washes chemicals used during everyday activities at airports off the airport platform. Such
waters enter the soil, surface water, and even groundwater, which can act as a source of
drinking water [ 9–14]. This can cause substantial difﬁculties, especially if the receiving
existing wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) is malfunctioning or there is no WWTP at
the airport [15,16].
Airport runoff waters can contain a wide range of hazardous pollutants, such as
benzotriazoles (BTs), heavy metals, glycols, detergents, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), pesticides, formaldehydes, and phenols, at differ-
ent concentrations [ 17–20]. The aforementioned contaminants can be discharged into runoff
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13137490 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 2 of 18
waters during refuelling, fuel storage, fuel transportation, aircraft repair, aircraft and air-
port apron cleaning, de/anti-icing, and engine aviation fuel combustion operations [21–25] .
These groups of pollutants are characterized by a high toxicity and carcinogenicity [ 26–30].
This topic is a serious problem for a wide range of stakeholders, especially those residing
in communities near airports, whose health issues, property values, and life quality metrics
can be affected by such environmental impacts [3,31,32].
In this context, airport runoff waters should be collected, treated, and monitored
constantly to avoid adverse effects on the environment and, above all, on humans and
animals [ 5,33,34]. The quality of the aquatic environment is traditionally evaluated via
chemical or physical analyses. Although fundamental for quantifying pollutants, such
analyses rarely assume their composite toxicity directly [ 35]. Therefore, it is crucial to assess
the toxic effect of polluted airport runoff waters on living organisms. Understanding the
level of airport runoff toxicity to aquatic organisms is essential for the effective management
of stormwater quality [ 36–40]. Biotests can fully complement the monitoring system based
on chemical determination of the most hazardous pollutants in airport runoff water samples.
There have been a very limited number of global-scale research studies using bioassays
to assess the toxicity of airport runoff waters on aquatic organisms [ 41,42]. Based on the
published literature, it can be summarized that most of the aforementioned works provide
data on the possible toxicological effects from aircraft de-icer and anti-icer solutions to
various types of aquatic organisms, namely, Pimephales promela ,Daphnia magna ,Daphnia
pulex ,Ceriodaphnia dubia ,Photobacterium phosphoreum ,Lemna gibba , and Aliivibrio ﬁscheri .
There are clear gaps in the study results of the acute whole efﬂuent toxicity of runoff water
from airports. To date, the ﬁeld of the conducted research is very limited. The test results
included infrequently organized sampling campaigns as well as sampling within only one
airport in each case. So far, the available reports do not provide data on the comparative
analysis of toxicity assessments of airports located in different geographical regions and
that are characterized by different levels of activity. Although our preliminary research
provides the results of the ecotoxicological effects of various compounds in complex
airport efﬂuents, the information contained therein has been very limited in regard to
the number of investigated airports, few sampling campaigns, as well as single sampling
sites on the platform airports. This research topic is not yet fully understood and requires
further research.
The main aim of the present study was to characterize the potential toxicity of runoff
water discharges from four international airports in Europe. Runoff water samples were
collected at international airports with large, high, medium, and low capacities of passenger
movement in four seasons—autumn, winter, spring and summer—in the period from 2011
to 2013. Within the ecotoxicological analyses, a battery of biotests incorporating organisms
of different trophic levels (Microtox®test and Thamnotoxkit F ™) were used. To our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that very detailed toxicity investigations of airport runoff
waters on such a scale regarding different European airports and a variety of drained areas
and their seasonal variations have been published.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Runoff Water Sampling, Collection and Handling
The runoff water samples were collected from the areas of four international airports in
Great Britain and Poland, coded as follows: Large Airport (UK), Big Airport (PL), Medium
Airport (PL), and Small Airport (PL). Average number of passenger movement at the
investigated airports was 45 million passengers per year (Large Airport UK), 18 million
passengers per year (Big Airport PL), 9.8 million passengers per year (Medium Airport
PL), and 0.4 million passengers per year (Small Airport PL). Samples were collected from
December 2011 to January 2013 in four seasons—summer, autumn, winter, and spring.
During this period, 121 runoff water samples were collected (51 samples—Small Airport
(PL), 32 samples—Medium Airport (PL), 33 samples—Big Airport (PL), 5 samples—Large
Airport (UK)).Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 3 of 18
Stormwater samples were mainly collected manually. During the research period, the
amount of precipitation ranged from 2 to 10 mm and the events lasted from 3 to 5 h. The
samples were collected from surface depressions near drain inlets and from the airport
drainage system. A list of chosen airport runoff water sampling sites was created by the
authors of this paper using the available protocols of airport industrial waste management,
the authors’ prior experience, and by consulting a group of experts consisting of airport
transport and engineers working at relevant airports [ 7,16,31,43,44]. A very important
criterion taken into consideration in selecting the sampling sites was the air trafﬁc intensity
at the airports. The essential criterion was also the possibility of signing an agreement
with the airport and obtaining a permit to collect samples from the airport platform. The
permission to collect the runoff water samples from the airport platform during everyday
operations of the airport maintenance obliges to quick (maximum ﬁve minute) sampling
from the single measuring point at the airport. These conditions result from the necessity
of keeping the regular cycle of work related to the proper airport functioning and more
stringent procedures introduced recently and connected with increased air trafﬁc while
maintaining the high service standard and the safety level of air operations. As a result,
four international airports with different capacities of passenger movement were selected.
The sampling locations at the airports were areas with the highest concentration of technical
service operations (the de-icing area, airport terminal, machinery storage area, runway, car
park, parking area) where the largest amounts of pollutants enter drainage ditches with
runoff and may be released into the environment (Table 1). Additionally, one location at
each airport was selected at the periphery of the airport or in the immediate vicinity of the
airport for comparison purposes.
Table 1. Characteristics of airport runoff water sampling sites.
Airports/Sampling
SiteLarge Airport UK Big Airport PL Medium Airport PL Small Airport PL
1 runway inﬂuent of a rivervicinity of an
airport terminalvicinity of an
airport terminal
2a river in the vicinity of
the airportefﬂuent of a river the technical road de-icing area
3 de-icing area (2)municipal water
catchment areade-icing areamachinery stock, parking
places
4 de-icing area (3)CARGO water
catchment areamachinery stock,
parking placesrunway
5 de-icing area (4) airport ramp the periphery of an airport parking places
6 the road near the airport car park runway the periphery of an airport
7 - de-icing area car park car park
8 - airport ramp - -
The stormwater samples were collected in 1000 mL dark glass bottles by using a
syringe (100 mL) with Teﬂon tubing. Prior to use, the syringes and tubing were rinsed with
ultrapure water, and then stormwater was sampled.
After the sample collection campaigns, the stormwater samples were transported to
the laboratory and stored at 4C until further analysis.
2.2. Toxicity Testing of Airport Runoff Water
The toxicity assessment of airport runoff water samples was carried out using a
battery of biotests. Two species from different trophic levels in the food chain were applied,
namely, decomposers (bacterium Vibrio ﬁscheri (Microtox®test)), and consumers (crustacean
Thamnocephalus platyurus (Thamnotoxkit F ™test)). These microbiotests do not require the
maintenance of continuous cultures of organisms and are based on immobilized or dormant
(cryptobiotic) stages of selected aquatic species set free or hatched as needed [10,45,46].Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 4 of 18
Parameters such as the pH, turbidity, temperature, and colour can interfere with the
test results; therefore, these factors were examined before each test.
Toxicity testing with the Thamnotoxkit FTMtest was performed according to the man-
ufacturer’s standard procedure. Cysts were incubated at 25C for 22 h under continuous
illumination. Ten larvae of aquatic crustacean Thamnocephalus platyurus were added to each
well containing 1 mL of airport stormwater sample. The test was carried out in triplicate
for each airport runoff water sample. Multiwell plates were incubated in darkness for 24 h
at 25C. The test reaction is the mortality of the organism. The Thamnotoxkit FTMtest was
performed in triplicate for each airport runoff water sample.
In turn, the Microtox®test was performed in accordance with the procedure PN-EN
ISO 11348-3:2008 [ 47] using the Microtox model 500 instrument (Strategic Diagnostic Inc.,
Newark, NJ, USA) for freeze-dried bacteria. The pH of the runoff water samples was
measured at the beginning of every test to ensure that it ranged between 6 and 8. The
sensitivity of bacteria was veriﬁed regularly with the reference toxicant ZnSO 4*7H 2O.
The measured parameter was the bacterial luminescence inhibition (% effect) evaluated
after 30 min of incubation. The test results were calculated using the manufacturer’s
MicrotoxOmni programme. The EC 50value was determined for toxic runoff samples. Each
test was carried out in triplicate. The repeatability of the results was regularly examined,
and the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) fell in the range of 10%.
3. Results
3.1. Toxicity Tests of Runoff Water Samples
3.1.1. Microtox®
Figure 1 presents the toxicity towards Vibrio ﬁscheri bacteria in stormwater samples
collected from 2011 to 2013 (in different seasons) of four international airports in Great
Britain and Poland with large, high, medium, and low capacities of passenger movement.
Acute toxicity tests were performed on 121 samples collected from the abovementioned
airports at various characteristic places (1–8). Generally, the sampling sites were set
as places where the most maintenance work was carried out and where the greatest
number of pollutants entered the stormwater. The potential toxicity of the collected airport
runoff water samples was described by applying a toxicity classiﬁcation system proposed
by Persoone et al. [ 48]. Classiﬁcation was performed on the basis of determining the
percentage effect (PE) obtained with each of the bioassays. The response of the organism
was classiﬁed as toxic when the percentage effect was equal to or higher than 20%. Within
the implemented research, the highest number of identiﬁed toxic samples (36.4%) was
observed for samples collected from Big Airport PL (Figure 1c). The results of the performed
studies showed that 11.8% of the tested samples collected at Small Airport PL (Figure 1a)
and only 9.4% collected at Medium Airport PL (Figure 1b) were toxic to the bacterium
Vibrio ﬁscheri . Bacterial luminescence inhibition in the range of 4–24% was observed in
samples collected at Large Airport UK during all campaigns (Figure 1d). However, it
should be emphasized that for technical reasons, a relatively small number of samples
collected at Large Airport UK were tested when we compared it with the number of
analysed samples taken from the other investigated airports.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 5 of 18
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 16 
 
a river from airports, car parks and de -icing areas (9 1–100% of the bacterial luminescence 
inhibition) (Figure 1c). In turn, samples collected from the runway, the vicinity of an air-
port terminal , and the de-icing area (sampling si tes no. 4, 1 , and 2) at Small Airport PL 
showed the highest toxicity towards Vibrio fischeri  (Figure 1a). Similarly, the runoff water 
samples collected at the Medium Airport PL in the vicinity of the airport terminal, car 
park and runway were characterized  by the highest toxicity (8 0–92% bacterial lum ines-
cence inhibition) (Figure 1 b). 
 
Figure 1. Toxicity of airport runoff water samples towards Vibrio fischeri determined by the Microtox® test. (a). Small 
Airport  PL; (b). Medium Airport PL ; (c). Big Airport PL; (d). Large Airport UK . 
Considering seasonal variations in the toxicity of runoff water samples collected at 
Big Airport PL, Medium Airport PL , and Small Airport PL, it can be concluded that the 
highest toxicity towards Vibrio fischeri  was observed in samples collected during winter 
seasons and autumn seasons, as presented in Figure 1. Based on the results of runoff water 
toxicity obtained by Microtox®, it could be concluded that the stormwater samples col-
lected in the de -icing area of Big Airport PL during the first winter campaign  in 2012 
showed the highest toxicity among all tested samples; the EC 50 values reached 4.96% (Fig-
ure 1c). The abovementioned sample (Big Airport PL, winter I, site no. 7) was classified as 
having a very high a cute hazard level (class V) according to the classification system for 
Figure 1. Toxicity of airport runoff water samples towards Vibrio ﬁscheri determined by the Microtox®test. ( a). Small
Airport PL; ( b). Medium Airport PL; ( c). Big Airport PL; ( d). Large Airport UK.
On the basis of the obtained data, the highest toxicity towards Vibrio ﬁscheri of samples
collected at Big Airport PL was determined in samples collected from the efﬂuent of a
river from airports, car parks and de-icing areas (91–100% of the bacterial luminescence
inhibition) (Figure 1c). In turn, samples collected from the runway, the vicinity of an
airport terminal, and the de-icing area (sampling sites no. 4, 1, and 2) at Small Airport PL
showed the highest toxicity towards Vibrio ﬁscheri (Figure 1a). Similarly, the runoff water
samples collected at the Medium Airport PL in the vicinity of the airport terminal, car park
and runway were characterized by the highest toxicity (80–92% bacterial luminescence
inhibition) (Figure 1b).
Considering seasonal variations in the toxicity of runoff water samples collected at Big
Airport PL, Medium Airport PL, and Small Airport PL, it can be concluded that the highest
toxicity towards Vibrio ﬁscheri was observed in samples collected during winter seasons
and autumn seasons, as presented in Figure 1. Based on the results of runoff water toxicity
obtained by Microtox®, it could be concluded that the stormwater samples collected in
the de-icing area of Big Airport PL during the ﬁrst winter campaign in 2012 showed the
highest toxicity among all tested samples; the EC 50values reached 4.96% (Figure 1c). The
abovementioned sample (Big Airport PL, winter I, site no. 7) was classiﬁed as havingSustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 6 of 18
a very high acute hazard level (class V) according to the classiﬁcation system for acute
toxicity proposed by the research team of Persoone et al. [ 48]; therefore, a dilution of 1:3 of
the sample was performed. After sample dilution, the toxicity towards Vibrio ﬁscheri was
still classiﬁed as being of an acute hazard level (EC 50= 11.6%). Moreover, the sample (Big
Airport PL, 2012, winter I, site no. 7) was ca. 300 times more toxic than the sample collected
at the airport ramp (Big Airport PL, 2013, winter II, site no. 5), which was characterized as
having the lowest toxicity among the samples tested. Very high toxicity was also observed
in the samples collected during the ﬁrst autumn campaign in 2012 at the runway (Small
Airport PL, 2012, autumn I, site no. 4), the winter campaigns at the efﬂuent of a river
from the airport (Big Airport PL, 2013, winter I, site no. 2), and the de-icing area of the
airport (Big Airport PL, 2013, winter II, site no. 7); the respective EC 50values were 6.7%,
7.9%, and 7.43% (undiluted samples). The performed studies showed that 70% of the most
toxic samples analysed within this study were collected during the autumn and winter
seasons (Figure 1).
3.1.2. Thamnotoxkit FTM
The results of the Thamnotoxkit FTMtest are presented in Figure 2. During all the
sampling campaigns, 83 samples were subjected to toxicity assessment towards Tham-
nocephalus platyurus . Toxicity testing with Thamnotoxkit FTMwas carried out on runoff
water samples collected at the four investigated airports in the 2012–2013 period, taking
into consideration the seasonality of sampling campaigns and the characteristic places of
airport infrastructure where the most maintenance work was performed. The number of
toxic runoff water samples identiﬁed by using the Thamnotoxkit F ™test was 93.9% at Big
Airport PL, 78.6% at Medium Airport PL, and 96.9% at Small Airport PL among all tested
samples (see Figure 2). In the case of runoff water samples collected at Large Airport UK,
only one studied sample was classiﬁed as toxic when the percentage effect of mortality
reached 40% (Figure 2d).
In the present study, the highest toxicity towards Thamnocephalus platyurus at Small
Airport PL was observed in samples collected in the de-icing area, runway, vicinity of an
airport terminal and car park; the respective mortality of crustaceans was 100% (Figure 1a).
When we consider the monitoring of most toxic runoff samples collected at Medium
Airport PL using Thamnotoxkit FTM, it can be concluded that the highest toxicity was
observed (100% mortality of crustaceans) in samples collected in the vicinity of an airport
terminal and car park (see Figure 1b). In the present study, a mortality of 100% crustaceans
of the species Thamnocephalus platyurus was observed in a relatively large number of
samples collected at Big Airport PL, inter alia, in the de-icing area, efﬂuent of a river from
airports, airport ramps, and car parks (Figure 2c). In turn, the highest toxicity towards
Thamnocephalus platyurus at Large Airport UK was observed in the samples collected in the
de-icing area (Large Airport UK, 2012, winter III, site no. 4), and the crustacean mortality
reached 40% (Figure 2d).
Furthermore, Figure 2 presents information on the seasonal variations in toxicity
of samples collected at the investigated airports. It is clear from these data that the
highest number of toxic runoff water samples (with the highest value of mortality of
crustaceans) was observed in samples collected during the autumn and winter seasons.
In detail, the mortality in crustaceans of the species Thamnocephalus platyurus was in the
range of 13.3–60% in samples collected at Small Airport PL during the spring campaign,
while samples from the summer, autumn, and winter campaigns were in the ranges of
3.3–60%, 6.5–100%, and 3.3–100%, respectively. In the case of Medium Airport PL, a
relatively small number of stormwater samples (i.e., the spring and summer campaigns of
2012) were subjected to toxicity assessment towards Thamnocephalus platyurus . Based on
the obtained results, it can be concluded that samples collected during both spring and
summer campaigns were characterised by a similar toxicity (3.3–100% mortality) towards
T. platyurus (see Figure 2b). In the case of Big Airport PL and Large Airport UK, due
to technical reasons, toxicity testing with the Thamnotoxkit FTMtest was performed onSustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 7 of 18
samples collected during autumn and winter campaigns in the period of 2011 to 2013. As
mentioned earlier, the obtained results indicate that most of the analysed runoff water
samples collected at Big Airport PL were classiﬁed as having an acute hazard ( 53.3%
mortality of crustaceans) level while having no acute hazard (<20%) level in the case of
runoff water samples collected at Large Airport UK, both during the autumn and winter
campaigns (Figure 2c,d).
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 16 
 
 
Figure 2. Toxicity of airport runoff water samples towards Thamnocephalus platyurus  determined by the Thamnotoxkit FTM 
test. (a). Small Airport PL; (b). Medium Airport PL; (c). Big Airport PL ; (d). Large Airport UK . 
In the present study, the highest toxicity towards Thamnocephalus platyurus  at Small 
Airport PL was observed in samples collected in the de -icing area, runway, vicinity of an 
airport terminal and car park; the respective mortality of crustaceans was 100% (Figure 
1a). 
When we consider the monitoring of most toxic runoff samples co llected at Medium 
Airport PL using Thamnotoxkit FTM, it can be concluded that the highest toxicity was ob-
served (100% mortality of crustaceans) in samples collected in the vicinity of an airport 
terminal and car park (see Figure 1b). In the present study, a mortality of 100% crustaceans 
of the species Thamnocephalus platyurus  was observed in a relatively large number of sam-
ples collected at Big Airport PL, inter alia, in the de -icing area, effluent of a river from 
airports, airport ramps , and car parks (Fig ure 2c). In turn, the highest toxicity towards 
Thamnocephalus platyurus  at Large Airport UK was observed in the samples collected in 
the de -icing area (Large Airport UK, 2012, winter III, site no. 4), and the crustacean mor-
tality reached 40% (Figure 2d).  
Furthermore, Figure 2 presents information on the seasonal variations in toxicity of 
samples collected at the investigated airports. It is clear from these data that the highest 
number of toxic runoff water samples (with the highest value of mortality of cr ustaceans) 
was observed in samples collected during the autumn and winter seasons. In detail, the 
mortality in crustaceans of the species Thamnocephalus platyurus  was in the range of 13. 3–
60% in samples collected at Small Airport PL during the spring campa ign, while samples 
Figure 2. Toxicity of airport runoff water samples towards Thamnocephalus platyurus determined by the Thamnotoxkit FTM
test. ( a). Small Airport PL; ( b). Medium Airport PL; ( c). Big Airport PL; ( d). Large Airport UK.
4. Discussion
This research evaluated the potential ecotoxicological effects of airport runoff waters
on the bacterium Vibrio ﬁscheri and crustacean Thamnocephalus platyurus as diagnostic and
assessment tools. To our knowledge, bioluminescence bacteria ( Vibrio ﬁscheri ) have been
used several times as test organisms in the ecotoxicological testing of runoff water, while
the crustacean Thamnocephalus platyurus has been used for testing airport runoff toxicity
only by the research team of Novak [ 49] and in our previous work [ 10]. A decrease in the
luminescence of Vibrio ﬁscheri or mortality of Thamnocephalus platyurus in airport runoff
water samples would indicate a potential adverse impact of these environmental samples
on aquatic organisms. The results of the measured data presented in Figures 1 and 2
revealed that the crustacean T. platyurus and the bacteria V . ﬁscheri , two organisms from
different trophic levels, respond differently to the target runoff water samples. It can be
concluded that the tested organisms are sensitive to different pollutants, which may be
present in the investigated airport runoff water samples. This conﬁrms that to assess the
real hazard of investigated samples to the environment, the use of various microbiotests isSustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 8 of 18
very helpful and provides a more complete analysis. Due to the importance of this type
of ecotoxicological analysis, bioassays have been subjected to detailed investigation and
numerous modiﬁcations over the last 30 years [ 48,50,51]. As a result, the measurement
procedures have been standardized; thus, there is no need for culturing test organisms,
and the developed bioassays are effective and relatively inexpensive. Microtox®is a quick
toxicity microbiotest used widely in scientiﬁc laboratories as well as in routine analysis.
This is mainly due to the simplicity of the operation, the short time of analysis, and there
being no need for culturing test organisms. V . Fischeri bacteria, which are applied as an
indicator organism, are susceptible to wide a spectrum of substances. Nevertheless, the
conducted research showed that Microtox®was less sensitive than Thamnotoxkit FTM.
Many of the investigated airport runoff water samples that were toxic to Thamnocephalus
platyurus did not show toxic effects towards Vibrio ﬁscheri , or the toxic effects were negligible.
Similar results in terms of the less toxic response of Vibrio ﬁscheri to environmental samples
compared to other biotests have been reported in the literature [ 39,52]. Considering the
results of this study and numerous works of other research groups, it should be emphasized
that Thamnocephalus platyurus is generally more sensitive to surface water and wastewater
contamination than Vibrio ﬁscheri and other bioindicators applied in bioassays [46,52,53].
The results of the conducted research indicate that winter and autumn present a
greater toxic threat than the rest of the year. During the abovementioned seasons, the
highest number of operations, such as the de-icing of the airport area and aircraft, is
performed, the largest amount of aviation fuel is burned (particularly during take-off
when the aircraft engines require more energy and time to start the vehicle due to the
reduced ambient temperature), and heat exchanger ﬂuids and chemical stabilizers are more
frequently exchanged in comparison with the other warmer seasons of the year, which may
account for the above characteristic relationship [ 10]. Additionally, it can be concluded that
samples collected in the de-icing area, car park, vicinity of an airport terminal, and runway
were characterized by the highest toxicity, which is also related to the above claim. It was
conﬁrmed that places where the most maintenance work at airport platforms is carried
out generally presents the greatest toxic threat. Moreover, the results of the bioassays
presented herein showed that in some cases, runoff water samples classiﬁed as having
an acute hazard level were discharged directly to the efﬂuent of a river from airports or
penetrated water samples at the periphery of airports. This type of practice at airports
poses a very high risk to the environment and to communities near airports.
Based on the results presented in Section 3, an attempt was made to classify the
collected airport runoff water samples according to the ﬁve-level toxicity classiﬁcation
system proposed by Persoone et al. [ 48]. Classiﬁcation was conducted based on deter-
mining the percentage effect (PE), estimated during the test performed on an undiluted
sample. Table S1 in the Supplementary Materials shows the hazard/toxicity classiﬁcation
system, which is the basis of the performed classiﬁcation. Data on the allocation of airport
runoff water samples to suitable toxicity classes (toxicity classiﬁcation in relation to both T.
platyurus and V . ﬁscheri ) are summarized in Tables 2–5. The recommended management
actions for each sampling site, from which runoff water samples were taken for toxicity
assessment, are also summarized in Tables 2–5. As a result of the conducted research, Tham-
nocephalus platyurus turned out to be a more sensitive bioindicator to airport runoff water
contamination; therefore, the toxicity classiﬁcation in relation to crustacean T. platyurus is
discussed in this section.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 9 of 18
Table 2. Determination of toxicity in the analysed airport water samples collected at Small Airport PL based on the toxicity classiﬁcation system proposed by Persoone et al. [48].
Microtox®Thamnotoxkit FTM
Sampling
Date/SeasonCampaign Site No. Threat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management
ActionsThreat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management
Actions
2011 Autumn I 1 Acute hazard III IAaNAdNA NA
I 2 No acute hazard I FObNA NA NA
I 3 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
2012 Winter I 1 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 2 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
I 3 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 4 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 6 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
2012 Winter II 1 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 2 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
II 3 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 4 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 6 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 7 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 8 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
2012 Spring I 1 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 6 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 2 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 4 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 5 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 6 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 6 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IASustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 10 of 18
Table 2. Cont.
Microtox®Thamnotoxkit FTM
Sampling
Date/SeasonCampaign Site No. Threat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management
ActionsThreat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management
Actions
2012 Autumn I 1 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 3 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 4 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 6 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
I 7 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
2012 Autumn II 1 Slight acute hazard II CAcAcute hazard III IA
II 2 Slight acute hazard II CA Very high acute hazard V IA
II 3 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
II 4 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 6 Slight acute hazard II CA Slight acute hazard II CA
II 7 Slight acute hazard II CA Very high acute hazard V IA
II 8 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
2013 Winter I 1 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 3 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 6 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 7 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 8 Slight acute hazard II CA No acute hazard I FO
aIA—immediate action required,bFO—further observation required,cCA—consideration of the need for action required,dNA—not analysed.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 11 of 18
Table 3. Determination of toxicity in the analysed airport water samples collected at Medium Airport PL based on the toxicity classiﬁcation system proposed by Persoone et al. [48].
Microtox®Thamnotoxkit FTM
Sampling
Date/SeasonCampaign Site No. Threat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management ActionsThreat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management Actions
2012 Winter I 1 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 3 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 4 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 6 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 1 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
II 2 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 3 Slight acute hazard II CA NA NA NA
II 4 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 6 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
II 7 Acute hazard III IA NA NA NA
2012 Spring I 1 Slight acute hazard II CA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 3 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 6 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 7 NA NA NA No acute hazard I FO
2012 Summer I 1 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 3 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 2 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 5 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
I 6 Slight acute hazard II CA NA NA NASustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 12 of 18
Table 4. Determination of toxicity in the analysed airport water samples collected at Big Airport PL based on the toxicity classiﬁcation system proposed by Persoone et al. [48].
Microtox®Thamnotoxkit FTM
Sampling
Date/SeasonCampaign Site No. Threat DegreeAcute
HazardClassesRecommended
Management ActionsThreat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management Actions
2012 Winter I 1 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
I 2 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 3 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
I 6 No acute hazard I FO Very high acute hazard V IA
I 7 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 8 Acute hazard III IA No acute hazard I FO
2012 Winter II 1 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
II 2 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 3 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
II 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
II 5 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 6 Acute hazard III IA No acute hazard I FO
II 7 Acute hazard III IA Slight acute hazard II CA
II 8 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
2012 Autumn I 1 NA NA NA Acute hazard III IA
I 2 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 4 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NA
2013 Winter I 1 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 2 Acute hazard III IA Acute hazard III IA
I 4 Slight acute hazard II CA Acute hazard III IA
I 5 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 6 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
I 7 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
I 8 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
2013 Winter II 1 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 2 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 3 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 4 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
II 5 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
II 6 No acute hazard I FO Acute hazard III IA
II 7 Acute hazard III IA Very high acute hazard V IA
II 8 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CASustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 13 of 18
Table 5. Determination of toxicity in the analysed airport water samples collected at Large Airport UK based on the toxicity classiﬁcation system proposed by Persoone et al. [48].
Microtox®Thamnotoxkit FTM
Sampling
Date/SeasonCampaign Site No. Threat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management ActionsThreat DegreeAcute Hazard
ClassesRecommended
Management Actions
2011 Autumn II 2 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
2012 Winter II 5 Slight acute hazard II CA No acute hazard I FO
III 4 No acute hazard I FO Slight acute hazard II CA
IV 4 No acute hazard I FO No acute hazard I FO
V 3 No acute hazard I FO NA NA NASustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 14 of 18
When we take into consideration the toxicity towards T. platyurus , 37.5% of the anal-
ysed runoff water samples collected at the Small Airport PL from 2011–2013 were classiﬁed
as having no acute hazard (class I) (see Table 2). The results of the performed studies
showed that 18.6% of all the tested samples collected at Small Airport PL were recorded as
having a slight acute hazard. In turn, 31.3% of monitored runoff water samples were classi-
ﬁed as having acute hazard levels (class III), where most of them were taken in the autumn
and winter seasons. Nearly 13% of the analysed runoff water samples were recorded as
having a very high acute hazard level (mainly in the winter period).
Considering the toxicity classiﬁcation of runoff water samples collected at Medium
Airport PL in relation to T. platyurus , it can be concluded that 50% of all analysed stormwater
samples were classiﬁed as having no acute hazard, 14.3% as having a slight acute hazard,
21% as having an acute hazard, and 14.3% as having a very high acute hazard (Table 3).
In the case of hazard classiﬁcation of runoff water samples collected in the areas of Big
Airport PL in the 2012–2013 period, the highest number of samples (30.3%) was classiﬁed
as having an acute hazard (class III). A very high acute hazard (class V) was noted for a
relatively large number of samples, viz., 24.2% of all analysed samples. In contrast, 18.2%
of the runoff water samples taken from the abovementioned airport were classiﬁed as
toxicity class II, and 27.3% were classiﬁed as toxicity class I (Table 4).
Taking into account the samples collected in the areas of Large Airport UK during the
period of 2011–2012, the runoff water samples were characterized by a lack of hazard to live
organisms (toxicity class I). Only one studied sample collected in the areas of Large Airport
UK was recorded as a slight acute hazard in relation to T. platyurus (see Table 5). The
obtained data show that the level of toxicity determined in runoff water samples collected
in the area of Large Airport UK was signiﬁcantly lower compared to that determined in
runoff water samples taken from the other investigated airports. This could be related to
the weather conditions. During the research period, ambient temperature in the area of
Large Airport UK ranged from 6.4C to 8.9C, while temperature in the areas of other
airports ranged from  3.2C to 4.0C. It can be associated with burning of less fuel,
smaller number of operations such as de-icing of aircraft and the airport area required in
higher ambient temperatures.
Due to safety regulations and the necessity of maintaining the regular schedule of work
related to the proper airport functioning (e.g., refuelling, airport apron cleaning, de/anti-
icing), airport runoff water sampling was not possible in some cases. A particularly small
number of samples collected at Large Airport UK were tested. This is due to the fact that
at this airport, which is characterized by very large air trafﬁc, we often did not obtain
permission to collect the runoff water samples from the airport platform.
Considering the aforementioned results presented in Tables 2–5, it can be summarized
that a relatively high number of runoff water samples collected at the investigated airports
in Europe were recorded as having a very high acute hazard (16.8%), an acute hazard
(27.7%), and a slight acute hazard (18.1%). It is essential to undertake immediate airport
management action, especially in places at the investigated airport platforms where the
most maintenance work was carried out (i.e., de-icing area, runway, vicinity of an airport
terminal, and parking places). Studied samples collected at this kind of sampling site were
characterized by having the highest level of hazard to live organisms. The results of the
conducted research ensure evidence-based information. Taking into account the obtained
results, it can be stated that it is crucial to improve the procedures and operations of
investigated airport management in the ﬁeld of the use of de-icing and cleaning agents, the
implementation of more effective treatment technologies and technologies for introducing
wastewater into sewage networks.
5. Conclusions
Airports are a major source of air, water, and soil pollution. Acute and chronic
exposure to all compartments of environmental pollution is harmful to human health
with established effects, inter alia, coryza and eye irritation effects, cognitive disorders,Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 15 of 18
cardiovascular diseases, and even death [ 22,54]. New types of environmental samples, such
as those of airport runoff water, which are characterized by a very complex and sometimes
variable matrix compositions, can contain a wide variety of toxic contaminants at various
concentration levels. Organic pollutants present in runoff water samples can be metabolized
or degraded by microorganisms or become diluted to such a scale that they cannot be
detected by using available procedures and apparatuses. Furthermore, the chemical,
photochemical, and biological transformations of xenobiotics present in runoff water may
lead to the formation of toxic substrates from relatively harmless compounds. In view of
this, the use of only chemical approaches to environmental contamination assessments
around airports is currently considered insufﬁcient [ 52]. Identifying a wide variety of
harmful contaminants at various concentration levels is a demanding task because this kind
of study is time-consuming and very expensive. Moreover, it is not possible to investigate
all the possible compounds and their interactions in ecosystems. Ecotoxicological analysis
enables the assessment of environmental hazards through the analysis of the overall toxicity
of samples and integrates the effect of all pollutants, including additive, antagonistic and
synergistic effects [52,55,56].
The conducted ecotoxicological assessment of airport runoff water using a variety of
bioindicators conﬁrms that it is an objective and useful tool that can be used for runoff
water management in airport areas. The results of the performed bioassays complement
current knowledge regarding the potential toxic impact of runoff water streams from
different European airports from a variety of drained areas and their seasonal variations.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst investigation of airport runoff water performed on such
a scale. Furthermore, the results of the performed research permit the following:
 The creation of a solid database that can be helpful in the rapid assessment of ecological
risks associated with this type of wastewater stream;
 a better understanding and estimation of the cause-and-effect relationship of the
long-term effects of airport pollutants on the environment;
 an implementation of new airport infrastructure management methods (standards and
procedures for reducing sources of pollution, recommended remediation techniques,
waste recirculation, and the application of environmentally safe de-icing agents).
Taking the above into account, one can conﬁdently say that this study is characterized
by major elements of scientiﬁc novelty. The obtained research results have a high potential
for innovation in regard to the tools used for the assessment of airport impacts on living
organisms. Through this kind of ecotoxicological evaluation of airport runoff water, it is
possible to reduce the negative impact of airports on the environment and subsequently
may lead to an improved quality of life.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
10.3390/su13137490/s1, Table S1: Toxicity classification system according to Persoone et al. [48].
Author Contributions: A.M.S.-S.—co-authorship of conceptualization of the research study, planned
the research, coordinated the project, collected the data, analysed, and interpreted the data, discussed
the results, wrote the paper, prepared all tables and ﬁgures, performed revisions of the article; ˙Z.P .—
co-authorship of conceptualization of the research study, discussed the results and commented on
the manuscript, discussed the manuscript revisions; P .P .—discussed the results and commented on
the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The APC was funded by Gdynia Maritime University, grant number PZ/04/2021.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors greatly appreciate the anonymous reviewers of this article for their
helpful comments and suggestions and the editors for their hard work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 16 of 18
References
1. Xu, H.; Fu, Q.; Yu, Y.; Liu, Q.; Pan, J.; Cheng, J.; Wang, Z.; Liu, L. Quantifying aircraft emissions of Shanghai Pudong International
Airport with aircraft ground operational data. Environ. Pollut. 2020 ,261, 114115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Freeman, S.; Lee, D.S.; Lim, L.L.; Skowron, A.; De Le ón, R.R. Trading off Aircraft Fuel Burn and NOx Emissions for Optimal
Climate Policy. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018 ,52, 2498–2505. [CrossRef]
3. EASA; EEA; EUROCONTROL. European Aviation Environmental Report 2019 ; Eurocontrol: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
4. Sulej, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Namiesnik, J. Analysis of Airport Runoff Waters. Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2011 ,41, 190–213. [CrossRef]
5. Sulej, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Namiesnik, J. Pollutants in Airport Runoff Waters. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012 ,42, 1691–1734.
[CrossRef]
6. Koryak, M.; Stafford, L.J.; Reilly, R.J.; Hoskin, R.H.; Haberman, M.H. The Impact of Airport Deicing Runoff on Water Quality and
Aquatic Life in a Pennsylvania Stream. J. Freshw. Ecol. 1998 ,13, 287–298. [CrossRef]
7. Shi, X.; Quilty, S.M.; Long, T.; Jayakaran, A.; Fay, L.; Xu, G. Managing airport stormwater containing deicers: Challenges and
opportunities. Front. Struct. Civ. Eng. 2017 ,11, 35–46. [CrossRef]
8. Bendtsen, K.M.; Bengtsen, E.; Saber, A.T.; Vogel, U. A Review of Health Effects Associated with Exposure to Jet Engine Emissions
in and around Airports. Environ. Health 2021 ,20, 1–21. [CrossRef]
9. Corsi, S.R.; Geis, S.W.; Bowman, G.; Failey, G.G.; Rutter, T.D. Aquatic Toxicity of Airﬁeld-Pavement Deicer Materials and
Implications for Airport Runoff. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009 ,43, 40–46. [CrossRef]
10. Sulej, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Wolska, L.; Cieszynska, M.; Namiesnik, J. Toxicity and chemical analyses of airport runoff waters in
Poland. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 2014 ,16, 1083–1093. [CrossRef]
11. Sulej-Suchomska, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Kokot, Z.J.; de la Guardia, M.; Namiesnik, J. Determination of antifreeze substances in the
airport runoff waters by solid-phase microextraction and gas chromatography—Mass spectrometry method. Microchem. J. 2016 ,
126, 466–473. [CrossRef]
12. Sulej-Suchomska, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Przyjazny, A.; Kokot, Z.J.; Namiesnik, J. Determination of fuel combustion product in
airport runoff water samples using liquid–liquid extraction with gas chromatography–spectrometry. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2016 ,13, 1475–1488. [CrossRef]
13. Kiss, A.; Fries, E. Occurrence of benzotriazoles in the rivers Main, Hengstbach, and Hegbach (Germany). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2009 ,16, 702–710. [CrossRef]
14. Ferguson, L.; Corsi, S.R.; Geis, S.W.; Anderson, G.; Joback, K.; Gold, H.; Mericas, D.; Cancilla, D.A. Formulations for Aircraft
and AirﬁeldDeicing and Anti-Icing: AquaticToxicity and Biochemical OxygenDemand ; University of South Carolina: Columbia, SC,
USA, 2008.
15. Jia, Y.; Ehlert, L.; Wahlskog, C.; Lundberg, A.; Maurice, C. Water quality of stormwater generated from an airport in a cold climate,
function of an inﬁltration pond, and sampling strategy with limited resources. Environ. Monit. Assess. 2017 ,190, 190. [CrossRef]
16. Barash, S.; Covington, J.; Tamulonis, C. Preliminary Data Summary Airport De-icing Operations (Revised) ; United States Environmen-
tal Protection Agency: Washington, DC, USA, 2000.
17. Zhang, W.; Ye, Y.; Tong, Y.; Ou, L.; Hu, D.; Wang, X. Modeling time-dependent toxicity to aquatic organisms from pulsed exposure
of PAHs in urban road runoff. Environ. Pollut. 2011 ,159, 503–508. [CrossRef]
18. Corsi, S.R.; Harwell, G.R.; Geis, S.W.; Bergman, D. Impacts of Aircraft Deicer and Anti-Icer Runoff on Receiving Waters from
Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas, USA. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2006 ,25, 2890–2900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Chen, F.; Gao, J.; Zhou, Q. Toxicity assessment of simulated urban runoff containing polycyclic musks and cadmium in Carassius
auratus using oxidative stress biomarkers. Environ. Pollut. 2012 ,162, 91–97. [CrossRef]
20. Heintzman, L.J.; Anderson, T.A.; Carr, D.L.; McIntyre, N.E. Local and landscape inﬂuences on PAH contamination in urban
stormwater. Landsc. Urban Plan. 2015 ,142, 29–37. [CrossRef]
21. O’Donnell, M. Management of Airport Industrial Waste ; Federal Aviation Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2008.
22. Fajersztajn, L.; Guimar ães, M.T.; Duim, E.; da Silva, T.; Okamura, M.N.; Brand ão, S.L.B.; Ribeiro, A.E.; Naud, L.M.; O’Sullivan, S.;
Saldiva, P .H.N.; et al. Health effects of pollution on the residential population near a Brazilian airport: A perspective based on
literature review. J. Transp. Health 2019 ,14, 100565. [CrossRef]
23. Corsi, S.R.; Geis, S.W.; Loyo-Rosales, J.E.; Rice, C.P .; Sheesley, R.; Failey, A.G.G.; Cancilla, D.A. Characterization of Aircraft Deicer
and Anti-Icer Components and Toxicity in Airport Snowbanks and Snowmelt Runoff. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006 ,40, 3195–3202.
[CrossRef]
24. Kiss, I. The Use of Biomarkers in the Ecotoxiclogical Risk Assessment. In Exposure and Risk Assessment of Chemical Pollution:
Contemporary Methodology ; Simeonov, L.I., Hassanien, M.A., Eds.; Springer: Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2009; pp. 233–245.
25. Hogenboom, A.; Leerdam, T.; Voogt, P . Accurate Mass Screening and Identiﬁcation of Emerging Contaminates in Environmental Samples
by Liquid Chromatography-LTQ FT Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry ; Kiwa Water Research: Nieuwegein, The Netherlands, 2008.
26. Sulej, A.M.; Polkowska, Z.; Astel, A.; Namiesnik, J. Analytical procedures for the determination of fuel combustion products,
anti-corrosive compounds, and de-icing compounds in airport runoff water samples. Talanta 2013 ,117, 158–167. [CrossRef]
27. Breedveld, G.D.; Roseth, R.; Sparrevik, M.; Hartnik, T.; Hem, L.J. Persistence of the De-Icing Additive Benzotriazole at an
Abandoned Airport. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2003 ,3, 91–101. [CrossRef]
28. Pillard, D.; Cornell, J.S.; DuFresne, D.L.; Hernandez, M.T. Toxicity of Benzotriazole and Benzotriazole Derivatives to Three
Aquatic Species. Water Res. 2001 ,35, 557–560. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 17 of 18
29. Grant, S.; Rekhi, N.; Prise, N.; Reeves, R. A Review of the Contaminants and Toxicity Associated with Particles in Stormwater Runoff ;
Caltrans: Sacramento, CA, USA, 2003.
30. Corsi, S.R.; Zitomer, D.H.; Field, J.A.; Cancilla, D.A. Nonylphenol Ethoxylates and Other Additives in Aircraft Deicers, Antiicers,
and Waters Receiving Airport Runoff. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2003 ,37, 4031–4037. [CrossRef]
31. Paraschi, E.P .; Georgopoulos, A.; Kaldis, P . Airport Business Excellence Model: A holistic performance management system. Tour.
Manag. 2019 ,72, 352–372. [CrossRef]
32. Nutile, S.A.; Solan, M.E. Toxicity testing of “eco-friendly” de-icing formulations using Chironomus dilutus .Environ. Pollut. 2019 ,
246, 408–413. [CrossRef]
33. Mohiley, A.; Franzaring, J.; Calvo, O.C.; Fangmeier, A. Potential toxic effects of aircraft de-icers and wastewater samples
containing these compounds. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015 ,22, 13094–13101. [CrossRef]
34. Burton, G.A.; Pitt, R.; Clark, S. The Role of Traditional and Novel Toxicity Test Methods in Assessing Stormwater and Sediment
Contamination. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000 ,30, 413–447. [CrossRef]
35. Zhou, Y.; Wang, F.; Wan, J.; He, J.; Li, Q.; Chen, Q.; Gao, J.; Lin, Y.; Zhang, S. Ecotoxicological bioassays of sediment leachates in a
river bed ﬂanked by decommissioned pesticide plants in Nantong City, East China. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2017 ,24, 8541–8550.
[CrossRef]
36. Vasquez, M.I.; Fatta-Kassinos, D. Is the evaluation of “traditional” physicochemical parameters sufﬁcient to explain the potential
toxicity of the treated wastewater at sewage treatment plants? Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2013 ,20, 3516–3528. [CrossRef]
37. Kent, R.A.; Andersen, D.; Caux, P .-Y.; Teed, S. Canadian Water Quality Guidelines for Glycols—An Ecotoxicological Review of
Glycols and Associated Aircraft Anti-Icing and Deicing Fluids. Environ. Toxicol. 1999 ,14, 481–522. [CrossRef]
38. Hongxia, Y.; Jing, C.; Yuxia, C.; Huihua, S.; Zhonghai, D.; Hongjun, J. Application of toxicity identiﬁcation evaluation procedures
on wastewaters and sludge from a municipal sewage treatment works with industrial inputs. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2004 ,57,
426–430. [CrossRef]
39. Mankiewicz-Boczek, J.; Nalecz-Jawecki, G.; Drobniewska, A.; Kaza, M.; Sumorok, B.; Izydorczyk, K.; Zalewski, M.; Sawicki, J.
Application of a microbiotests battery for complete toxicity assessment of rivers. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2008 ,71, 830–836.
[CrossRef]
40. Kaza, M.; Mankiewicz-Boczek, J.; Izydorczyk, K.; Sawicki, J. Toxicity Assessment of Water Samples from Rivers in Central Poland
Using a Battery of Microbiotests—A Pilot Study. Polish J. Environ. Stud. 2007 ,16, 81–89.
41. Calvo, O.C.; Quaglia, G.; Mohiley, A.; Cesarini, M.; Fangmeier, A. Assessing potential aquatic toxicity of airport runoff using
physicochemical parameters and Lemna gibba and Aliivibrio ﬁscheri bioassays. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020 ,27, 1–14. [CrossRef]
42. Hartwell, S.I.; Jordahl, D.M.; Evans, J.E.; May, E.B. Toxicity of aircraft de-icer and anti-icer solutions to aquatic organisms. Environ.
Toxicol. Chem. 1995 ,14, 1375–1386. [CrossRef]
43. Luter, L. Environmental Impacts of Airport Operations, Maintenance, and Expansion. In CRS Reports for Congress ; CRS:
Washington, DC, USA, 2008; pp. 1–19.
44. United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Managing Aircraft and Airﬁeld De-Icing Operations to Prevent Contamination
of Drinking Water ; United States Environmental Protection Agency: Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
45. Byrne, M.; Pollak, J.; Oakes, D.; Laginestra, E. Comparison of the Sub-Mitochondrial Particle Test, Microtox Andsea Urchin
Fertilisation and Development Tests: Parallel Assays Withleachate. Aust. J. Ecotoxicol. 2003 ,9, 19–28.
46. Marina, I.; Lavorgna, A.; Nardelli, M.; Parrella, A. Toxicity Identiﬁcation Evaluation of Leachates from Municipal Solid Waste
Landﬁlls: A Multispecies Approach. Chemosphere 2003 ,52, 85–94.
47. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 2008: Water Quality—Determination of the Inhibitory Effect of Water Samples on
the Light Emission of Vibrio Fischeri (Luminescent Bacteria Test) ; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland,
2008.
48. Persoone, G.; Marsalek, B.; Blinova, I.; Törökne, A.; Zarina, D.; Manusadzianas, L.; Nalecz-Jawecki, G.; Tofan, L.; Stepanova, N.;
Tothova, L.; et al. A practical and user-friendly toxicity classiﬁcation system with microbiotests for natural waters and wastewaters.
Environ. Toxicol. 2003 ,18, 395–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Novak, L.J.; Holtze, K.; Kent, R.A.; Jefferson, C.; Anderson, D. Acute Toxicity of Storm Water Associated with De-icing/Anti-icing
Activities at Canadian Airports. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2000 ,19, 1846–1855. [CrossRef]
50. Kuczy ´ nska, A.; Wolska, L.; Namie´ snik, J. Zastosowanie Biotest ów w Badaniach ´Srodowiskowych. In Nowe Horyzonty I Wyzwania
W Analityce I Monitoringu ´Srodowiskowym ; Centrum Doskonało´ sci Analityki I Monitoringu ´Srodowiskowego: Gdansk, Poland,
2003; pp. 668–699.
51. Blaise, C. Microbiotests in aquatic ecotoxicology: Characteristics, utility, and prospects. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual. 1991 ,6,
145–155. [CrossRef]
52. Melnyk, A.; Kukli´ nska, K.; Wolska, L.; Namiesnik, J. Chemical pollution and toxicity of water samples from stream receiving
leachate from controlled municipal solid waste (MSW) landﬁll. Environ. Res. 2014 ,135, 253–261. [CrossRef]
53. Tsarpali, V .; Kamilari, M.; Dailianis, S. Seasonal alterations of landﬁll leachate composition and toxic potency in semi-arid regions.
J. Hazard. Mater. 2012 ,233–234 , 163–171. [CrossRef]
54. Iervolino, I.; Accardo, D.; Tirri, A.E.; Pio, G.; Salzano, E. Quantitative risk analysis for the Amerigo Vespucci (Florence, Italy)
airport including domino effects. Saf. Sci. 2019 ,113, 472–489. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2021 ,13, 7490 18 of 18
55. Dewhurst, R.E.; Callaghan, A.; Connon, R.; Crane, M.; Mather, J.D.; Wood, R. Toxicity testing of groundwater quality. Water
Environ. J. 2005 ,19, 17–24. [CrossRef]
56. Szklarek, S.; Stolarska, M.; Wagner, I.; Mankiewicz-Boczek, J. The microbiotest battery as an important component in the
assessment of snowmelt toxicity in urban watercourses—Preliminary studies. Environ. Monit. Assess. 2015 ,187, 16. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]