16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
X-ray spectroscopic c haracterization of  As(V) -rich 
Tl(III) -particles in a weathered Tl- As-Fe-sulfide  
mineralization  
 
Francesco Femi Marafatto*,**, Dario Ferreira -Sanchez*,  Daniel Grolimund* , 
Jörg Göttlicher*** , Andreas Voegelin**  
 
*Paul Scherrer Institut , CH-5232 Villigen PSI ( francesco.marafatto@psi.ch ) 
** Eawag , CH-8600 Dübendorf  
***Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D -76344 Eggenstein- Leopoldshafen  
 
Thallium is a highly toxic trace metal of growing environmental concern. In 
Erzmatt (Swiss Jura mountains ) soils were found to contain high levels of Tl and 
As due to their formation from carbonate rock hosting a weathered 
hydrothermal Tl -As-Fe mineralization. Although Tl in this site was constrained to 
a limited area , it is ideally suited to study the long -term transformation of Tl at 
contaminated sites and its speciation in soils.  
In a previous study, the Erzmatt soils were found to contain T II-substituted 
jarosite and avicennite (TlIII
2O3) as important secondary Tl -bearing minerals [1]. 
The dominant soil -formed Tl species was TlI associated with illite. Elevated 
levels of TlIII were associated with soil Mn concretions, but accounted for only a 
minor fraction of total soil Tl. Circumstantial evidence suggested that another 
unidentified TlIII-rich phase is present in the Erzmatt soils.  
In continuing work, we identified and characterized the unknown TlIII-rich 
phase by examining soil and rock thin sections as well as individual particles 
isolated from soil and rock combining  laboratory X -ray fl uorescence 
spectrometry (XRF) and X -ray diffraction (XRD) with synchrotron- based bulk X -
ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and micro- resolved XRF/XRD  tomography . 
Our results suggest  that the composition of the Tl -rich particles correspond s 
to Tl 2O3 with up to 0.25 As(V) /Tl. Extended X -ray absorption fine structure 
(EXAFS) spectra in combination with XRD data suggest that the AsV-rich TlIII
2O3 
grains are amorphous or nanocrystalline precursors of crystalline avicennite. 
We speculate that these particles  form by the oxidation of Tl -As sulfide minerals 
such as lorandite (TlAsS 2) or ellisite (Tl 3AsS 4) and that the AsV inhibits  the 
crystallization of Tl 2O3 into avicennite.  
Avicennite and AsV-rich Tl 2O3 particles in the Erzmatt soils are coated with 
Mn-oxides that we identified as layered MnO 2, possibly in association  with a 
tectomanganate. The MnO 2-crusts contain up to 0.2 Tl/Mn as Tl(I) and may 
have formed via a redox reaction between dissolved Mn2+ and TlIII. 
The results from this work provide new insights into t he processes that 
control the release of Tl from Tl -bearing sulfide minerals and the sequestration 
of Tl in soils , and are relevant with respect to the assessment of risks arising 
from geogenically and anthropogenically Tl -contaminated sites.  
 
REFERENCES    
1. Voegelin, A.; Pfenninger, N.; Petrikis, J.; Majzlan, J.; Plotze, M.; Senn, A. 
C.; Mangold, S.; Steininger, R.; Gottlicher, J., Thallium speciation and 
extractability in a thallium - and arsenic -rich soil developed from mineralized 
carbonate rock. Environ Sci Technol 2015, 49, 5390- 5398.  